John Owen D.D.



Exercitations Concerning the Name, Original, Nature, Use and Continuance of a
DAY OF Sacred Rest.

Wherein The Original of the SABBATH from the Foundation of the World, the
Morality of the Fourth Commandment, with the Change of the Seventh Day are
enquired into.

Together with an Assertion of the Divine Institution of the LORD'S DAY, and
Practical Directions for its due Observation.

By John Owen, D D.

(...). 2 Cor. 6. 8.

John 5. 39. Search the Scripture.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nath. Ponder, at the Peacock in Chancery Lane
near Fleetstreet. 1671.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THERE are Two great Concerns of that Religion, whose Name thou bear; the
Profession of its Truth, and the Practice or Exercise of its Power. And these
are mutually assistant unto each other. Without the Profession of Faith in its
Truth, no man can express its Power in Obedience. And without Obedience,
Profession is little worth. Whatever therefore does contribute Help and
Assistance unto us in either of these according to the mind of God, is highly
to be prized and valued. Especially it is so in such a season; wherein the
Former of them is greatly questioned, and the Later greatly neglected, if not
despised. But if there be any thing which does equally confirm and strengthen
them both, it is certainly of great Necessity in and unto Religion; and will be
so esteemed by (...) who place their principal concerns in these things. Now
such is the Solenm Observation of a Sacred Weekly Day of Rest unto God. For
amongst all the outward Means of conveying to the present Generation, that
Religion which was at first taught and delivered unto men by Jesus Christ and
his Apostles, there has been none more effectual, than the Catholic
uninterrupted Observation of such a Day for the Celebration of the Religious
Worship appointed in the Gospel. And many material parts of it, were
unquestionably preserved by the successively continued Agreement of Christians
in this Practice. So far then the Profession of our Christian Religion in the
World at this Day, does depend upon it. How much it tends to the Exercise and
Expression of the Power of Religion cannot but be evident unto all, unless they
be such as hate it, who are not a few. With others it will quickly appear unto
a sober and unprejudicated Consideration. For no small part hereof does consist
in the constant payment of that Homage of Spiritual Worship, which we owe unto
God in Jesus Christ. And the Duties designed thereunto, are the Means which he
has appointed for the Communication of Grace and Spiritual Strength unto the
due performance of the Remainders of our Obedience. In these things consist the
Services of this Day, and the End of its Observation is their due performance
unto the Glory of God, and the Advantage of our own souls. Whereas therefore
Christian Religion may be considered two ways: First, As it is Publicly and
Solemnly professed in the World, whereon the Glory of God, and the Honor of
Jesus Christ do greatly depend: And Secondly, As it prevails and rules in the
Minds and Lives of Private Men, neither of them can be maintained without a due
Observance of a Stated Day of Sacred Rest. Take this away, Neglect and
Confusion will quickly cast out all Regard unto Solemn Worship. Neither did it
ever thrive or flourish in the World from the Foundation of it, nor will do so
unto its End, without a due Religious Attendance unto such a Day. Any man may
easily foresee the Disorder and Profaneness which would ensue upon the taking
away of that, whereby our Solemn Assemblies are guided and preserved. Wherefore
by Gods own Appointment it had its Beginning, and will have its End with his
Public Worship in this World. And take this off from the Basis whereon God
has fixed it, and all Humane Substitutions of any thing in the like kind to
the same purposes, will quickly discover their own Vanity. Nor without
advantage which it affords as it is the Sacred Repository of all sanctifying
Ordinances will Religion long prevail in the Minds and Lives of private Men.
For it would be just with God to leave them to their own Weakness and Decays,
which are sufficient to ruin them, who despise the Assistance which he has
provided for them, and which he tenders unto them. Thus also we have known it
to have fallen out with many in our Days, whose Apostasies from God have hence
taken their Rise and Occasion. This being the case of a Weekly Sacred Day of
Rest unto the Lord, it must needs be our Duty to enquire and discern aright,
both what Warrant we have for the Religious Observance of such a Day, as also
what Day it is in the Hebdomadal Revolution that ought so to be observed. About
these things there is an Enquiry made in the ensuing Discourses; and some
Determinations on that Enquiry. My Design in them, was to discover the
Fundamental Principles of this Duty, and what Ground Conscience has to stand
upon in its Attendance thereunto. For what is from God in these things, is
assuredly accepted with him. The Discovery hereof, I have endeavored to make,
and therewithal a safe Rule for Christians to walk by in this matter; so that
for want thereof they may not lose the Things which they have wrought. What I
have attained unto of Light and Truth herein, is submitted to the Judgment of
Men Learned and Judicious. The Censures of Persons heady, ignorant and proud;
who speak evil of those things which they know not, and in what they naturally
know corrupt themselves, I neither fear nor value. If any Discourses seem
somewhat dark or obscure unto Ordinary Readers, I desire they would consider,
that the Foundations of the things discoursed of, lie deep, and no Expression
will render them more familiar and obvious unto all Understandings, than their
Nature will allow: Nor must we in any Case quit the Strengths of Truth, because
the Minds of some, cannot easily possess themselves of them. However I hope
nothing will occurr, but what an Attentive Redder, though otherwise but of an
Ordinary Capacity, may receive and digest. And they to whom the Argument seems
hard, may find those Directions which will make the Practice of the Duty
insisted on; easy and beneficial. The especial Occasion of my present handling
this Subject, is declared afterward. I shall only add, that here is no Design
of contending with Any, of opposing or contradicting any, of censuring or
reflecting on those whose Thoughts and Judgments in these things differ from
ours, begun or carried on. Even those by whom an Holy Day of Rest under the
Gospel and its Services are laughed to scorn, are by me left unto God, and
themselves. My whole endeavor is to find out what is agreeable unto Truth
about the Observance of such a Day unto the Lord, what is the Mind and Will of
God concerning it, on what Foundation we may attend unto the Services of it, as
that God may be glorified in us, and by us, and the Interest of Religion in
Purity, Holiness, and Righteousness be promoted amongst Men.

J. O.
Jan. 11. 1670.
Exercitations Concerning the Name, Original, Nature, Use and Continuance of a
Day of Sacred Rest.
Exercitatio Prima.
HEBR. Chap. IV. Ver. IX. (...).
(1) Trouble and Confusion from men's Inventions. (2) Instanced in Doctrines and
Practices of a Sabbatical Rest. (3) Reason of their present Consideration. (4)
Extent of the Controversies about such a Rest. (5) A particular Enumeration of
them. (6) Special Instances of Particular Differences upon an Agreement in more
general Principles. (7) Evil Consequences of these Controversies in Christian
Practice. (8) Principles and Rules proposed for the right Investigation of the
Truth in this matter. (9) Names of a Sacred Day of Rest. (...). Genesis 2. 3. Heb.
4. 4. (10) (...). Genesis 2. 3. Exodus 16. 23. Chap. 35. 2. Lam. 1. 7. Saturn
called (...); and (...) by the Jews, and why. The Word doubled. (...). Reason
of it. (11) Translation of this Word into the Greek and Latin Languages. (...).
(12) All Judaical Feasts called Sabbata by the Heathen. Suetonius; Horace;
Juvenal cited to that purpose. (13) (...): Sunday. Used by Justine Martyr,
Tertullian, Eusebius. Blamed by Austin, Hierom, and Philastrius. (14) Use of
the Names of the Days of the Week derived from the Heathen of old. Custom of
the Roman Church. (15) First day of the Week. Lords Day. Lords Day Sabbath.

The First Exercitation.
SOLOMON tells us, that in his Disquisition after the Nature and State of
things in the world, this alone he had found out; that is absolutely and unto
his satisfaction; namely, that God made man upright, but they have sought out
many Inventions, Eccles. 7. 29. And the Truth hereof, we also find by woeful
experience, not only in sundry particular Instances, but in the whole course of
men in this world, and in all their concerns with respect unto God and
themselves. There is not any thing wherein and whereabout, they have not found
out many Inventions, to the Disturbance and perverting of that state of peace
and quietness, wherein all things were made of God. Yea, with the fruits and
effects of this perverse Apostasy, and Relinquishment of that universally
Harmonious state of things wherein we were created, not only is the whole world
as it lies in evil, filled, and as it were overwhelmed; but we have the
Relics of it to conflict withal, in that Reparation of our condition, which
in this life by Grace we are made partakers of. In all our Ways, Actions and
Duties, some of these Inventions are ready to immix themselves, unto our own
disturbance, and the perverting of the right ways of God.

Sacred Rest, and the Worship of God therein required. God originally out of
his Infinite Goodness, when suitably thereunto by his own Eternal Wisdom and
Power, he had made all things Good, gave unto men a day of Rest, as to express
unto them, his own Rest, Satisfaction, and Complacency in the Works of his
Hands; so to be a day of Rest and composure to themselves, and a Means of their
Entrance into, and Enjoyment of that Rest with himself, here and for ever,
which he had ordained for them. Hence it became unto them a Principle and
Pledge, a Cause and Means of Quietness and Rest, and that in and with God
himself. So might it be still unto the Sons of men, but that they are in all
things continually finding out new Inventions, or immixing themselves in
various Questions and Accounts; for so says the Wise man; (...), themselves
have sought out many Computations.

And hence it is, that whereas there are two general concernments of such a
Day, the Doctrine, and the Practice of it, or the Duties to be performed unto
God thereon, they are both of them solicited by such various Questions through
the many Inventions which men have found out, as have rendered this Day of Rest,
a matter of endless strife disquietment and contention. And whereas all
Doctrines of Truth do tend unto practice, as their immediate Use and End, the
whole Scripture being (...), Tit. 1. 1. the Truth which is according unto
Godliness, the contentions which have been raised about the Doctrine of the
Holy Day of Rest, have greatly influenced the minds of men, and weakened them in
that practice of Godliness, which all men confess to be necessary in the
Observation of such a Day of Rest unto the Lord, if such a Day of Rest there
be, on what foundation soever it is to be observed. For Christians in general,
under one notion or other, do agree, that a Day of Rest should be observed, in
and for the Celebration of the Worship of God. But whereas many Controversies
have been raised about the grounds of this Observance, and the Nature of the
Obligation thereunto, advantage has been taken thereby to introduce a great
neglect of the Duties themselves, for whose sakes the Day is to be observed,
whilst one questions the Reasons and Grounds of another for its Observation,
and finds his own by others despised. And this has been no small nor
ineffectual means of promoting that general Profaneness, and Apostasy from
strict and holy walking before God, which at this day are every where so justly
complained of.

Differences and Controversies, as agitated amongst men of all sorts. The known
pertinacy of inveterate Opinions, the many prejudices that the minds of most in
this matter are already possessed withal, and the particular Engagements, that
not a few are under, to defend the Pretensions and Persuasions which they have
published and contended for; will not allow any great Expectation of a change
in the minds of many, from what I have to offer. Besides, there are almost
innumerable eristical Discourses on this subject, in the hands of many, to whom
perhaps the Report of our Endeavors will not arrive. But yet, these and the
like considerations, of the Darkness, Prejudices and Interests of many, ought
not to discourage any man from the discharge of that Duty which he owes to the
Truths of God; nor cause him to cry with the Sluggard, There is a Lion in the
Streets, I shall be slain in the Way. Should they do so, no Truth should ever
more be taught, or contended for: for the Declaration of them all, is attended
with the same Difficulties, and liable to the same kind of Opposition.
Wherefore an Enquiry into this matter, being unavoidably cast upon me, from the
Work wherein I am engaged, in the Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews, I
could not on any such accounts wave the pursuit of it. For this Discourse,
though upon the Desires of many, now published by it self, is but a Part of our
remaining Exercitations on that Epistle. Nor am I without all hopes, but that
what shall be declared and proved on this subject, may be blessed to an
Usefulness unto them, who would willingly learn, or be established in the
Truth. An Attempt also will be made herein, for the conviction of others, who
have been seduced into Paths, inconsistent with the Communion of Saints, the
Peace of the Churches of Christ, or Opinions hurtful to the Practice of
Godliness; and left unto the Blessing of him, who when he has supplied seed to
the Sower, does himself also give the increase. And these Considerations have
prevailed with me to cast my Mite into this Sanctuary, and to endeavor the
right stating, and confirmation of that Doctrine, whereon so important a part
of our Duty toward God does depend, as is generally confessed, and will be
found by Experience, that there does on this concerning a Day of Sacred Rest.

Sabbath, (as we call it at present for Distinction sake, and to determine a
subject of our Discourse) which have been publicly agitated, are Universal as
unto all its concerns. Neither Name nor Thing is by all agreed on. For whereas
most Christians acknowledge, (we may say all, for those by whom it is denied,
are of no weight, nor scarce of any number) that a day on one account or other
in an Hebdomadal Revolution of Time, is to be set apart to the public Worship
of God, yet how that Day is to be called, is not agreed amongst them. Neither
is it granted, that it has any Name affixed unto it, by any such means, that
should cause it justly to be preferred unto any other, that men should
arbitrarily consent to call it by. The Names which have been, and amongst some
are still in use for its Denotation and Distinction, are the seventh Day, the
Sabbath, the Lords Day, the first Day of the Week, Sunday; So was the Day now
commonly observed, called of Old by the Graecians and Romans, before the
Introduction of Religion into its Observation. And this Name some still retain,
as a thing indifferent; others suppose it were better left unto utter disuse.

Thing it self are various, and respect all the concerns of the Day enquired
after. Nothing that relates unto it, no part of its respect to the Worship of
God, is admitted by all uncontended about. For it is debated amongst all sorts
of persons; (1.) Whether any part of Time be naturally and morally to be
separated and set apart to the solemn Worship of God; or which is the same,
whether it be a natural and moral Duty to separate any part of time in any
Revolution of it, unto Divine Service; I mean, so as it should be stated and
fixed in a periodical Revolution; otherwise to say, that God is solemnly to be
worshipped, and yet that no time is required thereunto, is an open
contradiction. (2.) Whether such a Time supposed, be absolutely and originally
moral, or made so by Positive Command suited unto General Principles and
Intimations of Nature. And under this consideration also, a part of Time is
called Moral Metonymically from the Duty of its Observance. (3) Whether on
supposition of some part of Time so designed, the Space or Quantity of it, have
its Determination or Limitation, morally, or merely by Law Positive or
Arbitrary. For the Observation of some part of Time, may be Moral, and the
quota pars arbitrary. (4) Whether every Law Positive of the Old Testament, were
absolutely Ceremonial, or whether there may not be a Law Moral Positive, as
given to, and obligatory of all mankind; though not absolutely written in the
Heart of man by Nature; that is, whether there be no morality in any Law, but
what is a part of the Law of Creation. (5) Whether the Institution of the
seventh Day Sabbath, was from the Beginning of the World, and before the Fall
of man, or whether it were first appointed, when the Israelites came into the
Wilderness. This in itself is only a matter of Fact; yet such, as whereon the
Determination of the Point of Right, as to the Universal Obligation unto the
Observation of such a Day does much depend; and therefore has the
Investigation and true stating of it, been much labored in and after, by
Learned men. (6) Upon a supposition of the Institution of the Sabbath from the
Beginning, Whether the Additions made, and Observances annexed unto it, at the
giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, with the Ends whereunto it was then designed,
and the Uses whereunto it was employed, gave unto the seventh Day a new State
distinct from what it had before; although naturally the same day was continued
as before. For if they did so, that new State of the Day, seems only to be
taken away under the New Testament; if not the Day it self seems to be
abolished: for that some change is made therein from what was fixed under the
Judaical Economy, cannot modestly be denied. (7) Whether in the fourth
Commandment, there be a Foundation of a Distinction between a seventh Day in
General, or one Day in seven; and that seventh Day, which was the same
numerically and precisely from the Foundation of the World. For whereas an
Obligation unto the strict Observation of that Day precisely is as we shall
prove, plainly taken away in the Gospel, if the Distinction intimated, be not
allowed, there can be nothing remaining obligatory unto us in that command,
whilst it is supposed, that that Day is at all required therein. Hence (8) It
is especially enquired, whether a seventh Day, or one Day in seven, or in the
Hebdomadal Cycle, be to be observed Holy unto the Lord, on the Account of the
fourth Commandment. (9) Whether under the New Testament all Religious
Observation of Days be so taken away, as that there is no Divine Obligation
remaining for the Observance of any one Day at all; but that as all Days are
alike in themselves, so are they equally free to be disposed of, and used by
us, as Occasion shall require. For if the Observation of one Day in seven, be
not founded in the Law of Nature, expressed in the Original Positive Command
concerning it; and if it be not seated Morally in the fourth Commandment, it is
certain that the necessary Observance of it is now taken away. (10) On the
other extreme, whether the seventh Day from the Creation of the world, or the
last Day of the Week, be to be observed precisely under the New Testament by
virtue of the Fourth Commandment and no other. The Assertion hereof supposes
that our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of the Sabbath has neither changed, nor
reformed any thing in or about the Religious Observation of an Holy Day of Rest
unto the Lord; whence it follows, that such an Observation can be no Part or
Act of Evangelical Worship properly so called, but only a Moral Duty of the
Law. (11) Whether on the supposition of a Non-obligation in the Law unto the
Observance of the seventh Day precisely, and of a New Day to be observed Weekly
under the New Testament, as the Sabbath of the Lord, on what Ground it is so to
be observed. (12) Whether of the Fourth Commandment as unto one Day in seven,
or only as unto some part or portion of Time, or whether without any respect
unto that Command as purely Ceremonial. For granting, as most do, the necessity
of the Observation of such a Day, yet some say, that it has no respect at all
to the Fourth Decalogical Precept, which is totally and absolutely abolished
with the residue of Mosaical Institutions; others that there is yet remaining
in it, an Obligation unto the Sacred Separation of some portion of our Time
unto the solemn Service of God, but indetermined; and some that it yet
precisely requires the Sanctification of one Day in seven. (13) If a Day be so
to be observed, it is enquired, on what Ground, or by what Authority there is
an Alteration made from the Day observed under the Old Testament, unto that now
in use; that is, from the last to the first Day of the Week; Whether was this
Translation of the solemn Worship of God, made by Christ and his Apostles, or
by the Primitive Church. For the same Day might have been still continued,
though the Duty of its Observation, might have been fixed on a new Reason and
Foundation. For although our Lord Jesus Christ totally abolished the old solemn
Worship required by the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, and by his
own Authority introduced a new Law of Worship according unto Institutions of
his own, yet might Obedience unto it in a solemn manner have been fixed unto
the former Day. (14) If this were done by the Authority of Christ and his
Apostles, or be supposed so to be, then it is enquired, Whether it were done by
the express Institution of a New Day, or a directive Example sufficient to
design a particular Day, no Institution of a new Day being needful. For if we
shall suppose that there is no Obligation unto the Observance of one Day in
seven indispensibly abiding on us, from the Morality of the Fourth Command, we
must have an express Institution of a new Day, or the Authority of it is not
Divine; and on the supposition, that that is so, no such Institution is
necessary; or can be properly made, as to the whole nature of it. (15) If this
Alteration of the Day were introduced by the Primitive Church; then whether the
continuance of the Observation of one Day in seven be necessary or no. For what
was appointed thereby, seems to be no farther Obligatory unto the Churches of
succeeding Ages, than their concernment lies in the Occasions and Reasons of
their Determinations. (16) If the continuance of one Day in seven for the
solemn Worship of God be esteemed necessary in the present State of the Church,
then, Whether the continuance of that now in general Use, namely, the First Day
of the Week be necessary or no; or whether it may not be lawfully changed to
some other Day. And sundry other the like Enquiries are made about the
Original, Institution, Nature, Use and Continuance of a Day of Sacred Rest unto
the Lord.

Day it self, or the separation of it to its proper Use and End, be any Part in
it self of Divine Worship, or be so merely relatively, with respect unto the
Duties to be performed therein. And as to those Duties themselves, they are not
only variously represented, but great Contention has been about them, and the
manner of their Performances, as likewise concerning the Causes and Occasions
which may dispense with our Attendance unto them. Indeed herein lies secretly
the (...), and principal Cause of all the strife that has been and is in the
World about this matter. Men may teach the Doctrine of a Sabbatical Rest, on
what Principles they please, deduce it from what Original they think good, if
they plead not for an exactness of Duty in its Observance, if they bind not a
Religious careful Attendance on the Worship of God, in Public and private, on
the Consciences of other men; if they require not a Watchfulness against all
Diversions and Avocations from the Duties of the Day, they may do it without
much fear of Opposition. For all the concernments of Doctrines and Opinions
which tend unto Practice are regulated thereby, and embraced or rejected, as
the Practice pleases or displeases that they lead unto.

Lastly, On a precise supposition that the Observation of such a Day is
necessary upon Divine Precept or Institution, yet there is a Controversy
remaining, about fixing its proper bounds as to its Beginning and Ending. For
some would have this Day of Rest measured by the first Constitution and
limitation of Time unto a Day from the Creation; namely, from the Evening of
the Day preceding unto its own; as the Evening and the Morning were said to be
(...) One Day, Genesis 1. 5. Others admit only of that proportion of Time, which
is ordinarily designed to our labor on the six Days of the Week; that is,
from its own Morning to its own Evening, with the Interposition of such
Diversions as our labor on other Days does admit and require.

man Upright, and gave him the Sabbath or Day of Rest, as a token of that
Condition, and Pledge of a future Eternal Rest with himself; yet through his
finding out many Inventions, that very Day is become amongst us, an Occasion
and Means of much Disquietment and many Contentions. And, that which is the
worst Consequent in things of this nature that belong unto Religion and the
Worship of God, these Differences, and the Way of their Agitation, whilst the
several Parties htigant have sought to weaken and invalidate their Adversaries
Principles, have apparently influenced the minds of all sorts of men unto a
neglect in the Practice of those Duties, which they severally acknowledge to be
incumbent on them, upon those Principles and Reasons, for the Observation of
such a Day, which themselves allow. For whilst some have hotly disputed, that
there is now no especial Day of Rest to be observed to the Lord, by virtue of
any Divine Precept or Institution; and others have granted that if it be to be
observed only by virtue of Ecclesiastical Constitution, men may have various
pretenses for Dispensations from the Duties of it, the whole due Observation of
it is much lost among Christians.

Neither is it a small evil amongst us, that the Disputes of some against the
Divine Warranty of one Day in seven to be separated unto Sacred Uses, and the
Pretense of others to an equal regard unto all Days from their Christian
Liberty, together with an open visible neglect in the most of any conscientious
Care in the Observance of it, have cast not a few unwary and unadvised Persons
to take up with the Judaical Sabbath, both as to its Institution and manner of
its Observation. Now whereas the solemn Worship of God, is the Spring, Rule and
Measure of all our Obedience unto him, it may justly be thought that the
neglect thereof, so brought about as has been declared, has been a great, if
not a principal Occasion, of that sad Degeneracy from the Power, Purity, and
Glory of Christian Religion; which all men may see, and many do complain of at
this Day in the World. The Truth is, most of the Different Apprehensions
recounted, have been entertained and contended for, by Persons Learned and
Godly, all equally pretending to a Love unto Truth, and Care for the
Preservation and Promotion of Holiness and Godliness amongst men. And it were
to be wished that this were the only Instance whereby we might evince, that the
best of men in this World do know but in part, and Prophecy but in part. But
they are too many to be recounted, although most men act in themselves and
toward others, as if they were themselves liable to no mistakes, and that it
is an inexpiable crime in others, to be in any thing mistaken. But as this
should make us jealous over our selves, and our own Apprehensions in this
matter, so ought the Consideration of it to affect us with Tenderness and
Forbearance toward those who dissent from us, and whom we therefore judge to
err and be mistaken.

But that which principally we are to learn from this Consideration, is, with
what care and Diligence we ought to inquire into the certain Rule of Truth in
this matter. For whatever we do determine, we shall be sure to find men Learned
and Godly otherwise minded. And yet in our Determinations are the Consciences
of the Disciples of Christ greatly concerned, which ought not by us to be
causelessly burdened, nor yet countenanced in the neglect of any Duty that God
does require. Slight and Perfunctory Disquisitions will be of little use in
this matter; nor are men to think that their Opinions are firm and
established, when they have obtained a seeming countenance unto-them from two
or three doubtful Texts of Scripture. The Principles and Foundations of Truth
in this matter lie deep, and require a diligent Investigation. And this is the
Design, wherein we are now engaged. Whether we shall contribute any thing to
the Declaration or Vindication of the Truth, depends wholly on the Assistance
which God is pleased to give or withhold. Our part it is, to use what Diligence
we are able; neither ought we to avoid any thing more, than the assuming or
ascribing of any thing unto our selves. It is enough for us, if in any thing,
or by any means God will use us, not as Lords over the Faith of men, but as
Helpers of their Joy.

Now for the Particular Controversies before mentioned, I shall not insist upon
them all, for that were endless; but shall reduce them unto those general
Heads, under which they may be comprehended, and by the right stating whereof
they will be determined. Nor shall I enter into any especial contest, unless it
be occasionally only, with any particular Persons, who of old or of late have
eristically handled this subject. Some of them have I confess given great
provocations thereunto; especially of the Belgic Divines, whose late Writings
are full of Reflections on the Learned Writers of this Nation. Our only design
is (...). And herein I shall lay down the general regulating Principles of the
Doctrine of the Scriptures in this matter; confirming them with such Arguments,
as occurr to my mind; and vindicating them from such Exceptions, as they either
seem liable unto, or have met withal: All with respect unto the Declaration
given of the Doctrine and Practice of the Sabbath in the different Ages of the
Church by our Apostle, Chap. 4. of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Rules that I shall proceed by are, (1.) Express Testimonies of Scripture,
which are not wanting in this Cause. Where this Light does not go before us,
our best course is to sit still; and where the Word of God does not speak in
the things of God, it is our Wisdom to be silent. Nothing I confess is more
nauseous to me, than Magisterial Dictates in Sacred things, without an evident
deduction and Confirmation of Assertions from Scripture Testimonies. Some men
write, as if they were inspired; or dreamed that they had obtained to
themselves a Pythagorean Reverence. Their Writings are full of strong
Authoritative Assertions arguing the good Opinion they have of themselves,
which I wish did not include an equal contempt of others. But any thing may be
easily affirmed, and as easily rejected.

(2.) The Analogy of Faith in the Interpretation, Exposition, and Application
of such Testimonies as are pleadable in this Cause. Hic labor hoc opus; Herein
the Writers Diligence, and the Readers Judgment, are principally to be
exercised. I have of late been much surprised with the Plea of some for the Use
of Reason in Religion and Sacred things; not at all that such a Plea is
insisted on, but that it is by them built expressly on a supposition that it is
by others, whom they reflect upon, denied; whereas some probably intended in
those Reflections have pleaded for it against the Papists (to speak within the
bounds of sobriety) with as much Reason, and no less effectually, than any
amongst themselves. I cannot but suppose their mistake to arise, from what they
have heard, but not well considered, that some do teach about the darkness of
the mind of man by Nature, with respect unto spiritual things, with his
disability by the utmost use of his rational faculties as corrupted, or
unrenewed, spiritually and savingly to apprehend the things of God, without the
especial assistance of the Holy Ghost. Now as no Truth is more plainly or
evidently confirmed in the Scripture than this; so to suppose, that those by
whom it is believed and asserted, do therefore deny the use of Reason in
Religion, is a most fond imagination. No doubt but whatever we do, or have to
do toward God, or in the things of God, we do it all as rational creatures,
that is, in and by the use of our Reason. And not to make use of it in its
utmost improvement in all that we have to do in Religion or the Worship of God,
is to reject it, as to the principal End for which it is bestowed upon us. In
particular, in the pursuit of the Rule now laid down, is the utmost exercise of
our Reason required of us. To understand aright the sense and importance of the
Words in Scripture Testimonies, the nature of the Propositions and Assertions
contained in them, the lawful deduction of Inferences from them; to judge and
determine aright, of what is proposed; or deduced by just consequence from
direct Propositions, to compare what in one place seems to be affirmed, with
what in others seems to be asserted to the same purpose, or denied; with other
Instances innumerable of the exercise of our minds about the Interpretation of
Scripture, are all of them Acts of our Reason; and as such are managed by us.
But I must not here farther divert unto the consideration of these things. Only
I fear, that some men write Books about them, because they read none. This I
know, that they miserably mistake what is in Controversy; and set up to
themselves Men of Straw as their Adversaries, and then cast Stones at them.

(3.) The Dictates of General and incorrupted Reason, suitable unto and
explained by Scripture Light, is another Principle that we shall in our
progress have a due regard unto. For whereas it is confessed, that the
separation of some portion of Time to the Worship of God, is a part of the Law
of our Creation, the Light of Nature does and must still on that supposition
continue to give Testimony unto our Duty therein. And although this Light is
exceedingly weakened and impaired by sin in the things of the greatest
importance, and as to many things truly belonging unto it in our original
Constitution, so overwhelmed with Prejudices, and contrary usages, that of it
self it owns them not at all; yet let it be excited, quickened, rectified, by
Scripture Light, it will return to perform its Office of testifying unto that
Duty, a sense whereof, and a Direction whereunto, were concreated with it. We
shall therefore enquire what Intimations the Light of Nature has continued to
give concerning a Day of Sacred Rest to be observed unto God; and what
uncontrollable Testimonies we have of those Intimations, in the knowledge,
confessions, and expressions of them, in and by those, who had no other Way to
come to an Acquaintance with them. And where there is a common or prevailing
Suffrage given amongst mankind, unto any Truth, and that, to free us from
entanglements about it, declared to be such in the Scripture, it must be
acknowledged to proceed from that Light of Nature which is common unto all,
though the actings of it be stifled in many.

(4.) The Custom and Practice of the Church of God in all Ages is to be
enquired into. I intend not merely the Church of Christ under the Gospel, but
the whole Church from the Beginning of the World, in the various Dispensations
of the Will and Grace of God unto it, before the giving of the Law, under the
Took of it, and since the Promulgation of the Gospel. And great weight may
certainly be laid upon its Harmonious consent in any practice relating to the
Worship of God. Nay, what may be so confirmed, will thence appear not to be an
Institution peculiar to any especial Mode of Worship that may belong unto one
season, and not unto another; but to have an everlasting Obligation in it, on
all that worship God, as such, never to be altered or dispensed withal. And if
every particular Church be the Ground and Pillar of Truth, whose Testimony
thereunto is much to be esteemed, how much more is the Universal Church of all
Ages so to be accounted. And it is a brutish Apprehension to suppose, that God
would permit a Persuasion to befall the Church in all Ages, with respect unto
his Worship, which was not from himself, and the Expression of its Practice
accepted with him. This therefore is diligently to be enquired into, as far as
we may have certain light into things involved in so much Darkness, as are all
things of so great Antiquity.

(5.) A due consideration of the Spirit and Liberty of the Gospel, with the
Nature of its Worship, the Reasons of it, and manner of its performance, is to
be had in this matter. No particular Instance of Worship is to be introduced or
admitted contrary to the Nature, Genius, and Reason of the whole. If therefore
such a Sabbatical Rest, or such an Observation of it be urged, as is
inconsistent with the Principles and Reasons of Evangelical Worship, as is
built upon Motives not taken from the Gospel, and in the manner of its
Observance enterferes with the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, it
discovers it self not to belong unto the present state of the Worshippers of
God in Christ. Nor is any thing to commend it self unto us under the mere
Notion of strictness or preciseness, or the Appearance of more than ordinary
severity in Religion. It is only walking according unto Rule, that will please
God, justify us unto others, and give us peace in our selves. Other seeming
Duties, that may be recommended, because they have (...), a Pretense of Wisdom
in doing even more than is required of us, through Humility and Mortification,
are of no price with God, nor useful unto men. And commonly those who are most
ready to overdo in one thing, are prone also to underdo in others. And this
Rule we shall find plainly rejecting the rigid Observation of the Seventh Day
as a Sabbath, out of the Verge of Gospel Order and Worship.

(6.) The Tendency of Principles, Doctrines, and Practices to the Promotion or
Hinderance, of Piety, Godliness, and Universal Holy Obedience unto God, is to
be enquired into. This is the End of all Religious Worship, and of all the
Institutions thereof. And a due Observation of the regular Tendency of things
unto this End, will give a great discovery of their Nature and Acceptance with
God. Let things be urged under never so specious pretenses, if they be found by
Experience not to promote Gospel Holiness in the Hearts and Lives of men, they
discover themselves not to be of God. Much more when Principles, and Practices
conformable unto them, shall be evidenced to obstruct and hinder it, to
introduce Profaness, and countenance Licentiousness of life, to prejudice the
due Reverence of God and his Worship, do they manifest themselves to be of the
Tares sowed by the Evil One. And by this Rule, we may try the Opinion which
denies all Divine Institution unto a Day of holy Rest under the New Testament.

These are the Principal Rules, which in this Disquisition after a Sabbatical
Rest, we shall attend unto. And they are such as will not fail to direct us
aright in our course, if through Negligence or Prejudice we miss not of a due
regard unto them. These the Reader is desired to have respect unto, in his
perusal of the ensuing Discourses; and if what is proposed or concluded be not
found suitable unto them, let it be rejected. For I can assure him, that no
self-assuming, no contempt of others, no prejudicing Adherence to any Way or
Party, no pretense of certainty above Evidence produced, have had any influence
into those enquiries after the Truth in this matter, which (...), we now
address our selves unto.

Name whereby this Day may be called. For that also among some has been
controverted. Under the Old Testament it had a double Appellation; the One
taken from the Natural Order of the Day then separated with respect unto other
Days, the Other from its Nature and Use. On the first Account it was called
(...), the seventh Day. Genesis 2. 3. (...) And God blessed the seventh Day and
sanctified it. So also Exodus 20. 11. Upon its first Institution, and on the
Reintroduction of its Observation, it is so called. But it is a mere
Description of the Day from its Relation to the six precedent days of the
Creation, that is herein intended; absolutely it is not so called any where.
Yet hence by the Hellenists it was termed (...), the seventh; and (...), the
Sacred seventh Day. So is mention made of it by Philo, Josephus, and others.
And our Apostle makes use of this Name, as that which was commonly in use to
denote the Sabbath of the Jews. Chap. 4. 4. (...); For he speaks, or it is
spoken somewhere concerning the seventh. (...), is not added, because (...),
was used technically to denote that Day. And he educeth the Reason of this
Denomination, from Genesis 2. 3. Being as was said, the Day that ensued
immediately after the six distinct Days wherein the World was created, and
putting a Period unto a measure of Time by a Numeration of Days, always to
return in its Cycle, it was called the seventh Day. And from that course of
Time completed in seven Days, thence recurring to its Beginning, is the name
of (...), Hebdomas, a Week, which the Hebrews call only (...), a seven. And the
same word sometimes signifies the seventh Day, or one Day in seven. (...); is
septimum Diem celebrare; to celebrate the, or a seventh Day. And the Latins
use the Word in the same manner, for seven Days, or One Day in seven. But this
Appellation, as we shall see the Apostle casts out of Consideration and Use, as
to the Day to be observed under the New Testament. For that which was first so,
is passed away, and another instituted in the Room thereof; which although it
be also (...), or a seventh Day absolutely, or one in the Revolution of seven,
yet not being the seventh in their Natural Order, that Name is now of no use,
but antiquated.

Sabbath, and the Sabbath Day. The Occasion of this Name is expressed, Genesis 2.
3. God blessed the seventh Day, (...), because he rested (shabath) that Day. It
is called Rest, the Rest, because on that Day God rested. And in the Decalogue,
it is (...), the Day of the Sabbath; or of Gods Rest, and ours. And absolutely
(...) the Sabbath, Isa. 56. 2. where also God from his Institution of it, calls
it my Sabbath: v. 4.

This being a thing so plain and evident, it were mere loss of Time to insist
upon the feigned Etymologies of this Name, after it came to be taken notice of
in the world; I shall only name them. Appion the Alexandrian would have it
derived from the Egyptian word Sabbo, as Josephus informs us; Cont. App. lib.
2. and what the signification of that Word is, the Reader may see in the same
place. Plutarch derives it from Sabboi, a Word that was used to be howled in
the furious Services of Bacchus; for his Priests and Devotoes used in their
Bacchanals, to cry out Evoi, Sabboi. Sympos. lib. 4. c. 15. which things are
ridiculous. Lactantius with sundry others of the Ancients, fell into no less,
though a less offensive mistake. Hic, says he, est dies Sabbati, qui lingua
Hebraeorum a numero nomen accepit; unde septenarius numerus legitimus and
plenus est. Institut. lib. 7. cap. 14. Procopius Gazaeus on the Pentateuch,
has a singular conceit. Speaking of the Tenth of the Month Tizri, termed
Sabbaton Sabbat. he calls it, (...). He would have it the Day of the Conception
of John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, when the Remission and Repentance
that he Preached began; and thence conjectures the Etymology of the Sabbath to
be from Sabachta (that is the Syriack (...)) which signifies Remission; that
Day being remitted holy unto the Lord; being the seventh Day which is Sabaa;
that is (...). The vanity of which conjectures is apparent to all. The Reason
and Rise of this Appellation is manifest.

Hence this was the proper and usual Name of this Day under the Old Testament,
being expressive of its Occasion, Nature, and End. The Word also has other
Forms; as (...), Exodus 16. 23. Chap. 35. 2. Sabbaton; and (...) Lam. 1. 7.
Mishbat; the signification of the Word being still retained. Neither yet is
this Word peculiarly Sacred as to what it denotes, but is used to express
things common or Profane; even any Cessation, resting, or giving over. The
first time it occurs, Genesis 2. 3. it is rendered in Targum, by (...), a common
Word to rest. See Isa. 14. 4. Chap. 24. 8. and many other places. It is also
applied, to signify a Week; because every Week, or seven of Days, had a
Sabbath or Day of Rest necessarily included in it, Levit. 23. 15. You shall
count to your selves; (...) seven complete Sabbaths; that is Weeks, each having
a Sabbath in it for its close; for the reckoning was to expire on the End of
the seventh Sabbath; v. 16. And this place being expounded by Onkelos in his
Targum of a Week; Nachmanides says upon it, that if it be so (which he also
grants and pleads) then (...), there will be two Tongues in one Verse; or the
same Word used twice in the same Verse with different significations; namely,
that the Word (...) should denote both the Holy Day of Rest, and also a Week of
Days. And he gives another Instance to the same purpose, in the Word (...),
Judge. 10. 4. Jair the Gileadite had thirty sons, (...), where the Word (...)
signifies in the first place Colts of Asses, and in the latter, Cities. And the
common number of seven is expressed by it, Levit. 25. 8. Thou shall number
unto, (...), seven Sabbaths of years; that is, as it is expounded in the next
words, (...) seven times seven years; seven years being called a Sabbath of
years, because of the Lands resting every seventh year, in answer to the Rest
of the Church every seventh Day: (see the Targum, on Isa. 58. 13. Esth. 2. 9.)
Moreover because of the Rest that was common to the Weekly Sabbath, with all
other Sacred Feasts of Moses's Institution in their stated Monthly or Annual
Revolution, they were also called Sabbaths, as shall be proved afterward. And
as the Greeks and Latins made use of this Word borrowed from the Hebrew, so
the Jews observing that their Sabbath Day had amongst them its Name from
Saturn, Dies Saturni, as amongst us it is still thence called Satterday, they
called him, or the Planet of that Name, (...); and (...) Shabbetai. And even
from hence, some of the Jews take advantage to please themselves with vain
Imaginations. So R. Isaac Caro, commending the Excellency of the seventh Day,
says, That Saturn is the Planet of that Day, the whole being denominated from
the first hour, (whereof afterward) He therefore, says he, has power on that
Day, to renew the strength of our Bodies, as also to influence our minds to
understand the Mysteries of God. He is the Planet of Israel, as the Astrologers
acknowledge, (doubtless;) and in his portion is the rational soul, and in the
parts of the earth, the house of the Sanctuary, and among Tongues the Hebrew
Tongue, and among Laws the Law of Israel. So far he; who whether he can make
good his claim to the Relation of the Jews unto Saturn, or their pretended
advantage on supposition thereof, I leave to our Astrologers to determine,
seeing I know nothing of these things. And on the same Account of their Rest
falling on the Day under that Planetary Denomination, many of the Heathen
thought they dedicated the Day and the Religion of it unto Saturn. So Tacitus,
Histor. lib. 5. Alii Honorem eum Saturno haberi. Seu Principia Religionis
tradentibus Idaeis quos cum Saturno Pulsos and conditores Gentis accepimus; seu
quod c septem syderibus queis mortales reguntur, altissimo orb and praecipua
Potentia stella Saturni feratur; ac pleraque coelestium vim suam and cursiem
septimos per numeros conficiant. Such Fables did the most diligent of the
Heathen suffer themselves to be deluded withal, whereby a prejudice was kept up
in their minds against the only true God and his Worship. The Word sometimes is
also redoubled by a pure Hebraisme. 1 Chronicles. 9. 32. (...), Shabbath, Shabbath;
that is, every Sabbath; and somewhat variously used in the conjunction of
another form; (...), Exodus 16. 23. Chap. 35. 2. And (...), Exodus 31. 15. Levit.
25. 4. We render (...), by Rest, the Rest of the Sabbath, and a Sabbath of
Rest. Where sabbaton is preposed at least, it seems to be as much as
Sabbatulum; and to denote the entrance into the Sabbath or the Preparation for
it; such as was more solemn when (...), a great Sabbath, an High Day ensued.
Such was the Sabbath before the Passover, for the Miracle, as the Jews say,
which befell their forefathers that day in Egypt. The time between the two
Evenings was the Sabbatulum. This then was the Name of the Day of Rest under
the Old Testament; yet was not the Word appropriated to the denotation of that
Day only; but is used sometimes naturally to express any Rest or Cessation;
sometimes as it were Artificially in numeration, for a Week, or any other
season, whose Composition was by, and Resolution into seven, though this was
merely occasional from the first limitation of a periodical Revolution of Time,
by a Sabbath of Rest; of which before.

Grecians and Latins also. As they borrowed the Word from the Jews, so they
did its Use. The Greek (...) is merely the Hebrew (...), or perhaps formed by
the Addition of their usual Termination from (...), whence also our Apostle
frames his (...). The Latin Sabbatum is the same. And they use this Word,
though rarely, to express the last day of the Week. So Suetonius in Tiber.
Diogenes Grammaticus Sabbatis disputare Rhodi solitus. And the LXX. always so
express the seventh Day Sabbath; and frequently they use it for a Week also.
And so in the New Testament, (...), Luke 18. 12. I fast twice on the Sabbath;
that is, two days in the Week. And (...), Acts 13. 14. the Day of the Sabbath,
is that day of the Week which was set apart for a Sabbatical Rest. Hence (...),
One day of the Sabbaths, which frequently occurs is the same with (...), the
first day of the Week; (...) or (...) being often put for (...); the Numeral
for the Cardinal.

Jews themselves and all the Heathen that took notice of them, called all their
Feasts and Solemn Assemblies, their Sabbaths; because they did no servile work
in them. They had the general nature of the Weekly Sabbath in a cessation from
Labor: So the first day of the Feast of Trumpets, which was to be on the first
day of the second Month, what day soever of the Week it happened to be on, was
called a Sabbath. Levit. 23. 24. This Scaliger well observes and well proves;
Emendat. Tempor. lib. 3. Canon. Isagog. lib. 3. p. 213. Omnem Festivitatem
Judaicam, non solum Judaei, sed and Gentiles Sabbatum vocant; Judaei quidem cum
dicunt Tisri nunquam incipere a feria prima, quarta, sexta, ne duo Sabbata
continuentur; Gentiles autem non alio nomine omnes eorum solennitates vocabant.
And this is evident, from the frequent mention of the Sabbatical Fasts of the
Jews, when they did not, nor was it lawful for them to fast on the Weekly
Sabbath. So speaks Augustus to Tiberius in Suetonius. Ne Judaeus quidem, mi
Tiberi, tam libenter Sabbatis jejunium servat, quam ego hodie servavi. And
Juvenals

Observant ubi Festa mero pede Sabbata Reges. And Martial,

Et non jejuna Sabbata lege premet. speaking in contradiction as he thought
unto them, And so Horace mentions their tricesima Sabbata, which were no other
but their New Moons. And to this usual manner of speaking in those days, does
our Apostle accommodate his Expressions; Col. 2. 16. Let no man therefore judge
you in Meat or in Drink, or in part of an Holy day, (any part of it, or respect
unto it) or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbaths; that is, any of the Judaical
Feasts whatever, then commonly called Sabbaths. So Maimonides Tract. de Sabb.
cap. 29. speaking of their (...), Good Days or Feasts; says expressly, (...),
they are all Sabbaths to the Lord.

And from this usage, some think to expound that vexed Expression, of (...),
Luke 6. 1. which we render the second Sabbath after the first. So Suidas,
(...). It was the second day of the Passover, and the first of unleavened
bread. And wonder not that it is called a Sabbath; for they called every Feast
Day a Sabbath. Theophylact gives us another Day, but on the same Reason: Says
he, (...). The Jews call every Feast a Sabbath: For Sabbath is as much as Rest.
Oft-times therefore there fell out a Feast on the day before the Weekly
Sabbath; and they called it a Sabbath, because it was a Feast. And therefore
that which was the proper Sabbath at that Time, was called the second Sabbath
after the first; being the second from that which went before. Chrysostom
allows of the same Reason. Hom. in Matthew. 39. Isidore Pelusiota fixes on
another Day, but still for the same reason. Epist. 110. lib. 3. (...). It is
called the Deuteroproton, because it was the second day from the sacrificing of
the Passover, and the first day of unleavened bread; which he shows was called
a Sabbath upon the general account of all the Jewish Feasts being so called.
For so he says, (...). By the way, this is expressly contrary to the Scripture,
which makes the Day spoken of, to be the proper Weekly Sabbath, as it is called
without any Addition, Matthew. 12. 11. whereon depended the Questions that ensued
about its Observation. But we are beholding to Scaliger for the true meaning of
this Expression, which so puzzled the Ancients, and concerning which Gregory
Nazianzen, turned of Hierome, with a scoff scarce becoming his Gravity, when he
enquired of him, what might be the meaning of it. Scaliger therefore
conjectures, that it is called (...), because it was the first Sabbath, (...),
from the second Day of unleavened bread. For on that Day they offered the
handful, or sheaf of new fruits; and from that day, they counted seven Weeks
unto Pentecost. And the Sabbaths of those Weeks were reckoned, (...), and the
first that followed was called (...): So he, both in his Emendat. Tempor. lib.
6. and Isagog. Canon. p. 218. And this is subscribed unto, by his Mortal
Adversary, Dyonisius Petavius Animad. in Epiphar. N. 31. p. 64. who will not
allow him ever to have spoken tightly, but in what the Wit of man can find no
tolerable Objection against. But this calling of their Feasts Sabbaths, with
the Reason of it is given us by all their principal Authors. So Lib. Tzeror.
Hammor. on Levit. p. 102. (...) Because all solemn Days are called holy
Convocations, they are all called so from the Sabbath, which is called holy;
wherefore the Sabbath is the Head of all solemn Feasts, and they are all of
them called by the Name thereof, Sabbaths of Rest; whereof he gives Instances.

diem folis, Sunday. As those who treat and deal with others; must express
things by the Names that are current amongst them, unless they intend to be
Barbarians unto them. So speaks Justine Martyr, Apol. 2. (...). We meet (for
the Worship of God) in common on Sunday. Had he said on the Sabbath, the
Gentiles would have concluded it to have been the Judaical Sabbath. To have
called it to them the Lords Day, had been to design no determinate Day, they
would not have known what day he meant. And the Name of the first Day of the
Week, taken up signally by Christians upon the Resurrection of Christ, was not
in use amongst them. Wherefore he called the Day he intended to determine, as
was necessary for him, by the Name in use amongst them to whom he spoke;
Sunday. In like manner Tertullian treating with the same sort of men, calls it
Diem solis; Apol. cap. 16. And Eusebius reporting the Edicts of Constantine for
the Observation of the Lords Day, as it is termed in them, adds that it is the
Day which we call (...), or Sunday.

But yet among Christians themselves this Name was not in common use, but by
some was rejected, as were also all the rest of the Names of the Days used
among the Pagans. So speaks August. in Psalm. 93. Quarta Sabbatorum, quarta
feria, que Mercurii dies dicitur a Paganis, and a multis, Christianis. Sed
noluimus ut dicant, and utinam corrigantur ut non dicant. And Hicrome Epist. ad
Algas. Vna Sabbati, dies dominica intelligenda est; quia Hebdomada in Sabbatum,
ut in primam, and secundam, and tertiam, and quartam, and quintam, and sextam
Sabbati dividitur; guam Ethnici Idolorum and Planetarum nominibus appellant. He
rejects the use of the ordinary Names unto the Heathens. And Philastrius makes
the usage of them amongst Christians almost Heretical, Number. 3.

All the Eastern Nations also, amongst whom the Planetary Denomination of the
Days of the Week first began, have since their casting off that kind of
Idolatry, rejected the use of those Names, being therein more Religious, or
more Superstitious, than the most of Christians. So is it done by the. Arabians
and Persians, and those that are joined unto them in Religious Observances. The
Day of their Worship, which is our Friday, the Arabians call Giuma, the
Persians Adina. The Rest of the Days of the Week they discriminate by their
natural Order within their Hebdomadal Revolution; the first, the second, the
third; only some of them in some places, have some special Name occasionally
imposed on them. The Church of Rome, from a Decree as they suppose, or pretend
of Pope Sylvester, reckons all the Days of the Week, by Feria prima, secunda,
and so onwards; only their Writers for the most part retain the Name of
Sabbatum, and use Dies Dominica for the first Day. And the Rhemists on Revel.
1. 10. condemn the name of Sunday, as Heathenish. And Polydore Virgil before
them, says, Profccio pudendum est, simulque dolendum, quod non antebac data
sunt istis diebus Christiana nomina; ne dii Gentium tam memorabile, inter nos,
monumentum haberent. de Invent. Rer. lib. 6. c. 5. And indeed among sundry of
the Ancients, there do many severe Expressions occurr against the use of the
common Planetary Names. And at the first Relinquishment of Gentilisme, it had
no doubt been well, if those Names of Baalim had been taken away out of the
mouths of men, especially considering that the retaining of them has been of
no use nor Advantage. As they are now riveted into custom and usage, claiming
their station on such a Prescription, as in some measure takes away the
corruption of their use, I judge that they are not to be contended about. For
as they are vulgarly used, their Names are mere notes of Ditinction, of no more
signification, than first, second and third, the original, and occasional
Imposition of them being utterly amongst the many unknown. Only I must add that
the severe Reflections, and contemptuous Reproaches, which I have heard made
upon, and poured out against them, who it may be out of weakness, it may be out
of a better Judgment than our own, do abstain from the using of them, argue a
want of due Charity and that Condescension in love, which become those who
judge themselves strong. For the truth is, they have a Plea sufficient at least
to vindicate them from the contempt of any. For there are some places of
Scripture which seem so far to give countenance unto them, that if they mistake
in their Application, it is a mistake of no other nature but what others are
liable unto, in things of greater importance. For it is given as the Will of
God, Exodus 23. 13. In all things says he that I have said be circumspect, and
make no mention of the names of other Gods, neither let them be heard out of
thy mouth. And it cannot be denied but that the Names of the Days of the Week,
were the Names of Gods among the Heathen. The Prohibition is renewed, Josh. 2.
7. Thou shall not make mention of the names of their Gods; which is yet
extended farther, Deuteronomy. 12. 3. to a command, to destroy and blot out the names
of the Gods of the people, which by this means are retained. Accordingly the
Children of Ruben, building the Cities formerly called Nebo, and Baal Meon,
changed their names, because they were the Names of Heathen Idols; Numb. 32.
38. And David mentions it, as a part of his Integrity, that he would not take
up the names of Idols in his lips. Psalm. 16. 4. And some of the Ancients as
has been observed, confirm what by some at present is concluded from these
places. Says Hierome; Absit ab ore Christiano dicere, Jupiter Omnipotens,
Mehercule, and Mecastor, and coetera magis Portenta quam nomina. Epist. ad
Damas. Now be it granted that the Objections against the Use of the Planetary
Names of the Days of the Week from these places may be answered, from
consideration of the change of Times and the circumstances of things, yet
certainly there is an appearance of Warranty in them sufficient to secure them
from contempt and reproach, who are prevailed on by them, to another use.

Day of Rest there is a peculiar Reason. If there be a Name given in the
Scripture unto such a Day, by that Name it is to be called, and not otherwise.
So it was unquestionably under the Old Testament. God himself had assigned a
Name unto the Day of Sacred Rest then enjoined the Church unto Observation, and
it was not lawful for the Jews to call it by any other Name given unto it, or
in use among the Heathen. It was, and was to be called the Sabbath Day, the
Sabbath of the Lord. In the New Testament, there is, as we shall see
afterward, a signal Note put on the first Day of the Week. So thence do some
call their Day of Rest or solemn Worship, and contend that so it ought to be
called. But this only respects the Order and Relation of such a Day to the
other Days of the Week, which is natural, and has no respect unto any thing
that is Sacred. It may be allowed then for the indigitation of such a Day, and
the Discrimination of it from the other Days of the Week, but is no proper
Name for a Day of Sacred Rest. And the first use of it, upon the Resurrection
of our Lord, was only peculiarly to denote the Time. There is a Day mentioned
by John in the Revelation (which we shall afterward consider) that he calls
(...), diem dominicam, the Lords Day. This Appellation what Day soever is
designed is neither Natural nor Civil, nor does it relate unto any thing in
Nature, or in the common usage of men. It must therefore be Sacred, and it is,
or may be very comprehensive of various Respects. It is the Lords Day; the Day
that he has taken to be his Lot, or especial Portion among the Days of the
Week; as he took as it were possession of it in his Resurrection. So his people
are his Lot and Portion in the world, therefore called his people. It is also,
or may be his Day subjectively; or the Day whereon his businesses and Affairs
are principally transacted. So the Poet,

-- Tydeos illa Dies; that was Tydeus his Day; because he was principally
concerned in the Affairs of it. This is the Day wherein the Affairs of the Lord
Christ are transacted, his Person and Mediation being the Principal Subjects
and Objects of its Work and Worship. And it is, or may be called his, the Lords
Day, because enjoined and appointed to be observed by him or his Authority over
the Church. So the Ordinance of the Supper is called the Supper of the Lord, on
the same Account. On supposition therefore that such a Day of Rest there is to
be observed under the New Testament, the Name whereby it ought to be called, is
the Lords Day; which is peculiarly expressive of its Relation unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, the sole Author and immediate Object of all Gospel Worship. But
whereas the general Notion of a Sabbatical Rest, is still included in such a
Day, a superaddition of its Relation to the Lord Christ, will entitle it unto
the Appellation of the Lords Day Sabbath; that is, the Day of Sacred Rest
appointed by the Lord Jesus Christ. And thus most probably in the continuation
of the Old Testament Phraseologie it is called the Sabbath Day, Matthew. 24. 20.
and in our Apostle comes under the general notion of a Sabbatism, Chap. 4. 9.

Exercitatio Secunda.
(1) Of the Original of the Sabbath; the importance of this Disquisition (2)
Opinion of some of the Jewish Masters about the Original of the Sabbath that it
began in Mara. (3) The Station in Mara and the Occurrences thereof; Tacitus
noted, Exodus 15. 25, 26. Jews Exposition of it. (4) This Opinion refuted by
Testimonies and Reasons. (5) Another Opinion of the Ancient Jews about the
Original of the Sabbath; and of the Mahumetans. (6) Opinions of Christians
about the Original of the Sabbath proposed. (7) That of its Original from the
Foundation of the World, asserted. The first Testimony given unto it, Genesis 2.
2. Vindicated. Exceptions of Heddigerus answered. (8.) What intended by
sanctifying and blessing the seventh Day. (9) Other Exceptions removed. Series
and Dependence of the Discourse in Moses cleared. The whole Testimony
vindicated. (10) Heb. 4 3, 4. Vindicated. (11) Observation of the Sabbath by
the Patriarchs before the giving of the Law. Instances hereof collected by
Manasse Ben Israel. Farther confirmation of it. (12) Tradition among the
Gentiles concerning it. Sacredness of the septenary Number. (13) Testimonies of
the Heathen collected by Aristobulus, Clemens, Eusebius. (14) Importance of
these Testimonies examined and vindicated. (15) Ground of the Hebdomadal
Revolution of time. Its Observation Catholic. (16) Planetary Denominations of
the Days of the Week, whence. (17) The contrary Opinion of the Original of the
Sabbath in the Wilderness proposed, and examined. (18) First Argument against
the Original of the Sabbath, Answered, etc.

The Second Exercitation. Of the Original of the Sabbath.
Name, the Thing it self falls nextly under Consideration. And the Order of our
Investigation shall be, to enquire first into its Original, and then into its
Causes. And the true stating of the former will give great light into the
latter, as also into its Duration. For if it began with the World, probably it
had a cause cognate to the Existence of the World, and the Ends of it, and so
must in Duration be commensurate unto it. If it ows its Rise to succeeding
Generations, amongst some peculiar sort of men, its Cause was arbitrary and
occasional, and its continuance uncertain. For every thing which had such a
Beginning in the Worship of God, was limited to some seasons only, and had a
Time determined for its Expiration. This therefore is first to be stated. And
indeed no Concern of this Day has fallen under more diligent, severe, and
Learned Dissertations. Very Learned men have here engaged into contrary
Opinions, and defended them with much Learning and Variety of Reading. Summa
sequar Vestigia rerum; and shall briefly call the different Apprehensions both
of Jews and Christians in this matter unto a just Examination. Neither shall I
omit the consideration of any Opinion, whose Antiquity or the Authority of its
Defenders did ever give it Reputation, though now generally exploded; as not
knowing in that Revolution of Opinions which we are under, how soon it may have
a Revival.

Jews that we may begin with them, (with whom some think the Sabbath began) are
divided among themselves about the Original of the Sabbath no less than
Christians; yea to speak the Truth, their Divisions and different Apprehensions
about this matter of Fact, have been the occasion of ours; and their Authority
is pleaded to countenance the mistakes of others. Many therefore of them assign
the Original, or first Revelation of the Sabbath, unto the Wilderness Station
of the people in Mara; others of them make it Coaeval with the World. The first
Opinion has countenance given unto it in the Talmud. Gemar. Babylon. Tit. Sab.
cap. 9. and Tit. Sanedr. cap. 7. And the Tradition of it, is embraced by so
many of their Masters and Commentators, that our Learned Seldom, de Jur. Genesis
apud Heb. lib. 3. cap. 12, 13, 14. contends for it, as the common and
prevailing Opinion amongst them; and endeavors an Answer unto all Instances or
Testimonies, that are or may be urged to the contrary, And indeed there is
searce any thing of moment to be observed in all Antiquity as to matter of Fact
about the Sabbath, whether it be Jewish, Christian or Heathen, but what he has
heaped together, or rather treasured up in the Learned Discourses of that third
Book of his Jus Gentium apud Hebraeos. Whether the Questions of Right belonging
thereunto, have been duly determined by him, is yet left unto further enquiry.
That which at present we are in the consideration of, is the Opinion of the
Jews about the Original of the Sabbath at the Station of Marah, which he so
largely confirms with Testimonies out of all sorts of their Authors, and those
duly alleged according to their own Sense and Conceptions.

Mara was the first Station that the Children of Israel fixed in, in the
Wilderness of Shur, five Days after their coming up out of the Red Sea. Before
their coming hither, they had wandered three days in the Wilderness without
finding any Water until they were ready to faint. The Report of this their
thirst and wandering was famous amongst the Heathen, and mixed by them with vain
and monstrous Fables, One of the Wisest amongst them puts as many Lies together
about it as so few words can well contain. Effigiem says he, Animalis quo
monstrante errorem sitimque depulerant, penetrali sacravere. Tacit. Histor.
lib. 5. He feigns that by following some Wild Asses they were led to Waters,
and so made an End of their Thirst and wandering, on the Account whereof they
afterward consecrated in their Temple the Image of an Ass. Others of them
besides him say that they wandered six days, and finding Water on the seventh,
that was the Occasion and Reason of their perpetual Observation of the seventh
Days Rest. In their Journey from the Red Sea to Mara they were particularly
pressed with Wandering and Thirst, Exodus 15. 22. But this was only for three
days, not seven. They went three Days in the Wilderness and found no Water.
The Story of the Asses Image, or Head consecrated amongst them, was taken from
what fell out afterward about the Golden Calf. This made them vile among the
Nations, and exposed them to their Obloquy and Reproaches. Upon the third Day
therefore after their coming from the Red Sea, they came to Mara, that is the
place so called afterward from what there befell them. For the Waters which
there they found being (...) bitter, they called the Name of the place (...) or
Bitterness. Hither they came on the third Day. For although it is said, that
they went three Days in the Wilderness and found no Water, Exodus 15. 22. after
which mention is made of their coming to Mara, v. 23. Yet it was in the Evening
of the third Day; for they pitched that night in Mara, Numb. 33. 8. Here after
their murmuring for the bitterness of the Waters, and the Miraculous Cure of
them, it is added in the Story, There the Lord made for them a Statute and an
Ordinance, and there he proved them; And said, If thou will diligently hearken
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his
sight, and wilt give ear to all his Commandments, and keep all his Statutes, I
will put none of those diseases upon thee which I have brought upon the
Egyptians; for I am the Lord that heals thee. v. 26.

It is said that he gave them (...); the Words whereby Sacred Ordinances and
Institutions are expressed. What this Statute and Judgment were in particular,
is not declared. These therefore are suggested by the Talmudical Masters. One
of them they say was the Ordinance concerning the Sabbath. About the other they
are not so well agreed. Some refer it to the fifth Commandment of honoring
Father and Mother; others to the Ceremonies of the Red Heifer with whose ashes
the water of sprinkling was to be mingled; for which conjecture they want not
such Reasons as are usual amongst them. The two first they confirm from the
Repetition of the Law; Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15. For there those Words, as the Lord thy
God commanded thee, are distinctly added to those two Precepts, the Fourth and
Fifth, and to no other. And this could arise from no other cause, but because
God had before given them unto the people in Mara, where he said he had given
them (...); that is the Ordinance and Law of the Sabbath, and the Judgment of
Obedience to Parents and Superiors. This is one of the principal ways whereby
they confirm their Imaginations. And fully to establish the Truth hereof, Baal
Hatturim, or the small Gematrical Annotations on the Masoretical Bibles adds,
that in those words (...) the final numeral Letters, make up the same number
with (...), the Name of the Place where these Laws were given. And this is the
sum of what is pleaded in this case.

Vanity of these Pretenses, and how easy it is for any one to frame a thousand
of them who knows not how better to spend his time. Aben Ezra and Abarbinel.
both confess that the words used in the Repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 5. do
refer to the giving of it on Mount Sinai. And if we must seek for especial
Reasons of the inserting of those words, besides the Sovereign Pleasure of God,
they are not wanting which are far more probable than these of the Masters. (1)
The one of these Commandments closing up the first Table concerning the Worship
of God, and the other heading the second Table concerning our Duties amongst
our selves and toward others, this Memorial, as the Lord thy God commanded
thee, is on that account expressly annexed unto them, being to be distinctly
applied unto all the Rest. (2) The Fourth Command is as it were Custos primae
Tabulae, the Keeper of the whole first Table, seeing our owning of God to be
our God, and our Worship of him according to his mind, were solemnly to be
expressed, on the Day of Rest commanded to be observed for that purpose; and in
the neglect whereof they will be sure enough neglected; whence also a
Remembrance to observe this Day is so strictly enjoined. And the Fifth
Commandment is apparently Custos secundae Tabulae; as appointed of God to
contain the means of exacting the observation of all the Duties of the second
Table, or of punishing the neglect of them and disobedience unto them. And
therefore, it may be the Memorial is not peculiarly annexed unto them on their
own distinct Account, but equally upon that of the other Commandments whereunto
they do refer. (3) There is yet an especial Reason for the peculiar
Appropriation of these two Precepts by that Memorial unto this people. For they
had now given unto them an especial Typical Concern in them, which did not at
all belong unto the rest of mankind who were otherwise equally concerned in the
Decalogue with themselves. For in the Fourth Commandment, whereas no more was
before required but that one Day in seven should be observed as a Sacred Rest,
they were now precisely confined to the seventh Day in order from the finishing
of the Creation; or the establishing of the Law and Covenant of Works; or a day
answering thereunto. For the Determination of the Day in the Hebdomadal
Revolution, was added in the Law Decalogical, to the Law of Nature. And this
was with respect unto, and in the confirmation of that Ordinance which gave
them the seventh Day Sabbath in a peculiar manner; that is the seventh Day
after six days raining of Manna, Exodus 16. And in the other, the Promise
annexed unto it of prolonging their Days, had peculiar respect unto the Land
of Canaan. There is neither of these, but is a far more probable Reason of the
annexing those words, as the Lord thy God commanded thee, unto those two
Commandments, than that fixed on by the Talmudical Masters. Herein only I agree
with them; that both these Commands were given alike in Mara; and one of them I
suppose none will deny to be a principal Dictate of the Law of Nature. For the
words mentioned, (...) an Ordinance and a Statute, the meaning of them is
plainly expounded, v. 26. God then declared this unto them as his unchangeable
Ordinance and Institution, that he would bless them on their Obedience, and
punish them upon their Unbelief and Rebellion, wherein they had Experience of
his Faithfulness to their cost. The Reader may see this Fiction farther
disproved in Tostatus on the place, though I confess some of his Reasons are
inconstringent and frivolous.

Moreover this Station of Mara, was on or about the twenty fourth Day of Nisan
or April. And the first solemn Observation of the Sabbath in the Wilderness was
upon the twenty second of Jiar, the Month following; as may easily be evinced
from Moses Journal. There were therefore twenty seven days between this
Fictitious Institution of the Sabbath, and the first solemn Observation of it
which was at their Station in Alush, as is generally supposed, certainly in the
Wilderness of Sin, after they had left Mara and Elim, and the Coast of the Red
Sea; whereunto they returned from Elim, Exodus 16. 1. Numb. 33. 8, 9, 10, 11.
For they first began their journey out of Egypt on the fifteenth Day of Nisan;
or the first Month, Exodus 12. 37. Numb. 33. 3. And they passed through the Sea
into the Wilderness, about the nineteenth Day of that Month, as is evident from
their journyings, Numb. 33. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. On the twentifourth of that Month
they pitched in Mara; and it was the fifteenth day of Jiar, or the second
Month, before they entered the Wilderness of Sin, where is the first mention of
their solemn Observation of the Sabbath, upon the occasion of the gathering of
Manna. Between these two seasons three Sabbaths must needs intervene; and those
immediately upon its first Institution, if this Fancy may be admitted. And yet
the Rulers of the Congregation looked upon the peoples Preparation for its
Observation as an unusual thing, Exodus 16. 22. Which could not have fallen out,
had it received so fresh an Institution.

Besides these Masters themselves and Raski in particular, who in his Comment
on the place, promotes this Fancy, grants that Abraham observed the Sabbath.
But the Law and Ordinances hereof they say he received on peculiar Favor, and
by especial Revelation. But be it so; it was the great Commendation of Abraham,
and that given him by God himself, that he would command his Children and
Household after him to keep the Way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. What ever
Ordinance therefore he received from God of any thing to be observed in his
Worship, it was a part of his Fidelity to communicate the knowledge of it unto
his Posterity, and to teach them its Observance. They must therefore of
necessity on those men's Principles, be instructed in the Doctrine and
Observation of the Sabbath before this pretended Institution of it. Should we
then allow that the Generality of the Jewish Masters and Talmudical Rabbis, do
assert that the Law of the Sabbath was first given in Mara; yet the whole of
what they assert, being a mere curious groundless conjecture, it may and ought
to be rejected. Not what these men say, but what they prove, is to be admitted.
And he who with much diligence has collected Testimonies out of them unto this
purpose, has only proved what they thought, but not what is the Truth. And
upon this fond Imagination is built their General Opinion, that the Sabbath was
given only unto Israel, is the Spouse of the Synagogue, and that it belongs not
to the rest of mankind. Such Dreams they may be permitted to please themselves
withal. But that these things should be pleaded by Christians against the true
Original and Use of the Sabbath is somewhat strange. If any think their
Assertions in this matter to be of any weight, they ought to admit what they
add thereunto; namely, that all the Gentiles shall once a Week keep a Sabbath
in Hell.

Masters are otherwise minded. For they both judge that the Sabbath was
instituted in Paradise, and that the Law of it, was equally obligatory unto all
Nations in the World. Of this mind are Maimonides, Aben-Ezra, Abarbinel and
others. For they expressly refer the Revelation of the Sabbath unto the
Sanctification and Benediction of the first seventh Day, Genesis 2. 2. The Targum
on the Title of Psalm. 92. ascribes that Psalm to Adam, as spoken by him on the
Sabbath Day. Whence Austin esteemed this rather the general Opinion of the
Jews. Tractat. 20. in Johan. And Manasse Ben Israel, Lib. de Creat. Problem. 8.
proves out of sundry of their own Authors, that the Sabbath was given unto, and
observed by the Patriarchs, before the coming of the people into the
Wilderness. In particular that it was so by Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph, he
confirms by Testimonies out of the Scripture not to be despised. Philo Judaeus,
and Josephus, both of them more ancient, and more learned than any of the
Talmudical Doctors, expressly assign the Original of the Sabbath unto that of
the World. Philo calls it, (...), The Day of the Worlds Nativity. And (...). A
Feast not of One City or Country, but of the whole World. De Opificio Mundi;
and de Vita Mos. lib. 2. To the same purpose speaks Josephus lib. 2. cont.
Appion. And the words of Abarbinel are sufficiently express in this matter;
(...). He sanctified and separated the seventh Day unto Glory and Honor,
because on its approach the work of Heaven and Earth was perfected and finished
-- Even as a man when he has performed an honorable Work, and perfected it,
makes a Banquet and a day of feasting. And yet more evident is that of Maimon.
Tract. Ridush. Hachodesch. cap. 1. (...). The vision or sight of the Moon is
not delivered to all men, as was the Sabbath Bereschith, or in the Beginning.
For every man can number six (Days) and rest on the seventh. But it is
committed to the House of Judgment (the Sanedrims) (that is to observe the
Appearances of the Moon) and when the Sanedrym declares and pronounces that
it is the New Moon, or the beginning of the Month, then it is to be taken so to
be. He distinguishes their Sacred Feasts into the Weekly Sabbath, and the New
Moons, or those that depended (...) upon the Appearing of the New Moon. The
first he calls (...); Sabbath Bereschith, the Sabbath instituted at the
Creation; for so from the first of Genesis they often express tecnically the
work of the Creation: This he says, was given to every man; for there is no
more required to the due Observation of it in point of Time, but that a man be
able to reckon six Days, and so rest on the seventh. But now for the
Observation of the New Moons, all Feasts that depended on the variations of her
Appearances, this was peculiar to themselves, and the Determination of it left
unto the Sanedrym. For they trusted not unto Astrological Computations merely,
as to the Changes of the Moon, but sent Persons unto sundry high places to
watch and observe her first Appearances, which if they answered the general
established Rules, then they proclaimed the Beginning of the Feast to be. So
Maimon. Ridush, Hackodesh, cap. 2.

And Philippus Guadagnolus Apol. pro Christiana Relig. Part. 1. cap. 8. shows
that Ahmed Ben Zin, a Persian Mahumetan whom he confutes, affirmed, that the
Institution of the Sabbath was from the Creation of the world. This indeed he
reflects upon in his Adversary with a saying out of the Alcoran Azoar. 3. where
those that Sabbatize are cursed; which yet will not serve his purpose. For in
the Alcoran respect is had to the Jewish Sabbath, or the seventh Day of the
Week precisely; when one day of seven only is pleaded by Ahmed to have been
appointed from the foundation of the world. I know some Learned men have
endeavored to elude most of the Testimonies which are produced to manifest the
Opinion of the most ancient Jews in this matter; But I know also that their
Exceptions might be easily removed, would the nature of our present Design
admit of a Contest to that purpose.

Original of the Sabbath which are embraced and contended about amongst Learned
men, yea and unlearned of the present Age and Church. And rejecting the conceit
of the Jews about the Station in Mara, which very few think to have any
probability attending it, there are two Opinions in this matter that are yet
pleaded for. The first is, that the Sabbath had its Institution, Precept, or
Warranty for its Observation in Paradise before the Fall of man, immediately
upon the finishing of the Works of Creation. This is thought by many to be
plainly and positively asserted, Genesis 2. 2. and our Apostle seems directly to
confirm it, by placing the Blessing of the seventh Day, as the immediate
consequent of the finishing of the Works of God from the Foundation of the
World, Hebrews, Chap. 4, 5, 6. Others refer the Institution of the Sabbath, to
the Precept given about its Observation in the Wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16. 22,
23, 24, 25, 26. For those who deny its Original from the Beginning, or a
Morality in its Law, cannot admit that it was first given on Sinai, or had its
Spring in the Decalogue, nor can give any peculiar Reason why it should be
inserted therein, seeing express mention is made of its Observation some while
before the giving of the Law there. These therefore make it a mere Typical
Institution given, and that without the solemnity of the giving other solemn
Institutions, to the Church of the Hebrews only. And those of this Judgment
some of them contend that in those words of Moses, Genesis 2. 3. And God blessed
the seventh Day and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all
his works, a Prolepsis is to be admitted; that is, that what is there
occasionally inserted in the Narrative, and to be read in a Parenthesis, came
not to pass indeed until above two thousand years after, namely in the
Wilderness of Sin; where, and when, God first blessed the seventh Day and
sanctified it. And the Reason given for the supposed intersertion of the Words
in the Story of Moses, is, because when it came to pass indeed, that God so
blessed the seventh Day, he did it on the account of what he was then relating
of the Works that he made, and the Rest that ensued thereon. Others give such
an Interpretation of the Words as that they should contain no Appointment of a
Day of Rest; as we shall see. Those who assert the former Opinion deny that the
Precept, or rather Directions about the Observation of the Sabbath given unto
the people of Israel in the Wilderness of Sin, Exodus 16. was its first Original
Institution; but affirm that it was either a new Declaration of the Law, and
usage of it unto them, who in their long Bondage had lost both its Doctrine and
Practice, with a renewed reinforcement of it, by an especial circumstance of
the Manna not falling on that Day; or rather a particular Application of a
Catholic Moral Command unto the Economy of that Church, unto whose state the
people were then under a Praeludium in the Occasional Institution of sundry
particular Ordinances, as has been declared in our former Exercitations. This
is the plain state of the present Controversy about the Original of the
Sabbath, as to Time and Place, wherein what is according unto Truth, is now to
be enquired after.

Institution of the Sabbath from the Beginning of the world, is founded
principally on a double Testimony, one in the Old Testament, and the other in
the New. And both of them seem to me of so uncontrollable an Evidence, that I
have often wondered how ever any sober and Learned Persons undertook to evade
their ^^rce or Efficacy in this Cause. The first is that of Genesis 2. 1, 2, 3.
That the Heavens and the Earth were finished and all the Host of them; and on
the seventh Day God ended his work which he had made, and he rested on the
seventh Day from all his work which he had made. And God blessed the seventh
Day and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all his Work which
God created and made. There is indeed somewhat in this Text, which has given
Difficulty unto the Jews, and somewhat that the Heathen took offense at. That
which troubles the Jews is, that God is said to have finished his work on the
seventh Day. For they feared that somewhat might be hence drawn to the
prejudice of their absolute Rest on the seventh Day, whereon it seems God
himself wrought in the finishing of his Work. And Hierome judged that they
might be justly charged with this Consideration. Arctabimus, says he, Judaeos,
qui de otio Sabbati gloriantur, quod jam tunc in principio Sabbatum dissolutum
sit; dum Deus operatur in Sabbato complens opera sua in eo, and benedicens ipsi
diei, quia in illo universa complevit. We will urge the Jews with this, who
glory of their Sabbatical Rest, in that the Sabbath was broken or dissolved
from the Beginning; whilst God wrought in it, finishing his work, and blessed
the Day, because in it he finished all things. Hence the LXX. read the words by
an open corruption, (...); on the sixth Day; wherein they are followed by the
Syriack and Samaritan Versions. And the Rabbis grant that this was done on
purpose, that it might not be thought that God made any thing on the seventh
Day. But this scruple was every way needless. For do but suppose, that (...)
which expresses the Time past, does intend the Praeterpluperfect Tense, as the
Praeterperfect in the Hebrew must do, where occasion requires, seeing they have
no other to express that which at any time is past by; and it is plain that God
had perfected his Work, before the Beginning of the seventh Days Rest. And so
are the Words well rendered by Junius; Quum autem perfecisset Deus die septimo,
opus suum quod fecerat. Or we may say, Compleverat Die septimo.

That which the Heathen took offense at, was the Rest here ascribed unto God;
as though he had been wearied with his work. Hence was that of Rutilius in his
Itinerary;

Septima quaeque Dies turpi damnata veterno Ut delassati mollis imago Dei. The
sense of this Expression we shall afterward explain. In the mean time it is
certain that the Word here used does often signify only to cease, or give over
without respect either to weariness or Rest; as Job 32. 1. 1 Samuel 25. 9. So
that no cause of offense was given in the Application of it to God himself.
However Philo, lib. de Opific. Mund. refers this of Gods Rest, to his
contemplation of the works of his hands, and that not unmeetly as we shall see.
But set aside Prejudices and preconceived Opinions, and any man would think
that the Institution of the Sabbath is here as plainly expressed as in the
Fourth Commandment. The Words are the continuation of a plain Historical
Narration. Having finished the Account of the Creation of the World in the
first Chapter, and given a Recapitulation of it in the first Verse of this;
Moses declares what immediately ensued thereon; namely the Rest of God, on the
seventh Day, and his Blessing and sanctifying that Day whereon he so rested.
That Day which he rested he blessed and sanctified; even that individual Day in
the first place, and a Day in the Revolution of the same space of Time for
succeeding Generations. This is plain in the Words, or nothing can be thought
to be plainly expressed. And if there be any Appearance of Difficulty in those
words, he blessed and sanctified it, it is wholly taken away in the explication
given of them by himself afterward in the Fourth Commandment, where they are
plainly declared to intend its setting apart and Consecration to be a Day of
Sacred Rest. But yet Exceptions all put in to this plain open sense of the
words. Thus it is lately pleaded by Heddigerus Theol. Patriarch. Exercitat. 3.
sect. 58. Deus Die septimo cessaverat facere opus novum, quia sex diebus omnia
consummata erant. Ei diei benedixit eo ipso quod cessans ab opere suo,
ostendit, quod homo in cujus creatione quievit, factus sit propter nominis sui
glorificationem; quod cum majus fuerit caeteris quae hactenus creata sunt,
vocatur benedictio; eundem diem cui sic benedixit sanctificavit, quia and illo
die, and reliquo toto tempore constituerat se in homine sanctificare tanquam in
corona and gloria sui operis. Sanctificare enim est, eum qui sanctus est,
sanctum dicere and testari. Dies igitur and tempus sanctum erat and
agnoseebatur, non per se, sed per sanctitatem hominis, qui in tempore se
sanctificat, and cogitationes, and studia, and actiones suas Deo, qui sanctus
est, vindicat and consecrat. I understand not how God can be said to bless the
seventh Day, because man who was created the sixth Day was made for the Glory
of his Name. For all things, as well as man, were made for the Glory of God. He
made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. And they all declare his glory, Psalm.
19. Nor is it said, that God rested on the seventh Day from making of man, but
from all the works that he had made. Grant man who was last made, to have been
the most eminent part of the visible Creation, and most capable of immediate
giving glory to God yet it is plainly said that the Rest of God respected all
the works that he had made, which is twice repeated; besides that the works
themselves are summed up into the making of the Heavens and Earth and all the
Host of them. And wherein does this include the blessing of the seventh Day? it
may be better applied to the first, wherein man was made; for on the seventh
God did no more make man, than he did the Sun and Moon, which were made on the
fourth. Nor is there here any Distinction supposed between Gods resting on the
seventh Day, and his blessing of it, which yet are plainly distinguished in the
Text. To say he blessed and sanctified it, merely by resting on it, is
evidently to confound the things that are not only distinctly proposed in the
Text, but so as that one is laid down as the cause of the other. For because
God rested on the seventh Day, therefore he blessed it. Nor is the
Sanctification of the Day any better expressed. God, says he, had appointed on
that day and always to sanctify himself in man as the Crown and Glory of his
work. I wish this Learned Man had more clearly expressed himself. What Act of
God is it, that can be here intended? It must be the Purpose of his Will. This
therefore is given us as the sense of this place. God sanctified the seventh
Day, that is, God purposed from Eternity to sanctify himself always in man,
whom on the sixth Day he would create for his Glory. These things are so
forced, as that they scarcely afford a tolerable sense.

Author and some others of that expression to sanctify, that is to declare or
testify any Person or thing to be Holy, being spoken by God, and not of him
objectively, usual or to be justified. In reference unto God, our sanctifying
him or his Name, is indeed to testify or declare his Holiness, by our giving
Honor and Glory to him, in our Holy Obedience. But as to men and things, to
sanctify them is either really to sanctify them by making them internally
holy, or to separate and dedicate them unto Holy Uses; the former peculiar to
Persons, the latter common to them with other things made sacred, by an
authoritative separation from profane or common Uses, unto a peculiar, sacred,
or holy Use in the Worship of God. And the following words in our Author, that
the Day is sanctified and made holy not in it self, but by the Holiness of man,
any more to the purpose. For as man was no more created on that Day than the
Beasts of the Field, so that from his Holiness no color can be taken to
ascribe Holiness unto the Day; so it is not consistent with what was before
asserted, that the sanctification intended is the Holiness of God himself as
declared in his works; for now it is made the Holiness of Man.

The sense of the words is plain, and are but darkened by these circumlocutions.
(...) The Jews do well express the general sense of the words when they say of
the Day, that (...), it was divided or distinguished from the common nature of
things in the world; namely, by having a new Sacred Relation added unto it. For
that the Day it self is the subject spoken of, as the object of Gods blessing
and sanctification, nothing but unallowable Prejudice will deny. And this to be
the sense of the Expressions, both the words used to declare the Acts of God
about it do declare.

(1.) (...) he blessed it. Gods Blessing as the Jews say, and they say well
therein, is (...) an Addition of Good. It relates to some thing that has a
real present Existence, to which it makes an Addition of some farther Good,
than it was before partaker of. Hereof, as we said, the Day in this place was
the Direct and immediate Object; God blessed it. Some peculiar Good was added
unto it. Let this be inquired into what it was, and wherein it did consist, and
the meaning of the words will be evident. It must be somewhat whereby it was
preferred unto, or exalted above other days. When any thing of that nature is
assigned, besides a Relation given unto it to the Worship of God, it shall be
considered. That this was it, is plain from the Nature of the thing it self,
and from the actual separation and use of it to that purpose which did ensue.

The other Word (...) and sanctified it, is farther instructive in the
intention of God, and is also exegetical of the former. Suppose still, as the
Text will not allow us to do otherwise, that the Day is the Object of this
Sanctification, and it is not possible to assign any other sense of the Words,
but that God ^^t apart by his Institution that Day to be the Day of his
Worship, to be spent in a Sacred Rest unto himself; And this is declared to be
the intendment of the Word in the Decalogue, where it is used again to the same
purpose: For none ever doubted but that the meaning of (...) and he sanctified
it, therein, is any other, but that by his Institution and command he set it
apart for a Day of holy Rest: And this signification of that Word is not only
most common, but solely to be admitted in the Old Testament, if Cogent Reason
be not given to the contrary; as where it denotes a Dedication and separation
to Civil uses, and not to Sacred, as it sometimes does, still retaining its
general nature of separation: And therefore I will not deny but that these two
words may signify the same thing, the one being merely exegetical of the
other; He blessed it, by sanctifying of it: as Numb. 7. 1. (...); And he
anointed them and sanctified them: that is, he sanctified them by anointing
them; or by their Unction set them apart unto an Holy Use, which is the
Instance of Abarbinel on this place: This then is that which is affirmed by
Moses. On the seventh Day after he had finished his work, God rested or ceased
from working, and thereon, blessed and sanctified the seventh Day, or set it
apart unto holy uses for their Observance, by whom he was to be worshipped in
this world, and whom he had newly made for that Purpose. God then sanctified
this Day, Not that he kept it holy himself, which in no sense the Divine Nature
is capable of; nor that he purified it, and made it inherently holy, which the
nature of the Day is incapable of; nor that he celebrated that which in it self
was holy, as we sanctify his name, which is the act of an inferior toward a
superior; but that he set it apart to sacred use authoritatively; requiring us
to sanctify it in that use obedientially. And if you allow not this original
sanctification of the seventh Day, the first Instance of its solemn, joint,
National Observation is introduced with a strange abruptness. It is said Exodus
16. where this Instance is given, that on the sixth day the people gathered
twice as much bread as on any other day, namely two Omers for one man; which
the Rulers taking notice of, acquainted Moses with it, v. 22. And Moses in
answer to the Rulers of the Congregation who had made the Information gives the
Reason of it; To morrow, says he, is the Rest of the holy Sabbath to the Lord.
v. 23. Many of the Jews can give some color to this manner of Expression; for
they assign as we have showed, the Revelation and Institution of the Sabbath
unto the Station in Mara, Exodus 15. which was almost a Month before. So they
think that no more is here intended but a direction for the solemn Observance
of that Day which was before instituted, with particular respect unto the
gathering of Manna, which the people being commanded in General before to
gather, every day according to their eating, and not to keep any of it until
the next day, the Rulers might well doubt whether they ought not to have
gathered it on the Sabbath also; not being able to reconcile a seeming
contradiction between those two commands, of gathering Manna every day, and of
resting on the seventh. But those by whom the Fancy about the Station in Mara,
is rejected, as it is rejected by most Christians, and who will not admit of
its Original Institution from the Beginning, can scarce give a tolerable
Account of this manner of Expression: Without the least intimation of
Institution and Command, it is only said, to morrow is the Sabbath holy to the
Lord; that is for you to keep holy. But on the supposition contended for, the
discourse in that place with the Reason of it is plain and evident. For there
being a previous Institution of the seventh Days Rest, the Observation whereof
was partly gone into disuse, and the Day it self being then to receive a new
peculiar Application to the Church State of that people, the Reason both of the
peoples fact, and the Rulers doubt, and Moses's Resolution is plain and obvious.

original of a seventh Days Sabbatical Rest from the Foundation of the World.
And this is taken not from the signification of the words, but the connection
and disposition of them in the Discourse of Moses. For suppose that by Gods
Blessing and sanctifying the seventh Day, the separation of it unto sacred Uses
is intended, yet this does not prove that it was so sanctified immediately upon
the finishing of the Work of Creation. For say some Learned men, those words of
v. 3. And God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because that in it he
had rested from all his Work which God created and made, are inserted
occasionally into the Discourse of Moses; from what afterward came to pass.
They are not therefore, as they suppose, a continued part of the Historical
Narration there insisted on, but are inserted into it by way of Prolepsis or
Anticipation, and are to be read as it were in a Parenthesis. For supposing
that Moses wrote not the Book of Genesis until after the giving of the Law,
(which I will not contend about, though it be assumed gratis in this Discourse
there being a Respect had unto the Rest of God when his Works were finished in
the Institution of the Sabbath, upon the Historical Relation of that Rest Mises
interserts what so long after was done and appointed on the Account thereof.
And so the sense of the Words must be; that God rested on the seventh day from
all his works that he had made; that is the next Day after the finishing of the
Works of Creation; wherefore, two thousand four hundred years after, God
blessed and sanctified the seventh day, not that seventh Day whereon he rested,
with them that succeeded in the like Revolution of Time, but a seventh Day that
fell out so long after, which was not blessed nor sanctified before. I know not
well how men Learned and Sober can offer more hardship unto a Text, then is put
upon this before us, by this Interpretation. The connection of the Words is
plain and equal. And the Heavens and the Earth and all the Host of them were
finished; And God had finished on the seventh day all his work that he had
made; and he rested the seventh day from all his work that he had made; And God
blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because in it God rested from all
his work which he had created and made. You may as well break off the order and
continuation of the Words and Discourse in any other place, as in that
pretended. And it may be as well feigned that God finished his work on the
seventh day, and afterward rested another seventh day; as that he rested the
seventh day, and afterward blessed and sanctified another. It is true there
may be sundry Instances given out of the Scripture of sundry things inserted in
Historical Narrations by way of Anticipation, which fell not out until after
the time wherein mention is made of them: But they are mostly such as fell out
in the same Age or Generation; the matter of the whole Narration being entire
within the memory of men. But of so monstrous and uncouth a Prolepsis as this
would be, which is supposed, no Instance can be given in the Scripture, or any
sober Author; especially without the least notice given that such it is. And
such Schemes of Writing are not to be imagined, unless necessity from the
things themselves spoken of, compel us to admit them; much less where the
matter treated of, and the coherence of the words, do necessarily exclude such
an Imagination, as it is in this place. For without the Introduction of the
words mentioned, neither is the Discourse complete, nor the matter of Fact
absolved. And what lies against our Construction and Interpretation of these
words, from the Arguments insisted on to prove the Institution of the Sabbath
in the Wilderness, shall be afterward considered.

New Testament, is that of our Apostle; Heb. 4. 3, 4. For we who have believed
do enter into Rest; as he said, as I swear in my wrath, if they shall enter
into my Rest; although the works were finished from the Foundation of the
world. For he speaks somewhere concerning the seventh day in this wise. And
God rested on the seventh day from all his works. Having insisted at large on
this place, with the whole ensuing Discourse in our Exposition of the Chapter
it self, I shall here but briefly reflect upon it, referring the Reader for its
full Vindication unto its proper place. The present Design is to convince the
Hebrews, of their concernment in the Promise of entering into the Rest of God;
namely that Promise and Rest which yet remained, and were prophesied of, Psalm.
91. To this purpose he manifests, that notwithstanding any other Rest of God,
that was mentioned in the Scripture, there yet remained another Rest for them
that did, or would believe in Christ through the Gospel. In the proof and
confirmation hereof he takes into consideration the several Rests of God, under
the several States of the Church which were now passed and gone. And first he
fixes upon the Sabbatical Rest of the seventh day, as that which was the first
in Order, first instituted, first enjoyed or observed. And this he says ensued
upon the finishing of the works of Creation. This the order of the words and
coherence of them require. Although the works were finished from the foundation
of the world, for he speaks concerning the seventh Day on this wise; The
works and the finishing of them did not at all belong to the Apostles Discourse
or Purpose, but only as they denoted the Beginning of the seventh days
Sabbatical Rest. For it is the several Rests of God alone, that he is enquiring
after. The first Rest mentioned, says he, cannot be that intended in the
Psalm; because that Rest began from the foundation of the world; but this
mentioned by David is promised, as he speaks, so long a time after. And what
was this Rest? Was it merely Gods ceasing from his own works? This the Apostle
had no concernment in. For he treats of no Rest of God absolutely, but of
such a Rest as men by Faith and Obedience might enter into. Such as was that
afterward in the Land of Canaan; and that also which he now proposed to them
in the Promise of the Gospel; both which God calls his Rests, and inviteth
others unto an entrance into them. Such therefore must be the Rest of God here
intended; for concerning his Rest absolutely, or his mere Cessation from
working, he had no Reason to treat. For his Design was only to show, that
notwithstanding the other Rests that were proposed unto men for to obtain an
Entrance into them, there yet remained another Rest to be entered into, and
enjoyed under the Gospel. Such a Rest therefore there was instituted and
appointed of God, from the Foundation of the world immediately upon the
finishing of the works of Creation; which sixeth immoveably the Beginning of
the Sabbatical Rest. The full Vindication of this Testimony, the Reader may
find in the Exposition it self, whither he is referred. And I do suppose that
no cause can be confirmed with more clear and undeniable Testimonies: The
Observation and Tradition of this Institution, whereby it will be farther
confirmed, are next to be enquired after.

seventh Day Sabbath was piously observed by the Patriarchs, who retained a due
Remembrance of Divine Revelations, is out of Controversy amongst all that
acknowledge the Institution it self; by others it is denied that they may not
be forced to acknowledge such an Institution. And indeed it is so fallen out
with the two great Ordinances of Divine Worship before the giving of the Law,
the one instituted before the Fall, the other immediately upon it, that they
should have contrary Lots in this matter; namely Sacrifices, and the Sabbath.
Sacrifices we find constantly observed by Holy men of old, although we read not
of their Express Institution. But from their Observation we do, and may
conclude that they were Instituted, although that Institution be not expressly
recorded. The Sabbath we find expressly instituted, and therefore do, and may
justly conclude that it was constantly observed, although that Observation be
not directly and in terms remembered. But yet as there is such light into the
Institution of Sacrifices as may enable us to justify them by whom they were
used, that they acted therein according to the mind of God, and in Obedience
unto his Will, as we have elsewhere demonstrated; so there want not such
Instances of the Observation of the Sabbath, as may confirm the Original Divine
Institution of it, pleaded for. This therefore I shall a little enquire into.

Many of the Jewish Masters, as we observed before, ascribe the Original of the
Sabbath unto the Statute given them in Mara, Exodus 15. And yet the same persons
grant that it was observed by the Religious Patriarchs before, especially by
Abraham, unto whom the knowledge of it was granted by peculiar Privilege. But
these things are mutually destructive of each other. For they have nothing to
prove the Institution of the Sabbath in Mara, but those words of v. 25. (...),
there he gave him a Statute and a Judgment; And it is said of Abraham, that he
taught his Household and Children after him to keep the way of the Lord to do
Justice and Judgment, Genesis 18. 19. If then the Observation of the Sabbath be a
Statute or Ordinance, and was made known to Abraham, it is certain that he
instructed his household and children, all his Posterity, in their Duty with
respect thereunto. And if so, it could not be first revealed unto them at Mara.
Others therefore of their Masters do grant, as we observed also, the Original
of the Sabbath from the Creation, and do assert the Patriarchal Observation of
it upon that Foundation. The Instances I confess which they make use of, are
not absolutely cogent, but yet considered with other circumstances wherewith
they are strengthened, they may be allowed to conclude unto an high probability.
Some of them are collected by Manasse Ben Israel; Lib. de Creat. Problem. 8.
says he, Dico quemadmodum traditio creationis Mundipenes Abrahamum and ejus
posteros tantum fuit; it a etiam ex dictamine Legis naturalis Sabbatum ab iis
solis cultum fuisse. De Abrahamo dicit sacra Scriptura, Observavit cultum meum.
((...)) Genesis 26. 5. Quo loco custodia Sabbati intelligitur. De Jacobo idem
affirmant veteros, ex eo loco quo dicitur venisse ad Salem, and castra posuisse
c regione vel ad conspectum civitatis; ((...)) Genesis 33. 18. Quia enim Sabbatum,
inquiunt, instabat, non licebat ei ulterius proficisci, sed subsistebat ante
urbem. Idem assirunt de Jasepho, quando dicitur jussisse servis suis ut
mactarent and praepararent, id propter Sabbatum factum fuisse. Ad hoc refertur
in sera and Rabba Mosem petiisse a Pharaone in Aegypto, ut afflicto populo suo
permitteret uno die cessare a Laboribus; eoqu^ impetrato, ex traditione
elegisse Sabbatum; ex his omnibus colligitur Sabbatum ante datam Legem
observatum fuisse. So far he. Of the Observation of the Sabbath by the Light of
Nature we shall treat afterward. As to the Instances mentioned by him, That
concerning Abraham is not destitute of good probability. That expression (...),
and kept my charge, seems to have peculiar respect unto the Sabbath, called
elsewhere the charge of God. Hence some of those amongst Christians who contend
for the Wilderness Original of the Sabbath, yet grant, that probably there was
a free Observation of it among the Patriarchs, from the Tradition they had of
the Rest of God upon the Creation of the world. So Torniellus, Annal. Vet.
Test. Suarez. de Religione, lib. 2. cap. 1. s. 3. Prideaux Orat. de Sabbat. For
as there is no doubt but that the Creation of the World was one of the
principal Articles of their Faith, as our Apostle also asserts; Heb. 11. 3. So
it is fond to imagine that they had utterly lost the Tradition of the Rest of
God upon the finishing of his works; and it may easily be conceived what that
would influence them unto, should you suppose that they had lost the
remembrance of its express Institution, which will not be granted. What
therefore may be certainly judged or determined of their practice in this
matter, shall be briefly declared.

That all the Ancient Patriarchs, before the giving of the Law, diligently
observed the solemn Worship of God in and with their Families, and those under
their Rule, or any way belonging to their care and disposal, both their own
Piety forbids us to question, and the Testimony given them, that they walked
with God, and by faith therein obtained a Good Report, gives us the highest
Assurance. Now of all Obedience unto God Faith is the Principle and Foundation,
without which it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11. 6. This Faith does
always, (and must always so do) respect the Command and Promise of God, which
gives it its Formal Nature. For no other Principle, though it may produce the
like Actions with it, is Divine Faith, but what respects the Command and
Promise of God, so as to be steered, directed, guided, and bounded by them.
Unto this Solemn Worship of God which in Faith they thus attended unto, some
stated time is indispensibly necessary. And therefore that some Portion of time
should be set apart to that purpose, is acknowledged, almost by all, to be a
Dictate of the Law of Nature; and we shall afterward prove it so to be. What
ground have we now to imagine, that the Holy Men of old were left without
Divine direction in this matter? That a Designation and Limitation of this Time
was or would have been of great Use and Advantage unto them, none can deny.
Considering therefore the dealings of God with them, and how frequently he
renewed unto them the knowledge of his Will by occasional Revelation, it cannot
be supposed that Divine Grace was wanting unto them herein. Besides in what
they did in this kind, they are expressly said to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis
18. 19. and in particular, his Charge, his Commandments, his Statutes and his
Laws. Chap. 26. 5. which comprize all the Institutions and Ordinances of Divine
Worship. That they did any thing of themselves, from their own Wisdom and
Invention in the Worship of God, is no where intimated; nor are they any where
commended on the account thereof: Yea to do a thing in Faith, as they did what
ever of this kind they did, and that as a part of the Worship of God, is to do
it upon the command of God. And the Institution mentioned, upon the Reason of
Gods Rest joined with it, is so express, as that none can doubt a Practice
conformable unto it, by all that truly feared the Lord, although the
particulars of it should not be recorded.

septenary Number, and the fixing of the first Period of time, (next unto that
which is absolutely natural and appearing so to the senses, of night and day,
with the composition of the Night and Day into one Measure of time, which was
also from the Original creation and conjunction of Evening and Morning into one
Day) unto a septenary Revolution of days, was so Catholic in the world; and
that both amongst Nations in general, and particularly amongst Individual
Persons, that were enquiring and contemplative. Not only that sort of
Philosophers who expressed their Apprehensions Mystically by Numbers, as the
Pythagoreans and some of the Platonicks, who from hence took the occasion of
that way of teaching and Instruction, esteemed the septenary Number sacred, but
those also did so, who resolved their Observations into things Natural or
Physical. For in all their Notions and Speculations about the Pleiades, and
Triones in Heaven; Lunar Changes, Sounds of Instruments, Variations in the Age
of man, Critical Days in bodily Distempers, and Transactions of Affairs
Private and Public, they found a Respect thereunto. It must therefore be
granted, that there is a great Impression left on the whole Creation of a
Regard to this Number, whereof Instances might be multiplied. The Ground hereof
was no other but an Emanation from the Old Tradition of the Creation of the
world, and the Rest that ensued on the seventh Day. So say the ancient Verses
which some ascribe to Linus, others to Callimachus.

(...)
(...).
In seven all things were perfected, in the Starry Heavens, which appear in
their Orbs, or Circles, in the Rolling or voluble years. This was the true
Original of their Notions concerning the sacredness of the Number seven. But
when this was obscured or lost amongst them, as were the greatest and most
important sacred Truths communicated unto man, in his Creation, they, many of
them retaining the Principle of the sacred number, invented other Reasons for
it of no importance. Some of these were Arithmetical, some Harmonical or
Musical Notions. But were their Reasons for it never so infirm, the thing it
self they still retained. Hence were their Notations of this number; It was
termed by them the Virgin, and Pallas; and (...), which sacredly is, says
Hesychius, (...), the number of seven. It is hard to give any other Account,
whence all these conceptions should arise, besides that insisted on. From the
Original Impression made on the minds of men by the Instruction of the Law of
Creation, which they were made under, and the Tradition of the Creation of the
world in six days, closed with an additional Day of Sacred Rest, did these
Notions and obscure Remembrances of the specialty of that Number arise. And
although we have not yet enquired what Influence into the Law of Creation, as
instructive and directive of our Actions, the six days work had, with its
consequential Day of Rest; yet all will grant, that whatever it were, it was
far more clear and cogent unto man in Innocence, directly obliged by that Law,
and able to understand its voice in all things, than it could be to them who by
the Effects of it made some dark enquiries after it; who were yet able to
conclude, that there was somewhat sacred in the number of seven, though they
knew not well what.

Number of seven only in General Sacred amongst them, but there are Testimonies
produced out of the most ancient Writers amongst the Heathens, expressing a
Notion of a seventh Days Sacred Feast and Rest. Many of these were of old
collected by Clemens Alexandrinus, and by Eusebius out of Aristobulus a Learned
Jew. They have by many been insisted on, and yet I think it not amiss here once
more to report them. The words of Aristobulus wherewith he prefaceth his
Allegation of them are in Eusebius, Praepar. Evangel. lib. 13. cap. 12.
speaking of the seventh Day; (...). Homer and Hesiod taking it out of our Books
do openly affirm that it is sacred. That what they affirm herein was taken from
the Jewish Books I much question; nor do I think that in their time, when the
Law only was written, that the Nations of the world had any the least
acquaintance with their Writings; nor much, until after the Babylonish
Captivity, when they began to be taken notice of; which was principally
diffused under the Persian Empire, by their commerce with the Graecians, who
enquired into all things of that nature, and that had an appearance of secret
Wisdom. But these Apprehensions what ever they were, they seem rather to have
taken up from the secret insinuations of the Law of Creation, and the Tradition
that was in the world, of the Matter of Fact. Out of Hefiod therefore he cites
the following Testimonies.

(...).
The first, the fourth, and the seventh Day is sacred.

Again,

(...).
The seventh again, the sacred or illustrious Light of the Sun.

And out of Homer;

(...).
Then came the seventh Day that is sacred.
Again;

(...).
It was the seventh Day wherein all things were finished, or perfected;

Again,

(...).
We left the flood of Acheron on the seventh Day.

Whereunto he subjoyns an ingenious Exposition about the Relinquishment of the
Oblivion of Error, by virtue of the sacredness of the Number seven.

He adds also out of Linus.

(...).
The seventh Day wherein all things were finished.

Again,

(...),
(...).
The seventh Day among the best things, the seventh is the Nativity of all
things.

The seventh is amongst the chiefest; and is the perfect Day.

Again,

(...)
(...).
of which before.

The same Testimonies he repeats again in his next Chapter out of Clemens, with
an Alteration of some few words not of any importance: And the Verses ascribed
to Linus in Aristobulus, are said to be the work of Callimachus in Clemens,
which is not of our concernment. Testimonies to the same purpose may be taken
out of some of the Roman Writers; so Tibullus giving an Account of the excuses
he made for his unwillingness to leave Rome,

Aut ego sum causatus aves, aut omina dira Saturni sacra me tenuisse Die.
Either I laid it on the Birds; (he had no encouraging Augury,) or that bad
Omens detained me on the sacred Day of Saturn. Lib. 1. Eleg. 3.

one Day sacred in the Week. Nor can I grant on the other hand, that those
ancient Assertions of Linus, Homer, and Hesiod, are to be measured by the late
Roman Writers, Poets or others, who ascribe the seventh Days sacred Feast to
the Jews in way of Reproach; as Ovid;

-- nec te peregrina morentur Sabbata.

Stay not (thy journey) for foreign Sabbaths.

And

Culta Palaestino septima festa viro;
The seventh Day Feast observed by the Jew.
Nor shall I plead the Testimony of Lampridius concerning the Emperor
Alexander Severus going unto the Capitol, and the Temples on the seventh Day;
seeing in those times he might learn that Observance from the Jews, whose
customs he had occasion to be acquainted with. For all ancient Traditions were
before this time utterly worn out, or inextricably corrupted. And when the Jews
by their conversation with the Romans, after the Wars of Pompey, began to
represent them unto them again, the generality despised them all, out of their
hatred and contempt of that people. And I do know, that sundry Learned men,
especially two of late, Gomarus and Seldom have endeavored to show, that the
Testimonies usually produced in this case do not prove, what they are urged
for. Great pains they have taken to refer them all to the sacredness of the
septenary number before mentioned, or the seventh day of the Month, sacred, as
is pretended, on the Account of the Birth of Apollo, whereunto indeed it is
evident that Hesiod has respect in his (...). But the Authority of Aristobulus
and Clemens is not to be despised. Something they knew undoubtedly of the state
of things in the world in their own Days, and those that went before. And they
do not only instance in the Testimonies before rehearsed, but also assert, that
the sacredness of one of the seven days was generally admitted by all. And the
Testimonies of Philo and Josephus are so express to that purpose, as that their
force cannot be waved, without offering violence unto their words. The words of
Philo we expressed before. And Josephus in his second Book against Appion,
says positively, (...). There is neither any City of the Greeks, nor
Barbarians, nor any Nation whatever, to whom our custom of Resting on the
seventh day is not come. And this in the words foregoing he affirms to have
been (...), from a long time before, as not taken up by an occasional
acquaintance with them. And Lucian in his Pseudologista, tells us that Children
at School were exempted from studying, (...), on the seventh Days. And
Tertullian in his Apology, cap. 16. tells the Gentiles of their Sabbaths or
Feasts on Saturday. But yet as was intimated* I shall grant, that the
Observation of a Weekly Sacred Feast is not proved by the Testimonies produced,
which is all that those who oppose them do labor to disprove. But I desire to
know from what Original these Traditions were derived, and whether any can be
assigned unto them, but that of the Original Institution of the Sabbatical
Rest. It is known that this was common amongst them; that when they had a
general Notion or Tradition of any thing, whose true Cause, Reason, and
Beginning they knew not, they would faign a Reason or occasion of it,
accommodate to their present Apprehensions and Practices, as I have elsewhere
evinced and cleared. Having therefore amongst them the Tradition of a seventh
Days Sacred Rest, which was originally Catholic, and having long lost the
Practice and Observance of it, as well as its Cause and Reason, they laid hold
on any thing to affix it unto, which might have any Resemblance unto what was
vulgarly received amongst them, or what they could divine in their more curious
speculations.

Hebdomadal Revolution of Time generally admitted in the world, is also a great
Testimony unto the Original Institution of the Sabbath. Of old it was
Catholic, and is at present received among those Nations, whose converse was
not begun until of late, with any of those parts of the world, where there is a
light gone forth in these things from the Scripture. All Nations, I say, in all
Ages have from Time immemorial, made the Revolution of seven Days to be the
first stated Period of Time. And this Observation is still continued throughout
the world, unless amongst them, who in other things are openly degenerated from
the Law of Nature; as those barbarous Indians who have no computation of times,
but by Sleeps, Moons, and Winters. The measure of time by a Day and Night is
directed unto sense, by the diurnal course of the Sun: Lunar Months, and Solar
years, are of an unavoidable Observation unto all Rational Creatures. Whence
therefore all men have reckoned Time by Days, Months, and Years, is obvious
unto all. But whence the Hebdomadal Revolution, or Weekly Period of Time should
make its Entrance, and obtain a Catholic Admittance, no man can give an
Account, but with respect to some Impressions on the minds of men from the
Constitution and Law of our Natures, with the Tradition of a Sabbatical Rest
instituted from the Foundation of the world. Other Original, whether Artificial
and Arbitrary, or Occasional, it could not have. Nothing of any such thing,
has left the least footsteps of its ever being in any of the Memorials of
Times past. Neither could any thing of so low an Original or Spring, be
elevated to such an Height, as to diffuse it self through the whole world. A
derivation of this Observation from the Chaldaeans and Egyptians, who retained
the deepest tincture of Original Traditions, has been manifested by others.
And so fixed was this computation of time on their minds, who knew not the
Reason of it, that when they made a disposition of the Days of the year into
any other Period on accounts Civil or Sacred, yet they still retained this
also. So the Romans, as appears by the Fragments of their old Kalendars, had
their Nundinae which were days of Vacation from Labor, on the eighth, or as
some think the ninth Days recurring, but yet still made use of the stated
Weekly period. It is of some consideration in this cause, and is usually urged
to this purpose; that Noah observed the septenary Revolution of Days, in
sending forth the Dove out of the Ark; Genesis 8. 10, 12. That this was done
casually is not to be imagined. Nor can any Reason be given why,
notwithstanding the disappointment he met with, the first and second time, he
should still abide seven days before he sent again, if you consider only the
natural condition of the Flood, or the Waters in their abatement. A Revolution
of Days, and that upon a sacred account, was doubtless attended unto by him.
And I should suppose that he still sent out the Dove the next day after the
Sabbath, to see as it were, whether God had returned again to Rest in the works
of his hands. And Genesis 29. 27. a Week is spoken of as a known account of Days
or Time. Fulfill her Week; that is, not a Week of years, as he had done for
Rachel; but fulfill a Week of Days in the Festivals of his marriage with Leah.
For (...) can have no other sense, seeing (...) of the Feminine Gender relates
unto Leah, whose Nuptials were to be celebrated, and not to (...) a Week, which
is of the Masculine. And it was the custom in those ancient times of the world,
to continue the celebration of a Marriage Feast for seven Days, or a Week: as
Judge. 14. 12, 15, 17. The seven days of the Feast, is spoken of as a thing
commonly known and in vulgar use.

Heathen, or the contemplative Persons amongst them, observing the unfixed,
various Motions of the seven Planetary Luminaries, as they used and abused it
to other Ends, so they applied their Number and Names unto so many days, which
were thereby as it were dedicated unto them, which shut them up in that
septenary Number. But that the Observation of the Weekly Revolution of Time,
was from the Philosophers, and not the common consent of the people, does not
appear. For those observed also the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and yet made
that no Rule to reckon Time or Days by. Besides the Observation of the Site
and Positure of the seven Planets as to their Height or Elevation with Respect
unto one another, is as ancient as the Observation of their peculiar and
various motions. And upon the first discovery thereof, all granted this to be
their Order, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna. What Alteration
is made herein by the late Hypothesis, fixing the Sun as in the Center of the
World, built on fallible Phenomenon, and advanced by many arbitrary
Presumptions, against evident Testimonies of Scripture, and Reasons as probable
as any are produced in its confirmation, is here of no consideration. For it is
certain that all the world in former Ages was otherwise minded. And our
Argument is not taken in this matter from what really was true, but from what
was universally apprehended so to be. Now whence should it be, that, if this
limiting the first Revolution of Time unto seven Days proceeded from the
Planetary Denominations fixed to the Days of the year arbitrarily, the Order
among the Planets should be so changed, as every one sees it to be? For in the
Assignation of the Names of the Planets to the Days of the Week, the midst is
taken out first, and so the fourth in order inclusive falls to be next, until
the whole Cycle be finished. Some would take the Reason hereof from the
proportion of Harmony, some from the Diurnal Ascension of the Planets which is
ridiculous. So Dio Cassius in the thirty seventh Book of his Histories, the
third of them that remain, treating of the taking of Jerusalem by Pompey on the
seventh Day of the Week, when the people out of their superstition made not
their wonted Resistance, enquires on that occasion, of the Reason of the
Assignation of the Planetary Names to the Days of the Week, which he affirms
to have had its Original from the Egyptians. And two Reasons he tells us that
he had heard of the especial Assignation of their several Names unto the
several Days, in the order wherein they are commonly used. The first is that
it was taken from the Harmony (...); or the Musical Note of Diatessaron. For
beginning says he with Saturn in the highest Sphere, and so passing unto the
fourth in order, it is the Sun, and so throughout in the whole Revolution. His
other Reason is; that taking the day and night, beginning with the first hour,
and assigning the Name of a Planet to each hour, beginning with Saturn for the
Reason before mentioned, and the succeeding hours to the other Planets in their
Order; so renewing the numerations to the end of the four and twenty hours, the
first hour of the next day falls to the Sun; and so of the day following to the
Moon, and the remainder to the other Planets in the order commonly ascribed
unto them. What there is in these conjectures, I know not: But both of them
give the precedence of the first days, as they are fixed, unto that which in
the true and natural order of the Days is the last. There is a good account
given us of this matter by Johannes Philoponus; (...), or de Creation. Mund.
lib. 7. cap. 14. (...). This, says he, is consented unto amongst all men, that
there are only seven days, which by a Revolution into themselves, compose the
whole of Time; whereof we can assign no other Reason, but that only which is
given by Moses; the Grecians indeed ascribe the seven days to the seven
Planets, the first to the Sun, the second to the Moon, the third to Mars, the
fourth to Mercury, the fifth to Jupiter, the sixth to Venus, the seventh to
Saturn; and hereby they first acknowledge that there are but seven days
whereof all time consists; but farther they can give no Reason, why the Days
are so disposed of unto the Planets. For why did they not rather constitute
twelve days, from the twelve parts of the Zodiac through which the Sun
passing perfecteth the year? Nor can any Reason be assigned from the Motions of
the Planets, why any one of the Days is inscribed to any of them. It is most
likely therefore that the Gentiles, as they without just Reason or Cause
dedicate the Planets by the Names of Demons and Hero's, so when they observed
that there were seven days acknowledged by all, and that the Planets were so
many in number, they did according to their pleasure in the two equal Numbers,
assign one day to one Planet, another to another; to which he adds truly;
(...). Only the great Moses being divinely inspired has delivered unto men the
true Reason of the septenary Number of the days. So far he. There seems to be
some Reason for assigning the conduct of time to the Sun, or calling the first
day by his name, as also of adjoining the Moon unto him in the next place. For
the succession of the Sun though created the fourth day, in point of Use, unto
that diffused Light which was created the first Day, with its being the
Instrumental Cause and Measure of every day, with the Tradition of the
Appointment of Sun and Moon to rule and distinguish times and seasons, with the
sensible Effects and Operations of them, might easily give them the
Pre-eminence by common consent in giving Names unto the Days of the Week. The
other Names were added and applied according to some prevailing Fictions
concerning the Planets, and their Respect unto Men and their Actions. But the
Hebdomadal Period of Time, was fixed long before the imposition of those Names
prevailed among the Grecians and the Romans, which perhaps is not very
anciently, as Dio thinks, though they derived them from the Chaldaeans and
Egyptians. And that the acknowledgement of seven Days, gave occasion to fix
unto them the Names of the seven Planets, and not that the Observation of the
seven Planets gave occasion to compute the Days of the World by sevens, is
manifest from hence; in that many Nations admitting of the Hebdomadal
Revolution of Time, gave the days in it quite other Names, as various Reasons
or Occasions did suggest them unto them. In the ancient Celtick or German
Tongue, and all Languages thence deriving, the Sun and Moon only on the Reasons
before mentioned giving name to the leading Days of the Week, the rest of the
days are distinguished and signalized with the Names of the Conductors of
their first great Colonies, in the North-Western Parts of the World. For to
fancy that Tuisco is the same with Mars, Wooden with Mercury, Thor with
Jupiter, and Frea with Venus, is to fancy what we please, without the least
ground of probability. Nor did the Celtae ever call the Planets by those Names;
so that if there be any Allusion in those Names unto those of the Grecians and
Romans, it was not taken from their natural speculation about the Planets, but
from the pleasing Fictions about Deified Heroes, wherein they were imitated by
most Nations of the world. The English and Dutch have taken in Saturday from
Saturn; other Nations of the same extract retain their own occasional Names.
The observation therefore of the seven Planets, gave neither Rise, Reason,
Cause, nor Occasion, to this Original Period of Time in an Hebdomadal
Revolution of Days. And hence Theophilus Antiochenus, lib. 2. ad Antolychum
affirms, that all mortal men agreed in the Appellation of the seventh Day,
whose Testimony is of good force, though himself mistake the Original of that
Appellation. For he tells us, that (...); by an Error common to many of the
Ancients, who could not distinguish between (...) and (...). It is also to this
purpose observed by Rivet and Seldom from Salmasius, out of Georgius Syncallus,
in his Chronology, that the Patriarchs reckoned the times, or distinguished
them (...), by Weeks only. This therefore is to me no small Evidence of the
Institution and Observation of the Sabbath from the Foundation of the world.
For hence did this Periodical Revolution of Time, prevail amongst the Nations,
even those who had not the least converse with, or knowledge of the Jews or
their customs, after the Command and Observation of it was renewed amongst
them. Not that this Evidence is of it self a sufficient Testimony unto its
Original Institution, nor that going before; but that the Piety of the
Patriarchs, and Traditions of the Apostate Gentiles, do confirm the Time of
that Institution, which is so expressly recorded.

Sabbath was peculiar to the Jews alone, and that it was given unto them in the
Wilderness, and not at all before. Many of the Jews as was declared, are of
this Judgment, and thence call the Sabbath the Bride of their Nation, that
which God gave to them as he did Eve to Adam, and to no other. Abulensis
contends for this Opinion in his Comment on Exodus 16. who is followed by some
Expositors of the Roman Church; and opposed by others, as Cornelius a Lapide,
etc. The same Difference in Judgment is found amongst the Protestant Divines.
The Dissertations of Rivet and Gomarus on this subject are well known. The
Controversy being of late renewed, especially among some of the Belgic
Divines, I shall take under consideration the Arguments of one of them who has
last of all defended this cause, and weigh of what importance they are;
separating as much as we can, between the matter of our present Dispute, which
is the Original of the Sabbath, and that of the Causes of it which we shall
nextly enquire into.

Quis vero dicere audebit, verba haec convenire in hominem ab initio
Creationis, sicut hic statuitur? (that is by his Adversary) an illi incumbebat
opus and quidem servile, idque per sex dies? an ipsi erant servi and ancillae?
an jumenta requietis indigentia? an peregrini inter portas ejus? quis non videt
ad solum Israelitarum statum in toto illo praecepto respici? Ita Calvinus in
Genesis 2. Postea in lege novum de Sabbato praeceptum datum est, quod Judaeis and
quidem ad tempus peculiare foret; fuit enim legalis ceremonia, spiritualem
quietem adumbrans, cujus in Christo apparuit veritas. Quo nihil efficacius dici
poterat.

Hanc vero praecepti mentem esse patet ex aliis Testimoniis Scripturae
apertissime, in quibus Judaeis tantum datum esse Sabbatum constanter docetur.
Exodus 16. 29. Videte quod Jehovah dedit vobis illud Sabbatum; idcirco dat vobis
cibum bidui. Et Ezekiel. 20. 12. Sabbata dedi eis, ut essent signum inter me and
ipsos ad sciendum me Jehovam sanctificare ipsos. Denique Neh. 9. 14. Sabbatum
quoque sanctum notum fecisti eis; quum praecepta statutaque and leges
praeciperes eis per Mosem servum tuum. In quibus locis uniformiter docetur
tanta cum emphasi, per Mosem deum dedisse Judaeis Sabbatum, non ergo aliis
gentibus datum fuit; aut ipsis etiam per Majores ipsorum ante illud tempus ab
origin Mundi. Disquisit. cap. 2. p. 50.

An. It is by all confessed, that the Command of the Sabbath in the Renewal of
it in the Wilderness, was accommodated unto the Paedagogical State of the
Church of the Israelites. There were also such Additions made unto it, in the
manner of its Observance, and the sanction of it, as might adapt its
Observation unto their Civil and Political Estate, or that Theocratical
Government which was then erected amongst them. So was it to bear a part in
that Ceremonial Instruction which God in all his dealings with them intended.
To this End also the manner of the Delivery of the whole Law, and the
Reservation of its Tables in the Ark were designed. And diverse Expressions in
the Explicatory part of the Decalogue have the same Reason and Foundation. For
there is mention of Fathers and Children to the third and fourth Generation,
and of their sins; of the Land given to the people of God in the fifth; of
Servants and Handmaids in the tenth. Shall we therefore say, that the Moral Law
was not before given unto mankind, because it had a peculiar Delivery for
special Ends and Purposes unto the Jews? It is no Argument therefore, that this
Command was not for the substance of it, given before to mankind in general,
because it has some Modifications added in the Decalogue to accommodate it to
the present Church, and Civil State of the Hebrews, as likewise had the fifth
command in particular.

(2.) For those Expressions infisted on, of Work, servile work, work for six
Days, of servants and handmaids, of the stranger within the Gates, they were
necessary Explications of the Command in its Application unto that people; and
yet such as had a just proportion unto what was enjoined at the first giving of
this command; occasioned from the outward change of the state of things amongst
men, from what it was in Innocence. For in that state God designed man to work,
and that in the tilling of the Ground, whilst he abode in it, Genesis 2. 15. He
put the Man in the Garden, (...) to work in it; the same word whereby Work is
enjoined in the Decalogue. And whereas God had sanctified the seventh Day to be
a Day of Rest, and thereon put man into the Garden, (...) to till it, by work
and labor; He did virtually say unto him as in the Command, (...). Six days
shall thou labor, and do all thy work. Neither was this in the least
inconsistent with the condition wherein he was created. For man being
constituted and composed partly of an Immortal soul, of a Divine Extract and
Heavenly Original, and partly of a Body made out of the Earth, he was a middle
creature between those which were purely Spiritual as the Angels, and those
which were purely Terrestrial, as the Beasts of the Field. Hence when God had
made man, (...) of dust from out of the Earth, as all the Beasts of the Field
were made; and had given him distinctly (...), a breath of life in a distinct
substance answerable to that of the Angels above, whose creation was not out of
any pre-existing matter, but they were the product of an immediate Emanation of
Divine Power, as was the soul of man; there was no meet help to be associated
unto him in the whole Creation of God. For the Angels were not meet for his
help and individual converse, on the account of what was terrene and mortal in
him. And the Beasts were much more unsuited unto him, as having nothing in them
to answer his Divine and more noble part. And as his Nature was thus
constituted, that he should converse, as it were amphibiously, between the
upper and inferior sort of creatures; so he was divided in his Work and
Operations suitably unto the Principles of his Nature and peculiar
Constitution. For they were partly to be divine and spiritual, partly terrene
and earthly, though under the Government of the Sovereign Divine Principle in
him. Hence it was required that in this condition, being not absolutely fitted
as the Angels for constant contemplation, that he should work and labor in the
earth, whilst he continued in it, and his Terrene part not refined or made
Spiritual and Heavenly. This made a certain Time of Rest necessary unto him,
and that upon a double Account flowing from the Principles of his own Nature.
For his Earthly Constitution could not always hold out to labor with its own
satisfaction, and his Intellectual and divine part was not to be always
diverted, but to be furthered in and unto its own peculiar Operations. This
made a Sacred Rest necessary to him. And in that Addition of sweat and travail
which befell him in his labor afterward, That was not a new course of life
enjoined him, but a Curse was mixed with that course and labor which was
originally allotted unto him. So then, although there is a different manner of
working more necessary, and supposed in the giving of the Law, then was at the
first Institution of a Sabbatical Rest, yet the change is not in the Law or
Command for labor, but in the state or condition of man himself.

The same may be spoken concerning the Addition about Servants and Handmaids;
For in the State of Innocence there would have been a superiority of some over
others, in that Government which is Oeconomical or Paternal. Hence all Duties
of persons in subordination, are built on the Law of Nature; and what is not
resolved thereinto, is Force and Violence. And herein lies the Foundation of
what is ordained with Reference unto Servants and Strangers, which is expressed
in the fourth Commandment, with an especial Application to the State of the
Judaical Church and People. Wherefore although there should have been no such
Servants or Strangers, as are intended in the Decalogue, in the state of
Innocence, when we plead that the Law of the Sabbath was first given; yet this
proves no more, but that this Precept in the Renovation and Repetition of it
unto the Jews, was accommodated to the present state of things amongst them;
that state being such as had its Foundation in the Law of Creation it self.

The places adjoined of Exodus 16. 29. Chap. 31. 17. Ezekiel. 20. 12. do prove
sufficiently and undeniably, that in the Mosaical Paedagogie, the Observation
of the seventh day, being precisely enjoined, there were Additions of
signification given unto it, that is to the seventh day precisely by Divine
Institution, as amongst them it was to be observed. And therefore unto the
utmost extent of the Determination of the Day of Rest, unto the seventh day
precisely, and all the significancy annexed unto it, to that people, we
acknowledge that the Sabbath was absolutely commensurate to the Church State of
the Jews, beginning and ending with it. But the Argument hence educed; namely,
that God gave the Sabbath, that is the Law of it, in a peculiar manner unto the
Jews, therefore he had not given the same Law for the substance of it before,
unto all mankind, is infirm. For God gave the whole Law to the Jews in an
especial manner, and enforced the Observation of it with a Reason or Motive
peculiar to them, namely, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt out of the house of bondage; and yet this Law was before given
unto them who never were in Egypt, nor never thence delivered. And upon the
account of this peculiar Appropriation of the Law unto the Jews, it is spoken
of in the Scripture in places innumerable, as if it had been given unto them
only, and to no others at all. So speaks the Psalmist, Psalm. 141. 19. (...)
declaring his Words unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel. Where
only (...) and (...) the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws are intended, so by (...)
his Words, and that (...) the ten Words, as Moses calls the Decalogue. And of
them all the Psalmist adds v. 20. (...) he has not done so unto any Nation;
namely, not in the same manner; for none will deny, but that nine Precepts at
least were given unto all mankind in Adam.

Praeterea (p. 51.) si quies scptimi diei omnibus ab origin mundi hominibus
injuncta fuisset, non autem solis Israelitis a Tempore Mosis, deus non solum
Israelitas ob neglectum illius praecepti sed and Gentiles, semel saltem eadem
de causa reprehendisset. Cum vero Israelitas ea de causa reprehendat
saepissime, Gentiles tamen nuspiam reprehendere hoc nomine legitur, qui propter
peccata in legem naturalem commissa toties and tam acriter a Deo
reprehenduntur. Luculentum ejus rei exemplum est; Nehem. 13. Tyrii asserunt
Hierosolymas and omnes res venales quas vendebant ipso Sabbato Judaeis, and
quidem Hierosolymis. v. 16. Non tamen Nehemias peccati violati Sabbati reos
arguit Tyrios sed Judaeos. v. 17. Tyrios autem clausis portis pridie Sabbati a
vespera usque urbem excludit, and ita compeseit, and tandem a muris urbis
abigit. v. 19, 20, 21. Si vero Tyrii hi una cum Judaeis lege Sabbati Communi
praecepto fuissent obstricti; nun a viro sanctissimo ejus peccati nomine
quoque reprehensi fuissent? quod tamen factum non apparet. Quum praeterea
Scriptura impia Gentilium festa, graviter reprehendat, an sancti Sabbati
neglectum, si id quoque ipsis observandum fuisset, tam constanti silentio
dissimulasset?

The force of this Argument consists in this Assertion, that whatever we find
God did not reprove in the Gentiles, therein they did not sin, nor had they any
Law given unto them concerning it, (...) not in Adam; which will by no means be
granted. For,

(1.) The Times are spoken of wherein God suffered them to walk in their own
ways, and wincked at their Ignorance. Hence as he gave them no Reproofs for
their sins, by his revealed Word, so those which he gave them by his
Providence, are not recorded. We may not therefore say, they sinned in nothing,
but what we find them reproved for in particular.

(2.) Other Instances may be given of sins against the Light of Nature among
the Gentiles, and that in things belonging to the second Table, wherein that
Light has a greater Evidence accompanying it, than in that of the first, the
first Precept only excepted, which yet we find them not rebuked for. Such were
the sins of Concubinacy and Fornication.

(3.) After the Renovation, or giving of this Command unto the Jews, it was the
Duty of the Nations to whom the knowledge thereof did come, to take up the
Observation of it. For it was doubtless their Duty to join themselves to God
and his people, and with them to observe his Statutes and Judgments; and their
not so doing was their sin, which as is pretended they were not reproved for,
or God was not displeased with them on that account.

(4.) The Publication of Gods Commands, is to be stated from his giving of
them; and not from the Instances of men's transgressing of them. Nor is it any
Rule, that a Law is then first given, when men's sins against it are first
reproved. For the Instance insisted on, of Nehemiah and the Tyrians, with his
different dealing with them and the Jews about the breach of the Law of the
Sabbath, Chap. 13. it is of no force in this matter. For when the Tyrians knew
the Command of the Sabbath among the Jews, which was a sufficient Revelation of
the Will of God concerning his Worship, it was their Duty to observe it. I do
not say, that it was their Duty immediately, and abiding in their Gentilisme to
observe the Sabbath according to the Institution it had among the Jews; but it
was their Duty to know, own, and obey the true God, and to join themselves to
his people, to do and observe all his commands. If this was not their Duty upon
that Discovery and Revelation, which those had of the Will of God who came up
to Jerusalem, as they did concerning whom we speak, then was it not their sin
to abide in their Gentilisme; which I suppose will not be asserted. It was
therefore on one Account or other, a sin in the Tyrians to profane the
Sabbath. It will be said, why then did not Nehemiah reprove them as well as he
did the Jews? The Answer is easy. He was the Head and Governor of the State
and Polity of the Jews, unto whom it belonged to see that things amongst them
were observed and done according to Gods Law and Appointment: And this he was
to do with Authority, having the warrant of God for it. With the Tyrians he had
nothing to do; no care of them, no Jurisdiction over them, no intercourse with
them, but according to the Law of Nations. On these accounts he charged not
them with sin, or a Moral Evil, which they would not have regarded, having no
regard to the true God, much less to his Worship; but he threatened them with
War and Punishment for disturbing his Government of the people according to the
Law of God.

It is well observed, that God reproved the Profane Feasts of the Heathens; and
therein unquestionably the neglect of them that were of his own Appointment.
For this is the Nature and Method of Negative Precepts; and condemnatory
sentences in Divine things, that they assert what is contrary to that which is
forbidden, and recommend that which is opposite unto what is condemned. Thus
the Worship of God according to his own Institution is commanded in the
prohibition of making to our selves, or finding out ways of Religious Worship
and Honor of our own. For whereas it is a prime Dictate of the Law of Nature,
that God is to be worshipped according to his own Appointment, which was from
the Light of it acknowledged among the Heathen themselves, it is not any where
asserted or intimated in the Decalogical Compendium of it, unless it be in that
prohibition. It suffices then, that even among the Gentiles, God vindicated
the Authority of his own Sabbaths, by condemning their impious Feasts and
abominable Practices in them.

Learned Writer, p. 52. The Testimony of the Jews in this case is pleaded. They
generally assirm, that the Sabbath was given unto them only, and not to the
rest of the Nations. Hence it is by them called the Bride of the Synagogue: Nor
do they reckon the command of it amongst the Noachical Precepts, which they
esteem all men obliged unto, and whose Observation they imposed on the
Proselytes of the Gate, or the uncircumcised strangers that lived amongst them.
Nay they say, that others were liable to punishment if they did observe it. For
that part of the command, nor the stranger that is within thy Gate, they say
intends no more, but that no Israelite should compel him to work, or make any
advantage of his Labor; but for himself he was not bound to abstain from
labor, but might exercise himself therein at his own discretion for his
advantage. These things are pleaded at large, and confirmed with many
Testimonies and Instances by the Learned Seldom; and from him are they again by
others insisted on. But the Truth is, there is not any thing of force in the
conceits of these Talmudical Jews in the least to weaken the principle we have
laid down and established. For,

(1.) As has been showed, this Opinion is not indeed Catholic amongst them;
but many, and those of the most Learned of the Masters do oppose it; as we have
proved already. And others may be added to them, whose Opinion although it be
peculiar, yet it wants not a fair probability of Truth. For, they say, that
the first part of the Precept, Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy, has
respect to the glorifying of God on the account of his Original Work and Rest.
This therefore belongs unto all mankind. But as for that which follows about
the six days labor, and the seventh days cessation or quiet; it had respect
unto the Bondage of the Israelites in Egypt, and their deliverance thence, and
was therefore peculiar unto them. So R. Ephraim in Keli Jacar. And hence it may
be, the Word, Remember, has respect unto the Command of the Sabbath from the
Foundation of the world. And therefore when the Command is repeated again, with
peculiar respect to the Church of Israel, as the Motive, from the Egyptian
Bondage and deliverance is expressed; so the Caution of Remembering is omitted,
Deuteronomy. 5. 12. and transferred to this other occasion; Remember that thou wast a
servant, v. 15.

(2.) The sole Foundation of it is laid in a corrupt and false Tradition or
conceit, of the giving of the Law of the Sabbath in Mara; which we have before
disproved, and which is despised as vain and foolish by most Learned men.

(3.) The Assertors of this Opinion do woefully contradict themselves, in that
they generally acknowledge that the Sabbath was observed by Abraham, and other
Patriarchs, as it should seem, at least four hundred years before its
Institution.

(4.) It is none of the seven, called, Noachical Precepts; for they contain not
the whole Law of Nature, or Precepts of the Decalogue, and one of them is
Ceremonial in their sense; so that nothing can thence be concluded against the
Original or Nature of this Law.

(5.) That an uncircumcised stranger was liable to punishment if he observed
the Sabbath, is a foolish imagination, not inferior unto that of some others
of them, who affirm that all the Gentiles shall keep the Sabbath, one day in
seven in Hell.

6. For the Distinction which they have invented, that a Proselyte of the Gate
might work for himself, but not for his Master, it is one of the many whereby
they make void the Law of God through their Traditions. Those who of old
amongst them feared God, knowing their Duty to instruct their Households or
Families, that is, their Children and Servants, in the Ways and Worship of
God, walked by another Rule.

p. 53. That the Gentiles knew nothing of this Sabbatical Feast, but that when
it came to their knowledge they derided and exploded it as a particular
Superstition of the Jews. To this purpose many Instances out of the Historians
and Poets, who wrote in the time of the first Roman Emperors, are collected by
Seldom, which we are again directed unto. Now it could not be, but that if it
had been originally appointed unto all mankind, that they should have been such
strangers unto it. But this matter has been discoursed before. And we have
showed that sundry of the first Writers of the Christian Church were otherwise
minded; for they judged and proved, that there was a Notion at least of the
seventh Days Sacred Rest, diffused throughout the world. And they lived nearer
the times of the Gentiles Practice, than those by whom their Judgment and
Testimony are so peremptorily rejected. It is not unlikely, but that they might
be mistaken in some of the Testimonies whereby they confirm their Observation;
yet this hinders not, but that the Observation it self may be true, and
sufficiently confirmed by other Instances which they make use of.

For my part, as I have said, I will not, nor for the security of the Principle
laid down, need I to contend, that the seventh Day was observed as a sacred
feast amongst them. It is enough that there were such Notices of it in the
World, as could proceed from no other Original, but that pleaded for, which was
common unto all. The Roman Writers, Poets and others, do speak of, and contemn
the Judaical Sabbaths, under which Name they comprehended all their Sacred
Feasts and Solemn Abstinencies. Hence they reproached them with their
Sabbatical Fasts; of which number the seventh day Hebdomadal Sabbath was not.
But they never endeavored to come to any real Acquaintance with their
Religious Rites, but took up vulgar Reports concerning them, as did their
Historians also, who in the Affairs of other Natitions are supposed to have
been curious and diligent.

Jerusalem by Pompey, when the People of the Jews began to be known among the
Romans, and to disperse themselves throughout their Provinces, they began every
day more and more to hate them, and to cast all manner of reproaches on them
without regard to Truth or Honesty. And it may not be amiss here a little (by
the way) to enquire into the Reasons of it. The principal cause hereof no
doubt, was from the God they worshipped, and the manner of his Worship observed
amongst them. For finding them to acknowledge and adore one only (the true)
God, and that without the use of any kind of Images, they perceived their own
Idolatry and Superstition to be condemned thereby. And this had been the
condition of that people under the former Empires, of the Chaldaeans, Persians,
and Grecians. God had appointed them to be his Witnesses in the world, that he
was God, and that there was none other. Isa. 44. 8, 9, 10. Ye are my Witnesses,
is there a God besides me, there is no God, I know not any. As also Chap. 43.
10* 11, 12. Ye are my Witnesses, that before me there was no God formed,
neither shall there be any after me, I even I am the Lord, and besides me there
is no Savior; therefore ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God.
This greatly provoked, as other Nations of old, so at length the Romans, as
bidding defiance to all their Gods, and their Worship of them, wherein they
greatly boasted. For they thought that it was merely by the Help of their Gods,
and on the account of their Religion, that they conquered all other Nations. So
Ciccro Orat. de Respon. Harusp. Quam volumus ipsi nos amemus, tamen nec numero
Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec calliditate Poenos, nec artibus Graecos, sed
pietate and religione, atque hac una sapientia, quod deorum immortalium numine
omnia regi, gubernarique prospeximus, omnes gentes nationesque superavimus. Let
us love and please ourselves as we think meet, yet we outgo neither the
Spaniards in number, nor the Gauls in strength, nor the Africans in craft, nor
the Grecians in Arts; but it is by our Piety and Religion, and this only
Wisdom, that we refer all to the Government of the immortal Gods, that we have
overcome all Countries and Nations. And Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Antiquit.
Romans lib. 2. having given an account of their Sacred Rites and Worship, adds
that he did it (...). That those who knew not before the Piety or Religion of
the Romans, might not now think it strange, that they should have such success
in all their Wars. To be judged and condemned in those things by the contrary
witness of the Jews, they could not bear. This made them reflect on God
himself, as the God which they worshipped. They called him incertum, and
ignotum, affirming the Rites of his Worship to be absurd, and contrary to the
common consent of mankind, as Tacitus expressly: Hist. lib. 5. The best they
could afford when they spoke of him was, (...), who ever he be. And Tully will
not allow that it was any respect to their God, or their Religion, which caused
Pompey to forbear spoiling the Temple when he took it by force. Non credo,
says he, religionem impedimento praestantissimo Imperatori fuisse, quod victor
ex illo fano nihil attigerit. Orat. pro Flacc. whereunto he adds as high a
Reproach of them and their Religion as he could devise. Stantibus Hierosolymis,
pacatisque Judaeis, tamen istorum religio sacrorum, a splendore hujus imperii;
gravitate nominis nostri, majorum institutis abhorrebat; nunc vero hoc magis,
quod illa gens, quid de nostro imperio sentiret ostendit armis, quam cara diis
immortalibus esset, docuit, quod victa est, quod clocata, quod servata. Whilst
Jerusalem stood (that is, in its own Power) and the Jews were peaceable, yet
their Religion was unworthy the splendour of this Empire, the gravity of our
Name, and abhorrent from the Ordinances of our Ancestors; how much more now,
when that Nation has showed what esteem it has of our Empire by its Arms; and
how dear it is to the immortal Gods, that it is conquered, and set out under
Tribute. The like Reflections, yea worse, may be seen in Trogus, Tacitus,
Plutarcb, Strabo, and Democritus in Suidas with others.

Jews whilst the Temple stood, gathered great sums of money out of all their
Provinces, which they sent unto the Sacred Treasury. So the same Person informs
us in the same place: Cum Aurum Judaeorum nomine, quotannis ex Italia, and ex
omnibus vestris Provinciis Hierosolymam exportari soleret. Out of Italy and all
other Provinces of the Empire, there was Gold wont to be sent by the Jews to
Jerusalem; as now the Europaean Jews do contribute to the maintenance of their
Synagogues in the same place; and this is acknowledged by Philo, Legate. ad
Caium; and Josephus Antiqui. lib. 14. cap. 11. to have been yearly a very great
sum. But by his Judaeorum nomine, he seems not only to express that the
Returns of the Gold mentioned were made in the name of the Jews, but also to
intimate, that it might be raised by others also, who had taken on them the
profession of their Religion. For this was the third and principal cause of
their Hatred and Animosity, namely that they drew over multitudes of all sorts
of persons to the profession of the Law of Moses. And a good work this was,
though vitiated by the wickedness and corrupt Ends of them who employed
themselves therein, as our Savior declares, Matthew. 23. 15. This greatly
provoked the Romans in those days, and on every occasion they severely
complain of it. So Dio Cassius speaking of them adds, (...). And this kind of
men (that is men of this Profession, not natural Jews,) is found also among the
Romans; which though they have been frequently punished, yet have for the most
part increased, so as to take the liberty of making Laws to themselves. For
their punishments, an Account is given us in Suetonius in Domit. and others, of
the Inquisition and Search, made after such as were circumcised. And as to
their making of Laws unto themselves, he respects their Feasts, Sabbaths,
Abstinencies, and such like Observances as the Jews obliged their Proselytes
unto. In like manner complains Juvenal,

Romanas autem soliti contemnere Leges
Judaicum ediscunt, and servant ac metuunt jus
Tradidit arcano quodcunque volumine Moses.
Contemning the Roman Laws, they learn the Rites and Customs of the Jews,
observing and learning the whole Right or Law delivered in the secret Writing
of Moses. Seneca is yet more severe. Cum interim usque eo sceleratissima gentis
consuetudo convaluit, ut per omnes jam terras recepta sit: Victi victoribus
leges dederunt. The custom of this wicked Nation has so far prevailed, that it
is now received among all Nations: The conquered, have given Laws to the
Conquerors. And Tacitus, Pessimus quisque spretis religionibus patriis tributa
and stipes, illuc (that is to Jerusalem) congerebat. The like revengeful Spirit
appears in those Verses of Rutilius lib. 1. Itinerar. though he lived
afterward under the Christian Emperors.

O utinam nunquam Judaea victa fuisset
Pompeii Bellis, imperioque Titi;
Laetius excisae pestis contagia serpunt
Victoresque suos natio victa premit.
But it is not unlikely, that he reflects on Christians also.

Jews amongst them was wicked and provoking. They were a people that had for
many Generations been harrased and oppressed, by all the principal Empires in
the world; this caused them to hate them, and to have their minds always
possessed with revengeful thoughts. When our Apostle affirmed of them, that
they pleased not God, and were contrary to all men; 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. he intends
not their opposition to the Gospel, and the Preachers of it, which he had
before expressed; but that envious contrariety unto mankind in general, which
they were possessed with. And this evil frame, the Nations ascribed to their
Law it self. Moses novos ritus contrariosque caeteris mortalibus and gentibus
indidit, says Tacitus. But this most falsely; no Law of man ever taught that
benignity, kindness, and general usefulness in the world, as theirs did. The
people themselves being grown wicked and corrupt, pleased not God, and were
contrary to all men. Hence they were looked on as such, who observed not so
much as the Law of Nature toward any but themselves; as resolving

Quaesitum ad fontem solos diducere verpos. Not to direct a thirsty person to a
common Spring if uncircumcised. Whence was that Censure of Tacitus, Apud ipsos
fides obstinata, misericordia in Promptu, adversus omnes alios hostile odium.
Faithful and merciful among themselves, toward all others they were acted with
irreconcilable hatred; which well expresses what our Savior charged them
with, as a corrupt principle among them, Matthew. 5. 43. Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy. Into which two sorts they distributed all
mankind; that is in their sense, their own Contrymen and Strangers.

Their corrupt and wicked conversation also made them a reproach, and their
Religion contemned. So was it with them from their first Dispersion as God
declares, Ezekiel. 36. 20. When they entered unto the Heathen whither they went,
they profaned my holy name, when they said to them, these are the people of the
Lord. And their wickedness increased with their time; for they still learned
the corrupt and evil Arts, with all ways of deceit, used in the Nations where
they lived, until for the crimes of many, the whole Nation became the common
hatred of mankind. And, that we may return from this Digression, this being the
state of things then in the world, we may not wonder, if the Writers of those
days were very supinely negligent, or maliciously envious, in reporting their
Ways, Customs, and Religious Observances. And it is acknowledged that before
those Times, the long course of Idolatry and Impiety wherein the whole world
had been engaged, had utterly corrupted and lost the Tradition of a Sabbatical
Rest. What Notices of it continued in former Ages, has been before declared.

(p. 54.) that indeed the Gentiles could be no way obliged to the Observation
of the fourth Commandment; seeing they had no Indication of it, nor any means
to free them from their Ignorance of the Being of any such Law. That they had,
and had lost the knowledge of it, in and by their Progenitors, is rejected as a
vain pretense. And so much weight is laid on this consideration, that a demand
is made of somewhat to be returned in answer, that may give any satisfaction
unto conscience. But I understand not the force of this pretended Argument.
Those who had absolutely lost the knowledge of the true God, (in and by their
Progenitors) as the Gentiles had done, might well also lose the knowledge of
all the concernments of his Worship. And so they had done, excepting only that
they had traduced some of his Institutions, as Sacrifices, into their own
Superstition; and so had they corrupted the use of his Sabbaths into that of
their Idolatrous Feasts. But when the true God, had no other acknowledgements
amongst them, but what answered the Title of the Unknown God, is it any wonder
that his Ways and Worship might be unknown amongst them also? And it is but
pretended that they had no Indication of a Sabbatical Rest, nor any means to
free them from their Ignorance Man's duty is both to be learned and observed in
Order. It is in vain to expect, that any should have Indications of an holy
Rest unto God, before they are brought to the knowledge of God himself. When
this is obtained, when the true God upon just Grounds is owned and
acknowledged, than that some time be set apart for his solemn Worship, is of
Moral and Natural Right. That this is included in the very first notion of the
true God, and our dependence upon him, all men do confess. And this principle
was abused among the Heathen to be the foundation of all their stated Annual,
or Monthly Sacred Solemnities, after they had nefariously lost the only Object
of all Religious Worship. Where this Progress is made, as it might have been,
by attending to the directive Light of Nature, and the impressions of the Law
of it left upon the souls of men, there will not be wanting sufficient
Indicatives of the meetest season for that Worship. However these things were,
and are to be considered and admitted in their Order; and with respect unto
that Order is their Obligation. The Heathen were bound first to know and own
the true God, and him alone; then to worship him solemnly; and after that, in
order of Nature, to have some solemn time separated unto the Observance of that
Worship. Without an Admission of these, all which were neglected and rejected
by them, there is no place to enquire after the Obligation of an Hebdomadal
Rest. And their Non-observance of it was their sin, not firstly, directly, and
immediately; but consequentially, as all others are that arise from an
Ignorance or Rejection of those greater Principles whereon they do depend.

Meridians is yet pleaded also. For hence it is pretended to be impossible,
that all men should precisely observe the same day. For if a man should sail
round the world by the East, he will at his return home have gotten a day by
his continual approach toward the rising Sun. And if he steer his course
Westward, he will lose a day in the annual Revolution, as it is gotten the
other way; so did the Hollanders An. 1615. And hence the posterity of Noah,
gradually spreading themselves over the world, must have gradually come to the
Observation of different seasons, if we shall suppose a Day of Sacred Rest
required of them, or appointed to them. Apage Nugas. If men might sail Eastward
or Westward, and not continually have seven days succeeding one another, there
would be some force in this Trifle. On our Hypothesis, where ever men are, a
seventh part of their Time, or a seventh day is to be separated to the
Remembrance of the Rest of God, and the other Ends of the Sabbath. That the
Observance of this portion of time shall in all places begin and end at the
same Instants, the Law and Order of Gods Creation will not permit. It is enough
that amongst all who can assemble for the Worship of God, there is no
difference in general, but that they all observe the same Proportion of Time.
And he who by circumnavigation of the world, (such rare and extraordinary
Instances being not to be provided for in a general Law) gets or loses a
day, he may at his return with a good conscience, give up again, what he has
got, or retrive what he has lost, with those with whom he fixes. For all such
occasional Accidents are to be reduced unto the common Standard. All the
Difficulty therefore in this Objection relates to the precise Observation of
the seventh Day from the Creation; and not in the least unto one day in seven.
And although the seventh day was appointed principally for the Land of
Pakstine, the seat of the Church of old, wherein there was no such Alteration
of Meridians; yet I doubt not, but that a wandering Jew might have observed the
foregoing Rule, and reduced his Time to order upon his return home. What other
exceptions of the like nature occur in this cause, they shall be removed and
satisfied in our next enquiry, which is after the Causes of the Sabbath; and
the Morality of the Observation of one day in seven.

Exercitatio Tertia.
(1) Of the Causes of the Sabbath. (2) God the Absolute Original Cause of it.
Distinction of Divine Laws into Moral and Positive. (3) Divine Laws of a mixed
nature, partly Moral, partly Positive. (4) Opinion of some that the Law of the
Sabbath was purely Positive. Difficulties of that Opinion. (5) Opinion of them
who maintain the Observation of one Day in seven to be Moral. (6) Opinion of
them who make the Observation of the seventh Day precisely to be a Moral Duty.
(7) The second Opinion asserted. (8) The common Notion of the Sabbath
explained. (9) The true Notion of it farther enquired into. (10) Continuation
of the same Disquisition. (11) The Law of Nature wherein it consists. Opinion
of the Philosophers. (12) Not comprised in the Dictates of Reason. No obliging
Authority in them formally considered. (13) Uncertainty and disagreement about
the Dictates of Reason. Opinions of the Magi, Zeno; Chrysippus, Plato;
Archelaus, Aristippus, Carneades; Brennus, etc. (14) Things may belong to the
Law of Nature not discoverable to the common Reason of the most. (15) The Law
of Nature wherein it does really consist. (16) Light given unto a septenary
Sacred Rest, in the Law of Nature. (17) Farther Instances thereof. (18) The
Observation of the Sabbath on the same foundation with Monogamy. (19) The
seventh Day an appendix of the Covenant of Works. (20) How far the whole Notion
of a Weekly Sacred Rest was of the Law of Nature. (21) Natural Light obscured
by the Entrance of Sin. (22) The sum of what is proposed. (23) The enquiry
about the Causes of the Sabbath renewed. (24) The Command of it in what sense a
Law Moral, and how evidenced so to be. (25) To Worship God in Associations and
Assemblies, a Moral Duty. (26) One Day in seven required unto solemn Worship by
the Law of our Creation. (27) What is necessary to warrant the Ascription of
any Duty to the Law of Creation. (28) 1. That is be congruous to the known
Principles of it. (29) 2. That it have a general Principle in the Light of
Nature. (30) 3. That it be taught by the Works of Creation. (31) 4. Direction
for its Observance, by superadded Revelation, no impeachment of it. (32) How
far the same Duty may be required by a Law Moral, and by a Law Positive. (33)
Vindication of the Truths laid down from an Objection. (34) Other Evidences of
the Morality of this Duty (35) Required in all states of the Church. (36) These
various states. (37) Command for the Sabbath before the Fall. (38) Before, and
at the giving of the Law, and under the Gospel. (39) Whether appointed by the
Church. (40) Of the fourth Commandment in the Decalogue. (41) The proper
subject of it. (42) The seventh Day precisely not primarily required therein.
(43) Somewhat moral in it granted by all. (44) The matter of this Command, a
Moral Duty by the Law of Creation. (45) The Morality of the Precept it self
proved from its interest in the Decalogue by various Instances. (46) The Law of
the Sabbath only preferred above all Ceremonial and Judicial Laws. (47) The
Words of our Savior, Matthew. 24. 20. considered. (48) The whole Law of the
Decalogue established by Christ. (49) Objections proposed. (50) The first
answered. (51) The second answered. (52) The third answered. (53) One Day in
seven, not the seventh Day precisely required in the Decalogue. (54) An
Objection from the sense of the Law. (55) Answered. (56) (57) Other Objections
answered. (58) Col. 2. 16, 17. considered.

The Third Exercitation. Causes of the Sabbath.
Original of the Sabbatical Rest, according to the best light we have received
into these things, and confirmed the Reasons of it with the consent of mankind.
The next step in our progress must be an Enquiry into its Causes. And here also
we fall immediately into those Difficulties and Entanglements, which the
various Apprehensions of Learned Men promoted and defended with much Diligence,
have occasioned. I have no Design to oppose or contend with any, although a
modest Examination of the Reasons of some, will be indispensibly necessary unto
me. All that I crave, is the liberty of proposing my own Thoughts and Judgment
in this matter, with the Reasons and Grounds of them. When that is done, I
shall humbly submit the whole, to the Examination and Judgment of all that
call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord, and ours.

Supreme, Original, and Absolute Cause of the Sabbath. When ever it began, when
ever it ends, be it expired, or still in force, of what kind soever were its
Institution, the Law of it was from God. It was from Heaven; and not of men;
and the Will of God is the sole Rule and measure of our Observation of it, and
Obedience to him therein. What may, or may not be done, in reference unto the
Observation of a Day of holy Rest by any inferior Authority, comes not here
under consideration. But whereas there are two sorts of Laws whereby God
requires the Obedience of his Rational Creatures, which are commonly called
Moral and Positive, it is greatly questioned and disputed, to whether of these
sorts does belong the Command of a Sabbatical Rest. Positive Laws are taken to
be such, as have no Reason for them in themselves, nothing of the matter of
them, is taken from the things themselves commanded, but do depend merely and
solely on the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God. Such were the Laws and
Institutions of the Sacrifices of old; and such are those which concern the
Sacraments and other things of the like nature under the New Testament. Moral
Laws are such as have the Reasons of them taken from the Nature of the things
themselves required in them. For they are Good from their respect to the nature
of God himself, and from that nature and order of all things, which he has
placed in the creation. So that this sort of Laws is but Declarative of the
absolute goodness of what they do require; the other is Constitutive of it, as
unto some certain Ends. Laws Positive, as they are occasionally given, so they
are esteemed alterable at pleasure. Being fixed by mere Will and Prerogative,
without respect to any thing that should make them necessary antecedent to
their giving, they may by the same Authority at any time be taken away and
abolished. Such I say are they in their own nature, and as to any firmitude
that they have from their own subject matter. But with respect unto Gods
Determination, Positive Divine Laws, may become eventually unalterable. And
this Difference is there between Legal and Evangelical Institutions. The Laws
of both are Positive only, equally proceeding from Sovereign Will and Pleasure,
and in their own Natures equally alterable. But to the former, God had in his
purpose fixed a determinate time and season, wherein they should expire, or be
altered by his Authority; the latter he has fixed a perpetuity and
unchangeableness unto, during the state and condition of his Church in this
world. The other sort of Laws are perpetual and unalterable in themselves, so
far as they are of that sort, that is Moral. For although a Law of that kind
may have an especial Injunction with such circumstances as may be changed and
varied, (as had the whole Decalogue in the Commonwealth of Israel) yet so far
as it is Moral, that is, that its Commands or Prohibitions, are necessary
emergencies, or expressions of the Good or Evil of the things it commands or
forbids, it is invariable. And in these things there is an Agreement; unless
sometimes through mutual Oppositions men are chased into some Exceptions or
Distinctions.

contradistinct; so that a Law of one kind, can in no sense be a Law in the
other. And this doubtless is true reduplicatively, because they have especial
formal Reasons. As far, and wherein, any Laws are Positive, they are not Moral;
and as far as they are purely Moral, they are not formally Positive, though
given after the manner of positive Commands. Howbeit this hinders not but that
some do judge, that there may be and are Divine Laws of a mixed nature. For
there may be in a Divine Law, a foundation in, and respect unto somewhat that
is Moral, which yet may stand in need of the superaddition of a Positive
Command for its due Observation unto its proper End. Yea, the Moral Reason of
things commanded, which arises out of a due natural Respect unto God, and the
order of the Universe, may be so deep and hidden, as that God who would make
the Way of his Creatures plain and easy, gives out express positive Commands
for the Observance, of what is antecedently necessary by the Law of our
Creation. Hence a Law may partake of both these Considerations, and both of
them have an equal influence into its Obligatory Power. And by this means
sundry Duties, some Moral, some Positive, are as it were compounded in one
Observance; as may be instanced in the great Duty of Prayer; Hence the whole
Law of that Observance becomes of a mixed nature, which yet God can separate at
his pleasure, and taking away that which is Positive, leave only that which is
absolutely Moral in force. And this kind of Laws, which have their Foundation
in the nature of things themselves, which yet stand in need of farther
Direction for their due Observation, which is added unto them by Positive
Institution, some call Moral Positive.

Distinctions of the Nature of the Laws which God expresses his Will in and
by, are men's Apprehensions different about the immediate and instrumental Cause
of the Sabbatical Rest. That God was the Author of it, is as was said, by all
agreed. But say some, the Law whereby he appointed it was purely Positive, the
matter of it being arbitrary, stated and determined only in the Command it
self; and so the whole Nature of the Law, and that commanded in it, changeable.
And because Positive Laws did, and always do respect some other things besides
and beyond themselves, it is pleaded that this Law was Ceremonial and Typical;
that is, it was an Institution of an outward present Religious Observation, to
signify and represent, some thing not present, nor yet come; such were all the
particulars of the whole systeme of Mosaical Worship, whereof this Law of the
Sabbath was a part, and an Instance. In brief, some say, that the whole Law of
the Sabbath was as to its general Nature positive, and arbitrary, and so
changeable; and in particular, Ceremonial and Typical, and so actually changed
and abolished. But yet it is so fallen out, that those who are most positive in
these Assertions, cannot but acknowledge, that this Law is so ingrafted into,
and so closed up with somewhat that is Moral and unalterable, that it is no
easy thing to hit the joint aright, and make a separation of the one from the
other. But concerning any other Law expressly and confessedly Ceremonial, no
such thing can be observed. They were all evidently and entirely arbitrary
Institutions, without any such near Relation to what is Moral, as might trouble
any one to make a distinction between them. For Instance; the Law of Sacrifices
has indeed an answerableness in it to a great Principle of the Law of Nature;
namely that we must honor God with our substance, and the best of our
Increase; yet that this might be done many other ways, and not by Sacrifice,
if God had pleased so to ordain, every one is able to apprehend. It is
otherwise in this matter; for none will deny, but that it is required of us in
and by the Law of Nature, that some Time be set apart and dedicated unto God,
for the Observation of his solemn Worship in the world. And it is plain to
every one, that this natural dictate is inseparably included in the Law of the
Sabbath. It will therefore surely be difficult to make it absolutely and
universally positive. I know some begin to whisper things inconsistent with
this concession. But we have as yet the Universal consent of all Divines,
Ancient and Modern, Fathers, Schoolmen and Casuists concurring in this matter.
For they all unanimously affirm, that the separation of some part of our Time
to sacred uses, and the solemn honoring of God, is required of us in the
Light, and by the Law of Nature. And herein lies the fundamental notion of the
Law now enquired after. This also may be farther added, that whereas this
Natural dictate for the observation of some time in the solemn worship of God,
has been accompanied with a Declaration of his will from the foundation of the
world that this Time should be one day in seven, it will be a matter of no
small Difficulty to find out what is purely positive therein.

Natural or Moral, as required by the Law of our Creation, (not that Time in it
self which is but a circumstance of other things, can be esteemed Moral, but
that our observation of Time may be a Moral Duty) do add; that the
Determination of one Day in seven, to be that portion of Time so to be
dedicated, is inseparable from the same foundation, and is of the same Nature
with it; That is, that the Sabbatical Observation of one Days Holy Rest in
seven, has a Moral Precept for its Warranty, or that which has the nature of
a Moral Precept in it; so that although the Revolution of Time in seven Days,
and the confining of the Day to that determined season, do depend on Revelation
and a Fositive Command of God for its Observance, yet on fupposition thereof,
the Moral Precept prevails in the whole, and is everlastingly Obligatory. And
there are some Divines of great Piety and Learning, who do judge, that a
Command of God given unto all men, and equally Obligatory unto all, respecting
their manner of living unto God, is to be esteemed a Moral Command, and that
indispensible and unchangeable; although we should not be able to discover the
Reason of it in the Light and Law of Nature. Nor can such a Command be reckoned
amongst them that are merely positive, arbitrary, and changeable, all which
depend on sundry other things, and do not firstly affect men, as men in
general. And it is probable, that God would not give out any such Catholic
Command, which comprised not somewhat naturally Good and Right in it. And this
is the best measure and Determination of what is Moral, and not our Ability of
discovering by Reason what is so, and what is not; as we shall see afterward.

precise Observation of the seventh Day in the Hebdomadal Revolution, lies
under a Command Moral and indispensible. For God they say, who is the Sovereign
Lord of us and our Times, has taken by an Everlasting Law this Day unto
himself for his honor and service; And he has therein obliged all men to an
holy Rest, not on some certain fixed and stated time, not on one Day in seven
originally, as the first Intention of his Command, but on the seventh Day
precisely, whereunto those other considerations of some stated and fixed time,
and of one Day in seven are Consequential, and far from previous foundations of
it. The seventh Day, as the seventh Day, is they say, the first proper Object
of the Command; the other things mentioned of a stated Time, and of one Day in
seven, do only follow thereon; and by virtue thereof belong to the Command of
the Sabbath, and no otherwise. Herein great Honor indeed is done unto the
seventh Day, above all other Ordinances of Worship whatever, even of the Gospel
it self; but whether with sufficient Warranty we must afterward enquire. At
present, I shall only observe, that this Observation of the seventh Day
precisely, is resolved into the Sovereignty of God, over us and our Times, and
into an Occasion respecting purely the Covenant of Works; on which bottoms it
is hard to fix it in an absolute unvariable station.

second Opinion, for the substance of it, which I shall endeavor to explain
and confirm; and therein prove a Sacred Sabbatical Rest unto God, of one Day in
seven, to be enjoined unto all that fear him, by a Law perpetual, and
indispensible, upon the account of what is Moral therein. The Reason I say of
the Obligation of the Law of the Sabbath is natural, and thence the Obligation
it self universal; however the Declaration and and Determination of the Day it
self, depend on arbitrary Revelation, and a Law merely positive. These things
being explained and confirmed, the other Opinions proposed will fall under our
consideration.

To obtain a distinct Light into the Truth in this matter, we must consider
both the true Notion of the Sacred Rest, as also of the Law of our Creation,
whereby we affirm that fundamentally and virtually, it is required.

a Portion of Time set apart by Divine Appointment, for the Observance and
Performance of the solemn Worship of God. The Worship of God is that which we
are made for, as to our station in this world, and is the means and condition
of our Enjoyment of him in Glory, wherein consists the ultimate End, as unto
us, of our Creation. This Worship therefore is required of us by the Law of our
Creation, and it is upon the matter all that is required of us thereby, seeing
we are obliged by it, to do all things to the Glory of God. And therefore is
the solemn Expression of that Worship required of us in the same manner. For
the End of it being our glorifying him as God, and the Nature of it consisting
in the Profession of our universal subjection unto him, and dependence upon
him, the solemn Expression of it, is as necessary as the Worship it self, which
we are to perform. No man therefore ever doubted, but that by the Law of Nature
we were bound to Worship God, and solemnly to express that Worship; for else
wherefore were we brought forth in this world? These things are inseparable
from our Natures, and where this Order is disturbed by sin, we fall into
another, which the Properties of God on the supposition of transgressing our
first natural Order, do render no less necessary unto his Glory, than the
other, namely that of Punishment.

Moreover in this Worship it is required by the same Law of our Beings that we
should serve God with All that we do receive from him. No man can think
otherwise. For is there any thing that we have received from God, that shall
yield him no Revenue of Glory, whereof we ought to make no acknowledgement unto
him? Who dare once so to imagine? Among the things thus given us of God, is our
Time. And this falls under a double consideration in this matter. First, as it
is an inseparable Moral Circumstance of the Worship required of us; so it is
necessarily included in the Command of Worship it self, not directly but
consequentially. Secondly, It is in it self a part of our vouchsafements from
God, for our own use and purposes in this world. So upon its own account
firstly and directly, a separation of a part of it unto God and his Solemn
Worship is required of us. It remains only to inquire what part of Time it is,
that is and will be accepted with God. This is declared and determined in the
fourth Commandment to be the seventh part of it, or one day in seven. And this
is that which is Positive in the Command, which yet as to the foundation,
formal Reason, and main substance of it, is Moral. And these things are true,
but yet do not express the whole Nature of the Sabbath, which we must farther
enquire into.

Sabbatical Rest, as enjoined unto men for their Observation, there is still
respect unto a Rest of God that preceded it, and was the cause and foundation
of it. In its first mention, Gods Rest is given as the Reason of his
sanctifying and blessing a Day of Rest for us, whence also it has its Name.
Genesis 2. 2, 3. God blessed and sanctified the seventh day (...), because he
sabbatized thereon himself. And so it is expressed, and the same Reason is
given of it in the fourth Commandment. God wrought six days and rested the
seventh; therefore must we rest, Exodus 20. 11. The same is observed in the New
Creation as we shall see afterward, and more fully in our Exposition of Heb.
4. Now that God may be said to Rest, it is necessary that some signal Work of
his do go before. For Rest in the first notion of it, includes a respect to an
antecedent Work or Labor. And so it is every where declared. God wrought his
works and finished them, and then rested. He made all things in six days, and
rested on the seventh. And he that is entered into Rest, cease from his work.
And both these, the work of God, and the Rest of God must in this matter be
considered. For the work of God, it is that of the old and whole Creation, as
is directly expressed, Genesis 2. Exodus 20. which I desire may be born in mind.

And this work of God may be considered two ways. First, Naturally or
Physically, as it consisted in the mere production of the Effects of his Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness. So all things are the work of God:

Secondly, Morally; as God ordered and designed all his works to be a means of
glorifying himself, in and by the Obedience of his rational Creatures. This
consideration, both the nature of it, with the Order and End of the whole
Creation do make necessary. For God first made all the inanimate, then animate
and sensitive creatures in their Glory, Order and Beauty. In, and on all these,
he implanted a teaching and instructive Power; for the Heavens declare the
glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work, Psalm. 19. 1, 2. and all
creatures are frequently called on to give praise and glory to him. And this
expresses that in their Nature and Order, which reveals and manifests him,
and the glorious Excellencies of his nature, which man is to contemplate in
their Effects in them, and give glory unto him. For after them all, was man
made to consider and use them all, for the End for which they were made; and
was a kind of Mediator between God and the rest of the creatures by and through
whom he would receive all his glory from them. This is that which our Apostle
discourses about, Romans 1. 19, 20. The design of God as he declares, was to
manifest and show himself in his works to man. Man learning from them the
Invisible things of God, was to glorify him as God; as he disputes. The
ordering and disposal of things to this purpose, is principally to be
considered in the works of God, as his Rest did ensue upon them.

Secondly, The Rest of God is to be considered as that which compleats the
Foundation of the Sabbatical Rest enquired after. For it is built on Gods
working and entering into his Rest. Now this is not a mere cessation from
working. It is not absolutely so; for God works hitherto. And the Expression
of Gods Rest is of a Moral, and not a Natural signification. For it consists in
the Satisfaction and Complacency that he took in his Works, as effects of his
Goodness, Power and Wisdom, disposed in the Order, and unto the Ends mentioned.
Hence as it is said, that upon the finishing of them, he looked on every thing
that he had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1. 31. that is, he was
satisfied in his works and their disposal, and pronounced concerning them, that
they became his infinite Wisdom and Power; so it is added, that he not only
rested on the seventh Day; but also that he was refreshed, Exodus 31. 17. that
is, he took great complacency in what he had done, as that which was suited
unto the End aimed at; namely the expression of his Greatness, Goodness and
Wisdom, unto his Rational Creatures, and his Glory through their Obedience
thereon; as on the like Occasion he is said to rest in his Love, and to rejoice
with singing, Zeph. 3. 17.

Now in the Work and Rest of God thus stated, did the whole Rule of the
Obedience of man originally consist; and therein was he to seek also his own
Rest, as his Happiness and Blessedness. For God had not declared any other way
for his Instruction in the End of his Creation, that is his Obedience unto him,
and Blessedness in him, but in and by his own Works and Rest. This then is the
first End of this Holy Rest. And it must always be born in mind, as that
without which we can give no glory to God as rational creatures, made under a
Moral Law in a dependence on Him. For this he indispensibly requires of us,
and this is the sum of what he requires of us; namely that we glorify him
according to the Revelation that he makes of himself unto us, whether by his
Works of Nature, or of Grace. To the solemnity hereof, the Day enquired after
is necessary. To express these things is the General End of the Sabbatical Rest
prescribed unto us, and our observation. For so it is said, God wrought and
rested, and then requires us so to do. And it has sundry particular Ends or
Reasons. First, That we might learn the satisfaction and complacency that God
has in his own works, Genesis 2. 2, 3. That is, to consider the impressions of
his Excellencies upon them, and to glorify him as God on that Account, Romans 1.
19, 20, 21. For hence was man originally taught to Fear, Love, Trust, Obey, and
Honor him absolutely; even from the manifestation that he had made of himself
in his works, wherein he rested. And had not God thus rested in them, and been
refreshed upon their completing and finishing; they would not have been a
sufficient means to instruct man in those Duties. And our Observation of the
Evangelical Sabbath, has the same respect unto the works of Christ, and his
Rest thereon, when he saw of the Travel of his soul and was satisfied, as shall
afterward be declared.

Secondly, Another End of the Original Sabbatical Rest was, that it might be a
pledge unto man of his Rest in and with God. For in and by the Law of his
Creation, man had an End, of Rest, proposed unto him, and that in God. This he
was to be directed unto, and encouraged to look after. Herein God by his Works
and Rest had instructed him. And by giving him the Sabbath, as he gave him a
Pledge thereof, so he required of him, his Approbation of the Covenant Way of
attaining it, whereof afterward. Hence Psalm. 92. whose Title is, (...), A
Psalm, a Song for the Sabbath Day, which some of the Jews ascribe unto Adam, as
it principally consists in contemplations of the Works of God, with holy
Admirations of his Greatness and Power manifested in them, with praises unto
him on their Account; so it expresses the Destruction of ungodly sinners, and
the salvation of the Righteous, whereof in that days Rest they had a pledge.
And this belonged unto that state of man wherein he was created, namely, that
he should have a pledge of Eternal Rest. Neither could his Duty and capacity be
otherwise answered or esteemed reasonable. His Duty which was working in Moral
Obedience, had a natural Relation unto a Reward. And his Capacity was such, as
could not be satisfied, nor himself attain absolute Rest, but in the Enjoyment
of God. A pledge hereof therefore belonged unto his condition.

Thirdly, Consideration was had of the Way and Means, whereby man might enter
into the Rest of God proposed unto him. And this was by that Obedience and
Worship of God, which the Covenant wherein he was created required of him. The
solemn Expression of this Obedience, and Exercise of this Worship, was
indispensibly required of him and his posterity, in all their Societies and
Communion with one another. This cannot be denied, unless we shall say, that
God making man to be a sociable creature, and capable of sundry Relations, did
not require of him to honor him in the Societies and Relations whereof he was
capable, which would certainly overthrow the whole Law of his Creation, with
respect unto the End for which he was made, and render all societies sinful,
and rebellious against God. Hereunto the Sabbatical Rest was absolutely
necessary. For without some such Rest fixed, or variable, those things could
not be. This is a Time or season, for man to express and solemnly pay that
homage which he owes to his Creator. And this is by the most esteemed the
great, if not the only End of the Sabbath. But it is evident, that it falls
under sundry precedent Considerations.

Original Sabbatical Rest, which contain the true Notion of it, we may nextly
enquire after the Law whereby it was prescribed and commanded. To this purpose
we must first consider the state wherein man was created, and then the Law of
his Creation. And for the state and condition wherein man was created it falls
under a threefold consideration. For man may be considered either (1.)
Absolutely as a Rational Creature; or (2.) As made under a Covenant of Rewards
and Punishments; or (3.) With respect unto the especial nature of that Covenant.

First, He was made a Rational Creature, and thereby necessarily in a Moral
Dependence on God. For being endowed with Intellectual Faculties, in an
immortal soul, capable of eternal Blessedness or Misery, able to know God, and
to regard him as the first Cause and last End of all, as the Author of his
Being, and Object of his Blessedness, it was naturally and necessarily
incumbent on him, without any farther considerations, to Love, Fear, and Obey
him, to trust in him as a Preserver and Rewarder; and this the order of his
nature, called the Image of God, inclined and enabled him unto. For it was not
possible, that such a creature should be produced, and not lie under an
Obligation unto all those Duties, which the Nature of God, and his own, and the
Relation of the one to the other, made necessary. Under this consideration
alone, it was required by the Law of man's Creation, that some time should be
separated unto the solemn Expression of his Obedience, and due Performance of
the Worship that God required of him. For in vain was he endued with
intellectual Faculties, and appointed unto society, if he were not to honor
God, by them, in all his Relations, and openly express the Homage which he owed
him. And this could not be done, but in a Time appointed for that purpose; the
neglect whereof must be a deviation from the Law of the Creation. And as this
is generally acknowledged; so no man can fancy the contrary. Here then do we
fix the necessity of the separation of some time to the Ends of a Sabbatical
Rest; even on the Nature of God and man, with the Relation of one to the other.
For who can say, no part of our time is due to God, or so to be disposed.

Secondly, Man in his Creation with respect unto the Ends of God therein, was
constituted under a Covenant. That is the Law of his Obedience was attended
with Promises and Threatenings, Rewards and Punishments, suited unto the
Goodness and Holiness of God. For every Law with Rewards and Recompenses
annexed, has the nature of a Covenant. And in this case, although the Promise
wherewith man was encouraged unto Obedidience, which was that of Eternal Life
with God, did in strict Justice exceed the worth of the Obedience required, and
so was a superadded Effect of Goodness and Grace, yet was it suited unto the
Constitution of a Covenant meet for man to serve God in unto his Glory; and on
the other side, the Punishment threatened unto Disobedience, in Death and an
everlasting separation from God, was such as the Righteousness and Holiness of
God, as his Supreme Governor, and Lord of him and the Covenant, did require.
Now this Covenant belonged unto the Law of Creation. For although God might
have dealt with man in a way of absolute Sovereignty, requiring Obedience of
him without a Covenant of a Reward infinitely exceeding it; yet having done so
in his Creation, it belongs unto, and is inseparable from the Law thereof. And
under this Consideration, the Time required in general for a Rest unto God,
under the first general notion of the Nature and Being of man, is determined
unto one Day in seven. For as we shall find, that in the various dispensations
of the Covenant with man, and the change of its Nature, yet so long as God is
pleased to establish any Covenant with man, he has, and does invarilably
require one Day in seven to be set apart unto the Assignation of Praise and
Glory to himself; so we shall see afterward, that there are indications of his
mind to this purpose in the Covenant it self.

Thirdly, Man is to be considered with especial Respect unto that Covenant
under which he was created, which was a Covenant of Works. For herein Rest with
God was proposed unto him, as the End or Reward of his own works, or of his
Personal Obedience unto God, by absolute strict Righteousness and Holiness. And
the peculiar form of this Covenant, as relating unto the way of Gods entering
into it, upon the finishing of his own works, designed the seventh day from the
Beginning of the Creation, to be the Day precisely for the Observation of an
holy Rest. As men then are always rational creatures, so some portion of Time
is by them necessarily to be set apart to the solemn Worship of God. As they
are under a Covenant, so this time was originally limited unto one day in
seven. And as the Covenant may be varied, so may this day also, which under the
Covenant of Works, was precisely limited unto the seventh day; and these things
must be further illustrated and proved.

Law of his Creation, commonly called the Law of Nature, with what belongs
thereunto, or what is required of us, by virtue thereof. Now by the Law of
Nature most understand the Dictates of Right Reason, which all men, or men
generally consent in, and agree about. For we exclude wholly from this
consideration the Instinct of Brute Creatures, which has some Appearance of a
Rule unto them. So Hesiod of old determined this matter, speaking of them.

(...). They devour one another, because they have no Right or Law amongst
them. Hence the Prophet complaining of force and violence amongst men, with a
neglect of Right, Justice and Equity, says, men are as the Fishes of the Sea;
as creeping things that have no Ruler over them, Habbuk. 1. 14. They devour one
another without regard to Rule or Right. As he in Varro.

Natura humanis omnia sunt paria.
Qui pote plus, urget; pisces ut saepe minutos
Magnu' come, ut aves enecat accipiter.
Most learned men therefore conclude, that there is no such thing as Jus, or
Lex Naturae among irrational creatures; and consequently, nothing of Good or
Evil in their Actions. But the consent of men in the Dictates of Reason, is
esteemed the Law of Nature. So Cicero Tuse. 1. Omni in re consensio omuium
Gentium Lex Naturae putanda est. The common consent of all Nations in any
thing, is to be thought the Law of Nature. And Aristotle also, Rhetoric. lib.
1. cap. 14. calls it, (...); a common Law, unwritten, pertaining unto all,
whose Description he adds; (...). That which is common, is according to Nature;
For there is somewhat which all men think, and this is common Right or
injustice by Nature, although there should be neither society nor compact
between them. And this he confirms out of Empedocles; that it is that (...),
not which is just to some, and unjust to others.

(...)
(...).
But it is Right amongst all, spread out with immense Light by the broad ruling
Sky. The like he affirms in his Ethics, lib. 5. cap. 10. defining it to be,
that which (...); that which has always, or every where the same Force or
Power, and does not seem or not seem so to be. This his Expositors affirm to
be, (...); amongst the most of men, who live according to the light of Nature,
with the Principles of it uncorrupted. This (...), is the same with (...)
according to the Dictates of Reason. So (...) Right Reason is the same with
many, as jus naturae, or natural. Tully in his first de Legib. pursues this at
large. Est unum jus, says he, quo devincta est hominum societas; and quod Lex
constituit una. Quae Lex est recta Ratio prohibendi and imperandi. There is one
Common Right, which is the bond of humane society, and which depends on One
Law. And this Law is the Right Reason of forbidding and commanding. This then
is generally received; namely that the Law of Nature consists in the Dictates
of Reason, which men sober, and otherwise uncorrupted, do assent unto, and
agree in. But there are sundry things which will not allow us to acquiesce in
this description of it. For,

Law of Nature, is a constant and perfect Law. It must be so, because it is the
Fountain and Rule of all other Laws whatever. For they are but Deductions from
it, and Applications of it. Now unto a complete Law it is required, not only
that it be instructive, but also that it have a binding force, or be coactive.
That is, it does not only teach, guide, and direct what is to be done,
persuading by the Reason of the things themselves which it requires; but also
it must have Authority to exact Obedience; so far as that those who are under
the power of it, can give themselves no Dispensation from its Observance. But
thus it is not with these Dictates of Reason. They go no farther than Direction
and Persuasion. And these always have, and always will have a respect unto
Occasions, Emergencies, and Circumstances. When these fall under any
Alterations, they will put Reason on New Considerations of what it ought to
determine with respect unto them. And this the Nature of an Universal Law will
not admit. Whatever then men determine by Reason, they may alter on new
considerations, such as occasioned their Original Determination. I do not
extend this unto all Instances of Natural Light, but to some only, which
suffices to demonstrate, that the unalterable Law of Nature does not consist
in these Dictates of Reason only. Suppose men do coalesce into any Civil
Society, on the mere Dictates of Reason, that it is meet and best for them so
to do; If this be the Supreme Reason thereof, no obligation arises from thence
to preserve the Society so entered into, but what is liable unto a Dissolution
from contrary considerations. If it be said, that Reason dictates and commands
in the Name of God, whence an indissoluble Obligation attends it; it will be
answered, that this introduces a new Respect, which is not formally included
in the Nature of Reason it self. Let a man indeed use, and improve his own
Reason without prejudice; let him collect what Resolutions, Determinations,
Instructions, Laws, have proceeded from the Reason of other men; it will both
exceedingly advance his Understanding, and enable him to judge of many things
that are congruous to the Light and Law of Nature. But to suppose the Law of
Nature to consist in a Systeme or Collection of such Instances and
Observations, is altogether unwarrantable.

disagreement of the Wisest men about the Dictates of Reason, utterly everts
this Opinion. The Law of Nature whatever it be, must in it self be one,
uniform, unalterable, the same in and unto all. For by these Properties it
differs from all other Laws. But if it have no higher, nor more noble Original
to be resolved into, but mere humane Reason, it will be found, if not in all
things, yet in most, fluctuating and uncertain. For about what is agreeable to
Reason in things Moral, and what is not, there have been Differences
innumerable from time immemorial, and that amongst them who searched most
diligently after them; and boasted themselves to be wise upon their
self-pleasing Discoveries. This gave the greatest occasion, unto the two
hundred eighty eight Sects of Philosophers, as Austin reports them out of
Varro, who was disertissimus Nepotum Romuli, lib. 19. de Civit. Dei. Yea, and
some of the most learned and contemplative Authors, did not only mistake in
many Instances of what Natural Light required, but also asserted things in
direct Opposition unto what is judged so to be. The saying produced out of
Empedocles by Aristotle before mentioned, is to prove that the killing of any
living creature is openly against the universally prevailing Law of Nature.
Others maintained such things to be natural, as the most did abominate. Incest
in the nearest Instances, with Sodomy, were asserted lawful by the Magi, and
some of the most learned Greeks, as Zeno and Chrysippus. And it was the
Judgment of Theodorus, that a Wise man ought, (...). as Hesychius Illustrius
reports in his life; he thought that neither Theft, nor Adultery, nor
Sacrilege, had any thing evil or filthy in them in their own Nature, so that a
Wise man ought to have respect unto them, according to Circumstances and
Occasions. Plato's promiscuous use of Wives, was confirmed by Law at Sparta.
And Archelaus at once determined, (...), as Diogenes in his life, who likewise
reports the same of Aristippus and Canreades. Naturally they thought, nothing
just or unjust, good or evil, but by virtue of some arbitrary Law. And there
are yet those in the world, partakers of humane Nature, in common with us all,
who know no other Rule of their Actions toward others, but Power; as the
Cannibals, and those Indians, who suppose they may justly spoil all that are
afraid of them. Yea some, who of late have pretended a severe inquisition into
these things, seem to incline unto an Opinion, that Power and self Advantage,
are the Rule of men's conversation among themselves in this world. So it was the
Principle of Brennus in his time the Terror of Europe, that there was no other
Law of Nature, but that the Weaker should obey the Stronger. And the Commander
of the Gauls who besieged the Roman Capitol, when he was on a composition to
depart upon the giving to him such a weight of Gold, threw in his Sword into
the Scale against it, giveing no other Reason for what he did, but Vae Victis.
Neither will another Rule which they had of assigning things to the Law of
Nature hold firm, namely a general usage of mankind from Time immorial. This
Antigona pleads in Sophocles for her burying of Polynices.

(...)
(...).
This (Right) ar se not to day nor yesterday, but was in force ever of old, nor
does any man know from whence it arose. For all Nations from beyond the Records
of the Original of Things, had consented into Practices directly contrary to
the Light of Nature; as is now acknowledged. And hence were all the Disputes of
old, about the Nature, Bounds and Ends of Good and Evil, Duty and Vice, Honest
and Filthy, Just and Unjust, that could never be determined. This Plato
observing affirms in his Phaedo, that if any one name either Silver or Iron
presently all men agree, what it is that is intended; but if they speak of that
which is just and good, presently we are at variance with others, and among our
selves. So great uncertainty is there in humane Reason, under its best natural
improvements, in its Judgment what does or does not belong to the Principles
and Condition of our Nature; so far is it from being comprehensive of the whole
Law thereof.

Law of Nature, it is no impeachment of our Assertion, to say, that it does not
appear so to the common Reason of mankind, or that right Reason has not found
it out or discovered it, provided it contain nothing repugnant thereunto. For
it will never be universally agreed, what does so appear to the common Reason
of all, nor what is, has been, or may be discovered thereby. And although it
should be true, which some say, that Moral and Natural Duties depend on, and
have their formal Reason from the Nature of God and Man, yet it does not thence
follow, that we do, or may, by the sole Light of Nature, know what does so
arise, with the due bounds and just consequences of it. But there is, as we
shall see something yet farther required, in and unto the Law of Nature, which
is the adequate Rule of all such Duties. I shall not therefore endeavor to
prove that the mere Dictates of Reason do evince a Sacred Hebdomadal Rest; as
knowing that the Law of Nature unto which we say it does belong, does not
absolutely consist in them; nor did they ever since the Fall steadily and
universally, as acted in men possessed of Reason, either comprehend or express,
all that belongs thereunto.

Nature gives unto all our Actions; but a Law given unto our Nature, as a Rule
and Measure unto our Moral Actions. It is Lex naturae Naturantis, and not
naturae naturatae. It respects the Efficient Cause of Nature, and not the
Effects of it. And this respect alone can give it the Nature of a Law; that is
an obliging Force and Power. For this must be always from the Act of a
Superior; seeing Par in Parem jus non habet; equals have no Right one over
another. This Law therefore is that Rule which God has given unto humane
Nature, in all the individual partakers of it, for all its Moral Actions, in
the state and condition wherein it was by him created and placed, with Respect
unto his own Government of it, and Judgment concerning it; which Rule is made
known in them and to them, by their inward constitution, and outward condition,
wherein they were placed of God. And the very Heathens acknowledged, that the
common Law of Mankind was Gods Prescription unto them. So Tully, 2. de Legib.
Hanc video sapientissimorum fuisse sententiam, Legem neque hominum ingeniis
excogitatam; neque scitum aliquod fuisse populorum, sed aeternum quiddam quod
universum mundum regeret, imperandi prohibendique sapientia. Ita principem
legem illam and ultimam, mentem dicebant omnia ratione cogentis, aut vetantis
Dei. Take this Law therefore actively, and it is the will of God commanding;
take it passively, and it is the conscience of man complying with it; take it
instrumentally, and it is the inbred notions of our minds, with other Documents
from the works of God proposed unto us; The Supreme Original of it, as of all
Authority, Law, and Obligation is the Will of God, constituting appointing, and
ordering the nature of things. The means of its Revelation is the Effect of the
Will, Wisdom, and Power of God, creating man and all other things wherein he is
concerned, in their Order, Place, and Condition; And the Observation of it, as
far as individual Persons are therein concerned, is committed to the care of
the Conscience of every man, which natarally is the minds acting it self
toward Gods as the Author of this Law.

Sacred Duty from the Law of our Creation. The first End of any Law is to
instruct, direct, and guide them in their duty, unto whom it is given. A Law
which is not in its own Nature instructive and directive, is no way meet to be
prescribed unto Rational Creatures. What has an Influence upon any creature of
any other kind, if it be internal is Instinct, and not properly a Law; if it be
external, it is Force and Compulsion. The Law therefore of Creation comprised
every thing, whereby God instructed man, in the creation of himself, and of the
Universe, unto his Works, or Obedience, and his Rest or Reward. And whatever
tended unto that End, belonged unto that Law. It is then as has been proved,
unduly confined unto the ingrafted Notions of his mind, concerning God, and his
Duty toward him, though they are a principal part thereof. Whatever was
designed to give improvement unto those Notions, and his natural Light, to
excite or direct them, I mean in the Works of Nature, not superadded positive
Institutions, does also belong thereunto. Wherefore the whole Instruction that
God intended to give unto man, by the Works of Creation, with their Order and
End, is as was said, included herein. What he might learn from them, or what
God taught him by them, was no less his Duty, than what his own inbred Light
directed him unto, Romans 1. 18, 19, 20. Thus the framing of the world in six
Days, in six Days of Work, was intended to be instructive unto man, as well
as the consideration of the things materially that were made. God could have
immediately produced All out of Nothing, (...), in the shortest measure of Time
conceivable. But he not only made all things for himself, or his glory, but
disposed also the Order of their Production unto the same End. And herein
consisted part of that Covenant Instruction which he gave unto man in that
condition wherein he was made, that through him he might have glory ascribed
unto him, on the Account of his Works themselves, as also of the Order and
Manner of their Creation. For it is vain to imagine, that the world was made in
six Days, and those closed with a Day of Rest, without an especial respect
unto the Obedience of Rational Creatures, seeing absolutely with respect unto
God himself, neither of them was necessary. And what he intended to teach them
thereby, it was their duty to enquire and know. Hereby then man in general was
taught Obedience and Working before he entered into Rest. For being created in
the Image of God, he was to conform himself unto God. As God wrought before he
rested, so was he to work before his Rest; his condition rendering that working
in him Obedience, as it was in God, an Effect of Sovereignty. And by the Rest
of God, or his Satisfaction and Complacency in what he had made and done, he
was instructed to feek Rest with God, or to enter into that Rest of God, by his
compliance with the Ends intended.

innate Light and Principles of his own mind informed him, that some time was
to be set apart to the solemn Worship of God, as he was a rational creature
made to give glory unto him; so the Instruction he received by the Works and
Rest of God, as made under a Covenant, taught him, that one day in seven was
required unto that purpose, as also to be a pledge of his resting with God. It
may be, it will be said, that man could not know, that the world was made in
six days, and that the Rest of God ensued on the seventh, without some
especial Revelation. I answer (1.) That I know not. He that knew the nature of
all the creatures, and could give them names suited thereunto upon his first
sight and view of them, might know more of the Order of their creation, than we
can well imagine. For we know no more in our lapsed condition, what the Light
of Nature directed man unto as walking before God in a Covenant, than men
merely natural do know of the Guidance and Conduct of the Light and Law of
Grace, in them who are taken into a New Covenant. (2.) However, what God
instructed him in, even by Revelation, as to the due Consideration and
improvement of the things that belonged unto the Law of his Creation, that is
to be esteemed as a part thereof. Institutions of things by especial Revelation
that had no Foundatiin the Law or Light of Nature, were merely positive; such
were the Commands concerning the Trees, of Life, and of the knowledge of Good
and Evil. But such as were directive of Natural Light, and of the Order of the
Creation, were Moral, and belonged unto the general Law of Obedience. Such was
the especial Command given unto man to till and keep the Garden, Genesis 2. 15. or
to dress and improve the place of his Habitation. For this in General the Law
of his Creation required. Now this God did, both as to his Works and his Rest.
Neither do I know any one as yet, that questioneth whither Adam and the
Patriarchs that ensued before the giving of the Law knew that the world was
created in six days. Though some seem to speak doubtfully hereof, and some by
direct consequent deny it, yet I suppose that hitherto it passes as granted.
Nor have they who dispute that the Sabbath was neither instituted, known, nor
observed before the people of Israel were in the Wilderness, once attempted to
confirm their Opinion with this supposition, that the Patriarchs from the
Foundation of the world, knew not that the world was made in six days; which
yet alone would be effectual unto their purpose. Nor on the other side, can it
be once rationally imagined, that if they had knowledge hereof, and therewithal
of the Rest which ensued thereon, that they had no regard unto it in the
Worship of God.

Sabbath, or the Observation of one day in seven as a Sacred Rest, fixed on the
same Moral grounds with Monogamy, or the marriage of one man to one only Woman
at the same time; which from the very fact and Order of the Creation, our
Savior proves to have been an unchangeable part of the Law of it. For because
God made them two single Persons Male and Female, fit for individual
conjunction, he concludes, that this course of life they were everlastingly
obliged not to alter, nor transgress. As therefore men may dispute that
Polygamy is not against the Law of Nature, because it was allowed and practiced
by many, by most of those who of old observed and improved the Light and Rule
thereof to the uttermost; when yet the very factum and Order of the Creation is
sufficient to evince the contrary; so although men should dispute, that the
Observation of one Days Sacred Rest in seven, is not of the Light nor Law of
Nature, all whose Rules and Dictates they say, are of an easy discovery, and
prone to the Observation of all men, which this is not; yet the Order of the
Creation, and the Rest of God that ensued thereon, is sufficient to evince the
contrary. And in the renewing of the Law upon Mount Sinai, God taught the
people not only by the words that he spoke, but also by the Works that he
wrought. Yea, he instructed them in a Moral Duty, not only by what he did, but
by what he did not. For he declares, that they ought to make no Images of, or
unto him, because he made no Representation of himself unto them, they saw no
manner of similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto them in Horeb out of
the midst of the fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16.

Covenant which man Originally was taken into, was a Covenant of Works; wherein
his obtaining Rest with God, depended absolutely on his doing all the Work he
had to do in a way of Legal Obedience, he was during the Dispensation of that
Covenant, tied up precisely to the Observation of the seventh Day, or that
which followed the whole Work of Creation. And the seventh Day, as such, is a
Pledge and Token of the Rest promised in the Covenant of Works and no other.
And those who would advance that Day again into a necessary Observation, do
consequentially introduce the whole Covenant of Works, and are become Debtors
unto the whole Law. For the works of God which preceded the seventh Day
precisely, were those whereby man was initiated into, and instructed in the
Covenant of Works; and the Day it self was a token and pledge of the
Righteousness thereof; or a Moral and Natural Sign of it, and of the Rest of
God therein, and the Rest of man with God thereby. And it is no service to the
Church of God, nor has any tendency unto the Honor of Christ in the Gospel, to
endeavor a Reduction of us unto the Covenant of Nature.

Weekly Sacred Rest, by all the Ways and Means which God was pleased to use in
giving him an acquaintance with his Will, and that Obedience unto his Glory
which he expected from him. For this knowledge he had partly by the Law of his
Creation as innate unto him or concreated with the Principles of his nature,
being the necessary exurgency of his Rational Constitution; and partly by the
Works and Rest of God, thereon proposed unto his consideration, both firmed by
Gods Declaration of his Sanctification of the seventh Day. Hence did he know,
that it was his Duty to express and celebrate the Rest of God, or the
complacency that he had in the Works of his Hands in reference unto their great
and proper End, or his Glory, in the Honor, Praise and Obedience of them unto
whose contemplation they were proposed, for those Ends. This followed
immediately from the Time spent in the Creation, and the Rest that ensued
thereon, which were so ordered for his Instruction, and not from any other
Cause or Reason taken either from the Nature of God, or of the things
themselves; which required neither six days to make the world in, nor any Rest
to follow thereon. For that Rest was not a cessation from working absolutely,
much less merely so. Hence did he learn the Nature of the Covenant that he was
taken into; namely, how he was first to work in Obedience, and then to enter
into Gods Rest in Blessedness. For so had God appointed, and so did he
understand his Will, from his own present State and Condition. Hence was he
instructed to dedicate to God, and his own more immediate communion with him,
one day in a Weekly Revolution, wherein the whole Law of his Creation was
consummate, as a Pledge and Means of entering eternally into Gods Rest, which
from hence he understood to be his End and Happiness. And for the
sanctification of the seventh Day of the Week precisely, he had it by
Revelation, or Gods sanctification of it, which had unto him the nature of a
Positive Law, being a Determination of the day suited unto the Nature and
Tenor of that Covenant wherein he walked with God.

innate Principles, and other Instructions to the same purpose in general. All
these things, I say, the last only excepted, was he directed unto, in and by
the innate Principles of Light and Obedience, wherewith the Faculties of his
soul were furnished, every way suited to guide him in the whole of the Duty
required of him; and by the farther Instruction he had from the other Works of
God, and his Rest upon the whole. And although it may be we cannot now discern,
how in particular his Natural Light might conduct and guide him to the
Observance of all these things, yet ought we not therefore to deny that so it
did, seeing there is evidence in the things themselves, and we know not well
what that Light was, which was in him. For although we may have some due
Apprehensions of the substance of it, from its remaining Ruins and Materials
in our lapsed condition, yet we have no acquaintance with that Light and
glorious Luster, that extent of its directive beams which it was accompanied
withal, when it was in him as he came immediately from the hand of God, created
in his Image. We have lost more by the Fall, than the best and wisest in the
world can apprehend, whilst they are in it; much more than most will
acknowledge, whose principal design seems to be, to extenuate the sin and
misery of man, which issues necessarily in an undervaluation of the Love and
Grace of Jesus Christ. But if a natural or carnal man cannot discern how the
Spirit or Grace of the New Covenant, which succeeds into the room of our first
innate Light, as unto the Ends of our living unto Gods glory in a new way,
directs and guides those in whom it is, unto the Observance of all the Duties
of it; let us not wonder if we cannot easily and readily comprehend the
Brightness and Extent, and Conduct of that Light, which was suited unto an
estate of things that never was in the world, since the Fall, but only in the
Man Christ Jesus; whose Wisdom and Knowledge in the Mind and Will of God, even
thereby, without his superadded peculiar Assistances, we may rather admire,
than think to understand.

Old World laid, and the Covenant of man's Obedience established, when all the
Sons of God sang for joy; even in the first Rest of God, and in the expression
of it by the sanctification of a Sacred Rest, to return unto him a Revenue of
Glory, in man's Observance of it. And on these grounds, I do affirm that the
Weekly Observation of a Day to God for Sabbath Ends, is a Duty Natural and
Moral, which we are under a perpetual and indispensible Obligation unto;
namely, from that Command of God, which being a part of the Law of our Creation
is Moral indispensible and perpetual. And these things with the different
Apprehensions of others about them, and Oppositions unto them, must now be
farther explained, and considered. For that we now enter upon, namely, the
consideration of the Judgment and Opinions of others about these things, with
the Confirmation of our own.

Causes of the Sabbath, the first Question usually insisted on, is concerning
the Nature of the Law, whereby its Observation is commanded. This some affirm
to be Moral, some only Positive, as we have showed before. And many Disputes
there have been about the true Notion and Distinction of Laws Moral, and
Positive. But whereas these Terms are invented to express the conceptions of
men's minds, and that of Moral, at least, includes not any absolute determinate
sense in the meaning of the Word, those at variance about them, cannot impose
their sense and understanding of them upon one another. For seeing this
Denomination of Moral, applied unto a Law, is taken from the subject matter of
it, which is the Manners or Duties of them to whom the Law is given, if any one
will assert that every command of God, which respects the manners of men, that
is of all men absolutely as men, is Moral, I know not how any one can compel
him to speak or think otherwise, for he has his liberty to use the Word in
that sense which he judges most proper. And if it can be proved, that there is
a Law, and ever was, binding all men universally to the Observation of an
Hebdomadal Sacred Rest, I shall not contend with any, how that Law ought to be
called, whether Moral or Positive. This contest therefore I shall not engage
into, though I have used, and shall yet further use those terms in their common
sense and acceptance. My way shall be plainly to enquire, what force there is
in the Law of our Creation unto the Observation of a Weekly Sabbath, and what
is superadded thereunto by the Vocal Declararion of the Will of God concerning
it.

some Time ought to be separated unto the Obserservance of the solemn Worship
of God. For be that Worship what it will, merely Natural, or any thing
superadded by voluntary and arbitrary Institutions, the Law for its Observance
is natural, and requires that Time be set apart for its Celebration; seeing in
time it is to be performed. When there was but one Man and Woman, this was
their Duty; and so it continued to be the Duty of their whole Race and
Posterity, in all the Societies, Associations and Assemblies whereof they were
capable. But the first Object of this Law or Command is the Worship of God it
self; Time falls under it only consequentially and reductively. Wherefore the
Law of Nature does also distinctly respect Time it self. For we are bound
thereby to serve God with all that is ours, and with the first fruits of our
substance in every kind. Somewhat of whatever God has given unto us, is to be
set apart from our own use, and given up absolutely to him, as an Homage due
unto him, and a necessary acknowledgement of him. To deny this, is to
contradict one of the principal Dictates of the Law of Nature. For God has
given us nothing ultimately for our selves, seeing we and all that we have, are
wholly his. And to have any thing, whereof no part as such is to be spent in
his service, is to have it with his displeasure. Let any one endeavor to
assert and prove this Position; No part of our Time is to be set apart to the
Worship of God, and his Service, in an holy and peculiar manner, and he will
quickly find himself setting up in a full contradiction to the Law of Nature,
and the whole Light of the knowledge of God in his mind and conscience. Those
who have attempted any such thing, have done it under this deceitful pretense,
that all our Time is to be spent unto God, and every day is to be a Sabbath.
For whereas notwithstanding this pretense, they spend most of their time
directly and immediately to themselves, and their own Occasions, it is evident
that they do but make use of it, to rob God of that which is his due, directly
and immediately. For unto the holy separation of any thing unto God, it is
required as well that it be taken from our selves, as that it be given unto
him. This therefore the Law of our Creation requires as unto the separation of
some part of our Time unto God. And if this does not at first consideration
discover it self in its Directive Power, it will quickly do so in its
condemning Power upon a contradiction of it. Thus far then we have attained.

Ends Political unto their own Good by Government and Order, which all men
confess to be a Direction of the Law of Nature. For what concerns our living to
God naturally, is as clear in that Light and Conduct, as what concerns our
living among our selves. Now a part of this Worship it is, that we honor him
with what, by his Gift, is made ours. Such is our Time in this world. Nor can
the Worship it self be performed and celebrated in a due manner, without the
Designation, and Separation of some Time unto that purpose; and thereby,
secondly, this Separation of Time becomes a branch of the Law of Nature, by an
immediate, natural and unavoidable consequence. And what is so, is no less to
be reckoned among the Rules of it, than the very first notions or impressions
that it gives us concerning the nature of any thing, Good or Evil. For whatever
Reason can educe from the Principles of Reason, is no less Reason, than those
Principles themselves, from whence it is educed. And we aim no more from this
discourse, but that the separation of some Time to the Worship of God,
according to the Ends before insisted on, is Reasonable, so that the contrary
in its first conception is unreasonable and foolish. And this I suppose is
evident to all, I am sure by most it is granted. Could men hereupon acquiesce
in the Authority and Wisdom of God, indigitating and measuring out that Portion
of Time in all seasons, and Ages of the Church; there might be a Natural Rest
from these contentions, about a Rest Sacred and Holy. However, I cannot but
admire at the Liberty which some men take positively to affirm and contend,
that the Command for the Observation of the Sabbath, when or however it were
given, was wholly umbratile and Ceremonial. For there is that in it confessedly
as its Foundation, and that which all its concernments are educed from, which
is as direct an Impression on the mind of man from the Law of Creation, as any
other Instance that can be given thereof.

stated Time directed unto for the Ends of a Sacred Rest unto God, by the Light
and Law of Nature, that is Gods Command impressed on the mind of man in and by
his own Creation, and that of the rest of the Works of God intended for his
Direction in Obedience, is, that it be one day in seven. For the confirmation
hereof, what we have discoursed concerning the Law of Creation, and the
Covenant ratified with man therein, is to be remembered. On the supposition
thereof, the Advancement or Constitution of any other Portion of Time in the
stead, and to the Exclusion thereof, as a Determination and Limitation of the
Time required in general in the first Instance of that Law, is and would appear
a contradiction unto it. God having finished his Works in six Days, and
rested on the seventh, giving man thereby and therein, the Rule, and Law of his
Obedience and Rewards for him to assign any other measure or portion of Time
for his Rest unto God in his Solemn Worship, is to decline the Authority of
God, for the sake of his own inventions; and to assign no portion at all unto
that End, is openly to transgress a principal Dictate of the Law of Nature, as
has been proved. Neither this Direction nor Transgression I confess, will
evidently manifest themselves in the mere Light of Nature, as now depraved and
corrupted. No more will sundry Instances of its Authority, unless its voice be
diligently attended unto, and its Light cultivated and improved in the minds of
men, by the Advantage of Consequential Revelations, given unto us for that
purpose. For that by the Assistance of Scripture Light, and Rational
Considerations thence arising, we may discover many things to be dictates of,
and to be directed unto by the Law of Nature, which those who are left unto the
mere Guidance and Conduct of it could not discover so to be, may be easily
proved from the open Transgression of it in sundry Instances which they lived
and approved themselves in, who seemed most to have lived according unto it,
and professed themselves to be wise in following the Light and Conduct of
Reason in all things, as was before at large discoursed. The Polutheisme that
prevailed amongst the best of the Heathens, their open profession of living
unto themselves, and seeking after their Happiness in themselves, with many
other Instances make this evident. And if Revelation or Scripture Light
contributed no more to the Discovery of the Postulata of the Law of Nature, but
by a removal of those Prejudices, which the manner and fashion of the world
amongst men, and a corrupt conversation received by Tradition from one
Generation to another had fixed on, and possessed their minds withal, yet were
the Advantages we have by it unto this end, unspeakable. Let then this help be
supposed, and let a Judgment be made of the Injunctions of the Law of Nature,
rather by its condemning Right and Power, than by its Directive Light, (for
that in our lapsed estate is a better (...) of its Commands, than the other)
and we shall find it manifesting it self in this matter. For on this
supposition, let those who will not acknowledge, that the Observation of one
Day in seven, is to be separated unto God for the Ends declared, allowing the
Assertion before laid down of the necessity of the separation of some stated
Time to that purpose, fix to themselves any other Time in a certain Revolution
of Days, and they will undoubtedly find themselves pressed with so many
Considerations from the Law of their Creation to the contrary, as will give
them little Rest or satisfaction in their minds, in what they do.

Requisite of the Law of our Creation. And here our Diligence is required. For
it must be said again expressly, what was before intimated, that it is a
childish mistake to imagine, that whatever is required by the Law of Nature, is
easily discernible, and always known to all. Some of its Directions it may be
are so, especially such as are inculcated on the minds of men, by their Common
Interest and Advantage. Such are neminem laedere, and jus suum cuique tribuere.
But it is far from being true, that all the Dictates of the Law of Nature, and
Requisites of Right Reason, are evident and incapable of Controversy, as they
would have been unto man had he continued in his Integrity. Many things there
are between men themselves concerning which, after all helps and advantages,
and a continued Observation of the course of the world unto this day, it is
still disputed, what is the sense of the Law of Nature about them, and wherein,
or how far they belong unto it. The Law of Nations among themselves with
respect unto one another, on which is founded the Peace and Order of mankind,
is nothing but the Law of Nature, as it has been expressed in Instances by the
Customs and Usages of them, who are supposed to have most diligently attended
unto its Directions. And how many Differences never to be determined by common
consent there are in and about these things, is known. For there are degrees of
Evidence in the things that are of Natural Light. And many things that are so,
are yet in Practice accompanied with the consideration of Positive Laws, as
also of Civil Usages and Customs amongst men. And it is not easy to
distinguish in many Observances; what is of the Law of Nature, and what of Law
Positive, or of useful Custom. But of these things we have discoursed before in
general. We are now to enquire what is requisite to warrant the Ascription of
any thing unto this Law.

congruous unto the Law of Nature, and all the other known principles of it.
Unto us it may be enjoined by Law Positive, or otherwise made necessary for us
to observe. But it must in it self or materially, hold a good correspondency
with all the known Instances of the Law of our Creation, and this manifested
with satisfying Evidence, before its Assignation thereunto. It is of Natural
Right that we should obey God in all his Commands; but this does not cause
every command of God to belong to the Law of Nature. It is, as was said,
moreover required thereunto, that it be in it self, and the subject matter of
it, congruous unto the Principles of that Law; whereof there is nothing in
things merely arbitrary and positive, setting aside that general notion, that
God is to be obeyed in all his Laws; which belongs not to this Question. Now
when this Congruity unto the Law of Nature or Right Reason in the matter of any
Law or Command is discovered and made evident, it will greatly direct the mind
in its Enquiry after its whole Nature, and manifest what is superadded unto it
by Positive Command. And this will not be denied unto the Sabbath, its Command
and Observation. Let the Ends of it before laid down be considered, and let
them be compared with any other Guidances or Directions which we have by
Natural Light concerning our living to God, and there will not only an Harmony
appear amongst them, but also that they contribute Help and Assistance to one
another toward the same Ultimate End.

general Principle in the Light of Nature, and Dictates of Right Reason, from
whence it may be educed, or which it will necessarily follow upon, supposing
that Principle rightly and duly improved. It is not enough that it be at
Agreement, that it no way interfere with other Principles, it must also have
one of its own, from whence it does naturally arise. So does the second
Commandment of the Decalogue, belong to the Law of Nature. Its Principle lies
in that Acknowledgement of the Being of God, which is required in the first.
For therein is God manifested to be of that Nature, to be such a Being, that it
is, and must be an absurd, unreasonable, foolish, and impious thing in it self,
implying a renunciation of the former Acknowledgements, to make any Images, or
limited Representations of his Being, or to adore him any way otherwise than
himself has declared. So is it here also. The separation of a stated Time unto
the Solemn Worship of God, is so fixed on the mind of man by its own inbred
Light, as that it cannot be omitted, without open sin against it, in those who
have not utterly sinned away all the Efficacy of that Light it self. However,
that this is required of us by the Law of our Creation, may be proved against
all contradiction. Hence whatever guiding, directing, determining Positive Law
may ensue or be superadded about the Limitation of this time so to be
separated, it being only the Application of this Natural and Moral Principle,
as to some circumstances of it, it hinders not, but that the Law if self
concerning it, is of the Law of Nature, and Moral. For the Original Power unto
Obligation of such a superadded Law, lies in the Natural Principle before
mentioned.

Works of Creation themselves, their Order, Harmony, and mutual Respect to each
other, with reference unto their Duty toward God, and among themselves, is of
the Law of Nature, although there be not an absolute distinct notion of it
inbred in the mind discoverable. It is enough that the mind of man is so
disposed, as to be ready and fit to receive the Discovery and Revelation of it.
For the very Creation it self, is a Law unto us, and speaks out that Duty that
God requires of us toward himself. For he has not only so ordered all the
works of it, that they should be meet to instruct us, or contain an Instructive
Power toward Rational Creatures made in that state and condition, wherein man
was created, which was before described, which has in it the first notion of a
Law; but it was the Will of God that we should learn our Duty thereby, which
gives it its complement, as a Law obliging unto Obedience. And it is not only
thus in general with respect unto the whole work of Creation in it self; but
the ordering and disposal of the Parts of it, is alike directive and
Instructive to the Nature of man, and has the force of a Law Morally and
everlastingly obligatory. Thus the preeminence of the Man above the Woman which
is Moral, ensues upon the Order of the Creation, in that the Man was first
made, and the Woman for the Man, as the Apostle argues, 1 Timothy 2. 12, 13. And
all Nations ought to be obliged hereby, though many of them through their
Apostasy from Natural Light, knew not that either Man or Woman was created,
but it may be, supposed them to have grown out of the Earth like Mushromes; and
yet an Effect of the secret Original impression hereof, influenced their minds
and practices. So the Creation of one Man and one Woman gave the Natural Law of
Marriage; whence Polygamy and Fornication became transgressions of the Law of
Nature. It will be hard to prove, that about these and the like things, there
is a clear and undoubted Principle of Directive Light in the mind of man,
separate from the consideration of the Order of Creation. But therein a Law,
and that Moral, is given unto us, not to be referred unto any other Head of
Laws, but that of Nature. And here as was before pleaded, the Creation of the
world in six days, with the Rest of God on the seventh, and that declared,
gives unto all men an everlasting Law of separating one day in seven unto a
Sacred Rest. For he that was made in the Image of God, was made to imitate him,
and conform himself unto him; God in this Order of things, saying as it were
unto him, what I have done, in your station do ye likewise. Especially was this
made effectual, by his innate Apprehension that his Happiness consisted in
entering into the Rest of God, the pledge whereof, it was his unquestionable
Duty to embrace.

Revelation in the way of a Precept for the due and just exercise, of the
Principles, Rules, and Documents before mentioned, is so far from impeaching
the Morality of any Command or Duty, as that it compleats the Law of it, with
the addition of a formal obligatory Power and Efficacy. The Light and Law of
Creation, so far as it was innate, or concreated with the faculties of our
souls, and completing our state of Dependence on God, has only the general
nature of a Principle, inclineing unto actions suitable unto it, and directing
us therein. The Documents also that were originally given unto that Light from
without, by the other Works and Order of the Creation, had only in their own
Nature the force of an Instruction. The Will of God, and an Act of Sovereignty
therein, formally constituted them a Law. But now man being made to live unto
God, and under his Conduct and Guidance in all things that he might come to the
Enjoyment of him, no Prejudice arises unto, nor Alteration is made in the
Dictates of the Law of Creation, by the superadding any Positive Commands for
the Performance of the Duties that it does require, and regulating of them, as
to the especial Manner and Ends of their Performance. And where such a Positive
Law is interposed or superadded, it is the highest folly to imagine, that the
whole Obligation unto the Duty, depends on that Command, as though the
Authority of the Law of Nature were superseded thereby; or that the whole
Command about it, were now grown Positive and Arbitrary. For although the same
Law cannot be Moral and Positive in the same respect; yet the same Duty may be
required by a Law Moral, and a Law Positive. It is thus with many Observances
of the Gospel. We may for Example instance in Excommunication, according to the
common received notion of it. There is a Positive Command in the Gospel for the
exercise of the sentence of it, in the Churches of Christ. But this hinders
not, but that it is natural for all Societies of men, to exclude from their
Societies those that refractorily refuse to observe the Laws and Orders of the
Society, that it may be preserved unto its proper End. And according to the
Rule of this Natural Equity, that it should be so, have all Rational Societies
amongst men, that knew nothing of the Gospel, proceeded for their own good and
preservation. Neither does the superadded Institution in the Gospel derogate
from the general Reason hereof, or change the nature of the Duty, but only
direct its practice, and make Application of it, to the uses and ends of the
Gospel itself.

I do not plead, that every Law that God prescribes unto me is Moral, because
my Obedience unto it is a Moral Duty. For the Morality of this Obedience, does
not arise from, nor depend upon the especial Command of it, which it may be is
Positive and Arbitrary, but from the respect that it has unto our Dependence
in all things which we have to do absolutely and universally on God. To obey
God in all things, is unquestionably our Moral Duty. But when the substance of
the Command it self, that is, the Duty required is Moral, the addition of a
Positive Command does no way impeach its Morality, nor suspend the Influence of
that Law, whereon its Morality does depend. It is therefore unduly pretended by
some, that because there is a Positive Command for the Observation of the
Sabbath, supposing there should be such a Command for the whole of it, which is
nothing else but an Explanation and Enforcement of the Original Moral Precept
of it, (as in every State of the Church something relating unto it, namely, the
precise Determination of the Day it self in the Hebdomadal Revolution, depended
on a Law Positive) that therefore the Law of it, is not Moral. It is not so
indeed, so far and in that respect wherein it is Positive; but it is so from it
self, for the substance of it, and Antecedently unto that Positive Command. The
whole Law therefore of the Sabbath and its Observation may be said to be Moral
Positive, which Expression has been used by some Learned Divines in this case,
and that not unduly. For a Law may be said to be so on a double Account. First,
When the Positive Part of the Law is Declarative, and accumulative with respect
unto a Precedent Law of Nature, as when some Additions are made to the Duties
therein required as to the manner of their Performance. Secondly, When the
Foundation of a Duty only is laid in the Law of Nature, but its entire Practice
is regulated by a Positive Law. From all the Instances insisted on, it is
manifest that the Law of the Sabbatical Observation is Moral, a branch of the
Law of Nature, however it be enforced, directed, and the especial Day in seven
be limited and determined by Positive Commands.

Law of Creation for a Sacred Rest unto God, on one day in seven. For they say,
that no such can be made to appear with that Evidence, which the common
Anticipations of the minds of men, are accompanied withal. But this Objection
has been sufficiently obviated, by a due stating of the Law of Nature, which
is not to be confined unto inbred natural Anticipations only. And it is certain
also, that some say the very same concerning the Being of God himself, of the
Difference between Good and Evil; namely, that there are no manifest and
steadfast Presumptions of them in the mind of man, which yet hinders not, but
that the Acknowledgement of a Divine Being, as also the Difference that is
between Good and Evil, is natural, and inseparable from the faculties of our
souls. Hence Julian in Cyril. lib. 5. con. Jul. joins the first and fourth
Precept together: says he, (...). He says, (and swears) that all Nations
judged that the Commandments (of the Decalogue) ought to be kept, excepting the
first forbidding other Gods, and the other of remembering the Sabbath to keep
it, the One may be rejected as well as the other.

Besides the Law of Nature as to an Obligatory Indication of our Duty, is not,
no not in the Extent insisted on, as comprizing the Objective Documents that
are in the Works and Order of the Creation, to be considered alone by it self
in this matter, but in conjunction with the Covenant that it was the Rule of.
For whatever was required of man by virtue of that Covenant, was part of the
Moral Law of God, or belonged unto the Law of his Creation. From all which the
Rest pleaded for to be Moral does arise. And considering the Nature of this
Duty, with the Divine Positive Direction whereby its first practice was
regulated, and stood in need so to be, when God blessed the seventh Day and
sanctified it; And it is mavelous, that the remaining Light of Nature about
it, should put forth it self by so many Intimations, as it does; and in so many
Instances to express the first impressions that it had from God in this matter.
For I think we have manifested that they are many, and those pleadable against
any probability of contradiction. In a word, we may in all Ages find the
generality of mankind, feeling, and as it were groping in the Dark, after a
stated Sacred Rest to be observed unto God. And however, the most of men
destitute of Divine Revelation, missed the Season, the Ends, and the Object of
this Rest, yet they were plainly influenced unto all their stated Sacred or
Religious Solemnities, both Feasts and Abstinences, by the remainders of an
innate Persuasion, that such a Rest was to be observed. Besides we know, that
the present Indications of Nature as corrupt, are no just Rule and Measure of
its Original Abilities, with respect unto living to God. And they do but
woefully bewray their Ignorance and Impudence who begin to plead, that our Minds
or Understandings, were no way impaired or worsted by the Fall; but that the
Principles or Abilities in them in reference unto God and our selves, are the
same as originally, and that unimpaired. Either such men design to overthrow
the Gospel and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, or they know not what they say,
nor whereof they do affirm. But hereof we shall treat elsewhere by Gods
Assistance. At present we know, that the Light of Nature is so defective, or so
impotent in giving Indications of it self, that many Nations left destitute of
Divine Revelation, or wilfully rejecting it, have lived and approved themselves
in open Transgressions of the Law of it, as has been showed. The Apostle gives
sundry Instances of that kind, amongst them who most boasted themselves to
attend to the Dictates of Right Reason, Romans 1. All Idolaters, Polygamists,
Fornicators, and those who constantly lived on Spoil and Rapine, approving
themselves, or not condemning themselves in what they did, are Testimonies
hereof. That alone then is not to be pretended to be of the Law of Nature,
which all men acknowledge to be a part of it, nor is every thing to be rejected
from having a place therein, which some have lived in a secure transgression
of, and others say, that it gives no Indications of it self; but that is to be
understood to belong thereunto, which by the diligent consideration of all
means and advantages of knowledge, may be found to be congruous to all the
other knwon and allowed Principles and Maxims of it, and to have its
Foundation in it, being what Originally God by any means instructed our Nature
in, as that which belonged unto our living unto him. And it may be a man may
sooner learn, what is Natural Duty to God, in and from corrupted Nature, by the
Opposition that it will make unto its Practice, as it is corrupted, than by the
Light and Guidance it will give unto it, as Nature. It is also, as we have
observed, more discernible in its judging and condemning what is done contrary
unto it, than in directing unto what it did originally require.

Morality of the Sabbath from the Indications of it, and Directions unto it in
the Light and Law of Nature, which will be found to be such, as not to be by
any modest or sober man contemned; we proceed to add those other consequential
confirmations of the same Truth, which God has given us in the following
Revelations of his Will about it. And First, this gives no small countenance
unto an Apprehension of an unchangeable Morality in the Law of the Sabbath,
that in all Estates of the Church, from the foundation of the world, under the
several Covenants wherein it has walked with God, and the various
Dispensations of them, there is a fall Evidence, that in them all God has
still required of his people, the Observation of a Sacred Rest unto himself, in
an Hebdomadal Revolution of Time or Days. A full confirmation hereof, with its
proofs and illustrations, the Reader will find at large in our Exposition of
the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, so soon as God shall give an
Opportunity to have it communicated unto him. At present, I shall touch only on
the Heads of things.

all Estates of the Church, having no foundation but only in Arbitrary
Institution, cannot be proved by any one single Instance. The Institutions of
the State of Innocence, in the matters of the Garden, with the Trees of Life,
and of the knowledge of Good and Evil ceased, as all men confess, with that
Estate. And although God did not immediately upon the sin of man destroy. that
Garden, no nor it may be until the Flood, leaving it as a Testimony against
the wickedness of that Apostate Generation, for whose sin the world was
destroyed; yet was neither it, nor the Trees of it, of any use, or lawful to be
used as to any significancy in the Worship of God. And the Reason is, because
all Institutions, are Appendixes, and things annexed unto a Covenant; and when
that Covenant cease, or is broken, they are of no use or signification at all.

new state of the Church erected presently after the Fall, and this also
attended with sundry new Institutions, especially with that concerning
Sacrifices. In this Church state some Alterations were made, and sundry
additional Institutions given unto it, upon the Erection of the peculiar Church
State of the Israelites in the Wilderness; which yet hindered not, but that it
was in General the same Church State, and the same Dispensation of the
Covenant, that the people of God, before and after the giving of the Law,
enjoyed and lived under. Hence it was, that sundry Institutions of Worship were
equally in force both before and after the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai; as
is evident in Sacrifices, and some other Instances may be given. But now when
the State of the Church, and the Dispensation of the Covenant, came to be
wholly altered, as they were by the Gospel, not any one of the old Institutions
was continued, or to be continued, but they were all abolished and taken away.
Nothing at all was traduced over from the Old Church States, neither from that
in Innocence, nor from that which ensued on the Fall in all its variations,
with any Obligatory Power, but what was founded in the Law of Nature, and had
its force from thence. We may then confidently assert, that what God requires
equally in all Estates of the Church, that is Moral, and of an everlasting
Obligation unto us, and all men. And this is the State of matters with the
Sabbath, and the Law thereof.

Genesis 2. 2, 3. It will, God assisting, be farther discoursed and confirmed in
our Exposition of the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. The
Observation of it by virtue of its Original Law and Command, before the
Promulgation of the Decalogue in Sinai, or the first Wilderness Observation of
the Sabbath, recorded on the occasion of giving Manna, has also been before
confirmed. Many Exceptions I acknowledge are laid in, against the Testimonies
insisted on for the proof of these things; but those such, as I suppose, are
not able to invalidate them in the minds of men void of Prejudice. And the
Pretense of the Obscurity that is in the Command, will be easily removed, by
the consideration of another Instance of the same Antiquity. All men
acknowledge, that a Promise of Christ, for the Object and Guide of the Faith of
the ancient Patriarchs, was given in those Words of God, immediately spoken
unto the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and
between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruize thy head, and thou shall bruize
its heel. The Words in themselves seem obscure unto any such End or Purpose.
But yet there is such light given into them, and the mind of God in them, from
the circumstances of Time, Place, Persons, Occasions, from the Nature of the
things treated of, from the whole ensuing Economy, or dealing of God with men
revealed in the Scripture, as that no sober man doubts of the Promissory Nature
of those Words, nor of the Intention of them in General, nor of the proper
subject of the Promise, nor of the Grace intended in it. This Promise therefore
was the immediate Object of the faith of the Patriarchs of old, the great
motive and encouragement unto, and of their Obedience. But yet it will be hard,
from the Records of Scripture, to prove, that any particular Patriarch did
believe in, trust, or plead that Promise, which yet we know that they did all
and every one; nor was there any need for our Instruction, that any such
practice of theirs should be recorded; seeing it is a general Rule, that those
Holy men of God did observe and do whatever he did command them; Wherefore from
the record of a Command, we may conclude unto a suitable Practice, though it be
not recorded; and from a recorded approved Practice on the other side, we may
conclude unto the Command or Institution of the thing practiced, though no
where plainly recorded. Let unprejudiced men consider those words, Genesis 2. 2,
3. and they will find the Command and Institution of the Sabbath, as clear and
conspicuous in them, as the Promise of Grace in Christ is in them before
considered; especially as they are attended with the Interpretation given of
them, in Gods following dealings with his Church. And therefore although
particular Instances of the Obedience of the old Patriarchs in this part of it,
or the Observation of the Sabbath, could not be given and evinced, yet we ought
no more on that account to deny, that they did observe it, than we ought to
deny their Faith in the promised Seed, because it is no where expressly recorded
in the Story of their lives.

Law, that is, after the giving of it in the Wilderness, it is granted, that
the portion of Time insisted on, was precisely required to be dedicate unto
God; although it may be for some Ages, it will be hard to meet with a recorded
Instance of its Observation. But yet none dares take any countenance from
thence, to question whether it were so observed or no.

All therefore is secure unto the great alteration that was made in Instituted
Worship under the Gospel. And to proceed unto that season, there is no Practice
in any part of Gods Public Worship, that appears earlier in the Records of the
New Testament, as to what was peculiar thereunto, than the Observation of one
Day in seven for the Celebration of it. Hereof more must be spoken afterward.
Some say indeed, that the Appointment of one Day in seven, and that the first
Day of the Week, for the Worship of God, was only a voluntary Agreement, or a
matter consented unto by the Apostolical or first Churches, merely (...)
gratia, or to keep good Order and decorum amongst them, without respect unto
any Moral Command of God to that purpose. This they say directly with respect
to the first Day of the Week, or the Lords Day, and its Religious Observation.
But those who appoint the first Day of every Week to be so observed, do without
doubt appoint that that should be the Condition of one Day in seven. Now I
could incline to this Apprehension, if besides sundry other invincible Reasons
that lie against it, I did not find that God had always before in all States
of the Church from the foundation of the world, invariably required the
Observation of one Day in seven; and I know no Reason why what had been
observed all along so far upon his own Authority, he would have observed still,
but no longer on his Command, but on the Invention and Consent of men. Had the
Religious Observance of one Day in seven been utterly laid aside and abolished,
it would and ought to to have been concluded, that the Law of it was expired in
the Cross of Christ, as were those of Circumcision, the Sacrifices, and the
whole Temple-Worship. But to have this Observance continued by the whole
Church, in and under the Approbation of God, whereof none ever doubted, by a
Reassumption of it through the Authority of the Church, after God had taken off
his own from it, is a most vain Imagination.

Circumcision and Saorifices. But this is the State of the Religious Observance
of one Day in seven. None can deny, but that formerly it was ordained and
appointed of God. And it should seem according to this Opinion, that he took
off the Authority of his own Command, that the same Observance might be
continued upon the Authority of the Church. Credat Apella. Neither do the
Footsteps of the Occasion of any such Ecclesiastical Institution appear any
where on Record in the Scripture, where all things of an absolute new and
Arbitrary Institution, whether occasional or durable, are taken notice of.
There is indeed mention made, and that frequently of the first day of the Week
to be set apart for the Assembling of Believers for the Worship of God, and a
solid Reason is insinuated, why that especial day in particular ought so to be.
But why one Day in seven should be constantly observed to the purpose
mentioned, no Reason, no Account is given in the New Testament, other than why
men should not lie or stea'. Nor has any man a Ground to imagine, that there
was an Intercision of a Sabbatical Observance, by the interposition of any
time, between the Observation of the seventh Day, and of the first of the Week,
for the same Ends and Purposes; though not absolutely in the same manner. If
there be any Indications, Proofs, Evidences, that the first Churches continued
without the Observation of one Day in seven, after they desisted from having a
Religious Respect unto the seventh Day, before they had the same regard to the
first of the Week unto this purpose, I wish they might be produced; for they
would be of good weight in this matter; but as yet no such thing is made to
appear. For if the Obligation of the Precept for Observing one Day in seven, as
a Sacred Rest to God, may be suspended in any change of the outward State and
Condition of the Church, it cannot be esteemed to be Moral. I speak not of the
actual Observance of the thing commanded, which for many causes may
occasionally and temporarily be superseded, but of the obliging force and power
in the Command it self, which if it be Moral, is perpetual, and not capable of
Interruption. Now Testimonies we have that sundry persons not sufficiently
instructed in the Liberty of the Gospel; and the Law of its Obedience, observed
both the Days, the seventh, and the first; yea, it may be that for a while
some observed the one day, and some the other; but that any Christians of old
thought themselves de facto set at liberty from the Religious Observation of
one day in seven, this neither is, nor can be proved. This Practice then was
Universal, and that approved of God, as we shall see afterward, and farther in
another Discourse, now more than once directed unto. Now what can any man
conceive to be the ground of this unvariableness in the commanded and approved
Observation of one day in seven in all states, conditions, and alterations in
and of the Church, but that the Command for it, is part of the Moral
unchangeable Law? Hereby therefore it is confirmed unto us so to be. And
indeed, if every State of the Church be founded in an especial Work of God, and
his Rest thereon, and complacency therein, as a Pledge or Testimony of giving
his Church Rest in himself, as elsewhere shall be fully confirmed; a Sabbatical
Rest must be necessary unto the Church in every state and condition. And
although absolutely another Day might have been fixed on under the New
Testament, and not one in an Hebdomadal Revolution, because its peculiar works
were not precisely finished in six Days; yet that season being before fixed
and determined by the Law of Creation, no Innovation nor Alteration would be
allowed therein.

Sabbath unto God, holds in the Decalogue. Concerning this we have no more to
enquire, but whether it have obtained a station therein, in its own Right, or
were on some other occasion advanced to that Privilege. For if it be free of
that Society in its own Right, or on the Account of its Origin and Birth, the
Morality of it can never be impeached; if it had only an Occasional Interest
therein, and held it by a lease of time, it may ere this be long since
disseized of it. Now we do not yet dispute, whether the seventh Day precisely
be ordained in the fourth Commandment; and do take up the whole nature of it,
as the only subject of it, and alone required in it. Only I take it for
granted, that the Observation of one Day in seven is required in the Command,
which is so, because the seventh Day, or a seventh Day in a septenary
Revolution, is expressly commanded.

seventh Day precisely, and one Day in seven, no otherwise than as it
necessarily follows thereon. For where the seventh Day is required, one in
seven is so consequentially. And they who thus pretend have a double Design,
the one absolutely contradictory to the other. For those do so, who from thence
conclude, that, the seventh Day precisely comprizing the whole Nature of the
Sabbath, that day is indispensibly and everlastingly to be observed: And those
do so, who with equal confidence draw their conclusion to the utter Abolition
of the whole Sabbath, and the Law of it, in the taking away of the seventh Day
it self. Such different Apprehensions have men of the use and improvement that
may be made of the same Principles and Concessions. For those of the later sort
hope, that if they can prove the Observation of the seventh Day precisely, and
not one of seven but only consequentially, to be the whole of what is intended
in the fourth Commandment, that by virtue of the Apostles Rule, Col. 2. 16. (to
which purpose he often elsewhere expresses himself) they shall be able to
prove, that it is utterly abolished. Those of the other sort suppose, that if
they can make this to be the sense of the Commandment, they shall prevail to
fix a perpetual Obligation on all men from thence unto the Observation of the
seventh Day precisely, although the words of the Apostle seem to lie expressly
against it.

uncertain, but certainly false. For the very Order of Nature it self disposes
these things unto that series, and mutual Respect which can never be
interrupted. The Command is about the separation of time unto the service of
God. This he tacitly grants, nor will deny, if he be pressed, who contends for
the seventh Day. Here therefore it is natural and necessary, that Time be
indefinitely considered and required, antecedently unto the Designation and
Limitation of the portion of Time that is required. This the Order of Nature
requires. For if it be Time indefinitely that is limited in the Command unto
the seventh Day, Time indefinitely is the first Object of that Limitation. And
the case is the same with Reference unto one Day in seven. This also has and
must have a natural priority unto the seventh Day; for the seventh Day, is one
Day of the seven. And these things are separable. Some Part of Time may be
separated unto Religious Worship, and yet not one day in seven; but any other
portion in a certain Revolution of Days, Weeks, Months, or Years; if there be
not a distinct Reason for it. And one Day in seven may be so separated, wherein
the seventh Day precisely may have no Interest. And these things the very
Nature of them does assert, distinguish, and determine. Whatever Morality
therefore, or Obligation unto a perpetual Observance can be fancied by any to
be in the Command as to the seventh Day, it is but consequential unto,
dependant upon, and separable from, the command and duty for the Observance of
One Day in seven. And this sussiceth as to our present purpose. For I do not
yet treat with them who contend for the precise Observation of the seventh Day
now under the Gospel. It is enough, that here we prove, that the fourth
Commandment requires the Sacred Observation of one Day in seven, and that so
far as it does so, it is Moral and unchangeable.

Moral in the fourth Commandment, namely, that either some part of it, or the
general Nature of it is so. I do not therefore well understand them, and Him of
late who has pleaded that the seventh Day only is required in that Command,
and yet that this seventh Day was absolutely Ceremonial and Typical, being
accordingly abolished. The consistency of these Assertions does not yet appear
unto me. For if the whole matter of the Command be Ceremonial, the Command it
self must needs be so also. For a relief against this contradiction, it is
said, that the Morality of this Command consists in this, that we should look
after and take up our Spiritual Rest in God. But this will not allow, that it
should be a distinct Commandment of it self, distinguished from all the Rest of
the Decalogue, nor indeed scarcely from any one of them. For the Primitive End
of all the Commandments was to direct us and bring us unto Rest with God; of
the first Table immediately, and of the second in and by the Performance of the
Duties of it, among our selves. And of the first Precept this is the sum; so
that it is unduely assigned to be the peculiar Morality of the fourth, instead
of the solemn. Expression of that Rest as our End and Happiness. Neither is
there any way possible to manifest an especial Intention in, and of any Law,
that is not found in this. The Words and Letter of it in their proper, and only
sense, require a Day, or an especial season to be appointed for a Sacred Rest.
And so does the Nature of Religious Worship which undoubtedly is directed
therein. The Rest of God proposed in the Command as the Reason of it, which was
on the seventh day after six of working, requires the same Intention in the
words. So does also the exact limitation of Time mentioned in it; all in
compliance with the Order and Place that it holds in the Decalogue, wherein
nothing in general is left unrequired in the Natural and Instituted Worship of
God, but only the setting apart, with the Determination and Limitation of some
time unto the solemn Observation of it. Few therefore have ever denied but that
the Morality of this Command, if it be Moral, does extend it self unto the
separation of some part of our Time to the solemn recognizing of God, and our
subjection unto him; and this in the Letter of the Law is limited on the
Reasons before insisted on, unto one day in seven, in their perpetual
Revolution. The sole Enquiry therefore remaining is, whether this Precept be
Moral or no, and so continue to be possessed of a Power perpetually obligatory
to all the sons of men. And this is that which we are now enquiring into.

subject matter of the Precept it self. For if that be not only congruous to
the Law of Nature, but that also which by the Creation of our selves and all
other things we are taught and obliged unto the Observation of, the Law whereby
it is required must be Moral. For the Descriptive, or Distinctive Term (Moral)
does first belong unto the things themselves required by any Law, and thence to
the Law whereby they are commanded. If then we have proved, that the thing it
self required in the fourth Commandment, or the Religious Observation of a
Sacred Rest unto God for the Ends mentioned, in the Periodical Revolution of
seven days is Natural and Moral, from the Relation that it has unto the Law
of Creation, then there can be no Question of the Morality of that Command.
What has been performed therein is left unto the Judgment of the Sober and
Judicious Reader. For no man can be more remote from a pertinacious adherence
to his own sentiments, or a Magisterial imposition of his Judgment and
Apprehensions upon the minds, thoughts, or practice of other men, than I desire
to be. For however we may please our selves in our light, knowledge, learning,
and sincerity; yet when we have done all, they are not constituted of God to be
the Rule or Measure of other men's Faith, Persuasions, Apprehensions and
Conversations. And others whom for some defects, at least, so supposed by us,
we may be apt to despise, may be yet taught the Truth of God, in things wherein
we may be out of the way. That then which we have to do in these cases, is
first to endeavor after a full Persuasion in our own minds, then to
communicate the Principles of Reason and Scripture Testimony which we ground
our Persuasion upon unto others, laboring with meekness and gentleness to
instruct them, whom we apprehend to be out of the way; so submitting the whole
to the Judgment of all that fear the Lord, and shall take notice of such
things. And these Rules have I, and shall I attend unto, as abhorring nothing
more, than a proud Magisterial imposing of our Apprehensions, and Inclinations,
on the minds and practices of other men; which I judge far more intolerable in
particular persons, than in Churches and Societies, in both contrary to that
Royal Law of Love and Liberty, which all Believers ought to walk by. And
therefore as we said, what has been spoken on this subject, or shall yet
farther be added, I humbly submit to the Judgment of the sober and indifferent
Readers, only assuring them, that I teach as I have learned, speak because I
believe, and declare nothing, but whereof I am fully persuaded in my own mind.

Decalogue, and the Distinction of its Precepts from all Commands Ceremonial or
Political, comes now under consideration. The whole Decalogue I acknowledge, as
given on Mount Sinai to the Israelites, had a Political Use, as being made the
Principal Instrument or Rule of the Polity and Government of their Nation, as
peculiarly under the Rule of God. It had a Place also in that Economy or
Dispensation of the Covenant, which that Church was then brought under, wherein
by Gods dealing with them and Instructing of them, they were taught to look out
after a farther and greater good in the Promise, than they were yet come to the
Enjoyment of. Hence the Decalogue it self in that Dispensation of it, was a
Schoolmaster unto Christ. But in it self, and materially considered, it was
wholly and in all the Preceptive parts of it, absolutely Moral. Some indeed of
the Precepts of it, as the first, fourth, and fifth have either Prefaces,
Enlargements, or Additions, which belonged peculiarly to the then present and
future State of that Church in the Land of Canaan; but these especial
Applications of it unto them, change not the Nature of its Commands or Precepts
which are all Moral, and as far as they are esteemed to belong to the Decalogue
are unquestionably acknowledged so to be. Let us therefore consider the Pleas
for Morality in the fourth Command upon the account of its Interest in the
Decalogue, and the manifest Evidences of that Interest. As therefore the
Giving, Writing, Use, and Disposal of the Decalogue were peculiar and distinct
from the whole Systeme of the Rest of the Laws and Statutes, which being with
it given to the Church of Israel, were either Ceremonial or Judicial; so the
Precept concerning the Sabbath, or the Sacred Observance of one Day in seven,
has an equal share with the other Nine, in all the Privileges of the whole.
As,

1. It was spoken immediately by the Voice of God, in the hearing of all the
people, Exodus 19. Whereas all the other Laws, whether Ceremonial or Judicial,
were given peculiarly to Moses, and by him declared unto the rest of the
people. What weight is laid hereon, see Exodus 19. v. 10, 11, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 4.
34. Chap. 33. 2. In the first whereof the work it self is declared; in the
latter a distinguishing Greatness and Glory, above all other Legislations, is
ascribed unto it. And it is worth the Enquiry what might be the cause of this
Difference. No other appears to me, but that God thereby declared, that the Law
of the Decalogne belonged immediately and personally unto them all and every
one, upon the Original Right of the Law of Nature, which it did represent and
express; whereas all the other Laws and Statutes given unto them by the
Mediation of Moses, belonged unto that peculiar Church State and Economy of
the Covenant which they were then initiated into; and which was to abide unto
the Time of the Reformation of all things by Jesus Christ. And here it may be
remembered, and so in all the ensuing Instances, that we have proved, the matter
of this Command to be first, the separation of some time indefinitely to the
Worship of God, and then the limitation of that time unto one day in seven. For
this it requires, or nothing at all which should be peculiar unto a distinct
Precept is required in it, as we have before manifested. And this one
consideration alone, is sufficient to evince its Morality.

2. This Command, as all the Rest of the Decalogue, was written twice by the
finger of God in Tables of Stone. And hereof there was a double Reason. First,
That it was a stable Revocation, and Objective Representation of that Law,
which being implanted on the heart of man, and communicated unto him in his
Creation, was variously defaced; partly by the corruption and loss of that
Light through the entrance of sin, which should have guided us in the Right
Apprehension and Understanding of its Dictates, and the Obedience that it
required; partly through a long course of a corrupt conversation which the
world had in the pursuit of the first Apostasy, and according to the
Principles of it plunged it self into. God now again fixed that Law
Objectively, in a way of durable Preservation, which in its primitive seat and
subject was so impaired and defaced. And hereof the Additions mentioned, with
peculiar Respect unto the Application of the whole, or any part of it, unto
that people, were no impeachment, as is acknowledged in the Preface given unto
them all, containing a Motive unto their dutiful Observance of the whole. And
hence this Law must necessarily be esteemed a part of the Antecedent Law of
Nature; neither can any other Reason be given, why God wrote it himself, with
those, and only those that are so, in Tables of Stone. Secondly, This was done
as an Emblem, that the whole Decalogue was a Representation of that Law, which
by his Spirit he would write in the fleshly Tables of the Hearts of his Elect.

And this is well observed by the Church of England, which after the Reading of
the whole Decalogue, the fourth Command amongst the rest, directs the people to
pray, That God would write all these Laws in their Hearts. Now this concerns
only the Moral Law. For although Obedience unto all Gods Ceremonial and Typical
Institutions whilst they were in force, was Moral, and a part of the Law
written in the Heart, or required in general in the Precepts of the first Table
of the Decalogue, yet those Laws themselves had no place in the Promise of the
Covenant, that they should be written in our Hearts; for if it should be so,
especial Grace would be yet administered for the Observation of those Laws now
they are abolished, which would not only be vain and useless; but contradictory
to the whole Design of the Grace bestowed upon us, which is to be improved in a
due and genuine Exercise of it. Neither does God bestow any Grace upon men, but
withal he requires the Exercise of it at their hands. If then this Law was
written in Tables of Stone together with the other Nine, that we might pray and
endeavor to have it written in our Hearts, according to the Promise of the
Covenant, it is and must be of the nature of the rest; that is, Moral and
everlastingly obligatory.

3. As all the rest of the Moral Precepts, it was reserved in the Ark; whereas
the Law of Ceremonial Ordinances was placed in a Book written by Moses on the
side of the Ark, separable from it, or whence it might be removed. The Ark on
many accounts was called the Ark of the Covenant; whereof, God assisting, I
shall treat elsewhere. One of them was, that it contained in it nothing, but
that Moral Law which was the Rule of the Covenant. And this was placed therein,
to manifest that it was to have its accomplishment in him, who was the End of
the Law, Romans 10. 3, 4. For the Ark with the Propitiatory was a Type of Jesus
Christ, Romans 3. 25. And the Reason of the different disposal of the Moral Law
in the Ark, and of the Ceremonial in a Book on the side of it, was to manifest,
as the inseparableness of the Law from the Covenant, so the establishing,
accomplishment, and answering of the one Law in Christ, with the Removal and
abolishing of the other by him. For the Law kept in the Ark, the Type of him,
he was to fulfill it in Obedidience, to answer its Curse, and to restore it unto
its proper use in the New Covenant; not that which it had originally when it
was it self the whole of the Covenant, but that which the nature of it requires
in the Moral Obedience of Rational Creatures, whereof it is a complete and
adequate Rule, when the other Law was utterly removed and taken away. And if
that had been the End whereunto the Law of the Sabbath had been designed, had
it been absolutely capable of Abolition in this world, it had not been
safeguarded in the Ark, with the other Nine, which are inseparable from man's
Covenant Obedience unto God, but had been left with other Ceremonial Ordinances
at the side of the Ark, in a Readiness to be removed, when the appointed time
should come.

4. God himself separates this Command from them which were Ceremonial in their
Principal Intention, and whole subject matter, when he calls the whole Systeme
of Precepts in the Two Tables by the name of the Ten Words or Commandments,
Deuteronomy. 10. 4. (...); Those ten Words which the Lord spoke unto you in the Mount
out of the midst of the fire, in the Day of the Assembly. No considering Person
can read these words, but he will find a most signal Emphasis in the several
parts of them. The Day of the Assembly; (...); is that which the Jews so
celebrate, under the Name of the Station in Sinai; the Day that was the
foundation of their Church State, when they solemnly covenanted with God about
the Observation of the Law. Deuteronomy. 5. 24, 25, 26, 27. And the Lord himself spoke
these words, that is, in an immediate and especial manner, which is still
observed where any mention is made of them, as Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. and 10. and
says Moses, he spoke them unto you; that is immediately unto all the Assembly;
Deuteronomy. 5. 22. where it is added, that he spoke them out of the midst of the
Fire, of the Cloud, and of the thick Darkness, with a great Voice, (that every
individual Person might hear it) and he added no more. He spoke not one Word
more, gave not one Precept more immediately unto the whole people, but the
whole solemnity of Fire, Thunder, Lightning, Earthquake, and sound of Trumpet
immediately ceased and disappeared; whereon God entered his Treaty with Moses,
wherein he revealed unto him, and instructed him in the Ceremonial and Judicial
Law, for the use of the people who had now taken upon themselves, the Religious
Observance of what he should so reveal and appoint. Now as the whole Decalogue
was hereby signalized, and sufficiently distinguished from the other Laws and
Institutions which were of another Nature; so in particular, this Precept
concerning the Sabbath, is distinguished from all those which were of the
Mosaical Paedagogie, in whose Declaration Moses was the Mediator between God
and the people. And this was only upon the Account of its Participation, in the
same Nature with the rest of the Commands, however it may and do contain
something in it, that was peculiar to that people, as shall be showed
afterward.

5. Whereas there is a frequent Opposition made in the Old Testament, between
Moral Obedience, and the outward observance of Ordinances of a mere arbitrary
Institution, there is no mention made of the Weekly Sabbath in that case,
though all Ceremonial Institutions are in one place or other enumerated. It is
true, Isa. 1. 13. the Sabbath is joined with the New Moons, and its Observation
rejected in comparison of Holiness and Righteousness. But as this is expounded
in the next Verse, to be intended principally of the appointed annual Feasts or
Sabbaths; so we do grant, that the Sabbath, as relating unto Temple Worship
there intended and described, had that accompanying it, which was peculiar to
the Jews and Ceremonial, as we shall show hereafter; But absolutely the
Observation of the Sabbath is not opposed unto, nor rejected in comparison of
other, or any Moral Duties.

6. The Observation of the Sabbath is pressed on the Church, on the same
Grounds, and with the same Promises, as the greatest and most indispensible
Moral Duties; and together with them opposed unto those Fasts which belonged
unto Ceremonial Institutions. To this purpose is the Nature and Use of it at
large discoursed, Isa. 58. v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

just Reasons of the Preference of the Sabbath above all Positive Institutions,
both by the place given unto it in the Decalogue, as also on the account of the
other especial Instances insisted on. Suppose the Command of it to be
Ceremonial, and one of these two Reasons, or both of them must be alleged as
the cause hereof. For this Exaltation of it must arise, either from the
Excelency of it in it self and service, or the Excellency of its signification,
or from both of them jointly. But these things cannot be pleaded or made use of
unto the purpose intended. For the service of it, as it was observed among the
Jews, it is now earnestly pleaded, that it consisted in mere Bodily Rest, which
is scarcely to be reckoned as any part of Divine Service at all. What is
farther in it, is said to be only a mere Circumstance of Time, not in any thing
better than that of Place, which had an Arbitrary Determination also for a
season. It cannot therefore be thus exalted and preferred above all other
Ordinances of Worship upon the account of its service, seeing it is apprehended
to be only a mere Adjunct of other services, which were therefore more worthy
than it, as every thing which is for it self, is more worthy than that which is
only for another. And take it absolutely, Place is a more Noble Circumstance
than Time in this Case,. considering that Place being determined by an
Arbitrary Institution in the building of the Temple became the most glorious
and significant part of Divine Worship; yet had it no place in the Decalogue,
but only in the Samaritan Corruption added unto it. It must therefore be upon
the account of its signification that it was thus peculiarly exalted and
honored. For the Dignity, Worth and Use of all Ceremonial Institutions
depended on their significancy, or their fitness and aptness to represent the
things whereof they were Types, with the especial worth of what they did
peculiarly Typifie. And herein the Sabbath even with the Applications it had
unto the Judaical Church State, came short of many other Divine Services,
especially the Solemn Sacrifices wherein the Lord Christ with all the Benefits
of his Death, was as it were evidently set forth crucified before their eyes.
Neither therefore of these Reasons, nor both of them in conjunction can be
pleaded as the cause of the manifold preference of the Sabbath above all
Ceremonial Institutions. It remains therefore that it is solely upon the
Account of its Morality, and the invariable Obligation thence arising unto its
Observation, that it is so joined with the Precepts of the same Nature; and
such we have now, as I suppose, sufficiently confirmed it to be.

praying that their flight should not be on the Sabbath Day, Matthew. 24. 20. He
does declare the continued Obligation of the Law of the Sabbath, as a Moral
Precept upon all. It is answered by some, that it is the Judaical Sabbath alone
that is intended, which he knew that some of his own Disciples would be kept
for a season in bondage unto. For the Ease therefore of their Consciences in
that matter, he gives them this Direction. But many things on the other side
are certain and indubitable, which render this conjecture altogether
improbable. For (1.) All real Obligation unto Judaical Institutions was then
absolutely taken away; and it is not to be supposed, that our Lord Jesus Christ
would before hand lay in provision for the edification of any of his Disciples
in Error. (2.) Before that time came, they were sufficiently instructed
doctrinally in the dissolution of all Obligation in Ceremonial Institutions;
This was done principally by St. Paul in all his Epistles; especially in that
unto the Hebrews themselves at Jerusalem. (3.) Those who may be supposed to
have continued a conscientious respect unto the Judaical Sabbath, could be no
otherwise persuaded of it, than were the Jews themselves in those Days. But
they all accounted themselves absolved in conscience from the Law of the
Sabbath upon eminent danger in time of War, so that they might lawfully either
fight or fly, as their safety did require. This is evident from the Decree made
by them under the Hasmonaeans. And such imminent danger is now supposed by our
Savior; for he instructs them to forego all consideration of their Enjoyments,
and to shift merely for their lives. There was not therefore any danger in
point of conscience with respect unto the Judaical Sabbath to be then feared or
prevented. But in general, those in whose hearts are the ways of God, do know
what an addition it is to the greatest of their earthly troubles, if they
befall them in such seasons, as to deprive them of the Opportunity of the
Sacred Ordinances of Gods Worship, and indispensibly engage them in Ways and
Works quite of another Nature, than, when they stand in most need of them.
There is therefore another Answer invented; namely, that our Lord Jesus in
these words respected not the Consciences of his Disciples, but their trouble;
and therefore joins the Sabbath Day and the Winter together, in directing them
to pray for an Ease and Accommodation of that Flight which was inevitable. For
as the Winter is unseasonable for such an occasion, so the Law concerning the
Sabbath was such, as that if any one traveled on that Day above a commonly
allowed Sabbath days journey, he was to be put to death. But neither is there
any more appearance of Truth in this pretense. For (1.) The Power of Capital
Punishments was before this time utterly taken away from the Jews, and all
their remaining Courts interdicted from proceeding in any Cause wherein the
lives of men were concerned. (2.) The times intended were such, as wherein
there was no Course of Law, Justice or Equity amongst them, but all things were
filled with Rapine, Confusion and Hostility, so that it is a vain imagination,
that any Cognizance was taken about such Cases as journying on the Sabbath.
(3.) The Dangers they were in, had made it free to them, as to Legal
Punishments upon their own Principles, as was declared; so that these cannot be
the Reasons of the Caution here given. It is at least therefore most probable,
that our Savior speaks to his Disciples upon a supposition of the perpetual
Obligation of the Law of the Sabbath; that they should pray to be delivered
from the necessity of a flight on the Day whereon the Duties of it were to be
observed, lest it falling out otherwise, should prove a great aggravation of
their distress.

Law of the Decalogue in general, and the perpetual Power of exacting Obedience
wherewith it is accompanied. That in the Old Testament it is frequently
declared to be universally obligatory, and has the same Efficacy ascribed unto
it without putting in any exceptions to any of its Commands or limitations of
its number, I suppose will be granted. The Authority of it is no less fully
asserted in the New Testament, and that also absolutely without distinction, or
the least intimation of excepting the fourth Command from what is affirmed
concerning the whole. It is of the Law of the Decalogue that our Savior
treats, Matthew. 5. 17, 18, 19. This he affirms that he came not to dissolve, as
he did the Ceremonial Law, but to fulfill it; and then affirms that not one Jot
or Tittle of it shall pass away. And making thereon a Distribution of the whole
into its several Commands, he declares his disapprobation of them who shall
break, or teach men to break any one of them. And men make bold with him, when
they so confidently assert, that they may break one of them, and teach others
so to do, without offense. That this reaches not to the confirmation of the
seventh Day precisely we shall afterward abundantly demonstrate. In like
manner St. James treats concerning the whole Law and all the Commands of it;
Chap. 2. 10, 11. And the Argument he insists on for the Observance of the
whole; namely, the giving of it by the same Authority, is confined to the
Decalogue, and the way of Gods giving the Law thereof, or else it may be
extended to all Mosaical Institutions, expressly contrary to his Intention.

objected against the Truth we have been pleading for; namely, the Morality of
a Sacred Rest to God, on one Day in seven, from its Relation to the Law of
Creation, and the Command for it in the Decalogue. And it is known also, that
what is so objected, has been by others solidly answered and removed. But
because those Objections, or Arguments, have been lately renewed and pressed,
by a Person of Good Learning and Reputation, and a new Reinforcement
endeavored to be given unto them, I shall give them a new Examination, and
remove them out of our way.

Disquisit. de Moralitate Sabbati; p 7. That the Command for the Observation of
the Sabbath, is a Command of Time, or concerning Time only; namely, that some
Certain and Determinate Time be assigned to the Worship of God; and this may be
granted to be Moral. But Time is no part of Moral Worship, but only a
Circumstance of it, even as Place is also. Therefore the Command that requires
them in particular cannot be Moral. For these and the like Circumstances must
necessarily be of a Positive Determination.

An. (1.) The whole force of this Argument consists in this, that Time is but
an Help, Instrument, or Circumstance of Worship, and therefore is not Moral
Worship it self, nor a part of Moral Worship, nor can so be. But this Argument
is not valid. For whatever God requires by his Command to be religiously
observed, with immediate respect unto himself, is a Part of his Worship. And
this Worship as to the kind of it, follows the Nature of the Law whereby it is
commanded. If that Law be merely Positive, so is the Worship commanded; however
it be a Duty required by the Law of Nature that we duly observe it, when it is
commanded; for by the Law of Nature God is to be obeyed in all his Commands, of
what sort soever they are. If that Law be Moral, so is the Duty required by it,
and so is our Obedience unto it. The only way then to prove, that the
Observation of Time is no part of Moral Worship, is this; namely, to manifest
that the Law whereby it is required is Positive, and not Moral; for that it is
required by Divine Command, of the one sort or the other, is now supposed. And
on the other side, from the Consideration of the thing it self naturally, as
that it is an Adjunct or Circumstance of other things, no consequence arises
to the determination of the Nature of the Law whereby it is required.

(2.) Time abstractedly, or one Day in seven absolutely, is not the adequate
Object of the Precept, or the fourth Commandment. But it is an Holy Rest to be
observed unto God in his Worship on such a Day. And this, not an Holy Rest unto
God in general, as the Tendency and End of all our Obedience and living unto
him, but as an especial Remembrance and Representation of the Rest of God
himself, with his Complacency and Satisfaction in his Works, as establishing a
Covenant between himself and us. This is the Principal subject of the Command;
or a stated Day of an Holy Rest unto God in such a Revolution of Days or Time.
This we have proved to be Moral from the Foundation and Reason of it, laid and
given in the Law of Nature, revived and represented in the fourth Command of
the Decalogue. Now though Place be an inseparable circumstance of all Actions,
and so capable of being made a circumstance of Divine Worship by Divine
Positive Command, as it was of old in the Instance of the Temple; yet no
especial or particular Place, had the least Guidance or Direction unto it in
the Law of Nature, by any Works or Acts of God, whose Instructive Virtue
belonged thereunto; and therefore all Places were alike free by Nature; and
every Place wherein the Worship of God was celebrated, was a natural
Circumstance of the Actions performed, and not a Religious Circumstance of
Worship, until a particular Place was assigned and determined by Positive
Command for that purpose. It is otherwise with Time, as has been showed at
large. And therefore although any place, notwithstanding any thing in the Law
of Nature, might have been separated by Positive Institution unto the Solemn
Worship of God, it does not thence follow, as is pretended, that any Time, a
Day in a Monthly or annual Revolution, might have been separated unto the like
purpose, seeing God had given us Indication of another Limitation of it in the
Law of Creation.

(Disquisit. p. 8.) That in the fourth Commandment not one Day in seven, but
the seventh Day precisely is enjoined. The Day was before made known unto the
Israelites in the Station at Mara, or afterward at Alesh; namely, the seventh
Day from the foundation of the world. This in the Command they are required to
observe. Hence the words of it are that they should Remember (...) that same
Sabbath Day, or that Day of the Sabbath which was newly revealed unto them.
This Command therefore cannot be Moral as to the Limitation of Time specified
therein, seeing it only confirms the Observation of the seventh Day Sabbath
which was before given unto the Hebrews in a Temporary Institution. And this is
insisted on as the principal strength against the Morality of the Command. I
shall first give you in my Answer in general, and then consider the especial
improvements that are made of it.

1. Instances may be given, and have been given by all Writers concerning the
Hebrew Tongue, wherein the prefixed Letters sometimes answering the Greek
Praepositive Articles, are redundant; and if at all emphatical, yet they do not
at all limit, specify or determine. See Psalm. 1. 4. Eccl. 2. 14. Lev. 18. 5.
The Observation therefore of prefixing (...) to (...), which may possibly
denote an Excellency in the thing it self, but tends nothing to the
Determination of a certain Day, but as it is afterward declared to be one of
seven, is too weak to bear the weight of the Inference intended. Nor will this
be denied by any whoever aright considered the various use, and frequent
redundancy of that Praefixe.

2. The Sabbath or Rest of a seventh Day was known and observed from the
foundation of the World, as has been proved. And therefore if from the
Praefixe, we are to conclude a Limitation, or Determination to be intended in
the Words, Remember the Sabbath Day, yet it respects only the Original Sabbath,
or the Sabbath in respect of its Original, and not any new Institution of it.
For supposing the Observation of the Sabbath to have been before in use,
whether that use were only of late, or a few days before, or of more ancient
Times, even from the beginning of the World, the Command concerning it may be
well expressed by (...) remember the Sabbath Day.

3. Suppose that the Sabbath had received a limitation to the seventh Day
precisely, in the Ordinance given unto that people in the first raining of
Manna; then does the Observation of that Day precisely by virtue of this
Command necessarily take place. And yet the Command which is but the revival of
what was required from the foundation of the world cannot be said to intend
that Day precisely in the first place. For the Reason of, and in the Original
Command for a Sabbatical Rest, was Gods making the World in six days, and
resting on the seventh; which requires no more, but that in the continual
Revolution of seven days, six being allowed unto Work, one should be observed
a Sacred Rest to God. These words therefore Remember the Sabbath Day, referring
unto the Primitive Command and Reason of it, as is afterward declared in the
Body of the Law, requires no more but a Weekly Day of Rest, whereunto the
seventh Day is reduced, as added by an especial Ordinance. And the Reason of
this Commandment from the Works of God, and the Order of them, is repeated in
the Decalogue, because the Instruction given us by them, being a part of the
Law of our Creation, more subject unto a neglect, disregard, and forgetfulness,
than those other Parts of it, which were wholly innate to the Principles of our
own Nature, it was necessary that the Remembrance of it should be so expressly
revived, when in the other Precepts there is only a tacit excitation of our own
inbred Light and Principles.

4. The Emphatical Expression insisted on; Remember the Sabbath Day, has
respect unto the singular Necessity, Use, and Benefit of this holy Observance,
as also to that neglect and decay in its Observation, which partly through
their own sin, partly through the Hardships that it met withal in the world,
the Church of former Ages had fallen into. And what it had lately received of a
new Institution with reference unto the Israelites, falls also under this
Command, or is reduced unto it, as a Ceremonial Branch under its proper Moral
Head, whereunto it is annexed. And whereas it is greatly urged, that the
Command of the seventh Day precisely, is not the Command of one day in seven;
and that what God has determined, as in this matter the Day is, ought not to
be indefinitely by us considered, it may be all granted without the least
Prejudice unto the Cause wherein we are engaged. For although the Institution
of the seventh Day precisely, be somewhat distinct from one Day in seven, as
containing a determinate limitation of that which in the other notion is left
indefinite; yet this hinders not, but that God may appoint the one and the
other; the one in the Moral Reason of the Law, the other by an especial
determination and Institution. And this especial Institution is to continue,
unless it be abrogated or changed by his own Authority, which it may be,
without the least impeachment of the Moral Reason of the whole Law, and a new
day be limited by the same Authority, which has been done accordingly, as we
shall afterward declare.

(Disquisit. p. 9, 10, 11, 12. That no Distinction can be made between a Weekly
Sabbath, and the seventh Day precisely. And if any such difference be asserted,
then if one of them be appointed in the fourth Commandment, the other is not.
For there are not two Sabbaths enjoined in it, but one. And it is evident, that
there never was of old but one Sabbath. The Sabbath observed under the Old
Testament was that required and prescribed in the fourth Commandment; and so on
the other side, the Sabbath required in the Decalogue, was that which was
observed under the Old Testament, and that only. Two Sabbaths, one, of one Day
in seven, and the other of the seventh Day precisely are not to be fancied. The
seventh Day, and that only was the Sabbath of the Old Testament, and of the
Decalogue. These things I say are at large pleaded by the forementioned Author.

An. 1. These Objections are framed against a Distinction used by another
Learned Person, about the Sabbath as absolutely commanded in the Decacalogue,
and as enjoined to practice under the Old Testament. But neither he nor any
other sober Person ever fancied that there were two Sabbaths of old, one
enjoined unto the Church of the Israelites, the other required in the
Decalogue. But any man may, nay, every prudent man ought to distinguish between
the Sabbath, as enjoined absolutely in words expressive of the Law of our
Creation, and Rule of our Moral Dependence on God, in the fourth Command; and
the same Sabbath, as it had a temporary, occasional Determination to the
seventh Day in the Church of the Jews by virtue of an especial Intimation of
the Will of God, suited unto that Administration of the Covenant which that
Church and People were then admitted into. I see therefore no Difficulty in
these things. The fourth Commandment does not contain only the moral Equity
that some Time should always be set apart unto the Celebration of the Worship
of God; nor only the Original Instruction given us by the Law of Creation, and
the Covenant Obedience required of us thereon, wherein the substance of the
Command does consist; but it expresses moreover, the peculiar Application of
this Command by the Will of God, to the State of the Church then erected by
him, with respect unto the seventh Day precisely, as before instituted and
commanded, Exodus 16. Nor is here the least appearance of two Sabbaths, but one
only is absolutely commanded unto all, and determined unto a certain Day for
the use of some for a season.

one Day in seven only, and not the seventh Day precisely, is directly and
immediately enjoined in the Decalogue, and the seventh only with respect unto
an antecedent Mosaical Institution, with the Nature of that Administration of
the Covenant which the people of Israel were then taken into, has been evinced
in our investigation of the Causes and Ends of the Sabbath preceding; and been
cleared by many. And it seems evident to an impartial consideration. For the
Observation of one Day in seven belongs unto every Covenant of God with man.
And the Decalogue is the unvariable Rule of man's walking before God, and living
unto him; of what nature soever, on other Reasons, the Covenant be between
them, whether that of Works, or that of Grace by Jesus Christ. The seventh Day
precisely belonging unto the Covenant of Works, cannot therefore be firstly,
but only occasionally intended in the Decalogue. Nor does it, nor can it,
invariably belong unto our absolute Obedience unto God, because it is not of
the substance of it, but is only an occasional determination of a duty, such as
all other Positive Laws do give us. And hence there is in the Command it self a
difference put between a Sabbath Day, and the arbitrary limitation of the
seventh Day, to be that day. For we are commanded to remember the Sabbath Day,
not the seventh Day, and the Reason given (as is elsewhere observed) is because
God blessed and sanctified the Sabbath Day, (in the close of the Command, where
the formal Reason of our Obedience is expressed) not the seventh Day. Nor is
indeed the joint Observation of the seventh Day precisely unto all to whom this
Command is given, that is, to all who take the Lord to be their God; possible;
though it were to the Jews in the Land of Palestina, who were obliged to keep
that Day. For the difference of the Climate in the world will not allow it. Nor
did the Jews ever know whether the Day they observed, was the seventh from the
Creation; only they knew it was so from the day whereon Manna was first given
unto them. And the whole Revolution, and Computation of Time by Days, was
sufficiently interrupted in the days of Joshua and Hezekiah, from allowing us
to think the Observation of the seventh Day to be Moral. And it is a Rule to
judge of the intention of all Laws Divine and Humane, that the meaning of the
preceptive part of them is to be collected from the Reasons annexed to them, or
inserted in them. Now the Reasons for a Sacred Rest that are intimated and
stated in this Command, do no more respect the seventh Day, than any other in
seven. Six days are granted to labor, that is in number, and not more in a
septenary Revolution. Nor does the Command say any thing, whether these six
days shall be the first or the last in the order of them. And any day, is as
meet for the performance of the Duties of the Sabbath, as the seventh, if in an
alike manner designed thereunto; which things are at large pleaded by others.

fourth Commandment does at least include something in it that is Moral; or
else indeed no color can be given unto its Association with them that are
absolutely so in the Decalogue. This is commonly said to be; that some part of
our Time be Dedicated to the Public Worship of God. But as this would
overthrow the Pretension before mentioned, that there can be no Moral Command
about Time, which is but a Circumstance of Moral Duties, so the Limitation of
that Time unto one Day in seven is so evidently a perpetually binding Law, that
it will not be hard to prove the unchangeable Obligation that is upon all men
unto the Observance of it, which is all for the substance that is contended
for. To avoid this, it is now affirmed (Disquisit p. 14.) That, Moralc Quarti
Praecepti est, non unum Diem sed totum tempus vitae nostrae quantum id fieri
potest, impendendum esse cultui Dei, quaerendo regnum Dei and Justitiam ejus,
atque inserviendo aedificationi proximi: quo pertinet ut Deo serviamus, ejus
beneficia agnoscamus and celeberemus, cum invocemus Spiritu, fidem nostram
testemur confessione oris, etc. This is that which is Moral in the fourth
Commandment; namely, that not one Day, but as much as may be our whole lives be
spent in the Worship of God; seeking his Kingdom and the Righteousness thereof,
and furthering the edification of our neighbor. Hereunto it belongs, that we
should serve God, acknowledge and celebrate his Benefits, pray unto him in
Spirit, and testify our faith by our Confession.

An. It is hard to discover how any of these things have the least respect to
the fourth Commandment, much more how the Morality of it should consist in
them. For all the Instances mentioned, are indeed required in the first Precept
of the Decalogue, that only excepted of taking care to promote the edification
of our Neighbor, which is the sum and substance of the second Table,
expressed by our Savior by loving our Neighbor as our selves. To live unto
God, to believe and trust in him, to acknowledge his Benefits, to make
Confession of him in the world, are all especial Moral Duties of the first
Commandment. It cannot therefore be apprehended, how the Morality of the fourth
Commandment should consist in them. And if there be nothing else Moral in it,
there is certainly nothing Moral in it at all. For these things and the like
are claimed from it, and taken out of its possession by the first Precept. And
thereunto does the General Consideration of Time, with respect unto these
Duties belong; namely, that we should live unto God, whilst we live in this
World. For we live in Time, and that is the measure of our duration and
continuance. Something else therefore must be found out to be Moral in the
fourth Commandment, or it must be denied plainly to have any thing Moral in it.

Sabbath was a Type of our Spiritual Rest in Christ; both that which we have in
him at present by Grace, and that which remains for us in Heaven. Hence it was
a shadow of good things to come, as were all other Ceremonial Institutions.
But that the same thing should be Moral, and a shadow is a contradiction. That
which is a shadow, can in no sense be said to be Moral, nor on the contrary.
The Sabbath therefore was merely Ceremonial.

An. It does not appear, it cannot be proved, that the Sabbath either as to its
first Original, or as to the substance of the Command of it in the Decalogue,
was Typical, or instituted to prefigure any thing that was future. Yea, the
contrary is evident. For the Law of it, was given before the first Promise of
Christ, as we have proved; and that in the state of Innocence, and under the
Covenant of Works in perfect force, wherein there was no respect unto the
Mediation of Christ. I do acknowledge that God did so order all his Works in
the first Creation, and under the Law of Nature, as that they might be suitable
Morally to represent his Works under the New Creation, which from the Analogy
of our Redemption to the Creation of all things is so called. And hence
according to the Eternal Counsel of God, were all things meet to be gathered
into an Head in Christ Jesus. On this account there is an Instructive
Resemblance, between the Works of one sort and of the other. So the Rest of God
after the Works of the old Creation, is answered by the Rest of the Son of God,
upon his laying the Foundation of the New Heavens and New Earth in his
Resurrection. But that the Sabbath Originally, and in its whole nature, should
be a free Institution to prefigure, and as in a shadow to represent any thing
Spiritual or Mystical, after wards to be introduced, is not, nor can be proved.
It was indeed originally a Moral Pledge of Gods Rest, and of our Interest
therein, according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Works; which things belong
unto our Relation unto God, by virtue of the Law of our Creation. It continues
to retain the same nature, with respect unto the Covenant of Grace. What it had
annexed unto it, what Applications it received unto the state of the Mosaical
Paedagogie, which were temporary, and umbratile, shall be declared afterward.

Parts of the fourth Commandment, that there can be nothing Moral, as to our
purpose in it. And these are said to be three. First, The Determination of the
seventh Day to be a Day of Rest. Secondly, The Rest it self commanded on that
Day. Thirdly, The sanctification of that Rest unto holy Worship. Now neither of
these can be said to be Moral. Not the first; for it is confessedly Ceremonial.
The second is a thing in its own nature indifferent, having nothing of Morality
in it, antecedent unto a Positive Command: Neither is the third Moral, being
only the means or manner of performing that Worship which is Moral.

An. It will not be granted, that this is a sufficient Analysis or Distribution
of the parts of this Command. The principal subject matter of it is omitted,
namely, the Observation of one Day in seven unto the Ends of a Sacred Rest. For
we are required in it to sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord our God, which was a
seventh Day in an Hebdomadal Revolution of Days. Supply this in the first
place in the room of the Determination of the seventh Day to be that day, which
evidently follows it in the Order of Nature, and this Argument vanishes. Now
it is here only tacitly supposed, not at all proved, that one Day in seven is
not required.

(2.) Rest, in it self absolutely considered is no part of Divine Worship
antecedently unto a Divine Positive Command. But a Rest from our own works,
which might be of use and advantage unto us, which by the Law of our Creation
we are to attend unto in this world, that we may intend and apply our selves to
the Worship of God, and solemnly express our universal Dependence upon him in
all things; a Rest representing the Rest of God in his Covenant with us, and
observed as a pledge of our entering into his Rest by virtue of that Covenant,
and according to the Law of it, such as is the Rest here enjoined, is a part of
the Worship of God. This is the Rest which we are directed unto by the Law of
our Creation, and which by the Moral Reason of this Command is enjoined unto
us, on one Day in seven; and in these things consists the Morality of this
Precept, on whose account it has a place in the Decalogue, which on all the
Considerations before mentioned, could not admit of an Association with one
that was purely Ceremonial.

(3.) Granting the Dedication of some Time or part of Time unto the Solemn
Worship of God to be required in this Command, as is by all generally
acknowledged, and let a Position be practically advanced against this, we
insist on, namely, that one Day in seven is the Time determined and limited for
that purpose, and we shall quickly perceive the mischievous consequents of it.
For when men have taken out of the hand of God the division between the Time
that is allowed unto us for our own occasions, and what is to be spent in his
service, and have cast off all influencing Direction from his Example of
working six days, and resting the seventh, and all guidance from that
seemingly perpetual Direction that is given us, of employing ordinarily six
Days in the necessary affairs of this life; they will find themselves at no
small loss what to fix upon, or wherein to acquiesce, in this matter. It must
either be left to every individual man to do herein as seems good unto him, or
there must an Umpirage of it be committed unto others, either the Church or the
Magistrate. And hence we may expect as many different Determinations and
Limitations of Time, as there are distinct Ecclesiastical or Political Powers
amongst Christians. What variety, Changeableness would hence ensue, what
Confusion this would cast all the Disciples of Christ into, according to the
prevalency of Superstition or Profaneness in the minds of those who claim this
power of determining and limiting the time of Public Worship, is evident unto
all. The Instance of Holy Days as they are commonly called, will farther
manifest what of it self lies naked under every rational Eye. The Institution
and Observation of them was ever resolved into the Moral Part of this Command,
for the dedicating of some part of our Time unto God; but the Determination
hereof being not of God, but left unthe Church, as it is said, one Church
multiplyes them without End, until they grew an unsupportable yoke unto the
people; another reduces this number into a narrower compass, a third rejects
them all, and no two Churches that are Independent Ecclesiastically and
Politically one on the other, do agree about them. And so will, and must the
matter fall out as to the especial Day whereof we discourse, when once the
Determination of it by Divine Authority is practically rejected. As yet men
deceive themselves in this matter, and pretend that they believe otherwise then
indeed they do. Let them come once soberly to join their Opinion of their
Liberty and their Practice together, actually rejecting the Divine limitation
of one day in seven, and they will find their own consciences under more
disorder, then yet they are aware of.

Again, if there be no day determined in the fourth Command, but only the
seventh precisely which is Ceremonial, with a general Rule that some time is to
be dedicated to the service of God, there is no more of Morality in this
Command, then in any of those for the Observation of New Moons, and annual
Feasts with Jubilees and the like; in all which the same general Equity is
supposed, and a Ceremonial Day limited and determined. And if it be so, as far
as I can understand; we may as lawfully observe New Moons and Jubilees, as a
Weekly Day of Rest, according to the custom of all Churches.

Paul, Col. 2. 16, 17. are at large insisted on to prove that the Sabbath was
only Typical and a shadow of things future. Let no man therefore judge you in
Meant or in Drink or in respect of an Holy Day, or of the New Moon ((...)) or of
the Sabbaths, or Sabbath Days; which are a shadow of things to come, but the
Body is of Christ. For hence they say it will follow, that there is nothing
Moral in the Observation of the Sabbath; seeing it was a mere Type and Shadow
as were other Mosaical Institutions; as also that it is absolutely abolished
and taken away in Christ.

An. This place must be afterward considered; I shall here only briefly speak
unto it. And (1.) It is known and confessed, that at that time all Judaical
Observations of Days, or the Days which they religiously observed, whether
Feasts or Fasts, Weekly, Monthly, or Annual were by themselves and all others,
called their Sabbaths, as we have before evinced. And that kind of Speech which
was then in common use, is here observed by our Apostle. It must therefore
necessarily be allowed, that there were two sorts of Sabbaths amongst them; The
first and principal was the Weekly Sabbath, so called from the Rest of God upon
the finishing of his works. This being designed for Sacred and Religious Uses,
other Days separated unto the same Ends in general, became from their Analogy
thereunto to be called Sabbaths also, yea, were so called by God himself, as
has been declared. But the Distinction and Difference between these Sabbaths
was great. The one of them was ordained from the foundation of the world;
before the Entrance of sin, or giving of the Promises, and so belonged unto all
mankind in general, the other were appointed in the Wilderness as a part of the
peculiar Church Worship of the Israelites, and so belonged unto them only. The
one of them was directly commanded in the Decalogue, wherein the Law of our
Creation was revived and expressed; the other have their Institution expressly
among the residue of Ceremonial Temporary Ordinances. Hence they cannot be both
comprised under the same Denomination, unless upon some Reason that is common
to both sorts alike. So when God says of them all, You shall observe my
Sabbaths, it is upon a Reason common to them all, namely, that they were all
commanded of God, which is the formal Reason of our Obedience, of what nature
soever his Commands are, whether Moral or Positive. Nor can both these sorts be
here understood under the same name, unless it be with respect unto something
that is common unto both. Allow therefore the Distinctions between them before
mentioned, which cannot soberly be denied, and as to what they agree in,
namely, what is, or was in the Weekly primary Sabbath of the same Nature with
those Days of Rest which were so called in allusion thereunto, and they may be
allowed to have the same sentence given concerning them. That is, so far the
Weekly Sabbath may be said to be a shadow, and to be abolished.

(2.) It is evident, that the Apostle in this place deals with them who
endeavored to introduce Judaisme absolutely, or the whole Systeme of Mosaical
Ceremonies into the Observation of the Christian Church. Circumcision, their
Feasts and New Moons, their distinctions of Meats and D^n^s he mentions
directly in this place. And therefore he deals about these things so far as
they were Judaical, or belonged unto the Economy of Moses, and no otherwise.
If any of them fell under any other Consideration, so far as they did so, he
designeth not to speak of them. Now those things only were Mosaical, which
being instituted by Moses, and figurative of good things to come, or the things
which being of the same nature with the residue of his Ceremonies, were before
appointed, but accommodated by him to the use of the Church which he built
(...) such as Sacrifices and Circumcision. For they were all of them nothing
else but an obscure Adumbration of the things whereof Christ was the Body. So
far then as the Weekly Sabbath had any Additions made unto it, or limitation
given of it, or directions for the manner of its Observance, or respected the
services then to be performed in it, and by all accommodated unto that
Dispensation of the Covenant which the Posterity of Abraham was then brought
into, it was a shadow, and it taken away by Christ. Therewith falls its
limitation to the seventh Day, its rigorous Observation, its penal Sanction,
its being a sign between God and that people, in a word, every thing in it, and
about it, that belonged unto the then present Administration of the Covenant,
or was accommodated to the Judaical Church or State. But now if it be proved,
that a septenary Sacred Rest was appointed in Paradise, that it has its
foundation in the Law of Creation, that thereon it was observed antecedently
unto the Institution of Mosaical Ceremonies, and that God renewed the Command
concerning it, in his Systeme of Moral Precepts manifoldly distinguished from
all Ceremonial Ordinances, so far and in these Respects it has no concern in
these words of the Apostle.

(3.) It cannot be said, that the Religious Observance of one Day in seven as
an holy Rest unto God, is abolished by Christ, without casting a great
Reflection of Presumption on all the Churches of Christ in the World, I mean
that now are, or ever were so; for they all have observed and do so observe
such a day. I shall not now dispute about the Authority of the Church to
appoint days unto Holy or Religious uses, to make holy Days. Let it be
granted to be, whatever any yet has pretended or pleaded that it is. But this
I say, that where God by his Authority had commanded the Observation of a day
to himself, and the Lord Christ by the same Authority has taken off that
Command, and abolished that Institution; it is not in the power of all the
Churches in the world, to take up the Religious Observance of that Day to the
same Ends and Purposes. It is certain that God did appoint that a Sabbath of
Rest should be observed unto him, and for the celebration of his solemn Worship
on one Day in seven. The whole Command of God hereof, is now pleaded to be
dissolved, and all obligation from thence unto its Observation to be abolished,
in and by Christ. Then say I, it is unlawful for any Church or Churches in the
World to reassume this Practice, and to impose the Observance of it, on the
Disciples of Christ. Be it that the Church may appoint Holy Days of its own,
that have no foundation in, nor Relation and to the Law of Moses; yet doubtless
it ought not to digg any of his Ceremonies out of their Grave, and impose them
on the Necks of the Disciples of Christ; yet so must it be thought to do on
this Hypothesis, that the Religious Observance of one Day in seven, is
absolutely abolished by Christ, as a mere part of the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances, which was nailed to his Cross and buried with him, by
the constant Practice and Injunctions thereof.

4. Herewith fall the Arguments taken from the Apostles calling the Sabbath in
this place a shadow. For it is said, that nothing which is Moral can be a
shadow. It is true; that which is Moral, so far as it is Moral, cannot be a
shadow. We therefore say, that the Weekly Observation of a Day of Rest, from
the foundation of the world, whereunto a general Obligation was laid on all men
unto its Observation, the Command whereof was a part of the Moral Law of God,
was no shadow, nor is so called by the Apostle, nor did Typifie good things to
come. But that which is in its own Nature Moral, may in respect of some
peculiar manner of its Observance, in such a Time or season, and some Adjuncts
annexed unto it, in respect whereof it becomes a part of Ceremonial Worship, be
so far, and in those respects esteemed a shadow, and as such pass away. In
brief, The Command it self of observing one Day in seven, as an holy Rest unto
God, has nothing Aaronical or Typical in it, but has its foundation in the
Light of Nature as directed by the Works of God and his Rest thereon. For its
limitation precisely to the last Day of the Week, with other Directions and
Injunctions for and in the manner of its Observance, they were Mosaical, and as
a shadow are departed, as we shall manifest in our ensuing Exercitations.

Weekly Sabbath is in any sense intended in these words of the Apostle. For he
may design the Sabbatical Years which were instituted among that people, and
probably now pressed by the Judaizing Teachers on the Gentile Proselytes. Nor
will the exception put in from some of the Rabbis, that the Sabbatical Years
were not to be observed out of the Land of Canaan, from which Colosse was far
enough distant, reinforce the Argument to this purpose. For as men in one
place, may have their Consciences exercised and bound with the Opinion of what
is to be done in another, though they cannot engage in the practice of it
whilst they are absent, so our Apostle charge the Galatians as far distant
from Canaan as the Colossians, that when they began to Judaize, they observed
years as well as Days, and Months, and Times, which could respect only the
Sabbatical years that were instituted by the Law of Moses.

Exercitatio Quarta. Of the Judaical Sabbath.
(1) The Sabbath how required by the Law of Nature; as a Covenant. (2)
Explanations of the Law of the Sabbath in the fourth Precept of the Decalogue.
(3) The Law of Creation and Covenant of Works renewed in the Church of Israel,
with what Alterations. (4) The Sabbath why said to be given peculiarly to the
Israelites. (5) Change in the Covenant, introduces a change in the Sabbath.
(6) The whole Nature of the Judaical Sabbath, and how it is abolished. (7) Jews
sense of the Original of the Sabbath rejected. (8) The first appropriation of
the Law of the Sabbath to that people, Exodus 16. (9) Their mistakes about its
Observation. (10) The giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, with the Ends of it.
(11) Nature of the fourth Commandment thereon; what Ceremonial in it. (12)
Renovation of the Command of the Sabbath, Exodus 31. 12, 13. (13) Occasion
hereof. (14) Appropriations made of the Sabbath to the Church of Israel in this
Renovation. (15) The Commandment renewed again, Exodus 34. 21. New additions
made to it. (16) So also Exodus 35. 2, 3. (17) The whole matter stated, Deuteronomy. 5.
15. (18) The Conclusion.

The Fourth Exercitation.
Septenary Sacred Rest, is required by the Moral Law, or the Law of our
Creation. Now this is not absolutely and merely as it is a Law; but as it
contained a Covenant between God and man. A Law it might have been, and not
have had the nature of a Covenant, which does not necessarily follow upon
either its instructive or preceptive Power. Yet it was originally given in the
Counsel of God to that End, and accompanied with Promises and Threatenings,
whence it had the Nature of a Covenant. By virtue of this Law as a Covenant,
was the Observation of a Sabbath prescribed and required, as a Token and Pledge
of Gods Rest in that Covenant, in the performance of the Works whereon it was
constituted; and of the Interest of man in that Rest, as also a Means of
Entrance into it. On this ground it should have been observed in the State of
Innocence, wherein the Law of it was given and declared. For it was no less
necessary unto that state and condition, than unto any other wherein God
requires Covenant Obedience of men; nor, considering the Nature and Ends of an
holy Rest or Sabbath, can any Reason be given, why it should be thought
accommodated only to the Administration of the Covenant under the Old Testament
after the giveing of the Law, whereunto by some it is appropriated.

Fourth Commandment, there is an explanation of the Rest of the Sabbath so far
as it consists in a Cessation from our own works that are of use and
advantage to the outward man in this life, suited as unto the state and
condition of mankind in general since the Fall, so unto the especial state of
the Jews, at that time when the Law was given; as there was also in the
Additional Appendix of the first Commandment. But for the substance of it the
same kind of Rest was to be observed in the State of Innocence; and was
necessary thereunto, on the grounds before insisted or. Servile Labor, with
Trouble, Sweat and Vexation, was occasioned by the Curse. Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19.
The State also of Servants and Handmaids such as was then, and is still in use,
followed on the entrance of sin, though merely to serve, be no part of the
Curse, 1 Cor. 7. 20, 21. as having its foundation in that subordination which
is natural. And the Government of Servants ought not to be Despotical, but
Paternal, Genesis 18. 19. In these things there was some Variation supposed in the
giving of the Decalogue as to their outward manner, from the original state of
things amongst mankind. But there was also Work required of man, or labor in
the Earth, with reference unto his natural life and subsistence in this world,
in the state of Innocence. For it is said expressly, that God put man into the
Garden, (...), Genesis 2. 15. to labor in it; and to preserve it by labor for
his Use. A Cessation therefore from bodily labor was consistent with, and
useful unto that condition, that men thereby might be enabled to give
themselves (in the season they were directed unto by the Works and Example of
God) wholly unto the especial Ends of living unto him according to the Covenant
made with them.

There is nothing therefore in the fourth Commandment, directing unto six days
of labor, and requiring a seventh unto Rest, that is inconsistent, or not
compliant with the Law of our Creation, and the state of living unto God
constituted thereby; although the manner of that work and labor be varied from
what originally it was. Likewise in that state of mankind, there was to be a
superiority of some over others. This the natural Relation of Parents and
Children makes manifest. And these latter were in the Worship of God to be
under the Government and Direction of the other. And unto this Natural Equity
is all subjection to Magistrates in Subjects, and Masters in Servants, reduced
in the fifth Commandment. So then, the outward variations, which are in these
things supposed in the fourth Commandment, do not in the least impeach its
Morality, or hinder but that for the substance of it, it may be judged a Law
Natural and Moral; and a true Representation of a part of the Law of our
Creation.

Moral Law, as a Covenant between God and man, required this Sacred Rest, as we
have proved; we must enquire what place, as such, it had in the Mosaical
Economy, whereon the true Reason and Notion of the Sabbath as peculiarly
Judaical, does depend. For the Sabbath being originally annexed to the Covenant
between God and man, the Renovation of the Covenant does necessarily require an
especial Renovation of the Sabbath, and the Change of the Covenant as to the
nature of it, must in like manner introduce a change of the Sabbath. And we
shall find, that the Covenant of the Law, or of Works, had a twofold Renovation
in the Church of Israel, in the framing and constitution of it. These rendered
it their especial Covenant, although it was not absolutely a New Covenant, nor
is it so called, but is every where called the Old; and hence the Sabbath
became peculiarly theirs.

(1.) It was renewed unto them materially. It was originally written in the
heart of man, or concreated with the Faculties of his soul; where its Light and
Principles being excited, guided, and variously affected with the consideration
of the Works of God,) proposed unto him with an instructive Ability, for that
End, whose Directions concurred to the making up of the entire Law of Creation)
was evidently directive unto all the Duties which God in the first Covenant
required at our hands. By the Entrance of Sin, with the corruption and debasing
of the Faculties of our souls, which ensued thereon, whereby the Alteration in
our Natures, the principal seat and subject of this Law was so great, as that
we lost the Image of God, or that Light and knowledge into our Duty with
respect unto him, which was necessary for us in that Covenant, the Law it self
became insufficient, a lame and imperfect Guide unto the Ends of the Covenant.
Besides, the Aspectable Creation, the outward Medium of instructing man in the
knowledge of the Goodness, Power and Wisdom of God, being for our sin brought
under the curse, and the creature into bondage, the contemplation of it would
not so clearly, distinctly, and perfectly represent him unto us, as formerly.
Let men fancy what they please, and please themselves whilst they will with
their fancies, all things both within, and without in the whole Creation, were
brought into such Disorder and Confusion by the Entrance of sin, as that the
Law of Nature was utterly insufficient to enable us unto, or to guide us in our
liveing unto God, according to the Tenor of the first Covenant.

There were, and are indeed, general Notions of Good and Evil indelibly planted
on the faculties of our souls, with a power of judging concerning our Actions
and Moral Practices, whether they are conformable unto those Notions, with
respect unto the superior Judgment of God. But besides the impairing of the
Principles of these Notions before mentioned, they were of old variously
obscured, perverted, and stifled, by Customs, Prejudices, and the Power of sin
in the world, so as that they were of little use as unto a due performance of
Covenant Duties, indeed of none at all, in reference unto any Acceptance with
God.

Wherefore God erecting his Church, and renewing the knowledge of himself, and
man's duty toward him in the Posterity of Abraham, he gave unto them afresh, in
the first place, the Precepts of the Law and Covenant of Nature, for the Guide
and Rule of their Obedience. And that this might now be permanent, he reduced
the substance of the whole Law unto ten Words or Commands, writing them in
Tables of Stone, which he appointed to be sacredly kept amongst them. The Law
thus declared and written by him, was the same, I say, materially, and for the
substance of it, with the Law of our Creation, or the Original Rule of our
Covenant Obedience unto God. Yet in it as thus transcribed, there was an
Innovation both in its Form and Principle of Obligation. For as to its form or
directive power, it was now made external and objective unto the mind of man,
which before was principally internal and subjective. And the immediate
Obligation unto its Observation among that people, was now from the
promulgation of it on Mount Sinai, and the delivery of it unto them thereon.
Hence it was prefaced with Motives peculiar to their state and condition, and
its Observation continually pressed on them afterward, with Arguments taken
from their peculiar Relation unto God; with his Love and Benefits unto them.
This gave it a new Respect, because there was nothing originally in it, nor
belonging unto it, but what was equally common unto all mankind. Now this
Alteration in the Law and Covenant of Creation as applied unto the Church of
the Israelites, did also affect the Law of the Sabbath which was a part of it.
It was now no more to them a mere Moral Command only, equally regarding all
mankind, but had a Temporary Respect given unto it, which was afterward to be
abolished and taken away. So was it with the whole Law, and so was it with the
Sabbath in particular. To take up therefore the Observation of it, as appointed
in the Decalogue, not as a material Transcript of the Law of Nature merely, but
as under its Renovation to the Church of Israel, is a groundless and
unwarrantable going over into a part of abolished Judaisme. For,

Economy under which God was pleased to bring his Church at that time, before
the Exhibition of the Promise, or the Accomplishment of it. And sundry things
are to be observed herein.

(1.) That God did not absolutely bring that people under the Covenant of Works
in all the Rigor of it, according unto its whole Law and Tenor, to stand or
fall absolutely by its Promises or Threatenings. For although the Law contained
the whole Rule of the Covenant, and on the considerations to be afterward
mentioned, it is often called the Covenant of God with that people, yet were
they not absolutely tied up unto it, and concluded by it, as to the eternal
issue of living unto God. This arose from the Interposition of the Promise. For
the Promise of Grace in Christ, being given upon the first Entrance of sin for
the Relief and Salvation of the Elect, and being solemnly renewed unto Abraham
and his seed four hundred and thirty years before the giving of the Law unto
his Posterity, there was a blessed Relief provided therein against the Curse
and Threatenings annexed to the first Covenant, for all them that betook
themselves unto it, and made use of it. Notwithstanding, I say, this Renovation
of the first Covenant materially unto them, they were so far freed from its
Covenant Terms, as that they had a Relief provided against what they could not
answer in it, with the consequences thereof.

(2.) From the Nature and Tenor of the Covenant of Works, so renewed amongst
that people, there was begotten in their minds such a Respect unto the Rigor of
its Commands, the manner of their Observance, or of Obedience unto them, with
the dread of its Curse, awfully denounced amongst them, as brought a servile
and bondage frame of Spirit upon them, in all wherein they had to do with God,
by virtue of the Law and Rule of that Covenant. This frame of Spirit, as that
which stands in direct Opposition unto the freedom and liberty purchased for us
by Jesus Christ, to serve God in Righteousness and Holiness without fear all
our Days, is much insisted on by the Apostle Paul especially in his Epistles
to the Romans and Galatians. And in their Observation of the Sabbath in
particular, they were under this bondage, filling them with many scrupulous
Anxieties, which arose not from the Law of the Sabbath it self as originally
given unto man in the state of Innocence; but from the Accommodation of the Law
thereof unto them, after the Entrance of sin. And hereby their Sabbath Rest
became unto them a great part of their wearying burdensome yoke, which is
taken off in Christ.

(3.) This Law was yet proposed to that Church and People in the Manner and
Form of a Covenant, and not only materially, as a Law or Rule. This it had from
the Promises and Threatenings which it was attended withal. There was adjoined
unto it, Do this, and live; and the man that does these things shall live in
them; as also, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in
the Law to do them. Not that it was hereby absolutely constituted a Covenant,
which eventually and finally they were to live or dye by, (for as we showed
before, there was a Relief provided against that condition in the Promise,) but
God gave the Old Covenant an especial Revival, though with respect unto other
Ends than were originally intended in it. Hence this Covenant Form given unto
it, rendered the Obedience of that people in a great measure servile, for it
gendred unto bondage.

(4.) The Law being attended with various Explanations, and many Ordinances of
Judgment, deduced from the Principles of Moral Right and Equity contained in
it, was made the Rule of the Polity and Government of that people, as an Holy
Nation under the Rule of God himself who was their King. For their Polity for
the kind of it, was a Theocracy, over which God in an especial manner presided
as their Governor and King. And hence he affirms, that when they would choose
another King over them after the manner of the Nations, that they rejected him
from reigning over them; though they resolved to adhere to his Laws, and the
manner of Government prescribed to them. And this was peculiar to that people.
Hence the Sabbath amongst them came to have an absolute necessity accompanying
it of an outward carnal Observance, the neglect whereof, or acting any thing
against the Law of it, was to be punished with Death.

(5.) Unto this Renovation of the Covenant in the manner, and for the ends
expressed, there was added a Typical Church State, with a great number of
Religious Laws and Ordinances, in themselves carnal and weak, but mystically
significant of spiritual and heavenly things; and instructive how to use the
Promise that was before given, for their relief from the Rigor and Curse of the
Law or Covenant, now proposed unto them. And in all these things did the
Covenant of God made with that people in the Wilderness consist. The
Foundation, Matter, Manner of Administration, Promises and Threatenings of it
were the same, with the Covenant of Works; but they were all accommodated to
their Ecclesiastical and Political Estate, with especial Respect unto their
approaching condition in the Land of Canaan; only there was, in the Promise,
new Ends and a new Use given unto it, with a Relief against its Rigor and Curse.

Sabbath, is it often mentioned in the Scripture, as that which God had in a
peculiar manner given unto the Israelites, in whose especial Worship it had so
great a place; many of their Principal Ordinances having a great Respect unto
it; it being also, the only means of keeping up the solemnity of Natural
Worship in their Synagogues among the people: Acts 15. 21. Thus God says
concerning them, that he gave them his Sabbaths in the Wilderness, to be a sign
between him and them, Ezekiel. 20. 10, 11, 12. And it is said of the same time,
Nehem. 9. 14. That he made known unto them his holy Sabbath; that is, in the
manner and for the Ends expressed. Nor is there any need why we should say,
that he gave them, intends no more, but that he restored the knowledge of the
Sabbath amongst them, the memory whereof they had almost lost; although that
Interpretation of the Expression might be justified. For he says no where,
that he then gave his Sabbaths; but that he then peculiarly gave them unto that
people; and that for the Ends mentioned. For the Sabbath was originally a Moral
Pledge and Expression of Gods Covenant Rest, and our Rest in God. And now was
it appointed of God, to be a sign of the especial Administration of the
Covenant which was then enacted. Hence it is said, that he gave it them as a
perpetual Covenant, Exodus 31. 16. that they might know him to be the Lord that
sanctified them, v. 13. that is, their God according to the Tenor of that
Covenant, which was to continue throughout their Generations; that is, until
the New Covenant should be brought in and established by Christ. Thus was it
peculiarly given unto them; and so far as it was so; as it was a sign of their
Covenant, as it was then first given, so it is now abolished. For,

change of the Covenant must and did introduce a change in the Rest annexed
unto it. For a Sabbath, or an holy Rest, belongs unto every Covenant between
God and man. But as for the kind and nature of it, as to its Ends, Use, and
Manner of Observation, it follows the especial kind or nature of that Covenant
wherein we at any season walk before God. Now the Original Covenant of Works
being in this Representation of it on Sinai, not absolutely changed, or
abolished, but a afresh represented unto the people, only with a relief
provided for the Covenanters against its Curse and Severity, with a direction
how to use it to another End than was first given unto it, it follows that the
Day of the Sabbatical Rest could not be changed. And therefore was the
Observation of the seventh Day precisely continued, because it was a Moral
Pledge of the Rest of God in the first Covenant. For this the instructive part
of the Law of our Creation, from Gods making the world in six days, and
resting on the seventh did require. The Observation of this day therefore was
still continued among the Israelites, because the first Covenant was again
represented unto them. But when that Covenant was absolutely, and in all
Respects as a Covenant taken away and disannulled, and that not only as to its
formal Efficacy, but also as to the manner of the Administration of Gods
Covenant with men, as it is under the Gospel, there was a necessity that the
Day of Rest should also be changed, as I have more fully showed elsewhere. I
say then, that the precise Observation of the seventh Day enjoined unto the
Israelites, had respect unto the Covenant of Works, wherein the foundation of
it was laid, as has been demonstrated. And the whole Controversy about what
day is to be observed now as a Day of holy Rest unto the Lord, is resolved
fully into this enquiry, namely, what Covenant we do walk before God in.

Judaical Sabbath, it must moreover be considered, that the Law in general, and
all the Precepts of it, was the Instrument of the Polity of the people under
the Government of God, as we before observed. For all the Judgments relating
unto Civil things, were but an Application of the Moral Law to their State and
Condition. Hence, was the sanction of the transgressions of it, to be punished
with Death. So was it in particular, with respect unto the Sabbath. Numb. 15.
35 partly, that it might represent unto them, the Original Sanction of the
whole Law as a Covenant of Works, and partly to keep that stubborn people by
this severity within due bounds of Government. Nor was any thing punished by
Death Judicially in the Law, but the transgression of some Moral Command.
(...), The Hand of Heaven is threatened against their Presumptuous
Transgressions of the Ceremonial Law, where no Sacrifice was allowed. I the
Lord will set my Face against that man, and cut him off. This also made the
Sabbath a yoke and a burden, that wherein their Consciences could never find
perfect Rest. And in this sense also it is abolished and taken away.

Again, it was made a part of their Law for Religious Worship, in their Typical
Church State, in which, and whereby the whole Dispensation of the Covenant
which they were under, was directed unto other Ends. And so it had the Nature
of a shadow, representing the good things to come, whereby the people were to
be relieved from the Rigor and Curse of the whole Law, as a Covenant. And on
these Reasons, new Commands were given for the Observation of the Sabbath, new
Motives, Ends and Uses were added thereunto, every way to accommodate it to the
Dispensation of the Covenant then in force, which was afterward to be removed
and taken away, and therewithal the Sabbath it self, so far as it had Relation
thereunto. For the continuation of the seventh Day precisely belonged unto the
new Representation that was made of the Covenant of Works. The Representation
of that Covenant, with the sanction given unto it amongst the Judgments of
Righteousness in the Government of the people in the Land of Canaan, which was
the Lords and not theirs, made it a yoke and burden; and the use it was put
unto amongst Ceremonial Observances, made it a shadow; in all which respects it
is abolished by Christ. To say that the Sabbath as given unto the Jews is not
abolished, is to introduce the whole Systeme of Mosaical Ordinances, which
stand on the same bottom with it. And particularly the Observation of the
seventh Day precisely, lies as it were in the Heart of that Economy. And
these things will the more clearly appear, if we consider the dealing of God
with that people about the Sabbath from first to last.

Jews, some of them at least, as was before discoursed, would have not only the
first Revelation of the Sabbath unto them, or the Renovation of its Command,
but its first Institution absolutely to have been in their station at Mara;
Exodus 15. The vanity of this pretense we have before sufficiently discovered.
And whereas this was the Opinion of the Talmudical Masters of the Middle Ages
since Christ, they seem to have embraced it on the same Account whereon they
have invented many other Fancies. For observing that a Sabbath was in esteem
amongst the Christians, in Opposition unto them, they began to contend, that
the Sabbath was, as they called it, the Bride of the Synagogue, and belonged to
themselves alone, being given secretly to them only. The vanity of this
pretense we have before laid open, and so shall not again insist upon it.

Sabbath, was evidently in their first Station at Alush, Exodus 16. The occasion
of the whole is laid down, v. 4, 5. Then said the Lord unto Moses, Behold I
will rain Bread from Heaven for you, and the people shall go out and gather a
certain rate every day, that I may prove them whether they will walk in my Laws
or no? And it shall come to pass, that in the sixth day they shall prepare that
which they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily. Here
is no mention of the Sabbath; nor any Reason given why they should gather a
double portion on the sixth Day. This Command therefore must needs have seemed
somewhat strange unto them, if they had before no notion at all of a seventh
Days Sacred Rest. They must else otherwise have been at a great loss in
themselves, why they must double their measure on the sixth Day. However it is
apparent, that either they had lost the true Day they were to observe through
that long Bondage in Egypt, or knew not what belonged to the due Observation
and Sanctification of it. For when the people had observed this Command, and
gathered a double portion of Manna, to keep one part of it for the next day,
although they had Experience that if at another season it were kept above one
Day, it would putrify, and stink, v. 20. The Rulers of the Congregation
fearing some mistake in the matter, go and acquaint Moses with what was done
amongst them, v. 22. Hereon Moses replyeth unto them, v. 23. This is that which
the Lord has said, to morrow is the Rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord,
bake that which you will bake.

This is the first express mention of the Sabbath unto, and amongst that
people. And it sufficiently declares that this was not the absolute Original of
a Sabbatical Rest. It is only an Appropriation and Application of the Old
Command unto them. For the words are not preceptive but directive. They do not
Institute any thing anew; but direct in the Practice of what was before. Hence
it is affirmed, v. 29. that God gave them the Sabbath; namely, in this new
Confirmation of it, and Accommodation of it to their present Condition. For
this new Confirmation of it, by withholding of Manna on that day, belonged
merely and solely unto them, and was the especial limitation of the seventh Day
precisely, wherein we are not concerned who do live on the the true Bread that
came down from Heaven. In those words therefore, to morrow is the Rest of the
holy Sabbath unto the Lord, there is a certain limitation of the Day, a
Direction for its Sanctification, as confirmed by the New sign of withholding
Manna, all which belonged to them peculiarly. For this was the first Time that,
as a People, they observed the Sabbath, which in Egypt they could not do. And
into this Institution and the Authority of it, must they resolve their Practice
who adhere unto the Observation of the seventh Day precisely. For that day is
no otherwise confirmed in the Decalogue, but as it had Relation hereunto.

Jews in this place fall into a double mistake about the Practical Observation
of their Sabbath. For from those words, Bake that which you will bake, and
seethe that which you will seethe, and that which remains lay up for you to
be kept until the morning; v. 23. They conclude it to be unlawful to bake or
seethe any thing on the Sabbath Day; whereas the words have respect only to the
Manna that was to be preserved. And from the words of v. 29. See, for that the
Lord has given you the Sabbath, therefore he gives you on the sixth day the
Bread of two Days; abide you every man in his place, let no man go out of his
place on the seventh day; they have made a Rule, yea many Rules about what
Motions or removals are lawful on the Sabbath Day, and what not. And hence they
have bound themselves with many anxious and scrupulous Observances; though the
Injunction it self do purely and solely respect the people in the Wilderness,
that they should not go out into the Fields to look for Manna on that day;
which some of them having done, v. 27. an occasion was taken from thence for
this Injunction. And hereunto do some of the Heathen Writers ascribe the
Original of the Sabbatical Rest among the Jews; supposing that the seventh day
after their departure out of Egypt they came to a place of Rest, in
Remembrance whereof they consecrated one day in seven to Rest and idleness ever
after, whereunto they add other fictions of an alike nature. See Tacit. Hist.
lib. 5.

Sinai, Exodus 20. That the Decalogue is a summary of the Law of Nature, or the
Moral Law, is by all Christians acknowledged, nor could the Heathens of old
deny it. And it is so perfectly. Nothing belongs unto that Law, which is not
comprised therein. Nor can any one Instance be given to the contrary. Nor is
there any thing directly, and immediately in it, but what belongs unto that
Law. Only God now made in it, an especial Accommodation of the Law of their
Creation unto that people, whom he he was in a second Work now forming for
himself, Isa. 43. 19, 20, 21. Chap. 51. 15, 16. And this he did as every part
of it was capable of being so accommodated. To this purpose he prefaceth the
whole with an Intimation of his particular Covenant with them; I am the Lord
thy God; and adds thereunto the Remembrance of an especial Benefit, that they
and they alone were made partakers of. That brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the house of Bondage, which he did in the pursuit of his
especial Covenant with Abraham and his seed. This made the Obligation to
Obedience unto the Law as promulgated on Mount Sinai, to belong unto them
peculiarly; to us, it is only an everlasting Rule, as declarative of the Will
of God, and the Law of our Creation. The Obligation, I say, that arose unto
Obedience from the Promulgation of the Law on Mount Sinai, was peculiar unto
the Israelites; and sundry things were then and there mixed with it, that
belonged unto them alone. And whereas the Mercy, the consideration whereof, he
proposes as the great Motive unto Obedience, which was his bringing them out
of Egypt, with Reference unto his settling of them in the Land of Canaan, was a
Typical Mercy, it gave the whole Law a station in the Typical Church State
which they were now bringing into. It altered not the nature of the things
commanded, which for the substance of them were all Moral; but it gave their
Obedience unto it a new and Typical Respect, even as it was the Tenor of the
Covenant made with them in Sinai, with Respect unto the promised Land of
Canaan, and their Typical State therein.

fourth Commandment. Three things are distinctly proposed in it. (1.) The
Command for an Observance of a Sabbath Day, v. 8. Remember the Sabbath Day to
keep it holy. This contains the whole substance of the Command. The formal
Reason whereof is contained in the last clause of it, Wherefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath Day and hallowed it. And upon the neglect of the Observance
of the Sabbath in former Generations, with a Prospect on the many Difficulties
that would arise among the people in the Observation of it for the future, as
also because the Foundation and Reason of it in the Law of Creation, being
principally external in the Works and Rest of God that ensued thereon, were not
so absolutely ingrafted in the minds of men, as continually to evidence and
manifest themselves, as do those of the other Precepts, there is an especial
note put upon it for Remembrance. And whereas it is a positive Precept, as is
that which follows it, all the rest being Negatives, it stood more in need than
they of a particular charge, and special Motives; of which Nature one is added
also to the next Command, being in like manner a Positive Enunciation. (2.)
Secondly, There is an express Determination of this Sabbath to be one Day in
seven, without which it was only included in the Original Reason of it, v. 9,
10. Six days shall thou-labour, and do all thy Work, but the seventh Day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. And herein the Day originally fixed in the
Covenant of Works is again limited unto this people, to continue unto the Time
of the full Introduction and Establishment of the New Covenant. And this
limitation of the seventh Day, was but the Renovation of the Command when given
unto them in the way of an especial Ordinance, Exodus 16. and belongs not to the
substance of the Command it self. Yea take the Command it self without respect
unto its explications elsewhere, and it expresses no such limitation; though
vertually because of the precedent Institution, Exodus 16. it be contained in
it. Hence (Thirdly) There is a Prescription for the manner of its Observance
accommodated unto the state and condition of that people, and that two ways,
(1.) In comprehending things Spiritual under things Carnal, when yet the carnal
are of no consideration in the Worship of God, but as they necessarily attend
upon things spiritual. Hence that part of the Command which concerns the manner
of the Observation of the Sabbath to be kept holy, is given out in a
Prohibition of bodily Labor and Work, or a Command of bodily Rest. But it is
the Expression of the Rest of God and his complacency in his Works and
Covenant, with the Sanctification of the Day in Obedience to his Commands, in
and by the holy Duties of his Worship, that are principally intended in it. And
this he farther intimates afterward unto them by his Institution of a double
Sacrifice to be offered Morning and Evening on that Day. (2.) In the
Distribution of the people into the Capital Persons with their Relations,
Servants and Strangers, that God would have to live amongst them, and join
themselves unto them. In the whole it appears, that the Sabbath is not now
commanded to be observed, because it is the seventh Day, as though the seventh
Day were firstly and principally intended in the Command, which as we have
showed, that neither the substance of the Command, nor the Reason of it, with
which the whole of the Precept is begun and ended, will admit of; but the
seventh Day is commanded to be observed, because by an antecedent Institution
it was made to be the Sabbath unto that people, Exodus 16. (Whence it came to
fall under the Command, not primarily, but reductively) as it had been on
another account from the foundation of the World. The Sabbath therefore is
Originally commanded as one day in seven to be dedirated unto an Holy Rest. And
the seventh Day, if we respect the order of the days, is added, as that
especial Day, which God had declared that he would have at that Time his
Sabbath to be observed on.

Now all these things in the Law of the Sabbath are Mosaical; namely, the
Obligation that arose unto its Observation, from the Promulgation of the Law
unto that people on Sinai; the limitation of the Day unto the seventh or last
of the Week, which was necessary unto that Administration of the Covenant,
which God then made use of, and had a respect unto a previous Institution; the
Manner of its Observance suited unto that servile and bondage frame of mind
which the giving the Law on Mount Sinai did ingenerate in them, as being
designed of God so to do; the ingrafting it into the systeme and series of
Religious Worship then in force, by the double Sacrifice annexed unto it, with
the various uses in, and accommodations it had unto the Rule of Government in
the Commonwealth of Israel; in all which respects it is abolished and taken
away.

seventh Day, and the manner of its Observation, as a part of the Covenant then
made with that people, he thereon makes use of it in the same manner, and unto
the same Ends with the residue of the Institutions and Ordinances which he had
then prescribed unto them. This he does, Exodus 31. 13, 14, 14, 15, 16, 17. And
the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, Speak thou unto the Children of Israel,
saying, Verily, my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between me and you
throughout your Generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord that does
sanctify you. Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you.
Every one that defiles it, shall surely be put to death, for whosoever does
any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from amongst his people. Six Days
may work be done, but in the seventh is the Sabbath of Rest holy to the Lord,
whosoever does any work on the Sabbath Day, shall surely be put to death.
Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath
throughout their Generations, for a perpetual Covenant. It is a sign between me
and the children of Israel for ever. For in six Days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, and on the seventh Day he rested and was refreshed. This is the next
mention of the Sabbath amongst that people, wherein all that we have before
laid down is fully confirmed. God had now by Moses appointed other Sabbaths,
that is Monthly and Annual Sacred Rests to be observed unto himself. With these
he now joins the Weekly Sabbath, in Allusion whereunto, they have that Name
also given unto them. He had sufficiently manifested a Difference between them
before. For the one he pronounced himself on Mount Sinai, as part of his
universal and eternal Law. The other he Instituted by Revelation unto Moses, as
that which peculiarly belonged unto them. The one was grounded on a Reason
wherein they had no more concern or interest than all the rest of mankind;
namely, Gods Rest on his Works, and being refreshed thereon, upon the Creation
of the World, and the establishment of his Covenant with man: the other, all
built on Reasons peculiar unto themselves, and that Church State whereinto they
were admitted. But here the Sabbaths of both these kinds are brought under the
same Command, and designed unto the same Ends and Purposes. Now the sole Reason
hereof lies in those temporary and Ceremonial Additions which we have
manifested to have been made unto the Original Law of the Sabbath in its
Accommodation to their Church State, with the Place which it held therein, as
we shall see yet farther in particular.

Renovation of the Command was the Building of the Tabernacle, which was now
designed, and forthwith to be undertaken. And with Respect hereunto, there was
a double Reason for the Repetition of this Command. First, Because that Work
was for an holy End, and so upon the matter an holy Work; and whereon the
people were very intent; hence they might have supposed, that it would have
been lawful for them to have attended unto it on the Sabbath Days. This
therefore God expressly forbids, that they might have no pretense for the
Transgression of his Command. And therefore is the Penalty annexed unto it, so
expressly here appointed and mentioned. Secondly, As the Tabernacle now to be
built, was the only seat of that solemn instituted Worship which God was now
setting up amongst them; so the Sabbath being the great Means of its
continuance and performance, this they were now to be severely minded of, lest
by their neglect and forgetfulness thereof, they might come to a neglect and
contempt of all that Worship, which was as it were built upon it. And as we
observed before more than once, the Weekly Sabbath being inserted into the
Economy of their Laws, as to the matter of Works and Rest, it is comprised in
the General with other Feasts called Sabbaths also. Verily, my Sabbaths ye
shall keep. And in this regard they are all cast together by our Apostle, Col.
2. 16. and the Sabbath Days. And they who by virtue of this and the like
Commands, would bind us up to the Judaical Sabbath, do certainly lose both
that, and all other ground for the Observance of any Sabbath at all. For look
in what respects it is joined with the other Sabbaths by Moses, in the same it
is taken away with them by the Apostle.

Weekly Sabbaths in this place made unto the Church of the Israelites. (1.) In
that the Observation of it is required of them in their Generations, that is,
during the continuance of that Church State, which was to abide to the coming
of Christ. For what was required of them in their Generations, as it was
required, was then to expire and be abolished. (2.) That they were to observe
it, as a perpetual Covenant, or as a part of that Covenant which God then made
with them, which is called everlasting, because it was to be so unto them,
seeing God would never make any other peculiar Covenant with them. And whereas
all the Statutes and Ordinances that God then gave them belonged unto, and
altogether entirely made up that Covenant, some of this, as this especial
Command for the Sabbath, and that of Circumcision, are distinctly called the
Covenant, and ceased with it. (3.) It was given unto them as an especial Pledge
of the Covenant that God then made with them, wherein he rested in his Worship,
and brought them to rest therein in the Land of Canaan, whereby they entered
into Gods Rest. Hence it is called a sign between them. v. 13, 14, which is
repeated and explained, Ezekiel. 20. 12. A sign it was, or an evident Expression
of the present Covenant of God, between them and him; not a Sacramental or
Typical sign of future Grace in particular; any otherwise than as their whole
Church Constitution, and their Worship in general whereof by these means it was
made a part, were so; that is, not in it self or its own nature, but as
prescribed unto them.

And a present sign between God and them it was upon a double account. (1.) On
the part of the people; Their assembling on that Day for the Celebration of the
Worship of God, and the avowing him alone therein to be their God, was a sign,
or an evident express Acknowledgement that they were the people of the Lord.
And this does not in the least impeach its Original Morality; seeing there is
no Moral Duty, but in its Exercise or actual Performance may be so made a sign.
(2.) On the part of God, namely, that it was he who sanctified them. For by
this Observance, they had a visible pledge that God had separated them unto,
and for himself; and therefore had given them his Word and Ordinances, as the
outward means of their further sanctification to be peculiarly attended unto on
that Day. And on these Grounds it is, that God is elsewhere said to give them
his Sabbaths, to reveal them unto them, as their peculiar Privilege and
Advantage. And their Privilege it was. For although in comparison of the
substance and Glory of things to be brought in by Christ, with the Liberty and
Spirituality of Gospel Worship, all their Ordinances and Institutions were a
yoke of Bondage, yet considering their Use, with their End and Tendency,
compared with the Rest of the World at that time, they were an unspeakable
Privilege, Psalm. 147. v. 19, 20. However therefore the Sabbath was originally
given before unto all mankind; yet God now by the Addition of his Institutions
to be observed on that Day whereby he sanctified the people, made an enclosure
of it, so far unto them alone. Lastly, Here is added a peculiar sanction under
the Penalty of Death. He that transgresses it shall surely be put to Death, v.
14. God sometimes threatens cutting off and extermination unto Persons,
concerning whom yet the people had no warranty to proceed Capitally against
them; only he took it upon himself, as the Supreme Legislator and Rector of
that people, to destroy them and cut them off, as they speak, by the hand of
Heaven. But where ever this expression is used, he shall surely be put to
death, (...), dying he shall dye, there the people, or the Judges among them
are not only warranted, but commanded to proceed Judicially against such an
Offender. And in this respect it belonged unto that severe Government which
that people stood in need of, as also to mind them of the sanction of the whole
Law of Creation as a Covenant of Works, with the same Commination of Death unto
all Transgressors. In all these regards, the Sabbath was Judaical, and is
absolutely abolished and taken away.

Six Days thou shall work, but on the seventh Day thou shall Rest, in Earing
time and in Harvest thou shall rest. Earing time and Harvest are the seasons
wherein those who till the Ground, are most intent upon their Occasions, and do
most hardly bear with Intermissions, because they may be greatly to their
Damage. Wherefore they are insisted on, or specified, to manifest that no
Avocation nor pretense can justify men in working or labor on that Day. For
by expressing Earing and Harvest all those Intervenings also are intended in
those seasons, whereon damage and loss might redound unto men, by omitting the
gathering in of their Corn. And it should seem on this Ground, that on that
day, they might not labor neither to take it away before a flood, nor remove
it from an approaching fire. So some of the Masters think, although our Savior
convince them from their own Practice, in relieving Cattle fallen into Pits on
that day, Luke 14. 5. and by loosing them that were tied to lead them to
watering, Chap. 13. 15. that they did not conceive this universally, to be the
intendment of that Law, that in no case, any work was to be done. And it seems
they were wiser for their Asses in those Days, than the poor wretch was for
himself in latter Ages, who falling into the Jakes at Tewkesbury on that Day,
would not suffer himself to be drawn out, if the Story be truly reported in
our Chronicles. In general, I doubt not but that this Additional Explanation in
a way of severity, is in its proper sense purely Judaical, and contains
something more of Rigidness, that is required by the Law of the Sabbath as
purely Moral.

Six Days shall work be done, but on the seventh Day there shall be to you an
holy Day, a Sabbath of Rest unto the Lord: whosoever does work therein shall be
put to death. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations on the
Sabbath Day. Here again the Penalties, and the Prohibition of kindling fire are
Mosaical; and so is, on their account, the whole Command, as here renewed,
though there be that in it, which for the substance of it, is Moral. And here
the seventh Day precisely is made (...) holiness unto them; (or (...) a
Convocation of holiness; an holy Convocation as it is expressed, Levit. 23. 2.
where these words are again repeated) whose Profanation was to be avenged with
Death. The Prohibition also added about kindling of fire in their habitations
has been the occasion of many anxious Observances among the Jews. They all
agree that the kindling of fire for Profit and Advantage, in Kilns, and Oasts
for the making of Brick, or drying of Corn, or for founding or melting Metals,
is here forbidden. But what need was there that so it should be; seeing all
these things are expressly forbidden in the Command in general, Thou shall do no
manner of work; somewhat more is intended. They say therefore, that it is the
kindling of fire for the dressing of Victuals; And this indeed seems to be the
intendment of this especial Law; as the Manna that was to be eaten on the
Sabbath, was to be prepared on the Parasecue. But withal I say, this is a new
additional Law, and purely Mosaical; the Original Law of the Sabbath making no
entrenchment on the ordinary duties of humane life, as we shall see afterward.
Whether it forbad the kindling of fire, for Light and Heat, I much question The
present Jews in most places employ Christian Servants about such works. For the
poor wretches care not what is done to their Advantage; so they do it not
themselves. But these and the like Precepts belonged unquestionably unto their
Paedagogie, and were separable from the Original Law of the Sabbath.

and remember that thou wast a Servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord
thy God brought thee out thence, through a mighty hand, and by a stretched out
Arm; therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day. The
Mercy and Benefit they had received in their Deliverance from Egypt is given
as the Reason, not why they should keep the Sabbath, as it was proposed as a
Motive unto the Observation of the whole Law in the Preface of the Decalogue;
but wherefore God gave them the Law of it, to keep and observe. Therefore the
Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath. Now the Reason of the Command
of a Sabbatical Roast absolutely, God had every where declared to be, his making
the world in six days, and resting on the seventh. The mention whereof in this
place is wholly omitted; because an especial Application of the Law unto that
people is intended. So that it is evident, that the Mosaical Sabbath was on
many Accounts, and in many things distinguished from that of the Decalogue,
which is a Moral Duty. For the Deliverance of the people out of Egypt, which
was a benefit peculiar unto themselves, and Typical of Spiritual Mercies unto
others, was the Reason of the Institution of the Sabbath as it was Mosaical,
which it was not nor could be of the Sabbath absolutely; although it might be
pressed on that people as a considerable Motive, why they ought to endeavor
the keeping of the whole Law.

seventh Day precisely from the Beginning of the world, belonged unto the
Covenant of Works; not as a Covenant, but as a Covenant of Works, founded in
the Law of Creation; And that in the Administration of that Covenant, which was
revived, and unto certain Ends reinforced unto the Church of Israel in the
Wilderness, it was bound on them by an especial Ordinance to be observed
throughout their Generations, or during the continuance of their Church State.
Moreover, that as to the manner of the Observance required by the Law, as
delivered on Mount Sinai, it was a yoke and burden to the people, because that
dispensation of the Law, gendred unto Bondage, Gal. 4. 24. For it begot a
Spirit of fear and Bondage in all that were its Children, and subject unto its
Power. In this condition of things, it was applied unto sundry Ends in their
Typical State, in which regard it was a shadow of good things to come. And so
also was it in respect of those other Additional Institutions, and Prohibitions
which were inseparable from its Observation amongst them, whereof we have
spoken. On all these Accounts I doubt not but that the Mosaical Sabbath and the
manner of its Observation is under the Gospel utterly taken away. But as for
the Weekly Sabbath, as required by the Law of our Creation, reinforced in the
Decalogue the summary Representation of that great Original Law, the
Observation of it is a Moral Duty, which by Divine Authority is translated unto
another Day.

Jews have a saying, which by the later Masters is abused, but a Truth is
contained in it. (...) The Sabbath gives firmitude and strength to all the
Affairs of this World. For it may be understood of the Blessing of God, on the
due Observation of his Worship on that Day. Hence it was they say, that any
young clean Beast that was to be offered in Sacrifice, must continue seven
days with the Damm, and not be offered until the eighth, Levit. 22. 27. That a
Child was not to be circumcised until the eighth Day, that there might be an
Interposition of a Sabbath for their Benediction. And it is not unlikely that
the eighth Day was also signalized hereby, as that which was to succeed in the
Room of the seventh, as shall be manifested in our next Discourse.

The Fifth Exercitation OF THE Lord's Day.
(1) A Summary of what has been proved, a progress to the Lord's Day. (2) The
new Creation of all things in Christ, the foundation of Gospel-Obedience and
Worship. (3) The old and new Creation compared (4) The old and new Covenant.
(5) Distinct Ends of these Covenants. (6) Supposition of the Heads of things
before confirmed. (7) Foundation of the Lord's Day on those Suppositions. (8)
Christ the ^uthor of the new Creation; his Works therein (9) His Rest from his
Works the Indication of a new Day of Rest. (10) Observed by the Apostles. (11)
Proof of the Lord's Day from Heb. 4. proposed. (12) The words of the Text. (13)
esign of the Apostle in general. (14) His answer unto an Objection; with his
general Argument. (15) The nature of the Rests treated on by him. (16) The
Church under the Law of Nature, and its Rest. (17) The Church under the Law of
Institution, and its Rest. (18) The Church under the Gospel, and its Rest. (19)
The foundation of it. (20) Christ his Works, and his Rest, intended Heb. 4. 10
(21) This farther proved by sundry Arguments. 22) What were his Works whereby
the Church was founded. (23) His entrance into his Rest, not in his Death, but
in his Resurrection. (24) The Day of Rest limited and determined hereby. (25)
The Sabbatism that remains for the people of God. (26) The sending of the Holy
Ghost. (27) Church Assemblies on the first day of the Week. (28) The Lord's Day,
Rev. 1. 10. (29) The sum of the preceding Discourse. (30) Necessity of the
Religious Observation of one day in seven. (31) Blessing of God on the
Church-worship on the first day. (32) Of the seventh day Sabbath, Judaism
restored in it. Of the Ebionites. (33) Schisms perpetuated by the opinion of
the seventh day Sabbath (34) Penalty of the Law reinforced with it. (35) The
Whole legal.

Rest of God and Man that ensued thereon, has been declared. It has also in
part, and sufficiently as unto our present purpose, been evidenced, how the
great Ends of the Creation of All, in the Glory of God, and the Blessedness of
Man in him, with the pledge thereof in a Sabbatical Rest, were for a season as
it were defeated and disappointed by the entrance of Sin, which brake the
Covenant that was founded in the Law of Creation, and rendered it useless unto
those ends. For the Law became Weak through sin, and the flesh, or the
corruption of our Nature that ensued thereon, Romans 8. 5. Hence it could no more
bring Man to Rest in God. But yet a continuation of the Obligatory force of
that Law and Covenant, with the direction of it unto other ends and purposes,
than at first given unto them, was under the Old Testament designed of God, and
has been declared also. Hence was the continuation of the original Sabbatical
Rest, in the Church of Israel, with the especial application of its command
unto that people, insisted on in the preceding Discourse. In this state of
things, God had of old determined the Renovation of All by a new Creation; a
new Law of that Creation, a new Covenant, and a new Sabbatical Rest, unto his
own Glory by Jesus Christ; and these things are now to be discussed.

new Creation of All, even of the Heavens and the Earth, and all things
contained in them, Psalm. 65. 17, 18. chap. 66. 22. 2 Pet. 3 13 Hence the state
of things to be introduced thereby, was under the Old Testament called the
World to come, Heb. 2. 5. So it is still called by the Jewish Masters, (...)
and (...) So Kimchi amongst other Expositions of the Title of Psalm. 92. a Psalm
or Song for the Sabbath day, adds this, as that which the most ancient Rabbis
fixed on, (...) They interpreted it of the World to come, which shall be wholly
Sabbath and Rest, and these are the days of the Messiah. A spiritual Rest it
is they intend, and not a cessation of a Sabbath Day in particular; seeing in
the prophecy of the new Temple, or Church State in those days, there is
especial direction given for the service of the Sabbath Day, Ezekiel. 46. 4.

And this Renovation of all things is said accordingly to be accomplished in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. Old things are past away, behold all things are
become New; the Old Law, Old Covenant, Old Worship, Old Sabbath, all that was
peculiar unto the Covenant of Works as such, in the first Institution of it,
and its renewed declaration on Mount Sinai, all are gone, and antiquated. What
now remains of them as to any usesulness in our living to God, does not abide
on the Old foundation, but on a New disposition of them, by the Renovation of
all things in Christ. For in the dispensation of the fullness of times. God
gathered unto an Head all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which
are on Earth, even in him, Ephesians. 1. 10. The whole old Creation, as far as it
had any thing in its self, or its order, that belonged unto, or communicated
any thing toward our living unto God and his Glory, is disposed anew in Christ
Jesus unto that End.

But this Renovation of all, which is the foundation of all our acceptable
Obedience unto God, and of his present Worship, consists principally in the
Regeneration of the Elect, making them new Creatures, and the erection of a new
Church State thereby to the Glory of God. Now this new Creation of all must
answer unto all the Ends of the Old, in reference unto the Glory of God, and
the Good of them who are partakers of it; otherwise it would not be so rightly
called, nor answer the declared Ends of it, which was to gather all things to
an Head in Christ Jesus. For what was lost by sin, as to the Glory of God in
the old Creation, in this, was to be repaired and recovered.

old Creation comprised in it the Law of the Obedience of all Creatures unto
God. This was therein and thereby implanted on their Natures, with
inclinations, Natural, or Moral, unto the Observation of it. And thus must it
be also in the new Creation, as unto the subject of it, which is the Church.
This Law of the old Creation unto Man, consisted principally in the Image of
God in him, and con-created with him. For hereby did he both know his duty, and
was enabled to perform it, and was acquainted with his Relation unto God, and
dependence upon him, which rendered it necessary and indispensible. But this Law
in the state of Creation, fell under a double consideration, or had a double
use; first of Rule, and then as a Principle. As a Rule, the light that was in
the mind of man, which was a principal part of the Image of God in him,
acquainted him with his whole duty, and directed him in the right performance
of it. As a Principle, it respected the Ability that the whole man was endowed
withal, to live to God according to his duty. This Law, as to its first use,
being much impaired, weakened, and in a great measure made useless by sin, God
was pleased to restore it in the vocal Revelation of his Will, especially in
the Decalogue, which with his own finger he wrote in Tables of Stone. In answer
hereunto, a new Law of Obedience is introduced by the new Creation in Christ
Jesus. And this principally consisted in the Renovation of the Image of God in
the new Creatures, which was lost by sin: For they are renewed in the spirit of
their minds, and do put on that new man, which after God is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. And this fully answers the
first Law, as it was a Principle of Light, and Power, unto Obedience. And in a
great measure it supplys the loss of it, as it was a Rule also; For there is a
great Renovation thereof in God's writing his Law in our hearts, not here to be
insisted on. But in this new Creation God designed to gather up all that was
past, in the Old, and in the Law thereof, and in the continuation of it by
writing under the Old Testament, unto one head in Christ. Wherefore he brings
over in this state, the use of the first Law, as renewed and represented in
Tables of Stone for a directive Rule of Obedience unto the new Creature;
whereby the first original Law is wholly supplied. Hereunto he makes an
Addition of what positive Laws he thinks meet, as he did also under the Old Law
of Creation, for the trial of our Obedience, and our furtherance in it. So the
Moral Law of our Obedience is in each condition, the old and the new,
materially the same; nor is it possible that it should be otherwise. But yet
this old Law, as brought over into this new estate, is new also. For all things
are become new. And it is now the Rule of our Obedience, not merely and
absolutely unto God as the Creator, the first cause and last end of all, but as
unto God in Christ bringing of us into a new Relation unto himself. In the
Renovation then of the Image of God in our souls, and the transferring our of
the Moral Law as a Rule accompanied with new distinct Principles, Motives and
Ends, does the Law of the new Creation consist, and fully answer the Law of the
first, as it was a Principle and a Rule, each of them having their peculiar
positive Laws annexed unto them.

Covenant included in it, or inseparably annexed unto it. This also we have
before declared, and what belonged thereunto, or ensued necessarily thereon.
Thus therefore must it be also in the new Creation, and the Law thereof: Yea
because the Covenant is that which as it were gathers all things together,
both in the Works and Law of God, and our Obedience, disposing them into that
order which tends to the Glory of God, and the Blessedness of the Creatures
in him; this is that which in both Creations is principally to be considered.
For without this, no End of God in his Works, or Law, could be attained, nor
man be made Blessed in a way of Righteousness and Goodness unto his Glory. And
the Law of Creation no otherwise failed, nor became useless as to its first End
by sin, but that the Covenant of it was thereby broken and rendered useless, as
to the bringing of man unto the enjoyment of God. This therefore was
principally regarded in the new Creation, namely the making, confirming, and
ratifying of a new Covenant. And the doing hereof was the great promise under
the Old Testament, Jerem. 31. 32. whereby the Believers who then lived, were
made partakers of the benefits of it. And the confirming of this Covenant in
and by Christ, is expressed as a part of the new Creation, Heb. 8. 9. and it is
indeed comprehensive of the whole Work of it.

End of the old Covenant, was to bring man by due Obedience unto the Rest of
God. This God declared in, and unto his inbred native light, by his Works and
his Rest that ensued thereon, and the Day of Rest which he instituted as a
pledge thereof, and as a means of attaining it, by that Obedience which was
required in the Covenant. This we have before declared, and this was the true
original and End of the first Sabbatical Rest. All these things therefore must
have place also in the new Covenant, belonging unto the new Creation. The
immediate End of it, is our entering into the Rest of God, as the Apostle proves
at large, Heb. 4. But herein we are not absolutely to enter into Gods Rest, as
a Creator and Rewarder, but into the Rest of God in Christ, the Nature whereof
will be fully explained in our Exposition of that Chapter. For Obedience is now
to be yielded unto God, not absolutely, but to God in Christ, and with that
respect therefore are we to enter into Rest. The foundation hereof must lie in
the Works of God in the new Creation, and the complacency with Rest which he
took therein. For all our Rest in God, is founded in his own Rest in his Works.
For a pledge hereof, a Day of Rest must be given and observed; the reasons and
necessity whereof we have explained and confirmed in our preceding Discourses.
This, as has been showed, originally was the Seventh day of the week. But as
the Apostle tells us in another case, the Priesthood being changed, there must
also of necessity a change of the Law ensue; so the Covenant being changed, and
the Rest which was the End of it being changed, and the way of entering into the
Rest of God being changed, a change of the Day of Rest must of necessity
thereon ensue. And no Man can assert the same Day of Rest precisely to abide,
as of old, but he must likewise assert the same Law, the same Covenant, the
same Rest of God, the same way of entering into it, which yet, as all
acknowledge, are changed. The Day first annexed unto the Covenant of works,
that is, the seventh Day, was continued under the Old Testament, because the
outward administration of that Covenant was continued. A relief indeed was
provided against the curse and penalty of it, but in the administration of it,
the nature, promises, and threatenings of that Covenant, though with other ends
and purposes, were represented unto the people. But now that Covenant being
absolutely abolished, both as to its nature, use, efficacy and power, no more
to be represented nor proposed unto Believers, the whole of it, and its renewed
administration under the Old Testament being removed, taken away, and
disappearing, Heb. 8 13. the precise Day of Rest belonging unto it, was to be
changed also; and so it is come to pass.

suppose what has been before proved and confirmed. There was a Day of holy
Rest unto God, necessary to be observed by the Law and Covenant of Nature, or
Works; neither was or could either of them be complete without it, looking on
them as the rule and means of man's living unto God, and of his coming to the
enjoyment of him. That this Day was in the innate right of Nature, as directed
by the Works of God, designed and proposed unto it for that purpose to be one
Day in seven. This was it to learn, and this it did learn from Gods creating
the World in six days, and resting on the seventh; for God affirms every
where, that because he did so, therefore it was the duty of man to labor on
six days, as his occasions do require, and to rest on the seventh. This
therefore they were taught by those Works and Rest of God, or it could not be
proposed as the reason of their suitable practice; and for this end did God so
Work and Rest. The Law therefore of this holy Rest he renews in the
Decalogue, amongst those other Laws, which being of the same nature and
original, namely branches of the Law of our Creation, were to be unto us moral
and eternal. For God would no longer entrust his mind and will in that Law unto
the depraved nature of man, wherein, if he had not in the best, often guided
and directed it by fresh extraordinary revelations, it would have been of
little use to his glory; but committed it by vocal revelation to the minds of
the people, as the doctrinal object of their consideration, and recorded it in
tables of stone. Moreover, the nature of the first Covenant, and the way of
Gods instructing man in the condition of it by his Works and Rest, had limited
this holy Day unto the seventh Day, the observation whereof was to be
commensurate unto that Covenant, and its administration, however the outward
forms thereof might be varied.

Lords Day under the New Testament, according to the institution of it, or
declaration of the mind of Christ, who is our Lord and Lawgiver concerning it.
1. A new work of Creation, or a work of a new Creation is undertaken and
completed, Isa. 65. 17. Chap. 66. 22, 23. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Rev. 21. 1. Romans 8.
19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15. 2. This new Creation is accompanied with a
new Law, and a new Covenant; or the Law of faith, and the Covenant of Grace,
Romans 3. 27. Chap. 8. 2, 3, 4. Jer. 31. 32, 33, 34. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. 3. Unto this Law and Covenant a Day of holy Rest unto the Lord does belong,
which cannot be the same Day with the former, no more than it is the same Law,
or the same Covenant, which were originally given unto us, Heb. 4. 9. Rev. 1.
10. 4. That this Day was limited and determined to the first Day of the Week by
our Lord Jesus Christ, is that which shall now further be confirmed; only I
must desire the Reader to consider, that whereas the Topical Arguments whereby
this Truth is confirmed, have been pleaded, improved, and vindicated by many of
late, I shall but briefly mention them, and insist principally on the
declaration of the proper grounds and foundations of it.

Author of the old Creation, Joh. 1. 3. Col. 1. 16. Heb. 1. 2, 10. so as
Mediator, he was the Author of this new Creation, Heb. 3. 3, 4. He built the
House of God; he built all these things, and is God. Herein he wrought, and in
the accomplishment of it, saw of the travail of his soul, and was satisfied,
Isa. 53. 11. that is, he rested and was refreshed. Herein he gave a new Law of
life, faith, and obedience unto God, Isa. 42. 4. not by an addition of new
Preceps to the moral Law of God, not virtually comprised therein, and distinct
from his own positive institutions of worship, but in his revelation of that
new way of obedience unto God in and by himself, with the especial causes,
means, and ends of it, which supplies the use and end whereunto the Moral Law
was at first designed, Romans 8. 2, 3. Chap 10. 3, 4. whereby he becomes the
Author of eternal salvation unto all that do obey him, Heb. 5. 9. This Law of
life and obedience, he writes by his Spirit in the hearts of his people, that
they may be willing in the day of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. 1 Cor. 3. 3, 6. Heb.
8 10. not at once, and in the foundation of his work actually, but only in the
causes of it. For as the Law of nature should have been implanted in the hearts
of men in their conception, and natural nativity, had that dispensation of
righteousness continued; so in the new birth of them that believe in him, is
this Law written in their hearts in all generations, Joh. 3. 6. Hereon was the
Covenant established, and all the promises thereof, of which he was the
Mediator, Heb. 8. 6. And for an holy Day of Rest, for the ends before
declared, and on the suppositions before laid down, evincing the necessity of
such a Day, he determined the observation of the first Day of the Week. For,

rested from his works, in and by his Resurrection; for then had he laid the
foundation of the new Heavens, and new Earth, and finished the works of the new
Creation, when all the Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for
joy. On this Day he rested from his works, and was refreshed, as God did, and
was from his. For although he works hitherto, in the communication of his
Spirit and Graces, as the Father continued to do in his works of providence,
after the finishing of the works of the old Creation, though these works
belonged thereunto; yet he cease absolutely from that kind of work whereby he
laid the foundation of the new Creation: henceforth he dies no more. And on
this Day was he refreshed in the view of his works, for he saw that it was
exceeding good. Now as Gods Rest, and his being refreshed in his work, on the
seventh Day of old, was a sufficient indication of the precise Day of Rest,
which he would have observed under the administration of that original Law and
Covenant; so the Rest of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his being refreshed in and
from his works on the first Day, is a sufficient indication of the precise Day
of Rest, to be observed under the dispensation of the new Covenant now
confirmed and established.

And the Church of Christ could not pass one Week under the New Testament, or
in a Gospel-state of worship, without this indication. For the Judaical
Sabbath, as sure as it was so, and as sure as it was annexed unto the Mosaical
administration of the Covenant, was so far abolished, as not to oblige really
the Disciples of Christ in conscience unto the observation of it, whatever any
of them might for a season apprehend. And if a new Day was not now determined,
there was no Day or season appointed, for an observance of an holy Rest unto
the Lord, nor any pledge given us of our entering into the Rest of Christ. And
those who say, that it is required that some time be set apart unto the ends of
a Sabbatical Rest, but that there is no divine indication of that time, when,
not what it is, or shall be, if we consider what are the ends of such a Rest,
as before declared, must allow us to expect firmer proofs of their uncouth
Assertion, than any as yet we have met withal.

Gospel Day of Rest and Worship, was embraced by the Apostles, who were to be
as the chief corner-stones, the foundation of the Christian Church. For
immediately hereon they assembled themselves on that Day, and were confirmed in
their Obedience by the Grace of our Lord, in meeting with them thereon, Joh.
20. 19, 26. And it seems that on this Day only he appeared unto them, when they
were assembled together, although occasionally he showed himself to sundry of
them at other seasons. Hence he left Thomas under his doubts an whole Week,
before he gave him his gracious conviction, that he might do it in the Assembly
of his Disciples on the first day of the week. From which time forward this Day
was never without its solemn Assemblies, as shall further be cleared afterward.

foundation and causes of the Lord's Day, is taught by the Apostle Paul in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 4. I shall present unto the Reader the sum of his
design and scope in that place, from verse. 3. to verse. 11. with an Application
of it unto our present purpose; referring him yet, for farther satisfaction,
unto our full Exposition of the Chapter it self. For this place is touched on
by all who have contended about the original and duration of the Sabbatical
Rest, but not yet that I know of diligently examined by any. I shall not fear
to lay much of the weight of the cause wherein I am engaged upon it, and
therefore shall take a view of the whole Context, and the Design of the Apostle
therein.

For we which have believed do enter into Rest, as he said, As I have sworn in
my wrath, if they shall enter into my Rest: although the works were finished
from the foundation of the world. For he spoke in a certain place of the
seventh Day on this wise, And God did Rest the seventh Day from all his works.
And in this place again, If they shall enter into my Rest. Seeing therefore it
remains taht some must enter therein, and they to whom it was first preached,
entered not in because of unbelief: Again, he limiteth a certain Day, saying, in
David, To day, after so long a time; as it is said, To day if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. For if Jesus had given them Rest, then wonld he
not afterward have spoken of another Day. There remains therefore a Rest to
the people of God. For he that is entered into his Rest, he has also ceased
from his own works, as God did from his, Heb. 4. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

That there is yet under the Gospel a promise of entering into the Rest of God,
left or remaining unto Believers; and that they do enter into that Rest, by
mixing the promise of it with Faith. This he declares; and the declaration of
it was useful unto, and necessary for the Hebrews. For he lets them know, that
notwithstanding their present, and ancient enjoyment of the Land of Canaan,
with the Worship and Rest of God therein, which their Forefathers fell short of
by their unbelief, they were under a new Trial, a new Rest being proposed unto
them in the promise This he proves by a Testimony out of the 95th. Psalm, the
words whereof he had insisted on at large Chap. 3. and does so again in this.
But the Application of that Testimony unto his purpose, is obnoxious to a great
Objection; For the Rest mentioned in that Psalm, seems to be a Rest long since
past and enjoyed, either by themselves or others. They therefore could have no
new or fresh concernment in it, nor be in danger of coming short of it. And if
this were so, all the Arguments and Exhortations of the Apostle in this place,
must needs be weak and incogent, as drawn from a mistaken and misapplyed
Testimony.

Design of the Apostle in this Discourse.

To this End he proceeds unto the Exposition and Vindication of the Testimony
it self, which he had cited out of the Psalms. And herein he shows from the
proper signification of the words, from the Time when they were spoken, and the
Persons to whom, that no other Rest was intended in them, but what was now by
him proposed unto them, as the Rest of God and his people, in the Gospel.

The general Argument which to this purpose he insists upon, consists in an
enumeration of all the several Rests of God and his people, which are mentioned
in the Scriptures. For from the consideration of them all, he proves that no
other Rest could be intended in the words of David, but only the Rest of the
Gospel, whereinto they enter who do believe.

Moreover, from that Respect which the ^^^ds of the Psalmist have unto the
other foregoing Rests of God and his people, he manifests that they (...) were
appointed of God, to be Representations of that spiritual Rest which was now
brought in and established. This is the general Design of this Discourse.

In pursuit hereof, he declares in particular, (1) That the Rest mentioned in
the Psalm, is not that which ensued immediately on the Creation of all things.
This he evinceth, because it was spoken of afterward, a long time after, and
that to another purpose, v. 4, 5. (2) That it was not the Rest of the Land of
Canaan, because that was not entered into by them unto whom it was first
proposed and promised; for they came short of it by their unbelief, and
perished in the Wilderness; but this Rest which is now afresh proposed is such,
as the people of God must and will enter into, v. 6, 7. (3) Whereas it may be
objected, that although the Wilderness Generation entered not in, yet their
posterity did so under the conduct of Joshua, v. 8. he answers, that this Rest
in the Psalm being proposed and promised in David so long a time, (above 400
years) after the people had quietly possessed the Land whereinto they were
conducted by Joshua, it must needs be that another Rest then yet to come, was
intended in those words of the Psalmist, v. 9. And (4) to conclude his
Argument, he declares that this new Rest had a new peculiar foundation, which
the other had no interest or concernment in, namely his ceasing from his works,
and entering into his Rest, who is the Author of it, verse 10. This is his way
and manner of arguing for the proof of what he had before laid down, and which
he issues in that Conclusion, verse 9. There remains therefore a Rest for
the people of God.

several Rests here discoursed of by the Apostle, which will give light and
confirmation unto what we have before discoursed. To this purpose will the
ensuing Propositions taken from the words conduce: As,

1. The Rest of God is the foundation and principal cause of our Rest. Hence in
general it is still called Gods Rest; if they shall enter into my Rest; It is
on some account or other Gods Rest before it is ours: not the Rest only which
he has appointed, commanded, and promised unto us, but the Rest wherewith
himself rested, as is plainly declared on every head of the Rests here treated
of. And this confirms that foundation and reason of a Sabbatical Rest which we
have laid down in our third Exercitation.

Gods Rest is not spoken of absolutely, with respect unto himself only, but
with reference unto an appointed Rest that ensued thereon, for the Church to
rest with him in. Hence it follows, that the Rests here mentioned are as it
were double, namely the Rest of God himself, and the Rest that ensued thereon
for us to enter into. For instance, at the finishing of the works of Creation,
which is first proposed, God ceased from his works, and rested. This was his
own Rest, the nature whereof has been before declared: He rested on the
seventh day; But this was not all, he blessed it for the Rest of man, a Rest
for us ensuing on his Rest, an expressive representation of it, and a pledge of
our entering into, or being taken into a participation of the Rest of God.

3. The Apostle proposes the threefold state of the Church unto
consideration: (1) The state of it under the Law of Nature or Creation. (2) The
state of it under the Law of Institutions, and carnal Ordinances. (3) That then
introducing under the Gospel. Accordingly have we distinguished our Discourses
concerning a Sabbatical Rest, in our third, and fourth, and this present
Exercitation. To each of these he assigns a distinct Rest of God, a Rest of the
Church, entering into Gods Rest, and a Day of Rest, as the means and pledge
thereof. And withal he manifests that the two former were ordered to be
previous Representations of the latter, though not equally, nor on the same
account.

First, He considers the Church and the state of it under the Law of nature,
before the entrance of sin; and herein he shows first that there was a Rest of
God in it; for says he, the works were finished from the foundation of the
world, and God did rest from all his works, verse 3, 4. As the foundation of
all, he lays down first the works of God. For the Church and every peculiar
state of the Church is founded in the work, some especial work of God, and not
merely in a Law or Command. The works says he, were finished from the
foundation of the world; (...), the works; (...), the work, that is of God, the
effect of his creating power, was finished or completed; (...), from the
foundation of the world: a Periphrasis of the six original Days, wherein time,
and all things measured by it, and existent with it, had their beginning. This
work of God, as has been proved Exercit. 3. was the foundation of the Church
in the state of Nature, and gave unto it the entire Law of its obedience.

On this work and the completing of it, ensued the Rest of God himself, verse
4. God rested the seventh day from all his works. This Rest of God, and his
Refreshment he took in his works, as comprizing the Law and Covenant of our
obedience, have been explained already.

But this alone does not confirm nor indeed come near the purpose or Argument
of the Apostle. For he is to speak of such a Rest of God, as men might enter
into, as was a foundation of Rest unto them, or otherwise his Discourse was not
concerned in it; whereupon by ^^citation of the words of Moses from Genesis 2. 2.
he tells us, that this Rest of God was on the seventh day, which God
accordingly blessed and san^tified, to be a Day of Rest unto man. So that in
this state of the Church there were three things considerable; (1) The Rest of
God himself on his works, wherein the foundation of the Church was laid. (2) A
Rest proposed unto man to enter into with God, wherein lay the Duty of the
Church. And (3) a Day of Rest, the seventh day, as a remembrance of the one,
and a means and pledge of the other. And herewith we principally confirm our
judgment, in the Sabbaths beginning with the World. For without this
supposition, the mentioning of Gods work and his Rest, no way belonged to the
purpose of our Apostle. For he discourses only of such Rests as men might
enter into, and have a pledge of. And there was no such thing from the
foundation of the world, unless the Sabbath were then revealed: Nor is it
absolutely the Work and Rest of God, but the Obedience of men, and their duty,
with respect unto them, which he considers. And this could not be, unless the
Rest of God was proposed unto men to enter into, from the foundation of the
world.

Law of Institutions; and herein he represents the Rest of the Land of
Canaan, wherein also the three distinct Rests beforementioned do occur.

1. There was in it a Rest of God. This gives denomination to the whole: He
still calls it his Rest; if they shall enter into my Rest. And the prayer about
it was, Arise O Lord into thy Rest, thou and the Ark of thy strength, or the
pledge of his presence and Rest. And this Rest also ensued upon his work, for
God wrought about it works great and mighty, and ceased from them when they
were finished. And this work of his answered in its greatness unto the work of
Creation, whereunto it is compared by himself, Isa. 51. 15, 16. I am the Lord
thy God that divided the Sea, whose waves roared, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name, and have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow
of my hand, that I may plant the Heavens, and lay the foundation of the Earth,
and say unto Zion thou art my people. The dividing of the Sea whose waves
roared, is put by a Synecdoche for the whole work of God, preparing a way for
the Church State of that people in the Land of Canaan. And this he compares to
the work of Creation, in planting the Heavens, and laying the foundation of the
Earth. For although those words are but a Metaphorical expression of the
Political and Church State of that people, yet there is an evident Allusion in
them unto the original Creation of all things. This was the work of God, upon
the finishing whereof, he entered into his Rest, in the satisfaction and
complacency that he had therein. For after the Erection of his Worship in the
Land of Canaan, he says of it, this is my Rest, ana here will I dwell.

2. God being thus entered into his Rest. in like manner as formerly, two things
ensue thereon: (1) That the people are invited and encouraged to enter into the
Rest of God. This the Apostle treats concerning in this and the foregoing
Chapter. And this their entrance into Rest, was their coming by Faith and
Obedience into a participation of the Worship of God wherein he Rested, as a
means and pledge of their everlasting Rest in him. And although some of them
came short hereof, by reason of their unbelief, yet others entered into it under
the conduct of Joshua. (2) Both these, his own Rest, and Rest of the people,
God expressed by appointing a Day of Rest. This he did, that it might be a
token, sign, and pledge, not now, as given to this people absolutely of his
first Rest at the Creation, but of his present Rest in his instituted Worship;
and to be a means in the solemn observation of that Worship, to farther their
entrance into his Rest eternally. Hence had the seventh Day a peculiar
Institution among that people, whereby it was made to them, a sign and token,
that he was their God, and they were his people. And here lies the foundation
of all that we have before discoursed concerning the Judaical Sabbath, in our
fourth Exercitation.

It is true, this Day was the same in order of the Days, with that before
observed; namely, the seventh Day of the Week. But it was now reestablished
upon new considerations, and unto new ends and purposes. The time of the change
of the Day was not yet come; for this Work was but preparatory for a greater.
And the Covenant whereunto the seventh Day was originally annexed, being not
yet to be abolished, that day was not to be yet changed, nor another to be
substituted in the room of it. Hence this Day became now to fall under a double
consideration: First, as it was such a proportion of time as was requisite unto
the Worship of God, and appointed as a pledge of his Rest in his Covenant.
Secondly, as it received a new Institution, with superadded ends and
significations, as a token and pledge of Gods Rest in the Law of Institutions,
and the Worship erected therein. So both these states of the Church, had these
three things distinctly; a Rest of God on his Works for their foundation; a
Rest in Obedience and Worship for man to enter into; and a Day of Rest as a
pledge and token of both the other.

Psalmist, that there was yet to be a Third state of the Church; an especial
state under the Messia, which he now proposed unto the Hebrews, and exhorted
them to enter into. And in this Church State, there is to be also a peculiar
state of Rest, distinct from them which went before. To the constitution
hereof, there are Three things required. First, that there be some signal work
of God completed and finished, whereon he enters into his Rest. This was to be
the foundation of the whole new Church State, and of the west to be obtained
therein. Secondly that there be a spiritual. Rest ensuing thereon, and arising
thence, for them that believe to enter into. Thirdly, that there be a new, or
renewed Day of Rest, to express that Rest of God, and to be a pledge of our
e^tring into it. If any of these, or either of them be wanting, the whole
structure of the Apostles discourse, will be dissolved; neither will there be
any color remaining for his mentioning the seventh day, and the Rest thereof.
These things therefore we must farther enquire into.

work of God, and that finished, for the foundation of the whole. This he had
made way for, chap. 3. verse. 4, 5. where he both expressly asserts the Son to be
God, and shows the Analogy that is between the Creation of all things, and the
building of the Church; that is, the works of the Old and New Creation. As then
God wrought in the Creation of all, so Christ, who is God, wrought in the
setting up of this new Church State. And upon his finishing of it, he entered
into his Rest, as God did into his, whereby he limited a certain Day of Rest
unto his people. So he speaks; There remains therefore a Sabbatism for the
people of God. For he that is entered into Rest, has ceased from his works, as
God did from his own. A new Day of Rest accommodated unto this new
Church State, arises from the Rest that the Lord Christ entered into, upon his
ceasing from his works. And as to this Day, we may observe; (1) That it has
this in common with the former Days, that it is a Sabbatism, or one day in
seven, which that name in the whole Scripture use, is limited unto. For this
portion of time to be dedicated unto Sacred Rest, having its foundation in the
light and Law of Nature, was equally to be observed in every state of the
Church. (2) That although both the former states of the Church had one, and the
same Day, though varied in some Ends of it; now the Day it self is changed, as
belonging to another Covenant, and having its foundation in a work of another
Nature, than what They had respect unto. (3) That the observation of it is
suited unto the spiritual state of the Church under the Gospel, delivered from
the bondage frame of spirit wherewith it was observed under the Law. And these
things must be farther confirmed from the Context.

v. 10. For he that is entered into his Rest, is ceased from his works, as God
from his own. Expositors generally apply these words unto Believers, and their
entering into the Rest of God; whether satisfactorily to themselves and others,
as to their design, coherence, scope, or signification of particular
expressions, I know not. The contrary appears with good evidence to me; For
what are the works that Believers should be said here to Rest from? Their sins,
say some; their labors, sorrows and sufferings, say others. But how can they
be said to Rest from these works, as God rested from his own? For God so rested
from his, as to take the greatest delight and satisfaction in them, to be
refreshed by them. In six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and on the
seventh day he rested and was refreshed, Exodus 31. 17. He so rested from them,
as that he rested in them, and blessed them, and blessed and sanctified the
Time wherein they were finished. We have showed before, that the Rest of God
was not only a cessation from working, nor principally; but the satisfaction
and complacency that he had in his works. But now if those mentioned be the
works here intended, men cannot so Rest from them, as God did from his. But
they cease from them, with a detestation of them, so far as they are sinful;
and joy for their deliverance from them, so far as they are sorrowful. This is
not to Rest, as God rested. Again; when are Believers supposed to Rest from
these works? it cannot be in this World: For here we Rest not at all from
Temptations, sufferings, and sorrows; and in that mortification of sin which we
attain unto, yet the conflict is still continued, and that with severity unto
death, Rom 7. 24. It must therefore be in Heaven that they thus Rest; and so it
is affirmed accordingly. But this excludes the Rest in and of the Gospel, from
the Apostles discourse, which renders it altogether unsuitable to his purpose.
This I have so fully demonstrated in the Exposition of the Chapter, as that I
hope it will not be gainsayed. Thirdly, there is no comparison in the whole
discourse between the works of God, and the works of Men, but between the works
of God in the Creation, and under the Law on the one side, and those in and
under the Gospel on the other. And the whole comparison is summed up and closed
in this Verse.

subject of the Apostles Proposition in this place has been mistaken. It is
another who is intended, even Christ himself, the Son of God, and his Rest from
his works, which is here compared with the Rest of God from his, at the
foundation of the world, to which end alone the mention of them was introduced,
verse 3, 4. For,

First, The Conjunction (...), For, whereby he brings in his Assertion,
manifests that the Apostle in these words gives an account whence it is that
there is a new Sabbatism remaining for the people of God. There remains a
Sabbath-keeping for the people of God; for he that is entered into his Rest, is
ceased from his works. Had there not been a work laying the foundation of the
Gospel-Church-state, and a Rest of God in it, and ensuing thereon, there could
have been no such Sabbatism for Believers, for those things are required unto a
Sabbath. He had proved before, that there could be no such Rest but what was
founded in the works of God, and his Rest that ensued thereon; such a
foundation therefore, he says, this new Rest must have, and it has it. This
must be and is in the Works and Rest of him by whom the Church was built, that
is Christ, who is God, as it is expressly argued, Chap. 3. verse. 3, 4. For as
that Rest which all the world was to observe, was founded in his Works and Rest
who made the world, and all things in it; so the Rest of the Church under the
Gospel is to be founded in his works and Rest, by whom the Church was built,
that is Jesus Christ: For he on the account of his works and Rest is also Lord
of the Sabbath, to abrogate one Day of Rest, and to institute another.

Secondly, The Apostle here changes the manner of his expression from the
plural absolutely, We who believe, or virtually in the name of a multitude, the
people of God, into that which is absolutely singular; (...), He that is
entered. A single person is here expressed, with respect unto whom the things
mentioned are asserted; and of this change of phrase, there can be no other
reason given.

Thirdly, The Rest which this person is said to enter into, is called His Rest
absolutely. As God speaking of the former Rest, calls it, My Rest, so this is
the My Rest, of another, namely the Rest of Christ: whereas when the entering of
Believers into Rest is spoken of, it is called either Gods Rest, They shall
enter into my Rest; or Rest absolutely, We that believe do enter into Rest, but
not their Rest, or our Rest, for it is not our own absolutely, but Gods Rest
whereinto we enter, and wherein we rest. But the Rest here is the Rest of him
whose it is, and who is the Author of ours.

Fourthly, There is a direct parallel in the words, between the works of the
old Creation, and those of the new, which are compared by the Apostle. For,

1. There are the Authors of them, which on the one side is said to be God; as
God did from his own, that is God the Creator, or God as Creator; on the other,
He, (...), the same with (...), Chap. 3. verse. 3. that is He of whom we speak,
as the Apostle declares himself, verse. 13. for in these words a transition is
made unto his treating of the Person of Christ.

2. The works of the one and the other are expressed. The works of the Creator
are (...), his proper works, his own works, the works of the old Creation,
(...). And there are the works of him of whom he speaks, (...), his works,
those which he wrought in like manner as God did his own at the beginning; that
is the work of building the Church. For these works must answer each other, and
have the same respect unto their Authors; they must be good and complete in
their kind, and such as Rest and Refreshment may be taken in, and on them. To
compare the sins and sufferings of men with the works of God, our Apostle did
not intend.

3. There is the Rest of the one and the other; and these also have their
mutual proportion. Now God rested from his own works of Creation, (1) By
ceasing from creating, only continuing all things by his Power in their order,
and propagating them unto his Glory. (2) By his respect unto them, and
refreshment in them, as those which expressed his Excellencies, and set forth
his praise, and so satisfied his glorious design. So also must he rest who is
spoken of. (1) He must cease from working in the like kind of works; he must
suffer no more, die no more, but only continue the work of his grace and power
in the preservation of the new creature, and the orderly increase and
propagation of it by his Spirit. (2) He takes delight and satisfaction in the
works that he has wrought; for he sees of the travel of his soul, and is
satisfied, and is in the possession of that Glory which was set before him,
whilst he was engaged in this work.

And these things sufficiently clear the Subject here spoken of, namely that it
is Jesus Christ the Mediator.

Works that the Rest mentioned respects have been sufficiently intimated; and I
have so fully insisted on them in the Exposition of the third and fourth Verses
of the third Chapter of this Epistle, that I shall not here again repeat them.
In brief, all that he did and suffered in and from his Incarnation to his
Resurrection, as the Mediator of the Covenant, with all the fruits, effects,
and consequences of what he so did and suffered, whereby the Church was built,
and the new Creation finished, belongs unto these works. His Rest that ensued
on these works has two parts; (1) A Cessation from his works, which was
eminent, and answered Gods Rest from his own. (2) Satisfaction in his works,
and the glorious product of them, as those which had an impression on them, of
his Love and Grace, Psalm. 16. 7.

his Entrance into his Rest, both how and when he did so, even as God entered
into his on the seventh day; for this must limit and determine a Day of Rest to
the Gospel Church. Now this was not his lying down in the Grave. His Body
indeed there rested for a while; but that was no part of his mediatory Rest, as
be was the founder and builder of the Church. For, (1) It was a part of his
Humiliation: Not only his Death, but his abode and continuance in the state of
Death, was so; and that a principal part of it. For after the whole Humane
Nature was personally united unto the Son of God, to have it brought into a
state of Dissolution, to have the Body and Soul separated from each other, was
a great Humiliation. And every thing of this nature belonged unto his Works,
and not his Rest. (2) This separation of Body and Soul under the power of
Death, was poenal, a part of the sentence of the Law which he underwent. And
therefore Peter declares, that the pains of Death were not loosed but in his
Resurrection, Act. 2. 24. Whom God, says he, has raised up, loosing the pains
of Death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it. Whilst he
was held of it, he was under it penally. This therefore could not be his Rest,
nor any part of it. Nor did he in it enter into his Rest, but continued in his
Work. Nor 2dly. did he first enter into his Rest at his Ascension: Then indeed
he took actual possession of his Glory, as to the full public manifestation of
it. But to enter into Rest is one thing, and to take possession of Glory
another. And it is placed by our Apostle as a consequent of his being justified
in the Spirit, when he entered into Rest, 1 Timothy 3. 16. But this his entrance
into Rest, was in, by, and at his Resurrection from the dead. For, (1) Then and
therein was he freed from the sentence, power and stroke of the Law; being
discharged of all the Debts of our sins, which he had undertaken to make
satisfaction for, Acts 2. 24. (2) Then and therein were all Types, all
Predictions and Prophesies fulfilled, which concern the work of our Redemption.
(3) Then therefore his work was done, I mean that which answers Gods creating
work, though he still continue that which answers his work of preservation.
Then was the Law fulfilled and satisfied, Satan subdued, Peace with God made,
the Price of our Redemption paid, the Promise of the Spirit received, and the
whole Foundation of the Church of God gloriously laid on his Person, in his
Works and Rest. (4) Then and therein was he declared to be the Son of God with
power, Romans 1. 4. God manifesting unto all, that this was he concerning and
unto whom he said, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, Acts 13. 33.

enter into his Rest. And this was, as all know, on the morning of the first
day of the week. And hereby did he limit and determine the Day for a sacred
Sabbatical Rest under the New Testament. For now was the Old Covenant utterly
abolished, and therefore the Day which was the pledge of Gods and Man's Rest
therein, was to be taken away, and was so accordingly, as we have showed. As
the Rest from the beginning of the World, had its foundation from the works of
God, and his Rest which ensued thereon, which was determined unto the seventh
Day, because that was the Day wherein God ceased from those works, which Day
was continued under the legal administration of the Covenant by Moses; so the
Rest of the Lord Christ the Son of God, is the foundation of our Rest, which
changing the old Covenant, and the day annexed unto it, he has limited unto
the first Day of the Week, whereon he ceased from his works, and entered into
his Rest. And hereby the Apostle compleats the due Analogy that is between the
several Rests of God and his people, which he has discoursed of in this
Chapter. For as in the beginning of the World, there was first, the work of
God, and his Rest thereon, which made way unto a Rest for his people in himself
and in his worship, by the contemplation of his works that he had made, on
whose finishing he rested; and a Day designed, determined, blessed and
sanctified, to express that Rest of God; whence mention is made of those works
in the command for the observation of that Day, seeing the workship of God in
and on it, consisted principally in the glorifying of him, by, and for those
works of his; as also to be a means to further men in their entrance into
eternal Rest, whereunto all these things do tend; and as at the giving of the
Law, there was a great Work of God, and his Rest thereon, in his establishing
his Worship in the Land of Canaan, which made way for the peoples entering into
his Rest in that Worship and Country, and had a Day of Rest enjoined unto
them, to express the one and the other, as also to help them to enter finally
into the Rest of God; so now under the Gospel there is a Rest answering all
these, in and by the instances which we have given.

is a Sabbatism for the people of God, v. 9. (...): The word is framed by our
Apostle from an Hebrew original, with a Greek Termination. And he uses it, as
that which is comprehensive of his whole sense, which no other word would be.
For he would show that there is a Sabbatical Rest founded in the Rest of God,
remaining for the Church; and therefore makes use of that word, whereby God
expressed his own Rest when he sanctified the seventh Day, for a Day of Rest
thereon. That Day of Rest being removed, and another, on a new foundation,
namely, the Rest of Christ upon his works introduced, he calls it a Sabbatism,
or a Sabbath-keeping. He does not do this only and separately, averring the
necessity of a Sabbath-observation in the first place, distinctly from a
Spiritual Rest in Christ, with an Eternal Rest ensuing thereon; but in the
manner and Order before laid down, wherein the necessity of such a Day is
included. And besides the evidence that arises from the consideration of the
whole Context, there are two things which make it undeniably evident, that our
Apostle asserts an Evangelical Sabbath, or Day of Rest, to be constantly
observed in and for the Worship of God under the Gospel. For first, without
this design, there can be no tolerable Reason assigned, why he should mention
the works of God from the foundation of the World, with his Rest that ensued
thereon, and referr us to the seventh Day, which without respect unto another
Day to be introduced, does greatly involve his whole Discourse. Again, his use
of this word, (...), a Sabbatism, which is framed, and as it were coined on
purpose, that it might both comprise the Spiritual Rest aimed at, and also a
Sabbath-keeping, or Observation of a Sabbath Rest, manifests his purpose. When
he speaks of our Rest in general, he still does it by (...), adding, that there
was an especial Day for its enjoyment. Here he introduces (...), a Sabbatism,
which his way of arguing would not have allowed, had he not designed to express
the Christian Sabbath. Add hereunto, that he subjoynes the especial Reason of
such a Days observation in the next Verse, as we have declared. And here do we
fix the Foundation and Reason of the Lord's Day, or the Holy observation of the
first Day of the Week; the Obligation of the fourth Commandment unto a weekly
Sacred Rest, being put off from the seventh Day to the first, on the same
Grounds and Reasons whereon the state of the Church is altered from what it was
under the Law, unto what it is now under the Gospel. And the Covenant it self
also is changed; whence the seventh Day is now of no more force, than the old
Covenant, and the old Law of Institutions, contained in Ordinances, because the
Lord Christ has ceased from his works, and entered into his Rest, on the first
Day.

Lord's Day, on the supposition of what has been proved concerning our Duty in
the Holy observance of one Day in seven, from the Law of our Creation, as
renewed in the Decalogue. The remaining Arguments evincing the change of the
Day from the seventh unto the first by Divine Authority, shall be but briefly
touched on by me, because they have been lately copiously handled, and fully
vindicated by others. Wherefore, (1) when the Lord Christ intended
conspicuously to build his Church upon the foundation of his Works and Rest, by
sending the Holy Ghost with his miraculous Gifts upon the Apostles, he did it
on this Day, which was then among the Jews the Feast of Pentecost, or of Weeks.
Then were the Disciples gathered together with one accord, in the observance of
the Day signalized to them by his Resurrection, Acts 2. 1. And by this does
their obedience receive a blessed confirmation, as well as their persons a
glorious endowment with abilities for the work which they were immediately to
apply themselves unto. And hereon did they set out unto the whole work of
building the Church on that foundation, and promoting the worship of it, which
on that Day was especially to be celebrated.

Practice of the Apostles, and the Apostolical Churches, owned the Authority of
Christ in this change of the Day of sacred Rest. For hence forward, whatever
apprehensions any of them might have of the continuance of the Judaical
Sabbath, as some of them judged that the whole service of it was still to be
continued, yet they observed this Day of the Lord, as the time of their
Assemblies and solemn worship. One or two instances hereof may be called over,
Acts 20. 6, 7. We came to Troas in five days, where we abode seven days. And
upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow, and continued
his speech until midnight. I doubt not but in the seven days that the Apostle
abode there, he taught and preached as he had occasion in the houses of the
Believers; but it was the first Day of the Week, when they used according to
their duty, to assemble the whole body of them, for the celebration of the
solemn Ordinances of the Church, synecdochically expressed by breaking of
Bread. This they did, without any extraordinary warning or calling together;
for in answer to their duty they were accustomed so to do. Such is the account
that Justin Martyr gives of the practice of all Churches in the next Age;
(...). On the Day called Sunday there is an assembly of all Christians, whether
living in City or the Country; and because of their constant breaking of bread
on this day, it was called Dies Panis, August. Epist 118. And Athanasius proved
that he brake not a Chalice at such a time, because it was not the first Day of
the Week when it was to be used, Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22 And whosoever reads
this passage without prejudice, will grant, that it is a mavelous, abrupt,
and uncouth expression, if it do not signify that which was in common
observance amongst all the Disciples of Christ, which could have no other
foundation but only that before laid down, of the Authority of the Lord Christ
requiring it of them. And I doubt not but that Paul preached his farewell Sermon
unto them, which continued until midnight, after all the ordinary service of
the Church was performed. And all the Objections which I have met withal
against this instance, amount to no more but this; that although the Scripture
says, that the Disciples met for their worship on the first Day of the Week,
yet indeed they did not so do.

1 Cor. 16. 2. the same practice is exemplified; Upon the first Day of the
Week, let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered him, that
there be no gatherings when I come. The constant Day of the Churches solemn
Assemblies being fixed, he here takes it for granted, and directs them unto the
observance of an especial duty on that Day. What some except, that here is no
mention of any such Assembly, but only that every one on that Day should lay by
himself what he would give, which every one might do at home, or where they
pleased, is exceeding weak, and unsuitable unto the mind of the Apostle. For to
what end should they be limited unto a Day, and that the first Day of the Week,
for the doing of that which might be as well, to as good purpose and advantage,
performed at any other time, on any other Day of the Week whatever? Besides it
was to be such a laying aside, such a treasuring of it in a common stock, as
that there should be no need of any Collection when the Apostle came. But if
this was done only privately, it would not of its self come together at his
Advent, but must be collected. But all exceptions against these Testimonies
have been so lately removed by others, that I shall not insist farther on them.

Times downwards the first Day of the Week had a solemn observation in all the
Churches of Christ, whereby they owned its substitution in the room of the
seventh Day, applying the duties and services of a Sabbath unto it, has also
been demonstrated. And that this was owned from the Authority of the Lord, is
declared by John in the Revelation, who calls it the Lords Day, Rev. 1. 10.
whereby he did not surprise the Churches with a new name, but denoted to them
the Time of his Visions, by the name of the Day which was well known unto them.
And there is no solid Reason why it should be so called, but that it owes its
pre-eminence and observation unto his Institution and Authority. And no man who
shall deny these things, can give any tolerable account, how, when, or from
whence this Day came to be so observed, and so called. It is (...), the Lords
Day, the Day of the Lord, as the Holy Supper is (...), 1 Cor. 11. 20. the Lords
Supper, by reason of his Institution. (...) the Day of the Lord in the Old
Testament, which the LXX render (...), no where (...), signifies indeed, some
illustrious Appearance of God in a way of judgment or mercy. And so also in
the Person of Christ, this was the Day of his Appearance, Mark 16. 9. So was it
still called by the ancient Writers of the Church. Ignatius in Epist. ad Trall.
ad magnes. ect. Dionysius of Corinth. Epist. ad Romans in Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4.
cap. 21. Theophilus Antioch. lib. 1. in 4. Evangel. Clemens Alex. stromat. lib.
7. cap. 7. Origin lib. 8. con. Cells. Tertul. de Coron. milit. cap. 3. As for
those who assign the Institution of this Day to the Apostles, although the
supposition be false, yet it weakens not the divine original of it. For an
Obligation lying on all Believers to observe a Sabbath unto the Lord, and the
Day observed under the Law of Moses being removed, it is not to be imagined
that the Apostles fixed on another Day, without immediate direction from the
Lord Christ. For indeed they delivered nothing to be constantly observed in the
worship of God, but what they had his Authority for, 1 Cor. 11. 23. In all
things of this nature, as they had the infallible guidance of the Holy Ghost,
so they acted immediately in the Name and Authority of Christ, where what they
ordained was no less of divine Institution, than if it had been appointed by
Christ in his own person. It is true, they themselves did for a season, whilst
their Ministry was to have a peculiar regard to the Jews, for the calling and
conversion of the remnant that was amongst them, according to the election of
grace, go frequently into their Synagogues on the seventh Day to preach the
Gospel, Act. 13. 14. Chap. 16. 13. Chap. 17. 2. Chap. 18. 4. But it is evident
that they did so, only to take the opportunity of their Assemblies, that they
might preach unto the greater numbers of them, and that at such a season
wherein they were prepared to attend unto sacred things. Upon the same ground
Paul labored if it were possible to be at Jerusalem at the Feast of
Pentecost, Act. 20. 16. But that they at any time assembled the Disciples of
Christ on that day for the worship of God, that we read not.

one Day in seven is by virtue of a divine Law to be observed Holy unto the
Lord, the original of such an observation, Genesis 2. 2. the Letter of the fourth
Commandment, with the nature of the Covenant between God and man, do prove and
evince. And hereunto is there a considerable suffrage given by learned men of
all parties. The Doctrine of the Reformed Divines hereabouts has been largely
represented by others. They also of the Church of Rome, that is, many of them
agree herein. It is asserted in the Canon Law it self. Tit. de Feriis cap.
licet, where the words of Alexander the third are, Tam veteris quam novi
Testamenti pagina septimum Diem ad humanam quietem specialiter deputavit; where
by septimus Dies he understands one Day in seven, as Suarez shows, De Relig.
lib. 2. cap. 2. And it is so by sundry Canonists reckoned up by Covarruvias.
The Schoolmen also give in their consent, as Bannes in 2a. 2a. g. 44. a. 1.
Bellarmine contends expressly, decultsanct. lib. 3. cap. 11. that Jus divinum
requirebat ut unus Dies Hebdomadae dicaretur cultui divino. So does Suarez, de
dieb. sac. cap. 1. and others might be added. We have the like common consent,
that whatever in the institution and observation of the Sabbath under the Old
Testament was peculiar unto that state of the Church, either in its own nature,
or in its use and signification, or in its manner of observance, is taken away
by virtue of those Rules, Romans 14. 5. Gal. 4. 10. Col. 2. 16, 17. Nor can it be
denied but that sundry things annexed unto the Sabbatical Rest, peculiar to
that Church State which was to be removed, were wholly inconsistent with the
spirit, grace, and liberty of the Gospel. I have also proved, that the
observation of the seventh Day precisely, was a pledge of Gods Rest in the
Covenant of works, and of our Rest in him, and with him thereby; so that it
cannot be retained without a re-introduction of that Covenant, and the
Righteousness thereof. And therefore although the command for the observation
of a Sabbath to the Lord, so far as it is moral is put over into the Rule of
the new Covenant, wherein Grace is administered for the duty it requires; yet
take the seventh Day preeisely as the seventh Day, and it is an Old Testament
arbitrary institution, which falls under no promise of spiritual assistance in,
or unto the observation of it. Under the New Testament we have found a new
Creation, a new Law of Creation, a new Covenant, the Rest of Christ in that
Work, Law, and Covenant, the limiting of a Day of Rest unto us, on the Day
wherein he entered into his Rest, a new Name given unto this Day, with respect
unto his Authority by whom it was appointed, and an observation of it by all
the Churches, so that we may say of it, This is the Day which the Lord has
made, we will rejoice and be glad in it, as Psalm. 118. 24.

the first Day of the Week, in opposition unto the Day of the Law, by some
contended for. It is therefore, first, acknowledged, that the observation of
some certain Day, in and for the solemn public Worship of God, is of
indispensible necessity They are beneath our consideration by whom this is
denied. Most acknowledge it to be a Dictate of the Law of Nature, and the
Nature of these things does require it. We have proved also, that there is such
a Determination of this Time, unto one Day in seven, as it must needs be the
highest Impudence in any Person, Persons or Churches, to attempt any alteration
herein. And notwithstanding the pretenses of some about their liberty, none yet
have been so hardy from the foundation of the World, as practically to
determine a Day for the Worship of God, in any other Revolution of Days or
Times, to the neglect and exclusion of one Day in seven. Yea the Light hereof
is such, and the use of it so great, that those who have taken up with the
worst of Superstitions instead of Religion, as the Mahumetans, yet complying in
general with the performance of a solemn Worship to God, have found it
necessary to fix on one certain Day in the Hebdomadal Revolution for that
purpose. And indeed partly from the Appointment of God, partly from the Nature
of the Thing it self, the Religious observation of such a Day, is the great
preservative of all solemn Profession of Religion in the World. This the Law of
Nature, this the written Word directs unto, and this Experience makes manifest
unto all. Take away from amongst men, a conscience of observing a fixed stated
Day of Sacred Rest to God, and for the celebration of his Worship in
Assemblies, and all Religion will quickly decay, if not come to nothing in this
World. And it may be observed, though it be not evident whether be the Cause,
or the Effect, that where, and amongst whom Religion flourishes in its power,
there, and amongst them is conscience the most exercised, and the most
diligence used in the observation of such a Day. I will not say absolutely that
it is Religion, or other Principles, that teaches men exactness in the
observation of this Day; nor on the other hand, that a conscience made of this
observation, does procure an universal strictness in other Duties of Religion.
But this is evident, that they are mutually helpful unto one another. And
therefore though some have labored to divest this Observation of any immediate
Divine Authority, yet they are forced to supply such a Constitution for the
Observation of one Day in seven, as that they affirm, that none can omit its
Observation without Sin in ordinary cases; whether they have done well to
remove from it the command of God, and to substitute their own in the room of
it, they may do well to consider.

first day of the week, with the presence of God in, and his blessing upon the
Worship of the Church therein, be considered. And this is a consideration, as I
think, by no means to be despised. It is manifest to all unprejudiced persons,
that the Apostles and Apostolical Churches, did religiously observe this Day.
And no man can with any modesty question, the celebration of the Worship of God
therein, in the next succeeding Generations. In the possession of this practice
are all the Disciples of Christ at this day in the World, some very few only
excepted, who Sabbatize with the Jews, or please themselves with a vain
pretense that every Day is unto them a Sabbath. Nor is it simply the
Catholicism of this practice which I insist upon; though that be such, and has
such weight in things of this nature, as that for my part I shall not dissent
from any practice that is so attested: But it is the blessing of God upon it,
and the Worship on this Day performed, which is pleaded, as that which ought to
be of an high esteem with all humble Christians. On this Day, throughout all
Ages, has the Edification of the Churches been carried on, and that public
revenue of Glory been rendered unto God which is his due. On this Day has God
given his presence unto all his solemn Ordinances, for all the Ends for which
he has appointed them. Nor has he by any means given the least intimation of
his displeasure against his Churches, for their continuance in the observation
of it. On the other side, not only have the wisest and holiest men, who have
complained of the Sins of their several times and Ages wherein they lived,
which procured the pouring out of the Judgments of God upon them, constantly
reckoned the neglect and profanation of the Lord's Day among them; but such
instances have been given of particular severities against them who have openly
profaned this Day, and that upon unquestionable Testimonies, as may well
affect the minds and consciences of those who profess a Reverence of God, in
the holy dispensations of his Providence.

Nor can any of these things be pleaded, to give countenance unto any other
Day, that should be set up in competition with the Lord's Day, or the first day
of the week. What of this nature can be spoken concerning the seventh Day now
by some contended for, and that which is grievous, by some persons Holy and
Learned? Of what use has it ever been to the Church of God, setting aside the
occasional Advantages taken from it by the Apostles, of preaching the Gospel in
the Synagogues of the Jews? What Testimonies have we of the presence of God
with any Churches, in the Administration of Gospel Ordinances and Worship on
that Day? And if any lesser Assemblies do at present pretend to give such a
Testimony, wherein is it to be compared with that of all the holy Churches of
Christ throughout the World in all Ages, especially in those last past.

Let men in whose hearts are the ways of God, seriously consider the use that
has been made under the blessing of God, of the conscientious observation of
the Lord's Day, in the past and present age, unto the promotion of Holiness,
Righteousness, and Religion universally in the power of it, and if they are not
under invincible prejudices, it will be very difficult for them to judge, that
it is a Plant which our Heavenly Father has not planted. For my part, I must
not only say, but plead whilst I live in this World, and leave this Testimony
to the present and future ages, if these Papers see the light, and do survive,
that if I have ever seen any thing in the ways and worship of God, wherein the
power of Religion or Godliness has been expressed; any thing that has
represented the Holiness of the Gospel, and the Author of it; any thing that
has looked like a Proeludium unto the everlasting Sabbath and Rest with God,
which we aim through Grace to come unto, it has been there, and with them,
where and amongst whom the Lord's Day has been had in highest esteem, and a
strict observation of it attended unto, as an Ordinance of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Remembrance of their Ministry, their Walking and Conversation,
their Faith and Love, who in this Nation have most zealously pleaded for, and
have been in their persons, Families, and Churches or Parishes, the most strict
observers of this Day, will be precious with them that fear the Lord, whilst
the Sun and Moon endure. Their Doctrine also in this matter, with the Blessing
that attended it, was that which multitudes now at Rest, do bless God for; and
many that are yet alive, do greatly rejoice in. Let these things be despised by
those who are otherwise minded, to me they are of great weight and importance.

the Day that by some is set up, not only in competition with this, but to its
utter exclusion. This is the seventh Day of the week, or the old Judaical
Sabbath, which some contend that we are perpetually obliged to the observation
of, by virtue of the Fourth Commandment. The Grounds whereon they proceed in
their Affertion, have been already disproved, so far as the Nature of our
present undertaking will admit; and such evidences given unto the change of the
Day, as will not easily be everted, nor removed. The consequences of the
observation of the seventh Day, should the practice of it be reassumed amongst
Christians, is that which at present I shall a little enquire into, when we
have summed up somewhat of what has been spoken. (1) It was not directly, nor
absolutely required in the Decalogue, but consequentially only, by way of
Appropriation to the Mosaical Economy, whereunto it was then annexed. The
command is to observe the Sabbath Day, and the blessing is upon the
Sabbath Day; God blessed the Sabbath Day. And the mention of the seventh day in
the Body of the command, fixes the number of the Days in whose Revolution a
Sabbatical Rest returns, but determines not an everlasting Order in them;
seeing the Order relating to the Old Creation, is inconsistent with the Law,
Reason, and Worship of the New. And if the seventh day and the Sabbath, as some
pretend, are the same, the sense of the command in the enforcing part of it is,
but the seventh day, is the seventh day of the Lord thy God, which is none at
all. (2) The state of the Church, and the Administration of the Covenant,
whereunto the observation of this day was annexed, are removed, so that it
cannot continue, no more than an House can stand without a Foundation. (3) The
Lord Christ who was the Lord of the Sabbath, and by assuming that Iitle to
himself, manifested his Authority as to the disposal of the Day whereon a
Sabbatical Rest was to be observed, has in his own Rest from his works,
limited unto us another day of Sacred Rest, called from his appointment of it,
the Lord's Day, his Day who is the Lord of the Sabbath. (4) The Day so
introduced by his Authority, has from the Day of his Rest been observed
without interruption, or any such difference about it, as fell out among the
Churches of God about other Feast days, whose observation was introduced among
them, they knew not well how; as of the Pascha, and the like. And whereas the
due observation of it, has been enjoined by Councils, Edicts of Emperors,
Kings, and Princes, Laws of all sorts; advised and pressed by the ancient
Writers amongst Christians, and the practice of its observance taken notice of
by all who from the beginning have committed the Affairs of Christianity unto
posterity; yet none of any sort pretend to give it any original, but all
mediately, or immediately referr it unto Christ himself. The observation then
of this Day, First, is an evident Judaizing, and a returnal unto those
Rudiments of the World, which the Apostle so severely cautioneth us against. I
know not how it is come to pass, but so it is fallen out, that the nearer Judaism
is unto an absolute Abolition and Disappearance, the more some seem inclinable
to its revival and continuance, or at least to fall back themselves into its
antiquated observances. An end it had put to it morally and legally long ago,
in the coming, Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And we may say of it,
what the Apostle said of Idols when the World was full of Idolatry, we know
that Judaism is nothing in the world; no such thing as by some it is esteemed.
The actual Abolition of it in the profession of the present Jews, by the
removing of the Veyle from their Hearts and Eyes, and their turning unto God,
we hope, is in its approach. And yet, as was said, there seems in many an
inclination unto their Rites, and servile observances.

It is apparent in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles, especially that to
the Hebrews, that at the first preaching of the Gospel, there were very many
Jews who came over to the faith and profession of it. Many of these continued
zealous of the Law, and would bring along with them all their Mosaical
Institutions, which they thought were to abide in force for ever. In this
weakness and mis-apprehension, they were forborne in the patience of God, and
wisdom of the Holy Ghost, guiding the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ.
In this state things continued unto the destruction of Jerusalem and the
Temple, when the chiefest cause of their contests was taken away. In the mean
time they carried themselves very variously, according to the various tempers
of their minds. For it is apparent that some of them were not content
themselves to be indulged in their opinions and practices, but they endeavored
by all means to impose the observance of the whole Mosaical Law on the Churches
of the Gentiles. Their Circumcision, their Sabbaths, their Feasts and Fasts,
their Abstinences from this or that kind of meats, they were contending about,
and thereby perverting the minds of the Disciples. Some stop was put to the
evil consequences hereof in the Synod at Jerusalem, Acts 15. which yet
determined nothing concerning the Jews own practice, but only concerning the
liberty of the Gentile-Believers.

After the destruction of Jerusalem, City and Temple, these professing Jews
fell into several distinct ways. Some of them, who as is probable had despised
the heavenly warning of leaving the place, took up their lot amongst their
unbelieving Brethren; relinquishing the profession of the Gospel which they had
made, not it may be with any express renuntiation of Christ, but with a
dis-regard of the Gospel, which brought them not those good things they looked
for; of which mind Josephus the Historian seems to be one. These in time became
a part of that Apostate brood which have since continued in their enmity to the
Gospel, and into whose new and old superstitions, they introduced sundry
customs which they had learned among the Christians. Some absolutely
relinquished their old Judaism, and completely incorporated with the new
Gentile Churches, unto whom the promise and Covenant of Abraham was transferred
and made over. These were the genuine Disciples of our great Apostle. Others
continued their profession of the Gospel, but yet still thought themselves
obliged unto the observation of the Law of Moses, and all its institutions.
Hereupon they continued in a distinct and separate state from the Believers and
Churches of the Gentiles, and that for some Ages, as some say to the days of
Adrian. These it may be were they whom Eusebius out of Hegesippus calls (...),
Masbothai, whom he reckons as a Sect of the Jews, Histor. lib. 4. 21. The Jews
call them (...), that is, Sabbatarians, which must be from some observation of
the Sabbath in a distinct manner, or for different Reasons, from themselves.
Buxtorfe, and our late learned Lexicographer, render (...), by Sabbatarii,
adding this explanation, Qui secundum Christi Doctrinam Sabbatum observabant,
by a mistake; For as they are reckoned unto the Jews by Hegesippus, so those
who followed the Doctrine of Christ, did not Sabbatize with the Jews, nor were
ever called Sabbatarians by them. There was indeed a sort of persons among the
Samaritans who are called Sabuaei, whom Epiphanius makes the third sect of
them. But these were so called without any respect unto a Sabbatical
observation. (...) the Jews call them, that is Septenarii. from (...); unless
we shall think with Drusius, that they were so denominated from Sebaia, who
came along with Dosthai to settle the new Inhabitants of Samaria. Epiphanius
says no more of them, but that they observed the Feast of Pentecost in Autumn,
and the Feast of Tabernacles in the Spring, at the time of the Jews Passover.
But this gives no account why they should be so called. But they got this
appellation from their observation of every Day in the Week, between the
Passover and the Pentecost, that is for seven weeks, which was the same with
the second Day in the Week of unleavened bread, whereon the Omer or Sheaf of
first fruits was to be offered. But to return. After this many of them
coalesced, and we hear no more of them. In the mean time as there were great
disputes and heats between the differing parties, whilst the occasion of their
difference continued, so the Gentile Believers did in many things either
condescend unto those of the Circumcision, or fell themselves in liking with
their observances, and received them into practice. Hence it was that they
embraced the Paschal solemnity, with some other Festivals, and also in many
places admitted the sacredness of the seventh Day Sabbath, though still
observing according to the institution of Christ and his Apostles the Lords Day
also. And it is not improbable that they might be induced the rather to
continue these observations, that they might thereby give a public testimony
of their faith against the Marcionites, who began early to blaspheme the Old
Testament, and the God thereof; which blasphemy they thought to condemn by this
practice. And hence in those Writings which are falsely ascribed to the
Apostles, but suited to those times, Can. 66. and Constitut. lib. 7. cap. 24.
the observation both of the Saturday and the Lords Day are enjoined.

Others of these Jews about the same season constituted a sect by themselves,
compounding a Religion out of the Law and Gospel, with additions and
interpretations of their own. These the Ancients call Ebionites. Circumcision
with all the Sabbaths, Feasts, and Rites of Moses, they retained from the Law.
That the Messiah was come, and that Jesus Christ was he, they admitted from the
Gospel; that he was only a mere man, not God and man in one person, they added
of their own, yet in compliance with the sense and expectation of the corrupt
and carnal part of the Church of the Jews, whereof originally they were. And
this sect is that which in a long tract of time has brought forth
Mahumetanisme in the East. For the Religion of the Mahumetans is nothing but
that of the Ebionites, with a super-addition of the interests and fanatical
brainsick notions of the Impostor himself.

And yet so it is that some begin now to plead, that these Ebionites were the
only true and genuine Believers of the Circumcision in those days. These, they
say, and these alone, retained the Doctrine preached by the Apostles to the
Jews, for they were the same and no other with those which were also called
Nazarenes. Thus do the Socinians plead expressly, and have contended for it in
sundry Treatises published to that purpose. This they do, hoping to obtain from
thence some countenance unto their impious Doctrine about the person of Christ,
wherein they agree with the Ebionites. But as to their Sabbatizing with the
Jews, and the rest of their ceremonial observances, they will have nothing to
do with them, as not finding those things suited unto their interest and
design. But herein do they now begin to be followed by some among our selves,
who apparently fall in with them in sundry things condemned by our Apostle, and
on the account whereof they declined him, and rejected his Authority, as others
seem almost prepared to do, on other Reasons not here to be mentioned. In
particular some begin to Sabbatize with them, yea to outgo them. For Ebion and
his followers, although they observed the seventh Day Sabbath with the Jews,
yet they observed also the Lords Day with the Christians, in honor of Jesus
Christ, as both Eusebius and Epiphanius testify: (...). They in like manner
with us observe the Lords Day, in remembrance of the saving Resurrection. How
great a scandal these things are to Christian Religion, how evidently tending
to harden the Jews in their infidelity is apparent unto all. For the
introduction of any part of the old Mosaical systeme of Ordinances, is a tacit
denial of Christ's being come in the flesh, at least of his being the King,
Lord, and Lawgiver of his Church. And to lay the foundation of all Religious
solemn Gospel Worship in the observation of a Day, which as such, as the
seventh Day precisely, has no relation unto any natural or moral precept, not
instituted, not approved by Jesus Christ, cannot but be unpleasing to them who
desire to have their consciences immediately influenced by his Authority, in
all their approaches unto God. But Christ is herein supposed to have built the
whole fabric of his worship on the foundation of Moses, and to have graffed
all his institutions into a stock, that was not of his own planting.

seventh Day Sabbath, tends to the increasing and perpetuating of schisms and
differences amongst the Disciples of Christ; things in their own nature evil,
and to be avoided by all lawful ways and means. It is known how many
different opinions and practices there are amongst professors of the Gospel.
That they should all be perfectly healed or taken away perhaps in this world,
is not to be expected. For the best know but in part, and prophecy but in
part. That every good man, and genuine Disciple of Christ ought to endeavor
his utmost for their removal, none will deny. For if it be our duty so far as
it is possible, and as much as in us lies to live peaceably with all men, in
that peace which is the life of civil society; doubtless it is so much more to
live so with all Believers, in a peaceable agreement in the worship of God. And
therefore of all differences in judgment which lead unto practice, those are
the worst and most pernicious, which occasion or draw after them any thing
whereby men are hindered from joining together in the same public solemn
worship, whereby they yield unto God that Revenue of his Glory which is due
unto him in this world. And that many of these are found at this day, is not so
much from the Nature of the things themselves about which men differ, as from
the weakness, prejudices, and corrupt affections of them who are possessed with
different Apprehensions about them. But now upon a supposition of an Adherence
by any unto the seventh day Sabbath, all Communion amongst Professors in solemn
Gospel Ordinances is rendered impossible. For if those of that persuasion, do
expect that others will be brought unto a relinquishment of an Evangelical
observance of the Lord's Day Sabbath, they will find themselves mistaken. The
Evidence which they have of its Appointment, and the Experience they have had
of the presence of God with them in its Religious Observation, will secure
their Faith and Practice in this matter. Themselves on the other hand,
supposing that they are obliged to meet for all solemn worship on the seventh
day, (which the other account unwarrantable for them to do, on the pretense of
any binding Law to that purpose) and esteem it unlawful to assemble
Religiously with others on the first Day, on the Plea of an Evangelical
warranty, they absolutely cut off themselves from all possibility of Communion
in the Administration of Gospel Ordinances, with all other Churches of Christ.
And whereas most other Breaches as to such Communion, are in their own nature
capable of healing, without a Renunciation of those Principles in the minds of
men, which seem to give countenance unto them; the Distance is here made
absolutely irreparable, whilst the Opinion mentioned is owned by any. I will
press this no farther, but only by affirming, that persons truly fearing the
Lord, ought to be very careful and jealous over their own understandings,
before they embrace an Opinion and Practice, which will shut them up from all
visible Communion, with the generality of the Saints of God in this World.

least part of the inconveniences that attend this persuasion, and its
practice; nor do I intend to mention all of them which readily offer themselves
to consideration. One or two more may yet be touched on. For those by whom it
is owned, do not only affirm that the Law of the seventh day Sabbath is
absolutely and universally in force, but also that the Sanction of it, in its
penalty against Transgressors, is yet continued. This was, as is known, the
Death of the offender by stoning. So did God himself determine the Application
of the Curse of the Law, unto the breach of this Command, in the instance of
the man that gathered wood on that day, and was stoned by His direction, Numb.
45. 35. Now the consideration of this penalty, as expressive of the Curse of
the Law, influenced the minds of the Jews into that bondage frame wherein they
observed the Sabbath. And this always put them upon many anxious arguings how
they might satisfy the Law in keeping the Day, so as not to incurr the penalty
of its Transgression. Hence are the Questions among the Jews, no less endless
than those about their Genealogies of old, about what work may be done, and
what not, how far they might journey on that day, which when they had with some
indifferent consent reduced unto 2000 Cubits, which they called a Sabbath-dayes
journey, yet where to begin their measure, from what part of the City where a
man dwelt, from his own House, or the Synagogue, or the Walls, or Suburbs of
it, they are not agreed. And the dread hereof was such amongst them of old,
from the rigorous Justice wherewith such Laws with such penalties were imposed
on them, that until they had by common consent in the beginning of the Rule of
the Hasmonaeans, agreed to defend themselves from their Enemies on that Day,
they sat still in a neglect of the Law of Nature, requiring all men to look to
their preservation against open violence, and suffered themselves to be slain,
to their satiety who chose to assault them thereon. And certainly, it is the
greatest madness in the world, for a people to engage in War, that do not think
it at least lawful at all times to defend themselves. And yet they lost their
City afterward by some influence from this Superstition. And do men know what
they do when they endeavor to introduce such a Bondage into the observance of
Gospel Worship, a yoke and bondage upon the Persons and Spirits of men, which
those before us were not able to bear? Is it according to the mind of Christ,
that the Worship of God, which ought to be in Spirit and Truth, now under the
Gospel, should be enforced on men by capital penalties? And let men thus state
their Principles; The seventh Day is to be kept precisely a Sabbath unto the
Lord, by virtue of the Fourth Commandment, for not one Day in seven, but the
seventh Day it self is rigorously and indispensibly enjoined unto observation;
and that the Transgression of this Law, not as to the Spiritual Worship to be
observed on it, but as to every outward Transgression, by journeying or other
bodily labor, is to be avenged with Death; undoubtedly in the practice of
these Principles, besides that open contradiction which they will fall into,
unto the Spirit, Rule, and Word of the Gospel, they will find themselves in the
same entanglements wherein the Jews were and are. And as the Cases that may
occur, about what may be done and what not, what Cases of necessity may
interpose for relief, are not to be determined by private persons according to
their own light and understanding, because they have respect unto the public
Law, but by them unto whom power is committed to judge upon it, and to execute
its penalty; so there will so many Cases, and those almost inexplicable, emerge
hereon, as will render the whole Law an intolerable Burden unto Christians. And
what then is become of the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free? and
wherein is the pre-eminence of the Spiritual Worship of the Gospel, above the
Carnal Ordinances of the Law?

seventh Day as such, is undoubtedly no part of the Law, naturally moral. This
we have sufficiently proved before, as I suppose. That Law is written in the
Hearts of Believers, by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, and strength is
administered thereby unto them for the due performance of the Duties that it
does require. Nor is it an Institution of the Gospel; none ever pretended it so
to be. If there be not much against it in the New Testament, yet surely there
is nothing for it. In the things that are so, we have ground to expect the
Assistance of the Spirit of Christ, to enable us for their right observation to
the Glory of God, and our own edification, or increase in Grace. But it is a
mere Precept of the Old Law as such. And what the Law speaks, it speaks unto
them that are under the Law. In all its Precepts, (...), it exercises a severe
Dominion over the souls and consciences of them that are under it. And we have
no way to extricate our selves from under that Dominion, but by our being dead
unto its power and Authority as such, through the Death of Christ; or an
interest by Faith in the Benefits that through his fulfilling and satisfying
the Law, do redound to the Church. But what is required of any one, under the
notion of the formal and absolute power of the Law, is to be performed in and
by that spirit, which is administered by the Law, and the strength which the Law
affords; and this indeed is great, as to conviction of Sin; nothing at all, as
unto Obedience and Righteousness. Do men in these things appeal unto the Law?
unto the Law they must go. For I know not any thing that we can expect
Assistance of Gospel Grace in or about, but only those things which are
originally moral, or superadded unto them in the Gospel it self; to neither of
which Heads this observation of the seventh Day as such can be referred. It is
therefore a mere legal Duty, properly so called, and in a bondage frame of
Spirit, without any especial assistance of Grace it must be performed. And how
little we are beholding unto those who would in any one instance reduce us from
the liberty of the Gospel, unto bondage under the Law, our Apostle has so
fully declared, that it is altogether needless farther to attempt the
manifestation of it.

Of the Lord's Day. The Sixth Exercitation.
(1) Practice the end of Instruction and Learning. (2) Practical observation of
the Sabbath, handled by many. (3) Pleas concerning too much rigor and
strictness in directions for the observation of the Sabbath. (4) Extremes to be
avoided in directions of sacred duties. Extreme of the Pharisees. (5) The worse
extreme of others in giving liberty to sin. (6) Mistakes in directions about
the observation of the Lords Day. (7) General directions unto that purpose
proposed. (8) Of the beginning and ending of the Sabbath. The first Rule about
Time. (9) The frame of spirit required under the Gospel in the observation of
the Lords Day. (10) Rules and Principles for its due observation. (11) Duties
required thereunto of two sorts. (12) Preparatory duties their necessity and
nature. (13) (14) Particular account of them. Meditation. (15) Supplication.
(16) Instruction. (17) (18) Public duties of the Day it self. (19) What
refreshments and labor consistent with them. (20) Of private duties.

practice suitable unto the principles laid down and pleaded. For this is the
End of all sacred Truth, and all instruction therein. This that great Rule of
our blessed Savior both teaches us, and obliges us to an answerable duty, If
you know these things, happy are ye if you do them, Joh. 13. 17. words so
filled with his wisdom, that happy are they in whose hearts they are always
abiding. The End then of our learning Scripture-Truths, is to obtain such an
Idea of them in our minds, as may direct us unto a suitable practice. Without
this they are to us of no use, or of none that is good; (...). Knowledge
without practice puffs, not builds up. For as Austin speaks with reference
unto those words, Con. Faust. Man. lib. 15. cap. 8. Multa quibusdam sunt noxia,
quamvis non sint mala. Things not evil, yea good in themselves, may be hurtful
unto others. And nothing is useful but as it is directed to its proper End.
This practice is unto sacred Truth.

necessary than in the foregoing Discourses. For there are many Treatises on
this part of our present Subject, extant in our own language, and in the hands
of those who esteem themselves concerned in these things. With some they meet
indeed with no other entertainment, than the Posts did that were sent by
Hezekiah through Ephraim, Manasseh and Zebulun, to invite them unto the
Passover; they are laughed to scorn and mocked at, 2 Chronicles. 30. 10. But
wisdom is justified of her children. Unto some they are of great use, and in
great esteem. And for the most part in the main of their design they do agree.
So that the Truth in them is established in the mouths of many witnesses,
without danger of dividing the minds of men about it. But yet I cannot take my
self to be discharged hereby from the consideration of this concern also of a
sacred Rest under the Gospel, the nature of our design requiring it. And there
are yet important Directions for the right sanctifying of the Name of God, in
and by the due observance of a Day of sacred Rest, which I have not taken
notice to have been insisted on by others; and whereas a due improvement may be
expected of the peculiar principles before discussed, I shall go through this
part of the Work also.

some of them, by Persons of sobriety and learning, pretending also a real care
for the preservation and due observance of all duties of Piety and Religion,
that there has been some excess in the Directions of many given about the due
sanctification of the Lords Day. And there is no small danger of mistakes on
this hand, whilst therein is a pretense of zeal and devotion to give them
countenance. Of this nature some men do judge some rigorous prescriptions to
be, which have been given in this matter. And they say that a great
disadvantage unto Religion has ensued hereon. For it is pretended that they
are such as are beyond the constitution of humane nature to comply withal; of
which kind God certainly requires nothing at our hands. Hence it is pleaded,
that men finding themselves no way able to come unto a satisfaction, in answer
unto the severe Directions for duties, and the manner of their performance,
which by some are rigorously prescribed, have taken occasion to seek for
relief, by rejecting the whole command; which is duly interpreted in such a
condescension as they were capable of a compliance withal, they would have
adhered unto. On this account men have found out various inventions to color
their weariness of that strict course of duty which they were bound unto. Hence
have some taken up a plea, that every Day is to them a Sabbath, that so they
might not keep any. Some, that there is no such thing as a sacred Rest on any
Day, required of us by the Authority of Christ, and therefore that all
Directions for the manner of the observance of such a Day, are to no purpose.
And many by degrees have declined from that strictness, which they could not
come up unto a delight in, until they have utterly lost all sense of duty
toward God in this matter. And these things are true, only the Reasons of them
are not agreed on.

Extremes. For he that condemns the righteous, and he that justifies the
wicked, are both of them an abomination to the Lord. And several Instances
there are of the miscarriages of men on the one hand and the other. On the one,
lay the sin of the Pharisees of old. When they had gotten the pretense of a
command, they would burden it with so many rigid observances, in the manner of
its performance, as should make it a yoke intolerable to their Disciples;
getting themselves the reputation of strict observers of the Law. But in truth
they were not so wanting unto their own ease and interest, as not to provide a
secret dispensation for themselves. They would scarce put a finger to the
burdens which they bound and laid on the shoulders of others. And this is the
condition of all almost that has an appearance of Religion or Devotion in the
Papacy. And a fault of the same nature, though not of so signal a provocation,
others may fall into unadvisedly, who are free from their hypocrisy. They may
charge and press both their own consciences, and other men's, above and beyond
what God has appointed. And this they may do with a sincere intention to
promote Religion and Holiness amongst men, by engaging them into the strictest
ways of the profession of it. Now in the Directions of the consciences of men
about their duties to God, this is carefully to be avoided. For Peace is only
to be obtained in keeping steady and even to the Rule. To transgress on the
right hand whatever the pretencebe, is to lie for God, which will not be
accepted with him.

accommodation of the Laws, Precepts and Institutions of God, unto the lusts,
with the present courses and practices of men. This evil we have had
exemplified in some of late, no less conspicuously than the forementioned was
in them of old. A mystery of iniquity unto this purpose has been discovered
not long since, and brought forth to light, tending to the utter debanchery of
the consciences and lives of men. And in it lies the great contrivance, whereby
the famous sect of the Jesuits have prevailed on the minds of many, especially
of Potentates and great men in the earth, so as to get into their hands the
conduct of the most important affairs of Europe. And this abomination, as it is
known, has lately been laid open by the diligence of some, in whom at once
concurred a commendable care of Christian Morality, and an high provocation in
other things, by them who endeavored to corrupt it. A search has been made
into the Writings which that sort of men have published, for the Direction of
the consciences of men in the practice of moral duties, or unto their
Disciples, for their guidance upon confessions. And a man may say of the
discovery, what the Poet said upon the opening of the House of Cacus:

Panditur extemplo foribus domus atra revulsis,
Abstructaeque; boves, abjurataeque; rapinae,
Caelo ostenduntur.
Non secus ac si qua penitus viterra dehiscens,
Infernas reseret seeds, and regna recludet,
Pallida.
Such a loathsome appearance of vizards and pretenses for the extenuating of
sin, and countenancing of men in the practice of it, was never before
represented unto the eyes of men. The main of their design as is now manifest,
has been so to interpret Scripture-Laws, Rules and Precepts, as to accommodate
them all to that course of corrupt conversation, which prevails generally in
the world, even among them who are called Christians.

-- Gratum opus Agricolis. A Work exceeding acceptable and obliging to all
sorts of men, who if not given up to open Atheism, would rejoice in nothing
more, than in a reconciliation between the Rule of their consciences and their
lusts, that they might sin freely without trouble or remorse. To this end
having learned the inclinations and temptations of men from their private
confessions, and ^nding it a thing neither possible in it self, nor at all
conducing to their own interest, to endeavor their Reformation by, and
recovery unto the fixed stable Rule of Truth and Duty, they have by their false
glosses, subtle distinctions, and resined imaginations, made it to justify and
countenance them in the highest abominations, and in ways leading constantly
to the practice of them. And there is nothing in their whole course, which
faithful interpreters of the mind of God ought more carefully to avoid, than a
falling in any instances into that evil, which these men have made it their
design to promote and pursue. The World indeed seems to be weary of the just,
righteous, holy ways of God; and of that exactness in walking according to his
institutions and commands, which it will be one day known that he does require.
But the way to put a stop to this declension, is not by accommodating the
commands of God to the corrupt courses and ways of men. The Truths of God, and
the Holiness of his Precepts, must be pleaded and defended though the World
dislike them here, and perish hereafter. His Law must not be made to lacquey
after the wills of men, nor be dissolved by vain interpretations, because they
complain they cannot, indeed because they will not comply with it. Our Lord
Jesus Christ came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them,
and to supply men with spiritual strength to fulfill them also. It is evil to
break the least Commandment, but there is a great aggravation of that evil in
them that shall teach men so to do. And this cannot be done, but by giving such
Expositions of them, as by virtue whereof, men may think themselves freed from
an obligation unto that obedience, which indeed they do require. Wherefore
though some should say now as they did of old concerning any command of God,
Behold what a weariness it is? and what profit is it to keep his Ordinances?
yet the Law of God is not to be changed to give them relief. We are therefore
in this matter to have no consideration of the present course of the world, nor
of the weariness of professors in the ways of strict obedience. The sacred
Truth and Will of God in all his commands is singly and sincerely to be
enquired after.

other extreme. Directions have been given, and that not by a few, for the
observation of a Day of Holy Rest, which either for the matter of them or the
manner prescribed, have had no sufficient warrant or foundation in the
Scripture. For whereas some have made no distinction between the Sabbath as
Moral, and as Mosaical, unless it be merely in the change of the Day, they have
endeavored to introduce the whole practice required on the latter into the
Lords Day. But we have already showed that there were sundry additions made
unto the command, as to the manner of its observance, in its accommodation unto
the Mosaical Pedagogie; besides that the whole required a frame of spirit
suited thereunto. Others again have collected whatever they could think of,
that is good, pious, and useful in the practice of Religion, and prescribed it
all in a multitude of instances, as necessary to the sanctification of this
Day; so that a man can scarcely in six Days read over all the duties that are
proposed to be observed on the seventh. And it has been also no small mistake,
that men have labored more to multiply Directions about external duties,
giving them out as it were by number or tale, than to direct the mind or inward
man, in and unto a due performance of the whole duty of the sanctification of
the Day, according to the spirit and genius of Gospel Obedience. And lastly, it
cannot be denied but that some, it may be measuring others by themselves, and
their own abilities, have been apt to tie them up unto such long tiresome
duties, and rigid abstinences from refreshments, as have clogged their minds,
and turned the whole service of the Day into a wearisome bodily exercise, that
profits little.

controversy amongst Persons learned and sober. Nor will I now extend this
Discourse unto a particular consideration of the especial duties required in
the sanctification or services of this Day. But whereas all sorts of men, who
wish well to the furtherance and promotion of Piety and Religion in the World,
on what Reasons or foundations soever they judge that this Day ought to be
observed an holy Rest to the Lord, do agree that there is a great sinful
neglect of the due observation of it, as may be seen in the Writings of some of
the principal of those who cannot grant unto it an immediate divine
Institution; I shall give such Rules and general Directions about it, as a due
application whereof will give sufficient guidance in the whole of our duty
therein.

should be premised concerning the measure or continuance of the Day to be set
apart unto an Holy Rest unto the Lord. But it being a matter of controversy,
and to me on the Reasons to be mentioned afterward, of no great importance, I
shall not insist upon the examination of it, but only give my judgment in a
word concerning it. Some contend that it is a natural Day, consisting of 24
hours, beginning with the evening of the preceding Day, and ending with the
same of its own. And accordingly so was the Church of Israel directed, Lev. 23.
32. From even unto even shall you celebrate your Sabbath; although that does
not seem to be a general Direction for the observation of the Weekly Sabbath,
but to regard only that particular extraordinary Sabbath, which was thus
instituted; namely the Day of Atonement on the tenth Day of the seventh month,
verse. 27. However suppose it to belong also unto the weekly Sabbath; it is
evidently an addition unto the command particularly suited unto the Mosaical
Pedagogie, that the Day might comprize the Sacrifice of the preceding evening
in the services of it, from an obedience whereunto we are freed by the Gospel.
Neither can I subscribe unto this opinion; and that because, (1) In the
description and limitation of the first original seven Days, it is said of
each of the six that it was constituted of an evening and a morning; but of the
Day of Rest there is no such description; it is only called the seventh Day,
without any assignation of the preceding evening unto it. (2) A Day of Rest
according to Rules of natural equity, ought to be proportioned unto a Day of
work or labor, which God has granted unto us for our own use. Now this is to
be reckoned from morning to evening, Psalm. 104. 20, 21, 22, 23. Thou make
darkness and it is night, wherein all the Beasts of the forest do creep; (from
whose yelling the Night has its name in the Hebrew Tongue.) The young Lions
rear after their prey, and seek their meat from God. The Sun rises, they
gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens. Man goes forth to
his work and his labor until the evening. The Day of labor is from the
removeal of darkness and the night, by the light of the Sun, until the return
of them again; which allowing for the alterations of the Day in the several
seasons of the year, seems to be the just measure of our Day of Rest. (3) Our
Lord Jesus Christ who in his Resurrection gave beginning and being to the
especial Day of Holy Rest under the Gospel, rose not until the morning of the
first Day of the Week, when the beamings of the light of the Sun began to
dispel the darkness of the night; or when it dawned toward day, as it is
variously expressed by the Evangelists. This with me, determines this whole
matter. (4) Mere Cessation from labor in the night, seems to have no place in
the spiritual Rest of the Gospel to be expressed on this Day; nor to be by any
thing distinguished from the night of other Days of the Week. (5) Supposing
Christians under the obligation of the Direction given by Moses
beforementioned; and it may entangle them in the anxious, scrupulous intrigues
which the Jews are subject unto, about the beginning of the evening it self,
about which their greatest Masters are at variance, which things belong not to
the Economy of the Gospel. Upon the whole matter, I am inclinable to judge,
and do so; that the observation of the Day is to be commensurate unto the use
of our natural strength; on any other Day, from morning to night. And nothing
is hereby lost that is needful unto the due sanctification of it. For what is
by some required as a part of its sanctification, is necessary and required as
a due preparation thereunto. This therefore is our first Rule or Direction.

The first Day of the Week, or the Lord's Day, is to be set apart unto the ends
of an Holy Rest unto God, by every one, according as his natural strength will
enable him, to employ himself in his lawful occasions any other Day of the
Week. There is no such certain standard or measure for the observance of the
duties of this Day, as that every one who exceeds it, should by it be cut
short, or that those who on important Reasons come short of it, should be
stretched out thereunto. As God provided in his services of old, that he who
was not able to offer a Bullock, might offer a Dove, with respect unto their
outward condition in the world; so here there is an allowance also for the
natural temperaments and abilities of men. Only whereas if Persons of old had
pretended poverty, to save their charge in the procuring of an offering, it
would not have been acceptable, yea they would themselves have fallen under the
curse of the Deceiver; so no more will now a pretense of weakness or natural
inability, be any excuse unto any for neglect or profaneness. Otherwise God
requires of us, and accepts from us, according to what we have, and not
according to what we have not. And we see it by experience, that some men's
natural spirits will carry them out unto a continuance in the outward
observance of duties, much beyond, nay doubly perhaps unto what others are
able, who yet may observe an Holy Sabbath unto the Lord with acceptance. And
herein lies the spring of the accommodation of these duties to the sick, the
aged, the young, the weak, or Persons any way distempered. God knows our
frame, and remembers that we are dust; as also, that, that dust, is more
discomposed, and weakly compacted in some than others. As thus the People
gathered Manna of old, some more, some less, (...) every man according to his
appetite, yet he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered
little had no lack, Exodus 16. 17, 18. So is every one in sincerity according to
his own ability, to endeavor the sanctifying of the Name of God in the duties
of this Day; not being obliged by the examples or prescriptions of others,
according to their own measures.

Labor to observe this Day, and to perform the duties required in it, with a
frame of mind becoming and answering the spirit, freedom and liberty of the
Gospel. We are now to serve God in all things in the newness of the spirit, and
not in the oldness of the letter, Romans 7. 6. with a spirit of peace, delight,
joy, liberty, and a sound mind. There were three Reasons of the bondage servile
frame of spirit, which was in the Judaical Church, in their observance of the
duties of the Law, and consequently of the Sabbath.

First, The dreadful giving and promulgation of it on Mount Sinai, which was
not intended merely to strike a terror into that Generation in the wilderness,
but through all Ages, during that Dispensation, to influence and awe the hearts
of the People into a dread and terror of it. Hence the Apostle tells us that
Mount Sinai gendered unto bondage, Gal. 4. 24. that is, the Law as given
thereon, brought the People into a spiritually servile state, wherein although
secretly on the account of the Ends of the Covenant they were children and
heirs, yet they differed nothing from servants, Chap. 4. 1, 3.

Secondly, The renovation and re inforcement of the old Covenant, with the
promises and threatenings of it, which was to be upon them during the
continuance of that state and condition. And although the Law had a new Use and
End now given unto it, yet they were so in the dark, and the proposal of them
attended with so great an obscurity, that they could not clearly look into the
comfort and liberty finally intended therein. For the Law made nothing perfect;
and what was of Grace in the administration of it, was so veiled with Types,
Ceremonies, and shadows, that they could not see into the End of the things
that were to be done away, 2 Cor. 3. 13.

Thirdly, The sanction of the Law by death increased their bondage. For as this
in it self was a terror unto them in their services, so it was expressive, and
a representation of the original curse of the whole Law, Gal. 3. 13. And hereby
were they greatly awed and terrified, although some of them by especial Grace
were enabled to delight themselves in God and his Ordinances.

And in these things was administered a spirit of bondage unto fear, which by
the Apostle is opposed to the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father,
Romans 8. 15. Which, where it is, there is liberty; where the spirit of the Lord
is there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. and there only. And therefore although they
boasted that they were the children of Abraham, and on that reason free and
never in bondage; yet our Savior lets them know, that whatever they pretended,
they were not free until the Son should make them so. And from these things
arose those innumerable, anxious scrupulosities which were upon them in the
observation of this Day, accompanied with the severe nature of those Additions
in its observation, which were made unto the Law of it, as appropriated unto
them for a season.

Now all these things we are freed from under the Gospel. For,

(1) We are not now brought to receive the Law from Mount Sinai, but are come
unto Mount Sion. So the Apostle at large, Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
For ye are not come unto the Mount that might be touched; (that is, which
naturally might be so by men's hands, though morally the touching of it was
forbidden) and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness, and darkness, and
tempest. And the sound of a Trumpet, and a voice of words, which they that
heard entreated that the Word should not be spoke unto them any more; for they
could not endure that which was commanded, and if so much as a Beast touch the
Mountain it shall be stoned or thrust through with a dart. And so terrible was
the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake; which it seems were
the words he used, where it is on this occasion said of him, And Moses spoke,
but nothing is added of what he said, Exodus 19 19. which things are insisted on
by him to show the Grounds of that bondage which the People were in under the
Law; whereunto he adds, But you are come to Mount Sion, unto the City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; Jerusalem that is above, which is free,
which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. That is, we receive the Law of our
Obedience from Jesus Christ, who speaks from Heaven, to be observed with a
spirit of liberty.

(2) The Old Covenant is now absolutely abolished, nor is the remembrance of it
any way revived, Heb. 8. 13. It has no influence into, nor upon the minds of
Believers. They are taken into a Covenant full of Grace, Joy and Peace For the
Law was given by Moses but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17.

(3) In this Covenant they receive the Spirit of Christ; or Adoption to serve
God without legal fear, Luke 1. 74. Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. And there is not any
thing more insisted on in the Gospel, as the principal privilege thereof. It
is indeed nothing to have liberty in the Word and Rule, unless we have it in
the Spirit and Principle. And hereby are we delivered from that anxious
solicitude about particular instances in outward duties, which was a great part
of the yoke of the People of old. For,

(1) Hence we may in all our duties look on God as a Father. By the Spirit of
his Son, we may in them all cry Abba Father. For through Christ we have an
access in one Spirit unto tho Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. To God as a Father; as one
that will not always chide; that does not watch our steps for our hurt, but
remembers that we are but dust. One who tyeth us not up to rigid exactness in
outward things, whilst we act in an holy spirit of filial obedience as his
sons or children. And there is great difference between the duties of servants
and children; neither has a Father the same measure of them. The consideration
hereof, regulated by the general Rules of the Scripture, will resolve a
thousand of such scruples as the Jews of old while servants were perplexed
withal.

2) Hence we come to know that he will be worshipped in spirit and in truth.
Therefore he more minds the inward frame of our hearts wherewith we serve him,
than the mere performance of outward duties, which are alone so far accepted
with him, as they are expressions and demonstrations thereof. If then, in the
observation of this Day, our hearts are single and sincere in our aims at his
Glory with delight, it is of more price with him than the most rigid
observation of outward duties, by number and measure.

(3) Therefore the minds of Believers are no more influenced unto this duty by
the curse of the Law, and the terror thereof, as represented in the threatened
penalty of death. The Authority and Love of Jesus Christ are the principal
causes of our Obedience. Hence our main duty lies in an endeavor to get
spiritual joy and delight in the services of this Day; which are the especial
effects of spiritual liberty. So the Prophet requires, that we should call the
Sabbath our delight, holy and honorable of the Lord, Isa. 58. 13. As also,
that on the other side we should not do our own pleasure, nor do our own ways,
nor find our own pleasure, nor speak our own words. And these Cautions seem to
regard the Sabbath absolutely, and not as Judaical. But I much question whether
they have not in the interpretation of some, been extended beyond their
original intention. For the true meaning of them is no more but this; that we
should so delight our selves in the Lord on his holy Day, as that being
expressly forbidden our usual labor, we should not need for want of
satisfaction in our duties, to turn aside unto our own pleasures, and vain
ways, which are only our own, to spend our time, and pass over the Sabbath; a
thing complained of by many; whence sin and Satan have been more served on this
Day, than on all the Days of the Week beside. But I no way think, that here is
a restraint laid on us from such Words, Ways, and Works, as neither hinder the
performance of any religious duties belonging to the due celebration of the
worship of God on the Day, nor are apt in themselves to unframe our spirits, or
divert our affections from them. And those whose minds are fixed in a spirit of
liberty to glorify God in and by this Day of Rest, seeking after Communion
with him in the ways of his worship, will be unto themselves a better Rule for
their Words and Actions; than those who may aim to reckon over all they do or
say, which may be done in such a manner, as to become the Judaical Sabbath,
much more then the Lord's Day.

sure to bring good and right Principles unto the performance of the duty of
keeping a Day of Rest holy unto the Lord. Some of these I shall name, as
confirmed expressly in, or drawn evidently from the preceding Discourses.

1. Remember that there is a Weekly Rest, or an holy Rest of one Day in the
week, due to the solemn work of glorifying God as God. Remember the Sabbath to
keep it holy. We have had a Week unto our own occasions, or we have a prospect
of a Week in the patience of God for them. Let us Remember that God puts in for
some Time with us. All is not our own. We are not our own Lords. Some time God
will have to himself from all that own him in the World. And this is that Time,
season, or Day. He esteems not himself acknowledged, nor his Sovereignty owned
in the World, without it. And therefore this Day of Rest he required, the first
Day as it were that the World stood upon its legs; has done so all along, and
will do so to the last Day of its duration. When he had made all things, and
saw that they were good, and was refreshed in them, he required that we should
own and acknowledge his Goodness and Power therein. This duty we owe to God, as
God

(2) That God appointed this Day, to teach us, that as he rested therein, so we
should seek after Rest in him here, and look on this Day as a pledge of eternal
Rest with him hereafter. So was it from the beginning. This was the End of the
appointment of this Day. Now our Rest in God in general consists in two things:
(1) In our Approbation of the Works of God, and the Law of our Obedience, with
the Covenant of God thereon. These things are expressive of, and do represent
unto us the Goodness, Righteousness, Holiness, Faithfulness, and Power of God.
For these, and with respect unto them, are we to give Glory to him. What God
rests in, he requires that through it, we should seek for our Rest in him. As
this was the duty of man in Innocence, and under the Law, so it is ours now
much more. For God has now more eminently and gloriously unveiled and
displayed the Excellencies of his Nature, and the Counsels of his Wisdom, in
and by Jesus Christ, than he had done under the first Covenant. And this should
work us to a greater and more holy admiration of them. For if we are to
acknowledge, that the Law is holy, just, and good, as our Apostle speaks,
although it is now useless as to the bringing of us to Rest in God; how much
more ought we to own and subscribe to the Gospel, and the declaration that God
has made of himself therein, that so it is. (2) In an actual solemn compliance
with his Will, expressed in his Works, Law, and Covenant. This brings us unto
present satisfaction in him, and leads us to the full enjoyment of him. This is
a Day of Rest; but we cannot Rest in a Day, nor any thing that a Day can
afford; only it is an help and means of bringing us to Rest in God. Without
this design, all our Observation of a Sabbath is of no use nor advantage.
Nothing will thence redound to the Glory of God, nor the benefit of our own
souls. And this they may do well to consider who plead for the observation of
the seventh Day precisely. For they do profess thereby that they seek for Rest
in God, according to the tenor of the first Covenant. That they approve of, and
that they look (by that profession) to be brought to Rest by; though really,
and on other Principles, they do otherwise. Whatever then be the Covenant
wherein we walk with God, the great Principle which is to guide us in the holy
observation of this Day, is, that we celebrate the Rest of God in that
Covenant, approve of it, rejoice in it, and labor to be partakers of it,
whereof the Day it self is given us as a pledge. We must therefore,

(3). Remember, that we have lost our original Rest in God by sin. God made us
upright, in his own Image, meet to take our Rest, satisfaction, and reward in
himself, according to the tenor of the Law of our Creation, and the Covenant of
Works established thereon. Hereof the seventh Day was a Token and Pledge. All
this we must consider that we have lost by sin. God might justly have left us
in a wandering condition, without either Rest, or any pledge of it. Our
Reparation indeed is excellent and glorious; yet so, as that on our part the
loss of our former estate was shameful, and in the Remembrance whereof we
ought to be humbled. And hence we may know, that it is in vain for us to lay
hold of the seventh Day again, which is but an Attempt to return into the
Garden after we are shut out, and kept out by a Flaming Sword. For although it
was made use of as a Type and shadow under the Law; yet to us who must live on
the substance of things, or not at all, it cannot be possessed with robbery:
and is of no use when attained. For, we are to remember,

(4) That the Rest in God, and with God, which we now seek after, enter into,
and celebrate the pledge of, using the means for the farther enjoyment of it,
in the observation of this Day, is a Rest by a Recovery, by a Reparation in
Jesus Christ. There is now, a new Rest of God, and a new Rest for us in God.
God now Rests, and is refreshed in Christ, in his Person, in his Works, in his
Law, in the Covenant of Grace in him; in all these things is his soul well
pleased. He is the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person; making a far more glorious Representation of him, than did the works of
Creation of old, which yet he had left such impressions of his Goodness, Power
and Wisdom upon, as that he Rested in them, was refreshed on them, and
appointed a Day for man to Rest in his Approbation of them, and giving Glory to
him for them. How much more is it so with him, with respect unto this glorious
Image of the invisible God. This he now deals with us in; For as of old, he
commanded light to shine out of darkness, whereby we might see and behold his
Glory which he had implanted, and was implanting on the work of his hands, so
now he shines into our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of his Glory,
in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. That is, enableth us to behold all
the excellencies of his nature, made manifest in the person and works of Jesus
Christ. The way also of bringing them unto him, through Christ, who had by sin
come short of his Glory, is that which he approves of, is delighted with, and
rests in, giving us a pledge thereof in this Day of Rest. Herein lies the
principal duty of this Days observances; namely, to admire this Retriveal of a
Rest with God, and of a Rest for God in us. This is the fruit of eternal
Wisdom, Grace and Goodness, Love and Bounty: This, I say, belongs unto the
sanctification of this Day, and this ought to be our principal Design therein;
namely, in it to give Glory unto God, for the wonderful Recovery of a Rest for
us with himself, and an endeavor to enter by Faith and Obedience into that
Rest. And for those ends and purposes, are we to make use of all the sacred
Ordinances of Worship, wherein, and whereby this Day is sanctified unto the
Lord.

(5) That in the Observation of the Lord's Day, which is the first day of the
week, we subject our consciences immediately to the Authority of Jesus Christ,
the Mediator, whose Day of Rest originally it was, and which thereby, and for
that Reason is made ours. And hereby in the observation of this Day, have we
fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. Of old there was nothing
appeared in the Day, whilst the seventh Day was in force, but the Rest of God
the Creator, and his Sovereign Authority intimated unto us thereby, for the
observing of an Holy Rest unto him, according to the Tenor of the first
Covenant. But now the immediate Foundation of our Rest on the Lord's Day, is the
Lords Rest, the Rest of Christ, when upon his Resurrection he ceased from his
works, as God did from his own. This gives great direction and encouragement in
the duty of observing this Day aright. Faith truly exercised in bringing the
Soul into an actual subjection unto the Authority of Christ in the observance
of this Day, and directing the thoughts unto a contemplation of the Rest that
he entered into after his works, with the Rest that he has procured for us to
enter into with him, does more thereby toward the true Sanctification of this
Day, than all outward Duties can do, performed with a legal Spirit, when men
are in bondage unto the Command as taught to them, and dare not do otherwise.
God in several places instructs the Israelites, what account they shall give
unto their Children concerning their observation of sundry Rites and Ceremonies
that he had instituted in his Worship, Exodus 13. 14. And it shall be when thy
son asks thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shall say unto
him, By strength of hand the Lord brought us out of the Land of Egypt, etc. It
was in remembrance of such works of God amongst them, whereof those Rites were
a Token and Representation. And we have here a special observance in the
Worship of God; what account can we give unto our selves, and our Children,
concerning our observation of this Day Holy unto the Lord? Must we not say, nay
may we not do so with joy and rejoicing, That whereas we were lost and undone
by sin, excluded out of the Rest of God, so far as that the Law of the
observation of the outward pledge of it, being attended with the Curse, was a
burden and no relief unto us; our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God undertook a
great work to make peace for us, to redeem and save us; and when he had so
done, and finished his work, even the erecting of the new Heavens and new Earth
wherein dwells Righteousness, he entered into his Rest, and thereby made known
unto us, that we should keep this Day as a day of an Holy Rest unto him; and as
a pledge that we have again given unto us, an entrance into Rest with God.

(6) We are then to Remember, that this Day is a pledge of our eternal Rest
with God. This is that whereunto these things do tend. For therein will God
glorify himself in the full accomplishment of his great design, in all his
Works of Power and Grace. And this is that which ultimately we aim at. We do at
best in this World but enter into the Rest of God; the full enjoyment of it is
reserved for Eternity. Hence that is usually called our everlasting Sabbath; as
that state wherein we shall always Rest with God, and always give Glory unto
him. And this Day is a pledge hereof on sundry accounts;

(1) Because thereon, God as it were calls us aside out of the World, unto an
immediate converse with himself. Israel never had a more dreadful Day, than
when they were called out of their Tents, from their occasions, and all worldly
concerns, (...), in occursum Jehovae, to a meeting with the Lord, Exodus 19. God
called them aside to meet and converse with him. But it was unto Mount Sinai
that he called them; which was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord
descended in fire, verse. 18. Hence although they had been preparing themselves
for it sundry Days, they were not able to bear the terror of Gods approach
unto them. But under the Gospel, we are this Day called out of the World, and
off from our occasions, to converse with God, to meet him at Mount Sion, Heb.
12. Here he does not give us a fiery Law, but a gracious Gospel; does not
converse us with Thunder and Lightning, but with the sweet still voice of mercy
in Jesus Christ. And as this requires due thoughts of heart in us to prepare
us for it; so it is in it self a great and unspeakable Privilege, purchased
for us by Christ. And herein have we a pledge of Rest with God above; when he
shall call us off from all Relations, all occasions of life, all our Interests
and Concerns in this World, and eternally set us apart unto himself. And
undoubtedly that it may be such a pledge unto us, it is our duty to take off
our minds and souls, as far as we are able, from all occasions of life, and
businesses of this World, that we may walk with God alone on this Day. Some
indeed do think this a great bondage. But so far as they do so, and so far as
they find it so, they have no interest in this matter. We do acknowledge that
there are weaknesses attending the outward man, through the frailty and
imbecility of our natures, and therefore have before rejected all rigid,
tiresome services. And I do acknowledge that there will be repisning and
rebelling in the flesh against this duty. But he who really judges in his
mind, and whose practice is influenced and regulated by that judgment, that
the segregation of a Day from the World, and the occasions of it, and a
secession unto communion with God thereon, is grievous, and burdensome, and
that which God does not require, nor is useful to us, must be looked on as a
stranger unto these things. He to whom the worship of God in Christ is a burden
or a bondage; who says, behold what a weariness it is, that thinks a Day in a
Week to be too much and too long to be with God in his especial service, is
much to seek, I think, of his duty. Alas! what would such Persons do if they
should ever come to Heaven, to be taken aside to all eternity to be with God
alone, who think it a great bondage to be here deiverted unto him for a Day?
They will say it may be, Heaven is one thing, and the observation of the
Lord's Day is another; were they in Heaven they doubt not but they should do
well enough. But for this observation of the Lord's Day they know not what to
say to it. I confess they are so; they are distinct things, or else one could
not be the pledge of the other. But yet they both agree in this, that they are
a separation and secession from all other things unto God. And if men have not
a principle to like that in the Lord's Day, neither would they like it in
Heaven, should they ever come there. Let us then be ready to attend in this
matter, to the Call of God, and go out to meet him. For where he places his
Name as he does on all his solemn Ordinances, there he has promised to meet
us. And so is this Day unto us a pledge of Heaven.

(2) It is so in respect of the duties of the Day, wherein the sanctification
of the Name of God in it does consist. All duties proper and peculiar to this
Day, are duties of communion with God. Everlasting, uninterrupted immediate
communion with God, is Heaven. Carnal Persons had rather have Mahomets
Paradise, than Christ's Heaven. But this is that which Believers aim at; eternal
communion with God. Hereof are the duties of this Day, in a right holy
performance, an assured pledge. For this is that which in them all we aim at,
and express according to the measure of our light and Grace. Hereon, we hear
him speak unto us, in his Word; and we speak unto him, in Prayers,
Supplications, Praises, Thanksgivings, in and by Jesus Christ. In all, our aim
is to give Glory to him, which is the End of Heaven, and to be brought nearer
to him, which is its enjoyment. In what God is pleased hereby to communicate
unto our souls, and in what by the secret and invisible supplies of his Grace,
and Spirit, he carries out our hearts unto, lie and consist those first fruits
of Glory, which we may be made partakers of in this World. And the first fruits
are a pledge of a full harvest; God gives them unto us for that End, that they
may be so. This then are we principally to seek after in the celebration of the
Ordinances of God, whereby we sauctifie his Name on this Day. Without this,
bodily labor in the outward performance of a multitude of duties, will profit
little. Men may rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of care and
diligence all the Day long; yet if they are not thus in the Spirit, and carried
out unto spiritual communion with God, in the services of the Day, it will not
avail them. Whatever there be either in the service it self performed, or in
the manner of its performance, or the duration of it, which is apt to divert or
take off the mind from being intent hereon, it tends to the profanation rather
than the sanctification of this Day.

(3) The Rest of the Day, is also a pledge of our Rest with God. But then this
Rest is not to be taken for a mere bodily cessation from labor, but in that
extent wherein it has before been at large described.

These are some of the Rules which we are to have a respect unto in our
observation of this Day. A due application of them unto particular occasions
and emergencies, will guide us through the difficulties of them. Therefore did
I choose rather to lay them thus down in general, than to insist on the
determination of particular Cases, which when we have done all, must be
resolved into them, according to the light and understanding of them who are
particularly concerned.

duties themselves, wherein the sanctification of this Day does consist. And
this I shall do briefly. It has been done already at large by others; so as
that from thence they have taken occasion to handle the nature of all the
Religious duties, with the whole manner of their performance, which belong to
the service of this Day, which does not properly appertain unto this place. I
shall therefore only name the duties themselves which have a respect unto the
sanctification of the Day, supposing the nature of them, and the due manner of
their performance, to be otherwise known.

Now these duties are of two sorts; (1) Preparatory for the Day; and (2) Such
as are actually to be attended unto in it.

There are duties preparatory for it For although as I have declared, I do not
judge that the preceding Evening is to be reckoned unto this Holy Rest as a
part of it; yet doubtless it ought to be improved, unto a due preparation for
the Day ensuing. And hereby the opinion of the beginning of the Sabbatical Rest
with the Morning is put into as good a condition for the furtherance of the
duties of Piety and Religion, as the other about its beginning in the Evening
preceding. Now Preparation in general is necessary;

(1) On the account of the Greatness and Holiness of God with whom in an
especial manner we have to do. The Day is his. The duties of the Day are his
prescriptions. The Privileges of the Day are his gracious concessions; he is
the beginning and ending of it. And we observed before, on this Day, he calls
us aside unto a converse with himself. And certainly, some special preparation
of our hearts and minds is necessary hereunto. This belongs to the keeping of
our foot when we go to the House of God, Eccl. 5. 1. namely, to consider what
we are to do, whither we are going, to whom we make our approaches, in the
solemn worship of God. The Rule which he gives, Lev. 10. 3. is moral, perpetual
or everlasting; I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all
the people I will be glorified. He loves not a rude careless rushing of poor
sinners upon him, without a sense of his Greatness, and a due reverence of his
Holiness. Hence is that advice of our Apostle, Heb. 12. 28, 2. 9. Let us have
Grace, be graciously prepared in our hearts and minds, whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire. And
this will not be answered by mere bodily postures of veneration. Hence there is
a due preparation necessary.

(2) It is so, from our own distractions and intanglements in the businesses
and occasions of life. I speak not of such who spend the whole Week in the
pursuit of their lusts and pleasures; whose Sabbath-Rest has an equal share in
profaneness, with all other parts of their lives. But we treat of those who in
general make it their design to live unto God. The greatest part of these I do
suppose to be engaged industriously, in some Calling or course of life. And
these things are apt to fill their minds, as well as to take up their time, and
much to conform them to their own likeness. Much converse with the world, is
apt to beget a worldly frame in men, and earthly things will taint the mind
with earthlyness. And although it be our duty, in all our secular occasions
also, to live to God, and whether we eat or drink to do all things unto his
Glory; yet they are apt to unframe the mind, so as to make it unready unto
Spiritual things, and Heavenly contemplations. There is a Command indeed that
we should pray always; which at least requires of us, a readiness of mind to
lay hold of all occasions and opportunities for prayer; yet none will deny, but
that there is great advantage in a due preparation for that, and all other
Duties of Religion. To empty therefore and purge our minds of secular earthly
businesses, designs, projections, accounts, dependencies of things one on
another, with reasonings about them, as far as in us lies, is a Duty required
of us, in all our solemn approaches unto God. And if this be not done, but men
go full of their occasions into Religious services, they will by one means or
other return upon them, and prevail upon them to their disturbance. Great care
is to be taken in this matter; and those who constantly exercise themselves
unto a good conscience herein, will find themselves fitted for the Duties of
the Day to a good success.

Reader will take along with him these Advertisements.

1. That I am not binding burdens on men or their consciences, nor tying them
up unto strict observances, under the consideration of sin, if not precisely
attended unto. Only I desire to give direction, such as may be helpful unto
the Faith and Obedience of those who in all things desire to please God. And if
they apply themselves to those ways in other instances which they find more to
their own edification, all is done that I aim at.

2. That I propose not these Duties, as those which fall under an especial
command, with reference unto this season; but only as such which being
commanded in themselves, may with good spiritual advantage be applied unto this
season. Whence it follows,

3. That if we are by necessary occasions, at any time diverted from attending
unto them, we may conclude that we have lost an opportunity or advantage, not
that we have contracted the guilt of sin; unless it be from the occasion it
self, or some of its circumstances.

Godly Reader a threefold preparatory Duty to the right observation of a Day of
Holy Rest unto the Lord. (1) Of Meditation; (2) Of Supplication; (3) Of
Instruction, unto such as have others depending on them.

(1) Of Meditation; and this answers particularly the Reasons we have given for
the necessity of these preparatory Duties. For herein are the minds of
Believers, to exercise themselves unto such Thoughts of the Majesty, Holiness,
and Greatness of God, as may prepare them to serve him with reverence and Godly
fear. The nature of the Duty requires, that this Meditation should first
respect God himself; and then the Day and its Services in its Causes and Ends.
God himself, I say, not absolutely, but as the Cause and Author of our
Sabbatical Rest. God is to be meditated on with respect unto his Majesty,
Greatness, and Holiness, in all our Addresses unto him in his Ordinances. But a
peculiar consideration is to be had of him, as the especial Author of that
Ordinance which we address our selves to the celebration of, and so to make our
access unto him therein. His Rest therefore in Jesus Christ, his satisfaction
and complacency in the way and Covenant of Rest for us through him, are the
objects of a suitable Meditation in our preparation for the observance of this
Day of Rest. But especially the person of the Son, whose works and Rest
thereon, is the Foundation of our Evangelical Rest on this Holy Day, is to be
considered, It were easy to supply the Reader with proper Meditations on these
blessed subjects, for him to exercise himself in as he finds occasion: But I
intend only Directions in general, leaving others to make Application of them
according to their ability.

Again; the Day it self and its sacred Services are to be thought upon. The
Privileges that we are made partakers of thereby; the Advantages that are in
the Duties of it, and the Duties themselves required of us, should be well
digested in our minds. And where we have an habitual apprehension of them, yet
it will need to be called over and excited. To this end those who think meet to
make use of these Directions, may do well to acquaint themselves with the true
nature of a Sabbatical Rest, from what has been before discoursed. It will
afford them other work for Faith and Thankfulness, than is usually taken notice
of, by them who have no other notion of it, than merely a portion of Time set
apart unto the solemn Worship of God. There are other mysteries of God and his
Love, other Directions for our Obedience unto God in it, than are commonly
taken notice of. By these means the ends of preparatory Duties above mentioned,
will be effected; the Mind will be filled with due reverential apprehensions of
God on the one hand, and disentangled on the other from those cares of the
world, and other cumbersome thoughts, wherewith the occasions of life may have
possessed it.

Supplication; that is Prayer with especial respect unto the Duties of the Day.
This is the life of all preparation for every Duty. It is the principal means
whereby we express our universal dependence on God in Christ, as also work our
own Hearts to a sense of our indigent estate in this world, with all our
especial wants, and the means whereby we obtain that supply of Grace, Mercy,
and Spiritual strength, which we stand in need of, with respect unto the Glory
of God, with the increase of Holiness and Peace in our own souls. Special
Directions need not be given about the performance of this known duty. Only I
say, some season for it, by way of Preparation, will be an eminent means to
further us in the due sanctification of the Name of God on this Day. And it
must be founded on Thanksgiving for the Day it self, with the Ends of it, as an
advantage for our converse with God in this World. His Goodness and Grace in
this condescension and care, are to be acknowledged and celebrated. And in the
petitory part of preparatory Prayer, two things are principally to be regarded;
(1) A supply of Grace from God, the God and Fountain of it. And herein respect
must be had, (1) Unto that Grace, or those Graces, which in their own nature
are most immediately serviceable unto the sanctification of the Name of God in
this Ordinance. Such are reverence of his Authority, and delight in his
Worship. (2) Such Graces in particular, as we have found advantage by in the
exercise of holy duties, as it may be contriteness of spirit, Love, Joy, Peace.
(3) Such as we have experienced the want of, or a defect in our selves as to
the exercise of them on such occasions; as it may be Diligence, Stedfastness,
and Evenness of mind. (2ly,) A removeal of Evils, or that God would not lead us
into temptation but deliver us from evil. And herein a regard is to be had, (1)
Unto the temptations of Satan. He will be casting his fiery darts in such a
season. He is seldom busier than upon our engagement into solemn duties. (2)
To the inconstancy, wavering and distraction of our own minds. These are indeed
a matter of unspeakable abasement, when we consider aright the Majesty of God
with whom we have to do. (3) To undue, and unjust offenses against Persons and
things, that we may lift up pure hands to God without wrath and without
doubting. Sundry things of the like nature might be instanced in, but that I
leave all to the great Direction, Romans 8. 26, 27.

Instruction. This in such cases was peculiarly incumbent on the People of old;
namely that they should instruct their Children and their Families in the
nature of the Ordinances whereby they worshipped God. This is that which God so
commended in Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. I know, says he, Abraham, that he will
command his Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of
the Lord, to do justice and judgment. In which expression the nature and
observance of all Ordinances is required. Thus is it incumbent on them who have
others under their charge, to instruct them in the nature of this service which
we observe unto the Lord. It may be this is not, this will not be necessary
upon every return of this Day. But that it should be so done at some appointed
season, no man that endeavors to walk uprightly before God, can deny. And the
omission of it has probably caused the whole service amongst many, to be built
on Custom and Example only. Hereon has that great neglect of it which we see,
ensued.

For the power of their influence will not long abide.

preparatory duties. Come we now to the Day it self; the duties whereof I shall
pass through with an equal brevity. And they are of two sorts; (1) Public; (2)
Private; whereof the former are the principal, and the latter subordinate unto
them. And those of the latter sort are either Personal, or Domestical.

public duties of the Day are principally to be regarded. By public duties, I
intend the due attendance unto, and the due performance of all those parts of
his solemn worship, which God has appointed to be observed in the Assemblies
of his People, and in the manner wherein he has appointed them to be observed.
One End of this Day is to give Glory to God in the celebration of his solemn
worship. That this may be done aright, and unto his Glory, he himself has
appointed the ways and means, or the Ordinances and duties wherein it does
consist. Without this, we had been at an utter loss, how we might sanctify his
Name or ascribe Glory to him. Most probably we should have set up the Calves of
our own imaginations to his greater provocation. But he has relieved us
herein, himself appointing the worship which he will accept. Would we therefore
give full Direction in particular, for the right sanctifying of the Name of God
on this Day; we ought to go over all the Ordinances of worship which the Church
is bound to attend unto, in its Assemblies. But this is not my present purpose.
Besides somewhat of that kind has been formerly done in another way. I shall
therefore here content my self, to give some general Rules for the guidance of
men in the whole. As,

(1) That the public and solemn worship of God is to be preferred above that
which is private. They may be so prudently managed, as not to interfer, nor
ordinarily to entrench on one another. But wherever on any occasion they seem
so to do, the private are to give place to the public. For one chief End of
the sacred setting apart of this Day, is the solemn acknowledgement of God, and
the performance of his worship in Assemblies. It is therefore a mavelous
undue custom, on the pretense of private duties, whether Personal or
Domestical, to abate any part of the Duties of solemn Assemblies. For there is
in it, a setting up of our own choice and inclinations against the Wisdom and
Authority of God. The End of the Day is the solemn worship of God; and the End
is not to give way to the most specious helps and means.

(2) Choice is to be made of those Assemblies for the celebration of public
worship, where we may be most advantaged as unto the Ends of them in the
sanctification of this Day, so far as it may be done without breach of any
Order appointed of God For in our joining in any concurrent acts of Religious
worship, we are to have regard unto Helps suited unto the furtherance of our
own Faith and Obedience. And also because God has appointed some parts of his
Worship, as in their own nature and by virtue of his appointment are means of
conveying light, knowledge, Grace, in spiritual supplies unto our souls, it is
certainly our duty to make choice and use of them, which are most meet so to do.

(3) For the manner of our Attendance on the public worship of God, with
Reverence, Gravity, Order, Diligence, Attention, though it be a matter of great
use and moment, yet not of this place to handle; nor does it here belong unto
us, to insist on those ways whereby we may excite particular Graces unto due
actings of themselves, as the nature of the Duties wherein we are engaged does
require.



1. Duties in their performance drawn out unto such a length as to beget
wearisomness and satiety, tend not unto edification, nor do any way promote the
Sanctification of the Name of God in the Worship it self. Regard therefore in
all such performances is to be had, (1) Unto the weakness of the natural
constitution of some, the Infirmities and Indispositions of others, who are not
able to abide in the outward part of Duties, as others can. And there is no
wise Shepherd, but will rather suffer the stronger sheep of his flock, to lose
somewhat of what they might reach unto in his guidance of them, than to compel
the weaker to keep pace with them to their hurt, and it may be their ruin.
Better a great number should complain of the shortness of some Duties who have
strength and desires for a longer continuance in them, than that a few who are
sincere should be really discouraged by being overburdened, and have the
service thereby made useless unto them. I always loved in sacred Duties, that
of Seneca concerning the Orations of Cassius Severus when they heard him;
Timebamus ne desineret; we were afraid that he would end. (2) To the spiritual
edge of the affections of men, which ought to be whetted, and not through
tediousness in Duties abated and taken off. Other things of a like nature might
be added, which for some considerations I shall forbear.

2. Refreshments helpful to nature, so far as to refresh it, that it may have
a supply of spirits to go on cheerfully in the Duties of Holy Worship, are
lawful and useful. To macerate the Body with Abstinences on this Day, is
required of none; and to turn it into a Fast, or to Fast upon it, is generally
condemned by the Ancients. Wherefore, to forbear provision of necessary food
for Families on this Day, is Mosaical; and the enforcement of the particular
precepts, about not kindling fire in our Houses on this Day, baking and
preparing the Food of it the Day before, cannot be insisted on without a
Re-introduction of the seventh Day precisely, to whose observation they were
annexed, and thereby of the Law and Spirit of the old Covenant. Provided
always that these Refreshments be, (1) Seasonable for the time of them, and
not when public Duties require our Attendance on them. (2) Accompanied with a
singular regard unto the Rules of Temperance: as (1) That there be no
appearance of evil. (2) That Nature be not charged with any kind of Excess, so
far as to be hindered rather than assisted in the Duties of the Day. (3) That
they be accompanied with Gravity, and Sobriety, and purity of conversation. Now
whereas these things are in the substance of them required of us in the whole
course of our lives, as we intend to please God, and to come to the enjoyment
of him, none ought to think an especial Regard unto them on this Day, to be a
bondage, or troublesome unto them.

3. Labor, or pains for the enjoyment of the benefit and advantage of the
solemn Assemblies of the Church, and in them of the appointed Worship of God,
is so far from entrenching on the Rest of this Day, that it belongs unto its
due observation. A mere Bodily Rest is no part of Religious Worship in it self,
nor does it belong unto the Sanctification of this Day, any farther then as it
is a means for the due performance of the other Duties belonging unto it. We
have no bounds under the Gospel for a Sabbath-dayes journey, provided it be for
Sabbath ends. In brief, all pains or labor, that our station and condition in
this world, that our troubles which may befall us, or any thing else make
necessary, as that without which we cannot enjoy the solemn Ends and Uses of
this Holy Day of Rest, are no way inconsistent with the due observation of it.
It may be the lot of one man to take so much pains, and to travel so far for
and in the due celebration of the Lords day, as if another should do the like
without his occasions and circumstances, it would be a profanation of it.

4. Labor in works of charity and necessity, such as are to visit the sick, to
relieve the poor, to help the distressed, to relieve or assist Creatures ready
to perish, to supply Cattle with necessary food, is allowed by all, and has
been by many spoken unto.

5. For Sports and such like Recreations, and their use on this Day, I referr
the Reader to Laws of sundry Emperors and Nations concerning them. See of
Constant. leg. omnes cap. de Feriis. Theodosius and Arcadius ibid. and of Leo
and Authemius, in the same place of the Code; of Charles the Great, Capilular.
lib. 1. cap. 81. lib. 5. cap. 188. The Sum of them all is contained in that
Exhortation which Ephram Syrus expresses in his Sermon. de diebus Festis.
Festivitates Dominicas honorare studiose contendite, celebrantes eas non
panegyrice, sed divine; non mundane, sed spiritualiter; non instar Gentilium,
sed Christianorum. Quare non portarum frontes coronemus; non choreaes ducamus,
non choram exornemus; non tibiis and citharis auditum affaeminemus, non
mollibus vestibus induamur, nec cingulis undique auro radiantibus cingamur; non
comessationibus and ebrietatibus dediti simus, verum ista relinquamus eis
quorum Deus venture est, and gloria in confusione justorum.

private Duties both Personal and Domestical, they are either antecedent or
consequent unto the solemn public Worship, as usually for Time it is
celebrated amongst us. These consisting in the known Religious Exercises of
Prayer, Reading the Scripture, Meditation, Family Instructions from the
Advantage of the public Ordinances, they are to be recommended unto every ones
Conscience, Ability and Opportunity, as they shall find strength and Assistance
for them.

(...).
These Books following are to be sold by Nath. Ponder, at the Peacock in
Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet.
EXercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews, also concerning the Messiah.
Wherein the Promises concerning him to be a Spiritual Redeemer of Mankind, are
explained and vindicated. His Coming, and Accomplishment of his Work according
to the Promises, is proved and confirmed. The Person, or who he is, is
declared. The whole O economy of the Mosaical Law, Rites, Worship, and
Sacrifices, is explained. And in all, the Doctrine of the Person, Office, and
Work of the Messiah, is opened: The nature and demerit of the first Sin is
unfolded: The Opinions and Traditions of the Ancient and Modern Jews are
examined; Their Objections against the Lord Christ and the Gospel are answered:
The time of the coming of the Messiah is stated: And the great Fundamental
Truths of the Gospel vindicated. With an Exposition and Discourses on the Two
First Chapters of the said Epistle to the Hebrews. By I. Owen, D. D. in Polio.
Price 14 s. bound.

Times of the Bible: Veyled in Cubits, Shekels, Talents, Furlongs, Chapters,
Verses, Letters, of the Scripture: With the Days, Hours, Watches, Weeks, and
Months of the Jewish Year. By I. S. in Quarto. Price 6 d. stitched.

A Practical Exposition on the 130th. Psalm. Wherein the Nature of the
Forgiveness of Sin is declared; the truth and reality of it asserted; and the
Case of a Soul distressed with the Guilt of Sin, and relieved by a discovery of
Forgiveness with God, is at large discoursed. By John Owen, D. D. John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures. In Quarto-Price 4 s. bound.

A Brief Declaration and Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity. As also of
the Person and Satisfaction of Christ. Accommodated to the Capacity and Use of
such as may be in danger to be seduced; and the establishment of the Truth.
John 5 39. Search the Scriptures. By John Owen, D. D. in Twelves. Price ^ s.
bound.

The Unreasonableness of Atheism. Made manifest in a Discourse to a Person of
Honor: By Sir Charles Wolseley Baronet. The Second Edition, Revised and
Enlarged by the Author. In Large Octavo. Price 1 s. 6 d. bound.

There is now published, a New Treatise written by Mr. Thomas Brooks, called
Londons Lamentations: Or, A sober serious Discourse concerning the late Fiery
dispensation; wherein the procuring causes, and the final causes of that
dreadful dispensation are laid open, with the Duties that are incumbent, both
upon those who have been burnt up, and upon those who have escaped those
consuming Flames; with thirteen Supports, to bear up the hearts of such as have
been Sufferers. Here are many great Objections answered, and many weighty
Questions resolved; and variety of Arguments to prove that a little that the
righteous man has, is better than the Riches of the wicked; with several other
Points of grand importance, all tending to the cooling, quieting, settling,
refreshing, upholding and comforting of all that have been Sufferers by the
late Fiery calamity. Price 4 s. bound.

Exercitations concerning the Name, Original, Nature, Use and Continuance of a
Day of Sacred Rest. By I. Owen, D. D. in Large Octavo.


