REMARKS ON A SERMON, ABOUT Corrupting the WORD of GOD. PREACHED BY Tho. Gipps,
Rector of Bury, On a Public Occasion, July 11. 1696.

Wherein the DISSENTERS ARE Fully Vindicated Against his Unjust Accusations.

By J. O. Minister of the Gospel at Oswestry.

COM. ix. Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor.

Et tuus Fronto, non ut ^tor testimonium fecit, sed Convicium ut Orator
aspersit.

Min. Fell. Octav. p. 92. Edit. Oxon. London, Printed for Zachary Whitworth,
Bookseller in Manchester, 1697.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Derby, Lord of Man, and the Isles, etc.
My Lord,
IT was a received Maxim in the Roman Judicatories, To Condemn no Man till he
were admitted to answer for himself, which being agreeable to the Laws of
Natural Justice, and the prevailing Sentiments of Mankind, I doubt not, but
will pass with Your Honor, for an equitable Rule of Judgment.

The Rector of Bury has Published a horrid Charge against a great Body of
People, the Dissenting Protestants, of Corrupting the Word of God, by Printing
the Word Ye instead of We in Acts 6.3. and presumes to shelter himself under
your Great and Honorable Name, by which he hopes to render it uncontestable,
and to give it a more general Acceptance in the World.

Now, My Lord, since he Appeals to Caesar, to Caesar he shall go. All the Favor
we desire, is a Full and Fair Hearing of our Cause, which will bear the
strictest Disquisition of a severe Judicature.

Our Accuser says, the first Corruption happened in the Year 1638. when the
Presbyterians were in the Ascendant, and that it was then begun, and continued
ever since in several Editions to promote the People's Power of setting up
their own Teachers.

But I have clearly Proved, that the Presbyterians were in no Power then; that
they are as much against the People's Ordaining Ministers as the Bishops are;
that there were far more corrupt Editions of that Place under King Charles II.
when the Press was entirely at the Devotion of the Bishops, than in the Year's
between 40. and 60. when the Anti-Episcopal Party had the Power of the Press. I
can find but Three Corrupt Editions during the long Parliament, and I have met
with Three and Thirty under King Charles II. which I humbly Present to your
Lordship's wise Consideration, not doubting but the Interests of Truth have the
Preference in your Esteem to the insinuating Artifices of officious Servants.

The Rector, who Honors himself with the Title of your Lordships Chaplain,
knowing its below your Greatness to examine his Matters, and presuming your
Lordship would take all upon trust (as one would think a Noble Person might
rely much upon the Word of a Chaplain) thought he might impose herein upon your
Honor, as no doubt he has upon many others: But the Duty we owe to all, and
to Persons of Honor especially, as well as our own necessary Vindication, has
obliged us to Expose the Falseness of his Accusations, and to recommend this
true Narrative of the Case to your Lordships Exact and Impartial Judgment.

I humbly crave your Lordships Pardon for this Address, occasioned by that of
the Rector's, in which he very rudely Prostitutes your Honor to the Patronage
of the vilest Calumny.

I leave him to your Lordship's just Censure, and wish him more Sincere
Affection to the Truth, more Deference toward his Superiors, and more Charity
toward his Neighbors, especially in a Conjuncture, when our Civil as well as
our Religious Interests do so loudly Call for the Exercise of 'em.

But I must not tire your Lordship's Patience, and therefore shall only add an
Apprecation of all Blessings to your Honor, and beg leave to subscribe my self.

Right Honorable, Your Lordship's most Humble And most Obedient Servant In our
Great Lord and Master JESUS CHRIST. James Owen.

The PREFACE.
THESE Papers were occasioned by a Sermon Preached at Christ's Church in
Manchester, by Mr. Tho. Gips, Rector of Bury, against Corrupting the World of
God. I Will give the Reader an Idea of the Sermon, before I enter on the main
Point.

His Text is in Prove. 30.6. Add^^^on not unto his Words, lest he reprove Thee,
and thou be found a Liar.

After some Explication, he says, The Text is levelled against all manner of
Corrupting the Word, p. 2.

One eminent Instance of which I shall produce by and by, the Chief Reason of
my undertaking this Subject.

The whole Sermon consists of but 28 Pages, and yet he overlooks the Chief
Reason of his Undertaking, till he comes to the 20th Page, in these Words, and
now I am come at length to the Point I chiefly aimed to insist on. It Is a sign
he wanted materials for his Chief Point, when he allows it but so little Room
in his Sermon, though he had promised to husband his Time as Thriftily as might
be, because his Argument could not easily be comprised in one single Discourse,
p. 1.

In handling of it, he promises, 1. To lay before us Negatively, what it is
not to add or diminish. 2. Positively, what it is.

1. Negatively, It is not adding, 1. When we explain Scripture, p. 2.

2. It is not diminishing, when we omit the Hebrew Titles of the Psalms, and
here he takes occasion to quarrel with one Mr. De Laune, who it seems had
censured this Omission in the Psalms used in the Liturgy, p. 3.

He calls upon the Dissenters to prove those Hebrew Titles to be Original and
Essential Parts of Scriptures.

I will not enter into this Controversy, but shall only take Notice, that the
Titles are as ancient as the Psalms themselves, for ought appears to the
contrary, they being in all the Hebrew and Greek Copies that ever I have seen:
That the Jewish Church received 'em as Parts of Scripture, and they are most of
'em translated by the LXX, and by Theodotion, Symmachus and Aquila, as also by
the Targumist, supposed to be R. Joseph: That they are received in the
Christian Church as Canonical Scripture, Jerome translates them in his Version,
and they are in the Modern Versions, French, Dutch, British, and in the English
Church-Bibles: That some of them are undeniably Canonical, as that of Psalm 18.
mentioned in 2 Samuel 22. Others of them must be prefixed by the Renman, or by a
Person Divinely Inspired, for they refer to Passages of History not mentioned
in the Body of the Psalm. Such are the Titles of Psalm 3. and 30. and 34. and
54. and 56, etc. The Title of the 90. Psalm, Is a Prayer of Moses, the Man of
God. He is not mentioned at all in this Psalm, nor is this Psalm mentioned in
all his other Writings.

If the Titles, or any one of them, be Essential Parts of Scripture; the Rector
has helped Mr. De Laune to a strong Argument, against the omitting of them,
viz. that it is a diminishing from the Word of God.

It had been his Discretion to have omitted this Head of his Sermon; but some
People cannot but expose their unthought-of-Faults by an unseasonable and weak
attempt to cover them.

He asks, Why the Titles are not always Translated? The Bishops could best
resolve that Question, whose Translation the Dissenters use. His other
Questions there, are not worth the Answering, p. 3, 4.

3. It is not a diminishing from the Word (says he) when we read some Verses
of a Chapter, omitting the rest for that Time, p. 5.

But what if they be omitted at all Times? As some Chapters and Books are in
the Calendar; it seems, according to the Rector's Restriction, a diminishing
from the Word of God.

I leave him and Mr. De Laune to argue, Whether the Epistles and Gospels do not
in diverse Places ruin the Scope and Connection, which is the Subject of this
and the two next Pages, p. 6, 7.

4. It is not adding to the Word (continues he) when several Passages of
Scripture, are cast into one Complex Sense.

Here he falls soul upon Mr. De Laune again, for affirming that in the
Liturgy-Translation of the Psalms, three whole Verses are foisted into the
14th. Psalm.

To this he Answers, that those Verses are in the Epistle to the Romans, Cap.
3. and in the LXX Translation, which for ought he knows is of as good
Authority, as the Hebrew at this Day is, and to be preferred before the Hebrew
in this 14th. Psalm, p. 8, 9.

That those additional Verses are in Romans 3. no Body Questions; and that they
were transcribed out of that ^pistle into the LXX Version, Jerome positively
affirms, Prefat. Lib. 16. in Isa. And he adds in the same Place, that these
Verses are not in the LXX Translation, and that none of the Greek Interpreters
have Commented on them.

It is certain, they are not to be found in most of the Greek Copies,
Manuscript and Printed, vid. Fr. Luc. Burgs. in Lib. Notat. ad varias Lect.
Vulg. Edit.

I will not Dispute at this time the Authority of the LXX, but if it be as good
as the present Hebrew Copy, it is very uncertain what becomes of the Rector's
Text, for it is not in my Edition of the Septuagint, Printed at Cambr. 1665
Juxta exemplar Vaticanum, which is one of the best Copies. Thus the Rector by
maintaining one absurdity runs himself into more, and by advancing the
Septuagint, has lost his Text.

We have Reason to believe that the Hebrew Copies were incorrupt in our
Saviors Time, who never charged the Jews with corrupting the Scriptures. And
Philo not long after, writes, that even unto his Times, for the space of above
2000 Years, not one Word had ever been changed in the Law of the Hebrews, and
that every Jew would sooner dye a hundred Deaths, than suffer the Law to be
changed in any one Point. Phil de Egress. fill. Isr. ab Aegypto. This Testimony
is cited by Eusebius. Praepar. Evang. VIII. 2.

The Invention of the Masora, in which all the Verses, Words, and Letters of
all the Books of the Old Testament are numbered, has been an effectual means to
preserve the Purity of the Hebrew Copies. If it be as old as Ezra the Scribe,
as the Learned Buxtorf conceives, it renders it impossible that any Corruption
should have crept into the Hebrew Copies, vid. Buxt. Tiberias.

But if it were written after the Talmud, by the Jews of Tiberias about the
Year 500. as Elias Levita, Capellus, and others think, it has undeniably
secured the Hebrew Copies from all Corruption since that Time. And it is highly
improbable, they should be corr^pted between Philo's Time, and the Invention of
the Masora, according to this latter Hypothesis. For the Hebrew Copies which
Jerome had toward the latter end of the Fourth Century were incorrupt, and had
not the additional Verses in Psalm 14. Nor can we imagine that the Jews of that
Age had degenerat^d from the Zeal of their Ancestors for the Purity of the Law.

The Rector himself allows the Masora to be before the Birth of Christ, for
says he, The Jews were Religious to Superstition, as may be thought, counting
the very Letters of the Bible to preserve it entire: Hereunto our Lord alludes
in Mat. 5.18. p. 13.

On the other Hand, it is certain we have not a pure Version of the LXX at this
Day, as all the Learned agree. And Dr. Lightfoot affirms more than once, that
the Translation that goes under the name of the LXX was dressed with more Craft
than Sincerity by the first Interpreters, and gives many Instances of it, Vol.
1. p. 401, 402 667. 806. and Vol 1. p. 1004, 1005.

It is unfair therefore in the Rector to depress the Authority of the Hebrew
Copies in favor of the LXX (which differs greatly from 'em) and thereby tempt
People to question the Purity of our authorized English Bibles, which are all
Translations of the Hebrew.

We agree with him in the next Head, that

5. It is not corrupting the Word, when we translate it into Vulgar Tongues, p.
9. to p. 12.

6. It is not adding to the Word, when a new Prophet arising delivers some
further Messages to the Churches, which are affixt to the Canon of the
Scripture; so all the following Books of Scripture, notwithstanding my Text,
were added to the Canon unto the end of Revelations, where (for ought we yet
know) the Book is shut up, p. 12.

Here he seems uncertain, whether we may not yet expect new Revelation, and a
new Canon of Scripture. For our parts we are Content with that we (...), and
shall leave this Point to be concerted between the Rector and the Quakers.

2. He shows Positively, when we add or diminish from the Word.

1. We diminish, when we cast away any, never so little Part of it, p. 13.

I leave it to Consideration, Whether the Titles of the Psalms be not a little
Part of the Word of God, and owned for such in our authorized Bibles.

But yet Interest has a Bias, adds he, instance M. (he would say Justin
Martyr) has charged the Jews with this Practice.

Justin M. charges them with corrupting the LXX, but not the Original Hebrew,
which he ought to have taken Notice of.

2. Then we diminish when we reject whole Books, as the Sadducees and
Samaritans of old did, all but the five Books of Moses, p. 14.

It is a Vulgar Error, that the Sadducees and Samaritans rejected all the Old
Testament, but the five Books of Moses, occasioned by a Passage in Josephus
That the Sadducees received the Law only, Antiq. Jude XVIII. 2. Where a he
speaks of the written Law in Opposition to the Oral Law, which the Pharisees
rec^ived. Thus he explains himself, Antiq. Jude XIII. 18.

Dr. Lightfoot gives Instances of their owning other parts of Scripture, Vol 2.
p. 541, 542.

3. We diminish from the Word, when we lay it aside as not necessary or not the
Supreme Rule of Faith, p. 14.

This implies, as if if there were some other, at least subordinate Rules of
Faith* What these are, he does not think fit to tell us? We know no Rule of
Divine Faith but the Holy Scriptures.

From the 15th to the 20th Page, he well asserts the Sufficiency, Perspicuity
and Supreme Authority of the Scriptures, p. 15. to p. 20.

Were this Principle practically acknowledged, it would soon heal our Breaches,
by disposing Men to lay aside the unscriptural Terms of Christian Communion,
which have been the fatal Engines of Disunion and Schism.

4. We diminish from the Word, when we add any thing to it, p. 20.

He gives two Instances of this, 1. When any thing is tacked unto the Word not
belonging to it, as is the Apocrypha by the Papists, but I hasten, says the
Rector.

But why in so much have? You must know he is upon a tender Point, which would
not be long dwelt upon. But if he be not in too much haste, I with tell him a
Story in his Ear, of a sort of People that leave out a considerable Part of
Canonica. Scripture, as the 1st. and 2d. Books of Chronicles, much of Ezekiel,
the Song of Solomon, and most of the Revelation, and substitute in the room of
it, a great Part of the Apocrypha, and among other Passages the fabulous Story
of Bell and Dragon, to be Read in the Public Congregation, for two Months of
the Year: Which tempts Ignorant People to fancy the Bible is not complete
without the Apocrypha.

But we must not detain him too long from his Chief Point, to which he is come
at length under the next Head.

2. We both add to the Word and diminish from it, when we alter it, especially
so as that it carries quite another Sense, than what was intended by the Spirit
of God. And now I am come at length (says he) to the Point I chiefly aimed to
insist on, p. 20.

The prosecuting of this Point takes up the eight last Pages.

Having given this Scheme of the Sermon, we will now follow him to his Eminent
Instance of corrupting the Word, the chief Reason of his Undertaking this
Subject.

THE Dissenters Vindicated FROM Mr. GIP's Unjust Accusations.
CHAP I. Some General Considerations relating to the Charge.
THE Rector of Bury, whose Genius leads him to New Discoveries, obliged us last
Summer with a Tentamen Novum (so he styles his Discourse) in which he
endeavors to prove, That the Dissenters have no Ministry: He now favors us
with another, to represent 'em in effect, as no Christians, for he Charges them
with no less a Crime than contributing to the Undermining the Foundation of
Christianity. p. 25, 26.

I have already examined his Tentamen, and shall now make some Remarks upon his
Sermon.

He tells us in the Title Page, That it was Preached upon a Public Occasion,
that is, as I ^m informed, at the Bishop's Visitation. It was Concio ad Clerum,
and if he wanted Courage to be his Lordship's Remembrancer in the Duties of his
high station, one might have expected a Testimony from him against the shameful
Scandals of some of the Clergy, too notorious to be either palliated or denied:
Or if he durst not Expose their Immoralties, l^st he should seem to bewray his
own Nest (which he seems tender of, p. 22.) was there ^o occasion of exciting
his Brethren to greater diligence and application in their several Provinces.
Something of this nature would have suited the present occasion, and have
become a faithful Dispenser of the Oracles of God.

But the Rector had other work to do. His business was not so much with the
Auditory that was present, as with a sort of People that were out of hearing,
and these he comes not to ^pprove for open miscarriages, but to accuse of some
secret Crimes, which no body but him^^lf pretends to know any thing of. All the
Concern he had with the Reverend Assembly to which he Preached, was to
endeavor to raise in them an ill-natured passion, (which he mis^alls Zeal)
toward an innocent People, whom he wretchedly misrepresents, and renders ^s
black as Hell.

He Charges 'em with no less a Crime than Corrupting the Word of God. p. 2. and
24.

And tho his Diligence and Observation has not been a little (as he tells us p.
22.) in search^ng the several Editions of the Bible, he can find but one
instance of this Corruption in the whole Bible, and that amounts to no more
than the change of one Letter for another, viz. w into y in Acts 6.3. whom we
may appoint, so it ought to be; but some Editions have it, whom ye may appoint,
by an oversight of the Printer, who has substituted a y for a w. This Literal
Mistake might easily happen, the upper part of a Roman y being a single v.

Does not this inquisitive Man labor under a sad deficiency of matter to
accuse us of? and is he not hard put to it to seek occasion against us, when he
is glad to Muster up the Errata's of the Press, and turn them into Presbyterian
Crimes.

This is another Tentamen novum, and the Truth is, all our Authors Productions
are like these of. Africa, new and monstrous?

I can scarce think him so Weak, as to believe his own Charge, it is so very
silly and inconsistent, that nothing but the Sin and Malice, which appear in
every part of it, can preserve it from being ridiculous.

However, he would have others believe, That there is a World of Consequences
depending upon these two Words we and ye; We refers to the Apostles, and
authorizes the Bishops to appoint Deacons or Paris^-Ministers (says he) Ye
refers to the People, and gives them the Power of appointing Ministers. p. 21.

For this Reason (affirms he) the Presbyterians have corrupted this place (
Acts 6.3.) to advance the Peoples Power to set up their own Teachers. ( p. 23,
24, 25.)

He is a Man of unparalled Confidence, that dare undertake to persuade the
World the truth of this Accusation, which is so notorious a slander, that I do
not think any degree of Credulity, below that which bids defiance to all our
Senses, can entertain it under any other Notion.

The Presbyterians, as their very enemies must acknowledge, admit none into the
Ministry without the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, and they take
the Deacons in Acts 6. (as I shall prove anon) for Ministers of Tables, and not
for Ministers of the Gospel: So that their Principles and Practice are directly
opposite to the Hypothesis which he pretends is favored by this corruption. He
acquits the Episcopal Party from a designed corrupting of this place, because
the Corruption is inconsistent with their Principles, p. 24.

By the same reason he must acquit the Presbyterians also, or involve himself
and Party in the same guilt.

I do here solemnly Protest in the Presence of the Supreme Judge, that I never
knew any Protestant Dissenter, Minister or Layman, that expressed his
Approbation of that corrupt Reading in Acts 6.3. and I believe very few of them
ever took notice of it, for most Editions of the Bible have it not.

If the Charge exhibited against us be false, as I shall anon demonstrate
beyond Contradiction, our Accuser is found a liar (to use the words of his
Text, Prove. 30.6.) and condemned out of his own Mouth of One of the most
detestable sins in the sight both of God and Man, so he calls a ^ye, p. ^.

We plead not guilty to the Charge, and we hope the Rector will not require us
to prove a Negative, the Proof lies on his ^^de. If a bold and malicious
Accusation may pass for a Crime, who can be innocent? Our Accuser ought in
Justice to produce most clear and convincing proofs of this Vill^ny, which he
has not yet offered; his circumstan^ial proof shall be considered before we
part with him.

It is the manner of some men (as he for good reasons observed) to accuse
stoutly -- for tho nothing be proved, yet something will stick, p. 5. Which
Political Maxim he seems to have well digested, as will appear in the following
Charge, for thus he speaks:

I will not be so positive as to aver, that it was at First industriously done,
yet I must call into Question the Dissenters, as persons suspected to have
secretly contributed to the corruption of this place, at least, to the
continuance and increase of it. p. 23.

1. This Accusation puts me in mind of a form of Accusation not unlike this in
Minucius Foelix, who brings in Cacilius a Heathen, charging the Christians with
incestuous mixtures, Thyestean Feasts, worshipping the Head of an Ass, and the
Genitalia of their Priests; and not being able to prove so vile a Calumny, he
minceth the matter, and says, nescio an falsa, certe occultis ac nocturnis
sacris apposita suspicio. i. e. I am not certain but the Report may be false,
but their Secret and Night-meetings may be sufficient to ground a suspicion on.
Min. Foel. Octav. p. 27, 28.


Both these Calumniators were visibly acted by one and the same Genius, which
enabled them to give an account of Secret Actions, and to turn Suspicions into
Proofs. Only the Pagan is the more honest of the two, for he Reports but what
he heard Audio eos turpissimae pecudis caput Asini consecratum -- venerari --
al^i cos serunt -- Ibid.
; and seems to doubt of the Truth of it, but our Christian Rector glories in
being the Discoverer of this great Secret, and Reports a Figment of his own
Brain, for an Undoubted Truth.

It would make any one but a Man of Mr. G. 's effrontery to blush, that a
Heathen should outshine him in Candor and Modesty.

2. If the Dissenters have secretly corrupted this place, how comes he to know
it? Did they make him their Confessor, and reveal this Secret to him, as the
only Person fit to be trusted with it? That cannot be, for it would have
furnished him with a Direct Proof, which he does not pretend to, p. 23. Or death
he dream Dreams, or see Visions? Or perhaps, such a Man as he can Divine, and
by a Prophetic Sagacity, tell the Words that we speak in our Bed-Chambers.

But we must not be too curious in our Inquiry, how the Rector came to discover
this Secret Artifice of the Dissenters, for that also is a Secret, which he has
not thought fit to publish.

The Truth is, this looks like the Tale which the Jewish Priests put into the
Mouths of the Soldiers that watched the Sepulcher of Jesus Christ. Matthew.
28.13. Say ye, his Disciples came by Night, and stole him away while we slept.
If they were asleep, how could they tell the Disciples stole him away? But it
was enough to satisfy some People, that the thing was secretly done, and the
Disciples might well be called into question as persons suspected. The Soldiers
were rare Witnesses in the Case, for they were asleep when the Feat was done,
as the Overseers of the Press were, as the Rector affirms, when the first
Corrupt Edition happened at Cambridge, p. 23. Whether the Jewish Priests and
the Rector have compared Notes together, I know not; but it is no new thing for
Good Wits to jump, and concur in abstruse Discoveries.

3. Had not the Rector examined the Errata of the Press, more out of ill will
to the Dissenters, than good will to the Public, his great diligence and
observation (which he brags of, p. 22.) might have discovered more faults than
this one in the several Editions of the Bible.

But that was not to his purpose, and it would have been inconsistent with the
Point which he chiefly aimed to insist on, p. 20. which was the accusing of the
Presbyterians with Corrupting the Word of God. Had he searched for other Errors
of the Press, many would have occurred as considerable as this of Ye for We,
which he could not with any color, charge upon the Dissenters.

It is a thing much to be lamented. That several Editions of the Holy Bible,
especially the smaller Volumes, which pass through more hands than the larger,
are very un-correct, and abound with such Errors as are destructive of the
sense.

It Is the Province of some of the Bishops (as I am informed) to take care that
the several Editions of the Bible be well done: And I humbly conceive, it were
an Undertaking worthy the Suprem^ Overseers of the Hock, at least to depute
others to provide wholesome Food for them, by more C^rrect Impressions of the
Bible.

I have a small duodecimo Bible by me, Printed at ^o^don by Charles Bill, and
the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, 1691. which is abominably faulty. It is right
in Act. 6.3. whom we may appoint, and so is free from the Corruption charged
upon the Dissenters; but has several others as bad as that. For Instance,

Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us -- that she should be holy: It should
be, that we should be holy.(...).

Have some Bibles ye for we in Act. 6.3.? So have others she for we in Ephesians.
1.4. Is this Corruption also to be imputed to the Dissenters?

In a Quarto Edition of the Bible, by Hays at Cambridge 1675. Job 6.21. instead
of ye are nothing, it is Printed, we are nothing. So that we and ye are easily
mistaken one for another.

The Rector is a Man of Diligence and Observation, and would do well to find
out the Author and the Reasons of this Corruption.

Gal. 5.21 -- of the which I the you before -- It ought to be -- of the which I
tell you before. 2 Timothy 1.18. The Lord grant unto him that he may and mercy;
instead of -- find mercy. Acts 19.26. They be no Goods which are made with
hands, It should be read, They be no Gods Titus 3.2. Put 'em in mind -- to be
on brawlers, It should be no brawlers. James 5.12. Let your yea be yea, and
your nay, day; It should be read -- and your nay, nay. 1 Pet. 2.17. Love the
brothergood, for brotherhood. Heb. 12.13. oul of the way, for out of the way.
Romans 1.18. who hold we truth (for the truth) in unrighteousness. Hosh. 8.6. the
Cast (for the Calf) of Samaria. -- 12.11. surety (for surely) they are vanity.
Isa. 63.2. -- treats in the Winefat, for treads in Matthew. 17.25. Jesus
prevented how, for him. Act 10.34. God is no resecter (for respecter) of
persons. -- 15.2. them (for they) determined that Paul and Barnabas -- 27.13.
sort, ly, for softly. Romans 2.14. Laws, for Law,(...). -- 2.18. approved, for
approvest,(...). Jer. 23.36. and the battle (it should be the burden) of the
Lord shall ye memion no more. -- 16.13. others Gods, for other Gods. -- 18.3.
on me Wheels, for on the Wheels. Psalm. 36.8. fatners, for fatness of thy
House. Matthew. 20.12. hear of the day, for heat of the day.
I could mention many more Errors of the like nature, which either make no
sense, or a corrupt one. But the Rector's Diligence and Observation can
overlook such little Errors as these, as not pertinent to the Design he had in
hand, which was only to discover such Corruptions as may seem to concern the
Bishops Interest, or give him any occasion to calumniate the Dissenters.

Have a care of such Errors as may seem to favor the Dissenters, and to weaken
the Bishops power, and this mighty man of Diligence, Observation and
Faithfulness, p. 22. can easily pass by all the rest.

CHAP. II. In which his Arguments are Answered.
BEFORE we come to his Proofs, we'll take a view of the Charge, and its
Aggravations, as they lie scattered here and there, in his Epistle and Sermon.
The sum of the Charge is, That he suspects the Presbyterians have corrupted
Acts 6.3. in the Year 1638, and secretly promoted the Coruption ^v^r since. p.
22. 23, 27.

The Aggravations follow:

Some People (says he) will doubtless be angry, that their foul-play is
brought upon the stage, and thus openly taxt -- Again, "The Error must be
confessed, and believed a wilful one -- "When the Presbyterian Government (or
Congregational, I cannot tell which) is publicly maintained by a Text of
Scripture, manifestly corrupted, it is high time to make the World sensible of
the Artifice. Epist.

The Adversaries of Christianity, with design to overthrow the whole frame of
our Religion, have already endeavored to take advantage of the numerous and
various Lections. What will they say, when they observe the purest Kirk in the
World (as is pretended) tampering with, and refining upon the Word of God?
Let Us not dare to suborn any false Witness whatever, much less out of the Word
of Truth; let us leave that Vile Artifice to our Adversaries on both hands. P.
26.

What if one Bible of every Edition thus depraved were burnt, to expose the
craftiness of those Circumcellians among us, who to advance their Design, do
not stick. It seems, to promote it by Falsehood; and grounding themselves upon a
mere Error of the Press, as we will suppose it was at first, deceiving* and
being deceived, do ly against the Holy Ghost, and bring a scandal upon the Word
of God, and our Holy Religion, p. 27.

Is it possible to believe that one unhappy mistake should be so successful, as
to have got into so many Editions, without the helping hand of some wily and
undermining Schismatic? p. 28.

The Charge you see, is very black, and represents the Dissenters as the worst
of M^n. That give advantage to the Enemies of Christianity, That undermine the
Scriptures of Truth, And promote their Opinions by the vilest Artifice.

But when the Accusation is duly considered, and the Arguments by which it is
supp^^ed, are impartially examined, they will be found to prove neither more
nor less, than that the Rector is as destitute of Truth as he is of Charity.

But let us hear how he proves his Charge.

He introduces it with this Question, Who then brought in this false Reading,
(of ye for we in Acts 6.3. p. 23.) And what Party encouraged and promoted it
since?

To which he answers, A clear and ful^ Discovery would deserve a Leca^onth. And
tho I will not promise so much, yet something I have to offer toward it, which
tho it amounts not to a direct Proof against any Persons, yet I think, may pass
for a good Circumstantial one.

1. It Is observable here, That he does not pretend to a direct Proof, and yet
through his whole Discourse would have it taken for granted, That his
Accusation is as true as Gospel. He would craftily insinuate a Belief into his
Reader, of what he hesitates about himself. One while he positively charges the
Dissenters with Foul-play, and says, Their Error must be confessed, and
believed a wilful one. Epist. Dedic.

Another while he only questions the Dissenters as persons suspected to have
secretly contributed to the corruption of this place, at least to the
continuance of it. p. 23.

And in another place he says, They do not stick, it seems, to promote their
Design by falsehood, p. 27.

Again, Admit they did not contrive the Corruption of this place, yet now,
belike, contribute to the confirming it, p. 24.

Here Is a manifest inconsistency in the Charge, which spoils the Credit of the
whole Story.

All the Evidence amounts to no more, than that it seems to be so, and belike
it is so. And yet with what assurance does he accuse them of lying against the
Holy Ghost? p. 27. It Is well he is not endued with the plenitude of Apostolical
power, to inflict upon us the punishment of Ananias and Sapphira: But to make
up the defect of this power, he moves those in Authority to expose the
Craftiness of those Circumcellians among us, who promote their design by
falsehood, ibid.

By the way, I cannot but Note the new Name he is pleased to give the
Dissenters. It seems he had read somewhere of the Circumcelliones, a barbarous
Sect of the Donatists, that murdered such as opposed their Opinions, and laid
violent hands on themselves that they might be thought to have suffered
Martyrdom by the hands of the Catholics. Aug. de Hocr.


His Tongue is his own to call what Names he pleases, but he knows who says,
If any man among you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Torgue -- this
man's Religion is vain, James 1.26.

You must not wonder that he overlooks a little Rule of Grammar in rendering
Circumcelliones Circumcellians, for he does not seem to tie himself to such
Scripture-Rules Matthew. 5.22.2.
as concern the ordering of our Speech, when his Choler is up against the
Dissenters.

He is uncertain whom to fix this Charge upon, whether on a s^ngle person, or a
Party of Men combined together to corrupt the Word of God.

He seems to point at a single person in the following words, Is it possible to
believe that one unhappy Instance should get into so many Editions, without the
helping hand of some wily and undermining Schismatic, p. 28. In other places
he taxes the Dissenters in general, p. 23. Sometimes he makes the
Presbyterians the guilty Party. p. 22. 24.

And in another Humor he lays it on the Presbyterians or Corgregational Men,
but confesses he cannot tell which, Epist. Dedic. So that the Accusation falls
upon a sort of individuum v^gum, which he is to seek for.

Thus the Subjects of the Charge are as uncertain as the Evidence of it.

3. All he pretends to, is a sort of Circumstantial Proof, as he calls it, and
upon this sandy foundation, he builds his whole Charge, which he aggravates
with all the little Rhetoric he is Master of.

He suggests Four Arguments by way of Circumstantial Proof, which are as
follows.

Argument I.

I must call the Dissenters into Question (says he) because the Alteration
happened in the Year 1638. Presbytery being then in the Ascendant, I say, just
in that nick of time when all things were in Preparation, and tended to the
Subversion of Episcopacy, Scotland having already made a Conspiracy, and bound
'emselves under a Curse to Extirpate it; and England, even a great part of the
Universities 'emselves, running into the same Excess of Riot. So that here is a
Concurrence of the Circumstance of Time, and a shrewd one too, sufficient to
ground a suspicion upon.

To this I Answer:

1. Admit there were a Concurrence of the Circumstance of time, Will it follow
the Corruption was designed? May not two Events happen at the same time, that
have no relation to one another?

How would he like it, if the Dissenters should charge the Episcopal Party, of
which he is one, with the false Readings I mentioned above, and should urge for
Proof that the Impression came out in 1691, when the Episcopal Party had the
Ascendant, none being admitted to any places of Trust without Conformity? Would
not this way of Arguing look as silly as it would be malicious? Would not the
Manager of such a ridiculous accusation, especially in a Public Sermon, be
judged sitter for Bedlam than a Pulpit? This way of Reasoning, if I may
Catachrestically call it so, is the same with that of the Rector's.

The abovementioned Errors of the Press were in 91, when the Episcopal Party
were more in the Ascendant than the Presbyterians in 38. Here is a concurrence
of the circumstance of time, and yet I am apt to think, the weakest Dissenter
in the Land has more Sense and Honesty than to charge the Episcopal Church with
the Errors of the Press.

2. But to do him Justice, the Rector is so kind to the Dissenters as to Answer
his own Argument for 'em. His Argument pretends to prove from the circumstance
of time, that the first alteration of we into ye, was designed: But himself
acknowledges again and again in other places, that the first ^^ror was an
unwilling one; so he speaks in the Epistle. And in p. 27. he calls it an
accide^tal slip, an unfortunate oversight, and a mere error of the Press. And
in Page 28, he calls it, an unhappy mistake.

So that his First Argument is impertinent, himself being Judge. But for
further satisfaction, I will add a few Remarks more.

3. He is grievously out in his Chronological History, for Presbytery was not
in the Ascendant in England in 1638, as he suggests. Conformity was then at the
highest, and urged by Archbishop Lau^ and his Faction with great severity.

Many were Suspended, Deprived and Excommunicated for not reading the Book of
Sports, to countenance the Profanation of the Lord's Day in 1637. I find in a
Certificate of the Bishop of Norwick, toward the latter end of the Year 37, an
Account of about Thirty Ministers Excommunicated and Suspended Rushw. Collect.
Part II. p. 462.
, by which we may guess what was done in other Dioceses.

In 1638 many more were suspended for not Reading the Common Prayers in their
Hoods and Surplices, as Dr. Heylin affirms, Life of Land, p 365.
. This and other things (says he) kept off the greatest part of the Rigid
Calvinists from exercising their Gifts, as formerly, in great Market Towns.

The severities of that time were such, that many were driven to Foreign
Countries for shelter; some to Holland, others to New England, whither the
Archbishop de^gn'd to pursue 'em, and to Dragoon 'em into the English
Conformity. Take the History of Dr. Heylin's own words, It was once under
Consulation of the Chief Physicians, to send a Bishop over to them, and back
him with some Forces to comp^l, if he were not otherwise able to persuade
obedience; but the troubles of Scotland strangled this Design. Life of Laud, p.
369.


The Presbyterians in 38 were deprived, not only of the Pulpit, but of the
Press also, and therefore it is a very unlikely Story that they should Corrupt
the Word of God in that Year.

Hear the Historian: Nor was the Archbishop less intent upon all Advantages
for keeping down the Genevian Party, and hindering them from Printing and
Publishing any thing which might disturb the Church's Peace, or Corrupt her
Doctrine. To this End he procured a Decree to be Passed in the Star Chamber, on
July 1. 1637. to Regulate Printing, and prevent all Abuses of it, to the
disturbance of the Church.

The Reader may see the Decree at large in Rushworth and Heylin. The latter has
this Remark on it. Heyl. Ibid. P. 362, 363.
By means of this Decree the Archbishop had so provided both at home and
abroad, that neither the Patience of the State should be Exercised with
continual Libels, nor the Church troubled by unwarrantable and outlandish
Doctrines.

In pursuance of this Decree against Printing or Selling Vnlicens'd Books, he
hindered the Importation of the Geneva Bibles with Notes from Holland, where
some of them had been Seized by the care of Boswel, the Resident at the Hague.
In the beginning of 38 he received advertisement of a new Impression of those
Bibles in Holland, designed for England, if the terror of this Decree did not
stop their coming Laud's Life, P. 364.
.

B^ this it appears what little Credit is to be given to the Rector's Secret
History of the Presbyterians corrupting the Word of God in 3^, when he so
notoriously contradicts the Public History of that Time. He might as well have
said, That Episcopacy was in the Ascendant in 1648, as that Presbytery was so
in 1638.

But (says ^e) all things were in Preparation, and tended to the Subversion of
Episcopacy.

The Preparations were so Secret, that n e but the Rector can make a Discovery
o^ them, which he has not yet done, and so we leave 'em among the Chimera's of
his own Invention.

I know nothing in appearance that tended then to the Subversion of Episcopacy
in England, except ^ines, Impr^s, Ba^^^^^^res, and other Severities against
Conscientiou^ Men (under the odious Name of He^^^ns) might have such a
tendency, by moving the Compassions of the People, who are apt (...) take part
with the Persecuted.

But Scotland, says the Rector, had already made a Conspiracy, and bound
themselves under a Curse to Extirpate Episcopacy.

Did the Scotch-Conspiracy depend upon altering of we into ye, in Acts 6.3. in
the Cambridge-Edition? Or did the Alteration depend on the Scotch-Conspiracy?
Wa^ there another Conspiracy between the Scotch-Conspirators and the
Cambridge-Printer? The Rector, Charitable Man! has the Faith to believe it, but
he is not so happy as to be abl^ to prove it.

How far the Scotch-Govenanters bound themselves under a Curse to extirpate
Episcopacy, pretend not to determine.

This is plain, that the Covenant which they subscribed in 1638, was the same
in matter of Religion, with the Covenant which was signed long before by King
James (the First Laud's Life, P. 364.
England) and the whole Kingdom of Scotland. This is expressly affirmed by K.
Charles] in his Proclamation against the Seditious Pradices of some in
Scotland, Dated at White-Hal^ Feb. 27, In these Words:

That Covenant in our Dear Father's time, was condescended unto by him, and s^^
the Subject (at the humble Petition of the Geteral Assembly it self.) permitted
by him to Sign it: We say it again. That our Covenant was Rejected by them,
because Commanded by us; and this is manifest, because for Matters of Religion
ours agreed in a^^ things with their own Covenant Rush. Collect. Par. 2. p. 831.
.

I Justify not the Irregularities of that Time, but they were occasioned by
Archbishop ^^ua's Innovations, contrary to Archbishop Spotswood's Advice.

King Charles I. in the Year 38. Issued out a Proclamation, requiring all
Persons to Subscribe the Old Covenant, in hopes of giving Satisfaction to the
Discontented Party by that Condescension, and by another Declaration of his
Pleasure anent Anulling the Service Book, Book of Canons, and High Commission,
discharging the pressing of the Practice of the Five Articles of Perth But the
Peoples Jealousies of the unlimited Power of their Bishops were grown then so
high, that nothing would satisfy 'em but the Abolition of that New Order,
which had been imposed upon 'em (as they conceived) contrary to their Old
National Covenant, by which they Judged themselves obliged to maintain the
Presbyterian Government.

However, the Scotch-Bishops, after some hesitation, did upon October. 5. 1638.
Sign the Old Confession of Faith (which had been Subscribed at first by K.
James, and his Household, in the Year 1580. and afterward by Persons of all
Ranks, in the Year 1581. by Ordinance of the Lords of the Secret Council, and
Acts of the General Assembly. And again was Subscribed by all sorts of Persons
in the Year 1590. with a General Band annexed, for Maintenance of the true
Religion, and the King^s Person)

But being sensible that this Confession favored Presbytery, they Signed it
with these Restrictions, viz. That they did not hereby Abjure or Condemn the
Episcopal Government, and the Five Articles of Perth; and that by adhering to
the Discipline of the Reformed Kirk of Scotl. they mean not any Immutability of
that Presbyterial Government which was A^. 1581 Rush. Ibid. P. 706.
.

By this it appears, That the Presbyterian was the Ancient Government of the
Kirk of Scotland, to which they were obliged by an Ancient Covernant, long
before 38, and that Episcopacy was an Innovation upon their First Constitution.

I mention these things by the by, to vindicate the present Establishment of
the Church of Scotland, as not only agreeable to the Scotch-Inclination, but to
the Ancient Scotch-Confession; and therefore agreeable to their Inclinations,
because agreeable to their Confession.

The Rector basely Reflects upon the Act of Settling Presbytery in Scotland
(though touched by the Royal Scepter) because it makes Presbytery most
agreeable to the Inclination of the Scotch Nation, which is just such another
Reason (says he) as an Adulterer also might give for his Wantonness P. 25.
.

He might more truly have said, which is just such another Reason as an honest
Man might give for enjoying the Wife of his Youth, which had been violently
detained from him, as Michal was from David.

The Words which he reflects on are His Majesty's own Words, in his Letter of
Instructions to his Commissioner in Scotland; though the Rector would Reproach
the Presbyterians, he should have spoken with more respect to the King, and not
so unhandsomly Reflect on His Majesty's Words, to whom he owes a greater
deference.

The Act affirms the Presbyterian Church Government to be agreeable to the Word
of God, and most conducive to the Advancement of true Piety and Godliness. But
the Rector wisely overlooks these Words, which would have spoiled his wanton
Comparison.

The same Statute Establishes the Confession of Faith, containing the Sum and
Substance of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and revives the
Presbyterian Church Government and Discipline, which had been Ratified and
Established by the 114 Act, Ja. 6. Parl. 12. Anno. 1592. and thereafter
received by the general Consent of the Scotch Nation Hist. of the late Re^col.
in Scotl. P. 252, 253.
. It the Scotch Inclination be agreeable to the Word of God, their ancient
Confession of Faith, and the old Laws of the Kingdom, I hope it is a little more
justifiable than the wanton Inclinations of an Adulterer.

I crave the Reader's Pardon for this Digression, occasioned by the Rector's
Impertinent Reflection upon the Church Government of Scotland.

I have done with his first Reason, when I have noted the last Words of it --
And England, even a great part of the Universities, were running to the same
excess of Riot. I presume he means they were not well affected to Episcopacy.

Presbytery is excess of Riot with this Gentleman. I remember the time when not
running into excess of Riot was Crime enough to bring a Man under Suspicion of
being a Presbyterian. Whether the Universities have improved in Morals since
they were rid of Presbytery, I will not presume to Determine, but the
Corruption of Manners which too many bring with them thence, is no great
Demonstration of it.

But it will not be amiss to take a view of the state of Cambridge in 1638,
when and where the first Corruption happened. It was far from being
Presbyterian or Puritan.

Six of the Heads of Colleges were fully in the Interests of Archbishop Laud,
viz.

Dr. Consins, Mr. of Peterhouse; Dr. Laney, Mr. of Pembroke-Hall; Dr. Martin,
Mr. of Queens College; Dr. Pasch, Mr. of Clare-Hall; Dr. Beal, Mr. of St.
John's; Dr. Stern, Mr. of Jesus.

These were all High Men for Bishop Laud, and were afterward put out by the
Parliament.

The Six following were more moderate, but fully for the King, and Church of
England, viz.

Dr. Collins, Regius Professor, Provost of King's College; Dr. Samuel Ward,
Professor of Divinity, and Mr. of Sidney College; Dr. Holdsworth, Mr. of
Emanuel; Dr. Brownrig, Mr. of Catharine-Hall; Dr. Comber, Mr. of Trinity; Dr.
Smith, Mr. of Magdalen. All these were put out by the Parliament, only Dr.
Smith died about the beginning of 1643.

The Three following were not put out by the Parliament, but were far from
being looked upon as Puritans or Presbyterians, viz.

Dr. Bainbrig, Mr. of Christ's College; Dr. Love, Mr. of Bennet College; Dr.
Eden, a Civilian, Mr. of Trinity-Hall.

Dr. Badgecroft, Mr. of Caius College, was a Person of little Note, but
whether he Died in his Place, or was put out, I cannot learn.

This State of Cambridge was communicated to me by the Learned and Judicious
Mr. Francis Tallents, who was a Student then in 38.

By this it appears what a ridiculous Story it is, that the Universities were
running into the same Excess of Riot with Scotland in 1638. But I proceed to
his 2d Argument, viz.

Argument II.

The Corruption in appearance favors the Dissenters and their Design against
Episcopacy. If then any, they may be suspected for being willing to have it at
least continued and propagated.

I Answer:

1. He durst not say, the Corruption favors the Dissenters, for he knows the
contrary; but he slily says, it does in appearance favor 'em. This appearance
is only to himself, for I believe no Dissenter ever thought of it.

2. I know no Principle of any sober Dissenters that is favored by this
Corruption.

It is the professed Principle of the Presbyterians, That no man ought to take
upon him the Office of a Minister of the Gospel, until he be lawfully called,
and Ordained thereunto by the Presbytery. See the Directory for Ordination.

Both Presbyterians and Congregational-Men, whom he disjunctively accuses,
have declared their United Judgment about the Ministry in the Heads of their
Agreement (Printed at London 1691) in which they Unanimously declare for the
Election and Ordination of such as undertake the Ministerial Office, the former
they ascribe to the People; the latter to the Elders or Pastors. Chap. 2. Of
the Ministry.

This then is the pernicious Principle which he fancies the Dissenters would
support by corrupting Act. 6.3. viz. that Ordinarily the People have power to
choose their own Ministers. This I confess is asserted by the United Brethren.

And could they be under any Temptation to corrupt a Text of Scripture to
assert a Principle that may be justified by express Scripture, and is asserted
in this very place without any corrupt Reading? Act. 6.3. Wherefore, Brethren,
look ye out among you Seven Men of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and
Wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.

Here the People choose the Deacons, the Apostles by Imposition of Hands and
Prayer, Ordain or Appoint the Persons so chosen.

The Rector himself, in another Mood, allows this power to the People, or
Multitude of Believers. For thus he speaks, The Apostles commanded the People
to choose seven men, Act. 6.3. So St. Peter exhorted them to choose one Tent.
Novum, p. 4.
Again, The choice of the Persons to be p^esented unto the Apostle; was made by
the People. p. 3.


Whether the Rector of Bury were acco^ding to this Apostolical practice, chosen
by the People, he himself best knows, and the good People of Bury may do well
to consider.

Behold here our Accuser asserts the very Principle, in favor of which he
pretends the Presbyterians or Corgr^gational Men (for he knows not which) have
corrupted the Word of God.

Now suppose a peevish Recriminator should retort the Charge upon him, and say,
there is shrewd suspicion that the Rector of Bury has contributed to the
corrupting of Act. 6.3. at least to the continuance and increase of it, Sermon.
p. 23.
; because it is done in favor of the Popular Principle he maintains; what can
the Rector say for himself? He stands condemned out of his own Mouth. If his
Argument be good against the Dissenters, it is good also against himself. For he
allows the People as much Power in making their Ministers as the Dissenters do.
Either then let him honestly acquit his Brethren, or condemn himself. They are
conscious to their own innocence; let him, who is acquainted with the secret
practices of the Press, come off as well as he can.

3. The altering of we into ye in Act. 6.3. cannot be imputed to the
Dissenters, or to any Design of theirs to assert the Peoples power of setting
up their own Ministers, p. 25. because the Seven Deacons in Act. 6, 3. were no
Ministers of the Word and Sacrament, in the Judgment of the Dissenters. They
have all along pleaded. That the Deacons in Act. 6. were Ministers of Tables,
and not of the Word. Is it likely they should corrupt a Text to assert the
Peoples Power in making Gospel Ministers, which in their Opinion speaks not of
those that Minister in Gospel Mysteries?

It belongs not to the Office of Deacons (says the Westminster Assembly) to
Preach the Word or administer the Sacraments, but to take special care in
distributing to the necessities of the Poor. See their Advice to the Parliament
concerning Church Government, in the Directory.

Argument III.

On the contrary it cannot (says our Accuser) with any color of reason be
imagined that the Episcopal Party designed to corrupt this place, p. 24.

Answer.

This proves nothing against the Dissenters, nor do they charge the Episcopal
Party with any design of corrupt^ng it, tho the Press was in their hands, and
strictly guarded against the Puritans, when it was first done, if it was in the
Year 1638, as he supposes.

Nor will any one of sense (adds he) believe that the Episcopal Party, were
willing to have that thrust out of the Scripture, upon which their Church
Government seems to be built; or to substitute in its room what in appea^ance,
overthrows their Polity, ibid.

I never understood before, that the Episcopal Government was built on this Act
of the Apostles in ordaining Deacons. Doubtless the Episcopal Party will reckon
themselves highly obliged to this Master-Build^r, who has supported the
Foundations of their Go^^rnment by so strong an Argument as is here proposed,
viz. The Ap^stles Ordained Dea^^^s to se^^^ ^ables, therefore the Church ought
to be governed by Bis^ops. But he spoils all (...) ^y s^^ing, That their Church
Government seems to be built on this Scripture, which, in ^lain E^g^^sh, is as
much as if he had said, it is not really built upon it. This overthrow^ (...)
P^^son, That it was their interest not to corrupt it; so that their Cause not
being really s^^^orted by this Text, they might be the Authors of the
Corruption, according to the R^cto^'s way of arguing.

Thus the Episcopal Party are more obliged to the Charity of the Dissenters in
acquitting 'em from a designed Corruption of this place, than to the strength
of the Rector's Argument.

Argument IV.

That Party ought in all Reason to be suspected of Foul-Play herein, who under
color of this new Text of Scripture, assert and support the new Popular
Government of the Church, as some of the Presbyterians do at this day.

For Pro^f of this he tells us a Memorable Story (as he calls it) of a
Cameronian (one of the most rigid Sects of the Scotch Presbyterians) who
Preaching some Years since, concerning the Peoples Power of setting up their
own Teachers, urged this corrupt Reading for Proof.

Answer.

1. It is a pretty way of proving that the English Presbyterians, assert the
Popular Government of the Church from this Text, because a Scotch Cameronian
has done so some Years since.

2. I expected he would have instanced in some English Presbyterians that had
asserted the new Popular Government, as he calls it, from this false reading,
which he charge on the Dissenters; but for Proof against the English
Dissenters, he sends us to the Scotch Presbyterians, and to the most Rigid
amongst them. Does our Accuser here manage his Evidence with the least^ show of
Common Honesty? He puts in a Charge against the Body of English Dissenters, and
brings in for Guilty, a single Scotch Cameronian.

3. The Scotch Evidence is by Hearsay, without so much as naming the Person,
Time or Place, nor producing any Vouchers for the Proof of it. He promised us a
good circumstantial proof, p. 23. and he gives us one divested of all its
circumstances.

He picks up a spurious Story, p^rhaps in the next Coffee-House or Alehouse,
that carries not the least Evidence of Truth with it, and this he legitimates
as far as his Word will go, and recommends from the Pulpit as a sacred Oracle
of God.

I will not lay the B^at at the Rector's Door, but since he is an Undertaker
for it, he ought to produce the true Father, lest he tempt such as know him
not, to suspect he is the Man.

I have more Charity for him (as little as he has for us) than to impute the
Origina^ of the Fable unto him; but he cannot be excused from taking up a
reproach against hi^ Neighbor, which is inconsistent with the Character of a
Citizen of Zion, Psalm. 15.3.

4. It is scarce Credible, That a Cameronian Presbyterian should assert a
Doctrine directly contrary to the Presbyterian Principles. It Is well known none
is admitted into the Ministry in Scotland, without the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery.

5. Suppose some ignorant Cameronian had been abused by that corrupt reading
(which we have no reason to believe on the Rector's word) and if he had abused
others by a wrong Quotation, must the Error of one Man be charged upon the
whole Church of Scotland? And must the Error of one Scotch-m^n be charged upon
all the Englis^ P^esb^te^ians? This is such a piece of Justice, as none will
defend, but a Hama^, who s^^l^s to be revenged of all the J^^rs, because one
N^^^ ^^c^l had offended.

Thus I have Examined his Four Circumsta^tial Pr^^fs, which app^ar to be as
silly as they are malicious.

He suggests one thing more in a Ma^ginal Note, which I had almost over-^ooked.

The Corruption (says he) crept in first in the year 1638, in a Bible Printed
at Carbridge by Tho. Buck and Reger Da^id, Printers to the University; the
latter of which was indeed the Manager of the Press, and in the Interest of
that Presbyterian Party.

1. Whether R. Da^iel was in the Interest of the Presbyterian Party, I know
not; but I have no cause to believe it, because he affirms it. He has made his
Word too cheap already to be taken for an Oracle.

A Gentleman Mr. F. Tallents of Salop.
that was in Cambrilge in 36, and continued Fellow of a College till (...)
assures me he knew Tho. ^uck very w^^l, and gives this Character of him, that
he wa^ an Eminent, Grave Church-^f- England Man, and one of the Ornaments of
it, and the Principal Manager of the Press. The same Gentleman tells me, he
knew Roger Daniel also, but he was never Reputed to be a Puritan, nor is it
likely, that Mr. Buck would bring in a person of the Puritan Principles.

2. But suppose he were a Presbyte^ian, (which is not very likely, considering
what a wa^chfull Eye Archbishop Laud had upon the Printing-Presses at that
time) may not a Man be a Presbyterian without being a corrupter of the Word of
God? We have proved already, that the Corruption of Act. 6.3. favors the
Presbyterians, no more than it does the Episcopal Party.

3. He acquits R. Da^iel by a kind of Self-Contradiction from a d^sign'd
Corruption of the place, for he himself acknowl^dges the first Corruption to be
an Oversight, a mere Error of the Press, and an accidental Slip, p 27.

4. I find a Cambri^ge Edition of the Bible in Twelves, in the Year 1648. by R.
Daniel, which has we, and not ye, in Acts 6.3. Whom we may appoint. This is a
clear Evidence, That Daniel's Edition in 38, was not designedly Corrupted, for
then he would have repeated it in a time when the Press was in the Power of the
Anti-Episcopal-Party.

It Is true, the Error has been repeated since in several Impressions of the
English Bible, but without any Influence or Connivance of the Dissenters, as he
unworthily Suggests.

An Error in one Impression is ca^^ly propagated, because the Frames of the
Bible are often kept entire, and not broken by Half Sheets, as in Printing
other Books, and so the same Set of Frames serves for a Second and Third
Impression, and so forward, until the Letters decay and grow useless.

CHAP. III. More Considerations to show the Falsity of the Rector's Charge.
1. NO Protestant Dissenters have ever Vindicated that Corrupt Reading, or
urged it in favor of a popular Government of the Church, in any of their
Writings against the Bishops and Ceremonies.

Let him Examine all that has been written since 1638, to 1696, and Produce, if
he can, any one Argument Supported by this False Reading. Had the Dissenters
designedly Corrupted this place to favor their Design against Episcopacy, the
Corruption would have appeared one time or other in some of their Polemic
Dissertations.

2. The Dissenters have Written several Commentaries and Annotations on the
Holy Bible, perhaps more than the Episcopal Party, and many of them have
written on Acts 6.3. and not one of them have attempted to Confirm the Corrupt
Reading of it. Mr. Baxter's Second Edition reads, Whom we may appoint: So do
the Continuators of Mr. Pool; so does Du-Veil on the Acts, though he was an
Anabaptist, as I am informed. Mr. Clark, in his Quarto Edition of the New
Testament has ye, but by a mistake of the Printer, for his Marginal Notes are
not corrupt, and the Error is rectified in his Fol. Edit. Printed at Land.
1690. That latter Edition has we.

3. Had the Corruption been designed in favor of the Dissenters, it would have
been promoted when they were uppermost, and had the power of the Press.

I have taken a little Pains to examine the Editions of most Years between
1640, and 1660, when the Anti-Episcopal Party were in the Ascendant, and I find
'em generally right in Acts 6.3.

For more Satisfaction to the Inquisitive Reader, I will exhibit the Editions
of each Year, which are as follows:

The Impression of the Bible in

1638 London, by Robert Barker, Octavo, has we, (and not ye) in Acts 6.3. 1639
London, by Barker has we. 1639 London, by Barker and Bill, we. 1639 Cambr. by
Th. Buck and Roger Daniel, we. 1640 Land. by R. Barker, Twelves, we. 1642
Amsterdam, with Beza and Jun. Notes, Folio, we. This Edition is much
Mis-Printed. 1642 Edinburgh, by Eva^ Tyler, 24. we. 1642 Land. by Barker,
Octavo, we. 1643 Cambr. by the Printers to the Univer. we. 1643 Amsterd. Fol.
with the Geneva Notes we. 1644 Amsterd. Twelves, we. 1646 Amsterd. by Bentley,
we. 1646 Land. by the Assigns of J. Bill, and C. Barker, we. 1646 Land. by the
Comp. of Stationers, we. 1647 Land. by Barker and the Assigns of Bill, we. 1647
Land. by the Company of Stationers, we. 1648 Land. by Will. Bentley, we. 1648
Land. by the Comp. of Stationers, we. 1648 Land. by R. Barker and Assigns of J.
Bill, we. 1648 Land. by Evan Tyler, we. 1648 Cambr. by R. Daniel, Twelves, we.
1649 Land. by the Comp. of Stationers, we. 1649 Land. by the Company of
Stationers, Octavo, we. 1649 Land. by the Company of Stationers, Quarto, with
Geneva Notes, we. 1650 Land. by Roger Norton, Octavo, we. 1650 Land. by the
Comp. of Stat. la^ge Oct. we. 1651 Land. by the Comp. of Stationers, we. 1651
Land. by Roger Norton, Octavo, we. 1652 Land. by the Company of Stationers,
Octavo, we. 1652 Land. by J. Field, Printer to the Parliament of England,
Twelves, we. 1653 Land. by J. Field, Printer to the Parl. Twelves, we. 1653
Land. by Field, 24. we. 1653 Land. by Evan Tyler, we. 1653 Land. for Giles
Calvert, we. 1653 Land. by J. Field, Parl. Print. we. 1654 Land. by Evan Tyler,
we. 24. 1655 Land. by Norton, we. 1655 Land. by E. T. for the Society of Stat.
we. 1656 Land. by H. Hills, and J. Field, Twelv. we. 1656 Land. by Jo. Field,
one of his Highness's Printers, 8vo. we. 1657 Land. by James Flesher, we. 1657
Cambr. by Jo. Field, large 8vo, ye. 1657 Cambr. by R. Daniel, ye. 1658 Cambr.
by Jo. Field, one of his Highness's Printers, Twelv. we. 1658 Cambr. by Jo.
Field, one of his Highness's Printers, 24. we. 1659 Cambr. by Jo. Field, large
Fol. ye.
By this Table of Editions it appears, That most Impressions from 40 to 60 are
right. I could yet find but three Editions that have ye in Acts 6.3. during the
whole time of the Long Parliament, which I have noted in the Year 1657, one by
Field, the other by Daniel, and a third by Field, 59. These must be accidental,
because Flesher's Edition of 1657 is right, and Field and Daniel are right in
the Editions of other Years.

All which makes it very Evident, the Presbyterians had no design to falsify
the Sacred Text.

4. Several Editions in King Charles the Second's time, when the Bishops, and
not the Dissenters had the Management of the Press, are Corrupt, and have, whom
ye may appoint, in Acts 6.3.

I will present the Reader with the true and false Editions in two distinct
Tables, from the Year 1660, to this present Year 1696.

The true Editions that have whom we may appoint, are as follows:

1660. Land. by Hills and Field, large Octavo, we. 1662. Cann's Bible we. 1663.
Cambr. J. Field, Quarto, we. 1664. Cann's Bible with References has we, though
a very Corrupt Edition. 1666. Cambr. by J. Field, Quarto, we. 1669. Land. by
Bill and Barker, we. 1669. Savoy, by Bill and Barker, large Octavo, we. 1669.
Land. by Barker, we. 1669. Land. by Bill and Barker, Octavo, we. 1670. Cambr.
by J. Hays, Quarto, we. 1673. Land. by Barker and Bill, Octavo, we. 1675.
Oxford, Quarto, we. 1675. Land. by the Assigns of Bill and Barker, large
Octavo, we. 1675. Cambr. by J. Hays, Quarto, we. 1676. Land. by Chr. Barker,
Quarto, we. 1677. Cambr. by J. Hays, Quarto, we. 1678. Land. by Bill, Barker,
Newcomb and Hills, Octavo, we. 1679. Oxford, Quarto, we. 1680. Cambr. by J.
Hays, Quarto, we. 1681. Edingburgh, by the Heir of Andr. Anderson, Printer to
the King, Quarto, we. 1682. Oxford, Octavo, we. 1683. Oxford, Quarto, we. 1684.
Land. Bill, Newcomb and Hills, we. 1684. Oxford, Fol. we. 1685. -- Twelves, we,
and another 24. we. 1686. -- we. 1687. Land. by Bill, Hills and Newcomb, we.
1687. Oxford, we. 1688. Land, by Bill, Hills and Newcomb, we. 1688. Oxford, 24.
we. 1689. Oxford, we. 169^. Land. Chr. Bill, and Tho. Newcomb, large Octavo,
we. 1691. -- by Bill and Newcomb, Twelves, we. 1691. -- by Bill and Newcomb*
Octavo, we. 1692. -- by Bill, and the Executrix of Tho. Newcomb, we. 1693. --
by Bill, we. 169^. -- by Bill, and the Executrix of Newcomb, we. 1694. -- by
Bill, Newcomb and Hills, we 1695. -- by Bill, Newcomb and Hills, we. 1695.
Oxford -- we 1695. London the New Testament; with Mr. Baxter's Notes, we. 1696.
-- by Bill and others, we. 1696. -- by Chr. Bill, and Executrix of Tho.
Newcomb, we.
It Is observable here, 1. That Two Editions of Came, which is all I have seen
of his, have We. He was a rigid Bromnist, but did not mis-print this place.

2. Mr. Baxter's Edition of the New Testament, for which he was Fined and
Imprisoned, has We. His very Enemies could not charge him with corrupting the
Sacred Text.

3. The Scotch Edition in 1681, has We; so has a former Edition which I noted
in 1642, and three more by Evan Tyler, the Scotch Printer in 53, 54, 55. These
are all the Scotch Editions I have yet seen, by which we may judge of the rest:
Tho he confidently affirms, without the least Proof, That the Scotch Bibles are
generally faulty in this passage p. 28. And, That the Scotch Kirk ^^^p^rs with,
and refines upon the Word of God. P. 26. But perhaps, I may give a more full
account of the Scotch Bibles hereafter.

I will subjoin an Account of such faulty Editions as I have met with from 1660
to 1696, which are as follows:

1660. London, by John Field. ye may appoint, Act. 6.3. 1661. Cambridge, by J.
Field, large 8vo. ye 1663. London, by Bill and Barker -- ye 1665. -- by J. Bill
and Chr. Barker, ye. 1666. -- by Bill and Barker, ye. 1668. -- by Bill and
Barker, ye. 1668. Savoy, by Bill and Barker, ye. 1670. Savoy by the Assigns of
John Bill and Chr. Barker, ye. 1671. -- by the Assigns of J. Bill and Chr.
Barker, ye (large 8vo.) 1671. Oxford, small 8vo. ye. 1672. Savoy, by the
Assigns of Bill and Barker, 12. ye. 1672. London, by the Assigns of Bill and
Barker, 24. ye. 1673. -- by Bill and Barker. 24. ye. 1673. -- by the Assigns of
Bill and Barker, 8vo. ye. 1674. -- by the Assigns of Bill and Barker, ye. 1675.
-- by the Assigns of Bill and Barker, 12. ye. 1676. -- by Bill and Barker, 12.
ye. 1676. -- by the Assigns of Bill and Barker, 24. ye. 1677. -- by the Assigns
of Bill and Barker, ye. 1678. -- by Bill, Barker, Newcomb and Hills, ye. 1679.
-- by Bill, Newcomb and Hills, large 8vo. ye. 1679. -- by Bill, Newcomb and
Hills, 12. ye. 1680. Oxford, 8vo. ye. 1680. London, by the Assigns of Bill,
Newccomb and Hills, ye 1681. Oxford, small 8vo. ye. 1681. London, by Bill,
Newcomb and Hills, ye. 8vo. 1681. -- by Bill, Newcomb and Hills, 24. ye. 1682.
-- by Bill, Newcomb and Hills, ye. 1682. -- by Hills and Newcomb, ye. 1682. --
by the Assigns of Jo. Bill, Tho. Newcomb and Henry Hills, large 8vo. ye. 1683.
-- by Hills and Newcomb, ye. 1683. -- by the Assigns of Bill, and by Hills and
Newcomb, ye. 1684. -- by the Assigns of Bill, and by Hills and Newcomb, ye.
1685. -- by the Assigns of J. Bill, and by Hills and Newcomb, ye. 1686. -- by
Charles Bill, H. Hills and Tho. Newcomb, ye. 1687. -- by Chapter Bill, Hills and
Newcomb, ye. 1689. Oxford, large 8vo. ye. 1691. -- 12. ye.
Observe in these Editions:

1. They are all Octavo's or Duodecimo's of the larger or smaller size, but
where the contrary is expressed.

2. I find no less than Thirty Eight Editions that are faulty in Act. 6.3. Our
Author tells us That upon Examination he has found the first accidental slip
repeated since in at least half a dozen Impressions of the Bible here in
England, p. 27. And in another place he says, His Diligence and Observation
has not been a little, and managed with all care and faithfulness in examining
this point, P. 22. If his Faithfulness be no greater than his Diligence and
Observation, I doubt it is very little. Wonderful Diligence! to be able to
discover about Six or Seven faulty Impressions in near Forty.

3. I can meet but with two faulty Editions in King William's Time, and both in
Oxford. which, he says, has, for ought he can learn, been somewhat happier, in
this kind, than her Sister Cambridge, P. 22. But in this also, he is somewhat
mistaken, as he is in his other accounts: For I find Five Oxford Editions that
are faulty. And I hope, he will not say, That Presbytery was in the Ascendant
when these Corruptions happened there.

4. Different Editions by the same hand do vary, some having we, others ye,
which is an evidence the Corruption is accidental. Bill and Barker's Edition in
Octavo, 1673, has We; another Edition by Bill and Barker in 24's, 1673, has
Ye. So in 1678, and in 1687.

5. From the whole it appears, that most of the Corrupt Editions were in K.
Charles the II's time, when the Episcopal Party were in the Ascendant, and had
the sole Management of the Press.

Therefore let the Rector lay the Saddle on the right Horse, and when he has
done, let him try his Skill, by another Tentamen novum, to make it fit as easy
as he can. I will not intrude upon his Province, to enquire into the Reasons of
multiplying Corrupt Editions in that Reign, in which Debauchery and Corruption
of Manners were in the Ascendant, which might render it a little difficult for
the Masters Printers, to get sober and conscientious Correctors.

I am of this Gentleman's mind, That some effectual course should be taken to
rectify not only this (which is all his concern) but other mistakes of the
Press; but we differ in the Method of curing these Evils.

He recommends to those in Authority, the burning of one or more Bibles thus
depraved, as a proper Remedy, P. 27, 28.

I confess, I love not the burning of the Holy Bible, especially for one
literal mistake, because by the same Rule, all our Bibles might be in danger of
the Flames, for it will be very difficult, if not next to impossible, to find
one Bible without a literal fault. And it is not fit the Sacred Scriptures
should be obnoxious to the Fiery Zeal of every peevish Critic, or desig^ing
Adversary, who may take occasion to pick quarrels with 'em, and demand Judgment
against 'em for every Misdemeanour of the Press.

Tell it not in Gath! That a Son of the Church, and a Protestant Divine, should
make a Motion for the burning of Bibles, at this time of day, when our Popish
Adversaries are threatening us, and ready to add more Fuel to the Fire, to
consume all the rest.

But I leave this Incendiary to walk in the light of his own Fire, and to warm
himself at the Sparks that he has kindled.

I humbly conceive, the most proper means of obtaining more Correct Bibles,
would be the employing of persons of greater Diligence and Observation, and of
greater Care and Faithfulness than the Rector has showed in examining the
Errata of the Press.

Had he evidenced as good an Interest in these qualifications, as he pretends
to, p. 22. he might have bid Fair for the Office of a Corrector of the Press,
which would have enabled him to serve his Generation to better purpose, than he
can do by Publishing Calumnies in the Name of God.

CHAP. IV. Vindicating Mr. B. and Exhibiting Ten Instances of the Rector's
corrupt way of Citing the Holy Scriptures.
IN his Epistle he accuses him also with corrupting the Word of God.

His Words are these, -- Nor is this (of Act. 6.3.) the only Instance of this
kind. In the Dissenters Petition for Peace above Years since, Act. 15.18. (it
should be 28.) is thus cited -- To lay upon you no greater burden than
necessary things, that small word these being cunningly left out merely to
support their Proposition. Mr. B. who drew up the Petition and since has been
publicly charged for thus abusing the Scripture, though he forgot not to
acquaint us, with the most trivial, yea, ridiculous Passages of his Life, yet
had not the ingenuity to Confess his Error, nor yet the courage to palliate it
with any Excuse.

Answer.

That great Man was not at leisure to take notice of, nor disposed to Answer
every trifling Accuser. This Accusation is as groundless as it is malicious,
and therefore Mr. B. might easily pass it over in silence.

He that will make Silence an Argument of Guilt, would have Condemned the most
Innocent Person that ever was, Matthew. 26.63.

Mr. B. urged that Text to prove that the Apostles imposed only necessary
things, and did not make unnecessary things necessary, by mere Imposition, his
Words are these:

The Apostles and Elders, Act. 15.28. declare unto the Churches, that it seemed
Good to the Holy Ghost and them, to lay upon them no greater burden, than
necessary, things; imposing them because antecedently necessary (for that is
given as the reason of their Selection and Imposition) and not only making
unnecessary things necessary, by Imposition, for then the Imposition had been
unnecessary, tho it was not a simple, unchangeable necessity, yet it was a
necessity by accident, pro tempore and loco, antecedent to the Imposition of
that Assembly -- Petit. for Peace. p. 20. Land. 1661.

Here I desire the Reader to observe:

1. That Mr. B. does not pretend to make a full Recital of the Words of the
Decree, but to give the Reason upon which it was grounded, and that is, the
necessity of the things imposed. They were not necessary, merely because
imposed, but imposed because necessary under present Circumstances.

Had the cited the very words of the Text, he would have rendered 'em in the
second person, It seemed Good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burden But he speaks in the 3d person, It seemed Good to the Holy Ghost
and them, to lay upon them -- referring to the History, and not to the very
words of the Decree.

The Rector may as well quarrel with him for not mentioning the Canons of the
Council, v. 29. (which he had no occasion to repeat) as for leaving out the
word these, which evidently points at them.

When Mr. B. cites the Words of Scripture, he does it in a different Character,
as may be seen in that very Page in 1 Cor. 11.19. which he there quotes in
Italick Letters; but he refers to Acts 15.28. without changing the form of the
Letters, by which it is apparent, he did not design to transcribe the very words
of the Text.

It Is hand measure to Charge a Man, who only refers to a Text of Scripture, or
gives the sense of it, with corrupting the Word of God, because he has not
transcribed the whole ^ose.

2. It would have looked more generous in this Criminator, to have answered Mr.
B's Argument from this place against unnecessary Impositions, than to blemish
the Reputation of a dead Man. But it is easier to revile a Man than to confute
him.

3. I have reason to suspect the Rector took up this Calumny at second hand
from Dr. Hook, to whom he refers in the Margin, and never examined the truth of
it. For thus he begins the Charge -- In the Dissenters Petition for Peace above
years since. He could not tell how many years since* and therefore left a
blark, to be filled up by any body that would do him that kindness. Had he
perused the Petition it self, it would have cured his Ignorance concerning the
distance of time.

Besides he cites the Text out of the Petition thus -- To lay upon you no
greater burden than necessary things. Whereas if he had taken the Words out of
the Petition it self, he must have exhibited them as I have above -- to lay
upon them no greater burden --

One may see by this what little trust is to be given to this man's Accusation,
who takes up any silly Calumny, and reports it again for truth, without once
examining whether it be so or not: But that is inconsistent with the Design he
had in hand, which was to Calumniate stoutly in hopes something might stick.

4. But since the Rector so roundly Charges others with corrupting the Word of
God, it will not be amiss to take notice how he treats it himself.

I will observe a few of his own Quotations, which I should have overlooked,
if he had not thus unjustly accused his Brethren of that which he is
notoriously guilty himself.

Qui alterum incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet.

Thou art inexcusable, O Man -- for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same things, Romans 2.1.

I confess, I love not recriminations, but when a Man is so quick-sighted, as
to behold a mote in his brothers Eye, it is an act of Charity to help him to a
Glass that may discover unto him some of the beam in his own Eye.

If he please to re-view the Scripture-Quotations in his own Sermon, he will find
many of 'em not exactly rendered. He would reckon it unfair did we go about to
aggravate its Oversights, and charge him with poisoning the fountainhead,
refining upon the Word of God, lying against the Holy Ghost, etc. He would say,
these were hard Words; and yet this is the Language he gives the Dissenters for
a litteral fault, which he cannot prove upon them.

Instances of his careless and loose way of citing the Scriptures.

I. His very Text from which he takes occasion to aggravate his Charge against
us of Corrupting the Word of God, is corruptly rendered by him, Prove. 30.6. Add
thou not unto his Word, so the Rector. It should have been, Add you not unto
his Words, in the pl. So it is in our English Bibles, etc. so it is in the
Original Hebrew (...) verbis ejus. Here is a litteral fault, and such as
substitutes the singular number for the plural, in our Rector's very Text. He
that so grievously censures others for a litteral fault, should tell by what
Authority he makes bold to alter (or to use his own Dialect, to corrupt) the
very Text of his Sermon.

He repeat; the Text in the same manner, in P. 1. and 2. and therefore cannot
charge the Press with this Error.

It Is true the variation does not corrupt the sense; but allow Men a liberty of
a litteral variation from the Language of the Holy Ghost, the sense and meaning
cannot be long secured.

II. The first Scripture that occurs after the Text and Context, is 1 Cor.
10.11. written for our instruction upon whom the ends of the World are come: So
he reads it, ( p. 1.) but in our English Bibles it is thus -- written for our
admonition upon whom -- Here he changes admonition into instruction, tho the
Original he (...), and properly rendered admonition by our Translators both
here, and in Ephesians. 6.4. Titus 3.10.

III. His next Allegation is from Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the Word,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it. It ought to be thus read, Ye shall not
add unto the Word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it.
Here he leaves out the Words which I command you, without which the sense is
imperfect. He condemns Mr. B. for leaving out the word these, and himself
leaves out but four Words together, and those also essential to the sentence he
p^oduceth.

IV. Having compared his Text with Deuteronomy. 2. and 12.32. he enlarges his
foundations, and says, for which reason therefore I would read the Text thus,
add not thou unto his Word, neither diminish ought from it, p. 2.

He may read it as he pleases, but those Words, neither diminish ought from it,
are an addition to that Text, which says add not. Must we tack to every Text
what is said in other Scriptures more fully, and make that explanatory addition
an essential part of the Text? And when we have thus filled it up from parallel
Scriptures, shall we pretend it ought to be read thus? This would create as
many various Readings, as there are parallel Texts.

Unhappy Solomon! Had thou lived in our days to consult a Man wiser than thy
self, he would have taught thee to have put this Saying in a better form, and
to write it thus, add thou not unto his word, neither diminish ought from it.
However, thou can not but take ^t kindly, that he supplies in Reading, the
defect of thy Writing.

Our Hebrew Bibles have several Keri's and Cethib's, in which the Marginal
Reading va^es from the Writing in the Text, as the Masorites have observed: But
this new Keri, or Reading escaped their Observation. It Is to be hoped the
Learned World will take notice of it in the next Edition of the Masora.

We have all read these Words, neither diminish ought from it, in Deuteronomy. 4.2.
but a Man may sooner read out his Eyes, than read the words in the Rector's
Text, as it lies in our Bibles.

And therefore to help you to the True Reading of this place, you must make a
Thankful Purchase of the Rectors Sermon for your Instruction.

V. He thus cites Isa. 11.9. That the knowledge of the Lord might cover the
Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea. Our Bibles have it thus, The Earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea.

Here also he not only changes the Construction of the former part of this
Sentence, but substitutes one word for another, viz. might cover, instead of
shall be full. The Heb. (...) which we render shall be full, will not admit of
the Rector's Translation. Schindler (in his Lexic. Pentaglot.) mentions four
significations of (...) but not one to the Rector's purpose.

Nor will the Lxx's Translation relieve him, for that has (...), which answers
our English filled, And I do not find that the other Gr. Versions do vary from
the Lxx upon this Text. Vid. Frag. Veter. Interp. Graec. in Isa. 11.

The Rector therefore abuses this Scripture in the two Instances which he
condemns in others, viz. diminishing and adding. He diminishes, by expunging
those words, shall be full; and adds of his own, the words, might cover.

VI. He thus quotes Rev. 22.18, 19. I certify to every man, etc. p. 13. Our
English Bibles have it, I testify unto every man -- And the Gr. (...), ought
to be so rendered. It should seem the Rector wanted his Spectacles, and by a
mistake of the Letter read certify, for testify.

VII. He tells us that We diminish from the Word, when we cast away any, never
so little part of it p. 13. And thus he cites Matthew. 5.18. -- Till Heaven and
Earth pass away, not one jor, or tittle shall pass from the Law.

Our Bibles render the Verse thus -- Till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise ((...)) pass from the Law, till all the fulfilled. Here
he leaves out the little word (one) which is repeated in the Text, and the
weighty words, in no wise; and over-looks the Concluding words, till all be
fulfilled.

Doubtless the words left out here, are a little part of the Scripture; and
therefore by his own Doctrine he diminishes from the Word.

VIII. He thus gives the words of Acts 6.3. Seek out seven Men of honest
Report, and full of the Holy Ghost, etc. p. 21.

Our Authorized Bibles have it thus, Look ye out among you seven Men -- Here he
puts seek for look ((...)) perhaps this also was an Oversight in Reading: But
why he should leave out those words, among you, I can give as little Reason, as
he can in charging Mr. B. with abusing the Scripture, in leaving out (these)
when he did not pretend to cite the very words of the Text, as the Rector here
does.

But I hope he will have the Ingenuity to confess his Error, or the Courage to
palliate it with an Excuse, (Epist.) the want of which he blames in Mr. B.

IX. He exhorts his Brethren to lay aside all guile and hypocrisies, 1 Pet.
2.1. P. 26.

The Text runs thus -- Laying aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies,
and envies, and evil speakings.

How he comes to skip over all malice, and to begin with guile, I do not
pretend to give a Reason; though perhaps some may tell him, That his Sermon is so
full of malice against the Dissenters, that he was not willing this troublesome
word should stare him in the face, and create any uneasiness of thought to him,
in his warm pursuit of that Party.

X. I will instance in one other Text, which he thus renders, 2 Pet. 3.16.
Which they that are Unstable and Unlearned wrest, as they do all the other
Scriptures, to their own destruction.

In our Bibles the words are thus, Which they that are Unlearned and Unstable
wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, etc.

Here he not only perverts the Order of the Holy Ghost, in the words, Unlearned
and Unstable; but for also the other Scriptures, ((...)) he reads all the other
Scriptures.

Thus we have tra^'d him in his Scripture-Quotations, in which one might have
expected more Exactness from so Critical a Censor.

To declame with such bitterness against Innocent Men, as Corrupters of the
Word of God, and in the same Breath to cite the Scriptures so Corruptly,
evidences more of Hatred to the Presbyterians, than of Affection to the Word of
God.

I will not say he had any Design to Corrupt these Scriptures: I believe it was
an Oversight, which is culpable enough in a Man of his Character, without being
aggravated.

The Rector, of any man, should be charitable in his Censures of others, who
while he is unjustly charging the Dissenters with one false reading, has made
himself undeniably guilty of Ten. Ton to One is great Odds, and yet our Accuser
would be thought a warm and zealous defender of the Scriptures, for these
Epithets he gives himself, p. 27.

If ever poor Man has made work for Repentance, the Rector has done so in this
Sermon (if I may abuse the Word by calling a Libel by that name) the chief
design of which is to load his Brethren with a Crime not to be named among
Christians. He tells us, that the Chief Reason of his undertaking, was to tax
the Dissenters with corrupting the Word of God. Epist. and p. 2. Nay, he says,
it is the point he chiefly aimed to insist on, p. 20.

Now let the World judge, what a vile thing it is, to accuse a Considerable
Party of Sober Christians, of the most impious practices, without the least
Proof to support the Charge.

A good Name is better than precious Ointment, and rather to be chosen than
great Riches, Eccl. 7.1. Pro. 22.1. therefore he that robs me of it, deprives
me of that which is more valuable than Gold and Silver. For this Reason, a
false testimony was Capitally punished by the old Roman Laws, Aul. Gell. xx. 1.
And God himself has levelled one of the Ten Commandments against this
Wickedness. He that said, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery,
has also said, Thou shall not bear false Witness.

Men may talk of Religion, and of their Zeal for the Word of God, but when the
Tongue is set on fire of Hell, and full of deadly poison, they will scarce
convince the World that they have any great share of the one or the other.

Can any thing be more inconsistent, than at the same time, to bless God even
the Father, and to curse (or reproach) men which are made after the similitude
of God? Can there be a greater Instance of this, than for a Man to aim at the
reviling of his Neighbors as the Chief Point he drives at in Preaching the
Word of God.

He that violates the Laws of Truth in his own words, may be presumed to have
no great regard to the Truth of Gods Word.

'Twas a saying of Pythagoras, that the Gods had granted unto Men two amiable
Blessings, (...) to embrace the truth, and to do good. Aelian. Hist. Var. xii,
59.


Truth and Goodness are Divine Persections, and the contrary to them are the
distinguishing Characters of the most degenerate Spirits.

I leave it to impartial Judgments to consider how far the Rector has declined
a Conformity to the Divine Pattern, and imitated the Accuser of the Brethren,
whose Prime Qualities are Lying and Malignity.

I have now done with him, and will only offer him this wholesome Counsel at
parting, in requital of the Wrong he has done us.

If he expects a well-grounded-Peace in a Dying-Hour, I would advise him in a
penitent manner to ask forgiveness, (1.) Of God, in whose Sacred Name he
delivered this Scandalous Figment. (2.) Of his Brethren the Dissenters, whose
Reputation he would have mortally wounded, if the poisoned Arrow of a False
Tongue could have done it. (3.) Of his Diocesan, and that Public Assembly, in
whose Ears he Published this Calumny; and (4.) Of that Honorable Lord, under
whose Name he presumes to shelter himself Epist.
, while he discharges Volleys of Reproaches against a Multitude of Innocent
People, whose only Defense is the Armor of Righteousness.

When he has proceeded thus far in the Duty of a Penitent, he ought to make
what reasonable satisfaction he is able, to the injured Party. The Dissenters
desire no Damages, for the Prejudices he has violently endeavored to have done
them: All the Reparation they demand, is no more than what himself must needs
judge reasonable, that is, That he will burn his Sermon.

This he cannot justly except against, for he himself has condemned whole
Bibles to be burnt for one Corruption of the Sacred Text p. 27, 28.
, and if this be a righteous sentence (as he thinks it is) he cannot but think
it highly equitable, That his Sermon should be cast into the fire, which
contains Ten Corruptions of the Sacred Text, besides the corrupt Design of the
whole, to Libel his honest Neighbors.

This may serve as a Touchstone to try the sincerity of his Zeal to the Word of
God, and it is Purity. If it be such as he pretends, he will make no difficulty of
expiating his Crime by such a cheap sacrifice as this. For if he can sacrifice
a Bible in revenge of the Dissenters for one imaginary fault of theirs, he will
cheerfully sacrifice a poor Sermon in revenge of himself for no less than Ten
real faults of his own; for you must not be so uncharitable, as to think him
fonder of his own Productions, than of the Inspired Writings.

I shall conclude with some of the first words of his Epistle, in which he
tells the World, That he has been persuaded by some private friends to Publish
his Sermon.

It does not concern us to know who these private friends were; perhaps, upon
second thoughts, he may take them for private foes, that would tempt him to
expose his blind side to the World, by making Public a false Accusation, which
had it been suppressed within those Walls, where it was delivered, might have
passed for a Secret Oracle with some Credulous People, and left the injured
Party under the Imputation of a base Reflection, without any possible Relief.

I cannot imagine that either his Ordinary, or the sober part of the Clergy
would ever persuade him to Publish a Calumny, so vile in its nature, so
inconsistent in its parts, so weakly managed, so maliciously applied, and so
visibly supported by ungrounded suspicions, and fabulous Narratives.

But whoever they are, and whatever ends they had, in procuring a Publication
of the Sermon, we reckon our selves obliged (...) them, for putting us in a
capacity to vindicate our selves.

Though, when all is done, the thanks is principally owing to the Rector
himself, whose Singular Good Will to the Dissenters, inclined him to an easy
compliance with the agreeable Request of his private friends.

Some Jesuits have asserted, That it is only a Venial Sin to calumniate falsely,
to maintain their own honor, and to ruin the Credit of those they take for
their Enemies. They have in many cases notoriously practisect accordingly, Mist
of Jesuitism. P. 361.371. and p. 366.370.390.422.
.

Though the Rector does not professedly espouse this Principle, yet his blind
Zeal has notoriously betrayed him into the same Practice.

Perhaps, he will be angry, that his foul-play (to use his own words) is brought
upon the stage and thus openly, but justly, taxt. Epist.

It is no more my disposition than his, to expose any man's mistake, whilst it
keeps in Doors, and contains it self within any bounds of modesty and privacy,
ibid. But when the sacred Laws of Truth are boldly and openly violated, and the
Wounds of the Church are made to bleed afresh, by such as should apply healing
Remedies, it is high time to un-deceive the World, to assert the Interests of
Religion, and to expose the subtle Artifices of designing Men

FINIS.
Advertisement.
LEST the Rector should Glory overmuch in his Mighty Discovery, it is thought
convenient to Acquaint the World, That his Mr. Calvin ( alias the Reverend Mr.
Roger Baldwin) Detected and Exposed the self-same Mistake, long before this
Author, in an Ordination-Sermon, as sundry then present, are ready to testify.


