A Brief DECLARATION AND VINDICATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY: As also of
the Person and Satisfaction of CHRIST.

Accommodated to the Capacity and Use of such as may be in danger to be
seduced: and the establishment of the Truth.

John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. By J. Owen D. D.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nath. Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock in
Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet. 1669.

Imprimatur,

Rob. Grove, R. F. D. Episcop. Land. a Sac. Dom.
Feb. 3. 1668/69.
TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THis Small Treatise has no other design but thy Good, and establishment in
the Truth. And therefore as laying aside that Consideration alone: I could
desirously have been excused from the Labor of those Hours which were spent in
its Composure, so in the Work it self, I admitted of no one thought, but how
the things treated of in it, might, and ought to be managed unto thy spiritual
Benefit and Advantage. Other designs most men have in writing what is to be
exposed to public view, and lawfully may have so; in this I have nothing but
merely thy Good. I have neither been particularly provoked, nor opposed by the
Adversaries of the Truth here pleaded for; nor have any need from any self
respect, to publish such a small plain discourse as this; Love alone to the
Truth, and the welfare of thy soul, have given Efficacy to their importunity
who pressed me to this small service.

The matters here treated of, are on all hands confessed to be of the greatest
moment; such as the Eternal welfare of the souls of men, is immediately and
directly concerned in. This all those who believe the Sacred Truths here
proposed and explained, do unanimously profess and contend for; nor is it
denied by those by whom they are opposed. There is no need therefore to give
thee any especial Reasons to evince thy concernment in these things, nor the
greatness of that concernment, thereby to induce thee unto their serious
consideration. It were well indeed that these great, sacred, and mysterious
Truths, might without contention or controversies about them, be left unto the
Faith of Believers as proposed in the Scripture, with that Explanation of them
which in the ordinary Ministry and Dispensation of the Gospel is necessary and
required.

Certainly these tremendous Mysteries, are not by us willingly to be exposed,
or prostituted to the Cavils of every perverse querist, and disputer; those
(...); whose pretended Wisdom, indeed ignorance, darkness and folly, God has
designed to confound and destroy in them and by them. For my part, I can assure
thee, Reader, I have no mind to contend and dispute about these things which I
humbly adore and believe as they are revealed. It is the Importunity of
Adversaries, in their Attempts to draw and seduce the souls of men from the
Truth and Simplicity of the Gospel in these great Fundamentals of it, that
alone can justify any to debate upon, or eristically to handle these awful
Mysteries. This renders it our Duty, and that indispensibly, in as much as we
are required to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints.
But yet also when this necessity is imposed on us, we are by no means
discharged from that humble Reverence of mind, wherewith we ought always to be
conversant about them; nor from that regard unto the way and manner of their
Revelation in the Scripture, which may preserve us from all unnecessary
intermixture of litigious or exotic Phrases and Expressions, in their
Assertion and declaration. I know our Adversaries would upon the matter decry
any thing peculiarly Mysterious in these things; although they are frequently,
and emphatically in the Scriptures affirmed so to be. But whilst they deny the
Mysteries of the things themselves, which are such as every may become the
glorious Being and Wisdom of God, they are forced to a^sign such an
aenigmatical sense unto the Words, Expressions and Propositions wherein they
are revealed and declared in the scripture, as to turn almost the whole Gospel
into an Allegory, wherein nothing is properly expressed, but in some kind of
Allusion unto what is so elsewhere; which irrational way of proceeding, leaving
nothing certain in what is or may be expressed by Word or Writing, is covered
over with a pretense of Right Reason, which utterly refuses to be so employed.
These things the Reader will find afterward made manifest, so far as the
nature of this brief discourse will bear. And I shall only desire these few
things of him that intends its perusal. First, That he would not look on the
subject here treated of, as the matter of an ordinary Controversy in Religion.
-- Neque enim hic levia aut ludicra petuntur
Praemia; lectoris de vita animaeque salute Certatur;


They are things which immediately and directly in themselves concern the
eternal salvation of the souls of men; and their consideration ought always to
be attended with a due sense of their weight and importance. Secondly, Let him
bring with him a due Reverence of the Majesty and Infinite, incomprehensible
nature of God, as that which is not to be prostituted to the captious and
sophistical scanning of men of corrupt minds, but to be humbly adored according
to the Revelation that he has made of himself. Thirdly, That he be willing to
submit his Soul and Conscience, to the plain and obvious sense of Scripture
Propositions and Testimonies, without seeking out Evasions and pretenses for
unbelief. These Requests I cannot but judge equal, and fear not the success,
where they are sincerely complied withal.

I have only to add; that in handling the Doctrine of the Satisfaction of
Christ, I have proceeded on that Principle, which as it is fully confirmed in
the Scripture, so it has constantly been maintained and adhered unto by the
most of those, who with Judgment and Success have managed these Controversies
against the Socinians. And this is that the Essential Holiness of God, with his
Justice or Righteousness, as the Supreme Governor of all, did indispensibly
require that sin should not absolutely go unpunished; and that it should do so,
stands in a Repugnancy to those Holy Properties of his Nature. This I say, has
been always constantly maintained by far the greatest number of them, who have
thoroughly understood the Controversy in this matter, and have successfully
engaged in it. And as their Arguments for their Assertion, are plainly
unanswerable, so the neglect of abiding by it, is causelessly to forego one of
the most fundamental and invincille Principles in our Cause. He who first
labored in the defense of the Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ, after
Socinus had formed his imaginations about the salvation that he wrought, and
began to dispute about it, was Covetus, a Learned man, who laid the foundation
of his whole Disputation in the Justice of God, necessarily requiring and
indispensibly the punishment of sin. And indeed the state of the Controversy
as it is laid down by Socinus, in his Book De Jesu Christo servatore, which is
an Answer to this Covetus, is genuine, and that which ought not to be receded
from, as having been the direct ground of all the Controversial Writings on
that subject, which have since been published in Europe. And it is in these
words laid down by Socinus himself. Communis and Orthodoxa (ut asseris)
sententia est, Iesum Christum ideo servatorem nostrum esse, quia divinae
Justiciae per quam peccatores damnari merebamur, pro peccatis nostris plene
satisfecerit; quae satisfactio Per fidem imputatur Nobis ex dono Dei
credentibus. This he ascribes to Covet. The Common and Orthodox Judgment is,
that Jesus Christ is therefore our Savior, because he has satisfied the
Justice of God, by which we being sinners deserved to be condemned, for all our
sins. In opposition whereunto he thus expresses his own opinion. Ego vero
censeo and Orthodoxam sententiam esse arbitror, Iesum Christum ideo servatorem
nostrum esse, quia salutis aeternae viam nobis annuntiaverit, confirmaverit,
and in sua ipsius persona, cum vitae exemplo, tum ex mortuis resurgendo,
manifest ostenderit, vitamque aeternam nobis ei fidem habentibus ipse daturus
sit. Divinae autem justitiae, per quam peccatores damnari meremur, pro peccatis
nostris neque illum satisfecisse, neque ut satisfaceret, opus fuisse arbitror.
I judge and suppose it to be the Orthodox Opinion, that Jesus Christ is
therefore our Savior, because he has declared unto us the way of eternal
salvation, and confirmed it in his own person; manifestly showing it, both by
the example of his life, and by rising from the dead; and in that he will give
eternal life unto us believing in him. And I affirm that he neither made
satisfaction to the Justice of God, whereby we deserved to be damned for our
sins, nor was there any need that he should so do. This is the true state of
the Question; and the principal subtilty of Crellius, the great Defender of
this part of the Doctrine of Socinus, in his Book of the Causes of the Death of
Christ, and the Defense of this Book De Jesus Christo servatore, consists in
speaking almost the same words with those whom he does oppose, but still
intending the same things with Socinus himself: This Opinion as was said of
Socinus, Covetus opposed and everted on the Principle before mentioned.

The same Truth was confirmed also by Zarnovitius who first wrote against
Socinus his Book; as also by Otto Casmannus who engaged in the same work; and
by Abraham Salinarius. Upon the same Foundation do proceed, Paraeus, Piscator,
Lubbertus, Lucius, Camero, Voetius, Amiraldus, Placaeus, Rivetus, Walaeus,
Thysius, Altingius, Maresius, Essenius, Arnoldus, Turretinus, Baxter, With many
others; The Lutherans, who have managed these Controversies, as Tarnovius,
Meisnerus, Calovius, Stegmannus, Martinius, Franzius, with all others of their,
way, have constantly maintained the same great fundamental Principle of this
Doctrine of the satisfaction of Christ; and it has well, and solidly been of
late asserted among our selves on the same foundation. And as many of these
Authors do expressly blame some of the Schoolmen, as Aquinas, Durandus, Biel,
Tataretus, for granting a possibility of pardon without satisfaction, as
opening a way to the Socinian Error in this matter; so also they fear not to
affirm, that the foregoing of this Principle of Gods Vindictive Justice
indispensibly requiring the Punishment of sin, does not only weaken the cause
of the Truth, but indeed leave it indefensible. However I suppose, men ought to
be wary how they censure the Authors mentioned, as such who expose the Cause
they undertook to defend, unto contempt; for greater, more able, and Learned
Defenders, this Truth has not as yet found, nor does stand in need of.

J. O.

THE PREFACE.
THE Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, having made that great confession of
him, in distinction and opposition unto them who accounted him only as a
Prophet, thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Mat. 16. 14, 15, 16. He
does on the occasion thereof, give out unto them that Great Charter of the
Churches stability and continuance; Upon this Rock I will build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, v. 18. He is himself the Rock
upon which his Church is built; as God is called the Rock of his People, on the
account of his eternal power and immutability, Deuteronomy. 32. 4, 18, 31. Isa. 26. 4.
And himself the Spiritual Rock which gave out supplies of Mercy and Assistance
to the people in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 4.

The Relation of the Professing Church unto this Rock, consists in the faith of
this Confession, that he is Christ the Son of the living God. This our Lord
Jesus Christ has promised to secure against all attempts; yet so as plainly to
declare, that there should be great and severe opposition made thereunto. For
whereas the Prevalency of the Gates of Hell in an enmity unto this confession
is denied, a great and vigorous attempt to prevail therein is no less certainly
foretold; neither has it otherwise fallen out. In all Ages from the first
solemn foundation of the Church of the New Testament, it has one way or other
been fiercely attempted by the Gates of Hell. For some time after the
Resurrection of Christ from the dead, the principal endeavors of Satan, and
Men acting under him, or acted by him, were pointed against the very foundation
of the Church, as laid in the expression before mentioned. Almost all the
Errors and Heresies wherewith for three or four Centuries of years it was
perplexed, were principally against the Person of Christ himself, and
consequently the Nature and Being of the holy and blessed Trinity. But being
disappointed in his design herein, through the watchful care of the Lord Christ
over his Promise; in the following Ages, Satan turned his craft and violence
against sundry parts of the superstructure; and by the assistance of the Papacy
cast them into confusion, nothing as it were remaining firm, stable, and in
order, but only this one confession, which in a particular manner the Lord
Christ has taken upon himself to secure.

In these latter Ages of the World, the power and care of Jesus Christ reviving
toward his Church in the Reformation of it, even the ruined heaps of its
building have been again reduced into some tolerable order and beauty. The old
Enemy of its peace and welfare falling hereby under a disappointment, and
finding his travail and labor for many Generations in a great part frustrate,
he is returned again to his old work of attacqueing the Foundation it self; as
he is unweary and restless, and can be quiet neither Conqueror nor conquered;
nor will be so, until he is bound and cast into the lake that burns with
fire. For no sooner had the Reformation of Religion firmed it self in some of
the Europaean Provinces, but immediately, in a proportion of distance not
unanswerable unto what fell out from the first foundation of the Church, sundry
Persons by the instigation of Satan attempted the disturbance and ruin of it,
by the very same errors and Heresies about the Trinity, the Person of Christ,
and his Offices, the person of the Holy Ghost and his Grace, wherewith its
first trouble and ruin was endeavored. And hereof we have of late an instance
given among our selves; and that so notoriously known, through a mixture of
imprudence and impudence in the managers of it, that a very brief reflection
upon it will suffice unto our present design.

It was always supposed, and known to some, that there are sundry Persons in
this Nation, who having been themselves seduced into Socinianism, did make it
their business under various pretenses to draw others into a compliance with
them in the same way and persuasion. Neither has this for sundry years been so
secretly carried, but that the design of it has variously discovered it self
by overt acts of Conferences, disputations, and publishing of Books; which last
way of late has been sedulously pursued. Unto these three is now a visible
Accession made, by that sort of People whom Men will call Quakers, from their
deportment at the first erection of their way, long since deserted by them;
until by some new Revolutions of Opinions, they cast themselves under a more
proper denomination. That there is a conjunction issued between both these
sorts of Men, in an Opposition to the holy Trinity, with the Person and Grace
of Christ, the Pamphlets of late published by the one and the other do
sufficiently evince. For however they may seem in sundry things as yet to look
diverse ways, yet like Sampson's Foxes, they are knit together by the tail of
consent in these firebrand Opinions, and jointly endeavor to consume the
standing Corn of the Church of God. And their joint management of their
business of late, has been as though it were their design, to give as great a
vogue and report to their Opinions, as by any ways they are able. Hence
besides their attempts to be proclaiming their Opinions under various
pretenses, in all Assemblies whereunto they may intrude themselves, as they
know without trouble, they are exceedingly sedulous in scattering and giving
away, yea imposing gratis, and as to some ingratiis, their small books which
they publish, upon all sorts of persons promiscuously, as they have advantage
so to do. By this means their Opinions being of late become the talk and
discourse of the common sort of Christians, and the Exercise of many, amongst
whom are not a few, that on sundry accounts, which I shall not mention, may
possibly be exposed unto disadvantage and prejudice thereby, it has been
thought meet by some, that the Sacred Truths which these men oppose, should be
plainly and briefly asserted and confirmed from the Scripture; that those of
the meanest sort of Professors, who a^e Sincere and upright, exercising
themselves to keep a good conscience in matters of faith and obedience to God,
may have somewhat in a readiness, both to guide them in their further enquiry
into the Truth, as also to confirm their Faith in what they have already
received, when at any time it is shaken or opposed by the cunning sleights of
men that lie in wait to deceive.

And this comprizeth the design of the ensuing discourse. It may possibly be
judged needless by some, as it was in its first proposal by him by whom it is
wri^^^^, and that because this matter at present is by an especial providence
cast on other hands, who both have, and doubtless, as occasion shall require,
will well acquit themselves in the defense of the Truths opposed. Not to give
any other account of the Reasons of this small undertaking, it may suffice,
that in publico discrimine omnis homo miles est. Every man's concernment lying
in a common danger, it is free for every one to manage it as he thinks best,
and is able, so it be without prejudice to the whole, or the particular
concerns of others. If a City be on fire, whose bucket that brings water to
quench it ought to be refused? The attempt to cast fire into the City of God,
by the Opinions mentioned, is open and plain, and a timely stop being to be put
unto it, the more hands are orderly employed in its quenching, the more speedy
and secure is the effect like to be.

Now, because the Assertors of the Opinions mentioned do seem to set out
themselves to be some great Ones, above the ordinary rate of men, as having
found out, and being able publicly to maintain such things, as never would
have entered into the minds of others to have thought on, or conceived; and also
that they seem with many to be thought worthy of their consideration because
they now are new, and such as they have not been acquainted withal; I shall in
this Prefatory entrance, briefly manifest that those who have amongst us
undertaken the management of these Opinions, have brought nothing new unto
them, but either a little contemptible Sophistry and caption of words on the
one hand, or futulous, affected, unintelligible expressions on the other; the
Opinions themselves being no other; but such as the Church of God having been
opposed by, and troubled with from the beginning, has prevailed against, and
triumphed over in all generations. And were it not that Confidence is the only
relief which engaged impotency adheres unto, and expects supplies from, I
should greatly admire that those amongst us who have undertaken an inforcement
of these old exploded errors, whose weakness does so openly discover and
proclaim it self in all their endeavors, should judge themselves competent to
give a new spirit of life to the dead carcass of these rotten Heresies, which
the faith of the Saints in all Ages has triumphed over; and which Truth and
Learning have under the care and watchfulness of Christ, so often baffled out
of the world.

The Jews in the time of our Saviors converse on the earth, being fallen
greatly from the Faith and Worship of their forefathers, and ready to sink into
their last and utmost Apostasy from God, seem amongst many other truths, to
have much lost that of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and of the Person of
the Messiah. It was indeed suited in the dispensation of God, unto the work
that the Lord Jesus had to fulfill in the world, that before his Passion and
Resurrection, the knowledge of his Divine Nature as unto his individual person,
should be concealed from the most of men. For this cause, although he was in
the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he made
himself of no reputation, by taking on him the form of a servant, and made in
the likeness of men, that being found in the fashion of a man, he might be
obedient unto death, Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9. whereby his Divine Glory was veiled for
a season, until he was declared to be the Son of God with power, according unto
the Spirit of Holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 4. And then
was glorified with that glory which he had with the Father before the world
was, John 17. 3. And as this dispensation was needful unto the accomplishment
of the whole work which as our M^diator he had undertaken, so in particular, he
who was in himself the Lord of Hosts, a Sanctuary to them that feared him,
became hereby, a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to both the Houses
of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Isa. 8.
13, 14. See Luke 2. 34. Romans 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 8. Isa. 28. 26. But yet
notwithstanding, as occasions required, suitably unto his own holy ends and
designs, he forbear not to give plain and open testimony to his own Divine
Nature and eternal pre-existence unto his Incarnation. And this was it, which
of all other things most provoked the carnal Jews with whom he had to do. For
having, as was said, lost the Doctrine of the Trinity and Person of the Messiah
in a great measure, when ever he asserted his Deity, they were immediately
enraged and endeavored to destroy him. So was it plainly, John. 8. 56, 57, 58
59. Says he, Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was
glad; then said the Jews unto him, thou art not yet fifty years old, and have
thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, before Abraham
was I am: then took they up stones to cast at him. So also, John 10. 30, 31,
32, 33. I and my Father are one: then the Jews took up stones again to stone
him; Jesus answered them, many good works have I showed you from my Father, for
which of those works do you stone me? The Jews answered him saying, for a good
work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because that thou being a Man
make thy self God. They understood well enough the meaning of those words, I
and my Father are one; namely, that they were a plain Assertion of his being
God. This caused their rage. And this the Jews all abide by to this day;
namely, that he declared himself to be God, and therefore they slew him.
Whereas therefore the first discovery of a plurality of Persons in the Divine
Essence consists in the Revelation of the Divine Nature and personality of the
Son, this being opposed, persecuted, and blasphemed by these Jews, they may be
justly looked upon and esteemed as the first Assertors of that misbelief, which
now some seek again so earnestly to promote. The Jews persecuted the Lord
Christ, because he being a Man, declared himself also to be God; and others are
ready to revile and reproach them, who believe and teach what he declared.

After the Resurrection and Ascension of the Lord Jesus, all things being
filled with tokens, evidences and effects of his Divine Nature and Power, Romans
1. 4. The Church that began to be gathered in his name, and according to his
Doctrine, being by his especial institution to be initiated into the express
profession of the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as being to be baptized in the
name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which confession
comprizeth the whole of the truth contended for, and by the indispensible
placing of it at the first entrance into all obedience unto him, is made the
doctrinal foundation of the Church, it continued for a season in the quiet and
undisturbed possession of this Sacred Treasure.

The first who gave disquietment unto the Disciples of Christ by perverting the
Doctrine of the Trinity was Simon Magus, with his followers; an account of
whose monstrous figments, and unintelligible imaginations, with their
coincidence with what some men dream in these latter days, shall elsewhere be
given. Nor shall I need here to mention the Colluvies of Gnostics,
Valentinians, Marcionites and Manichees, the foundation of all whose
abominations lay in their mis-apprehensions of the being of God, their unbelief
of the Trinity and Person of Christ, as do those of some others also.

In especial there was one Cerinthus, who was more active than others in his
opposition to the Doctrine of the person of Christ, and therein of the Holy
Trinity. To put a stop unto his Abominations, all Authors agree that John
writing his Gospel, prefixed unto it that plain declaration of the eternal
Deity of Christ which it is prefaced withal. And the story is well attested by
Irenaeus, Eusebius, and others, from Polycarpus who was his Disciple, that this
Cerinthus coming into the place where the Apostle was, he left it, adding as a
reason of his departure, lest the building through the just judgment of God
should fall upon them. And it was of the Holy, Wise Providence of God, to
suffer some impious Persons to oppose this Doctrine before the death of that
Apostle, that he might by infallible Inspiration farther reveal, manifest and
declare it to the establishment of the Church in future Ages. For what can
farther be desired to satisfy the minds of men, who in any sense own the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Scriptures, than that this Controversy about the Trinity
and Person of Christ (for they stand and fall together) should be so eminently
and expressly determined, as it were immediately from Heaven.

But he, with whom we have to deal in this matter, neither ever did, nor ever
will, nor can acquiesce or rest in the divine determination of any thing which
he has stirred up strife and controversy about. For as Cerinthus and the
Ebionites persisted in the Heresy of the Jews, who would have slain our
Savior for bearing witness to his own Deity, notwithstanding the evidence of
that testimony, and the right apprehension which the Jews had of his mind
therein; so he excited others to engage and persist in their Opposition to the
truth, notwithstanding this second particular determination of it from Heaven,
for their confutation or confusion. For after the more weak and confused
oppositions made unto it by Theodotus Coriarius, Artemon, and some others, at
length a stout Champion appears visibly and expressly engaged against these
fundamentals of our faith. This was Paulus Sa nosatenus Bishop of the Church of
Antioch about the year 272. A man of most intolerable pride, passion, and
folly; the greatest that has left a name upon Ecclesiastical Records. This man
openly and avowedly denied the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Deity of Christ
in an especial manner. For although he endeavored for a while, to cloud his
impious sentiments in ambiguous expressions, as others also have done, ( Eusebius.
lib. 7. cap. 27.) yet being pressed by the Professors of the truth, and
supposing his party was somewhat confirmed, he plainly defended his Heresy,
and was cast out of the Church wherein he presided. Some sixty years after,
Photinus Bishop of Syrmium, with a pretense of more sobriety in life and
conversation, undertook the management of the same design, with the same
success.

What ensued afterward among the Churches of God in this matter, is of too
large and diffused a nature to be here reported. These instances I have fixed
on, only to intimate unto persons whose condition or occasions afford them not
ability or leisure of themselves, to enquire into the memorials of times past
amongst the Professors of the Gospel of Christ, that these oppositions which
are made at present amongst us unto these fundamental Truths, and derived
immediately from the late renewed inforcement of them made by Faustus Socinus
and his followers, are nothing but old baffled attempts of Satan, against the
Rock of the Church and the building thereon, in the confession of the Son of
the living God.

Now, as all men who have ought of a due Reverence of God or his truth
remaining with them, cannot but be wary how they give the least admittance to
such Opinions as have from the beginning been witnessed against, and condemned
by Christ himself, his Apostles and all that followed them in their faith and
ways in all Generations; so others whose hearts may tremble for the danger
they apprehend which these sacred Truths may be in, of being corrupted or
defamed, by the present opposition against them, may know that it is no other,
but what the Church and faith of Professors has already been exercised with,
and through the power of him that enables them have constantly triumphed over.
And for my part, I look upon it as a blessed effect of the holy wise providence
of God, that those who have long harbored these Abominations of denying the
holy Trinity, the person and satisfaction of Christ in their minds, but yet
have sheltered themselves from common observation under the shades of dark
obscure and uncouth expressions, with many other specious pretenses, should be
given up to join themselves with such Persons, and to profess a community of
persuasion with them in those opinions, as have rendered themselves infamous
from the first foundation of Christianity, and wherein they will assuredly meet
with the same success as those have done, who have gone before them.

For the other head of Opposition made by these Persons unto the truth in
Reference unto the satisfaction of Christ, and the imputation of his
Righteousness thereon unto our Justification, I have not much to say as to the
time past. In general, the doctrine wherein they boast, being first brought
forth in a rude misshapen manner by the Pelagian Heretics, was afterward
improved by one Abailardus a Sophistical Scholar in France; but owes its
principal form and poison unto the endeavors of Faustus Socinus, and those who
have followed him in his subtle attempt to corrupt the whole doctrine of the
Gospel. Of these M^n, are those amongst us who at this day so busily dispute
and write about the Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and his satisfaction, the
Followers and Disciples. And it is much more from their Masters who were some
of them Men learned, diligent, and subtle, than from themselves that they are
judged to be of any great consideration. For I can truly say, that upon the
sedate examination of all that I could ever yet hear, or get a sight of, either
spoken or written by them, that is any amongst us; I never yet observed an
undertaking of so great importance managed with a greater evidence of
incompetency and inability, to give any tolerable countenance unto it. If any
of them shall for the future attempt to give any new countenance or props to
their tottering errors, it will doubtless be attended unto, by some of those
many, who cannot but know that it is incumbent on them, to contend earnestly
for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints. This present brief endeavor is
only to assist and direct those, who are less exercised in the ways of
managing controversies in Religion, that they may have a brief comprehension of
the truths opposed, with the firm foundations whereon they are built, and have
in a readiness to shield their Faith, both against the fiery darts of Satan,
and secure their minds against the cunning sleights of Men who lie in wait to
deceive. And wherein this discourse seems in any thing to be too brief, or
concise, the Author is not to be blamed; who was confined unto these strait
bounds, by those whose requests enjoined him this service.

The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity Explained and Vindicated.
THe Doctrine of the blessed Trinity may be considered two ways. First, In
respect unto the Revelation and proposal of it in the Scripture, to direct us
unto the Author, Object, and End of our Faith, in our worship and obedience.
Secondly, As it is farther declared and explained, in terms, expressions, and
propositions, educed from the Original Revelation of it, suited thereunto, and
meet to direct and keep the mind from undue apprehensions of the things it
believes; and to declare them unto farther edification.

In the first way, it consists merely in the propositions wherein the
Revelation of God is expressed in the Scripture; And in this regard two things
are required of us. First, To understand the terms of the propositions, as they
are Enunciations of Truth; And Secondly, To believe the things taught,
revealed, and declared in them.

In the first Instance, no more, I say, is required of us, but that we assent
unto the Assertions and Testimonies of God concerning himself, according to
their natural and genuine sense, as he will be known, believed in, feared and
worshipped by us; as he is our Creator, Lord, and Rewarder; and that because he
himself has by his Revelation, not only warranted us so to do, but also made
it our duty necessary and indispensible. Now the sum of this Revelation in this
matter is, that God is one; that this one God, is Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
that the Father is the Father of the Son; and the Son, the Son of the Father;
and the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Father and the Son; and that in respect
of this their mutual Relation, they are distinct from each other.

This is the substance of the Doctrine of the Trinity as to the first direct
concernment of faith therein. The first intention of the Scripture in the
Revelation of God toward us is, as was said, that we might fear him, believe,
worship, obey him, and live unto him, as God. That we may do this in a due
manner, and worship the only true God, and not adore the false imaginations of
our own minds, it declares, as was said, that this God is one, the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; that the Father is this one God, and therefore is to be
believed in, worshipped, obeyed, lived unto, and in all things considered by us
as the first cause, sovereign Lord, and last end of all: that the Son, is the
one true God, and therefore is to be believed in, worshipped, obeyed, lived
unto, and in all things considered by us as the first cause, Sovereign Lord,
and last end of all. And so also of the Holy Ghost. This is the whole of Faiths
concernment in this matter, as it respects the direct Revelation of God made by
himself in the Scripture, and the first proper general end thereof Let this be
clearly confirmed by direct and positive divine Testimonies containing the
declaration and Revelation of God concerning himself, and faith is secured as
to all its concerns. For it has both its proper formal object, and is
sufficiently enabled to be directive of divine Worship and Obedience.

The Explication of this Doctrine unto Edification suitable unto the Revelation
mentioned, is of another consideration. And two things are incumbent on us to
take care of therein. First that what is affirmed and taught, do directly tend
unto the ends of the Revelation it self, by informing and inlightning of the
mind in the knowledge of the mystery of it, so far as in this life we are by
Divine Assistance capable to comprehend it; that is, that faith may be
increased, strengthened and confirmed against temptations and oppositions of
Satan, and men of corrupt minds; and that we may be distinctly directed unto,
and encouraged in the Obedience unto, and Worship of God that are required of
us. Secondly, That nothing be affirmed or taught herein, that may beget, or
occasion any undue apprehensions concerning God, or our Obedience unto him,
with respect unto the best, highest, securest Revelations, that we have of him
and our duty. These things being done and secured, the End of the Declaration
of this Doctrine concerning God is attained.

In the declaration then of this Doctrine unto the Edification of the Church,
there is contained a farther Explanation of the things before asserted, as
proposed directly, and in themselves as the object of our faith, namely, how
God is one, in respect of his Nature, Substance, Essence, Godhead, or Divine^
Being. How being Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, he subsisteth in these three
distinct persons, or Hypost^sies: and what are their mutual respects to each
other, by which as their peculiar properties giving them the manner of their
subsistence, they are distinguished one from another; with sundry other things
of the like necessary consequence unto the Revelation mentioned. And herein as
in the Application of all other Divine Truths and Mysteries whatever, yea, of
all moral commanded duties, use is to be made of such words and expressions as
it may be are not literally and formally contained in the Scripture; but only
are unto our conceptions and apprehensions expository of what is so contained.
And to deny the Liberty, yea, the necessity hereof, is to deny all
interpretation of the Scripture, all endeavors to express the sense of the
words of it, unto the understandings of one another; which is in a word to
render the Scripture it self altogether useless. For if it be unlawful for me
to speak or write what I conceive to be the sense of the words of the
Scripture, and the nature of the thing signified and expressed by them, it is
unlawful for me also to think or conceive in my mind what is the sense of the
words or nature of the things; which to say, is to make brutes of our selves,
and to frustrate the whole design of God in giving unto us the great privilege
of his word.

Wherefore in the declaration of the Doctrine of the Trinity, we may lawfully,
nay we must necessarily, make use of other words, phrases and expressions that
what are Literally and Syllabically contained in the Scriptures, but teach no
other things.

Moreover whatever is so revealed in the Scripture, is no less true and divine
as to whatever necessarily follows thereon, than it is, as unto that which is
principally revealed and directly expressed. For how far soever the lines be
drawn and extended, from truth nothing can follow and ensue but what is true
also; and that in the same kind of truth, with that which it is derived and
deduced from. For if the principal Assertion be a truth of Divine Revelation,
so is also whatever is included therein, and which may be rightly from thence
collected. Hence it follows, that when the Scripture reveals the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, to be one God, seeing it necessarily and unavoidably follows
thereon that they are one in Essence, wherein alone it is possible they can be
one; and three in their distinct Subsistences, wherein alone it is possible
they can be three: This is no less of Divine Revelation, than the first
principle from whence these things follow.

These being the respects which the Doctrine of the Trinity falls under, the
necessary method of (...) and Reason in the beheving and declar^ing of it, is
plain and evident.

1. The Revelation (...) it is to be asserted and vindicated, as it (...)
proposed to be believed for the ends mentioned. Now this is, as was declared,
that there is one God, that this God, is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and so,
that the Father is God, so is the Son, so is the Holy Ghost.

This being received and admitted by faith, the Explication of it is, (2.) To
be insisted on, and not taken into consideration until the other be admitted.
And herein lies the preposterous course of those who fallaciously and
captiously go about to oppose this sacred truth. They will always begin their
opposition, not unto the Revelation of it, but unto the Explanation of it which
is used only for farther edification. Their Disputes and Cavils shall be
against the Trinity, Essence, Substance, Persons, Personality, Respects,
Properties of the Divine Persons, with the modes of expressing these things,
whilst the plain Scriptural Revelation of the things themselves from whence
they are but explanatory deductions, is not spoken to, nor admitted unto
confirmation. By this means have they entangled many weak unstable souls, who
when they have met with things too high, hard and difficult for them, (which in
Divine Mysteries they may quickly do) in the Explication of this Doctrine, have
suffered themselves to be taken off from a due consideration of the full and
plain Revelation of the thing it self in Scripture; until their temptations
being made strong, and their darkness increased, it was too late for them to
return unto it; as bringing along with them the Cavils wherewith they were
prepossessed rather than that Faith and Obedience which is required. But yet
all this while these Explanations so excepted against, are indeed not of any
Original consideration in this matter. Let the direct express Revelations of
the Doctrine be firmed, they will follow of themselves, nor will be excepted
against by those who believe and receive it. Let that be rejected, and they
will fall of themselves, and never be contended for by those who did make use
of them. But of these things we shall treat again afterward.

This therefore is the way, the only way that we rationally can, and that which
in duty we ought to proceed in, and by, for the asserting and confirming of the
Doctrine of the holy Trinity under consideration; namely, that we produce
Divine Revelations, or Testimonies, wherein faith may safely rest and
acquiesce, that God is one; that this one God, is Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
So that the Father is God; so also is the Son, and the holy Ghost likewise, and
as such are to be believed in, obeyed, worshipped, acknowledged as the first
cause, and last end of all, our Lord and Reward. If this be not admitted, if
somewhat of it* be not particularly denied, we need not, we have no warrant or
ground, to proceed any farther, or at all to discourse about the Unity of the
Divine Essence, or the distinction of Persons.

We have not therefore any original contest in this matter with any, but such
as deny either God to be one, or the Father to be God, or the Son to be God, or
the Holy Ghost so to be. If any deny either of these in particular, we are
ready to confirm it by sufficient Testimonies of Scripture, or clear and
undeniable Divine Revelation. When this is evinced and vindicated, we shall,
willingly proceed to manifest that the explications used of this Doctrine unto
the Edification of the Church are according to truth; and such as necessarily
are required by the nature of the things themselves. And this gives us the
method of the small ensuing Discourse, with the Reasons of it.

The first thing which we affirm to be delivered unto us by divine Revelation
as the Object o^ ou^ Faith is, that God is one. I know that this may be
uncontroulably evidenced by the ^ight of Reason it self, unto as good and quiet
an Assurance as the mind of man is capable of in any of its apprehensions
whatever. But I speak of it now, as it is confirmed unto us by Divine
Revelation. How this Assertion, of one God, respects the Nature, Essence, or
Divine Being of God, shall be declared afterward. At present it is enough to
represent the Testimonies that he is one, only one. And because we have no
difference with our Adversaries distinctly about this matter, I shall only name
some few of them, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. A
most pregnant Testimony; and yet notwithstanding, as I shall elsewhere
manifest, the Trinity it self, in that one divine Essence is here asserted,
Isa. 44. 6, 8. Thus says the Lord, the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the
Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no
God; Is there a God besides me? Yea there is no God, I know not any; In which
also we may manifest that a plurality of Persons is included and expressed. And
although there be no more absolute and sacred truth than this, that God is one;
yet it may be evinced, that it is no where mentioned in the Scripture, but that
either in the words themselves, or the context of the place, a plurality of
persons in that one sense is intimated.

Secondly, It is proposed as the object of our Faith, that the Father is God.
And herein as is pretended there is also an agreement, between us, and those
who oppose the Doctrine of the Trinity. But there is a mistake in this matter.
Their hypothesis as they call it, or indeed presumptuous error, casts all the
conceptions that are given us concerning God in the Scripture, into disorder
and confusion. For the Father, as he whom we worship, is often called so, only
with reference unto his Son; as the Son is so, with reference to the Father. He
is the only begotten of the Father, John 1. 14. But now, is this Son had no
praeexistence in his Divine nature before he was born of the Virgin, there was
no God the Father seventeen hundred years ago, because there was no Son. And on
this ground did the Marcionites of old, plainly deny the Father whom under the
New Testament we Worship, to be the God of the Old Testament, who made the
World and was Wo^shipped from the foundation of it. For it seems to follow,
that he whom we worship being the Father, and on this supposition that the Son
had no praexistence unto his incarnation, he was not the Father under the Old
Testament, he is some other from him that was so revealed: I know the folly of
that inference; yet how on this opinion of the sole existence of the Son in
time, Men can prove the Father to be God, let others determine. He who abides
in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son, but whosoever
transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, he has not God, 2
John 9. Whoever denies Christ the Son, as the Son, that is the eternal Son of
God, he loses the Father also, and the true God; he has not God. For that God
which is not the Father, and which ever was, and was not the Father, is not the
true God. Hence many of the Fathers, even of the first Writers of the Church,
were forced unto great pains in the confirmation of this truth, that the Father
of Jesus Christ was he who made the World, gave the Law, spoke by the Prophets,
and was the Author of the Old Testament; and that against Men who professed
themselves to be Christians. And this brutish apprehension of theirs, arose
from no other principle but this, that the Son had only a temporal Existence,
and was not the Eternal Son of God.

But that I may not in this brief discourse digress unto other Controversies
than what lies directly before us, and seeing the Adversaries of the truth we
contend for, do, in words at least, grant that the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ is the true God, or the only true God, I shall not further show the
inconsistency of their hypothesis with this confession; But take it for
granted, that to us there is one God the Father, 1 Cor. 8. 6. See John 17. 3.
So that he who is not the Father, who was not so from Eternity, whose paternity
is not equally coexistent unto his Deity, is no God unto us.

Thirdly, It is asserted and believed by the Church that Jesus Christ is God;
the Eternal Son of God; that is, He is proposed, declared and revealed unto us
in the Scripture, to be God, that is to be served, worshipped, believed in,
obeyed as God, upon the account of his own Divine excellencies. And whereas we
believe and know that he was Man, that he was born, lived, and dyed as a Man,
it is declared that he is God also; and that as God, he did preexist in the
form of God before his Incarnation, which was effected by voluntary actings of
his own; which could not be without a preexistence in another nature. This is
proposed unto us to be believed upon Divine Testimony, and by Divine
Revelation. And the sole enquiry in this matter is, whether this be proposed in
the Scripture as an Object of Faith, and that which is indispensibly necessary
for us to believe. Let us then nakedly attend unto what the Scripture asserts
in this matter, and that in the order of the Books of it in some particular
instances which at present occurr to mind; as these that follow,

Psalm 45. 6. Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, applied unto Christ, H^b.
1. 8. But unto thy Son he says, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever.

Psalm 68. 17, 18, 19. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands
of Angels, the Lord is among them as in Sinai in the holy place; thou have
ascended on high, thou have lead Captivity Captive, thou have received gifts
for Men, yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God may dwell among them,
applied unto the Son, Ephesians. 4. 8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on
high, he led Captivity captive, and gave gifts unto Men. Now that he ascended,
what is it but that be also descended first into the lower parts of the Earth;
He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that
he might fill all things.

Psalm 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand; applied
unto Christ by himself, Mat. 22. 44.

Psalm 102. 15, 16, 17. Of old thou have laid the foundation of the Earth and
the Heavens are the work of thy hands; they shall perish but thou shall endure,
yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture shall thou change
them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall
have no end. Declared by the Apostle to be meant of the Son, Heb. 1. 10.

Prove. 8. 22. to the 31. The Lord possessed Me in the beginning of his ways;
before his works of old: I was set up from everlasting, in the beginning or
ever the Earth was, when there were no depths, I was brought forth when there
were no Fountains abounding with waters, before the Mountains were settled,
before the Hills was I brought forth; while as yet he had not made the Earth,
nor the Fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the World; When he prepared
the Heavens I was there; when he set a compass upon the face of the Earth, when
he established the clouds above; and the fountains of the deep; when he gave to
the Sea his decree that the waters should not pass his commandment; when he
appointed the foundations of the Earth; then I was by him as one brought up
with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; rejoicing
in the habitable parts of his Earth, and my delights were with the Sons of Men.

Isa. 6. 1, 2, 3. I saw also the Lord sitting upon a Throne, high and lifted up
and his train filled the Temple; above it stood the Seraphims, each one had six
wings, with twain he covered his face, with twain he covered his feet, and with
twain he did fly: and one cried unto another and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the
Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his Glory. applied unto the Son, John
12. 41, 42.

Isa 8. 13, 14. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your dread;
let him be your fear, and he shall be for a Sanctuary, but for a stone of
Stumbling, and for a rock of offense to both the Houses of Israel, for a gin
and for a snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, applied unto the Son, Luke 2.
34. Romans 9. 33. 1 Pet. 2. 8.

Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his shoulders; and his name shall be called wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the
increase of his Government and peace there shall be no end.

Jer. 23. 5, 6. Behold the day is come says the Lord that I will raise unto
David a righteous branch, and this is his name whereby he shall be called,
Jehovah our Righteousness.

Hos. 12. 3, 4, 5. He took his Brother by the heel in the womb, and by his
strength he had power with God; yea, he had power over the Angel and prevailed,
he wept and made supplications unto him; he found him in Bethel, and there he
spoke with us, even the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is his memorial.

Zach. 2. 8, 9. For thus says the Lord of Hosts, after the glory has he sent
me unto the Nations which spoiled ye, and ye shall know that the Lord of Hosts
has sent Me.

Mat. 16. 16. Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Luke 1. 35. The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, the power of the most High shall overshaddew thee,
therefore also shall that Holy thing which shall be born of thee, be called the
Son of God.

John 1. 1, 2, 3. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God; all things were made
by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made.

Ver. 14. And we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the
Father.

John 3. 3. And no Man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that* came down from
Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven.

John 8. 56, 57, 58. Then said the Jews unto him, thou art not fifty years old,
and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus says unto them, verily, I say unto you,
before Abraham was, I am.

John 10. 30. I and my Father are one.

John 17. 3. And now O Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the
glory which I had with thee before the World was.

John 20. 28. And Thomas answered and said unto him, my Lord and my God.

Acts 20. 28. Feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood.

Rom 1. 3, 4. Concerning his Son Jesus our Lord, which was made of the ^eed of
David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with power,
according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.

Romans 9. 5. Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came; who is over all, God
blessed for ever. Amen.

Romans 14. 10, 11, 12. For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ; as it is written, as I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue shall confess to God. So then every one of us, shall give
an account of himself to God.

1 Cor. 8. 6. And one Lord Jesus, by whom are all things, and we by him.

1 Cor. 10. 9. Neither let us also tempt Christ as some of them also tempted,
and were destroyed of Serpents; compared with, Numb. 21. 6.

Phil. 2. 5, 6. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus; who
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God.

Col. 1. 15, 16, 17. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of
every Creature; for by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and
that are in Earth, Visible and Invisible, whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him and for
him, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

1 Timothy 3. 16. Without Controversy great is the Mystery of godliness, God was
manifested in the flesh.

Tit. 2. 13. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the
great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us.

Hebrews the first throughout.

Chap. 3. 4. For every house is builded by some man, but he that built all
things is God.

1 Pet. 1. 11. Searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did signify.

Chap. 3. 18, 19. But Christ also has once suffered for sinners, being put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; by which also he went and
preached unto the Spirits in Prison which sometimes were disobedient, when once
the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah.

1 John 3. 16. Hereby we perceive the Love of God, because he laid down his
life for us.

Chap. 5. 20. And we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ,
this is the true God and Eternal life.

Rev. 1. 8. I am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the
Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

Ver. 11. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, and what thou see,
write in a Book: and I turned to see the voice that spoke with me; and being
turned, I saw seven Golden Candlesticks, and in the midst of the seven
Candlesticks, one like unto the Son of Man.

Ver. 17. And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead; and he laid his right
hand upon me, saying unto me, fear not, I am the First and the Last.

Chap. 2. 23. I am he which searches the reins and hearts, and will give unto
every one of you according to your works.

These are some of the places wherein the truth under consideration is revealed
and declared; some of the Divine Testimonies whereby it is confirmed, and
established; which I have not at present enquired after, but suddenly repeated
as they came to mind. Many more of the like nuture and importance may be added
unto them; and shall be so as occasion does require.

Let now any one who owns the Scripture to be the Word of God, to contain an
infallible Revelation of the things proposed in it to be believed, and who has
any conscience exercised toward God for the receiving and submitting unto what
he declares and reveals, take a view of these Testimonies, and consider whether
they do not sufficiently propose this Object of our faith. Shall a few poor
trifling Sophisms, whose terms are scarcely understood, by the most that
amongst us make use of them, according as they have found them framed by
others, be thought meet to be set up in opposition unto these multiplied
Testimonies of the Holy Ghost, and to cast the Truth confirmed by them down
from its credit and reputation in the consciences of men. For my part, I do not
see in any thing, but that the Testimonies given to the Godhead of Christ, the
Eternal Son of God, are every way as clear and unquestionable, as those are,
which testify to the Being of God, or that there is any God at all. Were men
acquainted with the Scriptures as they ought to be, and as the most,
considering the means and advantages they have had, might have been, did they
ponder and believe on what they (...), or had any tenderness in their
consciences as to that Reverence, Obedience, and Subjection of soul, which God
requires unto his Word, it were utterly impossible that their faith in this
matter should ever in the least be shaken, by a few lewd Sophisms, or loud
clamours of men destitute of the truth, and of the Spirit of it.

That we may now improve these Testimonies unto the end under design, as the
nature of this brief discourse will bear, I shall first remove the general
Answers which the Socinians give unto them; and then manifest farther, how
incontrolable they are, by giving an instance in the frivolous exceptions of
the same Persons to One of them in particular. And we are ready, God assisting,
to maintain, that there is not any one of them, which does not give a
sufficient ground for faith to rest on in this matter concerning the Deity of
Christ; and that against all the Socinians in the world.

They say therefore commonly, that we prove not by these testimonies what is by
them denied. For they acknowledge Christ to be God, and that because he is
exalted unto that Glory and Authority that all creatures are put into
subjection unto him; and all both men and Angels are commanded to worship and
adore him. So that he is God by Office, though he be not God by nature. He is
God, but he is not the most high God. And this last expression they have almost
continually in their mouths. He is not the most high God. And commonly with
great contempt and scorn they are ready to reproach them who have solidly
confirmed the Doctrine of the Deity of Christ, as ignorant of the state of
controversy, in that they have not proved him to be the most high God, in
subordination unto whom, they acknowledge Christ to be God, and that he ought
to be worshipped with Divine and Religious worship.

But there cannot be any thing more empty and vain than these pretenses. And
besides they accumulate in them, their former Errors, with the addition of new
ones. For,

First, The name of the most high God, is first ascribed unto God in Genesis 49.
18, 19, 22. denoting his Sovereignty and Dominion. Now, as other Attributes of
God, it is not distinctive of the subject, but only desscriptive of it. So are
all other Excellencies of the nature of God. It does not intimate that there
are other Gods, only he is the most high, or one over them all, but only that
the true God, is most high, that is endued with Sovereign Power, Dominion and
Authority over all. To say then, that Christ indeed is God, but not the most
high God, is all one as to say he is God, but not the most holy God, or not the
true God. And so they have brought their Christ into the number of false Gods,
whilst they deny the true Christ who in his divine nature, is over all God
blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. A phrase of speech, perfectly expressing this
Attribute, of the most high God.

Secondly, This Answer is suited only unto those testimonies which express the
name of God with a corre^ponding Power and Authority unto that name. For in
reference unto these alone can it be pleaded with any pretense of reason, that
he is a God by Office; though that also be done very Futilously and
impertinently. But most of the Testimonies produc^d, speak directly unto his
divine Excel^encies, and properties, which belong unto his nature necessarily
and absolutely. That he is Eternal, Omnipotent, Immense, Omniscient, Infinitely
wise, and that he is, and works and produces Effects suitable unto all these
properties, and such as nothing but they can enable him for, is abundantly
proved by the foregoing Testimonies. Now all these concern a divine nature, a
natural Essence, a Godhead, and not such power or authority as a man may be
exalted unto. Yea, the ascribing any of them to such a one, implies the highest
contradiction expressible.

Thirdly, This God in Authority and Office, and not by nature, that should be
the Object of Divine Worship, is a new abomination. For they are divine,
essential excellencies that are the formal Reason and Object of Worship
Religious and divine. And to ascribe it unto any one, that is not God by
nature, is Idolatry. By making therefore their Christ such a God as they
describe, they bring him under the severe commination of the true God, Jer. 10.
11. The Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall
perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens. That Christ they worship,
they say is a God; but they deny that he is that God that made the Heavens and
the Earth: and so leave him exposed to the threatenings of him, who will
accomplish it to the uttermost.

Some other general exceptions sometimes they make use of, which the Reader may
free himself from the entanglement of, if he do but heed these ensuing Rules.

X. Distinction of persons, (of which afterward) it being in an infinite
substance, does no way prove a difference of Essence between the Father and the
Son. Where there fore Christ as the Son, is said to be Another from the Father,
or God, spoken personally of the Father, it argues not in the least that he is
not partaker of the same nature with him. That in one Essence, there can be but
one person, may be true where the substance is finite and lim^ted, but has no
place in that which is infinite.

2. Distinction and Inequality in respect of Office in Christ, does not in the
least take away his equality and sameness with the Father, in respect of nature
and Essence, Phil. 2. 7, 8. A Son, of the same nature with his Father, and
therein Equal to him, may in Office be his inferior, his subject.

Thirdly, The Advancement and exaltation of Christ as Mediator to any dignity
whatever, upon, or in reference to the work of our Redemption and salvation, is
not at all inconsistent with the essential Honor, Dignity, and Worth which he
has in himself as God blessed for ever. Though he humbled himself and was
exalted in Office, yet in Nature he was one and the same, he changed not.

Fourthly, The Scriptures asserting the Humanity of Christ with the concerments
thereof, as his birth, life, and death, do no more thereby deny his Deity, than
by asserting his Deity with the essential properties thereof, they deny his
humanity.

Fifthly, God working in and by Christ as he was Mediator, denotes the Fathers
Sovereign Appointment of the things mentioned to be done, not his immediate
efficiency in the doing of the things themselves.

These Rules are proposed a little before their due place in the Method which
we pursue. But I thought meet to interpose them here, as containing a
sufficient ground for the resolution and answering of all the Sophisms and
Objections which the Adversaries use in this cause.

From the cloud of witnesses before produced, every one where of is singly
sufficient to evert the Socinian Infidelity; I shall in one of them give an
infiance both of the clearness of the Evidence, and the weakness of the
exceptions which are wont to put in against them as was promised. And this is,
John 1. 1, 2, 3. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God, the same was in the beginning with God. All things were made
by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made.

By the Word, here, or (...), on what account soever he be so called, either as
being the Eternal Word and wisdom of the Father, or as the great Revealer of
the Will of God unto us, Jesus Christ the Son of God is intended. This is on
all hands acknowledged, and the context will admit of no haesitation about it.
For of this Word, it is said, that he came into the World, v. 10. was rejected
by his own, v. 11. was made flesh and dwelt amongst us whose glory was the
glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, v. 14. called expressly Jesus
Christ, v. 17. the only begotten Son of the Father, v. 18. The subject then
treated of is here agreed upon. And it is no less evident that it is the design
of the Apostle to declare both who, and what he was of whom he treats. Here
then, if any where, we may learn what we are to believe concerning the person
of Christ; which also we may certainly do, if our minds are not perverted
through prejudice, whereby the God of this world does blind the minds of them
which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the
image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Of this Word then, this Son
of God it is affirmed that he was in the beginning. And this Word if it does
not absolutely and formally express Eternity, yet it does a preexistence unto
the whole Creation which amounts to the same. For nothing can preexist unto all
Creatures but in the nature of God which is eternal; unless we shall suppose a
creature before the Creation of any. But what is meant by this expression, the
Scripture does elsewhere declare. Prove. 8. 23. I was set up from everlasting
before the beginning, or ever the earth was, John 17. 5. Glorify thou me with
thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. Both
which places as they explain this phrase, so also do they undeniably testify
unto the Eternal preexistence of Christ the Son of God. And in this case we
prevail against our Adversaries, if we prove any preexistence of Christ unto
his Incarnation, which as they absolutely deny, so to grant it, would overthrow
their whole heresy in this matter. And therefore they know that the testimony
of our Savior concerning himself, if understood in a proper intelligible
sense, is perfectly destructive of their pretensions. John 8. 58. Before
Abraham was, I am. For although there be no proper sense in the words but a
gross ^quivocation, if the Existence of Christ before Abraham was born be not
asserted in them, seeing he spoke in Answer to that objection of the Jews, that
He was not yet fifty years old, and so could not have seen Abraham, nor Abraham
him; and the Jews that were present understood well enough that he asserted a
divine preexistence unto his being born so long ago, as that hereon, after
their manner, they took up stones to stone him, as supposing him to have
blasphemed in asserting his Deity as others now do in the denying of it; yet
they seeing how fatal this prae-existence, though not here absolutely asserted
to be eternal, would be to their cause, they contend that the meaning of the
words, is, that Christ was to be the light of the world before Abraham was made
the Father of many Nations. An interpretation so absurd and sottish, as never
any man not infatuated by the God of this world could once admit and give
countenance unto.

But in the Beginning, as absolutely used, is the same with From Everlasting,
as it is expounded, Prove. 8. 23. and denotes an eternal existence, which is
here affirmed of the Word the Son of God. But let the Word beginning, be
restrained unto the subject matter treated of which is the Creation of all
things, and the praeexistence of Christ in his divine nature unto the Creation
of all things is plainly revealed and inevitably asserted. And indeed, not only
the Word, but the discourse of these verses, does plainly relate unto, and is
expository of the first verse in the Bible, Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning God
created Heaven and Earth. There it is asserted that in the beginning God
created all things, here, that the Word was in the beginning and made all
things. This then is the least that we have obtained from this first word of
our Testimony; namely, that the Word or Son of God had a personal praeexistence
unto the whole Creation. In what nature this must be, let these men of Reason
satisfy themselves, who know that Creator and Creatures, take up the whole
nature of Beings; one of them he must be; and it may be well supposed that he
was not a Creature before the Creation of any.

But, Secondly, Where, or with whom, was this Word in the beginning? it was
says the Holy Ghost, with God. There being no creature then existing, he could
be no where but with God; that is, the Father as it is expressed in one of the
testimonies before going, Prove. 8. 22. The Lord possessed me in the beginning of
his ways before his works of old; ver. 30. Then was I by him as one brought up
with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; that is,
in the beginning, this Word or Wisdom of God was with God.

And this is the same, which our Lord Jesus asserts concerning himself, John 3.
13. And no man, says he, has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down
from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Heaven. And so in other places. He
affirms his being in Heaven, that is, with God, at the same time when he was in
the earth; whereby He declares the immensity of his Nature, and the distinction
of his person; and his coming down from Heaven before he was Incarnate on the
earth, declaring his preexistence; by both manifesting the meaning of this
Expression, that in the beginning he was with God. But hereunto they have
invented a notable evasion. For although they know not well what to make of the
last clause of the words, that say, then he was in Heaven when he spoke on
Earth; the Son of man which is in Heaven, answerable to the description of Gods
Immensity, do not I fill Heaven and Earth says the Lord, Jer. 23. 27. But say,
that he was there, by Heavenly meditation as another man may be; yet they give
a very clear Answer to what must of necess^^y be included in his descending
from Heaven, namely his preexistence to his Incarnation. For they tell us, that
before his public Ministry, he was in his humane nature, (which is all they
allow unto him) taken up into Heaven, and there taught the Gospel; as the great
Impostor Mahomet pretended he was taught his Alcoran; If you ask them, who told
them so, they cannot tell; but they can tell when it was; namely, when he was
led by the spirit into the Wilderness for forty days after his baptism. But yet
this instance is subject to another her misadventure; in that one of the
E^angelists plainly affirms that he was those forty days in the Wilderness
with the wild beasts, Mark 17. 13. And so surely not in Heaven in the same
nature by his bodily presence with God and his holy Angels.

And let me add this by the way that the Interpretation of this place, Joh. 1.
1. to be mentioned after wards; and those of the two places before mentioned,
John 8. 58. chap. 3. 31. Faustus Socin^s learned out of his Uncle Laelius
papers as he confesses, and does more than intimate that he believed he had
them as it were by Revelation; and it may be so; they are indeed so forced,
absurd, and irrational, that no man could ever fix upon them by any reasonable
Investigation. But the Author of this Revelation, if we may judge of the Parent
by the Child, could be no other but the spirit of Error and darkness. I suppose
therefore that notwithstanding these exceptions, Christians will believe, that
in the beginning the word was with God; that is, that the Son was with the
Father, as is frequently elsewhere declared.

But who was this Word? says the Apostle, He was God. He was so with God, that
is the Father, as that he himself was God also. God, in that the notion of God,
which both nature, and the Scripture does represent. Not a God by Office, one
exalted to that dignity, (which cannot well be pretended before the Creation of
the world) but as Thomas confessed him, our Lord and our God, John 20. 28. Or
as Paul expresses it; over all God blessed for ever; or the most high God,
which these men love to deny. Let not the infidelity of men excited by the
craft and malice of Satan s^ek for blind occasions, and this matter is
determined; if the Word and Testimony of God be able to umpire a difference
amongst the Children of men. Here is the sum of our Creed in this matter; In
the beginning the Word was God; and so continues unto Eternity; being Alpha and
Om^ga, the first and the last, the Lord God Almighty.

And to show that he was so God in the beginning, as that he was distinct, one,
in some thing from God the Father, by whom afterward he was sent into the
world, he adds, ver. 2. the same was in the beginning with God. Father also to
evince what he has asserted, and revealed for us to believe, the Holy Ghost
adds, both as a firm declaration of his Eternal Deity; and also his immediate
care of the world (which how he variously exercised both in a way of
providence, and grace, he afterward declares) verse 3. All things were made by
him. He was so in the beginning, before all things, as that he made them all.
And that it may not be supposed, that the All that he is said to make, or
create, was to be limited unto any certain sort of things, he adds, that
without him nothing was made that was made; which gives the first Assertion an
absolute universality as to its subject.

And this he farther describes, v. 10. He was in the world, and the world was
made by him. The world that was made, has an usual distribution in the
Scripture, into the Heavens and the Earth, and all things contained in them; as
Acts 4. 24. Lord thou art God which have made Heaven and Earth and the Sea, and
all that in them is; that is the world, the making whereof is expressly assigned
unto the Son, Heb. 1. 10. Thou Lord in the beginning, have laid the foundation
of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thine hands. And the Apostle
Paul to secure our understandings in this matter, instanceth in the most noble
parts of the creation, and which if any might seem to be excepted from being
made by him, Col. 1. 16. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven,
and that are in Earth visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him and for
him. The Socinians say indeed, that he made Angels to be Thrones and
Principalities; that is, he gave them their Order, but not their Being; which
is expressly contrary to the words of the Text; so that a man knows not well
what to say to these persons, who at their pleasure cast off the authority of
God in his word: By him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that
are in Earth.

What now can be required to secure our faith in this matter? In what words
possible, could a divine Revelation of the Eternal Power and Godhead of the Son
of God, be made more plain and clear unto the Sons of men? Or how could the
truth of any thing more evidently be represented unto their minds? If we
understand not the mind of God, and Intention of the Holy Ghost in this matter,
we may utterly despair ever to come to an acquaintance with any thing that God
reveals unto us; or indeed with any thing else that is expressed, or is to be
expressed by words. It is directly said that the Word, that is Christ, as is
acknowledged by all, was with God; distinct from him, and was God, one with
him; that he was so in the beginning, before the Creation; that he made all
things, the world, all things in Heaven and in Earth; and if he be not God, who
is? The sum is, All the ways whereby we may know God, are his Name, his
Properties, and his works. But they are all here ascribed by the Holy Ghost to
the Son, to the Word; and he therefore is God, or we know neither who, nor what
God is.

But say the Socinians, these things are quite otherwise, and the words have
another sense in them than you imagine. What is it I pray? we bring none to
them, we impose no sense upon them; we strain not any word in them, from,
besides, or beyond its native, genuine signification, its constant application
in the Scripture, and common use amongst men. What then is this latent sense
that is intended, and is discoverable only by themselves? let us hear them
coining and (...) this sense of theirs.

First, They say that by in the beginning, is not meant of the beginning of all
things, or the creation of them; but the beginning of the preaching of the
Gospel. But why so I pray? Where ever these words are else used in the
Scripture, they denote the beginning of all things, or Eternity absolutely, or
an Existence preceding their creation. In the beginning God created Heaven and
Earth, Genesis 1. 1. I was set up from everlasting from the beginning ere ever the
earth was, Prove. 8. 23. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of
the Earth, Heb. 1. 10. And besides, these words are never used absolutely any
where for the beginning of the Gospel. There is mention made indeed of the
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mark 1. 1. which is referred to the
preaching of John Baptist. But in the beginning absolutely, is never so used or
applied. And they must meet with men of no small inclination unto them, who
will upon their desire in a matter of so great importance, forego the sense of
words, which is natural and proper, fixed by its constant use in the Scripture,
when applied in the same kind; for that which is forced, and strained, and not
once exemplified in the whole book of God. But the words they say are to be
restrained to the subject matter treated of. Well, what is that subject matter?
the new creation by the Preaching of the Gospel. But this is plainly false; nor
will the words allow any such sense; nor the context: nor is any thing offered
to give evidence unto this corrupt perverting of the words, unless it be a
farther perverting of other testimonies, no less clear than this.

For what is according to this Interpretation the meaning of those words, in
the beginning was the Word? that is, when John Baptist preached, and said, this
is the Lamb of God, which was signally the beginning of the Gospel, then he
was. That is, he was when he was, no doubt of it. And is not this a notable way
of interpreting of Scripture, which these great pretenders to a Dictatorship in
Reason, indeed Hucksters in Sophistry, do make use of? But to go on with them
in this supposition; how was he then with God, the Word was with God. That is,
say they, he was then known only to God, before John Baptist preached him in
the beginning. But what shall compel us to admit of this uncouth sense and
Exposition. He was with God, that is, he was known to God alone. What is their
singular herein, concerning how many things may the same be affirmed? Besides,
it is absolutely false. He was known to the Angel Gabriel who came to his
Mother with the Message of his Incarnation, Luke 1. 35. He was known to the two
Angels which appeared to the Shepherds upon his birth, Luke 2. To all the
Heavenly Host assembled to give praise and glory to God on the Account of his
Nativity, as those who came to worship him, and to pay him the homage due unto
him, Luke 2. 10, 13, 14. He was known to his Mother, the Blessed Virgin; and to
Joseph; and Zachariah; and to Elizabeth; to Simeon and Anna, to John Baptist;
and probably to many more to whom Simeon and Anna spoke of him, Luke 2. 38. So
that the sense pretended to be wrung out and extorted from these words, against
their proper meaning and intendment, is indeed false and frivolous, and belongs
not at all unto them.

But let this pass. What shall we say to the next words, And the word was God.
Give us leave without disturbance from you, but to believe this expression
which comprizeth a Revelation of God proposed to us on purpose that we should
believe it, and there will be, as was said, an end of this difference and
debate. Yea, but say they, these words have another sense also. Strange I they
seem to be so plain and positive, that it is impossible any other sense should
be fixed on them, but only this, that the Word was in the beginning, and was
God, and therefore is so still, unless he who is once God can cease so to be.
But the meaning is; that afterward, God exalted him and made him God, as to
Rule, Authority and Power. This making of him God, is an expression very
offensive to the ears of all sober Christians, and was therefore before
exploded. And these things here, as all other figments, hang together like a
rope of sands. In the beginning of the Gospel he was God, before any knew him
but only God. That is, after he had preached the Gospel, and dyed, and rose
again, and was exalted at the right hand of God, he was made God, and that not
properly, which is absolutely impossible, but in an improper sense. How prove
they then this perverse nonsense to be the sense of these plain words. They
say it must needs be so. Let them believe them who are willing to perish with
them.

Thus far then we have their sense; In the beginning, that is, about sixteen or
seventeen hundred years ago; the Word, that is, the Humane nature of Christ
before it was made flesh, which it was in its being; was with God; that is,
known to God alone; and in the beginning, that is afterward, not in the
Beginning, was made God; which is the sum of their Exposition of this place.

But what shall we say, to what is affirmed concerning his making of all
things, so as that without him, that is, without his making of it, nothing was
made that was made; especially seeing that these all things are expressly said
to be the world, verse. 10. And all things therein contained, even in Heaven and
Earth, Col. 1. 16. An ordinary man would think that they should now be taken
hold of, and that there is no way of escape left unto them. But they have it in
a readiness. By the all things here are intended all things of the Gospel, the
preaching of it, the sending of the Apostles to preach it, and to declare the
Will of God; and by the world, is intended the world to come, or the new state
of things under the Gospel. This is the substance of what is pleaded by the
greatest masters amongst them in this matter, and they are not ashamed thus to
plead.

And the Reader in this instance may easily discern what a desperate cause they
are engaged in, and how bold and desperate they are in the management of it.
For,

First, The words are a plain Illustration of the Divine Nature of the Word, by
his Divine Power and works, as the very series of them declares. He was God,
and he made all things; for he that made all things is God, Heb. 3. 4.

Secondly, There is no one word spoken concerning the Gospel, nor the Preaching
of it, nor any effects of that Preaching, which the Apostle expressly insists
upon and declares afterward, verse 14. and so onwards.

Thirdly, The making of all things here ascribed unto the Word, was done in the
beginning. But that making of all things which they intend, in erecting the
Church by the Preaching of the Word, was not done in the beginning, but
afterward; most of it as themselves confess, after the Ascension of Christ
into Heaven.

Fourthly, In this gloss what is the meaning of all things? only some things
say the Socinians. What is the meaning of were made? that is, were mended? by
him that is the Apostles principally preaching the Gospel; and this in the
beginning; after it was past; for so they say expressly that the Principal
things here intended, were effected by the Apostles afterward.

I think since the beginning, place it when you will the beginning of the
world, or the beginning of the Gospel, there was never such an Exposition of
the word; of God or man contended for.

Fifthly, It is said he made the World, and he came into it; namely, the world
which he made and the World, or the Inhabitants of it, knew him not. But the
World they intend did know him; or the Church knew him, and acknowledged him
to be the Son of God. For that was the foundation that it was built upon.

I have instanced directly in this only testimony to give the Reader a pledge
of the full confirmation which may be given unto this great fundamental truth,
by a due improvement of those other Testimonies, or distinct Revelations which
speak no less expressly to the same purpose. And of them there is not any one,
but we are ready to vindicate it, if called thereunto, from the exceptions of
these men; which how bold and Sophistical they are, we may in these now
considered, also learn and know.

It appears then that there is a full sufficient Revelation made in the
Scripture of the Eternal Deity of the Son of God; and that he is so, as is the
Father also. More particular testimonies I shall not at present insist upon,
referring the full discussion and vindication of these truths, to another
season.

We are therefore in the next place to manifest that the same, or the like
testimony, is given unto the Deity of the Holy Spirit; that is, that he is
revealed and declared in the Scripture, as the Object of our Faith, Worship,
and Obedience on the account, and for the R^ason of those divine Excelleneies
which are the sole Reason of our yielding religious worship unto any, or
expecting from any the Reward that is promised unto us, or to be brought by
them to the end for which we are. And herein, lies as was showed, the
concernment of faith. When that knows what it is to believe as on Divine
Revelation, and is enabled thereby to regulate the soul in its present
obedience and future expectation, seeing it is its* nature to work by love and
hope, there it rests. Now this is done to the utmost satisfaction in the
Revelation that is made of the divine Existence, divine Excellencies, and
divine Operations of the Spirit as shall be briefly manifested.

But before we proceed, we may in our way observe a great congruency of success
in those who have denied the Deity of the Son, and those who have denied that
of the holy Spirit. For as to the Son, after some men began once to dis-believe
the Revelation concerning him, and would not acknowledge him to be God and man
in one person, they could never settle nor agree, either what, or who he was,
or who was his Father, or why he was the Son. Some said he was a Phantasm or
appearance; and that he had no real subsistence in this world, and that all
that was done by him was an appearance, he himself being they know not what
elsewhere. That proud beast Paulus Sam^satenus, whose flagitious life,
contended for a pre-eminence in wickedness with his prodigious heresies, was
one of the first after the Jews, that positively contended for his being a man
and no more, who was followed by Photinus and some others. The Arians
perceiving the folly of this opinion, with the odium of it amongst all that
bare the name of Christians, and that they had as good deny the whole Scripture
as not grant unto him a preexistence in a divine nature antecedent to his
Incarnation, they framed a new Deity which God should make before the world, in
all things like to himself, but not the same with him in Essence and substance;
but to be so like him, that by the writings of some of them, ye can scarce know
one from the other; and that this was the Son of God also who was afterward
Incarnate. Others in the mean time had more monstrous imaginations; some that
he was an Angel, some that he was the Sun, some that he was the Soul of the
World, some the light within men. Departing from their proper rest, so have
they hovered about, and so have they continued to do, until this day.

In the same manner it is come to pass with them who have denied the Deity of
the Holy Ghost. They could never find where to stand or abide; but one has
cried up one thing, another another. At first they observed that such things
were every where ascribed unto him in the Scripture, as uncontroulably
evidenced him to be an intelligent voluntary Agent. This they found so plain
and evident, that they could not deny, but that he was a person or an
intelligent subsistence. Wherefore seeing they were resolved not to assent unto
the Revelation of his being God, they made him a created spirit, chief and
above all others. But still whatever else he were, he was only a Creature. And
this course some of late also have steered.

The Socinians on the other hand, observing that such things are assigned and
ascribed unto him, as that if they acknowledge him to be a person, or a
substance, they must upon necessity admit him to be God, though they seemed not
at first at all agreed what to think or say concerning him positively, yet they
all coneurred peremptorily in denying his personality. Hereon, some of them
said he was the Gospel, which others of them have confuted; some that he was
Christ. Neither could they agree whether there was one Holy Ghost or more;
whether the spirit of God and the Good spirit of God, and the holy spirit, be
the same or no. In general now they conclude that he is vis Dei, or virtus Dei,
or efficacia Dei; no substance, but a quality that may be considered either as
being in God, and then they say it is the spirit of God; or as sanctifying, and
conforming men unto God, and then they say, it is the Holy Ghost. Whether these
things do answer the Revelation made in the Scripture concerning the Eternal
Spirit of God, will be immediately manifested. Our Quakers, who have for a long
season hovered up and down like a swarm of flies with a confused noise and
humming, begin now to settle in the opinions lately by them declared for. But
what their thoughts will fall into be, concerning the Holy Ghost, when they
shall be contented to speak Intelligibly, and according to the usage of other
men, or the pattern of Scripture, the great rule of speaking or treating about
spiritual things, I know not; and am uncertain whether they do so themselves or
no. Whether he may be the light within them, or an infallible afflatus is
uncertain. In the mean time, what is revealed unto us in the Scripture to be
believed concerning the Holy Ghost, his Deity, and personality, may be seen in
the ensuing testimonies.

The sum of this Revelation is, that the Holy Spirit is an eternally divine
existing substance, the Author of Divine operations, and the Object of Divine
and Religious Worship; that is, over all God Blessed for ever; as the ensuing
testimonies evince. Gen 1. 2. The spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters.

Psalm 33. 6. By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host
of them by the Spirit of his mouth.

Job 26. 13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens.

Job 33. 4. The Spirit of God has made me.

Psalm 104. 30. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit; they are Created.

Mat. 28. 19. Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.

Acts 1. 16. That Scripture must needs have been fulfilled which the Holy Ghost
by the mouth of David spoke.

Acts 5. 3. Peter said to Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to
the Holy Ghost? Verse. 4. Thou have not lied unto men but unto God.

Acts 28. 25, 26. Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet unto our
Fathers, saying, go unto this people and say --

1 Cor. 3. 16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit
of God dwells in you.

1 Cor. 12. 11. All these works that one and self-same spirit, dividing to
every man as he will, 2. 6. And there are deversities of operations, but it is
the same God which works all in all.

2 Cor. 13. 14. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.

Acts 20. 28. Take heed to the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers.

Matthew. 12. 31. All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but
the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.

Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit?

John 14. 26. But the Comforte^ which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things.

Luke 12. 12. The Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what you ought to
say.

Acts 13. 3. And as they ministered to the Lord and fasted; the Holy Ghost said,
separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.

Verse. 4. So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed into, etc.

2 Pet. 1. 21. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of men, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

It is evident upon the first consideration, that there is not any thing which
we believe concerning the Holy Ghost, but that it is plainly revealed and
declared in these testimonies. He is directly affirmed to be, and is called
God, Acts 5. 3, 4. Which the Socinians will not say is by virtue of an
Exaltation unto an Office or Authority, as they say of the Son; That he is an
intelligent voluntary Divine Agent; he knows, he works as he will, which
things if in their frequent repetition, they are not sufficient to evince an
intelligent Agent, a personal subsistence, that has Being, Life and Will, we
must confess that the Scripture was written on purpose to lead us into mistakes
and misapprehensions of what we are under penalty of eternal ruin rightly to
apprehend and believe. It declares also, that he is the Author and Worker of
all sorts of Divine Operations requiring Immensity, Omnipotency, Omnisciency,
and all other Divine Excellencies unto their working and effecting. Moreover,
it is revealed, that he is peculiarly to be believed in; and may peculiarly be
sinned against; the great Author of all Grace in Believers, and order in the
Church. This is the sum of what we believe of what is revealed in the
Scripture concerning the Holy Ghost.

As in the consideration of the preceding head, we vindicated one Testimony in
particular from the exceptions of the adversaries of the truth, so on this we
may briefly sum up the evidence that is given us in the testimonies before
produced, that the Reader may the more easily understand their intendment, and
what in particular, they bear witness unto.

The sum is, that the Holy Ghost is a divine distinct person, and neither
merely the power or virtue of God, nor any created Spirit whatever. This
plainly appears from what is revealed concerning him. For he who is placed in
the same series or order with other divine persons, without the least note of
difference or distinction from them, as to an Interest in personality, who has
the names proper to a divine person only, and is frequently and directly called
by them, who also has personal properties, and is the voluntary Author of
personal divine Operations, and the proper Obj^ct of Divine Worship, he is a
distinct divine person. And if these things be not a sufficient evidence and
demonstration of a divine intelligent substance, I shall, as was said before,
despair to understand any thing that is expressed and declared by words. But
now thus it is with the Holy Ghost according to the Revelation made concerning
him in the Scripture. For,

First, He is placed in the same rank and order without any note of difference
or distinction as to a distinct interest in the Divine Nature, that is, as we
shall see, personality, with other Divine persons, Matthew. 28. 19. Baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.
7. There be three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit, and these three are one, 1 Cor. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6. No man can say the Lord
Jesus Christ is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; now there are diversities of
gifts, but the same Spirit, and there are differences of administrations, but
the same Lord; and there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God
which works all in all. Neither does a denial of his divine being and
distinct existence leave any tolerable sense unto these Expressions. For read
the words of the first place from the mind of the Socinians, and see what is it
can be gathered from them. Baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the virtue or efficacy of the Father. Can any thing be more
absonant from Faith and Reason, than this absurd expression? And yet is it the
direct sense, if it be any, that these men put upon the words. To join a
quality with acknowledged persons, and that in such things and cases, as
wherein they are proposed under a personal consideration, is a strange kind of
Mystery. And the like may be manifested concerning the other places.

Secondly, He also has the Names proper to a divine person only. For he is
expressly called God, Acts 5. He who is termed the Holy Ghost, ver. 3. And the
Spirit of the Lord, verse 9. Is called also God, ver. 4. Now this is the name
of a divine Person on one Account or other. The Socinians would not allow
Christ to be called God, were he not a divine person, though not by nature, yet
by ^ffice and authority. And I suppose, they will not find out an office for
the Holy Ghost whereunto he might be exalted on the account whereof he might
become God, seeing this would acknowledge him to be a person which they deny.
So he is called the Comforter, John 16. 7. A personal Appellation this is also;
and because he is the Comforter of all Gods people, it can be the name of none
but a divine person. In the (...) it is frequently (...) come, that he shall,
and will do such and such things, all of them declaring him to be a person.

Thirdly, He has personal properties assigned unto him, as a Will, 1 Cor. 12.
11. He divides to every man severally as he will; and understanding, 1 Cor. 2.
10. The Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. As also all
the actings that are ascribed unto him are all of them such, as undeniably
affirm personal properties in their principle and Agent. For,

Fourthly, He is the voluntary Author of Divine operations. He of old cherished
the creation, Genesis 1. 3. The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
He formed and garnished the Heavens. He inspired, acted and spoke, in and by
the Prophets, Acts 28. 25, 26. Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet
unto our Fathers, 2 Pet. 1. 21. The Prophecy came not in old time by the will
of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. He
regenerateth, enlightneth, sanctifies, comfort, instructs, leads,
guides, all the Disciples of Christ, as the Scriptures every where testify.
Now all these are personal Operations, and cannot with any pretense of sobriety
or consistency with Reason be constantly and uniformly assigned unto a quality
or virtue. He is, as the Father and Son, God with the properties of Omniscience
and Omnipotency, of Life, Understanding and Will; and by these properties,
works, acts, and produces effects according to Wisdom, Choice, and Power.

Fifthly, The same regard is had to him in Faith, Worship, and Obedience, as
unto the other persons of the Father and Son. For our being baptized into his
name, is our solemn engagement to believe in him, to yield obedience to him,
and to worship him, as it puts the same obligation upon us to the Father and
the Son. So also in reference unto the Worship of the Church. He commands that
the Ministers of it be separated unto himself, Acts 13. 2. The Holy Ghost said,
separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. Ver.
4. So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost departed, which is comprehensive
of all the religious Worship of the Church.

And on the same account is he sinned against, as Acts 5. 3, 4, 9. For there is
the same Reason of Sin and Obedience. Against whom a man may sin formally and
ultimately, him he is bound to obey, worship, and believe in. And this can be
no quality, but God himself. For what may be the sense of this expression: Thou
have lied to the efficacy of God in his operations; Or how can we be formally
obliged unto obedience to a quality. There must then an antecedent Obligation
unto Faith, Trust, and Religious Obedience be supposed as the ground of
rendering a person capable of being guilty of sin toward wards any. For sin is
but a ^ailure in Faith, Obedience or Worship. These therefore are due unto the
Holy Ghost; or a man could not sin against him so signally and fatally as some
are said to do, in the foregoing testimonies.

I say therefore unto this part of our Cause, as unto the other, that unless we
will cast off all Reverence of God, and in a king of Atheism, which as I
suppose the prevailing wickedness of this Age has not yet arrived unto, say
that the Scriptures were written on purpose to deceive us, and to lead us into
mistakes about, and misapprehensions of what it proposes unto us, we must
acknowledge the Holy Ghost to be a substance, a person, God; yet distinct from
the Father and the Son. For to tell us, that he will come unto us, that he will
be our Comforter, that he will teach us, lead us, guide us, that he spoke of
old, in and by the Prophets, that they were moved by him, acted by him, that he
searches the deep things of God, works as he will, that he appoints to
himself Ministers in the Church; In a word, to declare in places innumerable,
what he has done, what he does, what he will do, what he says, and speaks,
how he acts, and proceeds, what his will is, and to warn us, that we grieve him
not, sin not against him, with things innumerable of the like nature, and all
this while to oblige us to believe that he is not a person, an helper, a
comforter, a searcher, a willer, but a quality in some especial operations of
God, or his power and virtue in them, were to distract men, not to instruct
them, and leave them no certain conclusion but this, that there is nothing
certain in the whole Book of God. And of no other tendency are these and the
like imaginations of our Adversaries in this matter.

But let us briefly consider what is objected in general unto the truth we have
confirmed.

First, They say, the Holy Spirit is said to be given, to be sent, to be
bestowed on men, and to be promised unto them; and therefore it cannot be that
he should be God; for how can any of these things be spoken of God.

I answer, As these Expressions do not prove him to be God, nor did ever any
produce them to that purpose, yet they undeniably prove him to be a person; or
an intellingent voluntary Agent, concerning whom they are spoken and affirmed.
For how can the power of God, or a quality as they speak, be said to be sent,
to be given, to be bestowed on men; so that these very Expressions are
destructive to their imaginations.

Secondly, He who is God equal in nature and being with the Father, may be
promised, sent, and given, with respect unto the holy dispensation and
condescension wherein he has undertaken the Office of being our Comforter and
Sanctifier.

Thirdly, The communications, distributions, impartings, divisions of the
spirit, which they mention, as they respect the Object of them, Or those on
whom they were, or are bestowed, denote only works, gifts, operations and
effects of the spirit, the rule whereof is expressed, 1 Cor. 12. 7. He workeeth
them in whom he will, and as he will. And whether these, and the like
exceptions, taken from Actings and operations, which are plainly interpreted
and explained in sundry places of Scripture, and evidently enough in the
particular places where they are used, are sufficient to impeach the truth of
the Revelation before declared, all who have a due reverence of God, his word
and truths, will easily understand and discern.

These things being declared in the Scripture concerning the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, it is moreover Revealed, and these three are one; that is,
one God, jointly to be worshipped, feared, adored, believed in and obeyed, in
order unto eternal life. For although this does absolutely and necessarily
follow from what is declared and has been spoken concerning the one God, or
onenes^ of the Derty, yet for the confirmation of our faith, and that we may
not by the distinct consideration of the three be taken off from the one, it is
particularly declared, that these three are one, that one, the one and same
God, But whereas, as was said before, this can no otherwise be, the testimonies
given thereunto are not so frequently multiplied as they are unto those other
heads of this truth, which through the craft of Satan, and the pride of men,
might be more liable to exceptions. But yet they are clear, full, and
distinctly sufficient for faith to acquiesce in immediately, without any other
expositions, interpretations, or arguments, beyond our understanding of the
naked importance of the words. Such are they, of the Father the Son, John 10.
30. I and my Father are one. Father, Son and Spirit, Joh. 5. 7. three that bare
witness in Heaven, Father, Son and Spirit, and these three are one, Mat. 28.
19. Baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Spirit. For if those
into whose name we are Baptized be not one in nature, we are by our Baptism
engaged into the Service and Worship of more Gods than one. For as being
Baptized, or sacredly initiated into, or in the name of any one does
Sacramentally bind us unto a holy and Religious obedience unto him, and in all
things to the avowing of him as the God whose we are, and whom we serve, as
here we are in the Name of the Father, Son and Spirit, so if they are not one
God, the Blasphemous consequence before mentioned must unavoidably be admitted;
which it also does upon the Socinian principle, who whilst of all others they
seem to contend most for one God, are indeed direct polutheists, by owning
others with Religious respect, due to God alone, which are not so.

Once more! it is revealed also, that these three are distinct among themselves
by certain peculiar Relative properties, if I may yet use these terms. So that
they are distinct, living, divine, intelligent voluntary principles of
operation or working, and that in, and by internal acts one toward another,
and in acts that outwardly respect the Creation and the several parts of it.
Now this distinction originally lies in this; that the Father begets the
Son, and the Son is begotten of the Father; and the Holy Spirit proceeds from
both of them. The manner of these things, so far as they may be expressed unto
our Edification, shall afterward be spoken to. At present it suffices for the
satisfaction and confirmation of our faith, that the distinctions named are
clearly revealed in the Scripture, and are proposed to be its proper object in
this matter. Psalm 2. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Matthew.
16. 16. Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. Joh. 1. 14. We saw his
Glory, the glory of the only begotten of the Father. Ver. 18. No man has seen
God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father he
has revealed him. John 5. 26. For as the Father has life in himself, so has
he given to the Son to have life in himself. 1 John 5. 20. The Son of God is
come, and has given us an understanding. Joh. 14. 26. But when the Comforter
is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father even the spirit of truth
which proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of me.

Now as the nature of this distinction, lies in their mutual Relation one to
another, so it is the foundation of those distinct actings and operations,
whereby the distinction it self is clearly manifested and confirmed. And these
actings as was said, are either such, as where one of them is the object of
another actings, or such as have the creature for their objects ^ The first
sort are testified unto, Psalm 110. 1. John 1. 18. Chap. 5. 20. Chap. 17. 5. 1
Cor. 2. 10, 11. Prove. 8. 21, 22. Most of which places have been before recited.
They, which thus know each other, love each other, delight in each other, must
needs be distinct; and so are they represented unto our faith. And for the
other sort of actings the Scripture is full of the expressions of them; see*
Genesis 19. 24. Zachariah 2. 8. Joh. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 8. 9.

Our conclusion from the whole is; that there is nothing more fully expressed
in the Scripture, than this sacred truth is; that there is one God, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost; which are divine, distinct, intelligent, voluntary,
omnipotent principles of operation, and working, which whosoever thinks himself
obliged to believe the Scripture must believe; and concerning others, in this
discourse, we are not solicitous.

This is that which was first proposed; namely, to manifest what is expressly
revealed in the Scripture concerning God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; so as
that we may duly believe in him, yield Obedience unto him, enjoy communion with
him, walk in his love and fear, and so come at length to be blessed with him
for evermore. Nor does faith for its security, establishment and direction,
absolutely stand in need of any farther Exposition or Explanation of these
things; or the use of any terms not consecrated to the present service by the
Holy Ghost. But whereas it may be variously assaulted by the Temptations of
Satan, and opposed by the subtle s^phisms of men of corrupt minds; and whereas
it is the duty of the Disciples of Christ to grow in the knowledge of God, and
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by an explicit apprehension of the things
they do believe, so far as they are capable of them; this Doctrine has in all
ages of the Church, been explained and taught, in and by such Expressions,
Terms, and Propositions, as farther declare what is necessarily included in it,
or consequent unto it; with an exclusion of such things, notions, and
apprehensions, as are neither the one, nor the other. This I shall briefly
manifest, and then vindicate the whole from some exceptions, and so close this
dissertation.

That God is One, was declared and proved. Now this Oneness can respect nothing
but the Nature, Being, Substance or Essence of God. God is one in this respect.
Some of these words indeed are not used in the Scripture. But whereas they are
of the same importance and signification, and none of them include any thing of
imperfection, they are properly used in the declaration of the Unity of the
Godhead. There is mention in the Scripture of the Godhead of God, Romans 1. 20.
His Eternal power and Godhead. And of his Nature, by excluding them from being
objects of our Worship, who are not God by nature, Gal. 4. 8. Now this natural
Godhead of God, is, his Substance or Essence with all the Holy divine
Excellencies which naturally and necessarily appertain thereunto. Such are
Eternity, Immensity, Omnipotency, Life, Infinite Holiness, Goodness, and the
like. This one Nature, Substance or Essence, being the Nature, Substance, or
Essence of God, as God, is the Nature, Essence and Substance of the Father,
Son, and Spirit, one and the same absolutely in and unto each of them. For none
can be God as they are revealed to be, but by virtue of this divine Nature or.
Being. Herein consists the Unity of the Godhead.

Secondly, The distinction which the Scripture reveals between Father, Son, and
Spirit is that whereby they are three ^^p^stasis, or Persons, distinctly
subsisting in the same divine Essence or Being. Now a divine person, is nothing
but the divine Essence upon the account of an especial property, subsisting in
an especial manner. As in the Person of the Father, there is the Divine
Essence, and Being, with its property of begetting the Son, subsisting in an
especial manner as the Father. And because this Person has the whole Divine
Nature, all the Essential Properties of that nature are in that person. The
Wisdom, the Understanding of God, the Will of God, the Immensity of God, is in
that person; not as that Person, but as the Person is God. The like is to be
said of the Persons of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Hereby each Person having
the Understanding, the Will, and power of God, becomes a distinct principle of
operation; and yet all their actings ad extra being the actings of God, they
are undivided, and are all the works of one, of the self same God. And these
things do not only necessarily follow, but are directly included in the
Revelation made concerning God, and his subsistence in the Scriptures.

There are indeed very many other things that are taught, and disputed, about
this Doctrine of the ^rinity, as the manner of the eternal Genera^^on of the
Son, of the Essence of the Father; of the procession of the Holy Ghost, and the
difference of it from the Generation of the Son; of the mutual in-being of the
persons, by reason of their unity in the same Substance or Essence; the nature
of their personal subsistence, with respect unto the properties whereby they
are mutually distinguished, all which are true and defensible against all the
Sophisms of the Adversaries of this truth. Yet because the distinct
apprehension of them, and their accurate expression, is not necessary unto
faith, as it is our guide and principle in and unto* Religious Worship and
obedience, they need not here be insisted on. Nor are those brief Explications
themselves before mentioned, so proposed as to be placed immediately in the
same rank or order with the Original Revelations before infisted on, but only
are pressed as proper Expressions of what is revealed to increase our light and
further our edification. And although they cannot rationally be opposed or
denied, nor ever were by any, but such as deny and oppose the things themselves
as revealed, yet they that do so deny or oppose them, are to be required
positively in the first place to deny or disapprove the Oneness of the Deity,
or to prove that the Father, or Son, or Holy Ghost in particular, are not God,
before they be allowed to speak one word against the manner of the Explication
of the truth concerning them. For either they grant the Revelation declared and
contended for, or they do not: If they do; let that concession be first laid
down, namely, that the Father, Son, and Spirit are one God; and then let it be
debated whether they are one in Substance and three in Persons, or how else the
matter is to be stated. If they deny it; it is a plain madness to dispute of
the manner of any thing, and the way of expressing it, whilst the thing it self
is denied to have a being: for of that which is not, there is neither manner,
property, adjunct, nor effect. Let then such persons, as this sort of men are
ready to attempt with their Sophistry, and to amuse with cavils about persons,
substances, subsistences, and the like, desire to know of them what it is that
they would be at. What would they deny, what would they disapprove. Is it that
God is one; or that the Father is God, or the Son, or the Holy Ghost is so. If
they deny, or oppose either of these, they have Testimonies and instances of
divine Revelation, or may have, in a readiness, to confound the Devil and all
his Emissaries. If they will not do so, if they refuse it, then let them know,
that it is most foolish and unreasonable to contend about Expressions and
Explanations of any thing, or doctrine, about the manner, respects, or
relations of any thing, until the thing it self, or Doctrine, be plainly
confessed or denied. If this they refuse, as generally they do and will, which
I speak upon sufficient experience, and will not be induced to deal openly,
properly and rationally, but will keep to their Cavils and Sophisms, about
terms and expressions, all farther debate, or conference with them, may justly,
and ought both conscienciously and rationally to be refused, and rejected. For
these sacred mysteries of God and the Gospel, are not lightly to be made the
subject of men's contests and disputations.

But as we dealt before in particular, so here I shall give Instances of the
Sophistical exceptions that are used against the whole of this Doctrine; and
that with respect unto some late collections, and Representations of them: From
whence they are taken up and used by many who seem not to understand the words,
Phrases and Expressions themselves, which they make use of.

The sum of what they say in general, is, How can these things be? How can
three be one, and one be three? Every person has its own substance, and
therefore if there be three persons, there must be three substances; and so
three Gods.

Answ. 1. Every person has distinctly its own substance, for the one substance
of the Deity, is the substance of each person, so it is still but one. But each
person has not its own distinct substance, because the substance of them all
is the same, as has been proved.

2. They say, That if each person be God, then each person is Infinite, and
there being three persons there must be three Infinites.

Answ. This follows not in the least; for each person is Infinite as he is God.
Al^ divine properties, such as to be Infinite is, belong not to the persons on
the account of their personality, but on the account of their nature, which is
one, for they are all natural properties.

But they say, If each person be God, and that God subsist in three persons,
then in each person there are three persons or Gods.

Answ. The collusion of this Sophism consists in that expression, be God; and
that God; in the first place, the nature of God is intended; in the latter a
singular person. Place the words intelligibly and they are thus; If each person
be God, and the nature of God subsists in three persons, then in each person
there are three persons; and then the folly of it will be evident.

But they farther infer; That if we deny the persons to be Infinite, then an
Infinite Being has a finite mode of subsisting, and so I know not what
supposition they make hence; that seeing there are not three Infinites, then
the Father, Son, and Spirit are three finites that make up an Infinite.

The pitiful weakness of this Cavil is open to all: for finite and Infinite are
properties and adjuncts of Beings, and not of the manner of the subsistence of
any thing. The nature of each person is Infinite, and so is each person,
because of that nature. Of the manner of their subsistence, fini^e and Infinite
cannot be predicated or spoken, no farther than to say, an Infinite Being does
so subsist.

But you grant, say they, that the only true God is the Father, and then if
Christ be the only true God, he is the Father.

Answ. We say, the only true God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. We never say,
the Scripture never says, that the Father only is the true God, whence it
would follow, that he that is the true God, is the Father. But we grant the
Father to be the only trne God: and so we (...) is the Son also. And it does
not (...) all thence follow, that the Son is (...) Father. Because in saying
the (...) the true God, we respect not his paternity, or his paternal Relation
to his Son; but his Nature, Essence and Being. And the same we affirm
concerning the other persons. And to say, that because each person is God, one
person must be another, is to crave leave to disbelieve what God has revealed,
without giving any Reason at all for their so doing.

But this Sophism being borrowed from another, namely Crellius, who insisted
much upon it, I shall upon his account, and not on theirs, who as far as I can
apprehend, understand little of the intendment of it, remove it more fully out
of the way. It is proposed by him in way of Syllogism, thus, The only true God
is the Father; Christ is the only true God; therefore he is the Father. Now
this Syllogism is ridiculously Sophystical. For in a Categorical Syllogism the
Major Proposition is not to be particular, nor equipollent to a particular. For
from such a Proposition, when any thing communicable to more is the subject of
it, and is restrained unto one particular, nothing can be inferred in the
conclusion. But such is this Proposition here, the only true God is the Father.
It is a particular Proposition; wherein the subject is restrained unto a
singular, or individual predicate, though in it self communicable to more. Now
the Proposition being ^o made particular, the terms of the subject or predicate
are supposed rec^procal; namely, that one God, and the Father, are the same;
which is false: Unless it be first proved, that the name God, is communicable
to no more, or no other, than is the other term of Father; which to suppose, is
to beg the whole Question. For the only true God, has a larger signification
than the term of Father, or Son. So that though the only true God be the
Father, yet every one who is true God, is not the Father: Seeing then that the
name of God here, supplies the pla^e of a species, though it be singular
absolutely, as it respects the Divine Nature which is absolutely singular, and
one, and cannot be multiplied; yet in respect of communication it is otherwise,
it is communicated unto more, namely, to the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And
therefore if any thing be intended to be concluded from hence, the Proposition
must be expressed according to what the subject requires, as capable of
communication or Attribution to more than one, as thus; who ever is the only
true God, is the Father; which Proposition these Persons and their Masters,
shall never be able to prove.

I have given in particular these strictures thus briefly, upon these empty
Sophisms; partly, because they are well removed already, and partly because
they are mere exscriptions out of an Author not long since translated into
English, unto whom an entire answer may ere long be returned.

That which at present shall suffice, is to give a general answer unto all
these cavills, with all of the same kind, which the men of these principles do
usually insist upon.

I. The things, they say, which we teach concerning the Trinity, are contrary
to Reason; and thereof they endeavor to give sundry instances, wherein the
sum of the opposition which they make unto this truth does consist. But first,
I ask what Reason is it that they intend? It is their own, the carnal reason of
men. By that they will judge of these Divine Mysteries. The Scripture tells us
indeed, that the Spirit of a man which is in him knows the things of a man. A
man's Spirit, by natural Reason, may judge of natural things. But the things of
God, knows no man but the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. So that what we know
of these things, we must receive upon the R^v^lation of the Spirit of God
merely; if the Apostle may be believed. And it is given unto men to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. To some, and not to others; and unless it be
so given them they cannot know them. In particular, none can know the Father,
unless the Son reveal him. Nor will, or does, or can, flesh and blood reveal or
understand Jesus Christ to be the Son of the living God, unless the Father
reveal him, and instruct us in the truth of it, Matthew. 16. 18. The way to come
to the acknowledgement of these things, is that described by the Apostle,
Ephesians. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in Heaven and Earth is
named, that he would grant ye, according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in
your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and grounded in love may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, etc. As also Col. 2. 2. That ye might come unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the
Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ. In whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. It is by faith and prayer, and through the
Revelation of God, that we may come to the acknowledgement of these things; and
not by the carnal reasonings of men of corrupt minds.

2. What Reason do they intend? If Reason absolutely, the Reason of things; we
grant that nothing contrary unto it, is to be admitted. But Reason as it is in
this or that man, particularly in themselves, we know to be weak, maimed and
imperfect; and that they are, and all other men, extremely remote from a just
and full comprehension of the whole Reason of things. Are they in such an
estate, as that their apprehension shall pass for the measure of the nature of
all things; we know they are far from it, So that though we will not admit of
any thing, that is contrary to reason, yet the least intimation of a Truth by
Divine Revelation, will make me embrace it, although it should be contrary to
the reason of all the Socinians in the world. Reason in the abstract, or the
just measure of the answering of one thing unto another, is of great moment:
But Reason, that is, what is pretended to be so, or appears to be so unto this
or that man, especially in and about things of Divine Revelation, is of very
small importance; of none at all where it rises up against the express
testimonies of Scripture, and these multiplied to their mutual confirmation and
explanation.

3. Many things are above Reason, that is, as considered in this or that
subject, as men, which are not at all against it. It is an easy thing to
compel the most curious enquirers of these days to a ready confession hereof,
by multitudes of Instances in things finite and temporary. And shall any dare
to deny but it may be so, in things Heavenly, Divine, and Spiritual? Nay, there
is no concernment of the Being of God, or his properties, but is absolutely
above the comprehension of our reason. We cannot by searching find out God, we
cannot find out the Almighty to perfection.

4. The very foundation of all their Objections and Cavils against this truth,
is destructive of as fundamental principles of reason, as are in the world.
They are all at best reduced to this; it cannot be thus in things finite; the
same Being cannot in one respect be one, in another three, and the like, and
therefore it is so in things Infinite. All these reasonings are built upon this
supposition, that that which is finite can perfectly comprehend that which is
Infinite. An assertion absurd, foolish and contradictory unto it self! Again,
it is the highest reason in things of pure Revelation, to captivate our
understandings to the Authority of the Revealer, which here is rejected. So
that by a loud specious pretense of Reason, these men by a little captious
Sophistry endeavor not only to countenance their unbelief, but to evert the
greatest principles of Reason it self.

5. The Objections these men principally insist upon, are merely against the
Explanations we use of this Doctrine; not against the Primitive Revelation of
it, which is the principal object of our faith, which how preposterous and
irrational a course of proceeding it is, has been declared.

6. It is a Rule among Phil^sophers; that if a man on just grounds and reasons
have embraced any opinion or persuasion, he is not to desert it, merely because
he cannot answer every Objection against it. For if the Objections wherewith we
may be entangled, be not of the same weight and importance, with the reason on
which we embraced the opinion, it is a madness to forego it on the Account
thereof. And much more must this hold amongst the common sort of Christians, in
things spiritual and divine. If they will let go, and part with their faith in
any truth, because they are not able to answer distinctly some Objections that
may be made against it, they may quickly find themselves disputed into Atheism.

7. There is so great an intimation made of such an expression, and resemblance
of a Trinity in Unity, in the very works of the Creation, as learned men have
manifested by various instances, that it is most unreasonable to suppose that
to be contrary to reason, which many objects of rational consideration, do more
or less present unto our minds.

8. To add no more considerations of this nature; Let any of the Adversaries
produce any one Argument or grounds of reason, or those pretended to be such,
against that that has been asserted, that has not already been baffl^d a
thousand times, and it shall receive an answer, or a public acknowledgement
that it is Indissoluble.

Of the Person of Christ.
THE next Head of Opposition made by the men of this conspiracy, against this
sacred truth; is against the head of all truth, the person of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The Socinians indeed would willingly put a better face, or color upon
their Error, about the Person of Christ, then it will bear, or endure to lie on
it. For in their Catechism unto this Question, Is the Lord Jesus Christ, purus
Homo, a mere man? they Answer; by no means. How then? has he a divine nature
also? which is their next question: To this they say, by no means, for this is
contrary to right reason. How then will these pretended Masters of Reason
reconcile these things? For to us it seems, that if Christ have no other nature
but that of a man, he is as to his nature, purus Homo, a mere man, and no more.
Why, they answer, that he is not a mere man, because he was born of a Virgin;
Strange! that that should be an argument to prove him more than a man, which
the Scripture and all men in their right wits grant to be an invincible reason,
to prove him to be a man, and as he was born of her, no more. Romans 1. 3.
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, Romans 9. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came. Gal. 4. 4. God sent forth his Son, made of a
Woman, made under the Law. But say they; he was endowed with the Spirit,
wrought Miracles, was raised from the dead, had all power given in Heaven and
Earth; for by these degrees, he became to be God. But all men see that the
inquiry is about the nature of Christ; and this Answer is about his state and
condition. Now this changes not his nature on the one hand, no more than his
being humbled, poor and dying, did on the other. This is the right reason we
have to deal withal in these men. If a man should have enquired of some of
them of old, whether Melchizedeck were purus Homo, a mere man? some of them
would have said, no, because he was the Holy Ghost; some no, because he was the
Son of God himself; and some no, because he was an Angel; for such foolish
opinions have men fallen into. But how sottish soever their conceptions were,
their Answer to that enquiry would have been regular, beca^se the Question and
Answer respect the same subject, in the same respect. But never any was so
stupid, as to answer, he was not a mere man, that is by nature, because he was
a Priest of the high God, which respects his Office, and condition. Yet such is
the pretense of these men about the Person of Christ to incrustate and give
some color unto their soul mis-belief; as supposing that it would be much to
their disadvantage to own. Christ only as a mere man, though the most part of
their disputes that they have troubled the Christian World withal, have had no
other design nor aim but to prove him so to be, and nothing else. I shall
briefly, according to the method insisted on, first lay down what is the direct
Revelation which is the object of our faith in this matter; then express the
Revelation it self in the Scripture testimonies wherein it is recorded; and
having vindicated some one or other of them from their exceptions, manifest how
the Doctrine hereof is farther explained, unto the Edification of them that
believe.

That there is a Second Person, the Son of God, in the holy Trin-Vnity of the
Godhead* we have proved before. That this Person did of his infinite Love and
Grace take upon him our nature, bumane nature, so as that the divine and humane
nature should be come one Person, one Christ, God and Man in one; so that
whatever he does in, and about our Salvation, it is done by that one Person,
God and Man, is revealed unto us in the Scripture, as the Object of our Faith.
And this is that which we believe concerning the Person of Christ. Whatever
acts are ascrib^d unto him, however immediately performed, in, or by the Humane
Nature, or in and by his Divine Nature, they are all the acts of that one
Person, in whom are both these natures. That this Christ, God and Man, is
because he is God, and on the account of what he has done for us as Man, to be
believed in, worshipped, with worship Religious and Divine, to be trusted and
obeyed; this also is asserted in the Scripture. And these things are as it were
the common notions of Christian Religion; the common Principles of our
Profession; which the Scriptures also abundantly testify unto.

Isa. 7. 14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bare a Son, and shall call his
name Emanuel; that is, he shall be God with us, or God in our nature. Not, that
that should be his name whereby he should be called in this World; but that
this should be the condition of his Person, he should be God with us; God in
our nature. So are the words expounded, Mat. 1. 21, 22, 23. That which is
conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost; and she shall bring forth a Son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his People from their sins.
Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord
by the Prophet, saying, Behold, a Virgin shall be with Child, and shall bring
forth a Son, and they shall call his name Emanuel, which being interpreted, is
God with us. His name whereby he was to be called, was Jesus, that is a
Savior. And thereby was accomplished the prediction of the Prophet, that he
should be Emanuel, which being interpreted, is God with us. Now a Child born to
be God with us, is God in that Child taking our nature upon him, and no
otherwise can the words be understood.

Isa. 9. 6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and his name shall
be called the migh^y God. The Child that is born, the Son that is given, is the
mighty God; and as the migh^y God, and a Child born, or Son, given, he is the
Prince of peace, as he is there called, or our Savior.

John 1. 14. The Word was made flesh. That the Word was God, who made all
things he had before declared. Now he affirms that this Word was made flesh.
How! converted into flesh, into a Man, so that he who was God ceased so to be,
and was turned or changed into flesh, that is a Man? besides that this is
utterly impossible, it is not affirmed. For the Word continued the Word still,
although he was made flesh, or made of a Woman, as it is elsewhere expressed,
or made of the seed of David, or took our flesh or nature to be his own.
Himself continuing God, as he was, became Man also, which before he was not.
The Word was made flesh; this is that which we believe and assert in this
matter.

See John 3. 13. and ver. 31. John 6. 62. Chap. 16. 28. All which places assert
the Person of Christ to have descended from Heaven in the Assumption of Humane
nature, and ascended into Heaven therein being assumed; and to have been in
Heaven as to his Divine nature, when he was in the Earth in the flesh that he
had assumed.

Acts 20. 28. Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. The Person spoken of is said to be God absolutely; the Church of God.
And this God is said to have blood of his own; the blood of Jesus Christ, being
the blood of him that was God, though not the blood of him as God; For God is a
Spirit. And this undeniably testifies to the unity of his Person as God and Man.

Romans 1. 3, 4. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the Spirit of H^liness, by the Resurrection from the Dead.
Romans 9. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. This is all we desire; that
we may believe without disturbance from the clamours of these Men. Namely, that
the same Christ, as concerning the flesh, came of the Fathers, of David, and in
himself, is over all God blessed for ever. This the Scripture asserts plainly,
and why we should not believe it firmly, let these Men give a reason when they
are able.

Gal. 6. 4. God sent forth his Son made of a Woman; He was his Son, and was
made of a woman; according as he expresses it, Heb. 10. 5. A body have thou
prepared Me; as also, Romans 8. 3.

Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made
in the likeness of M^n. It is the same Christ that is spoken of. And it is here
affirmed of him that he was in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God; But is this all; is this Jesus Christ God only? Does he subsist
only in the form or nature of God? No, says the Apostle, he took upon him the
form of a Servant, was made in the likeness of Men, and was found in fashion as
a Man; that his being truly a Man is expressed in these words our Adversaries
deny not; and we therefore believe that the same Jesus Christ is God also,
because that is no less plainly expressed.

1 Timothy 3. 16. And without controversy great is the mystery of Godliness, God
was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels. It is a
Mystery indeed, under which name it is despised now and reproached; nor are we
allowed so to call it, but are reflected on, as flying to mysteries for our
defense. But we must take leave to speak in this matter, according to his
directions, without whom we cannot speak at all. A Mystery it is, and that a
great mystery; and that confessedly so, by all that do believe. And this is,
that God was manifested in the flesh. That it is the Lord Christ who is spoken
of, every one of the ensuing expressions do evince, Justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received
up into Glory. And this also is the substance of what we believe in this
matter; Namely, That Christ is God, manifest in the flesh, which we
acknowledge, own, and believe to be true, but a great mystery; yet no less
great and Sacred a truth notwithstanding.

Heb. 2. 14. For as much then as the Children were partakers of flesh and
blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same. ver. 16. For verily he
took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham.
And this plainly affirms his pre-existence unto that Assumption of our nature,
and the unity of his Person in it being so assumed.

1 John 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the Love of God, because he laid down his
life for us. He who was God laid down for a season, and parted with that life,
which was his own in that nature of ours which he had assumed. And that taking
of our nature is called his coming in the flesh, which who so denies, is not of
God, but is the Spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4. 3.

These are some of the places, wherein the Person of Christ is revealed unto
our Faith, that we may believe on the Son of God, and have Eternal Life.

The Method formerly proposed would require that I should take off the general
Objections of the Adversaries against this Divine Revelation; as also vindicate
some peculiar Testimonies from their exceptions. But because a particular
opposition unto this Truth, has not as yet publicly and directly been
maintained and managed by any that I know of among our selves, though the
denial of it be expressly included in what they do affirm; I shall leave the
further confirmation thereof unto some other occasion, if it be offered, and it
be judged necessary.

And this is that which the Faith of Believers rests in, as that which is
plainly revealed unto them; namely, that Jesus Christ is God and Man in one
Person; and that all his actings in their behalf are the actings of him who is
God and Man; and that this Son of God, God and Man, is to be believed in by
them, and obeyed that they have Eternal Life.

What is farther added unto these express testimonies, and the full Revelation
of the Truth contained in them in this matter, in way of explication educed
from them, and suitable unto them, to the edification of the Church, or
information of the minds of Believers in the right apprehension of this great
Mystery of God manifested in the flesh, may be reduced to these heads.

(1.) That the Person of the Son of God, did in his assuming humane nature to
be his own, not take an individual Person of any one into a near conjunction
with himself, but preventing the personal subsistence of humane nature in that
flesh which he assumed, he gave it its subsistence in his own Person, whence it
has its individuation and distinction* from all other persons whatever This is
the Personal Union. The Divine and humane nature in Christ have but one
personal subsistence; and so are but one Christ, one distinct personal
principle of all Operations of all that he did, or does, as Mediator. And this
undeniably follows from what is declared in the Testimonies mentioned. For the
Word could not be made flesh, nor could he take on him the seed of Abraham, nor
could the mighty God be a Child born and given unto us, nor could God shed his
blood for his Church, but that the two natures so directly expressed, must be
united in one Person; for otherwise as they are two natures still, they would
be two Persons also.

2. Each nature thus united in Christ, is entire, and preserves unto it self
its own natural properties. For he is no less perfect God, for being made Man,
nor no less a true perfect Man, consisting of soul and body with all their
essential parts by that natures being taken into subsistence with the Son of
God, His Divine nature still continues Immense, Omniscient, Omnipotent,
infinite in Holiness, etc. his bumane nature, finite, limited, and before its
Glorification, subject to all infirmities of life and death, that the same
nature in others absolutely considered, is obnoxious unto.

3. In each of these natures, he acts suitably unto the essential properties
and principles of that nature. As God, he made all things, upholds all things,
by the word of his Power, fills Heaven and Earth, etc. As man, he lived,
hungered, suffered, dyed, rose, ascended into Heaven. Yet by reason of the Union
of both these natures in the same Person: not only his own Person is said to do
all these things, but the Person expressed by the name which he has on the
account of one nature, is said to do that which he did only in the other. So
God is said to redeem his Church with his own blood, and to lay down his life
for us; and the Son of Man to be in Heaven, when he was in the Earth. All
because of the unity of his Person as was declared. And these things do all of
them directly and undeniably flow from what is revealed concerning his Person,
as before is declared.

Of the Satisfaction of CHRIST.
THE last thing to be enquired into, upon occasion of the late opposition to
the great fundamental Truths of the Gospel, is the satisfaction of Christ. And
the Doctrine hereof is such, as I eonceive needs rather to be explained than
vindicated. For it being the Center wherein most, if not all the Lines of
Gospel Promises, and Precepts do meet, and the great medium of all our
Communion with God in Faith and Obedience, the great distinction between the
Religion of Christians, and that of all others in the world, it will easily on
a due proposal be assented unto by all, who would be esteemed Disciples of
Jesus Christ. And whether a parcel of insipid Cavils, may be thought sufficient
to obliterate the Revelation of it, men of sober minds will judge and discern.

For the term of Satisfaction, we contend not about it. It does indeed properly
express and connote that great Effect of the Death of Christ which in the cause
before us, we plead for. But yet because it belongs rather to the Explanation
of the Truth contended for, then is used expressly in the Revelation of it, and
because the right understanding of the Word it self depends on some notions of
Law, that as yet we need not take into consideration, I shall not in this
entrance of our discourse, insist precisely upon it, but leave it as the
natural conclusion of what we shall find expressly declared in the Scripture.
Neither do I say this, as though I did decline the Word, or the right use of
it, or what is properly signified by it, but do only cast it into its proper
place answerable unto our method and design in the whole of this brie^
discourse.

I know some have taken a new way of expressing and declaring the Doctrine
concerning the Mediation of Christ, with the causes and ends of his death,
which they think more rational, than that usually insisted on. But as what I
have yet heard of or seen in that kind, has been not only unscriptural, but
also very irrational, and most remote from that accuracy whereunto they
pretend, who make use of it; so if they shall publish their conceptions, it is
not improbable but that they may meet with a Scholastical Examination by some
hand or other.

Our present work, as has been often declared, is for the establishment of the
Faith of them, who may be attempted, if not brought into danger to be seduced
by the slights of some who lie in wait to deceive, and the clamours of others
who openly drive the same design. What therefore the Scripture plainly and
clearly reveals in this matter, is the subject of our present enquiry. And
either in so doing, as occasion shall be offered, we shall obviate, or in the
close of it remove those Sophisms that the Sacred Truth now proposed to
consideration has been attempted withal.

The sum of what the Scripture reveals about this great truth, commonly called
the satisfaction of Christ, may be reduced unto these ensuing heads.

1. That Adam being made upright, sinned against God, and all mankind, all his
posterity in him. Genesis 1. 27. So God created man in hit own Image, in the Image
of God created he him, Male and Female created he them, Genesis 3. 11. And he
said, who told thee that thou wast naked? Have thou eaten of the Tree whreof I
commandeded thee that then should not eat? Eccles. 7. 29. Lo, this only have
I found, that God made man upright, but he has sought out many inventions.
Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Ver. 18.
Therefore by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation,
Ver. 19. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners.

2. That by this Sin of our first Parents, all men are brought into an Estate
of Sin, and Apostasy from God, and of an enmity unto him, Genesis 6. 5. God saw
that the wickedness of man was great in the Earth, and that every imagination
of the thoughts of his heart, was only evil continually, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold, I
was s^^^pen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Romans 3. 23. For
all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind
is enmity against God, f^r it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed
can be Ephesians. 4. 18. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the
life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their heart, Chap. 2. 1. Col. 2. 13.

Thirdly, That in this state all men continue in sin against God, nor of
themselves can do otherwise, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12. There is none righteous, no
not one, there is none that understands, there is none that seeks after
God; they are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable,
there is none that does good, no not one.

Fourthly, That the Justice and Holiness of God, as he is the Supreme Governor
and Judge of all the world, require that sin be punished, Exodus 34. 7. That
will by no means clear the guilty, Josh. 24. 19. He is an holy God, he is a
jealous God, he will not forgive your transgressions nor your sins, Psalm 5. 4,
5, 6. For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall
evil dwell with thee; the foolish shall not stand in thy sight; thou hate all
workers of iniquity, thou shall destroy them that speak leasing. Hab. 1. 13.
Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look upon iniquity.
Isa. 33. 14. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire, who among us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Romans 1. 32. Who knowing the judgment of
God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death. Romans 3. 5, 6. Is
God unrighteous who takes vengeance? I speak as a man, God forbid! for then
how shall God judge the world? 2 These. 1. 6. It is a righteous thing with God,
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. Heb. 12. 29. For our God is
a consuming fire. From Deuteronomy. 4. 24.

Fifthly, That God has also engaged his veracity and faithfulness in the
Sanction of the Law not to leave sin unpunished, Genesis 2. 17. In the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them. In this state and
condition all mankind had they been left without divine aid and help, must have
perished Eternally.

Sixthly, That God out of his infinite Goodness, Grace and Love to mankind,
sent his only Son to save and deliver them out of this condition, Matthew. 1. 21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his People from their sins,
John 3. 16, 17. God so loved the world, that be gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life:
for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. Romans 5. 8. God commends his love toward
us, in that while we were ye^ sinners Christ dyed for us, 1 John 4. 9. In this
was manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him, v. 10. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his* Son to be a propitiation
for our sins, 1. These. 1. 10. Even Jesus which delivers us from the wrath to
come.

Seventhly, That this Love was the same in Father and Son, acted distinctly in
the manner that shall be afterward declared; so vain are the pretenses of men
who from the Love of the Father in this matter, would argue against the Love of
the Son; or on the contrary.

Eighthly, That the way in general whereby the Son of God being Incarnate, was
to save lost sinners, was by a substitution of himself according to the design
and appointment of God in the room of those whom he was so save, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might become the
righteousness of God in him, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, being made a curse for us. Romans 5. 7, 8. For scarcely for a
Righteous Man will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man some will even dare
to dye; but God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners Christ dyed us. Romans 8. 3. For what the Law could not do in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh; that the Righteousness of the
Law might be fulfilled in us. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in
his own body on the Tree; Chap. 3. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for
us, the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God. All these
expressions undeniably evince a substitution of Christ as to suffering in the
stead of them whom he was to save; which in general is all that we intend by
his satisfaction; namely, that he was made sin for us, a curse for us, dyed for
us, that is in our stead, that we might be saved from the wrath to come. And
all these Expressions as to their true genuine importance shall be vindicated,
as occasion shall require.

Ninthly, This way of his saving sinners is in particular, several ways
expressed in the Scripture. As,

1. That he offered himself a Sacrifice to God, to make atonement for our
sins, and that in his death and sufferings. Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin. John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God who takes
away the sins of the World, Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ has loved us, and has given
himself for us an offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor,
Heb. 2. 17. Was a merciful high Priest in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the Sins of the People, Heb. 9. 11, 12, 13, 14. But Christ
being come an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building, neither
by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, he entered in once into
the Holy place; having obtained Eternal Redemption for us; For if the blood of
Bulls, etc. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead
works?

2. That he Redeemed us by paying a price, a ransom for our Redemption. Mark
10. 45. The Son of Man came to give his life a ransom for many. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
For ye are bought with a price, 7. 23. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who gave himself a ransom
for all to be testified in due time. Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that
he might Redeem us from all iniquity, 1 Pet. 1. 18. For we were not Redeemed
with Silver and Gold and corruptible things. 19. But with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot.

3. That he bare our sins, or the punishment due unto them. Isa. 53. 5. He was
wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes are we healed; All
we like Sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. 11. For he shall bear their
iniquities. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own Body on the
Tree.

4. That he answered the Law and the penalty of it; Romans 8. 3. God sent forth
his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh; that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has Redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.
Chap. 4. 4, 5. God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to
Redeem them that were under the Law.

5. That he dyed for sin, and sinners, to expiate the one, and in the stead of
the other. Romans 4. 25. He was delivered for our offenses. Romans 5. 10. When we
were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. 1 Cor. 15. 3.
Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures. 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the
Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed for
all, then were all dead, 1 These. 5. 9, 10.

6. Hence on the part of God, it is affirmed that he spared him not, but
delivered him up for us all; Romans 8. 32. And caused all our iniquities to meet
upon him, Isa. 53. 7.

7. The Effect hereof was,

1. That the Righteousness of God was glorified, Romans 3. 25, 26. Whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his
Righteousness for the remission of sins. (2.) The Law fulfilled and satisfied,
as in the places before quoted. Romans 8. 3. Gal. 3. 13, 14. Gal. 4. 5. (3.) God
reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. Heb. 2. 17. He made
reconciliation for the sins of the People. (4.) Atonement was made for sin,
Romans 5. 11. By whom we have now received the Atonement; and peace was made
with God, Ephesians. 2. 14. For he is our peace, who has made both one, that he
might reconcile both unto God in one Body by the Cross, having slain the emnity
thereby. (...) Made an end of sin, Dan. 9. 24. To finish transgression, to make
an end of sins, to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting Righteousness. The glory of God in all these things being exalted,
himself well pleased, Righteousness and everlasting Redemption or Salvation
purchased for Sinners, Heb. 9. 14. In that the chastisement of our peace was
upon him, and that by his stripes we are healed, he being punished that we
might go free, himself became a Captain of Salvation unto all that do obey him.

I have fixed on these particulars; to give every Ordinary Reader an instance
how fully and plainly what he is to believe in this matter is revealed in the
Scripture. And should I produce all the Testimonies which expressly give witness
unto these positions, it is known how great a part of the Bible must be
transcribed. And these are the things which are indispensibly required of us to
believe, that we may be able (...) and regulate our obedience according to the
mind and will of God. In the Explanation of this Doctrine unto further
Edification, sundry things are usually insisted on, which necessarily and
infallibly ensue upon the propositions of Scripture before laid down; and serve
to beget in the minds of Believers a due apprehension, and right understanding
of them. As,

1. That God in this matter is to be considered as the chief, supreme, absolute
Rector and Governor of all; as the Lord of the Law, and of sinners; but yet so
as an offended Ruler. Not as an offended Person, but as an offended Ruler, who
has right to exact punishment upon Transgressors, and whose Righteousness of
Rule requires that he should so do.

2. That because he is Righteous and Holy, as he is the supreme Judge of all
the World, it is necessary that he do right in the punishing of sin, without
which the order of the Creation cannot be preserved. For sin being the
Creatures deduction of it self from the order of its dependence upon and
obedience unto the Creator, and supreme Lord of all, without a reduction of it
by punishment, confusion would be brought into the whole Creation.

3. That whereas the Law and the Sanction of it is the moral or declarative
cause of the punishment of sin, and it directly obliges the sinner himself
unto punishment; God as the supreme Ruler, dispenses, not with the act of the
Law, but the immediate object; and substitutes another sufferer in the room of
them who are principally liable unto the sentence of it, and are now to be
acquitted or freed; that so the Law may be satisfied, requiring the punishment
of sin, Justice exalted, whereof the Law is an effect, and yet the sinner saved.

4. That the Person thus substituted was the Son of God incarnate, who had
power so to dispose of himself with will and readiness for it; and was upon the
account of the dignity of his Person, able to answer the penalty which all
others had incurred and deserved.

5. That God upon his voluntary susception of this Office, and condescension to
this work, did so lay our sins in and by the sentence of the Law upon him, that
he made therein full satisfaction for whatever legally could be charged on them
for whom he dyed or suffered.

6. That the special way terms and conditions whereby and whereon sinners may
be interested in this satis^action made by Christ, are determined by the Will
of God, and declared in the Scripture.

These and the like things are usually insisted on in the Explication or
declaration of this head of our confession. And there is not any of them but
may be sufficiently confirmed by Divine Testimonies. It may also be farther
evinced that there is nothing asserted in them, but what is excellently suited
unto the common notions which mankind has of God and his Righteousness; and
that in their practice they answer the light of nature, and common reason
exemplified in sundry Instances among the Nations of the World.

I shall therefore take one Argument from some of the testimonies before
produced in the confirmation of this Sacred Truth, and proceed to remove the
objections that are commonly banded against it.

If the Lord Christ according to the Will of the Father, and by his own counsel
and choice, was substituted, and did substitute himself as the Mediator of the
Covenant, in the room and in the stead of sinners that they might be saved, and
therein bare their sins, or the punishment due unto their sins, by undergoing
the curse and penalty of the Law, and therein also according to the Will of God
offered up himself for a propitiatory, expiatory Sacrifice to make Atonement
for sin, and Reconciliation for sinners, that the Justice of God being
appeased, and the Law fulfilled, they might go free, or be delivered from the
wrath to come; and if therein also he paid a real satisfactory price for their
Redemption; then he made satisfaction to God for sin. For these are the things
that we intend by that expression, of satisfaction. But now all those things
are openly, and fully witnessed unto in the Testimonies before produced; as may
be observed by suiting some of them unto the several particulars here asserted.

As 1. What was done in this matter, was from the will, purpose, and love of
God the Father. Psalm 40. 6, 7, 8. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. Act. 4. 28. John 3. 16.
Romans 8. 3.

2. It was also done by his own voluntary consent, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8.

3. He was Substituted, and did Substitute himself as the Mediator of the
Covenant in the room and stead of sinners, that they may be saved, Heb. 10. 5,
6, 7. Chap. 7. 22. Romans 3. 25, 26. Romans 5. 7, 8.

4. And he did therein bear their sins, or the punishment due to their sins.
Isa. 53. 6, 11. 1 Pet. 2. 23. And this,

5. By undergoing the Curse and penalty of the Law, Gal. 3. 13. Or the
punishment of sin required by the Law, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans 8. 3.

6. Herein, also according to the will of God, He offered up himself ^
propitiatory and expiatory Sacrifice to make Atonement for sin, and
Reconciliation for sinners, Ephesians. 5. 2. Romans 2. 17. Heb. 9. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Which he did that the Justice of God being satisfied, and the Law fulfilled,
sinners might be freed from the wrath to come, Romans 3. 25. 1 These. 1. last.

7. And hereby also, He paid a real price of Redemption for sin and sinners, 1
Pet. 1. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 6. last. These are the things which we are to believe,
concerning the satisfaction of Christ; And our Explication of this Doctrine, We
are ready to defend, when called thereunto.

The consideration of the Objections which are raised against this great
fundamental Truth, shall close this Discourse. And they are of two sorts.
First, In general, to the whole Doctrine, as declared, or some of the more
signal heads, or parts of it. Secondly, Particular Instances, in this or that
supposal, as consequences of the Doctrine asserted. And in general,

1. They say, This is contrary to, and inconsistent with the Love, Grace,
Mercy, and Goodness of God, which are so celebrated in the Scripture as the
principal properties of his nature, and Acts of his Will, wherein he will be
glorified. Especially contrary to the freedom of Forgiveness, which we are
encouraged to expect, and commanded to believe. And this exception they
endeavor to firm by Testimonies, that the Lord is Good and Gracious, and that
He does freely forgive us our sins and trespasses.

Answer: First, I readily grant that whatever is really contrary to the Grace,
Goodness and Mercy of God, whatever is Inconsistent with the free Forgiveness
of sin, is not to be admitted. For these things are fully revealed in the
Scripture, and must have a consistency with whatever else is therein revealed
of God, or his Will.

Secondly, As God is Good and Gracious, and Merciful, so also He is Holy,
Righteous, True and Faithful. And these things are no less revealed concerning
him than the other; and are no less Essential Properties of his Nature than his
Goodness and Grace. And as they are all Essentially the same in him, and
considered only under a different habitude or respect as they are exerted by
Acts of his will; so it belongs to his Infinite Wisdom, that the effects of
them, though diverse, and produced by diverse ways, and means, may no way be
contrary one to the other, but that Mercy may be exercised, without the
prejudice of Justice, or Holiness; and Justice be preserved entire, without any
obstruction to the Exercise of Mercy.

Thirdly, The Grace and Love of God that in this matter the Scripture reveals
to be exercised, in order unto the forgiveness of sinners, consists principally
in two things. 1. In his Holy Eternal Purpose of providing a relief for lost
sinners. He has done it, to the praise of the Glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 6.
2. In the sending his Son in the pursuit* and for the accomplishment of the
holy purpose of his Will and Grace. Herein most eminently does the Scripture
celebrate the Love, Goodness, and kindness of God; as that whereby, in
Infinite, and for ever to be adored Wisdom and Grace, he made way for the
forgiveness of our sins. Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, as he gave his
only begotten Son, Romans 3. 24, 25. Whom he has set forth to be a propitiation
through says in his blood, Romans 5. 7, 8. God commends his Love toward us,
in that while we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, Titus 3. 4. 1 John 4. 8,
9. Herein consists that ever to be adored Love, Goodness, Grace, Mercy and
Condescension of God. Add hereunto, that in that act of causing our iniquities
to meet on Christ, wherein he immediately intended the Declaration of his
Justice, Romans 3. 25. ( Not sparing him, in delivering him up to death for us
all, Romans 8. 32.) There was a blessed harmony in the highest Justice, and most
excellent Grace and M^rcy. This Grace, this Goodness, this Love of God toward
mankind, toward sinners, our Adversaries in this matter neither know, nor
understand; and so indeed what lies in them, remove the foundation of the whole
Gospel, and of all that faith and obedience, which God requires at our hands.

Fourthly, Forgiveness, or the actual condonation of sinners, the pardon and
forgiveness of sins, is free; but yet so, as it is every where restrained unto
a respect unto Christ, unto his death and bloodshedding, Ephesians. 1. 7. We have
Redemption in his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Chap. 4. 32. God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you, Romans 3. 25, 26. God has set him forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
forgiveness of sins. It is absolutely free in respect of all immediate
transactions between God and sinners. Free on the part of God.

First, In the Eternal purpose of it, when he might justly have suffered all
men to have perished under the guilt of their sins. 2. Free in the means that
he used to effect it unto his Glory. (1.) In the sending of his Son; and (2.)
In laying the punishment of our sin upon him. (3.) In his Covenant with him,
that it should be accepted on our behalf. (4.) In his tender and proposal of it
by the Gospel unto sinn^rs to be received without money or without price. (5.)
In the actual condonation and pardon of them that do believe.

Secondly, It is free on the part of the persons that are forgiven. In that
(1.) It is given and granted to them without any satisfaction made by them for
their former transgressions. (2.) Without any merit to purch^se or procure it.
(3.) Without any poenal satisfactory suffering here, or in a purgatory
hereafter. (4.) Without any Expectation of a future recompense; or that being
pardoned, they should then make or give any satisfaction for what they had done
before. And as any of these things would, so nothing else can impeach the
freedom of pardon and forgiveness. Whether then we respect the pardoner or the
pardoned, Pardon is every way free; namely, on the part of God who forgives,
and on the part of sinners that are forgiven. If God now has besides all this,
provided himself a Lamb for a Sacrifice; if he has in Infinite Wisdom and
Grace found out a way, thus freely to forgive us out sins, to the praise and
glory of his own Holiness, Righteousness and severity against sin, as well as
unto the unspeakable advancement of that Grace, Goodness and bounty which he
immediately exercises in the pardon of sin, are these men's eyes evil, because
he is good? Will they not be contented to be pardoned, unless they may have it
at the rate of dispoiling God of his Holiness, Truth, Righteousness and
Faithfulness? And as this is certainly done by that way of pardon which these
men propose, no reserve in the least being made for the glory of God in those
holy properties of his nature which are immediately injured and opposed by sin;
so that pardon it self which they pretend so to magnify, having nothing to
influence it but a mere arbitrary act of Gods will, is utterly d^based from its
own proper worth and excellency. And I shall willingly undertake to manifest,
that they derogate no less from Grace and Mercy in pardon, than they do from
the Righteousness and Holiness of God by the forgiveness which they have
feigned; and that in it both of them are perverted, and dispoiled of all their
glory.

But they yet say, If God can freely pardon sin, why does he not do it without
satisfaction; if he cannot, he is weaker and more imperfect than man, who can
do so.

Answ. First, God cannot do. many things that men can do; nor that he is more
imperfect than they, but he cannot do them on the account of his perfection. He
cannot lie, he cannot deny himself, he cannot change, which men can do, and do
every day.

Secondly, To pardon sin without satisfaction in him who is absolutely Holy,
Righteous, True and Faithful, the absolute necessary supreme Governor of all
sinners, the Author of the Law, and sanction of it, wherein punishment is
threatened and declared, is to deny himself, and to do what one infinitely
perfect, cannot do,

Thirdly, I ask of these men, why God does not pardon sins freely without
requiring faith, repentance and obedience in them that are pardoned; yea, as
the conditions on which they may be pardoned? For seeing he is so infinitely
good and gracious^, cannot he pardon men without prescribing such terms and
conditions unto them, as he knows, that men, and that incomparably the
greatest number of them will never come up unto; and so must of necessity
perish for ever. Yea, but they say, this cannot be; neither does this impeach
the freedom of pardon. For it is certain that God does prescribe these things,
and yet he pardons freely. And it would altogether unbecome the holy God to
pardon sinners that continue so to live and dye in their sins. But do not these
men see that they have hereby given away their Cause which they contend for?
For if a prescription of sundry things to the sinner himself, without which he
shall not be pardoned, do not at all impeach, as they say, the freedom of
pardon, but God may be said freely to pardon sin notwithstanding it* How shall
the receiving of satisfaction by another, nothing a^ all being required of the
sinner; have the least appearance of any such thing? If the freedom of
forgiveness consists in such a boundless notion as these men imagine, it is
certain that the prescribing of faith and repentance in and unto sinners
antecedently to their participation of it, is much more evidently contrary unto
it, than the receiving of satisfaction from another who is not to be pardoned,
can to any appear to be. Secondly, If it be contrary to the holiness of God to
pardon any, without requiring Faith, Repentance and Obedience in them, as it is
indeed; let not these persons be offended, if we believe him when he so
frequently declares it, that it was so to remit sin without the fulfilling of
his Law and satisfaction of his Justice.

Secondly, They say, There is no such thing as Justice in God requiring the
punishment of sin, but that that, which in him requires and calls for the
punishment of sin, is his Anger and Wrath, which expressions denote free Acts
of his Will, and not any essential properties of his nature. So that God may
punish sin, or not punish it at his pleasure. Therefore there is no Reason that
he should require any satisfaction for sin, seeing he may pass it by absolutely
as he pleases.

Answ. Is it not strange that the great Governor, the Judge of all the world,
which on the supposition of the Creation of it, God is naturally and
necessarily, should not also naturally be so righteous, as to do right, in
rendering unto every one according to his works?

(2.) The Sanction and penalty of the Law, which is the Rule of punishment, was
as I suppose, an effect of Justice, of Gods natural and essential Justice, and
not of his Anger or Wrath. Certainly never did any man make a Law for the
Government of a people in anger. Draco's Laws were not made in wrath, but
according to the best apprehension of right and Justice that he had, though
said to be written in blood. And shall we think otherwise of the Law of God?

(3.) Anger and Wrath in God express the effects of Justice; and so are not
merely free acts of his will. This therefore is a tottering cause, that is
built on the denial of Gods Essential Righteousness. But it was proved before,
and it is so elsewhere.

(3.) They say that the Sacrifice of Christ was Metaphorically only so. That he
was a metaphorical Priest, not one properly so called. And therefore that his
Sacrifice did not consist in his death and bloodshedding, but in his appearing
in Heaven upon his Ascersion, presenting himself unto God in the most Holy
Place not made with hands as the Mediator of the new Covenant.

Answ. When once these men come to this Evasion, they think themselves safe,
and that they may go whither they will without control. For they say it is
true, Christ was a Priest, but only he was a Metaphorical one. He offered
Sacrifice, but it was a Metaphorical one. He redeemed us, but with a
Metaphorical Redemption; and so we are Justified thereon, but with a
Metaphorical Justification; and so for ought I know they are like to be saved,
with a Metaphorical Salvation. This is the substance of their plea in this
matter. Christ was not really a Priest, but did somewhat like a Priest. He
offered not Sacrifice really, but did somewhat that was like a Sacrifice. He
redeemed us not really, but did somewhat that looked like Redemption. And what
these things are, wherein their Analog^e consists, what proportion the things
that Christ has done, bare to the things that are really so, from whence they
receive their denomination, that it is meet it should be wholly in the power of
these persons to declare. But,

(2.) What should hinder the death of Christ to be a Sacrifice, a proper
Sacrifice, and according to the nature, end, and use of Sacrifices to have made
Atonement, and Satisfaction for sin? (1.) It is expressly called so in the
Scripture; wherein he is said to offer himself, to make his soul an offering,
to offer himself a Sacrifice, Ephesians. 5. 2. Heb. 1. 3. Heb. 9. 14, 25. 26. Chap.
7. 27. And he is himself directly said to be a Priest or a Sacrificer, Heb. 2.
18. And it is no where intimated, much less expressed that these things are not
spoken properly but Metaphorically only. (2.) The Legal Sacrifices of the Old
Law were instituted on purpose to represent and prepare the way for the
bringing in of the Sacrifice of the L^mb of God, so to take away the sin of the
World. And is it not strange, that true and real Sacrifices, should be Types
and R presentations of that which was not so? On this supposition all those
Sacrifices are but so many seductions from the right understanding of things
between God and sinners. (3.) Nothing is wanting to render it a proper
propitiatory Sacrifice, for, (1.) There was the person offering, and that was
Christ himself, Heb. 9. 14. He offered himself unto God. He, that is the
Sacrificer, denotes the person of Christ God and Man; and Himself as the
Sacrifice denotes his Humane Nature; whence God is said to purchase his Church
with his own blood, Act. 20. 28. For he offered himself through the Eternal
Spirit; so that (2.) There was the Matter of the Sacrifice, which was the
Humane Nature of Christ soul and body; His soul was made an offering for Sin,
Isa. 53. 10 And his body, the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, Hob. 10 11.
His blood especially, which is often Synecdochically mentioned for the whole.
(4.) His death had the nature of a Sacrifice: For (1.) Therein were the sins of
men laid upon him, and not in his entrance into Heaven; for he bare our sins in
his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 23. God made our sins then to meet upon
him, Isa. 53. 6. Which gives the formality unto any Sacrifices. Quod in ejus
Caput sit, is the formal reason of all Propitiatory Sacrifices, and ever was
so, as is expressly declared, Lev. 16. 21, 22. And the phrase of bearing sin, of
bearing iniquity, is constantly used for the undergoing of the punishment due
to sin. (2.) It had the End of a proper Sacrifice; it made expiation of sin,
propitiation and atonement for sin with reconciliation with God, and so took
away that enmity that was between God and sinners, Heb. 1. 3. Romans 3. 25, 26.
Heb. 2. 17, 18. Heb. 5. 10. Romans 8. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. And although God
himself pesigned, appointed, and contrived in Wisdom this way of
Reconciliation, as he did the means for the attoning of his own Anger toward
the friends of Job, commanding them to go unto him, and with him offer
Sacrifices for themselves which he would accept, Chap. 4. 28. Yet as He was the
Supreme Governor, the Lord of all, attended with Infinite Justice, and
Holiness, Atonement was made with him, and satisfaction to him thereby.

What has been spoken, may suffice to discover the emptiness and weakness of
those exceptions which in general these men make against the Truth before laid
down from the Scripture. A brief examination of some particular instances,
wherein they seek not so much to oppose, as to reproach the Revelation of this
Mystery of the Gospel, shall put a close to this discourse. It is said then,

1. That if this be so, then it will follow, that God is gracious to Forgive,
and yet impossible for him unless the debt be fully satisfied.

Answ. I suppose the confused and abrupt expression of things here, in words
scarcely affording a tolerable sense, is rather from weakness than
captiousness; and so I shall let the manner of the proposal pass. (2.) What is
this should follow, that God is gracious to forgive sinners, and yet will not,
cannot, on the account of his own Holiness and Righteousness, actually forgive
any, without Satisfaction and Atonement made for sin? the worst that can be
hence concluded is, that the Scripture is true which affirms both these in many
places. (3.) This sets out the exceeding greatness of the Grace of God in
forgiveness, that when sin could not be forgiven without satisfaction, and the
sinner himself could no way make any such satisfaction, that he provided
himself a Sacrifice of Atonement, that the sinner might be discharged and
pardoned. (4.) Sin is not properly a debt, for then it might be paid in kind,
by sin it self; but is called so, only because it binds over the sinner to
punishment, which is the satisfaction to be made for that which is properly a
Transgression, and improperly only a debt. It is added,

2. Hence it follows that the finite and impotent creature is more capable of
extending Mercy and Forgiveness, than the Infinite and Omnipotent Creator.

Answ. God being Essentially Holy and Righteous, having engaged his
faithfulness in the sanction of the Law, and being naturally and necessarily
the Governor and Ruler of the World, the Forgiving of sin without
satisfaction, would be no perfection in him, but an effect of impotency, and
imperfection; a thing which God cannot do; as he cannot lie, nor deny himself.
(2.) The direct contrary of what is insinuated, is asserted by this Doctrine;
for on the supposition of the Satisfaction, and Atonement insisted on, not
only does God freely forgive, but that in such a way of Righteousness and
Goodness as no Creature is able to conceive or express the glory and excellency
of it. And to speak of the poor halving pardons of private Men, upon particular
offenses against themselves, who are commanded so to do, and have no right nor
authority to require or exact punishment nor is any due upon the mere account
of their own concernment, in comparison with the forgiveness of God, arises
out of a deep ignorance of the whole matter under consideration.

3. It is added by them, that hence it follows, that God so loved the World, he
gave his only Son to save it; and yet that God stood off in high displeasure,
and Christ gave himself as a complete satisfaction to offended Justice.

Answ. 1. Something these Men would say, if they knew what or how; for (1.)
That God so loved the World, as to give his only Son to save it, is the
expression of the Scripture, and the foundation of the Doctrine whose truth we
contend for. That Christ offered himself to make Atonement for sinners, and
therein made satisfaction to the Justice of God, is the Doctrine it self which
these Men oppose, and not any consequent of it. (3.) That God stood off in high
displeasure, is an expression which neither the Scripture uses, nor those who
declare this Doctrine from thence, nor is suited unto divine perfections, or
the manner of divine operations. That intended seems to be that the
Righteousness and Law of God required the punishment due to Sin, to be
undergone, and thereby satisfaction to be made unto God; which is no consequent
of the Doctrine, but the Doctrine it self.

4. It is yet farther objected, that if Christ made satisfaction for sin, then
he did it either as God, or as Man, or as God and Man.

Answ, (1.) As God and Man, Acts 20. 28. God redeemed his Church with his own
blood, 1 John 3. 16. Herein was manifest the Love of God, that he laid down his
life for us, Heb. 9. 14. (2.) This dilemma is proposed as that which proceeds
on a supposition of our own principles, that Christ is God and Man in one
Person, which indeed makes the pretended difficulty to be vain and a mere
effect of ignorance. For all the Mediatory acts of Christ being the acts of his
Person, must of necessity be the acts of him as God and Man. (3.) There is yet
another mistake in this inquiry; for satisfaction is in it looked on as a real
act or operation of one, or the other nature in Christ; when it is the
Ap^telesma or Effect of the actings, the doing and suffering of Christ; the
Dignity of what he did in reference unto the end for which he did it. For the
two natures are so united in Christ, as not to have a third compound principle
of Physical acts and operations thence arising; but each nature acts distinctly
according to its own being and properties; yet so, as what is the immediate act
of either nature, is the act of him who is one in both, from whence it has its
dignity. (4.) The sum is; that in all the Mediatory actions of Christ we are
to consider, (1.) The Agent, and that is the Person of Christ. (2.) The
immediate principle by which, and from which the Agent works; and that is the
natures in the Person. (3.) The Actions, which are the effectual Operations of
either nature. (4.) The Effect or work with respect to God and us; and this
relates unto the Person of the Agent, the Lord Christ, God and Man. A blending
of the natures into one common principle of operation, as the compounding of
Mediums unto one end, is ridiculously supposed in this matter.

But yet again it is pretended that sundry consequences irreligious and
irrational do ensue upon a supposition of the satisfaction pleaded for. What
then are they?

1. That it is unlawful and impossible for God All-mighty to be gracious, and
merciful, or to pardon Transgressors.

Answ. (1.) The miserable confused misapprehension of things, which the
proposal of this, and the like consequences does evidence, manifests
sufficiently how unfit the makers of them are to manage Controversi^s of this
nature. For (1.) It is supposed that for God to be Gracious and Merciful, or to
pardon Sinners, are the same; which is to confound the Essential properties of
his nature, with the free acts of his will. (2.) Lawful, or unlawful, are terms
that can with no tolerable sense be used concerning any properties of God, all
which are natural and necessary unto his Being; as Goodness, Grace, and Mercy
in particular are. (3.) That it is impossible for God to pardon Transgressors
according to this Doctrine, is a fond Imagination, for it is only a declaration
of the manner how he does it. (4.) As God is gracious and Merciful, so also he
is Holy, and Righteous, and true; and it became him, or was every way meet for
him, in his way of exercising Grace and Mercy toward sinners, to order all
things so, as that it might be done without the impeachment of his Holiness,
Righteousness and Truth. It is said again,

2. That God was inevitably compelled to this way of saving Men; the highest
affront to his uncontrollable Nature.

Answ. Were the Authors of these exceptions put to declare what they mean by
Gods uncontrollable nature, they would hardly disentangle themselves with
common sense. Such Masters of Reason are they indeed, whatever they would fain
pretend to be. Controulable, or uncontrollable, respect actings and operations,
not Beings or Natures. (2.) That upon the Principle opposed by these Men, God
was inevitably compelled to this way of saving Men, is a fond and Childish
Imagination. The whole business of the Salvation of Men according unto this
Doctrine, depends on a mere free Sovereign act of Gods will exerting it self in
a way of Infinite Wisdom, Holiness, and Grace. (3.) The meaning of this
Objection (if it has either sense or meaning in it) is, that God freely
purposing to save lost sinners, did it in a way becoming his holy Nature, and
righteous Law. What other course Infinite Wisdom could have taken for the
satisfaction of his Justice we know not; That Justice was to be satisfied, and
that this way it is done, we know and believe.

3. They say it hence follows, that it is unworthy of God to pardon, but not to
inflict punishment on the Innocent; or require a satisfaction where there was
nothing due.

Answ. (1.) What is Worthy or unworthy of God, himself alone knows, and of men
not any but according to what he is pleased to declare and reveal. But
certainly, it is unworthy any Person pretending to the least Interest in
Ingenuity or use of Reason, to use such frivolous Instances in any case of
importance which have not the least pretense of Argument in them but what
arises from a gross misapprehension, or misrepresentation of a Doctrine
designed to opposition. (2.) To pardon sinners, is a thing becoming the
Goodness and Grace of God; to do it by Christ, that which becomes them, and
his Holiness and Righteousness also. Romans 3. 25. Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. (3.) The Lord
Christ was Personally Innocent; but He who knew no sin was made sin for us, 2
Cor. 5. 21. And as the Mediator and Surety of the Covenant, he was to answer
for the sins of them whom he undertook to save from the wrath to come; by
giving himself a ransom for them, and making his soul an Offering for their
sin. (4) That nothing is due to the Justice of God for sin, that is, that sin
does not in the Justice of God deserve punishment, is ^ good comfortable
Doctrine, for Men that are resolved to continue in their sins whilst they live
in this World. The Scripture tells us, that Christ paid what he took not; that
all our iniquities were caused to meet upon him; that he bare them in his own
body on the Tree; that his soul was made an offering for sin, and therei by
made Reconciliation or Ationement for the sins of the People; if these Persons
be otherwise minded, we cannot help it.

4. It is added; that this Doctrine does not only disadvantage the true virtue
and real intent of Christ's life and death, but entirely deprives G^d of that
praise which is o^ing to his greatest Love and Goodness.

Answ. I suppose that this is the first time, that this Doctrine fell under
this imputation; nor could it possibly be liable unto this charge from any, who
did either understand it, or the grounds on which it is commonly opposed. For,
there is no end of the Life or death of Christ, which the Socinians themselves
admit of, but it is also allowed, and asserted in the Doctrine now called in
Question. Do they say, that he taught the Truth or revealed the whole mind and
will of God concerning his Worship and our obedience? We say the same. D^ they
say, that by his death he hare testimony unto, and confirmed the truth which he
had taught? it is also owned by us. Do they say that in what he did, and
su^fered, he set us an Example that we should labor after conformity unto? it
is what we acknowledge and teach. Only we say that all these things belong
principally to his Prophetical Office. But we moreover affirm and believe, that
as a Priest, or in the discharge of his Sacerdotal Office, he did in his death
and sufferings, offer himself a Sacrifice to God, to make Atonement for our
sins, which they deny; and that he dyed for us, or in our stead, that we might
go free; without the faith and acknowledgement whereof no part of the Gospel
can be rightly understood. All the ends then which they themselves assign of
the Life and death of Christ, are by us granted; and the principal one, which
gives life and efficacy to the rest, is by them denied. Neither (2.) does it
fall under any possible imagination, that the praise due unto God should be
Ecclipsed hereby. The Love and Kindness of God toward us, is in the Scripture
fixed principally and fundamentally, on his sending of his only begotten Son to
dye for us. And certainly the greater the work was that he had to do, the
greater ought our acknowledgement of his Love and kindness to be; but it is
said,

5. That it represents the Son more kind and compassionate than the Father;
whereas if both be the same God, then either the Father is as loving as the
Son, or the Son as angry as the Father.

Answ. (1.) The Scripture refers the Love of the Father, unto two heads.
(1.) The sending of his Son to dye for us, John 3. 16. Romans 5. 8. 1 John 4. 8.
(2.) In choosing sinners unto a participation of the fruits of his love, Ephesians.
1. 3, 4, 5* 6. The Love of the Son, is fixed signally on his actual giving
himself to dye for us, Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 5. 25. Rev. 1. 5. What balances
these Persons have got, to weigh these Loves in, and to conclude which is the
greatest or most weighty, I know not.

2. Although only the actual discharge of his Office be directly assigned to
the Love of Christ, yet his cond^scention in taking our nature upon him
expressed by his mind, Ephesians 6. 7. and the readiness of his Will, Psalm 40. 8.
does eminently comprise Love in it also.

Thirdly, The Love of the Father in sending of the Son, was an act of his will,
which being a natural and essential property of God, it was so far the act of
the Son also, as he is partaker of the same nature; though eminently and in
respect of order it was peculiarly the act of the Father.

(4.) The anger of ^od against sin, is an effect of his essential Righteousness
and Holiness which belong to him as God; which yet hinders not, but that both
Father, and Son, and Spirit acted Love toward sinners. They say again,

6. It robs God of the gift of his Son for our redemption, which the Scriptures
attribute to the unmerited Love he had for the World, in affirming the Son
purchased that redemption from the Father, by the gift of himself to God as our
complete satisfaction.

Answ. (1.) It were endless to consider the improper and absurd expressions
which are made use of in these exceptions; as here the last words have no
tolerable sense in them according to any principles whatever. (2.) If the Son's
purchasing Redemption for us, procuring, obtaining it, do rob God of the gift
of his Son for our redemption; the Holy Ghost must answer for it: For having
obtained for us, or procured, or purchased eternal redemption, is the word used
by himself, Heb. 9. 14. And to deny that he has laid down his Life a ransom
for us, and to have bought us with a price, is openly to deny the Gospel. (2.)
In a word, the great gift of God consisted in giving his Son to obtain
Redemption for us. (3.) Herein he offered himself unto God, and gave himself
for us; and if these Persons are offended herewithal, what are we that we
should withstand God. They say,

7. Since Christ could not pay what was not his own, it follows that in the
payment of his own, the case still remains equally grievous. Since the debt is
not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred only; and by consequence we
are no better provided for salvation than before, owing that now to the Son,
which was once owing to the Father.

Answ. The looseness, and dubiousness of the expressions here used, makes an
appearance that there is something in them, when indeed there is not. There is
an Allusion in them to a debt and a payment, which is the most improper
expression that is used in this matter, and the interpretation thereof is to be
regulated by other proper expressions of the same thing. But to keep to the
Allusion, (1.) Christ paid his own, but not for himself, Dan. 9. 26. (2.)
Paying it for us, the debt is discharged, and our actual discharge is to be
given out according to the ways and means, and upon the conditions appointed
and constituted by the Father and Son. (3.) When a debt is so transferred as
that one is accepted in the room, and obliged to payment in the stead of
another, and that payment is made and accepted accordingly, all Law and Reason
require that the original Debtor be discharged. (4.) What on this account we
owe to the Son, is praise, thankfulness, and obedience, and not the debt which
he took upon himself, and discharged for us, when we were non-solvent, by his
love. So that this matter is plain enough, and not to be involved by such
cloudy expressions and incoherent discourse, following the Metaphor of a debt.
For if God be considered as the Creditor, we all as Debtors, and being
insolvent, Christ undertook out of his Love to pay the debt for us, and did so
accordingly, which was accepted with God; it follows that we are to be
discharged, upon Gods terms, and under a new obligation unto his Love, who has
made this satisfaction for us, which we shall eternally acknowledge. It is said,

8. It no way renders Men beholding, or in the least obliged to God, since by
their Doctrine he would not have abated us, nor did he Christ the least
farthing; so that the acknowledgements, are peculiarly the Sons, which
destroys the whole current of Scripture Testimony for his good will toward
Men. O the infamous portraicture this Doctrine draws of the Infinite Goodness;
is this your retribution, O injurious Satisfactionists?

Answ. This is but a bold Repetition of what in other words was mentioned
before over and over. Wherein the Love of God in this matter consisted, and
what is the obligation on us unto thankfulness and obedience, has been before
also declared. And we are not to be moved in Fundamental Truths, by vain
exclamations of weak and unstable Men. It is said,

9. That Gods Justice is satisfied for sins past, present and to come, whereby
God and Christ have lost both their power of inj^yning Godliness, and
prerogative of punishing disobedience; for what is once paid, is not revokable;
and if punishment should arrest any for their debts, it argues a breach on God
or Christ's part; or e^se that it has not been sufficiently solved; and the
penalty complete sustained by another.

Answ. The intention of this pretended consequence of our Doctrine is, that
upon a supposition of satisfaction made by Christ, there is no solid foundation
remaining for the prescription of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience on the one
hand, or of punishing them who refuse so to obey, believe, or repent, on the
other. The Reason of this Inference insinuated, seems to be this; that sin
being satisfied for, cannot be called again to an Account. For the former part
of the pretended consequence, namely that on this supposition, there is no
foundation left for the prescription of Godliness, I cannot discern any thing
in the least looking toward the confirmation of it, in the words of the
Objection laid down. But these things are quite otherwise; as is manifest unto
them that read and obey the Gospel. For (1.) Christ's satisfaction for sins,
acquits not the creature of that dependence on God, and duty which he owes to
God, which notwithstanding that, God may Justly, and does prescribe unto him,
suitable to his own Nature, Holiness and Will. The whole of our regard unto
God, does not lie in an acquitment from sin. It is moreover required of us as a
necessary and indispensible consequence of the Relation wherein we stand unto
him, that we live to him and obey him, whether sin be satisfied for, or no. The
manner and measure hereof are to be regulated by his prescriptions, which are
suited to his own Wisdom and our condition. And they are now referred to the
heads mentioned of Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience. (2.) The Satisfaction
made for sin, being not made by the sinner himself, there must of necessity be
a Rule, Order, and law-Constitution how the sinner may come to be interested in
it, and made partaker of it. For the consequent of the Freedom of one by the
suffering of another, is not natural or necessary, but must proceed and arise
from a Law-Constitution, Compact, and Agreement. Now the way Constituted and
Appointed, is that of Faith, or believing, as explained in the Scripture. If
Men believe not, they are no less liable to the punishment due to their sins,
than if no satisfaction at all were made for sinners. And whereas it is added,
forgetting that every one must Appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, to
receive according to things done in the body; Yea and every one must give an
Account of himself to God; closing all with this, but many more are the gross
absurdities and Blasphemies that are the genuine fruits of this so confidently
believed Doctrine of satisfaction. I say it is (3.) Certain, that we must all
Appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, to receive according to the things
done in the body; and therefore Woe will be unto them at the great day, who are
not able to plead the Atonement made for their sins by the blood of Christ,
and an Evidence of their interest therein by their faith and obedience, or the
things done and wrought in them, and by them whilst they were in the body here
in this World. And this it would better become these persons to betake
themselves unto the consideration of, than to exercise themselves unto an
unparalled confidence in reproaching those with absurdities and blasphemies,
who believe the Deity and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ the Son of the living
God, who dyed for us, which is the ground and bottom of all our Expectation of
a blessed life and immortality to come.

The removal of these Objections against the Truth scattered of late up and
down in the hands of all sorts of Men, may suffice for our present purpose. If
any amongst these Men, who judge that they have an ability to manage the
opposition against the Truth as declared by us, with such pleas, Arguments, and
exceptions, as may pretend an interest in appearing Reason, they shall, God
assisting, be attended unto. With men, given up to a spirit of railing or
reviling, though it be no small honor to be reproached by them who reject with
scorn the eternal Deity of the Son of God, and the Satisfactory Atonement he
made for the sins of Men, no Person of Sobriety will contend. And I shall
further only desire the Reader to take notice, that though these few sheets
were written in few hours, upon the desire, and for the satisfaction of some
private Friends, and therefore contain merely an expression of present
thoughts, without the least design or diversion of mind toward accuracy or
Ornament; yet the Author is so far confident that the Truth, and nothing else
is proposed and confirmed in them, that he fears not but that an opposition to
what is here declared will be removed, and the Truth reinforced in such a way
and manner as may not be to its disadvantage.

FINIS.
An Appendix.
THE preceding Discourse, (as has been declared) was written for the Use of
Ordinary Christians; or such as might be in danger to be seduced, or any way
entangled in their minds, by the late attempts against the Truths pleaded for.
For those to whom the dispensation of the Gospel is committed, are debtors both
to the Greeks, and to the Barbarians; both to the Wise and to the unwise, Romans
1. 14. It was therefore thought meet, to insist only on things necessary, and
such as their faith is immediately concerned in; and not to immix therewithal,
any such Arguments or Considerations, as might not, by reason of the Terms
wherein they are expressed, be obvious to their Capacity and Understanding.
Unto Plainness and Perspicuity, Brevity was also required, by such as judged
this work necessary. That design we hope is answered, and now discharged in
some usesul measure. But yet because many of our Arguments on the head of the
satisfaction of Christ, depend upon the genuine signification and notion of the
Words and Terms wherein the Doctrine of it is delivered, which for the Reasons
before mentioned could not conveniently be discussed in the foregoing
discourse, I shall here in some few Instances, give an Account of what farther
confirmation the Truth might receive, by a due Explanation of them. And I shall
mention here but few of them, because a large Dissertation concerning them all,
is intended in another way.

First, For the Term of satisfaction it self; It is granted that in this matter
it is not found in the Scripture. That is, it is not so (...), or Syllabically,
but it is (...), the thing it self intended is asserted in it, beyond all
Modest contradiction. Neither indeed is there in the Hebrew Language any word
that does adequately answer unto it; no nor yet in the Greek. As it is used in
this cause, (...), which is properly sponsio or fide jussio, in its actual
discharge, makes the nearest approach unto it. (...) is used to the same
purpose. But there are Words and Phrases both in the Old Testament, and in the
New, that are equipollent unto it, and express the matter or thing intended by
it: As in the Old are, (...) and (...) This last word we render satisfaction,
Numb. 35. 32, 33. where God denies that any compensation, Sacred or Civil,
shall be received to free a Murderer from the punishment due unto him; which
properly expresses what we intend. Thou shall admit of no satisfaction for the
life of a Murderer.

In the New Testament; (...); and the Verbs; (...), are of the same importance;
and some of them accommodated to express the thing intended, beyond that which
has obtained in vulgar use. For that which we intended hereby, is, the
Voluntary Obedience unto Death, and the Passion or suffering of our Lord Jesus
Christ, God and Man, whereby, and wherein he offered himself through the
Eternal Spirit, for a propitiatory Sacrifice, that he might fulfill the Law, or
answer all its universal Postulata, and as our Sponsor, undertaking our Cause,
when we were under the sentence of condemnation, underwent the punishment due
to us from the Justice of God, being transferred on him; whereby having made a
perfect and absolute Propitiation or Atonement for our sins, he procured for
us deliverance from death, and the Curse, and a Right unto life everlacting.
Now this is more properly expressed by some of the words before mentioned, than
by that of Satisfaction; which yet nevertheless as usually explained, is
comprehensive, and no way unsuited to the matter intended by it.

In general, men by this word understand either reparationem offensae, or
solutionem debiti: either Reparation made for offense given unto any; or the
payment of a debt. Debitum is either oriminale, or pecuniarium; that is,
either, the obnoxiousness of a man to punishment for crimes, or the guilt of
them, in answer to that justice and Law which he is necessarily liable and
subject unto; or, unto a payment or compensation by, and of money, or what is
valued by it; which last consideration, neither in it self, nor in any
reasonings from an Analogy unto it, can in this matter have any proper place.
Satisfaction is the effect of the doing or suffering, what is required for the
answering of his charge against faults or sins, who has Right, Authority and
Power to require, exact, and inflict punishment for them. Some of the
Schoolment define it, by voluntaris radditio aequivalentis indebiti; of which
more elsewhere. The true meaning of to satisfy, or make satisfaction, is
tantum facere aut pati, quantum satis sit just irato ad vindictam. This
satisfaction is impleaded, as inconsistent with free Remission of Sins; how
causlesly we have seen. It is so far from it, that it is necessary to make way
for it, in case of a Righteous law transgressed, and the public Order of the
Universal Governor and Government of all, disturbed. And this God directs
unto, Lev. 4. 31. The Priest shall make an Atonement for him, and it shall be
forgiven him. This Atonement was a Legal Satisfaction; and it is by God
himself premised to Remission or Pardon. And Paul prays Philemon to forgive
Onesimus, though he took upon himself to make satisfaction for all the wrong or
damage that he had sustained, Epist. v. 18, 19. And when God was displeased
with the friends of Job he prescribes a way to them, or what they shall do, and
what they shall get done for them, that they might be accepted and pardoned,
Job 42. 7, 8. The Lord said unto Eliphaz, my wrath is kindled against thee and
against thy two friends, therefore take unto you now seven Bullocks and seven
Ramms, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt offering,
and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him I will accept; lest I deal with
you after your folly. He plainly enjoyneth an Atonement, that he might Freely
pardon them. And both these, namely satisfaction and pardon, with their order
and consistency, were solemnly represented by the great Institution of the
Sacrifice of the Escape Goat. For after all the sins of the people were put upon
him, or the punishment of them transferred unto him in a Type and
Representation with quod in ejus caput-sit, the Formal Reason of all Sacrifices
propitiatory, he was sent away with them, denoting the oblation or forgiveness
of sin, after a Translation made of its punishment, Lev. 16. 21, 22. And
whereas it is not expressly said, that that Goat suffered, or was slain, but was
either (...) Hircus (...), a Goat sent away, or was sent to a Rock called
Azazel in the Wilderness, as Vatablus and Oleaster, with some others think,
(which is not probable, seeing though it might then be done whilst the people
were in the Wilderness of Sinai; yet could not by reason of its distance, when
the people were settled in Canaan be annually observed;) it was from the poverty
of the Types, whereof no one could fully represent that Grace which it had
particular respect unto. What therefore was wanting in that Goat, was supplied
in the other, which was slain as a sin offering, v. 11. 15.

Neither does it follow, that on the supposition of the satisfaction pleaded
for, the Freedom, Pardon, or Acquitment of the person originally guilty and
liable to punishment, must immediately and ipso facto, ensue. It is not of the
nature of every solution or satisfaction, that deliverance must ipso facto
follow. And the Reason of it is, because this satisfaction by a succedaneous
substitution of one to undergo punishment for another, must be founded in a
voluntary compact, and Agreement, For there is required unto it, a Relaxation
of the Law, though not as unto the punishment to be inflicted, yet as unto the
person to be punished. And it is otherwise in personal guilt, than in pecuniary
debts. In these the Debt it self is solely intended, the person only obliged
with reference thereunto. In the other, the person is firstly and principally
under the Obligation. And therefore when a pecuniary debs is paid, by
whomsoever it be paid, the Obligation of the person himself unto payment
cease ipso facto. But in things criminal, the guilty person himself, being
firstly, immediately and intentionally under the Obligation unto punishment,
when there is introduced by compact, a vicarious solution in the fubstitution
of another to suffer, though he suffer the same absolutely which those should
have done for whom he suffers; yet because of the Acceptance of his person to
suffer, which might have been refused, and could not be admitted, without some
Relaxation of the Law, Deliverance of the guilty persons cannot ensue ipso
facto, but by the intervention of the Terms fixed on in the Covenant or
Agreement for an admittance of the substitution.

It appears from what has been spoken, that in this matter of Satisfaction,
God is not considered as a Creditor, and sin as a debt, and the Law as an
obligation to the payment of that Debt, and the Lord Christ as paying it;
though these notions may have been used by some for the Illustration of the
whole matter; and that not without countenance from sundry expressions in the
Scripture to the same purpose; But God is considered as the infinitely holy and
righteous Author of the Law, and Supreme Governor of all mankind, according to
the Tenor and Sanction of it. Man is considered as a sinner, a transgressor of
that Law, and thereby obnoxious and liable to the punishment constituted in it,
and by it, answerably unto the Justice and Holiness of its Author. The
Substitution of Christ was merely Voluntary on the part of God, and of himself,
undertaking to be a Sponsor to answer for the sins of men, by undergoing the
punishment due unto them. That to this End there was a Relaxation of the Law,
as to the persons that were to suffer, though not as to what was to be
suffered. Without the former, the Substitution mentioned could not have been
admitted. And on supposition of the latter, the suffering of Christ could not
have had the nature of punishment properly so called. For punishment relates to
the Justice and Righteousness in Government of him that exacts it, and inflicts
it. And this the Justice of God does not, but by the Law. Nor could the Law be
any way satisfied, or fulfilled by the suffering of Christ, if antecedently
thereunto its obligation or power of obliging unto the penalty constituted in
its Sanction, unto sin, was relaxed, dissolved, or dispensed withal. Nor was
it agreeable to Justice, nor would the nature of the things themselves admit of
it, that another punishment should be inflicted on Christ, than what we had
deserved, nor could our sin be the impulsive cause of his death: nor could we
have had any benefit thereby. And this may suffice to be added unto what was
spoken before, as to the nature of satisfaction, so far as the brevity of the
discourse whereunto we are confined, will bear, or the use whereunto it is
designed does require.

Secondly, The Nature of the Doctrine contended for, being declared and
cleared, we may in one or two instances manifest how evidently it is revealed,
and how fully it may be confirmed or vindicated. It is then in the Scripture
declared, that Christ dyed for us; that he dyed for our sins, and that we are
thereby delivered. This is the foundation of Christian Religion as such.
Without the faith, and acknowledgement of it, we are not Christians. Neither is
it in these general terms, at all denied by the Socinians. It remains
therefore, that we consider, (1.) How this is revealed and affirmed in the
Scripture: and (2.) What is the true meaning of the Expressions and
Propositions wherein it is revealed and affirmed; for in them, as in sundry
others, we affirm, that the satisfaction pleaded for, is contained.

1. Christ is said to dye, to give himself, to be delivered, (...) etc. for us,
for his sheep, for the life of the world; for sinners, John 6. 51. Chap. 10.
15. Romans 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Gal. 2. 20. Heb. 2. 9. Moreover he is said to
dye (...), for sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3. Gal. 1. 4. The End whereof every where
expressed in the Gospel, is, that we might be freed, delivered, and saved.
These things as was said, are agreed unto, and acknowleded.

2. The meaning and importance, we say of these Expr^ssions, is; that Christ
dyed in our Room, Place, or Stead, undergoing the Death or Punishment which we
should have undergone in the way and manner before declared. And this is the
satisfaction we plead for. It remains therefore, that from the Scripture, the
nature of the things treated of, the proper signification and constant use of
the. Expressions mentioned, the Exemplification of them in the Customs and
Usages of the Nations of the World, we do evince and manifest, that what we
have laid down, is the true and proper sense of the words, wherein this
Revelation of Christ's dying for us is expressed; so that they who deny Christ
to have dyed for us in this sense, do indeed deny that he properly dyed for us
at all; what ever benefits they grant, that by his death we may obtain.

First, We may consider the Use of this Expression in the Scripture, either
indefinitely, or in particular Instances.

Only we must take this along with us, that dying for sins and Transgressions,
being added unto dying for sinners or persons, makes the substitution of one
in the room and stead of another, more evident, than when the dying of one for
another only, is mentioned. For whereas all Predicates are regulated by their
subjects, and it is ridiculous to say, that one dies in the stead of sins, the
meaning can be no other, but the bearing or answering of the sins of the
sinner, in whose stead any one dies. And this is in the Scripture declared to
be the sense of that Expression, as we shall see afterward. Let us therefore
consider some Instances.

John 11. 50. The words of Caiaphas Counsel are, (...). It is expedient for us,
that one man should dye for the people, and that the whole Nation perish not:
which is expressed again, Chap. 18. 14. (...), perish for the people. Caiaphas
feared, that if Christ were spared, the people would be destroyed by the
Romans. The way to free them, he thought was by the destruction of Christ; him
therefore he devoted to death, in lieu of the People. As He Vnum pro multis
dabitur Caput. One head shall be given for many. Not unlike the Speech of Otho
the Emperor in Xiphilin, when he slew himself to preserve his Army; For when
they would have persuaded him to renew the war after the defeat of some of his
Forces, and offered to lay down their lives to secure him; he replied, that he
would not; adding this Reason, (...). It is far better, and more just that one
should perish or dye for all; than that many should perish for one; that is,
One in the stead of many, that they may go free; or as another speaks; (...).
Eurip.
Let one be given up to dye in the stead of all.


Joh. 13. 38. (...). They are the words of St. Peter unto Christ; I will lay
down my life for thee; To free thee, I will expose my own head to danger, my
life to death; that thou may live and I dye. It is plain that he intended the
same thing with the celebrated (...) of old, who exposed their own lives,
((...)) for one another, such were Damon and Pythias, Orestes and Pylades,
Nisur and Eurialus. Whence is that saying of Seneca, Succurram perituro; sed ut
ipse n^n peream; nisi si futurus ero magni hominis, aut magnae rei merces. I
will relieve or succor one that is ready to perish; yet so as that I perish
not my self; unless thereby, I be taken in lieu of some great man, or great
matter. For a great man, a man of great worth and usefulness I could perish, or
dye in his stead, that he might live and go free.

We have a great Example also of the importance of this Expression in those
words of David concerning Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 33. (...) Who will grant me to
dye, I for thee, or in thy stead; My Son Absalom. It was never doubted, but
that David wished that he had dyed in the stead of his Son; and to have
undergone the death which he did, to have preserved him alive. As to the same
purpose, though in another sense, M^zentius in Virgil expresses himself, when
his Son Lausus interposing b^tween him and danger in Battle, was slain by
Aeneas.

Tantane me tenuit vivendi nate voluptas, Vt pro me hostili paterer succedere
dextrae
Quem genui? tuane haec genitor per vulnera servor?
Morte tua vivam?


Have thou O Son, fallen under the Enemies hand in my stead; am I saved by thy
wounds; do I live by thy death?

And the word (...) used by David does signify, when applied unto persons,
either a succession, or a substitution; still the coming of one into the Place
and Room of another: When one succeeded to another in Government, it is
expressed by that word, 2 Samuel 10. 1. 1 Kings 7. 7. Chap. 19. 16. In other
cases it denotes a substitution. So Jehu tells his Gurad, that if any one of
them let any of Baals Priests escape, (...), 2 Kings 10. 24. his life should go
in the stead of the life that he had suffered to escape.

And this answers unto (...) in the Greek, which is also used in this matter;
and ever denotes either equality, contrariety, or substitution. The two former
senses, can here have no place; the latter alone has. So it is said, that
Archelaus reigned, (...); Mat. 2. 1, 2. In the room or stead of Herod his
Father. So (...), Matthew. 5. 38. is an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,
And this word also is used in expressing the death of Christ for us. He came,
(...). Matthew. 20. 28. To give his life a ransom for many; that is, in their
stead to dye. So the words are used again, Mark 10. 45. And both these notes of
a succedaneous substitution are joined together, 1 Timothy 2. 6. (...). And this
the Greeks call (...) to buy any thing, to purchase or procure any thing, with
the price of ones life. So Tigranes in Xenophon, when Cyrus asked him what he
would give or do for the liberty of his Wife whom he had taken prisoner;
answered, (...); I will purchase her liberty with my life, or the price of my
soul. Whereon the Woman being freed, affirmed afterward, that she considered
none in the company, but him who said, (...); that he would purchase my liberty
with his own life.

And these things are added on the occasion of the Instances mentioned in the
Scripture, whence it appears, that this expression of dying for another, has
no other sense or meaning, but only dying instead of another, undergoing the
death that he should undergo, that he might go free. And in this matter of
Christ's dying for us, add that he so dyed for us, as that he also dyed for our
sins, that is, either to bear their punishment, or to expiate their guilt, (for
other sense the words cannot admit) and he that pretends to give any other
sense of them than that contended for, which implies the whole of what lies in
the Doctrine of Satisfaction, erit mihi magnus Apollo; even he who was the
Author of all ambiguous Oracles of old.

And this is the common sense of mori pro alio, and pati pro alio, or pro alio
discrimen capitis subire; a substitution is still denoted by that expression,
which suffices us in this whole cause; for we know both into whose room he
came, and what they were to suffer. Thus Entellus killing and sacrificing an Ox
to Eryx in the stead of Dares whom he was ready to have slain, when he was
taken from him, expresses himself; Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte
Daretis Persolvo.

He offered the Ox, a better Sacrifice, in the stead of Dares, taken from him.
So Fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit.
And they speak so not only with respect unto death, but where ever any thing
of Durance or suffering is intended. So the Angry Master in the Comoedian,
Verberibus Caesum te Dave in pistrinum dedam usque ad necem.
Ea lege atque omine, ut si inde te exemerim, ego pro te molam.
He threatened his Servant to cast him into Prison to be macerated to death with
labor, and that with this engagement, that if he ever let him out he would
grind for him; that is, in his stead. Wherefore without offering Violence to
the common means of Understanding things amongst men, another sense cannot be
affixed to these words.

The Nature of the thing it self will admit of no other Exposition than that
given unto it; and it has been manifoldly exemplified among the Nations of the
world. For suppose a man guilty of any crime, and on the account thereof, to be
exposed unto Danger from God or man, in a way of Justice, Wrath, or Vengeance,
and when he is ready to be given up unto suffering according unto his demerit,
another should tender himself to dye for him that he might be freed, let an
appeal be made to the common Reason and Understandings of all men, whether the
intention of this his dying for another, be not, that he substitutes himself in
his stead to undergo what he should have done, however the translation of
punishment from one to another may be brought about and asserted. For at
present we treat not of the Right, but of the fact, or the thing it self. And
to deny this to be the case as to the sufferings of Christ, is as far as I can
understand, to subvert the whole Gospel.

Moreover, as was said, this harh been variously exemplified among the Nations
of the world; whose actings in such cases, because they excellently shadow out
the general notion of the death of Christ for others, for sinners; and are
appealed unto directly by the Apostle to this purpose, Romans 5. 7, 8. I shall in
a few Instances reflect upon.

Not to insist on the voluntary surrogations of private Persons, one into the
Room of another, mutually to undergo dangers and death for one another, as
before mentioned, I shall only remember some public Transactions in reference
unto communities, in Nations, Cities, or Armies. Nothing is more celebrated
amongst the Ancients than this; that when they supposed themselves in Danger,
from the Anger and displeasure of their Gods, by reason of any guilt or crimes
among them, some one person should either devote himself, or be devoted by the
people, to dye for them, and therein to be made as it were an expiatory
Sacrifice. For where sin is the cause, and God is the object respected, the
making of satisfaction by undergoing punishment, and expiating of sin by a
propitiatory Sacrifice, are but various expressions of the same thing. Now
those whosoever devoted themselves, as was said, to dye in the stead of others, or
to expiate their sins, and turn away the Anger of the God they feared by their
death, designed two things in what they did. First, That the Evils which were
impendent on the people and feared, might fall on themselves, so that the
people might go free. Secondly, That all good things which themselves desired,
might be conferred on the People; which things have a notable shadow in them
of the great expiatory Sacrifice concerning which we treat, and expound the
Expressions wherein it is declared. The Instance of the Decii, is known; of
whom the Poet, Plebeiae Deciorum animae, plebeia fuerunt
Nomina; pro totis legionibu^ hitam^n, and pro
Omnibus auxiliis, atque omni plehe Latins.
Sufficient Diis infernis.


The two Decii, Father and Son, in imminent dangers of the people, devoted
themselves, at several times, unto Death and Destruction. And says he;
sufficient Diis infernis; they satisfied for the whole people; adding the
Reason whence so it might be; Pluris enim Decii quam qui servantur ab illis.


They were more to be valued, than all that were saved by them. And the great
Historian does excellently describe both the Actions, and Expectations of the
one and the other in what they did. The Father, when the Roman Army commanded
by himself and Titus M^nlius, was near a total ruin by the Latins, called for
the public Priest, and caused him with the usual solemn Ceremonies, to devote
him to death, for the deliverance and safety of the Army: after which making
his requests to his Gods, ( dii quorum est potestas nostrorum hostiumque) the
gods that had power over them and their Adversaries, as he supposed, he cast
himself into death by the swords of the Enemy. Conspectus ab utraque acie
aliquanto augustior humano visu, sicut coelo missus, piaculum omnis Deorum
irae, qui pestem ab suis aversam in hosts ferret. He was looked on by both
Armies, as one more August than a man, as one sent from Heaven, to be a
piacular Sacrifice; to appease the Anger of the gods, and to transfer
destruction from their own Army to the Enemies, Live. Hist. 8. His Son in like
manner in a great and dangerous battle against the Galls and Samnites; wherein
he commanded in Chief, devoting himself as his Father had done, added unto the
former solemn deprecations; prae se, agere sese, formidinem ac fugam, caedemque
ac cruorem, coel stium, infernorum iras, lib. 11. That he carried away before
him, (from those for whom he devoted himself) fear and flight, slaughter and
blood, the anger of the Celestial and Infernal gods. And as they did in this
devoting of themselves design, averuncare malum, deum iras, lustrare p^pulum,
aut exercitum, piaculum fieri or (...), expiare crimina, scelus, reatum, or to
remove all evil from others by taking it on themselves in their stead; so also
they thought they might, and intended in what did, to covenant and contract for
the good things they desired. So did these Decii, and so is Menaeceus reported
to have done* when he devoted himself for the City of Thebes in danger to be
destroyed by the Argives. So Papinius introduces him treating his gods,
Armorum superi, tuque, o quifunere tanto
Indulges mihi Phoebe mori, date gaudia Thebis,
Quae pepegi, and toto quae sanguine prodi gus emi.


He reckoned that he had not only repelled all death and danger from Thebes, by
his own, but that he had purchased joy, in peace and liberty for the people.

And where there was none in public calamities, that did voluntarily devote
themselves, the people were wont to take some obnoxious person, to make him
exercra^le, and to lay on him according to their superstition, all the wrath of
their Gods, and so give him up to Destruction. Such the Apostle alludes unto,
Romans 9. 3. 1 Cor. 4. 9, 13. So the Massilians were wont to explate their City
by taking a Person devoted, imprecating on his head all the evil that the City
was obnoxious unto, casting him into the Sea with th^se words, (...) be thou
our expiatory Sacrifice; To which purpose were the solemn words that many used
in their expiatory Sacrifices; as Herodotus test^fieth of the Egyptians,
bringing their Offerings, says he, (...); they laid these imprecations on
their heads; that if any Evil were happening toward the Sacrificer, or all
Egypt, let it be all turned and laid on this devoted head.

And the persons whom they thus dealt withal, and made execrate, were commonly
of the vilest of the people, or such as had rendered themselves detestable by
their own crimes; whence was the complaint of the Mother of M^naeceus upon her
Sons devoting himself, Lustralemne feris, ego te puer inclyte Thebis,
D^votumque caput, vilis seu matter alebam?


I have recounted these Instances to evince the common intention, sense, and
understanding of that expression, of one dying for another; and to manifest by
Examples, what is the sense of mankind, about any ones being devoted and
substituted in the Room of others, to deliver them from death and danger; the
consideration whereof, added to the constant use of the words mentioned, in the
Scripture, is sufficient to f^^nd and confirm this conclusion.

That whereas it is fr^quently affirmed, in the Scripture, their Christ dyed
for us, and for our sins, etc. to deny that he dyed and suffered in our stead,
undergoing the death whereunto we were obnoxious, and the punishment due to our
sins, is; if we respect in what we say or believe* the constant use of those
words in the Scripture, the nature of the thing it self concerning which they
are used, the uncontrolled use of that Expression in all sorts of Writers, in
expressing the same thing, which the instances and examples of its meaning and
intention among the Nations of the World, is to deny that he dyed for us at all.

Neither will his dying for our Good or advantage only, in what way or sense
soever, answer or make good, or true, the Assertion of his dying for us, and
our sins. And this is evident in the Death of the Apostles and Martyrs; they
all dyed for our Good; our advantage and benefit was one end of their
sufferings, in the will and appointment of God; And yet it cannot be said, that
they dyed for us, or our sins.

And if Christ dyed only for our Good, though in a more effectual manner than
they did, yet this alters not the kind of his dying for us; nor can he thence
be said properly, according to the only due sense of that expression, so to do.

I shall in this brief and hasty discourse, add only one consideration more
about the death of Christ to confirm the Truth pleaded for. And that is that he
is said in dying for sinners, to bear their sins, Isa. 53. 11. He shall bear
their iniquities, v. 12. He bare the sins of many; explained, v. 5. He was
wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
Chastisement of our peace was upon him, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our
sins in his own body on the Tree, etc.

This expression is purely Sacred. It occurreth not directly in other Authors,
though the sense of it in other words do frequently. They call it luere
peccata; that is, delictorum supplicium far; to bear the punishment of sins.
The meaning therefore of this phrase of speech, is to be taken from the
Scripture alone, and principally from the Old Testament, where it is originally
used; and from whence it is tranferred into the New Testament in the same
sense, and no other. Let us consider some of the places.

Isa. 53. 11. (...) The same word (...) is used, verse. 4. (...) And our griefs
he has born them. The word signifies, properly to bear a Weight or a Burden,
as a man bears it on his shoulders; bajulo, porto. And it is never used with
respect unto sin, but openly and plainly it signifies the undergoing of the
punishment due unto it; so it occurrs directly to our purpose, Lam. 5. 7. (...)
Our Fathers have sinned and are not; and we have born their iniquities; The
punishment due to their sins. And why a new sense should be forged for these
words, when they are spoken concerning Christ, who can give a just reason?

Again (...) is used to the same purpose. (...) verse. 12. And he bear the sin
of many. (...) is often used with respect unto sin; sometimes with reference
unto Gods actings about it, and sometimes with reference unto men's concerns in
it. In the first way, or when it denotes an act of God, it signifies to lift
up, to take away, or pardon sin; and leaves the word (...) where with it is
joined under its first signification, of iniquity; or the g^ilt of sin, with
respect unto punishment ensuing as its consequent. For God pardoning the guilt
of sin, the removal of the punishment does necessarily ensue; Guilt containing
an Obligation unto punishment. In the latter way, as it respects men or
sinners, it constantly denotes the bearing of the punishment of sin, and gives
that sense unto (...), with respect unto the guilt of sin as its cause. And
hence arises the ambiguity of those words of Cain, Genesis 14. 13. (...), if
(...) denotes an act of God, if the words be spoken with reference in the first
place to any acting of his toward Cain, (...) retains the sense of iniquity,
and the words are rightly rendered, My sin is greater than to be fogiven. If it
respect Cain himself firstly, (...) assumes the signification of Punishment,
and the words are to be rendered; My punishment is greater than I can bear, or
is to be born by me.

This I say is the constant sense of this expression, nor can any Instance to
the contrary be produced. Some may be mentioned in the confirmation of it.
Numb. 14. 33. Your children shall wander in the Wilderness forty years, (...)
and shall bear your Whoredoms, v. 34. (...) Ye shall bear your in quities forty
years; that is, the punishment due to your whoredoms and iniquities, according
to Gods Provideneial d^aling with them at that time. Lev. 19. 8. He that eats
it, (...) shall bear his iniquities, How? (...) that s^ul shall be cut off. To
b^ cut off for sin, by the punishment of it, and for its guilt, is to bear in
quity. So Chap. ^0 16, 17 18. for a man to bear his iniquity, and to be killed,
slain, or put to death for it, are the same.

Ezekiel. 18. 20. (...) (...); the soul that sins it shall dye; the Son shall
not bear the sin of the Father. To bear sin, and to dye for sin, are the same.
More Instances might be added, all uniformity speaking the same sense of the
words.

And as this sense is sufficiently indeed invincibly established by the
invariable use of that Expression in the Scripture, so the manner whereby it is
affirmed that the Lord Christ bare our iniquities, sets it absolutely free from
all danger by Opposition. For he bare our iniquities when (...) the Lord made
to meet on him, or laid on him, the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53. 6. which words
the LXX. render, (...) (...), The Lord gave him up, or delivered him unto our
sins. That is, to be punished for them; for other sense the words can have
none; He made him sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. so he bore our sins, Isa. 53. 11.
How? in his own Body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. that when he was, and in his
being stricken, smitten, afflicted, wounded, bruised, slain, so was the
chastisement of our Peace upon him.

Wherefore to deny that the Lord Christ in his death and suffering for us,
underwent the punishment due to our sins, what we had deserved, that we might
be delivered, as it everts the great foundation of the Gospel, so by an open
perverting of the plain words of the Scripture, because not suited in their
sense and importance to the vain imaginations of men, it gives no small
countenance to Infidelity and Atheism.

FINIS.

