A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING Liturgies, AND THEIR IMPOSITION.

Printed in the Year, 1662.

A Discourse concerning Liturgies, and their Imposition.
CHAP. I.
The state of the Judaical Church. The Liberty given by Christ. 1. From the
arbitrary Impositions of men. 2. From the Observances and Rites instituted by
Moses. The continuance of their Observation in the patience and forbearance of
God. Difference about them stated. Legal Righteousness and Legal Ceremonies
contended for together, the Reason of it.

ALthough our present enquiry be merely after one part of Instituted Worship
under the Gospel, and the due performance of it according to the mind of God;
yet there being a communication of some light to be obtained from the turning
over of that Worship from the Mosaical, to the care and practice of the
Evangelical Church, we shall look a little back unto it as therein stated,
hoping thereby to make way for our clearer progress. What was the state of the
Church of God amongst the Jews as to Instituted Worship, when our blessed
Savior came to make the last and perfect discovery of his mind and will, is
manifest both from the appointment of that Worship in the Law of Moses, and the
practice of it remarked in the Gospel. That the Rites and Ordinances of the
Worship in the Church observed, were from the original in their nature Carnal,
and for the number many, on both accounts burdensome and grievous to the
Worshippers, the Scripture frequently declares. Howbeit the Teachers and Rulers
of the Church, being grown wholly Carnal in their spirits, and placing their
only glory in their yoke, not being able to see to the end of the things that
were to be done away, had in reased those Institutions both in number and
weight, with sundry Inventions of their own, which by their authority they made
necessary to be observed by their Disciples. In an equal practice of these,
Divine Institutions, and Humane Inventions, did our Lord Jesus Christ find the
generality of the Church at his coming in the flesh. The former being to
continue in force until the time of Reformation, at his Resurrection from the
dead should come; both by his practice, and his teaching as a Minister of
Circumcision, he confirmed and pressed frequently on the Consciences of men,
from the authority of the Lawmaker. The latter he utterly rejected, as
introduced in an high derogation from the perfection of the Law, and the honor
of him, whose Prerogative it is, to be the sole Lawsphar-giver of his Church;
the only Fountain and disposer of his own Worship. And this was the first
dawning of Liberty, that with the rising of this Day Star did appear to the
burdened and languishing consciences of men. He freed them by his Teaching
from the bondage of Pharisaical atbitrary Impositions, delivering their
Consciences from subjection to any thing in the Worship of God, but his own
immediate Authority. For it may not be supposed that when he recommended unto
his Hearers an attendance unto the teaching of the Scribes and Pharisees, with
an injunction to obey their directions, that he intended ought but those
Commands which they gave from him; and according to his mind, whose fear they
did outwardly profess; seeing that both in general and particular he did
himself condemn their Traditions and Impositions; giving out a rule of liberty
from them unto others in his own constant practice. Yea and whereas he would do
Civil things in their own nature indifferent, whereunto he was by no righteous
Law obliged, to avoid the offense of any which he saw might follow, Mat. 17.
24. yet would he not practice or give countenance unto, nay nor abstain from
condemning of any of their Ecclesiastical Self invented Observances, though he
saw them offended and scandalized at him, and was by others informed no less,
Mat. 15. 12, 13, 14 confirming his practice with that standing Rule concerning
all things relating to the Worship of God, Every plant which my heavenly Father
has not planted shall be rooted up. But he is yet further to carry on the work
of giving Liberty to all his Disciples, that he might take them into a
subjection to himself, and his own Authority only. The Aaronicall Priesthood
being the hinge on which the whole Ceremonial Worship turned, so that upon a
change thereof, the obligation of the Law unto that worship, or any part of it,
was necessarily to cease, our blessed Savior in his death and oblation
entering upon the Office, and actually discharging the great duty of his
Priesthood, did virtually put an end to the whole obligation of the first
Institution of Mosaical Worship. In his death was the procurement of the
Liberty of his Disciples completely finished as unto conscience, the supposed
Obligation of men's Traditions, and the real Obligation of Mosaical
Institutions, being by him, (the first as a Prophet in his teaching, the last
as a Priest in his offering) dissolved and taken away. From that day all the
Disciples of Christ were taken under his immediate Lordship, and made free to
the end of the world from all obligations in Conscience unto any thing in the
Worship of God, but what is of his own Institution and Command.

This dissolution of the Obligation of the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, being declared by his Apostles and Disciples, became a matter of
great difference and debate amongst the Jews to whom the Gospel was first
preached. Those who before had slain him in pursuit of their own charge, that
he would bring in such an alteration in the Worship of God as was now divulged,
were many of them exceedingly entaged at this new Doctrine; and had their
prejudices against him and his way much increased, hating indeed the light,
because their deeds were evil, These being obstinately bent to seek after
righteousness (as it were, at least) by the works of the Law, contended for
their Ceremonial works as one of the best stakes in their hedge, in whose
observance they placed their chiefest confidence of their acceptance with God.
But this is not all, many, who falling under powerful convictions of his
Doctrine and Miracles believed on him, did yet pertinaciously adhere to their
old Ceremonial Worship. Partly for want of clear light and understanding in the
Doctrine of the Person and Office of the Messiah, partly through the power of
those unspeakable prejudices which influenced their minds in reference to those
Rights, which being from of old observed by their Forefathers, derived their
original from God himself, (much the most noble Pleas and Pretenses, that ever
any of the sons of men had to insist upon, for a subjection to such a yoke, as
indeed had lost all power to oblige them) they were very desirous to mix the
observance of them with obedience unto those Institutions which they through
the Lord Jesus had superadded to them.

Things being thus stated amongst the Jews, God having a great work to
accomplish among and upon them in a short time, would not have the effect of it
turn upon this Hinge merely, and therefore in his Infinite Wisdom and
Condescension waved the whole contest for a season. For whereas within the
space of forty years or thereabout he was to call and gather out from the body,
by the preaching of the Gospel, his Remnant according to the Election of Grace,
and to leave the rest inexcusable, thereby visibly glorifying his Justice in
their Temporal and Eternal ruin, it pleased him in a way of connivance and
forbearance, to continue unto that people an allowance of the observation of
their old Worship, until the time appointed for its utter removal and actual
casting away should come. Though the original obligation in Conscience from the
first institution of their Ceremonies was taken away, yet hence arose a new
necessity of the observation of them, even in them who were acquainted with the
dissolution of that obligation; namely from the offense and scandal of them to
whom their observance was providentially indulged. On this account the
Disciples of Christ (and the Apostles themselves) continued in a promiscuous
observation of Mosaical Institutions, with the rest of the body of that people,
until the appointed season of the utter rejection and destruction of the
Apostate Churches were come. Hence many of the Ancients affirm that James the
less, living at Jerusalem in great reputation with all the people for his
Sanctity and Righteousness, was not to the very time of his Martyrdom known to
be a Christian; which had been utterly impossible, had he totally abstained
from communion with them in Legal Worship. Neither had that old controversy
about the Feast of the Passover any other rise or spring, then the mistake of
some who thought John had observed it as a Christian, who kept it only as a
Judaical Feast among the Jews; whence the Tradition ran strong that he observed
it with them, on the fourteenth day of the Month, which precise time others
turning it into a Christian observation, thought meet to lay aside.

Things being thus stated in the connivance and forbearance of God among the
Jews, some of them not contented to use the indulgence granted to them in mere
patience for the ends before mentioned, began sedulously to urge the Mosaical
Rites upon all the Gentiles that were turned unto God. So making upon the
matter the Preaching of the Gospel to be but a new way of proselyting men unto
Judaism. For the most part it appears, that it was not any mistake or
unacquaintedness with the Liberty brought in by Christ, that made them engage
in this quarrel for Moses, but that indeed being themselves carnal, and
notwithstanding the outward Name of Christ, seeking yet for righteousness by
the Law, they esteemed the observation of the Ceremonies indispensably
necessary unto Salvation. This gave occasion unto Paul, unto whom the
Apostleship of the Gentiles was in a special manner committed, to lay open the
whole mystery of that Liberty given by Christ to his Disciples from the Law of
Moses, as also the pernicious effects which its observance would produce upon
those principles which were pressed by the Judaical Zealots. Passing by the
peculiar dispensation of God toward the whole Nation of the Jews, wherein the
Gentile Believers were not concerned; as also that determination of the case of
scandal made at Jerusalem, Acts 15. and the temporary rule of Condescension as
to the abridgment of Liberty in some particulars agreed unto thereupon, he
fully declares that the time of the Appointment was come, that there was no
more power in the Law of their Institutions to bind the Consciences of men, and
that it was not in the power of all the men in the world, to impose the
observation of them, or any like unto them, upon any one though the meanest of
the Disciples of Jesus Christ. The mind of Christ in this matter being fully
made known, and the Liberty of his Disciples vindicated, various effects in the
minds of men ensued thereupon. Those who were in their inward principle
themselves carnal, notwithstanding their outward profession of the Gospel,
delighting in, and resting on an outward ceremonious Worship, continued to
oppose him with violence and fury. Those who with the profession of the Lord
Christ had also received the Spirit of Christ, and were by him instructed as in
the perfection of righteousness, so in the beauty and excellency of the Worship
of the Gospel, rejoiced greatly in the Grace and Privilege of the purchased
Liberty. After many contests this controversy was buried in the ruins of the
City and Temple, when the main occasion of it was utterly taken away.

By these degrees were the Disciples of Christ put into a complete actual
possession of that Liberty which he had preached to them, and purchased for
them; being first delivered from any conscientious subjection to the
Institutions of men, and then to the temporary Institutions of God which
concerned them not, they were left in a dependence on, and subjection into
himself alone, as to all things concerning worship; in which state he will
assuredly continue and preserve them to the end of the world, under the
guidance and direction of those Rules for the use of their Liberty which he has
left them in his Word. But yet the principle of the difference before
mentioned, which is fixed in the minds of men by Nature, did not die together
with the controversy that mainly issued from it. We may trace it effectually
everting it self in succeeding Ages. As Ignorance of the Righteousness of God
with a desire to establish their own, did in any take place, so also did
endeavors after an outward Ceremonies worship: For these things do mutually
further and strengthen each other. And commonly proportionable unto men's
darkness in the mystery of the Righteousness of God in Christ, is their zeal
for a worldly Sanctuary and carnal Ordinances. And such has been the force and
efficacy of these combined Principles in the minds of carnal men, that under
the profession of Christianity, they reduced things (in the Papacy) to the very
state and condition, wherein they were in Judaism at the time of Reformation;
the main Principle in the one and the other Church in the Apostasy, being Legal
Righteousness, and an unsupportable yoke of Ceremonious observances in the
Worship of God. And generally in others the same Principles of Legal
Righteousness and a Ceremonious Worship have their prevalency in a just
proportion, the latter being regulated by the former: And where by any means
the former is everted, the latter for the most part falls of its own accord;
yea, though riveted in the minds of men by other prejudices also. Hence when
the soul of a Sinner is effectually wrought upon by the preaching of the
Gospel, to renounce himself and his own righteousness, and being truly humbled
for sin, to receive the Lord Christ by Faith, as made unto him of God Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, there needs for the most part
little arguing to dissuade him from resting in, or laying wait upon an outside
pompous Worship; but he is immediately sensible of a delivery from its yoke,
which he freely embraces. And the reason hereof is, because that good Spirit
by whom he is enabled to believe and receive the Lord Jesus Christ, gives him
also an Acquittance with, and an experience of the Excellency, Glory, and
Beauty of that spiritual Communion with God in Christ, whereunto Believers are
called in the Gospel, which discovers the emptiness and uselessness of all,
which before perhaps he admired and delighted in. For where the Spirit of
Christ is, there is Liberty. And these things of seeking a Righteousness in
Christ alone, and delighting in spiritual Communion with God, exercising it
self only in the ways of his own appointment, do inseperably proceed from the
same Spirit of Christ; as those before mentioned from the same Principle of
Self and Flesh.

CHAP. II.
The Disciples of Christ taken into his own disposal. General things to be
observed about Gospel Institutions. Their number small. Excess of men's
Inventions. Things instituted brought into a Religious Relation by the
Authority of Christ. That Authority is none other. Suitableness in the matter
of Institutions to be designed to their proper significancy. That discoverable
only by infinite Wisdom. Abilities given by Christ for the Administration of
all his Institutions. The way whereby it was done, Ephesians. 9. 7, 8. Several
Postulata laid down. The sum of the whole state of our Question in general.

WE have brought unto, and left the Disciples of Jesus Christ in the hand and
sole disposal of him their Lord and Master, as to all things which concern the
Worship of God, and how he has disposed of them we are in the next place to
consider. Now he being the Head, Lord, and only Lawgiver of his Church,
coming from the bosom of his Father, to make the last Revelation of his Mind
and Will, was to determine and appoint that Worship of God in and by himself,
which was to continue to the end of the world. It belongs not unto our
purpose to consider distinctly and apart all the several Institutions which by
him were ordained. We shall only observe some things concerning them in
General that will be of use in our progress, and so proceed to the
Consideration of that Particular about which we are in Disquisition of his Mind
and Will, The Worship of God is either Moral and Internal, or External and of
Sovereign or arbitrary Institution. The former we do not now consider, nor was
the ancient original fundamental Obligation unto it altered or dissolved in the
least by the Lord Christ. It was as unto superadded Institutions, of outward
Worship, which have their foundation and reason in Sovereign Will and Pleasure,
that he took his Disciples into his own disposal, discharging them from all
Obligations to ought else whatever, but only what he should appoint.
Concerning these, some few considerations will lead us to what in this
Discourse we principally intend. And the First is, That they were few, and
easy to be observed. It was his Will and pleasure, that the Faith and Love of
his Disciples should in some few Instances be exercised in a willing ready
subjection to the impositions of his Wisdom and Authority. And their service
herein he does fully recompense, by rendering those his Institutions blessedly
useful to their spiritual advantage. But he would not burden them with
Observances either for nature or number, like or comparable unto them from
which he purchased them Liberty. And herein has the practice of succeeding
Ages put an excellent luster upon bis Love and Tenderness. For whereas he is
the Lord of his Church, to whom the Consciences of his Disciples are in an
unquestionable subjection, and who can give Power and Efficacy to his
Institutions to make them useful to their Souls? Yet when some of their Fellow
servants came, I know not how, to apprehend themselves enabled to impose
arbitrarily their Appointments, for reason seeming good to their wisdom, they
might have been counted moderate, if they had not given above ten Commandments,
for his one. Bellarmine tells us indeed, that the Laws and Institutions of the
Church that absolutely bind all Christians, so that they sin if they omit their
Observation, are upon the matter but four; namely, to observe the Fasts of Lent
and Ember-weeks, to keep the Holy days, Confession once a year, and to
Communicate at Easter: De Romans Pon^^f. lib. 4. cap. 18. But whereas they double
the number of the sacred Ceremonies instituted by Christ, and have every one of
them a great number of subservient Observations attending on them; so he must
be a stranger to their Councels, Cannon-laws, and practices that can believe
his insinuation.

Again, as the Institutions and Ordinances of Christ in the outward Worship of
God, whose sole foundation was in his will and pleasure, were few and easy to
be observed, being brought into a relation of Worship unto God by virtue of his
institution and command, without which no one thing in their kind can do so
more then another; so they were for the matter of them such as he knew had an
aptness to be serviceable unto the significancy whereunto they were appointed
by him, which nothing but infinite wisdom can judge of. And this eternally
severs them from all things of men's inventions, either to the same purpose, or
in the same way to be used. For as whatever they shall appoint in the Worship
of God, can have no significancy at all as unto any spiritual end, for want of
a Christ-like Authority in their Institution, which alone can add that
significancy to them, which in themselves without such an appointment they have
not; so they themselves want wisdom to choose the things which have any
fitness or aptitude to be used for that end, if the Authority were sufficient
to introduce with them, such a significancy. There is nothing they can in this
kind fix upon, but as good reason as any they are able to tender for the proof
of their Expedience unto the end proposed to them, will be produced to prove
them meet for a quite other signification and purpose, and the contrary unto
them, as least things diverse to them, be asserted with as fair pretenses, as
meet to be used in their place and room.

But that which we principally shall observe in and about Christ's Institutions
of Gospel Worship, is the Provision that he made for the Administration of it
acceptably unto God. It is of the Instituted Worship of his Public Assemblies
that we treat. The chiefest acts and parts thereof may be referred to these
three Heads, Preaching of the Word, Administration of the Sacraments, and the
Exercise of Discipline; all to be performed with Prayer and Thanksgiving. The
Rule for the administration of these things so far as they are purely of his
Institution, he gave his Disciples in his appointment of them. Persons also he
designed to the regular administration of these his holy things in the
Assemblies of his Saints; namely, Pasters and Teachers to endure to the end of
the world, after those of an extraordinary employment under him, were to cease.
It remains then to consider how the Persons appointed by him unto the
Administration of these Holy Things in his Assemblies, and so to the discharge
of the whole public Worship of God, should be enabled thereunto, so as the end
by him aimed at of the Edification of his Disciples, and the Glory of God might
be attained. Two ways there are whereby this may be done. First by such
Spiritual Abilities for the discharge and performance of this whole work as
will answer the mind of Christ therein, and so serve for the end proposed.
Secondly, By the prescription of a form of words whose reading and
pronunciation in these administrations should outwardly serve as to all the
ends of the Prayer and Thanksgiving required in them, which they do contain.
Its evident that our Savior fixed on the former way; what he has done as to
the latter, or what his mind is concerning it, we shall afterward enquire,

For the first, as in many other places so signally in one the Apostle
acquaints us with the course he has taken, and the Provision that he has made,
namely, Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Unto every of us is given
Grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he says when
he Ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. And
he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers for the perfect^ng of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all-come in the unity of the faith
and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the Stature of the fullness of Christ, etc. The thing aimed it is the bringing
of all the Saints and Disciples of Christ, the whole Church, to that measure
and perfection of Grace which Christ has assigned to them in this world, that
they may be meet for himself to receive in glory. The means whereby this is to
be done and effected is the faithful, regular, and effectual discharge of the
work of the Ministry, unto which the administration of all his Ordinances and
Institutions do confessedly belong. That this work may be discharged in an
orderly manner to the end mentioned, he has granted unto his Church, the
Offices mentioned to be executed by persons variously called thereunto
according to his mind and will.

The only enquiry remaining is, how these persons shall be enabled for the
discharge of their Office, and so accomplishment of the work of the Ministry.
This he declares is by the communication of grace and spiritual gifts from
heaven unto them by Christ himself. Here lies the spring of all that
follows; the care hereof he has taken upon himself unto the end of the
world. He that enabled the shoulders of the Levites to bear the Ark of old, and
their arms to slay the sacrifices, without which natural strength those carnal
ordinances could not have been observed (nor was the Ark to be carried from
supply of defect of ability in the Levites) has upon their removal, and the
Institution of the Spiritual Worship of the Gospel, undertaken to supply the
administratours of it with spiritual strength and abilities for the discharge
of their work, allowing them supply of the defect of that which he has taken
upon himself to perform. I suppose then that these ensuing will seem but
reasonable Postulata.

1. That the means which Jesus Christ has appointed for the attaining of any
end is every way sufficient for that purpose whereunto it is so appointed: his
wisdom exacts our consent to this proposition.

2. That what he has taken upon himself to perform unto the end of the world,
and promised so to do, that he will accomplish accordingly; here his
faithfulness requires our assent.

3. That the communication of spiritual gifts and graces to the Ministers of
the Gospel is the provision that Christ has made for the right discharge of
the work of their Ministry, unto the edification of his Body. This lies plain
in the Text.

4. That the exercise and use of those gifts in all those administrations for
which they are bestowed, are expected and required by him. The nature of the
thing it self, with innumerable testimonies confirm this truth also.

5. That it is derogatory to the glory, honor and faithfulness of the Lord
Jesus Christ to affirm that he cease to bestow gifts for the work of the
Ministry, whilst he continues and requires the exercise and discharge of
that work. What has befallen men, or does yet befall them through the wretched
sloth, darkness and unbelief, which their wilful neglect of dependence on him,
or of stirring up, or improving of what they do receive from him, and the
mischiefs that have accrewed to the Church by the Intrusion of such persons
into the Place and Office of the Ministry as were never called nor appointed by
him thereunto, are not to be imputed unto any failing on his part, in his
promise of dispensing the gifts mentioned to the end of the world. Of which
several Positions we shall have some use in our further progress.

Our Lord Jesus Christ then having delivered his Disciples from the yoke of
Mosaical Institutions which lay upon them from of old, as also from being
entangled in their consciences by or from any inventions of men imposed on
them, giving them Rules for the practice of the Liberty whereunto by him they
were vindicated, taking them for the future into his own sole disposal in all
things concerning the Worship of God, he appoints in his Sovereign Authority
both the Ordinances which he will have alone observed in his Church, and the
Persons by whom they are to be administered, furnishing them with spiritual
abilities to that end and purpose, promising his presence with them to the end
of the world, commands them to set such in his Name and Strength in the way and
unto the work that he has allotted to them.

That now which on this Foundation we are further to enquire into is, whether
over and above what we have recounted, our Savior has appointed, or by any
ways given allowance unto the framing of a stinted Form of Prayers and Praises
to be read and used by the Administratours of his Ordinances in their
Administration of them; or whether the prescription and imposing of such a Form
or Liturgy upon those who Minister in the Church, in the Name and Authority of
Christ, be not contrary to his mind, and cross to his whole design, for
perpetuating of his Institutions to the end of the world, in due order and
manner. And this we shall do; and withal discover the Rise and Progress which
such Liturgies have had, and made in the Church of God?

CHAP. III.
Of the Lords Prayer, and what may be concluded from thence, as to the
Invention and Imposition of Liturgies in the public Worship of God. The
Liberty whereunto Christ vindicated, and wherein he left his Disciples.

THe first plea used to give countenance unto the composing and imposing of
Liturgies, is taken from that act of our Savior himself, who upon the request
of his Disciples composed for them a Form of Prayer, which being recorded in
the Gospel, is said to have the force of an Institution, rendering the
observation or use of that Form a necessary duty unto all believers to the end
of the world. And this Plea is strengthened by a discovery which some learned
men say they have made, namely that our blessed Savior composed this Form
which he delivered to his Disciples, out of such other Forms as were then in
ordinary use among the Jews; whereby (they say) he confirmed that practice of
prescribing Forms of Prayer among them; and recommended the same course of
proceeding, by his so doing unto his Disciples. Now though it be very hard to
discover how upon a supposition that all which is thus suggested is the very
truth, any thing can be hence concluded to the justification of the practice of
imposing Liturgies, now enquired into; yet that there may be no pretense left
unto a plea, though never so weak and infirm, of such an extract as this lays
claim unto, it will be necessary to consider the severals of it. It is
generally apprehended that our Savior in his prescription of that Form of
Prayer unto his Disciples did aim at two things. 1. That they might have a
summary Symbol of all the most excellent things they were to ask of God in his
Name, and so a Rule of squaring all their desires and supplications by. This
end all universally concur in: and therefore Matthew considering the Doctrinal
nature of it, gives it a place in the first recorded Sermon of our Savior, by
way of anticipation, and mentions it not when he comes to the time wherein it
was really first delivered by him. 2. For their benefit and advantage, together
with other intercessions that they should also use the repetition of those
words, as a prescript Form wherein he had comprised the matter of their
Requests and Petitions. About this latter, all men are not agreed in their
Judgments, whether indeed our Savior had this aim in it or no. Many Learned
men suppose that it was a supply of a Rule and Standard of things to be prayed
for, without prescribing to them, the Use or Rehearsal of that Form of words
that he aimed at. Of this number are Musculus, Gortius, and Cornelius a Lapide,
with many others; but it may suffice to intimate that some of all sorts are so
minded. But we shall not in the case in hand make use of any Principle so far
obnoxious unto common prejudice, as experience proves that opinion of those
Learned men to be. Let it therefore be taken for granted, that our Savior did
command that Form to be repeated by his Disciples; and let us then consider
what will regularly ensue thereupon. Our Savior at that time was Minister of
the Circumcision, and taught the Doctrine of the Gospel under and with the
Observation of all the Worship of the Judaical Church. He was not yet
glorified, and so the Spirit was not as yet given; I mean that Spirit which he
promised unto his Disciples, to enable them to perform all the Worship of God
by him required at their hands, whereof we have before spoken. That then which
the Lord Jesus prescribed unto his Disciples for their present practice in the
Worship of God, seems to have belonged unto the Economy of the old Testament.
Now to argue from the prescription of, and outward helps for the performance of
the Worship of God under the old Testament, unto a necessity of the like or the
same under the New, is upon the matter to deny that Christ is ascended on high,
and to have given spiritual Gifts unto men, eminently distinct from, and above
those given out by him under the Judaical Padogogy. However their boldness
seems unwarrantable, if not intolerable, who to serve their own ends upon this
Prescription of his, do affirm that our Lord Jesus Composed this Form out of
such as were then in common use among the Jews. For as the proof their
Assertion which they insist on, namely the finding of some of the things
expressed in it, or Petitions of it in the Writings of the Jews, the eldest
whereof is some hundreds of years younger then this Prayer it self, is most
weak and contemptible; so the affirmation it self is exceeding derogatory to
the glory and honor of his Wisdom, assigning unto him a work so unnecessary
and trivial, as would scarce become a man of ordinary Prudence and Authority.
But yet to carry on the work in hand, let it be supposed that our Savior did
command that Form of Prayer out of such as were then customarily used among the
Jews, which is false, and asserted without any color of proof, also that he
prescribed it as a Form to be Repeated by his Disciples, which we have shown
many very eminently Learned men to deny; and that though he prescribed it as a
Minister to the Judaical Church, and to his Disciples whilst Members of that
Church, under the Economy of the old Testament, not having as yet received the
Spirit and Gifts of the New, yet that he did it for the use and observance of
his Disciples to the end of the World, and that not as to the objective
regulation of their Prayers, but as to the repetition of the words; yet it does
not appear how from all these Concessions any Argument can be drawn to the
Composition and Imposition of Liturgies, whose Rise and Nature we are enquiring
after. For it is certain, that our Savior gives this direction for the end
which he intends in it, not primarily as to the Public Worship of the
Assemblies of his Disciples, but as to the guidance of every individual Saint
in his private Devotion, Matthew. 6. 6, 8. Now from a Direction given unto
private Persons, as to their private deportment in the Discharge of any
Religious Duty, to argue unto a prescription of the whole Worship of God in
public Assemblies, is not safe, But that we may hear the Argument drawn from
this act of our Savior speak out all that it has to offer, let us add this
also to the forementioned Presumptions, that our Savior has Appointed and
Ordained, that in the Assemblies of his Disciples in his Worship by him
required, they who Administer in his Name in and to the Church, should repeat
the words of this Prayer, though not peculiarly suited to any one of his
Institutions, what will thence be construed to ensue? why then it is supposed
that this will follow; that it is not only lawful, but the duty of some men to
Compose other Forms, an hundred times as many, suited in their Judgment to the
due Administration of all Ordinances of Worship in particular, imposing them on
the Evangelical Administrators of those Ordinances, to be read by them, with a
severe interdiction of the use of any other Prayers in those Administrations,
Bellarmine de Pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 16. argues for the necessity of the
Observation of Rites indifferent, when once commanded by the Church, from the
necessity of the Observation of Baptism, in its self a thing indifferent, after
it was commanded by Christ. Some think this is not to Dispute but Blaspheme.
Nor is the Inference before mentioned of any other Complexion. When it shall be
made to appear that whatever it was lawful for the Lord Christ to do, and to
prescribe to his Church and Disciples in reference to the Worship of God, the
same, or any thing of the like nature, it is lawful for men to do, under the
pretense of their being invested with the Authority of the Church, or any else
whatever, then some color will be given to this Argument; which being raised
on the tottering suppositions before mentioned, ends in that which seems to
deserve an harder name, then at present we shall affix unto it.

And this is the stare and condition wherein the Disciples of Christ were left
by himself, without the least intimation of any other impositions in the
Worship of God to be laid upon them. Not in any thing, or by any act of his did
he intimate the necessity, or lawful use of any such Liturgies as these which
we are enquiring after, or prescribed and limited Forms of Prayers or Praises
to be used or read in the public administration of Evangelical Institutions,
but indeed made provision rendering all such prescriptions useless; and because
they cannot be made use of, but by rejection of the Provision by himself made,
unlawful.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Worship of God by the Apostles. No Liturgies used by them, nor in the
Churches of their plantation. Argument from their practice. Reasons pleaded for
the use of Liturgies. Disabilities of Church Officers for Gospel Administration
to the edification of the Church. Uniformity in the Worship of God. The
practice of the Apostles as to these pretenses considered. Of other
Impositions. The Rule given by the Apostles. Of the Liturgies fulsly ascribed
unto some of them.

OUr next enquiry is after the practice of the Apostles, the best
interpretation of the mind of the Lord Jesus Christ, as to the Agenda of the
Church, or what he would have done therein in the Worship of God, and how. That
one end of their being furnished with the Spirit of Christ, was the right and
due administration of his Ordinances in his Church, to the edification of his
Disciples, I suppose will not be denied. By virtue of his assistance, and the
gifts from him received, they discharged this part of their duty accordingly.
That they used any Liturgies in the Church Worship wherein they went at any
time before the Disciples, cannot with any color of proof be pretended. The
Scripture gives us an account of many of their Prayers, of none that were a
Repetition of a Form. If any such were used by them, how came the memory of
them utterly to perish off the Earth? Some indeed of the Ancients say that they
used the Lords Prayer in the Consecration of the Eucharist, which by others is
denied, being in its self improbable, and the Testimonies weak that are
produced in behalf of its Assertion. But as has been showed, the use of that
Prayer no way concerns the present Question. There are no more Christ's but one;
to us there is one Lord Jesus Christ. For him who has affirmed, that it is
likely they used Forms of Prayer and Homilies composed for them by Saint Peter,
I suppose he must fetch his Evidence out of the same Authors that he used, who
affirmed that Jesus Christ himself went up and down singing Mass.

The practice then of the Apostles is not, as far as I know, by any sober and
learned Persons controverted in this matter. They administered the holy things
of the Gospel, by virtue of the holy Gifts they had received. But they were
Apostles. The enquiry is, what Directions and Commands they gave unto the
Bishops or Pastors of the Churches which they planted, that they might know how
to behave themselves in the House and Worship of God. Whatever they might do
in the discharge of their duty by virtue of their extraordinary Gifts, yet the
case might be much otherwise with them, who were entrusted with ordinary
Ministerial Gifts only. But we do not find that they made any distinction in
this matter between themselves and others. For as the Care of all the Churches
was on them, the duties whereof they were to discharge by virtue of the Gifts
they had received, according to their Commission impowering them thereunto, so
to the Bishops of particular Churches, they gave charge to attend unto the
administration of the holy things in them, by virtue of the Gifts they had
received to that purpose, according to the limits of their Commission. And upon
a supposition that the Apostles were enabled to discharge all Gospel
Administrations to the edification of the Church, by virtue of the Gifts they
had received, which those who were to come after them in the performance of the
same Duties, should not be enabled unto, it cannot be imagined but that they
would have provided a supply for that want and defect themselves; and not have
left the Church halt and maimed to the Cure of those men, whose weakness and
unfitness for the Duty was its Disease. So then neither did the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ use any Liturgies, in the sense spoken of, in their
administration of the Worship Instituted by him in his Church, nor did they
Prescribe or Command any such to the Churches, or their Officers that were
planted in them; nor by any thing intimate the usefulness of any such Liturgy,
or Form of public Worship as after Ages found out and used.

Thus far then is the Liberty given by Christ unto his Church preserved entire,
and the Request seems not immodest that is made for the Continuance of it. When
men cry to God for the Liberty in his Worship, which was left unto them by
Christ and his Apostles, he will undoubtedly hear, though their Fellow servants
should be deaf to the like Requests made unto them: And truly they must have a
great Confidence in their own Wisdom and Sufficienty, who will undertake to
Appoint and Impose on others the Observation of things in the Worship of God,
which neither our Lord Jesus, nor his Apostles did appoint or impose.

Two things are principally pretended as Grounds of the Imposition of public
Liturgies. First, The disability of the present Ministers of the Churches to
Celebrate and administer the Ordinances of the Gospel to the honor of God, and
Edification of the Church without the use of them. Secondly, The great
importance of Uni^ormity in the Worship of God, not possibly to be attained,
but by virtue of this expedient, I desire to know whether these Arguments did
occur the consideration of the Apostles or no: If they shall say they did; I
desire to know why they did not make upon them the Provision now judged
necessary, and whether those that so do, do not therein prefer their wisdom
and care for the Churches of God, unto the wisdom and care of the Apostles. If
it shall be said, that the Bishops or Pastors of the Churches, in their days
had abilities for the discharge of the whole work of the Ministry without this
relief, so that the Apostles had no need to make any such supply. I desire to
know from whom they had these abilities; If it be said that they had them from
Jesus Christ, I then shall yet also further ask, whether ordinary Bishops or
Pastors had any other Gifts from Jesus Christ, but what he promised to bestow
on ordinary Bishops and Pastors of his Churches; it seems to me that he
bestowed no more upon them then he promised to bestow, viz. Gifts for the Work
of the Ministry, with an especial regard to that outward condition of his
Churches, whereunto by his providence they were disposed. It will then in the
next place be enquired, whether the Lord Jesus Christ promised to give any
other Gifts to the ordinary Bishops and Pastors of the Churches in those days,
then he promised to all such Officers in his Church to the end of the World. If
this appear to be the state of things, that the Promise by virtue whereof they
received those gifts and abilities for the disdarge of their duty, which
rendered the Prescription of Liturgies needless, as to the first Ground of them
pretended; did and do equally respect all that succeed in the same Office and
Duty, according to the mind and will of Christ unto the end of the World, is
not the pretended necessity derogatory to the glory of the faithfulness of
Jesus Christ, as plainly intimating that he does not continue to fulfill his
Promise; or at least a full declaration of men's unbelief, that they do not, nor
will depend upon him for the accomplishment of the same. Thus the first
pretended Ground of the necessary use of such Liturgies as we speak of, ends
in a reflection upon the honor of our Lord Jesus, or a Publication of their
own Unbelief, and Apostasy.

The Second is like the former. It will not, I suppose, be denied but that the
Apostles took care for the Unity of the Churches, and for that Uniformity in
the Worship of God which is acceptable unto him. Evidence lies so full unto it
in their Writings, that it cannot be denied. Great weight every where they lay
upon this duty of the Churches, and propose unto them the ways whereby it may
be done, with multiplied Commands and Exhortations to attend unto them. Whence
is it then that they never once intimate any thing of that which is now
pressed, as the only medium for the attaining of that end? It cannot but seem
strange to some, that this should be the only expedient for that Uniformity
which is acceptable unto God, and yet not once come into the thoughts of any of
the Apostles of Christ, so as to be commended unto the Churches for that
purpose. Considering the many Treacheries that are in the hearts of men, and
the powerful workings of unbelief under the most solemn outward Professions, I
fear it will appear at the last day, that the true rise of most of the
Impositions on the Consciences of men, which on various pretenses are practiced
in the World, is from the secret thoughts that either Christ does not take that
Care of his Churches, nor make that supply unto them of spiritual abilities for
the work of the Ministry, which he did in the days of old; or that men are now
grown wiser then the Apostles, and those who succeeded them in the
administration of the things of God, and so are able to make better provision
for attaining the end they professedly aimed at, then they knew how to do.

The Heathen I confess thought Forms of Prayer to a means of preserving an
uniformity in their Religious Worship. Hence they had a solemn Form for every
public action; yea, for those Orations which the Magistrates had unto the
People. So Levius informs us, that when Sp. Posthumous the Consul was to speak
unto the People about the wickednesses that were perpetrated by many under the
pretense of some Bacchanalian superstition, he gave them an account of the
usefulness of the Solenne precationis carmen, which he had recited to keep out,
and prevent such differences about their Religion as were then fallen out, lib,
39. Concione advocat a cum Solenne precationis carmen, quod praefari priusquam
populum alloquantur, Magistratus solent, peregisset Consul, it a caepit. Nulli
unquam concioni, Quirites, tam non solum apta, sed etiam necessaria haec
solennis Deorum comprecatio fuit, quae nos admoneret, hos esse Deos quos
colerevenerari, precarique Majores vestri instituissent, non illos, etc. But I
hope we shall not prefer their Example and Wisdom before that of our Lord
Christ, and his Apostles.

Were prejudices removed, and self-interests laid out of the way, a man would
think there were nor much more necessity for the determination of this
difference; Christ, and his Apostles, with the Apostolical Churches, knew no
such Liturgies. At least it seems as was said not an unreasonable request to
ask humbly and peaceably at the hands of any of the sons of men, that they
would be pleased to allow unto Ministers of the Gospel that are sound in the
Faith, and known so to be, who will willingly submit the trial of their
Ministerial abilities to the Judgment of any who are taught of God, and
enabled to discern of them aright, that Liberty in the Worship of God which was
confessedly left unto them by Christ and his Apostles. But the state of things
is altered in the World. At a Convention of the Apostles and others, wherein
the holy Ghost did peculiarly preside, when the Question about Impositions was
agitated, it was concluded that nothing should be imposed on the Disciples but
what was necessary for them to observe antecedently to any Impositions, Acts
15. 28. necessary though not in their own nature, yet in the posture of things
in the Churches, necessary to the avoidance of scandal, whereby the observation
of that injunction was to be regulated. Nor was there among the things called
necessary the Imposition of any one thing positively to be practiced by any of
the Disciples in the Worship of God, but only an abridgement of their Liberty
in some few external things, to which it did really extend. But that Spirit of
Wisdom, Moderation, and Tenderness whereby they were guided being rejected by
men, they began to think that they might multiply Impositions as to the
positive practice of the Disciples of Christ in the Worship of God at their
pleasure, so that they could pretend that they were indifferent in themselves
before the Imposition of them, which gives as they say, a necessity to their
Observations; which proceeding must be left to the Judgment Seat of Jesus
Christ, Matthew. 25. 45.

It is not worth our stay to consider what is pretended concerning the
antiquity of Liturgies, from some yet extant that bear the Names of some of the
Apostles or Evangelists. There is one that is called by the Name of James,
printed in Greek and Latin; another ascribed unto Peter, published by
Lindanus; one also to Matthew, called the Aeohtopick; another to Mark, which
are in the Bible P. P. And pains have been taken by Santesius, Pamelius and
others, to prove them genuine; but so much in vain as certainly nothing could
be more. Nor does Baronius in their lives dare ascribe any such thing unto
them. We need not any longer stay to remove this Rubbish out of our way. They
must be strangers to the Spirit, Doctrine, and Writings of the Apostles, who
can impose such Trash upon them, as these Liturgies are stuffed withal? The
common use of words in them not known in the Ages of the Apostles, nor of some
of them ensuing; The parts in them whose Contrivers and Framers are known to
have lived many Ages after; The mentioning of such things in them, as were not
once dreamed of in the days whereunto they pretend, The remembrance of them in
them as long before them deceased, who are suggested to be their Authors. The
preferring of other Liturgies before them when once Liturgies came in use, with
a neglect of them; which the utter silence of the first Christian Writers,
Stories, Councels concerning them, do abundantly manifest that they are plainly
Suppositions, of a very late Fraud and Invention. Yea, we have testimonies
clear enough against this pretense. In Gregor. lib. 7. Epist. 63. Alcuinus,
Amatorius, Rabanus, lib. P. P. tom. 10. with whom consent Walafridus, Strabo,
Rupertus Titiensis, Berno, Radulphus Tangrensis, and generally all that have
written any thing about Liturgies in former days, many of whom show how, when,
and by whom the several parts of that Public Form which at length signally
prevailed were invented and brought into use.

CHAP. V.
The practice of the Churches in the first three Centuries as to Forms of
Public Worship. No set Forms of Liturgies used by them. The Silence of the
first Writers concerning them. Some Testimonies against them.

IT is not about stinted Forms of Prayer in the Worship and Service of God, by
those who of their own accord do make use of that kind of Assistance, judging
that course to be better then any thing they can do themselves in the discharge
of the work of the Ministry, but of the Imposition of Forms on others who
desire to stand fast in the Liberty with which Christ has made them Free, that
we enquire. This Freedom we have manifested to have been purchased for them by
the Lord Jesus, and the use of it continued by the Apostles in their own
practice, and to the Churches planted by themselves. And this will one day
appear to have been a sufficient Plea for the maintenance of that Liberty to
the end of the world. Now though what is purely matter of Fact among the
succeeding Churches, be not so far Argumentative as to be insisted on as a Rule
exactly binding us to the imitation of it; yet it is deservedly worthy of great
Consideration, and not hastily to be rejected, unless it be discovered to have
been diverse from the Word whereunto we are bound in all things to attend. We
shall therefore make some enquiry into the practice of those Churches, as to
this matter of prescribing of Forms of Prayer in public Church
Administrations, so far as any thing thereof is by good Antiquity transmitted
unto us.

Our first Enquiry shall be into the three first Centuries, wherein confessedly
the streams of Gospel Institutions did run most clear and pure from humane
mixtures, then in those following, although few of the Teachers that were of
Note do escape from Animadversions from those, that have come after them. It
cannot be denied but that for the most part the Churches and their Guides
within the space of the time limited, walked in the paths marked out for them
by the Apostles, and made conspicuous by the Footsteps of the first Churches
planted by them. It does not then appear, for ought as I can yet discover, that
there was any attempt to Invent, Frame and Compose any Liturgies or prescribed
Forms of administering the Ordinances of the Gospel, exclusive to the discharge
of that duty by virtue of spiritual Gifts received from Jesus Christ, much less
for an Imposition of any such Forms on the Consciences and Practice of all the
Ministers of the Churches within the time mentioned, If any be contrary minded,
it is incumbent on them to evince their Assertion by some instances of
unquestionable Truth. As yet, that I know of, this is not performed by any.
Buronius ad An, Christi 58. number. 102, 103, 104, etc. treating expressly of the
public Prayers of the Ancient Christians, is wholly silent as to the use of
any Forms amongst them; though he contends for their Worshipping toward the
East, which custom when it was introduced, is most uncertain: but most certain
that by many it was immoderately abused, who expressly worshipped the Rising
Sun; of which abominable Idolatry among Christians, Leo complains Sermon. 7. De
Nativitate. Indeed the Cardinal ad An. 63. 12, 17. faintly contends, that some
things in the Liturgy of James were composed by him, because some passages and
expressions of it are used by Cyril of Jerusalem in his Mistagog. 5. But
whereas Cyril lived not within the time limited unto our Enquiry, and those
Treatises are justly suspected to be suppositions, nor is the Testimony of that
Liturgy, once cited or mentioned by him, the weakness of this insinuation is
evident. Yea, it is most probable that whosoever was the Composer of that
forged Liturgy, he took those Passages out of those reputed Writings of Cyril,
which were known in the Church long before the name of the other was heard of.
I know no ground of expectation of the performance of that, which as yet men
have come short in, namely, in producing Testimonies for the use of such
Liturgies as we are enquiring after, considering the diligence, ability, and
interest of those have been already engaged in that enquiry. Now the silence of
those, who in all probability would have given an account of them, had any such
been in use in their days, with the description they gave us of such a
performance of the Worship of God in the Assemblies of Christians, as is
inconsistent with, and exclusive of such prescribed Forms as we treat of, is as
full an evidence in this kind as our negative is capable of. In those golden
Fragments of Antiquity which we have preserved by Eusebius, I mean the Epistles
of the Church of Smyrna, about the Martyrdom of Polycarpus, and of the
Churches of Vienna and Lions, concerning their Persecution, we have not the
least intimation of any such Forms of Service. In the Epistle of Clemens, or
the Church of Rome to the Church of Corinth, in those of Ignatius, in the
Writings of Justin Martyr, Clemens, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and their
Contemporaries, there is the same silence concerning them. The
Pseudopegraphical Writings that bear the Names of the men of those days, with
any pretense of considerable Antiquity, as the Canons of the Apostles,
Quaestiones ad Orthodoxos, Dionysius Hierarch. Divin. Nom. will not help in the
cause. For though in some of them there are Prayers mentioned, and that for and
about such things as were not in Rerum Natura, in the days wherein those
persons lived, unto whose Names they are falsely ascribed; yet they speak
nothing to the point of Liturgies as stated in our enquiry. Something I confess
may be found in some of the Writings, of some one or two of those of the third
Century, intimating the use of some particular Prayers in some Churches; So
Origin. Homil. 11. in Hierimea. Ubi frequenter in or at ione dicimus, da
omnipotens, da nobis partem cum Prophetis, da cum Apostolis Christi tui, tribue
ut inveniamur ad vestigia unigeniti tui. But whether he speaks of a Form, or of
the matter only of Prayer, I know not. But such Passages belong not unto our
purpose. Those who deal expressly about the Order, State, and Condition of the
Churches, and the Worship of God in them, their Prayers and Supplications knew
nothing of prescribed Liturgies; yea, they affirm plainly that which is
inconsistent with the use of them. The account given of the Worship of the
Christians in those days by Justin Martyr, and Tertullian, is known as having
been often pleaded. I shall only mention it in our Passage, and begin with the
latter. Illue, says he, (that is toward Heaven) suspicientes Christiani (not
like the Idolaters who looked on their Idols and Images) manibus expausis (not
embracing Altars or Images as did the Heathen) quia innocuis capite nudo, quia
non crubescimus denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus, not as they who
repeat their Prayers after their Priests or Sacrificers, but pouring out our
Prayers conceived in our breasts, Apol. cap. 30. And again cap. 39. Corpus
s^mus de cons^ientia, Religionis and Discipl naeunit te, and spei foedere
coimus in caetum and congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi vi facta precatiombus
ambiamus orantes. Haecavis Deo grata est. Oramus etiam, etc. Whether this
description of the public Worship of the Christians in those days be
consistent with the prescribed Forms contended about, impartial men may easily
discern.

The former treats of the same matter in his Apology in several places of it.
(...) Atheists says he, we are not, seeing we worship the Maker of the world,
affirming indeed as we are taught that he stands in no need of blood
drink offerings or incense, in all our Oblations we praise him according to our
abil^ties, with (or in the way of) Prayer and Thanksgivings. This was it seems
the Liturgy of the Church in the days of Justin Martyr, they called upon God
with Prayer and Thanksgivings according to the abilities they had received. The
like account he gives of the Prayers of persons converted to prepare themselves
for Baptism, as also of the Prayers of the Administratiours of that Ordinance.
Afterward also treating of the joining the Baptized person unto the Church; and
the Administration of the Lords Supper in the Assembly he adds. (...), etc.
After the Believer who to joined unto us is thus washed, we bring him to those
who are called Brethren (that is the Body of the Church) th^ther where they are
gathered together for to make their Prayers and Supplications for themselves
and him who is (newly) illuminated, etc. These Prayers he declares afterward,
were made by him who did preside among the Brethren in the Assembly, that is
the Bishop or Pastor, who when he had finished his Prayer, the whole people
cried Amen; which leaves small room for the practice of any Liturgy that is
this day extant, or that has left any memory of its self in the world. These
Prayers and Supplications he adds that the President of the Assembly (...),
powers out according to his ability; and (...): he does this work at large, or
continues long in his work of (praises unto God in the Name of Jesus Christ.) I
know some have excepted against the usual interpretation of those words (...);
although they have not been able to assign any other tolerable sense unto them,
besides that which they would willingly oppose. But as the rendering of them
according to his ability, or as he is able may not only be justified but
evinced to be the only sense the words are capable of, so the Argument in hand
does not as to its efficacy depend on the precise signification of those two
words, but on the whole contexture of the holy Martyrs discourse; so relating
to the Worship of the Churches in those days, as to manifest that the use of
prescribed Forms of Liturgies to be read in them was then utterly unknown.

I suppose it will be granted that the time we have been enquiring into,
namely, the first 300 years after Christ, was the time of the Churches greatest
purity, though out of her greatest Prosperity; that the Union of the several
Churches was preserved, beyond what afterward was ever in a Gospel way
attained, and the Uniformity in Worship which Christ requires observed amongst
them; but all this while the use of these Liturgies was utterly unknown; which
makes the case most deplorable, that it should now be made the Hinge whereon
the whole exercise of the Ministry must (...), it being a thing not only
destitute of any warrant from Christ and his Apostles, but utterly unknown to
(...) Churches whose Antiquity gives them deservedly reverence withal; and so
cannot claim its spring and original anteced^^^ to such miscarryings and
mistakes in the Churches, as all acknowledge to deserve a narrow and serious
weighing and consideration; we may then, I suppose, without giving occasion to
the just imputation of any mistake, Affirm, That the Composing and Imposition
of Liturgies to be necessarily used or read in the Administration of the
Ordinances of the Gospel, is destitute of any Plea or Pretense, from Scripture,
or Antiquity.

CHAP. VI.
The pretended Antiquity of Liturgies disproved. The most Ancient. Their
variety. Canons of Counsels about Forms of Church Administrations. The Reasons
pleaded in the justification of the first Invention of Liturgies answered.
Their progress and end.

COnsidering with what confidence the Antiquity of Liturgies in the Churches of
Christ has been pretended, it may seem strange to some that we should so much
as attempt to divert them of that Plea and Pretense. But the love of the Truth
enforces us to contend against many prejudices in this matter. May a denial of
their Antiquity with the Reasons of that denial tendered, provoke any to assert
it by such Testimonies, as we have not as yet had the happiness to come to an
acquaintance with, the advantage as well as the trouble will be theirs who
shall so do. Only in their endeavor to that purpose, I shall desire of them
that they would not labor to Impose on those whom they undertake to inform, by
the ambiguous use of some words among the Ancient, nor conclude a prescribed
Form of Administration when they find mention of the Administration it self,
nor reckon reading of the Scriptures, or singing of Psalms as parts of the
Liturgy contended about, nor from the use of some particular Prayer by some
persons, argue for the equity or necessity of Composing such entire Liturgies,
or Offices as they call them, for all Evangelical Administratours, and their
necessary observation. So that these Conditions be observed, I shall profess my
self much engaged unto any one who shall discover a Rise of them within the
limits of the Antiquity that has been usually pretended and pleaded in their
justification and practice. For my part I know not any thing that ever obtained
a Practice and Observation among Christians, whose springs are more dark and
obscure then these of Liturgies. They owe not their Original to any Councels,
General or Provincial; they were not the product of the Advice or Consent of
any Churches, nor was there any one of them at any time completed. No Pleas
can I as yet discover in them of old about Uniformity in their use, or any
Consent in them about them. Every Church seems to have done what seemed good
in the Churches own eyes, after once the way unto the Use of them was opened.
To whom in particular we are indebted for that Invention, I know not: It may be
those who are wiser do; and I wish they would value the Thanks that they may
have for the Discovery when they shall be pleased to make it. They seem to me
to have had but slender Originals. One invented one Form of Prayer, or
Thanksgiving, or Benediction; Another added to what he had found out, which was
the easier task. Future Additions gave some compleatness to their beginners.
Those in the Greek Church, which bear the names of Chrysostom and Basiil, seem
to be the first that ever extended themselves to the whole Worship of the
Church; not that by them whose Names they bear they were Composed as now they
appear, unless we shall think that they wrote them after their decease; but
probably they Collected some Forms into Order that had been by others Invented;
making such Additions themselves as they judged needful, and so commended the
use of them, to the Churches wherein they did preside. The use of them being
arbitrarily introduced, was not by any Injunction we find, made necessary. Much
less did any one single Form plead for a general Necessity. In the Latin
Church, Ambrose used one Form, Gregory another, and Isidore a third. Nor is it
unlikely but the Liturgies were as many as the Episcopal Churches of those
days. Hence in the beginning of the Fifth Century in an African Council, Can.
70. which is the 103d in the Codex Can. African; it is provided, that no
Prayers be read in the Administration of the Eucharist, but such as have been
approved in some Council, or have been observed by some Prudent men formerly;
which Canon with some Addition is confirmed in the Second Milenitan Council
Can. 12. and the Reason given in both is, least there should any thing contrary
to the Faith, creep into their way of Worship. But this, as I said, was in the
beginning of the Fifth Century, after diverse Forms of Administration of holy
things in the Church, had by diverse been invented. The finding out of this
Invention was the act of some particular men, who have not been pleased to
acquaint us with the Reason of their undertaking. As yet it does not appear
unto us, that those Reasons could possibly be taken from the Word, the
practice of the Apostles, or the Churches by them planted, or those which
followed them for some Generations, nor from any Council held before their
days; and so it may be we are not much concerned to enquire what they were.
Yet what is at present pleaded in the behalf of the first Composers of
Liturgies may in the way be chiefly considered. Necessity is the first thing
usually pretended. Many men being put into the Office of the Ministry, who had
not Gifts and Abilities for the profitable discharge of the Work of the
Ministry, unto the edification of the Church, they who had the oversight of
them according to the custom of those days, were enforced to Compose such
Forms for their use, as they judged expedient, so providing for the Edification
of the Church, which else would have suffered from their weakness and
insufficiency. Besides many parts of the World, especially the East, in those
days swarmed with Anti Trinitarian Heretics of sundry sorts, who many of them
by unsuspected wiles, and dissimulations and subscriptions of Confessions,
endeavored to creep into the Office of the Ministry of the Church, partly out
of blind zeal to diffuse the poison of their abominations, partly out of carnal
Policy to be made partakers of the advantages, which for the most part attended
the Orthodox Profession. This increased the necessity of Composing such Forms
of Public Worship, as being filled with Expression^ pointed against the
Errors of the Times, might be a means to keep Seducers from imposing themselves
on Ecclesiastical Administrations. Thus there is no Ancient Liturgy, but it is
full of the expressions that had been consented upon in the Counsels that were
Conveened for the Condemnation of those Errors, which were in their days most
rife and pernicious. On this ground do learned men of all sorts conclude the
Liturgy falsely ascribed to James, to be younger then the Nieene and Ephesine
Councels, from the use of the words (...) and (...) in it.

But it does not yet appear that these Reasons were sufficient to justify such
an ^nnovation in the Churches of Christ. For supposing that there were such a
decay of Gifts and Abilities among them that were called to the Administration
of Gospel Institutions, that they were not able to discharge their duty in that
work, to the edification of the Church, in like manner as those had done who
went before them, this must needs have come to pass, either because our Lord
Jesus Christ did cease to give out his Gifts to his Church, as he had done in
former days upon his usual terms; or that men were negligent and careless in
the receiving of them from him, either not seeking them at his hand, or not
exercising and improving of them according to his will and command. Other
Reason of this decay that I know of, cannot be assigned. To affirm the former
on any pretense whatever, is blasphemously to accuse our Lord Jesus Christ of
breach of Promise; he having solemnly engaged to be with his Disciples, not for
an Age or two, but to the end of the World, and that by the Graces and Gifts of
his Spirit. I know it is pretended, that when Christians were multiplied, there
was a necessity of appointing them Officers, who had not the Gifts and
Qualifications that otherwise would have been esteemed necessary; But I know
withal, that it is impossible Christians should be multiplied in the way of
Christ, faster then he is ready to give out Gifts for their edification. The
latter Reason above then must be granted to be the Cause of the defect of
Abilities in Church Officers, pleaded in the justification of the Introduction
into the Church of composed Forms of Administrations to be read by them. I wish
then we might in the fear of the Lord, consider whether the Remedy were well
suited unto the Disease. I suppose all impartial men will grant that there
ought to have been a return unto him endeavored from whom they were gone
astray, at least Gospel means used for the obtaining of those Gifts of Christ,
and the improving of them being received. Finding themselves at the loss
wherein they were, should they not have searched their hearts and ways, to
consider wherefore it was that the Presence of Christ was so withdrawn from
them, that they were so left without the assistanco which others ministering in
their places before them had received; should not they have pulled out their
single Talent, and fallen to Trading with it, that it might have increased
under their care? Was not this the Remedy and Cure of the breach made by them,
that God and man expected from them? Was it just then and according to the
mind of Christ, that instead of an humble returnal unto an holy Evangelical
dependence on himself, they should invent an expedient to support them in the
condition wherein they were, and so make all such returnal for hereafter
needless? Yet this they did in the invention of Liturgies, they found out a way
to justify themselves in their spiritual negligence and sloth, and to render a
dependence on the Lord Christ for supplies of his Spirit to enable them unto
Gospel Administrations altogether needless, they had now provided themselves
with an ability they could keep in the Church, so that he might keep the
furniture of his Spirit unto himself. And this quickly became the most
poisonous ingredient in the Apostasy of the latter Times.

Nor is there any sufficient warrant for this Invention in the Second Pretense.
There were many Antichrists in the Apostles time, yet they never thought of
this Engine for their discovery or exclusion out of the Church, Confessions of
Faith, or acknowledped Forms of wholesome Words with the care of the Disciples
of Christ, or his Churches, which are enabled by him to judge and discern of
Truth and Error, are the preservations against the danger intimated, that the
Gospel has provided.

This being the entrance that the Liturgies enquired after, made into the
Churches of God, we are not much concerned to enquire what was their Progress.
That in the Western parts of the World they all at length centred in the Roman
Mass Book and Rituals we know. Their beginnings were small, plain, brief, their
use Arbitrary, the Additions they received were from the endeavors of private
men in several Ages, occasional for the most part; the number of them great,
equal to the various denominations of the Churches, until the Papal authority
growing absolute and uncontrollable, the Roman Form was imposed on the World,
that by innumerable artifices in a long tract of Ages was subjected thereunto,
and that contrary to the determination of former Roman Bishops, who advised the
continuance of the different Forms of administrations which were in use in
several Churches. Mihi placet, ut sive in Romany sive in Galliarum partibus*
seu in qualibet Ecclesia aliquid invenisti quod plus Omnipotenti Deo possit
placere solicit eligas. Greg. Resp. ad Interrogat. August.

This being the State and Condition, this the Issue, That the Invention of
Liturgies to be read in the Worship of God was come unto, before the
Reformation, I shall briefly subjoyn unto it an account of what was done in
these Kiagdomes in reference unto it, which will make way to the clear stating
of the question in particular that we are further to speak unto. The History of
our Reformation is known. I shall not speak any thing that may reflect with the
least dishonor on the Work or the Workmen. We have abundant cause to bless the
Lord continually for the one and the other. Yet still we must remember that our
Reformers were men, and that the Reformation was a work performed by men; The
former never claimed Infallibility, nor the latter, that I know of, Perfection;
so that some things that were done by the one, and in the other, may admit of
new Considerations without the reflection of any thing upon them, that the one
and the other would not readily and willingly admit. I shall therefore briefly
give an account of that part of the Work which concerns our business in hand.
What was the state of this Nation at the time of the Reformation, and what were
the minds of the greater part of men in them, in reference unto the Work, is
sufficiently declared, in all the stories of those days. God having been
pleased to send the saving Light of the Gospel into the minds and hearts of
them in chief Rule, that is King Edward, and some of his Counselors, they
found no small difficulties to wrestle withal in dealing with the inveterate
prejudices wherewith the Generality of men were possessed against the work they
intended. The far greater part of the Clergy, true to their carnal present
Interest, with all their might and cunning opposed their endeavors. The
greatest part of the Nobility averse to their proceedings. The Body of the
people blinded with superstition and profaneness, easily excited by the Priests
(whose peculiar, concernment lay in keeping all things in their old channel and
course) to make head against their proceedings; Foreign Nations round about
fomenting to the uttermost all homebred discontents, and offering themselves,
by the instigation of the Pope, to hinder the work by all ways that possible
they could imagine. Amongst all these the Body of the people, which are the
Kings most special care, as they are his strength and wealth, were looked on as
most to be regarded, as without whose concurrence their discontents of all
others were like only to consume themselves. Now the people being in those
days very ignorant and unacquainted with the Doctrines of the Scripture, were
very little or not at all concerned what persuasion men were of in Religion, as
to the Articles of pure belief, so as they might retain the Agenda in the
Worship of God which they had been accustomed unto. Hence it was that those
Prelates, who were the Instruments of the Papal Persecution in this Nation,
wisely stated the whole cause of their cruelty to be the Mass, or the Worship
of the Church, seldom unless compelled by Disputations once mentioning of the
Articles of Faith, which yet they knew to be the main foundation of the
difference between themselves and the Reformers; because in this particular
they had the advantage of the popular favor; the people violently interposing
themselves in the behalf of that part of the present Religion wherein their
only share did lie. Had they laid the Reasons and Grounds of their Quarrel in
the differences of Opinions about the Credenda of the Gospel, they would
scarcely have prevailed with the common people to carry Faggot, for the burning
of their Brethren, for things whereof they understood little or nothing at all.

Our wise and provident Reformers considering this state of things, and temper
of the minds of men, however they resolvedly declared for the Credenda of the
Gospel, and asserted the Articles of Faith from which the Roman Church had
most eminently apostatized, yet found in their concernment to attemper the way
of public Worship as much as was possible with consistency with the Articles
of the Faith they professed, to that which the popularity had been inured unto.
Observing plainly that all their concernments in Religion lay in the outward
Worship whereunto they had been accustomed, having very confused apprehensions
of the speculative part of it, it was easy for them to apprehend that if they
could condescend to furnish them with such a way thereof as might comply in
some reasonable manner with their former usuage, these two things would ensue.
First, That the main Reformation in the Doctrine which alone would deliver the
people from their prejudicate Opinions about the Worship of God, would be
carried on with less noise and observation, and consequently less contest and
opposition. For whilst they had a Way and Form of Worship proposed to them
wherewith they could be contented, those that were wiser might believe and
teach what they pleased, which in the Providence of God proved in a short time
a blessed means of delivering them from their old entanglements and darkness.
Secondly, That their Priests who were their chief Instigators to all disorder
and opposition to the whole work of Reformation, finding a way proposed for
their continuance in the possession of their places, and a Worship prescribed
which they could as easily perform and go through withal, as what they had
practiced in former days, might possibly acquiesce in the proceedings of their
betters, finding the temporal interest which they chiefly respected, to be
saved. And this afterward accordingly they did, reading the Service Book
instead of the Mass, without which supply of such wants and defects in them as
I shall not name, they would never have entertained any thoughts of owning the
Reformation, nor of suffering the people to submit themselves thereunto. On
these considerations and for these ends, it is evident from the story of those
times, that our present Liturgy was framed. Rejecting out of the Offices before
in use, such things as were directly contrary to the Articles of Faith
protested in the Reformation in hand, translating of what remained into
English, with such supplies and alterations as the rejection of those things
before mentioned made necessary: The Book mentioned in some haste, and with
some other disadvantages for such a Work, was by our first Reformers compiled.
And indeed somewhat there was in this case not much unlike that insisted on in
the entrance of this Discourse, between the believing Jews and Gentiles. Many
of the Jews who were willing to receive Christ's Reformation in point of Faith
and Obedience, yet pertinaciously adhered to their old Ceremonious Worship;
violently setting themselves against any that durst speak a word against its
Continuance. That there might not be an endless contest and strife about the
matter, and so the progress of the Gospel be hindered amongst the one sort and
the other the Apostles taking in hand the old Worship, as to the Gentile
Worshippers whose case above came then under consideration, they reject and
declare, abrogate all such Ceremonies whose necessary observation had an
inconsistency with the Doctrine of the Gospel, proposing only some few things
to be observed, which occasioned the greatest difference between the Parties at
variance.

Now as this Composition of that Difference was accommodated to the present
Scandal, and the obligation unto its observation to be regulated thereby; so by
the removal thereof, its self as unto any use in the Church of Christ did
expire. Nor unlike unto this of the Apostle seems the aim of our first
Reformers to have been, That they might win the People who had been accustomed
to the way of Worship in use in the Papacy unto a compliance with the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and that there might not be endless Contests about that which
was presently to be practiced, which perhaps they though of small importance in
comparison of those weighty fundamental Truth which they endeavored to
acquaint them with, and bring them to the belief of, they provided for the use
of such parts of it, and in such a manner as were not openly inconsistent with
the Truths, which was in their hearts to communicate unto them. And it is not
impossible but that this constitution might have had the same end with the
other, if not of present use, being in things of another nature, yet of a
timely expiration, when notoriously useless as to the main ends intended in it,
had not the interest of some interposed for its Continuance beyond the life and
influence of all or any of those causes or occasions. And hence it is that
those streams at this day run strongly and fiercely, by the addition and
pouring into of adventitious rivulets, with showers or rather storms of
temporal interest, whose springs are all utterly long since dried up.

The Book of Common Prayer being Composed as has been declared, became from
its very Cradle and Infancy a bone of contention to the Church of God in this
Nation. Many of the People and Ministers who seemed to be enlightened with a
beam of Truth, of an equal luster and brightness with that which shined in ^he
minds of their Brethren, wholly decried that prudential compliance with the
peoples ignorance and adherence to Popery, which was openly avowed in the
Composition and Imposition of it, and called earnestly for a purer way of the
Administrations of Gospel Ordinances more agreeable to the Word and Primitive
times, then they apprehended that prescribed Form to contain and exhibit.
Others again in the justification of that whereof themselves were the Authors,
labored to recommend the Book, not only as to Truth, but as useful and very
beneficial for the edification of the Church. It is known also that the
Contests of men in this Nation about this Form of Divine Service, were not
confined to this Nation, but were carried by them into other parts of the
world. And should I pursue the suffrage that has lien against it, from the
first day of its Composure, to this wherein we live, never giving it a quiet
possession in the minds and consciences of men, with the various evils that
have all along attended its Imposition, I suppose it might of it self prevail
with sober men who desire their moderation should ne known to all, because the
Judge stands at the door, to take the whole matter of the Imposition of this,
or the like Form once more under a sedate Consideration. And they may perhaps
be the rather induced thereunto, if they will but impartially weigh that the
Opposition to the imposed Liturgy has increased daily according to the
increase of Light and Gospel Gifts among men. So that there seems to be no way
to secure its station, but by an Opposition unto them and extirpation of them,
which is a sad work for any that are called Christians, to engage into.

I presume the conscientious Reader will be able to discover, from what has
been spoken, Rules sufficient to guide his judgment in reference unto the use
of prescribed Liturgies. The story of their Rise and Progress is enough to
plead for a Liberty from an indispensable necessity of their Observation. That
which is of pure humane invention, and comparatively of late and uncertain
Original, whose Progress has been attended mith much Superstition and
Persecution, stands in need of very cogent Reasons to plead for its
continuance. For others will not out-ballance the evils that are asserted to
flow from it. But it may be this will not suffice with some for a final
decision and determination of this difference; I shall therefore briefly state
the Question about them, which only I shall speak unto, and try their use and
usefulness by that infallible Rule by which both we and they must be judged
another day.

CHAP. VII.
The Question stated. First Argument against the Composing and Imposing of
Liturgies. Arbitrary Additions to the Worship of God rejected. Liturgies not
appointed by God. Made necessary in their Imposition: and a part of the Worship
of God. Of Circumstances of Worship. Instituted Adjuncts of Worship not
Circumstances. Circumstances of Actions as such, not Circumstances of Worship.
Circumstances commanded made parts of Worship. Prohibitions of Additions
produced, considered, applied.

TO clear up what it is in Particular that we insist upon, some few things are
to be premised. 1. Then I do not in especial intend the Liturgy now in use in
England, any farther then to make it an Instance of such Imposed Liturgies,
whereof we treat. I shall not then at all enquire what footing it has in the
Law, how nor when established, nor what particular failings are pleaded to be
in it, nor what Conformity it bears with the Roman Offices, with the like
things that are usually Objected against it. Nor, Secondly, do I oppose the
directive part of this Liturgy as to the reading of the Scripture, when it
requires that which is Scripture to be read, the Administration of the
Ordinances by Christ appointed, nor the Composition of Forms of Prayer suited
to the nature of the Institutions to which they relate, so they be not Imposed
on the Administrators of them, to be read precisely, as prescribed. But,
Thirdly, this is that alone which I shall speak unto; the Composing of Forms of
Prayer in the Worship of God, in all Gospel Administrations, to be used by the
Ministers of the Churches, in all Public Assemblies, by a precise reading of
the words prescribed unto them; with Commands for the reading of other things,
which they are not to omit, upon the penalty contained in the Sanction of the
whole Service and the several parts of it. The liberty which some say is
granted for a man to use their own Gifts and Abilities in Prayer before and
after Sermons, will I fear as things now stand, upon due Consideration, appear
rather to be taken then given. However it concerns not our present question,
because it is taken for granted by those that plead for the strict Observation
of a Book, that the whole Gospel Worship of God in the Assemblies of
Christians, may be carried on and performed without any such Preaching as is
prefaced with the liberty pretended.

These things being Premised, I shall subjoyn some of the Reasons that
evidently declare the Imposition and Use of such a Liturgy or Form of Public
Words, to be contrary to the Rule of the Word, and consequently sinful.

First, The Arbitrary Invention of any thing with Commands for its necessary
and indispensable use in the Public Worship of God, as a part of that Worship,
and the use of any thing so Invented and so Commanded is that Worship, is
unlawful and contrary to the Rule of the Word; But of this nature is the
Liturgy we treat of. It is an Invention of men, not appointed, not commanded of
God; it is commanded to be used in the Public Worship of God, by reading the
several Parts of it, according to the occasions that they respect; and that
indispensably; and is made a part of that Worship.

There are Three Things affirmed in the Assumption concerning the Liturgy,
First, That it is not Appointed or Commanded of God, i. e. there is no Command
of God either for the use of this or that Liturgy in particular, nor in general
that any such should so be, and be so used as is pleaded. And this we must take
for granted, until some instance of any such Command be produced. Secondly,
That it is made Necessary by virtue of the Commands of men, to be used in the
Public Worship of God. About this there will be no difference. Let it be
denied, and there is an end of all this strife. I shall not dispute about other
men's practice. They who are willing to take it upon their Consciences, that the
best way to serve God in the Church, or the best Ability that they have for the
discharge of their duty therein, consists in the reading of such a Book (for I
suppose they will grant that they ought to serve God with the best they have)
shall not by me be Opposed in their way and practice. It is only about its
Imposition, and the Necessity of its Observance by virtue of that Imposition,
that we Discourse. Now the present Command is, That such a Liturgy be always
used in the Public Worship of God, and that without the use or reading of it,
the Ordinances of the Gospel be not Administered, at any time, nor in any place;
with strong Pleas for the Obligation arising from that Command, making the
omissions of its Observance to be sinful. It is then utterly impossible that
any thing should be more indispensably Necessary, then the reading of the
Liturgy in the Worship of God, is. It is said indeed, that it is not Commanded
as though in its self it were Necessary; either a prescribed Liturgy or this or
that, for then it were sin in any not to use it, whether it were commanded by
the Church or not, but for Order, Uniformity, Convenience, and the preventing
of sundry Evils that would otherwise ensue, it is commanded; which Command
makes the Observation of it Necessary unto us. But we are not as yet enquiring
what are the Reasons of its Imposition. They may afterward be spoken unto: and
time also may be taken to show, that it were much more Tolerable, if men would
plead for the Necessity of the things which it seems good unto them to Command,
and on that ground to Command their Observance, then granting them not
Necessary in themselves, to make them Necessary to be Observed merely by virtue
of their Commands, for Reasons which they say satisfy themselves, but come
short of giving satisfaction to them from whom Obedience is required. For
whereas the Will of man can be no way influenced unto Obedience, but by mere
acknowledged Sovereignty, or conviction of Reason in and from the things
themselves, Commands in about things wherein they own not that the Commanders
have an absolute Sovereignty, (as God has in all things, the Civil Supreme
Magistrate in things Civil that are good and lawful) nor can they find the
Reasons of the things, themselves cogent, are a yoke which God has nor
designed the sons of men to bear. But it is concerning the Necessary use of the
Liturgy in the Worship of God that we are Disputing, which I suppose will not
be denied.

It remains then to consider whether the use of the Liturgy as prescribed be
made a part of the Worship of God. Now that wherewith and whereby God is
commanded to be worshipped, and without which all Observation or Performance of
his public Worship is forbidden, is it self made a part of his Worship. The
Command with this, or thus, shall you Worship God, makes the Observation of
that Command a part of Gods Worship. It is said that it is only a
Circumstance of Worship but no part of it. Prayer is the Worship of God; but
that this Prayer shall be used and no other, is only a Circumstance of it. So
that though it may be possibly accounted a Circumstance, or Accidentary part of
Gods Worship, yet it is not asserted to be of the substance of it. How far
this is so, and how far it is otherwise must be considered. Circumstances are
either such as follow actions as actions, or such as are arbitrarily superadded
and adjoined by Command unto actions, which do not of their own accord, nor
naturally nor necessarily attend them. Now Religious actions in the Worship of
God, are actions still. Their Religious Relation does not destroy their natural
being. Those Circumstances then which do attend such actions as actions, not
determined by Divine Institution may be ordered, disposed of, and regulated by
the prudence of men. For instance, Prayer is a part of Gods Worship. Public
Prayer is so, as appointed by him. This as it is an action to be performed by
man, cannot be done without the assignment of time, and place, and sundry other
things, if Order and Convenience be attended. These are Circumstances that
attend all actions, of that nature, to be performed by a Community, whether
they relate to the Worship of God or no. These men may according as they see
good regulate, and change, as there is occasion: I mean they may do so, who are
acknowledged to have power in such things. As the Action cannot be without
them, so their regulation is arbitrary if they come not under some Divine
Disposition and Order; as that of time in general does. There are also some
things, which some men call Circumstances also, that no way belong of
themselves to the actions whereof they are said to be the Circumstances, nor do
attend them, but are imposed on them, or annexed unto them, by the arbitrary
Authority of those who take upon them to give Order and Rules in such cases.
Such is to Pray before an Image, or toward the East, or to use this or that
Form of Prayer in such Gospel administrations and no other. These are not
Circumstances attending the nature of the thing it self, but are arbitrarily
superadded to the things that they are appointed to accompany. What ever men
may call such Additions, they are no less parts of the whole wherein they
serve, then the things themselves whereunto they are adjoined. The Schoolmen
tell us, that that which is made so the condition of an action, that without it
the action is not to be done, is not a circumstance of it, but such an adjunct
as is a necessary part. But not to contend about the word; such additionals
that are called Circumstanstantial, are made parts of Worship, as are made
necessary by virtue of Command to be observed. Sacrifices of old were the
Instituted Worship of God. That they should be offered at the Tabernacle or
Temple at Jerusalem and no where else, was a circumstance appointed to be
observed in their Offerings; and yet this circumstance was no less a part of
Gods Worship, then the Sacrifice it self. In the judgment of most men not
only Prayer, and the matter of our Prayer is appointed by our Savior in the
Lords Prayer, but we are commanded also to use the very words of it. I desire
to know whether the precise use of these words be not a part of Gods Worship?
It seems that it is: For that which is commanded by Christ to be used in the
Worship of God, is a part of Gods Worship. The case is the same here. Prayer is
Commanded; and the use of these Prayers is commanded; the latter distinctly as
such, as well as the former is made a part of Gods Worship. Nor is there any
ground for that distinction of the Circumstantial or Accidentary part of Gods
Worship, and Worship Substantially taken, or the Substantial parts of it. The
Worship of God is either Moral or Instituted. The latter contains the peculiar
ways and manner of exerting the former according to Gods appointment. The
Actions whereby these are jointly discharged, or the inward Moral Principles of
Worship are exerted in, and according to the outward Institutions have their
Circumstances attending them. These in themselves nakedly considered, have in
them neither good nor evil; nor are any Circumstances in the Worship of God,
much less circumstantial parts of his Worship, but only circumstances of
those Actions as actions, whereby it is performed. And whatever is Instituted
of God, in and about those Circumstances, is a Substantial part of his Worship.

Nor is the prescribing of such a Form of Prayer a regulation of those
circumstances of Public Prayer; for Decency, Order, and Uniformity, which
attend it as a public Action, but the superaddition of an adjunct condition,
with which it is to be performed, and without which it is not to be performed
as it is Prayer, the Worship of God. On this nature was Sacrificing of old on
the Altar at the Tabernacle or Temple, and there alone. And many more instances
of the like nature may be given. Praising of God, and blessing of the People
were parts of the Worship of God, appointed by himself to be performed by the
Priests under the Law. In the doing thereof at certain Seasons, they were
commanded to use some Forms of words prescribed unto them for that purpose. Not
only hereby the praising and blessing of God, but the use of those Forms in so
doing, became necessary part of the Worship of God. And so was the use of
Organs and the like Instruments of Music, which respect that manner of Prasing
him which God then required. The Case is here no otherwise. Prayers and
Thanksgivings in the Administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel are of the
Instituted Worship of God. Unto these, as to the manner of their Performance,
is the Imposition of the Liturgical Forms spoken of, superadded; and their use
made a necessary adjunct of the duty it self, so as that it may not be
performed without them; which makes them a no less necessary part of the
Worship of God, then any of his Institutions of old were, which related to the
Circumstances and the manner of his Worship, as the Temple, Tabernacle, Altar,
Forms of Thanksgiving, and Confession, composed and prescribed by the Holy
Ghost himself.

But I suppose this will not be much gainsaid; by some it is acknowledged in
express terms, and for the matter of Fact, we find that the Reading of a Book
of Service, is with many taken not to be a part, but the whole of the Worship
of God, which if it be done, they suppose God is acceptably Worshipped without
more ado; and if it be omitted, whatever else be done in the room of it, that
God is not Worshipped at all.

Our Enquiry then must be whether such Additions to or in the Worship of God,
besides or beyond his own Institution and Appointment, be allowable, or lawful
to be practiced. I shall first recite the words in general of some Testimonies
that lie against such a practice, and then consider what they most particularly
speak unto. Of this sort are Exodus 20. 4, 5. Thou shall not make unto thee any
graven Image, or any likeness to any thing that is in Heaven about, or that is
in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water under the Earth. Thou shall not
bow down to them nor serve them, for I the Lord the God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, etc. Den. 4. 2. Ye
shall not add unto the Word which I command you, neither shall you diminish
ought from it, that you may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which I
command you, Chap. 12. 32. What thing soever I command you observe to do it,
thou shall not add thereunto, nor diminish from it, Prove. 30. 6. Add not unto
his words least he reprove thee and thou be found a liar, Jer. 7. 31. They have
built the high places of Tophet which is in the valley of the Son of Hinnom to
burn their Sons and their Daughters in the fire, which I commanded them not,
neither came it into my heart. Matthew. 15. 9. In vain do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandment of men. ver. 13. Every plant which my
Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. Also Mark 7. 7, 8. Revel. 22. 18.
If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this Book. The Mind of God in these and the like
prohibitions, the Reader may find exemplified, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Josh.
22. 10, etc. Judge. 8. 24. 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. 2 Kin. 16. 11, 12. and in other
places.

Men who having great abilities of Learning, are able to distinguish themselves
from under the power of the most express rules and commands, should yet
methinks out of a sense of their weakness (which they are ready to profess
themselves convinced of when occasion is offered to deliver their thoughts
concerning them) have compassion for those, who being not able to discern the
strength of their reasonings because of their fineness, are kept in a
conscientious subjection to the express Commands of God, especially conceiving
them not without some cogent cause reiterated.

But least the present exasperation of the Spirits of men, should frustrate
that hope and expectation, let us consider what is the precise intendment of
the testimonies produced, being we have reason to look well to the justice of
our cause in the first place; which being cleared, we may the better be
satisfied in coming short of favor where it may not be obtained. The places of
Scripture produced, are taken partly out of the Old Testament, partly out of
the New. And I suppose it will be granted that there is an equal force of rule
in the one, as in the other. For though these in the Old Testament had their
peculiar respect to the Worship that was then instituted, yet they had not as
then instituted but as the Worship, which God himself had appointed. And
therefore their general force abides whilst God requires any Worship at the
hands of men; unless it may be made appear that God has parted with that
Prerogative of being the Appointer of his own Worship, now under the New
Testament, which he so vindicated unto himself under the Old. Take them then in
their general aim and intention, that which these and the like Testimonies
unanimously speak unto us, is this, That the will of God is the sole Rule of
his Worship, and all the concernment of it, and that his Authority is the sole
Principle and Cause of the relation of any thing to his Worship, in a Religious
manner; and consequently that he never did, nor ever will allow that the wills
of his Creatures should be the rule or measure of his Honor or Worship, nor
that their Authority should cause any thing to hold a new relation unto him, or
any other but what it has by the Law of its Creation. As this is the sum and
substance of the Second Commandment, wherein so great a cloud of Expositors do
center their thoughts, that it will not be easy for any to withstand them, so
that the other Texts produced are express to all the Particulars of the
Assertion laid down, may be easily evinced.

That the Lord asserts his own Aothority and Will as the constituting cause and
rule of all his Worship, was the first thing asserted. His repetition of My
Words, what I have commanded, and the like expressions, secure this enclosure.
Unless men can pretend, that there is the same reason of the words and commands
of God himself, it is in vain for them to pretend a power of instituting any
thing in the Worship of God: For the formal reason of every such Institutions
is, That the Word of it is the Word of God. It is enough to discard any thing
from a relation to the Worship of God, to manifest that the appointers of it
were men, and not God. Nor can any man prove that God has diligated unto them
his Power in this matter. Nor did he ever do so to any of the sons of Men;
namely, that they should have Authority to appoint any thing in his Worship,
or about it, that seems meet unto their wisdom. With some indeed in former
days, he entrusted the work of Revealing unto his Church and People what he
himself would have observed, which dispensation he closed in the Person of
Christ, and his Apostles. But to entrust men with Authority not to declare what
he revealed, but to appoint what seems good unto them, he never did it, the
Testimonies produced lie evidently against it. Now surely Gods asserting his
own Will and Authority as the only rule and cause of his Worship, should
make men cautions how they suppose themselves like or equal unto him herein,
especially being destitute of warrant from the approved Example or President of
any that have gone before them. If the example of any one in the Old or New
Testament could be produced, that of his own Mind and Authority made any such
Additions to the Worship of God, as that which we treat about, by virtue of
any Trust or Power pretended from or under him, and found acceptance in his so
doing, or that was not severely rebuked for his sin therein, some countenance
would seem to be given unto those, that at present walk in such paths; although
I suppose, it would not be easy for them to prove any particular instances,
which might have peculiar exemption from the general Law, which we know not, to
be a sufficient warrant for their proceedings. But whereas God himself having
instituted his own Worship and all the concernments of it, does also assert
his own Authority and Will as the sole cause and rule of all the Worship that
he will accept, no instance being left on record of any one that ever made any
Additions to what he had appointed, on any pretense whatever, or by virtue of
any Authority wherever that was accepted with him; and whereas the most eminent
of those who have assumed that power to themselvea, as also the judgment of
the reasons necessary for the exerting of it, as to matter and manner, have
been given up in the righteous judgment of God to do things not convenient,
yea abominable unto him (as in the Papal Church) it is not unlikely to be the
wisdom of men to be very cautious of intruding themselves into this thankless
Office.

But such is the corrupt nature of man, that there is scarce any thing,
whereabout men have been more apt to contend with God from the foundation of
the world. That their will and wisdom may have a share (some at least) in the
ordering of his Worship is that which of all things they seem to desire.
Wherefore to obviate their pride and folly, to his asserting of his own
Prerogative in this matter, he subjoyns severe interdictions, against all or
any man's interposing therein; so as to take away any thing by him commanded, or
to add any thing to what is by him appointed. This also the Testimonies
recited fully express. The Prohibition is plain, Thou shall not add to what I
have commanded. Add not to his Words, that is, in his Worship to the things
which by his Word he has appointed to be observed; neither to the Word of
his Institution, nor to the things instituted, Indeed adding things adds to the
Word; for the Word that adds is made of a like Authority with his. All Making
to our selves is forbidden, though what we so make may seem unto us to tend to
the furtherance of the Worship of God. It is said men may add nothing to the
substance of the Worship of God, but they may order, dispose, and appoint the
things that belong to the manner and circumstances of it, and this is all that
is done in the prescription of Liturgies. Of Circumstances in and about the
Worship of God we have spoken before, and removed that pretense. Nor is it
safe distinguishing in the things of God, where himself has not distinguished.
When he gave out the Prohibitions mentioned under the Old Testament, he was
appointing or had appointed his whole Worship, and all that belonged unto it,
in matter and manner, way and order, substance and circumstance. Indeed there
is nothing in its whole nature, as it belongs to the general being of things,
so circumstantial, but that if it be appointed by God in his Worship, it
becomes a part of the substance of it; nor can any thing that is not so
appointed ever by any be made a circumstance of his Worship, though many
things are circumstances of those actions, which in his Worship are performed.
This distinction then directly makes void the Command, so that Conscience
cannot acquiesce in it. Besides we have showed that Liturgies prescribed and
imposed, are necessary parts of Gods Worship, and so not to be salved by this
distinction.

Moreover, to testify what weight he laip on the Observance of these general
Prohibitions when men found out other ways of Worship then what he had
appointed, though the particulars were such as fell under other special
interdictions, yet the Lord was pleased to place the great aggravation of their
sin in the contempt of those general rules mentioned. This is that he urges
them with, That they did things by him not appointed; of not observing any
thing in Religion, but what he requires, that he presses them withal. The
Command is general. You shall add nothing to what I have instituted; and the
aggravation of the sin pressed by him relates not to the particular nature of
it, but to this general command or prohibition; You have done what I commanded
you not. That the particular evil condemned was also against other special
Commands of God, is merely accidental to the general nature of the Crime they
were urged withal. And whereas God has given out these Rules and Precepts;
You shall do whatever I command you, and according as I command you, you shall
add nothing thereunto, nor take any therefrom; can the transgression of this
Rule be any otherwise expressed, but thus: They did the thing which he
commanded not, nor did it ever come into his heart.

It is said that the intention of these Rules and Prohibitions, is only to
prevent the Additions of what is contrary to what God has appointed, and not
of that which may ^end to the furtherance and better discharge of his
Appointments. The usual answer to this acception is, That whatever is added, is
contrary to what is commanded, though not in this or that particular command,
yet to that command that nothing he added. It is not the nature of any
particular that is condemned, but the power of adding, in those Prohibitions.
Let us see then whether of these senses have the fairest evidence with the
evident purport and intention of the Rules, Precepts, and Prohibitions under
Consideration.

Our Lord Jesus Christ directs his Apostles to teach his Disciples to do and
observe whatever he commanded them. Those who contend for the latter
interpretation of these and the like Precepts beforementioned, affirm that
there is in these words a restriction of the matter of their Commission, to the
express commands of Christ. What he commands, they say, they were to teach men
to observe, and nothing else, nor will he require the observance of ought else
at our hands. The others would have his intention to be, whatever he commanded,
and whatever seems good to them to command, so it be not contrary unto what
was by him commanded. As if he had said, Teach men to observe whatever I
command them, and command you them to observe whatever you think meet, so it be
not contrary to my commands. Certainly this gloss at the first view seems to
defeat the main intendment of Christ, in that express limitation of their
Commission unto his own commands. So also under the Old Testament; given order
about his Worship, the Lord lets Moses know that he must do all things
according to what he should show and reveal unto him. In the close of the Work
committed unto him, to show that what he had done was acceptable to God, it is
eight or ten times repeated, that he did all as the Lord commanded him: Nothing
was omitted, nothing added by him. That the same course might be observed in
the following practice, which was taken in the first Institution, the Lord
commands that nothing be added to what was so appointed by him; nothing
diminished from it. The whole Duty then of the Church, as unto the Worship of
God, seems to lie in the precise Observation of what is appointed and commanded
by him. To assert things may be added to the Worship of God, not by him
appointed, which in the judgment of those that add them, seem useful for the
better performance of what he has appointed, so that they be not contrary unto
them, seems to defeat the whole end and intention of God in all those Rules and
Prohibitions; if either the occasion, rise, cause of them, or their commendable
Observance be considered. On these and no better terms is that prescribed
Liturgy we treat of, introduced and imposed. It comes from man, with Authority
to be added to the Worship that Christ requires, and ventures on all the severe
interdictions of such Additions, armed only with the pretense of not being
contrary to any particular command, in the matter of it (which yet is denied)
and such distinctions, as have not the least ground in Scripture, or in the
Reason of the things themselves, which it is applied unto. Might we divert into
particulars, it were easy to demonstrate, that the instances given in the
Scripture of Gods rejection of such additions, do abundantly obviate all the
Pleas that are insisted on, for the waving of the general Prohibition.

CHPA VIII.
Of the Authority needful for the constituting and ordering of any, that is to
have relation to God and his Worship. Of the power and authority of Civil
Magistrates. The power imposing the Liturgy. The formal reason of religious
Obedience. Use of the Liturgy an act of civil and religious Obedience, Mat. 28.
20. No Rule to judge of what is meet in the Worship of God, but his Word.

BEsides the Regulation of all our proceedings and actions in the Worship of
God, by the command and prohibitions insisted on, in the foregoing Chapter,
there are two things indispensably necessary to render the prescription of any
thing in religious Worship allowable, or lawful to be observed, both pointed
unto by the Testimonies produced. And these are, First, An Authority to enjoin;
And Secondly, A certain Rule to try the injunction by.

The Worship of God is of that nature, that whatsoever is performed in it, is
an act of Religious Obedience. That any thing may be esteemed such, it is
necessary that the Conscience be in it subject to the immediate Authority of
God. His Authority alone renders any act of Obedience, Religious. All Authority
is originally in God, and there are two ways whereby he is pleased to exert
it. First, By a Delegation of Authority unto some Persons for some ends and
purposes, which they being invested withal, may command in their own Names an
Observance of the things about which by Gods appointment their Authority is to
be exercised. Thus is it with Kings and Rulers of the Earth. They are powers
ordained of God, having Authority given them by him. And being invested with
power, they give out their commands for the doing or performing of such or such
things, whereunto their Authority does extend. That they ought to be obeyed in
things good and lawful, does not arise from the Authority vested in themselves,
but from the immediate command of God, that in such things they ought to be
obeyed. Hence Obedience in general unto Magistrates, is a part of our Moral and
Religious Obedience unto God, as it respects his Command, whatever the nature
and object of it be. But the performance of particular actions, wherein by
their determination our Obedience exerts it self, being resolved into that
Authority which is vested in them, is not Religious but Civil Obedience, any
otherwise then as in respect of its general nature it relates to the Command of
God in general. No act I say, that we perform, whereof this is the formal
Reason, that it is appointed and commanded by man, though that man be entrusted
with power from God, to appoint and require acts of that nature, is an act of
Religious Obedience unto God in its self; because it relates not immediately to
his divine Authority requiring that act.

Secondly, God does exert his Authority immediately; and that either directly
from Heaven, as in the giving of the Law; or by the inspiration of others to
declare his will, unto both which his Word written answers. Now whatever is
done in obedience to the Authority of God thus exerting it self, is a part of
that Religious duty which we owe to God; whether it be in his first Institution
and Appointment, or any duty in its primitive Revelation; or whether it be in
the Commands he gives for the Observation of what he has formerly appointed.
For when God has Commanded any things to be Observed in his Worship, though he
design and appoint men to see them observed accordingly, and furnish them with
the Authority of Commanding to that purpose, yet the interposition of that
Authority of men, though by Gods Institution, does not at all hinder, but that
the duty performed is Religious obedience, relating directly to the Will and
Command of God. The power commanding in the case we have in hand is man's, not
that of the Lord: For though it be acknowledged that those who do command, have
their Authority from God; yet unless the thing commanded be also in particular
appointed by God, the Obedience that is yielded is purely Civil, and not
Religious. This is the state of the matter under Consideration. The Commanding
and Imposing Power is variously apprehended. Some say it is the Church that
does it; and so assert the Authority to be Ecclesiastical; every Church, say
they, has Power to order things of this nature for order and decency sake;
when it is enquired what the Church is that they intend, there some are at a
loss, and would fain insinuate somewhat into our thoughts that they dare not
openly assert and maintain. The truth is, the Church in this sense is the King,
or the King and Parliament, by whose Advice he exerts his Legislitive Power. By
their Authority was the Liturgy Composed, or it was Composed without Authority:
by their Authority it must be Imposed if it be Imposed; what is, or was done in
the Preparation of it by others, unto their judgment has no more influence
into the Authoritative imposition of it, when the act of a Person learned in
the Law, drawing up a Bill for the Consideration of Parliament, has into its
binding Law Power, when confirmed. In this sense we acknowledge the Power
ordaining and imposing this Liturgy to be of God, to be good and lawful, to be
obeyed unto the utmost extent of that Obedience, which to man can be due, and
that upon the account of the Institution and Command of God himself. But yet
supposing the Liturgy to fall within the precincts and limits of that
Obedience, yet the observance and use of it, being not Commanded of God, is
purely an act of Civil obedience, and not Religious, wherein the Conscience
lies in no immediate subjection to Jesus Christ. It is of the same general
nature with the honest discharge of the Office of a Constable; and this seems
in consistent with the nature of the Worship of God.

But whatever be the immediate imposing Power, we have direction as to our duty
in the last Injunction of our blessed Savior to his Apostle, Matthew, 28. 20.
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded. In things
which concern the Worship of God, the commanding Power is Christ; and his
Command the adaequate Rule and Measure of our Obedience. The Teaching,
Commanding, and enjoyn^ng of others to do and observe those Commands, is the
duty of those entrusted with Christ's Authority under him. Their Commission to
Teach and Enjoin, and our Duty to Do and Observe, have the same Rules, the same
Measure, Bounds, and Limits. What they teach and enjoin beyond what Christ has
Commanded, they do it not by virtue of any Commission from him; what we do
beyond what he has Commanded, we do it not in obedience to him; what they so
teach, they do it in their own Name, not his; what we so do, we do in our own
strength, not his; nor to his Glory. The Answer of Bellarmine to that Argument
of the Protestant Divines from this place, against the Impositions of his
Church, is the most weak and frivolous, that I think ever any Learned man was
forced to make use of; and yet where to find better will not easily occur.
Our Lord Jesus Christ says, Go and teach men to do and observe whatever I have
commanded you, and so I am with you; To which he subjoynes, It is true; but yet
we are bound also to obey them that are set over us, that is our Church Guides;
and so leaves the Argument as sufficiently discharged. Now the whole Question
is concerning what those Church Guides may teach and enjoy^, whereunto we are
to give Obedience, which is here ^^presly restrained to the things Commanded by
Christ; to which the Cardinal offers not one word. The things our Savior
treats about, are principally the Agenda of the Gospel, things to be done and
observed in the Worship of God. Of these, as was said, he makes his own Command
the adaequate Rule and Measure. Teach men to observe (...), all whatsoever I
command; in their so doing alone, does he promise his Presence with them; that
is, to enable them unto the discharge of their duty. He commands, I say, all
that shall to the end of the World, be called to serve him in the Work of the
Gospel, to teach. In that Expression he compriseth their whole duty; as their
whole Authority is given them in this Commission. In their Teaching indeed they
are to command with all Authority; and upon their non-obedience of men unto
their teaching, either by not receiving their word, or by walking unworthy of
it when it is received in the Profession of it, he has allotted them the
course of their whole proceedings; but still requiring that all be regulated by
what they are originally commissionated, and enabled to teach and command. Let
then the Imposition of a Liturgy be tried by this Rule. It was never by Christ
Commanded to his Apostles, cannot by any be taught as his Command, and
therefore men in the Teaching or Imposing of it, have no promise of his
Presence, nor do they that observe it, yield any obedience unto him therein.
This I am sure will be the Rule of Christ's Enquiry at his great Visitation at
the last Day; the things which himself has Commanded will be enquired after,
as to some men's Teachings, and all men's Observation, and those only. And I
cannot but admire with what peace and satisfaction to their own Souls, men can
pretend to act as by Commission from Christ, as the chief Administrators of his
Gospel and Worship on the Earth, and make it their whole business almost to
teach men to do and observe what he never commanded, and rigorously to enquire
after and into the observation of their own commands, whilst those of the Lord
Jesus are openly neglected.

But let the Authority of men for Imposition, be supposed to equal the fancy of
any who through ignorance or interest are most devoted unto it; when they come
to put their Authority into execution, commanding things in and about the
Worship of God, I desire to know by what Rule they are to proceed in their so
doing. All the actions of men are, or ought to be Regular. Good or evil they
are, as they answer to, or dissent from their proper Rule. The Rule in this
matter must be the Word of God, or their own Prudence. Allow the former to be
the Rule, that is revealing what they ought to command, and there is a total
end of this Difference. What a Rule the latter is like to prove is easy to
Conjecture; but there is no need of Conjectures where Experience interposeth.
The great Philosopher is blamed by some for inserting the determination of men
Wise and Prudent, into his definition of the Rule of Moral Virtue. For, they
say that cannot be certainly known, whose Rule and Measure is fluctuating and
uncertain. If there be ground for this Assertion in reference to Moral virtues,
whose Seed and Principles are in-laid in the nature of Man, how much more is
that Rule to be questioned when applied to things whose spring and foundation
lies merely in supernatural Revelation. How various, uncertain, and
tumultuating, how roving this pretended Rule is like to prove, how short it
comes to any one single property of a sufficient Rule, much more of all things
that are necessary to complete a Rule of Prorocecome in such cases, were easy
to demonstrate. What good and useful place that is like to obtain in the
Worship of God, which having its Rise in the Authority of man; is framed by the
Rule of the wisdom of man; and so wholly resolved into his Will, I may say
will be one day judged and determined, but that it is so already sufficiently
in the Word of Truth.

CHAP. IX.
Argument Second. Necessary use of the Liturgy exclusive of the use of the
means appointed by Christ for the Edification of his Church.

WE proceed to some further Considerations upon the state of the Question
before laid down; and shall insist on some other Argument against the
Imposition pleaded for. We have spoken to the Authority Imposing; our next
Argument is taken from the Thing or Matter Imposed, and the End of that
Imposition.

An Humane Provision of means for the accomplishing of any End or Ends in the
Worship of God, for which Jesus Christ himself has made and does continue to
make Provision, to the exclusion of that Provision so by him made, is not
allowable, About this Assertion I suppose we shall have no Contention. To
assert the Lawfulness of such Provisions, is in the first instance to exalt the
Wisdom and Authority of men, above that of Christ, and that in his own house.
This men will not nakedly and openly do, though by just consequence it be done
every day. But we have secured our Proposition by the plainness of its terms,
against which no Exception can lie. It remains then that we show, that the
things mentioned in it, and rejected as disallowable are directly applicable to
the Imposition of Liturgies contended about.

That the Prescription of the Liturgy, to be used as prescribed, is the
Provision of a means for the accomplishing of some Ends in the Worship of God,
the Judgment and the Practice of those who Contend for it, do sufficiently
declare. Those Ends, or this End (to sum them up all in one) is, That the
Ordinances and Institutions of Christ may be quickly administered and solemnized
in the Church with decency and order unto the Edification of the Assemblies
wherein it is used. I suppose none will deny this to be the end intended in its
Imposition; it is so pleaded continually; nor is there uny other that I know of
assigned. Now of the things mentioned it is the last that is the principal end;
namely, the Edification of the Church, which is aimed at for its own sake, and
so regulates the whole Procedure of mere mediums, and those that are so mediums
as also to be esteemed subordinate ends. Such are Decency and Order, or
Uniformity. These have not their worth from themselves, nor do they influence
the intention of the Liturgists for their own sakes, but as they tend unto
Edification. And this the Apostolical Rule expressly requires, 1 Cor. 14. The
Prescription then of a Liturgy is a Provision for the right Administration of
the Ordinances of the Gospel uno the Edification of the Church. This is its
general nature; and in the Administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel,
consists the chief and main work of the Ministry: That this Provision is
Humane, has been before declared. It was not made by Christ, nor his Apostles;
but of men, and by men was it made and Imposed on the Disciples of Christ. It
remains then that we Consider whether Jesus Christ have not made provision
for the same end and purpose; namely, that the Ordinances and Institutions of
the Gospel may be administered to the edification of the Church. Now this the
Apostle expressly affirms, Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Unto every one of
us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ; wherefore he
says when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive and gave Gifts unto
men, -- He gave -- some Pastors and Teachers for the perfection of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ; till we
all came in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a p^rfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
The Lord Jesus who has appointed the Office of the Ministry, has also
provided sufficient furniture for the Persons called according to his mind to
the discharge of that Office, and the whole Duty of it. That the administration
of the Ordinances of the Gospel is the work of the Ministry I suppose will not
be denied. Now that this work of the Ministry may be discharged to the
edification of his Body, and that to the end of the World, until all his People
in every Generation are brought unto the Measure of Grace assigned unto them in
this life, is expressly affirmed. He has given Gifts for this end and purpose;
namely, that the work of the Ministry may be performed to the edification of
his Body. To say that the Provision he has made is not every way sufficient
for the attaining of the End for which it was made by him, or that he
continues not to make the same Provision that he did formerly, are equally
false, equally blasphemous; the one injurious to his Wisdom, the other to his
Truth, both to his Love and Care of his Church. For Decency and Uniformity in
all his Churches the Lord Jesus also has provided. The Administration of the
same specifical Ordinances in the Assemblies of his Disciples conveened
according to his mind, according to the same Rule of his Word, by virtue of the
same specifical Gifts of the Spirit, by him bestowed on the Administrators of
them, constitutes the Uniformity that he requires and is acceptable unto him.
This was the Uniformity of the Apostolical Churches, walking by the same Rule
of Faith and Obedience, and no other; And this is all the Uniformity that is
among the true Churches of Christ, that are this day in the World. To imagine
that there should be an Uniformity in Words and Phrases of Speech and the like,
is an unpracticable Figment, which never was obtained, nor ever will be to the
end of the World. And when men by the invention of Rites and Orders, began to
depart from this Uniformity, how far they were from falling into any other, is
notorious from that Discourse of Socrates on this matter, lib. 5. cap. 21. For
these then the Lord Christ has made provision. And where there is this
Uniformity unto Edification, let those things be attended unto, which are
requisite for the nature of Assembles meeting for such ends, as Assemblies, and
all the Decency and Order which Christ requires will ensue. I suppose it will
not be safe for any man to derogate from the sufficiency of this provision. If
any shall say, That we see, and find by experience that men called to be
Ministers are not so enabled to the Work of the Ministry, as by virtue of the
Gifts they have received to admidister the Ordinancer of the Gospel unto the
edification of the Church, I shall desire them to Consider whether indeed such
persons be rightly called unto the Ministry, and do labor aright to discharge
their duty in that Office; seeing that if they are so, and do so, there seems
to be a direct failure of the Promise of Christ, which is blasphemy to imagine.
And it may be Considered whether this pretended defect and want, do not, where
it is in those who are indeed called to the Work of the Ministry, proceed from
their neglect to stir up the Gifts that they have received by the use and
exercise of them, for which end alone they are entrusted with them; And it may
be further Considered whether their neglect has not been occasioned greatly by
some men's imposing of prescribed Liturgies, and others trusting to their use,
in those things, and for those ends, for which men are entrusted with those
Gifts by Jesus Christ. And if this be so, as indeed upon due search it will
appear so to be, then we have a secret inclusion of the Provision made by
Christ for the ends mentioned, plainly intimated unto us, before we arrive at
the express Consideration of it.

But to proceed; The provision that Christ has made for the discharge of the
whole Work of the Ministry, in the Administration of the Ordinances of the
Gospel unto the edification of his Church, is his Collation or bestowing of
Gifts on men rightly called to the Office of the Ministry, enabling them unto,
and to be exercised in that Work: In the Prescription and Imposition of a
Liturgy, there is a provision made for the discharge of the Work of the
Ministry in the Administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel unto the
edification of the Church, in and by the precise reading and pronouncing of the
words set down therein without alteration, diminution, or addition. It
remains then to Consider where this latter Provision be not exclusive of the
former, and whether the use of them both at the same time be not inconsistent.
The Administration of Gospel Ordinances, consists in Prayer, Thanksgiving,
Instruction and Exhortations, suitably applied unto the special nature and end
of the several Ordinances themselves, and the use of them in the Church. For
the right performance of all these, Christ gives Gifts unto Ministers; the
Liturgy a certain number of Words to be read without addition or alteration,
and this toties quoties as the Ordinances are to be administered. Now unless it
can be made to appear, that an ability to read the prescribed words of the
Liturgy, be the Gifts promised by Christ for the discharge a^ the Work of the
Ministers, which cannot be done, it is most evident, that there is an
inconsistency between the use and actual exercise of these several Provisions
of mediums for the compassing of the same end; and consequently the necessary
indispensable use of the Liturgy is directly exclusive of the use of the means
provided by Christ, and for that end, for which the Liturgy is invented and
imposed. What dismal effects have issued hereupon may be declared hereafter if
need be. Certainly more then one Commandment of God, and more then one Promise
of Christ have been made void by this Tradition: And I desire that none would
be offended, if as my own apprehension I affirm, That the Introduction of
Liturgies was, on the account insisted on, the principal means of increasing
and carrying on that sad defection and Apostasy, in the guilt whereof most
Churches in the World had enwrapped themselves. Nor does there lie at present
any relief against this Consideration from hence, that Ministers are allowed
the exercise of their gifts they have received in their Preaching, and Prayers
before and after Sermons; For First, that indeed there is such a Liberty
allowed, if the present Liturgy be so imposed as by some is pretended, is very
questionable; many that are looked on as skilled in that law and Mystery of it,
do by their practice give another interpretation of the intendment of its
Imposition* making it extend to all that is done in the Public Worship, the
bare Preaching or Reading of a Sermon or Homily excepted. Nor Secondly, is that
the matter enquired into, Whether Ministers may at any time, or in any part of
Gods Worship make use of their Gifts, but whether they may do it in all those
Administrations, for whose performance to the edification of his Body, they are
bestowed on them by Jesus Christ; which by the Rule of the Liturgy we have
showed they may not; and I doubt not but it will be granted by those who
contend for the Imposition of the Liturgy, that it extends to the principal
parts, if not the whole of the Public Worship of God in the Church. Now
certainly it is necessary that Conscience be clearly satisfied, that this
prescription of an Humane Provision of means for such Ends in the Worship of
God, as Christ has made provision for, which is ex^luded thereby, be not
against express rule of Scripture, ( Ezech 43. 8. Matthew. 15. 9. Col. 2. 20.)
without president or example, derogatory to the Glory of Christ, ( Heb. 3. 5*
6.) and in particular of his Truth, Wisdom, and Love of his Church, as also to
the perfection the Scripture, (2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.) and whether it brings not the
Ministers of the Gospel into open sin ( Romans 12. 6* 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. Ephesians. 4. 8, 11, 12. 1 Pet. 4. 10, ^^.) and so be an occasion of the
wrath of God, and ruin of the Souls of Men, before they admit of it, or submit
unto it.

CHAP. X.
Other Considerations about the Imposition of Liturgies.

FUrthermore, the great Rule of Gospel Administrations is that all things be
done to Edification. This is the main End of the Ministry its self, in all the
duties thereof, that are purely Evangelical. For this end was the Office of the
Ministry Instituted, for this end are Ministerial Gifts dispensed, for this end
were the Sacraments appointed, and all Church Assemblies, Church Power, and
whatever else belongs to Churches; it is all Ordained for this End that the
Body of Christ may be edified and increased with the increase of God, Ephesians. 4.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Col. 2. 19. Acts 9. 31. Romans 14. 19, 15. 1
Cor. 10, 23. cap. 14. 3, 4, 5, 12, 26. 2 Cor. 12. 19. 1 Tit. 1. 4. The full and
adaequate Rule of all Church Order and duties is, That all things be done to
Edification. It does not hence ensue that whatever men shall judge to conduce
to edification, may be used by themselves or imposed on others in the Worship
of God. Christ himself, the only wise and competent Judge in such Cases, has
precisely himself determined what is conducing hereunto; having as on other
accounts, so on this also, limited men to his prescription, because nothing is
effectual unto Edification but by virtue of his blessing, which is annexed
only to his own Institutions. But this will undeniably hence ensue, That
whatever is contrary unto, or an hindrance of Edification, oughr not to be
appointed or observed in the Worship of God. For certainly whatever is an
hindrance of that in any kind, unto whose furtherance all things of that kind
ought to contribute, their whole worth and virtue consisting in that
contribution, can have no due place amongst them. If it appear that this is the
state and condition of this Imposed Liturgy in Church Administrations, I
presume it will be confessed that it ought not to obtain any place or room
amongst them. The Edification of the Church depends principally on the blessing
of God upon the exercise of those Ministerial gifts which are bestowed on men
for that end; namely, that the Church be edified. God supplying seed to the
Sower, blesses it with an increase in the field where it is sowed, 2 Cor. 9.
10. The Gifts that are bestowed on Ministers are their principal Talents that
they ought to trade withal for the profit of their Master; that is, the
building up of his house wherein his wealth in this world does lie. Yea, all
the Gifts that are bestowed by the Spirit of Christ on men, are given them to
profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. and they are required with them to act for God in
the edification of the Body of Christ, every one according to his measure, 1
Pet. 4. 10, 11. This I suppose will be granted. Moreover, that the Gifts
bestowed by Christ on the guides of his Church, the Ministers of the Gospel are
proportioned and suited to the end which he aims to accomplish by them, as we
have in part before declared, so it is evident from the infinite Wisdom of him
that bestows them. From both which it will undeniably follow, that on the due
and regular use and employment of those Gifts which men receive from Christ,
depends and that solely the edification of his Church, I suppose this will not
be denied, where the Gifts bestowed by the Spirit of Christ upon the Ministers
of his Church, are used and exercised in the Work of the Ministry, according to
his Mind and Will, there by his blessing the edification which he does intend
will ensue. Let us then proceed. These Gifts as the Scripture witnesses, and
experience convinces are bestowed in great variety and in several degrees. The
greater and more excellent they are in any entrusted with them, the more
excellent is the means of edification which the Lord affords unto his Disciples
by them. Edification then as in its general nature it depends on the gifts of
Christ which he bestows on the Officers of his Church, so as to the degrees of
it, and its special furtherance, it depends on the degrees and special
improvement of those Gifts. For this cause all those to whom the work of the
Ministry is committed, as they ought to desire spiritual gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 1.
that the Church may be edified by them, so to covet earnestly the best gifs, 1
Cor. 12. 31. that they may singularly edify the Church, and also seek to excel
in those gifts, 1 Cor. 14. 20. that the same word of Edification may be carried
on to the utmost. It may then be enquired how these spiritual gifts which we
must suppose all Ministers of the Gospel in some measure to have received, may
be improved, so that they may excel to the edifying of the Church, which is
expressly required of them: We say then, that the improvement and increase of
spiritual gifts does ordinarily and regularly depend on their due and holy
exercise. He that had a Talent and used it not, though he endeavored to keep
it safe, yet it did not increase; when every ^^e that traded with the stock
wherewith they were entrusted, made a regular increase according to the measure
they had received. And in Experience we daily see men Napkening their Talents
until they are taken from them; whilst others receive Additions to their store,
at least such supplies as that their first Provisions fail not. Hence the great
direction for the exercise of the work of the Ministry is, to stir up the gift
received, by a due performance whereof in all persons entrusted with them, is
the whole work of edifying the body of Christ, until it reach the measure
appointed to every member, completed and finished. Edification then depends on
the improvement of Gifts, and the improvement of Gifts on their due exercise
according to the mind of Christ. The want then of that due exercise, either by
the neglect of them on whom they are bestowed, or any hindrance of it put upon
them by others, is the sole way of obstructing the improvement of spiritual
gifts, and by direct and immediate consequence of the edification of the
Church. Now this seems to be so much done by the prescription of the Liturgy
and imposition of it, that it is impossible for the wit of man to invent a more
effectual expedient for the compassing of that evil end. The main exercise of
Spiritual gifts on which their growth and improvement does depend, lies in the
administration of Gospel Ordinances. That is the work of the Ministry for which
they are bestowed. To hinder therefore or forbid that exercise is directly to
forbid the due, regular, appointed means of their increase, and so also of the
edification of the body of Christ; the means indispensably necessary unto it,
being removed and taken away. Now this is openly and avowedly done in the
imposed Liturgy if imposed. It says expressly that the Ministers of the Gospel
shall not use or exercise any Spiritual gift in the administration of those
Ordinances for which provision is made in the Book.

And as in this Case the condition of the People who are deprived of the means
of their edification, is sad, so that of the Ministers of the Gospel miserable
and deplorable. The Lord Jesus Christ bestows gifts upon them, requiring the
use and exercise of them in the Work of the Ministry at their utmost peril; Men
on the other side, forbid them that use and exercise, and that with such
forcible Prohibitions as threaten to bear down the whole public exercise of
the Ministry before the^. But the Lord knows how to deliver those that are his
out of temptation. It will be no relief against the force of this
Consideration, that there are some things left wherein Ministers may exercise
their gifts and trade with their Talents; for as this is but pretended, so it
is not in this or that part of their Work, but in the whole of the Ministry
committed unto them, that Christ indispensably requires of the guides of his
Church, that they should trade with their Talents and exercise their Gifts; and
accordingly are they to provide for their account at the last day: By this one
engine then at the same time are the people deprived of the means of
Edification provided for them in the Care, Wisdom, and Love of the Lord
Christ, and Ministers brought into a necessity of sinning, or foregoing the
public exercise of their Ministry.

Again in Particular; It is the work and duty of the Ministers of the Gospel,
to make Application of the Grace of Christ whereof they are Stewards to the
Flocks committed to their Charge, and that according to the especial state and
condition of all especial wants which may any way be known unto them. The way
of their Application of this Grace, lies principally in the Administration of
Gospel Ordinances. Therein are they to declare, unfold, tender, and apply the
Grace of Christ according unto the wants of his Disciples, the good of whose
souls they watch for in particular. These wants are very far from being the
same, and in the same degree in and unto every Congregation, or unto any one
Congregation at all times, or unto all Persons in any Congregation, which is
easily discerned by a faithful and skilful Guide. The especial Application then
mentioned according to the Rule of the Gospel, and special Addresses unto God
in the Name of the Flock, with respect to the especial wants of all or any of
them, belongs to that edification, which Christ has appointed for his Church.
Now how this duty can be attended unto in the observance of a prescribed Form
of Liturgy, from whence it is not lawful to digress, is beyond my understanding
to apprehend. I confess men who scoff at Edification, and deride spiritual
Gifts, who thinks all Religion to consist in the Observation of some carnal
Institution, who neither know nor care to come to an acquaintance with the
spiritual (...) poor souls, nor do tremble at the threatenings of Christ pointed
against their negligence and ignorance, Ezekiel. 34. 4. that suppose the whole
Baptized World converted to God, and Preaching its self on that account less
necessary then formerly at the first Plantation of the Gospel; that esteem the
doubts and temptations of Believers as needless scruples, and their sedulous
endeavors to grow in Grace and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ labor
lost in hypocrisy; that perhaps do envy at, and are troubled with the light
and knowledge of the People of God, and suppose they can discharge the Duty of
the Ministry by a bare reading of the Service Book to their Parish, by
themselves, or some Hired by them so to do, without once enquiring into the
spiritual Condition of them, the care of whose souls they plead to be committed
to them, may think light of this Consideration; but those who know the terror
of the Lord, and any thing of their own Duty, will be otherwise minded. Yet
farther; There seems to be in the Imposition of a Liturgy to be used always as
a Form in all Gospel Administrations, an unwarrantable abridgement of their
Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free; and therefore sin in the
Imposition and Use of it. For as it is a sin in others to abridge us of the
Liberty purchased for us by Jesus Christ, so it is in us, to give it up, and
not to suffer in our Testimony for it. Now of that Liberty purchased for us by
Jesus Christ, so far as it relates to the Worship of God there are two Parts;
First, a freedom from those Paedagogical Institutions of God himself, which by
his own appointment were to continue only to the time of Reformation.
Secondly, A freedom from subjection to the Authority of men as to any new
Impositions in or about the Worship of God, 1 Cor. 7. 11. And the same Rule is
given out as to our duty and deportment in reference unto both these, Gal. 5:
1. 1 Pet. 2. 16. Now not to stand fast in the Liberty for us purchased by
Christ, is not to have that esteem of it as a Privilege given us by his Love
as we ought to have, not that sense of it as a duty enjoined us by him which
ought to be in us. I say there is the same reason of both these in respect of
Liberty. As we are freed from Mosaical Institutions, so that none can Impose
the Observation of them upon us, by virtue of their first Appointment, so are
we also from any succeeding Impositions of men. Our Liberty equally respects
the one and the other. (...) those Institutions, such was the tenderness of the
Holy Ghost and the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ by his directions and
guidance, that they would not, (no not for a season) enjoin the observance of
any of them, no not of those which put men on no positive Duties; but were mere
abridgements in point of some practices, upon the Disciples of Christ, but
only such whose observation for that season was made necessary by reason of
scandals and offenses, before any such Imposition of theirs, Acts 15. nor by a
purity of reason if regard be had to their Example, can there any abridgement
be lawfully made of the Liberty of Christ's Disciples by any Imposition of
things of the later sort, unless it be as to the Observation of some such
things as are made necessary in case of scandal antecedent unto any such
Imposition. We grant then that there may be, yea, there ought de facto to be an
abridgement made of our Liberty, as to the performance of some things at some
times, which in general we are made free unto, where that performance in the
use and exercise of our Liberty, would prove an hindrance unto Edification, the
great End whereunto all these things are subservient. But then the case must be
so stated antecedent to any Imposition. First to Impose that which is not
necessary, and then to assert a Necessity of its Observation least Scandal
should ensue, is a Course that men are not directed unto by any Gospel Rule or
Apostolical practice. The sum is, that abridgement of the Liberty of the
Disciples of Christ by Impositions on them of things which he has not
appointed, nor made necessary by Circumstances antecedent unto such
Impositions, are plain Usurpations upon the Consciences of the Disciples of
Christ, destructive of the Liberty which he has purchased for them, and which
if it be their duty to walk according to Gospel Rule, is sinful to submit unto.
That of this nature is the Imposition of a Liturgy contended about, is evident.
It has no Institution or Appointment by Jesus Christ, it is wholly of Men,
there is nothing antecedent unto its Imposition that should make it Necessary
to be Imposed; a Necessity of its Observation is induced upon and by its
Imposition, which is directly destructive to our Liberty in Jesus Christ. The
Necessity pretended from the insufficiency of Ministers for the discharge of
that which is their proper Work, has in great (...) been caused by this
Imposition; and where it has not, some men's sin, is not to be made other men's
punishment. Reasons pleaded for the Imposition Opposed, shall be elsewhere
Considered.

FINIS.

