A FURTHER VINDICATION OF THE DISSENTERS FROM THE Rector of Bury's UNJUST
ACCUSATIONS, WHEREIN His Charge of their being Corrupters of the WORD of GOD,
is Demonstrated to be False and Malicious.

(...) pretended Justification and Confirmation of it to be Groundless, Weak
and Self-condemning.

^stles of the Psalms to be Divinely Inspired. The Purity of the Hebrew Copies
is Asserted. The Scotch Church and Bibles Defended.

The Rector Convicted of Corrupting the Word of God, by Adding to it, and
Diminishing from it, in several Instances.

And his unworthy Calumnies of St. Jerome and other Good Men, Detected and
Confuted.

By James Owen, Minister of the Gospel at Oswestry.

Psalm 120. 3. What shall be done unto thee, thou false Tongue? P^overbs 12.
19. The lips of Truth shall be Established for ever, but a lying Tongue is but
for a moment. (...). Metaphr. sub nom. Greg. Nazian. in Eccl. 7.

LONDON: ^S. Bridge, for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three ^s in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel, 1699.

ERRATA.
Page 1. Line 1. for had r. has, P. 7. l. 9. for the r. this Rule, P. 10. l.
22. for he r. we, P. 16. l. 3. for 1638 r. 1658, P. 22. l. 3. a fin. r. takes,
P. 28. l. 2. r. Article, P. 31. l. 2. for book r. look, P. 33. l. 7. dele the
before Jerusalem, ibid. l. 19. r. Magdeburg. P. 36. l. 8, and 12. for reaping
r. ripping, Cut off Fol. 39, and 40. being the Title Page before the
Postscript, P. 42. l. 25. for covered r. Coeval, P. 46. l. 2. a fin. r. Full.
P. 48. l. 10. for i. e. two r. 1st, and 2d, ibid l. 32. r. observe, P. 49. l.
2. r. 90, P. 50. l. 3. a fin. r. Pol. ibid l. 7. a fin. r. serves, P. 51. l. 3.
r. answer, ibid l. 3. a fin. r. (...), ibid l. 21. a fin. r. Number: 23. 9. P. 52.
l. 19. r. (...), P. 53. l. 1. for mind r. mine, P. 54. l. 3. a fin. r.
misrepresents him, P. 55: l. 27. r. Vilis, l. 9. a fin. r. utique and for ille
r. illo, l. 8. a fin. r. ignotus, P. 56. l. 3. a fin. r. Fretell. P. 57. l. 17.
r. Psalms about, P. 58. l. 26. for impious r. impure, P. 60. l. 5. a fin. r.
(...), P. 61. l. 3. a fin. after not add only, P. 62. l. 19. for ser r. seu,
ibid l. 9. a fin. for fourth r. fifth, P. 63. l. 25. for Coequal r. Coeval, P.
64. l. 3. a fin. r. Judaeos, P. 65. l. 7. dele used, P. 66. l. 12. after Lxx
add or, ibid l. 16. r. Originals, ibid l. 30. r. inserted, ibid l. 13. a fin.
for of r. by, ibid l. 9. a fin. r. Argument, ibid l. 3. a fin. for and r. and,
ibid l. 2. a fin. r. scripturam, P. 67. l. last r. Constabit, P. 68. l. 28. r.
pereant, ibid l. 31. for 2000 r. 6000, ibid l. 34. r. that of the Hebrew, ibid
l. 17. r. Autolyc, P. 69 l. 10. r. usque and proaem, ibid l. 16. for these r.
this, P. 70. l. 12. a fin. for above r. about ibid l. 23. r. Cod. regys.

There are other Faults of the Press, occasioned by the Authors distance from
it, which the Candid Reader is desired to overlook.

A FURTHER VINDICATION OF THE DISSENTERS FROM Mr. GIPP's Unjust Accusations.
CHAP. I.
Containing some Animadversions on his First Chapter.
IT had been observed of the Authors of the most inconsistent Un-truths, that
by often reporting them, they come at last to believe 'em themselves, and with
a recollected Effrontery to recommend 'em to the easy World as undoubted and
uncontestable Verities:

The Reverend Rector of Bury in Lancashire, has given such a discovery of this
Spirit as will hardly admit of a Parallel. In a Sermon of his he advanced a
vile Charge against the Presbyterians of Corrupting the Word of God by
Mis-printing ye for we in Acts 6. 3. A Charge so black, so senseless, so
inconsistent with their known Principles, so weakly grounded, that none but
such as have abandoned the Charity, which is Essential to a Christian, and
sacrificed the Reason which constitutes a Man, to the absurdest Prejudices, can
entertain it under any other Character, than that of a malicious and silly
Calumny. I have fully proved it to be such in my Remarks on his Sermon, and
have charitably called upon him to give Glory to God, and consult his own Peace
in a dying Hour, by acknowledging his Offense against God, in whose Name he
has published the Vilest of Falsehoods.

It would have contributed more to his present Reputation and future Comfort,
ingenuously to have retracted an uncharitable Presumption, than to have
attempted to confirm his Charge, as he calls it, by a Defense of his First
Arguments which is so very weak, that it not only convincingly Justifies the
Dissenters against his Accusations, but condemns himself to be a Man that can
assume the Liberty to affirm any thing, be it never so false and absurd, when
it serves to expose an adverse Party. This will evidently appear when I have
considered his Defense, and the additional Proofs.

I desire the Reader to take Notice that it is Matter of Fact, and not any
point of Controversy, we are now upon, namely, whether the Presbyterians be
Guilty of Corrupting the Word of God? The Rector affirms it in his Sermon, and
pretends to confirm it, in his Defense of it. I doubt not but all Men, who have
any regard to Truth or commom Honesty, will expect a very clear, direct proof
of so High a Charge, against a great Body of sober People, and will not easily
take uncharitable Suspicious for evident Proofs.

Instead of a direct Proof, his Sermon produces only a circumstantial one. But
in his Remarks upon Remarks (as he styles the defense of his Sermon) he
pretends to confirm his Charge, for thus his Title Page runs, The Rector of
Bury's Charge exhibited against the Dissenters for endeavoring to Corrupt the
Word of God, Justified and further Confirmed.

When a Charge is Justified and Confirmed, the Proofs are supposed to be Clear
and Convincing; but you will soon find your selves mistaken if you expect any such
thing in the Rectors Remarks. He affirms, with a brazen Coufidence, and
confirms with Leaden Arguments, whose main Edge consists in the basest Sort of
Railing and Calumny, against the living and the dead, and he gives it the
Keenness that such Metal is capable of by the vigorous Application of that
Whetstone which he deserves.

But let us hear how he confirms his Charge.

1. Above thirty Pages of the sixty four in his Book are on things Foreign to
that Charge, which is the main Thing he was to confirm, and a great Part of the
rest of his Book is taken up in personal Reflections, which is a clear Evidence
he wanted Materials for his chief Point.

2. He bestows the three first Pages in reflecting on the Ingenious Author, of
the Notes upon the Lord Bishop of Salisbury 's four last Discourses.

I never could certainly tell who was the Author of those Notes which I have
not by me, and therefore can say nothing of 'em. If he retorts the Schism upon
the imposers of unscriptual Terms of Communion, as the Rector seems to hint, he
would do well to answer his Arguments instead of branding him causelessly, and
in the rudest Manner with ill Nature, want of good Breeding, etc.

And now his Hand is in, the Bishop himself cannot escape his Censure, whom he
takes upon him to correct for his too -- gentle Expressions of the Dissenters,
and would have had him styled them the Foxes and Firebrands of this Church and
Nation, that is he would teach the Judicious and Moderate Prelate to speak the
Language of the confident and fiery Author of the Sermons of Allegiance. Here
the Rector gives the Dissenters an Instance of his good Nature, and the Bishop
of his good Breeding. p. 3.

3. Rather than want Objects of his Anger, he will dig into the Graves of the
Dead. If he has not the courage to meet their Ghosts (which he is not sure of
p. 17.) he dares trample upon their Memories: He gives a Proof of this in the
Aspersions he casts on the Reverend Mr. Baldwin, who is now with the Lord. p. 4.

He has picked up some imperfect Notes of an old Sermon of his, which has so
filled his Head, that his Reflections upon it is become the standing Preface to
all his late Works. He mentions it in his Tentament Novum, here you find it
again, and because you cannot have too much of a good Thing, he promise, you
shall hear more of it another time.

4. At length, sensible of his Impertinency, he asks, What Is this to the
Minister at Oswestry? Indeed nothing at all, however it helps to fill up Paper
for want of better Matter.

But does he in Earnest think to resolve his Question by this following one,
And I also ask, What was it to the Minister at Oswestry, If the Rector of Bury
preached a Sermon in Vindication of the Church of England, against the
Lancashire Dissenters? The Sermon he preached and which I answered, Charges the
Dissenters in General with Corrupting the Word of God, especially those in
Cambridge in the year 1638. And affirms that the Corruption has been secretly
promoted by that Party ever since; that it has been publicly owned by a Scotch
Chameronian: And was all this Charge against the Lancashire Dissenters, who are
not so much as mentioned in the whole Sermon? A Man that dare thus boldly
Charge the Body of English and Scotch Presbyterians, and then think to come off
by saying, his Sermon was against the Lancashire Dissenters, may affirm or deny
any thing at his Pleasure. It it a bad Omen to stumble thus at the Threshold.
Had the Rector preached a Sermon only against the Lancashire Dissenters (as I
hear he has done many) he should never have heard from the Minister at
Oswestry. But when he not only Preaches, but publishes an Invective against the
whole Body, I judged my self concerned to vindicate Truth and Innocence. Since
he is upon asking Questions, I will take the freedoom to ask him one, What is
it to the Rector of Bury, if I thought fit to Vindicate my Ordination by
Presbyters, whilst I allowed the Validity of Episcopal Ordination? I only
justified Ordination by Presbytery, but did not condemn that by Bishops. This
is the design of my Plea for Scripture Ordination, which one would have thought
inoffensive. But the Rector, like the old Donatists, confining the Ministry,
Sacraments and Salvation, to those of his own Communion, would needs take upon
him to answer my Book. This occasioned my Tutamen Evangelicum; which I had no
sooner sent into the Press, but his Sermon came to my Hands: When I had read it
over, I was easily persuaded to draw up a few Remarks upon it.

But the Rector, who is the unhappiest Man in the World at Conjectures, and
perhaps one of the boldest in affirming 'em for Truths, would prove from the
different Air in the Remarks from Mr. Owen's other Writings that he is but the
reputed Father of this spurious Offspring: Who then is the true Father? Why,
he believes the Note-Maker was principal in the Remarks, and that they are the
Work of a Club of Ministers, and that the Remarkers true Name is Legion, for
they are many. p. 5.

If the poor Rector had not been grievously tormented by the Remarks, he had
scarce thought of this frightful Name. He finds himself driven to a Precipice
with the bristled Herd in the Gospel, and would fain keep above water, but who
can relieve the Animal, whom a Legion pursues?

To be Serious, I thought he had more Sense than to deny the Remarks to be
mine, because they are written in a Style different from my Writings upon other
Subjects. Any Author that understands the Laws of Writing, will adapt his Style
to the Subject he is upon. If my lines are something pointed, the Rector's
infamous detraction, by which he had exposed a vast Body of Protestants to an
unjust and public reproach, must be my Apology. I perceive he is a great
Stranger to the Dissenters, when he affirms my Remarks to be dressed up with all
the gaudy Feathers and Embellishments, which the Wit of the Party could furnish
them with. They were wholly dressed up, such as they are, by my self, and the
habit they appear in is neither Sordid nor Gay; the Truth and Innocence, they
assert, desires not the former, nor needs the latter. A very small degree of
Wit will enable a Man to expose the Rector's Defamatory Libel, which has as
little of Wit as it has of Honesty. I will not be so Injurious to the
Reputation of his Party as to suspect any Man of Wit and Candor among 'em, to
have contributed so much as a single Stroke to the Criminatory part of his
Sermon, which so resembles the true Father, that not only his Figure, but his
very Soul and Spirit are squez'd into it. p. 5.

But the Remarks, in their way to London, took a tour to Manchester. p. 5.

They did so, for Zachary Whitworth of Manchester undertook the Printing of
'em. I presume the Ministers might read 'em, but I dare affirm, and so will
they, that they neither altered them, in whole, or in part, nor added to 'em,
except two lines ^n p. 11. and the short Advertisment after the end of my Book.
And now for his Satisfaction I have made him my Confessor for this once, if it
may be any relief to him to know by whom he suffers, for he seems like a Man
desperately wounded, who turns himself every way to behold the Hand that
directed the fatal Arrow to his smarting Side.

Had the Manchester Ministers put themselves to the trouble of answering his
Sermon, he would have felt more penetrating Strokes; nor is he so formidable
that they need be afraid; or they so despicable, as to be ashamed to own their
genuine Productions.

5. He stuffs p. 6. and 7. with more Invectives against the Dissenters, and
indeed he never seems to be so much in his Element as when he is upon that
Subject. But at last he comes to the Remarks, p. 8. and begins with the Preface.

In my Preface, which consisted of four Pages only, I gave a short Account of
the Heads of his Sermon, with brief Remarks upon some passages in it, which I
judged Exceptionable. He has a long Chapter (Chap. 2.) which takes up near half
his Book (from p. 8. to p. 32.) in answer to my short Preface. I told him I
would not intermeddle in the Controversy between him and Mr. De Laun, nor will
I now: I I only touched upon a few things, concerning which I see no Cause to
alter my Sentiments, by what he has offered, to the Contrary. But I will not
detain the Reader from the main Poin, by attending his tedious digression about
the Titles of the Psalms, and the Corruptions of the Hebrew Text, which I shall
consider in a Postcript by it self.

CHAP. II.
Being an Answer to the latter Part of his Second Chapter.
I Called the Rector's affirming the Sadducees to have rejected all but the
Five Book of Moses, a vulgar Error, and gave my Reasons for it out of Josephus
and Lightfoot, to whom I refer the Reader, whom I will not detain on this
trifling Subject, on which the Rector bestows the best Part of two Pages. He
says the Fathers were of another Opinion, and he hopes I will not thrust them
into the vulgar Form. p. 27, 28.

It Is certain the Fathers are not free from all the vulgar Errors of the Age,
in which they lived; the Story of the Phoenix, springing out of the Ashes of
the old One, is mentioned by several Fathers. Clemens Romanus has it, and would
prove the Resurrection from it.

The ingenuous Rector here desires his Reader to mark, how we are advocating
for the Samaritans and Sadducees, which in good Time the Dissenters will
comprehend also. Some of the Quakers and Anabaptists, the modern Sadducees and
Mahometans (I mean the Socinians), and almost all the Nation of Schismatics
and Heretics are in their interests already: The Samaritans and Jews are
happily coming into the confederacy. p. 27.

I advocate no further for them than Dr. Lightfoot, to whose Judgment the
Rector promises to stand; thus he speaks, Li. Vol. II. P. 1101, 1102.
It Is the received Opinion amongst the Learned, that the Sadducees refused all
the old Testament but only the Five Books of Moses: If they mean it absolutely,
I must confess my small reading has not taught so far as to be satisfied in
that: But if they mean it with some Qualification, it is very True. In such a
qualified Sense, as to say the rest of the Jews refused the third Part of the
Bible, i. e. the Hagiographa, viz. Job, Psalms, Solomon's Writings, Daniel,
etc. They admitted not the reading of these in the Synagog, not because they
undervalued them, but because they counted the rest Sufficient, i. e. the Law
and Prophets, which were read every Sabbath. p. 27.

The Church of England admits not the reading of some Parts of the Bible in the
public Congregation, will you therefore say she rejects them?

2. But be this Matter as it will, the Rector's inference has as little Sense
in it, as it has Truth and Charity. If he means, that the Quakers, Anabaptists
and Socinians, are in the Interests of the Presbyterians, it is a vile Calumny.
If he means that they are Dissenters from the Episcopal Churches, so they are
from the Presbyterian also. Though I must tell him, that the Socinians in some
of their printed Pamphlets, declare themselves of the Church of England, nor do
I hear that they are expelled their Communion, when any of them are disposed to
join with her. Nay it is well known that Mr. S. N. a beneficed Parson of the
Church of E. is the Author of several of the late Socinian Pamphlets. I mention
not this to reflect on the Church of England who disowns this Heresy, and ought
not to be charged with the Errors of particular Persons, but as a necessary
Vindication of our selves. I do not know any one Congregation of Dissenters
that would tolerate a Socinian in their Communion.

As to the Samaritans and Jews I know none fitter for their Confederacy than
the Rector of Bury, who helps them to a Chronological Argument out of our
English Bibles to disprove the coming of Christ in the Flesh: For according to
our Vossian Rabbi, Christ was not to come until the 6000th Year of the World,
and according to our Bibles the World is not yet 6000 years Old.

Mr. G. in his Sermon called the Scripture, the supreme Rule of Faith, to which
I made this Answer, We know no other Rule of divine Faith, but the holy
Scripture.

The Rector undertakes to teach us several Subordinate Rules of Faith, such as
Creeds, Catechisms, Decrees of Councils, Testimony of Fathers, Dictates of wise
and good Men* the Instrustions of Parents, Consent of Adversaries, the Voice of
Conscience, Reason, Preaching, Providence, and lastly universal Tradition. p.
29.

The Industrious Rector has found out no less than Twelve new Rules of Faith,
and these may be multiplied into 12000, for every Article of a Creed, every
Canon of a Council, every Dictate of a wise and good Man, every Saying of a
Father, every Passage in a Sermon, is a Rule of Faith with the Rector. For
Instance, we will suppose the Rector a wise and good Man, I hope then you will
receive all his Dictates for so many Rules of Faith, of which you have
abundance in his Remarks upon Remarks, and among others, that all our Bibles
are Corrupted in very material Things.

This look's a little Comical, the supreme Rule of Faith is Corrupted, and you
must believe it, because the subordinate Rule, the wise and good Rector's
Dictates assures us of it, however it is not Impossible but the supreme Rule
may be Right and Pure, and the subordinate Rule Crooked and Corrupt. And the
Rector will be so Good as to Pardon us, or so Wise as to Instruct us better, if
we think so. I now begin to understand the Reason why he is so very Impatient
of Opposition; why, all his Dictates are Rules of Faith, and ought to be
received for Oracles: But the best on it is, he allows us the Benefit of another
Rule of Faith, that is the Light of Reason; what if these two Rules happen to
clash? We have known Creeds, Councils, Sermons, etc. to do so; as contrary as
they are, they are still Rules of Faith with the Rector.

Yea the sayings of the Pagan wise Men of Greece, are Rules of Divine Faith to
him* and but for Universal Tradition he would know no difference between Plato,
Seneca, the wise Men of Greece (you may if you please put a wise Man of Gotham
among them) and the holy Scripture, for says he, the excellency of it is moral
Precepts, the high Strains and noble Flights of Piety, prove not that it was
written by inspiration, for then Plato, Seneca, Ignatius, Clement, Romanus, the
VII. wise Men of Greece, etc. might lay claim to inspiration.

Would you think it, that a Protestant Divine, should talk thus ignorantly of
the blessed Scriptures? Are the Precepts in Plato and Seneca, as Excellent as
those of the Holy Bible? Can he find such high Strains and noble Flights of
Piety in Pagan Authors, as in the inspired Writings? A Man that has felt the
Power of God's Word renewing, quickening, comforting and strengthening his
Heart, will acknowledge the vast Difference between inspired and humane
Writings, and resolve his Faith into the Authority of God, who speaks
powerfully and feelingly unto our Consciences by his Spirit in the Scriptures,
which have Signatures of their Divine Original upon them, that no Book besides
can lay claim to.

Tradition is of Use to beget in us a good Opinion of the Scripture, but he
that makes it a Rule of Faith, especially the first and leading Rule (as the
Rector seems to do) resolves his Faith into a humane Authority, which can beget
but a Humane Faith. Divine Faith is founded upon a Divine Testimony, and a
Humane Testimony can produce but a Humane Faith.

Vinc. Lerin. adv. haeres.
Lerinensis his Rule about Tradition is, quod omnes ubique and semper. All the
Faithful have not at all times and in every Place, transmitted every Book of
Scripture as of Divine Authority. The Popish Church pretend Tradition for the
Apocrypha, which they receive as Canonical. Few of the People are able to judge
of the Rule whether it be True, or False; Ministers may tell 'em of it, suppose
they receive their Dictates, which few are able to Examine, they believe with an
Implicit Faith, because their Ministers say so; and thus the Subordinate Rule
becomes the first and leading Rule.

Creeds, Canons, Dictates of wise and good Men, and the like, are either
agreeable to the Scripture, or they are not. If they be not, they are far from
being Rules of Divine Faith, for they are Rules of Error and Falsehood: If they
are agreeable to the Scripture, we believe and receive them, because they are
Consonant to the Word of God, the only Rule of saving Divine Faith. We will
allow 'em to be helps unto our Faith, but judge it very improper to call 'em
Rules of Faith.

I told the Rector, That the laying aside the Un-scriptural Terms of Communion,
which have been the fatal Engines of Disunion and Schism, would soon heal us.

To this he Answers 1, The Experiment has been once made, in the late Times,
but without Success, Divisions were increased, etc.

Things were in a fair way of healing, when the Concessions of King Charles I.
were voted satisfactory by the Parliament, had not a Faction in the Army put
all out of Course, and governed the Nation, by a very Arbitrary Power, and yet
there were very hopeful beginnings of a Coalition -- between the moderate
Episcopal, Presbyterian and Congregational Brethren, upon the Principle I
mention, between the years 1652 and 1659, as appears by the Worcestershire
Association, as also by those of Cumberland, Westmorland, Essex, etc. which are
to be seen in Print.

If this Principle did not heal us in those distracting and unsettled Times, it
does not follow that it would not do it now in a State of Settlement, and such
a Settlement, wherein the Bishops are in Power, under whom the moderate
Dissenters would not scruple to Exercise their Ministry, if the offensive Terms
were removed out of the way.

And if ever our unhappy Breaches be healed, it must be upon this Principle,
which has been asserted by the Great Men of the Episcopal Communion.

Iren. Pref.
Dr. Stillingfleet, the present Biship of Worcester, declares against
Vn-scriptural Impositions. He that came to take away the Un-scriptural Yoke of
Jewish Ceremonies, certainly did never intend to Gall the Back of his
Disciples, with another instead of it: And it would be strange, the Church
should require more than Christ himself did. What possible Reason can be
assigned, why such Things should not be sufficient for Communion with a Church,
which are sufficient for Eternal Salvation? Without all Controversy the main
Inlet of all the Distractions, Confusions and Divisions in the Christian
World, has been by adding of other Conditions of Church Communion, than Christ
has made.

My Lord Bacon says, that the ancient and true Bounds of Unity, are one Faith,
one Baptism, and not one Ceremony, one Policy. Resusc. par. 1. p. 129.
The same was the Judgment of King James the I. In non necessariis libertati
Christianae locus detur. Is. Casaub. ep. ad Card Peron.
See Mr. Tallents's healing Book of large Foundations, wherein you may find
more Testimonies to this purpose.

2. The Rector perscribes the method of healing us, and that is, to obey them
that have the Rule over us in all lawful things, i. e. which are not forbidden
by God.

The meaning is, if I understand him, that Church Rulers have Power to impose
Things lawful, i. e. not forbidden, as Terms of Communion, and that it is our
Duty to obey such impositions. This Explication permised, I answer,

1. He ought to prove, that Christ has Commissioned our Church Rulers to fix
un-scriptural Terms of Christian Communion, before he prove it our Duty to obey
'em. Where they have no power to command, I see not our obligation to obey. The
grand Commission, says Dr. Stillingfleet, the Apostles were sent out with, was
only to teach what Christ had Commanded them. Not the least intimation of any
Power given to impose or require any thing beyond what himself had spoken to
them, or they were directed to by the immediate Guidance of the Spirit of God.
Iren* ubi supra.
It is not whether the things required, be lawful or not, -- but whether they
do consult for the Churches Peace and Unity, who suspend it uopn such Things?
How far the Example of our Savior, or his Apostles does warrant such rigorous
Impositions? We never read the Apostles making Laws, but of Things supposed
necessary.

2. He ought to show, that all Things not forbidden may lawfully be imposed as
Terms of Communion. The use of Oil, Spittle, Salt, Cream, etc. are not
forbidden in Baptism, therefore the Rector would submit to the Use of them, if
his Rulers think fit to enjoin them, as is done in Popery. Holy Water is not
forbidden, nor are any of the Ceremonies used in Popery expressly Prohibited in
Scripture, therefore they are lawful to the Rector. You see whither this
Hypothesis tends: Sitting at the Lords Supper is not forbidden, no more is
Prostration, the humblest Gesture of Adoration; the Rector would scarce like
it, if either of these were rigidly imposed.

3. Who must judge what is Lawful, what not? If those that obey, we are but
where we were; that which appears Lawful to the imposer, may be judged
otherwise by conscientious Dissenters, which is our Case: If the imposers only
must judge, Popish Rulers will say, it is Lawful to bow to a Crucifix, to a
Graven-Image, to adore the Bread in the Eucharist, etc. Let the Rector take
which side of the Question he please, he must either acquit the Dissenters or
justify the Papists.

He concludes his Second Chapter, with a Vindication of their reading Apocrypha
in the Churches, to the Exclusion of several Parts of Scripture.

Why do the Dissenters neglect the reading of the Word of God to make way for
their Sermons and Expositions? p. 31.

If any do neglect reading the Scriptures, let 'em bear the blame of it, I know
none such. I hope he would not have us lay aside Sermons and Expositions, to
fill up the whole time with reading the holy Scripture. They that Expound do
also Read, though not so much, yet perhaps to more Advantage, by helping the
People to understand what they read. And if preaching (which also Explains the
holy Scripture) take up most of the time in some Congregations, where less
Scripture is read, it cannot be denied but preaching is an Ordinance of God,
but so is not the reading of Apocrypha, and therefore this recrimination is
impertinent. But says the Rector, to read the Apocrypha is not to Canonize it.

I do not say it is; but to comprehend it under the Name of the Holy Scripture,
as is done in the Rubric before the Table of Lessons in the Liturgy, and to
read it to the total Exclusion of some Parts of Scripture, may tempt ignorant
People to think it Canonical.

Many wise Men, adds he, think the Story of Bell and Dragon to be true. p. 31.

So the Papists do, and they think it Canonical too. They are Men Wise in their
Generation, and the Dictates of Wise Men are a Rule of Faith to the Rector.

But he is not sure, but it may be a Fiction, or Fable, or in more civil Terms
a Parable, and many think says he, the Book of Job, of this kind, a Parable.
p. 31.

Names of Persons, Countries and Places, don't use to be inserted into
Parables, as is done in the Story of Bell and Dragon, as also in the Book of
Job, which he invidiously compares to this fabulous Story. The Book of Job is
allowed to be Canonical by all Christians, and has all the Characters of a real
History, the Names of Places, Persons, etc. his Children, Estate, Losses,
Friends, Enemies and his Restoration are particularly described, and he is
expressly mentioned by the Holy Ghost in other Places, Ez. 14. 14. James 5. 11.
and cited in 1 Cor. 3. 19. I find in Pools Synopsis but two Sorts of People
that make the History of Job a Parable, some Ancient Jews and some Modern
Anabaptists, but neither one nor 'tother at present seem to own that Opinion.

The Rector is a rare Man, he can convert an Apocryphal Fable into a Divine
History, and a Divine History into a Parabolical Fable. And that you may not
think him singular in this Faculty, he has Papists, Jews and Anabaptists in his
Interests.

He that denies the Book of Job to be a History, may in good Time, turn all
Scripture History into a Parable, or a cunninly devised Fable, and when he has
served a temporal Interest by it, may brag with the Roman Pontiff, whose
Dictates the Rector must own for a Rule of Faith, quantum nobis profuit haec
Fabula de Christo.

CHAP. III.
Being an Answer to his Third Chapter.
IN his Third Chapter, he pretends to Answer my first, in which I observed (p.
1.) That in a Sermon to the Clergy, a Testimony against the shameful Scandals
of some of them, would have became a faithful Minister, but that he had other
work to do, his Business being to accuse of secret Crimes, and not to reprove
for open Miscarriages.

All the Rector can say for this inexcusable Omission and Partiality is, That
he dare undertake to point out as many Scandalous Dissenting Ministers in
Lancashire, as we can Clergy Men. p. 35.

He is a Man of bold Undertaking, but the one and the other are pretty well
known in that Country and other Parts of the Nation, which will scarce receive
the Dictates of this daring Undertaker against the Evidence of Sense and common
Observation. If he knows any Scandalous Dissenting Ministers, let him name the
Men, and spare not.

I added p. 2, 3, 4. that the Corruption in Acts 6. 3. is inconsistent with the
Principles of the Presbyterians; that I never knew any that approved of that
Corruption; that his Charge amounts to no more than a bare Suspicion that the
Dissenters have secretly contributed to the Corruption of this Place; that had
not he Examined the Errata of the Press more out of ill Will to the Dissenters,
than good Will to the Public, he might have found several other Errors of the
Press as considerable as ye for we; as she for he, in Ephesians. 1. 4. in a Twelves
Bible, London 1691. we for ye in Job 6. 21. in a Quarto Edition of the Bible at
Cambridg, 1675. and several more I mention there.

Among all these Particulars, he takes notice only of the last, and to excuse
himself, most falsely Affirms, That all I offer in this Chapter, in Vindication
of the Dissenters, is, that several Editions of the Bible abound with such
Errors as are destructive of the Sense. Judge by this what Credit is to be
given to the Rectors Affirmations, But let us hear what he can say to the Errors
of the Press, of which I give a Catalogue. He has four Things to offer, p. 32,
33.

I. He quarrels with an Uncorrected Error of the Press (in (...)). And
disingenously insinuates as if I were defective in the Greek Tongue. The Rector
is grievously at a loss how to make good his Charge, since he fills Paper with
such stuff as this.

II. Though he might be justly suspected (says the Rector), in the Account given
of these Errata's, yet I will admit it to be True. A mighty Favor indeed! To
admit that for True which he cannot disprove; but his most generous Concessions
have a Tincture of his ill Nature, which is as Lazy as it is Suspicious. I
refer to the Editions, why is he not at the Pains to Examine them, if he justly
suspects my Account? The Truth is, it is not as Easy to disprove, as to
impeach ones Veracity. The Rector has an excellent Faculty at the latter, let
who will undertake the former.

III. Such Errors don't establish any Untruth, nor favor any side in the
present Controversies, nor has Mr. O. given us one Example of the same Error
repeated in several Editions. p. 33.

Where they make a corrupt Sense, they establish an Untruth, as in Job 6. 21.
we are nothing, it should be, ye are nothing. There is we for ye, as in Acts 6.
3. you have ye for we. So that we and ye are easily mistaken one for another.
But the Rector seems to have no concern for any Truth, but what respects the
Bishops power. Avoid all Corruption that may prejudice that, and this tender
hoofed Creature (it is his own Expression, p. 24.) can easily digest all the
rest. It was none of my business to Examine, how often these Errors have been
repeated, though I told him, Remark p. 13. an Error in one Impression is easily
repeated, because the Frames of the Bible are often kept entire, and not broken
by half Sheets, as in printing other Books, and so the same set of Frames
serves for a second and third Impression, and so forward until the Letters
decay and grow useless.

But this He takes no Notice of.

IV. An Error of the Press deserves not to be taken to task, when no ill Use is
made of it.

I know no Body that has made any ill Use of ye in Acts 6. 3. Nor has he yet
been able to produce any one Writer among the Dissenters, that has made Use of
it against the Bishops. His Cameronian Story we shall Examine anon.

Does he know what ill Use may be made by ignorant People of other Errors of
the Press?

I took notice in my Remarks, of his loose and careless way of citing
Scriptures, and gave Ten Instances of it in that very Sermon, in which he
Charges the Dissenters with a literal Error of the Press, which he cannot prove
upon them. One might have expected more Exactness from so Critical a Censor.

To this he Answers, Jesus Christ and St. Paul, did not tie themselves to the
very Words of the Scripture in their Quotations, p. 34, 35. nor does Mr. Baxter.

Jesus Christ and St. Paul, were infallibly acted by the Holy Ghost in their
Quotations and had Reasons for their Variation: The Rector is not only
destitute of a Spirit of Infallibility, but of such Reasons as may Justify his
chopping and changing Texts of Scripture at his Pleasure. He does not pretend
to give any Reason why he should mis-quote so many Scriptures within the
compass of one short Sermon, nor is the thing Capable of any other but this,
that the Rector is a very careless Transcriber of the Scripture

I believe he cannot produce in Mr. Baxter, or scarce in any other Author so
many Texts of Scripture mis-quoted in one Sermon as there are in his: Much less
can he give an Instance of so Supine a Negligence in Mr. Baxter, as to
mis-render the Text of his Sermon. This the Rector has done, substituting the
singular (Word) add thou not unto his Word, for the plural (Words) add thou not
unto his Words.

I acquitted him from Corrupting the Sense, in this Variation, but gave this
necessary Caution, allow Men a liberty of a literal Variation from the Language
of the Holy Ghost, the Sense and meaning cannot be long secured. This he calls a
putid and ridiculous Remark.

The Rector 's ye and we in Acts 6. confirms my Remark; the Variation is in one
Letter, but the Sense and Meaning is destroyed by it. Suppose a bold
Transcriber should write Gods for God, this is a literal Variation, but such as
destroys the Unity of the Godhead.

CHAP. IV.
Being an Answer to his Fourth Chapter.
IN this Chapter the Rector endavours to confirm his Arguments to prove the
Dissenters guilty of corrupting Acts 6. 3. His Arguments are four, 1st. The
Alteration happened in 1638. when Presbytery was in the Ascendant. 2ly. It
favors the Dissenters. 3ly. The Episcopal Party designed not to Corrupt this
Place. 4ly. A Cameronian urged this Corrupt reading.

To his first Argument, that the Corruption happened in 38. when Presbytery was
in the Ascendant, I answered Three Things, First, That two Events may happen at
the same time, that have no relation to one another. Right, says he, when
there is nothing else to be alleged for confirming the Suspicion, but the
Turbulency of the Times, the Sway of the Populacy, and the Corruption of this
Place: All looked the same way, viz. The Extripation of Episcopacy. p. 36.

The Times were not Turbulent at Cambridge, where he says the first Corruption
happened, nor was there any Sway of Populacy there in the Year 38. Buck and
Daniel, the University Printers at that time, were both Episcopal Men, as I
observed in my Remarks, but this he takes no Notice of; is it likely that the
Cambridge Episcopal Printers, should conspire with the Scotch Covenanters to
root out Episcopacy in that Year?

I never understood before, that an Error of the Press had an influence for the
Extirpation of Episcopacy. The Rector has not produced any one Instance of any
English, or Scotch Presbyterians, who made Use of that Error to the prejudice
of Episcopacy at that Time. His Cameronian Story is a later Thing, and cannot
affect those Times.

2. I observed, that the Rector had answered his own Argument by acknowledging
the first Corruption an unwilling One, an accidental Slip, an unfortunate
Oversight, a mere Error of the Press and an unhappy Mistake.

In answer to this he cries, My Remarks are all of a Third, Lies and Stories,
that by the unwilling Error he meant the Presbyterian Government p. 36.

Be it so, all that can be inferred from it is, that I mistook his Meaning,
which a Man may easily do in a Writer, whose Notions are confused and
incoherent, and way of Expression muddy and perplexed. But he cannot deny, that
he has called it an accidental Slip, an unfortunate Oversight, a mere Error of
the Press, and an unhappy Mistake, which is sufficient to overthrow his
Argument.

True says he, yet unto the two first I added, I am willing to believe, etc.

The Remarks were just now with him all of a Third, Lies and Stories, and yet
in the same Breath, he cannot but acknowledge my Quotations to be True. If they
are all Lies and Stories, there is no Truth in them, but some Things are True,
by his own Confession; therefore he is inexcusable, for wherein he Judges
another, he Condemns himself. As Diogenes trampled upon Plato's Pride with a
greater Pride, so the Rector exhibits a lying Accusation against my Remarks,
that they are all Lies and Stories.

But he qualified some of his other Concessions, by saying, he was willing to
believe, that the first Corruption was an unfortunate Oversight and a mere
Error of Press.

If he is willing to believe this himself, what a disingenuous Thing is it in
him to endeavor to persuade others to the Contrary? The design of his Argument
is to make People believe the first Corruption in 38. was a designed Thing to
root out Episcopacy. Is this the Part of an honest Man Mr. Rector, to persuade
the World to believe what is contrary to your own Belief? I hope all your
Sermons are not of a Piece with this, you must not blame us for believing as
you do, that the Error you Charge us with was an unfortunate Oversight and a
mere Error of the Press, and then your Argument is out of Doors: Especially,
when you positively Affirm, that it was an accidental Slip, an unhappy Mistake.
Thus his first and chief Argument is eternally dismissed by himself, and his
Attempts to defend it, do but show the Rector to be as Ill a Man, as he is a
Disputant. To be willing to believe us Innocent, and at the same time to
endeavor to prove us Guilty, be-speaks a Disposition worse than that of
Pilate, who though he condemned Jesus Christ, when he had pronounced him
Innocent, did not seek for Evidence to prove him Guilty, he contented himself
to give an unjust Sentence to please the Jews: But the Rector did not seem to
be under the temptation of pleasing his own Party, who were so far from
extorting this unjust Sentence from him, that several of them have condemned
him for it; yet he has not only passed an unrighteous Judgment upon us, but has
done his utmost to load us with an unproved Guilt, after he had made our Crime,
an accidental Slip, and unhappy Mistake.

3. I proved, ex abundanti, that Presbytery was not in the Ascendant in England
in 38. That conformity was then at the highest, being urged by Arch Bishop Laud
and his Faction with great Severity, that many were suspended, deprived and
excommunicated for not reading the Book of Sports, in 37.

I gave an Account of about Thirty Ministers so used in the Bishopric of
Norwich. And in 38. many more were Suspended for not using Hoods and Surplices,
many were driven to foreign Countries, to Holland, New England, etc. whither
the Archbishop designed to pursue 'em, and to Dragoon 'em into the English
Conformity: I proved they were deprived not only of the Pulpit, but of the
Press also by a Decree passed in the Star Chamber, July the 1st, 1637. By
Virtue of this Decree, several Geneva Bibles with Notes were seized in Holland,
and a New Impression designed for England, was stopped from coming over. All
this I proved out of Rushworth and Heylyn, by which it appears what little
Credit is to be given to his secret History of the Presbyterians Corrupting the
Word of God in Thirty Eight, when he so notoriously Contradicts the Public
History of that Time.

To this the Rector Answers, He would not for any Thing be found tripping in
this Part of his Argument. p, 37.

That Mr. Owen blunders about the signification of these Words, being in the
Ascendant, which he understands of being in full Power and Authority, as if it
were the same with having the Ascendant: And least you should think him an
Ignoramus in the Mathematics, be informs us out of Lyburn, when a Star is said
to be in the Ascendant, which is, when having passed the Imum Caeli, and being
got into the the Ascendant, it bends it is course toward Medium Caeli and the
Meridian, i. e. is Ascending.

I hope you are Edified by this Piece of Learning: A Star is in the Ascendant,
when it is got into the Ascendant, and is Ascending: This puts me in Mind of
that famous Verse of Battus the Poet, Montibus, inquit, erant, and erant in
montibus illis;

Which you may thus English, in conformity to the Rector: The Mountains high he
did Ascend,
Ascending still, he did Ascend.


His Explications are transcendent Blunders, which would have been more
Excusable, if he had not set up for a Teacher of the Mathematics, and involved
a learned Author in a tautological Pleonasm.

The Rectors distinction between being in the Ascedant, and having the
Ascendant is a little Nice, he owns Presbytery had not the Ascendant in Thirty
Eight, and yet Affirms it was got into the Ascendant. But the happiness is,
this Distinction will do him no good, for my Argument proves Presbytery to be
so far from the Ascendant in his very Sense, that it makes it to be in the
Descendant in England that Year. Episcopacy was never higher, nor Presbytery
lower. The Episcopal Power was in its Meridian Altitude, having the High
Commission-Court and the Star Chamber to support it, and an Active Arch-Prelate
moving in the highest Orb, whose Influences were as Malignant to the Puritans
(the better Part of the Church of England then) as they were favorable to the
Men of Ceremony. In a Word, he had the Presbyterians (if any such there were)
under his Feet, and made this Climate too hot for them, that they were glad to
seek for shelter in the remotest Parts of the Earth. This I have proved out of
Heylyn, but the Rector wisely overlooks it. If being under Foot and trampled in
the dust be Ascending toward the Meridian, then were the Presbyterians in the
Ascendant in Thirty Eight. If bending their Course versus fines terrae, be the
same with bending it versus medium Caeli, they must be acknowledged to be in
the Ascendant.

But says he, That prodigious and terrible blazing Star, the Covenant, that
very Year begun to appear in Scotland, and soon drew the Eyes and Inclinations
of a great Part of England upon it. p. 37.

The Covenant appeared in Scotland long before Thirty Eight, and was subscribed
by King James I. as I showed in my Remarks. p. 8.

The renewing of the Covenant in Thirty Eight, proves Presbytery to be in the
Ascendant in Scotland, but what is this to England? Presbytery is now in the
Meridian in Scotland, I hope the Rector will not say it is so in England. It
must be so by his Argument, He undertook to prove Presbytery in the Ascendant
in England, It must be so by his Argument, He undertook to prove Presbytery in
the Ascedant in England, and his Argument is, it was so in Scotland, as if the
State of England and Scotland were always the same. Lets see the Strength of
this doughty Argument, the Presbyterian Covenant appeared in Scotland in Thirty
Eight, therefore the Presbyterians at Cambridge corrupted the Bible. Did the
Scotch Covenant depend upon altering of we into ye at Cambridge, or did the
Alteration depend on the Covenant? Was there a Conspiracy between the Scotch
Covenanters, and the Cambridge Episcopal Printers.

Suppose the Covenant drew the Inclinations of some English, this does not
prove Presbytery in the Ascendant in England, much less does it prove the
Presbyterians Guilty of Corrupting the Word of God. A Man may have Inclinations
to Presbytery, and not be a Corrupter of the Word of God --

Thus the Rector who would not for any Thing be found tripping in this Part of
his Argument, is found not only to Trip, but to Stumble and overthrow his
Rider, when he affirms Presbytery to be in the Ascendant in Thirty Eight, in
England. But suppose Presbytery had been in the Ascendant then, this will not
prove the Presbyterians Authors of that Corruption; 1st. It does not favor
their Principles. 2ly. Archbishop Laud had guarded the Press against them, as
I have proved, nor was the Rector able to Contradict me. 3ly. the Cambridge
Printers in Thirty Eight, were Episcopal Men, who ought in Justice to be
charged with the Errors of the Press. 4ly. The University of Cambridge was far
from being Presbyterian at that time, the Heads of Colleges being all
Episcopal, a List of which Mr. Francis Talents communicated to me, which I find
agreeing with Mr. Fullers Church History.
. To this the Rector Answers, That Mr. Owen talks like one who knows not
Cambridge. Nor had diligence enough to inform himself, and Mr. Talents, he
fears is past his Memory and Judgment not to say his Integrity. p. 37. 39.

Mr. Owen has known Cambridge above twenty Years ago when he was admitted
Student there, Mr. Talents Judgment, Memory and Integrity deserves not to be
reflected on, since Mr. Fuller in his History of the University of Cambridge
fully writes the same thing he mentioned.

But says he, besides these sixteen Heads, there are Fellows, Scholars,
Noblemen a Follow-Commoners, Persioners and Sisars or Servitors, which make up
about 2000, among which there were many that favored Presbytery, especially in
Emanuel, which not long after furnished six Colleges with Heads, and it was
called pure Emanuel; from the abundance of Puritans in it. p. 39.

The Rector informs us of what every body knows, that there are a great many
Students in Cambridge, and if he can find there five or six Presbyterians among
two Thousand Scholars, he thinks he has proved his Charge against that Party of
Corrupting the Word of God. This puts me in Mind of a Passage in Lactamius, He
says, that as Diocletian was Sacrificing, and the ordinary Marks in the
Intrailes of the Sacrifices not appearing, Tages, that were set over the
Diviners, said, that their Rites did not succeed, because there were some
profane Persons (i. e. Christians) that had thrust themselves into the
Assembly. Lactant of the Prim. Pers. Ergl. by Dr. Burnet. p. 75.
This occasioned the last and great Persecution of the Christians under that
Emperor and his Colleagues. The Rector is as just to the Furitans, as the Pagan
Priests were to the Ancient Christians, their being upon the spot is sufficient
to make the one and the other Criminals. Thus St. Paul was Accused for bringing
Greeks into the Temple, and the Evidence was, they had seen Trophimus with him
in the City. Acts 21. 28, 29.

I have heard of a certain late Judge, that as he passed a dirty Place in
London-Streets, he found a Man sheltring himself under a Belcony from a Shower
of Rain. Sir, says he, to the Man I will have you indicted for this Nuisance.
The Man told him, he was a Stranger there, that is nothing, replies the Judge, I
have found you on the Premises, and you must Answer for the Nuisance.

The Rector thinks he has found a few Puritans in Cambridge in Thirty Eight,
among near two Thousand Churchmen, and they must be Guilty of the Corruptive
Nuisance, because he has found 'em on the Premises.

But that which spoils all is, the Puritans were Members of the Church of
England, and generally of the Episcopal Judgment, nay the Moderate and Pious
Bishops could not escape that Nickname, which was applied to all Calvinists in
Doctrine, as Dr. Heylyn confesses. Life of Archbishop Laud. p. 124.
Though in strictness the Name was given to the Non-con-formists, which were very
few at that time, the Terms of Conformity not being screwed up to the present
height.

But the Heads of Colledgs were no Puritans, no not Dr. Haldsworth Master of
Emanuel, who was put out by the Parliament; and any Man will judge of the State
of the University, and indeed of all Societies, by the Governing Party, who
have a considerable Influence in their respective Provinces. If Cambridge
supplied Trinity College, Oxford, with ten Fellows that were for the
Parliament (as he affirms p. 39.) It does not follow they were Presbyterians
before, for we know its usual for abundance of People to change with the Times;
I doubt not but the Rector can Name the Men who took the Covenant and the
Engagement; and after all, approved themselves to be right Episcopal-Men.
Besides, many of those that were made Fellows at Oxford in the Year 1638. were
very Young, and not admitted in Cambridge till after 1648.

From the whole it appears that Presbytery in Thirty Eight, was not in the
Ascendant in England, especially in Cambridge where all the Heads of Colleges
were Episcopal.

Thus I have exposed the weak Vindication of his First Argument from the
Circumstance of Time.

I affirmed the Scotch Covenant and the Presbyterian Government in Scotland to
be more Ancient than Thirty Eight, which the Rector cannot deny, but he
endeavors to prove from the Fundamental Charter of Presbyter examined, etc.
that the Reformation in Scotland was first cast into the Episcopal Platform,
and continued so for fifteen Years. p. 40.

The Pamphlet to which he refers, has been learnedly answered by Dr. Rule in
his good old Way defended, to which I refer the Reader.

The Reformation there was gradually, and with much opposition carried on, as
it was here in England, and no wonder, if in such a struggle Esau came forth
before Jacob, but certain it is, when they came to some degree of Settlement.
Presbytery was set up, and the confession of Faith, in which they promised to
ad-here to that Government, was signed by King James the I. and his Household,
Anno 1580. and by Persons of all Ranks Anno 1581. by Ordinance of the Council,
and Acts of the General Assembly. It was subscribed again by all Persons, Anno
Domini 1590. with a General Band for maintenance of the true Religion and the
Kings Person.

I am still of Opinion (says he), That the Scotch Kirk put away the Wife of
its Youth, I mean Episcopacy, when it reformed from Popery, and joined it self
unto an Harlot (I mean Presbytery).

I think Presbytery as Honest as Episcopacy, and I am sure the Church lost it is
purity, and degenerated into a Harlot, under the Lordly and Tyranical
Government of Popish Bishops. p. 41.

What an honorable Character does this Gentleman give to the Reformation, in
which not only Scotland, but most of the foreign Protestant Churches are
concerned? When they cast off Idolatrous Popish Bishops, they put away the Wife
of their Youth; when they put themselves under the Conduct of Protestant
Pastors, they joined themselves to a Harlot. In plain English, they lived in
chaste Wedlock under Popery, and defiled the Marriage Bed, when they became
Protestants. This looks more like the Language of a Jesuit than of a
Protestant-Minister.

The Rector, in his Sermon basely reflected upon the ACT of Settling Presbytery
in Scotland (though touched by the Royal Scepter), and also upon his Majesty's
Words in his Letter of Instructions to his Commissioner in Scotland, both which
affirms Presbytery most agreeable to the Inclination of the Scotch Nation,
which is such another Reason (faith he) as an Adultrer might give for his
Wantomess. He would fain Palliate this inexcusable Indecency toward the King
(which I complained of) though he comes off but sorrily.

1st. This is the first time (says he), I ever heard of a Presbyterian having
any due regard unto a Kings Honor, and perhaps it will be the last, if the
Commonwealth Principle gets a little more footing among us. p. 41.

The Presbyterians have approved themselves to be as Good Subjects as any of
their Neighbors, both in this and neighboring Countries; for the neighboring
Countries let him ask the French Protestants, and the persecuted Vaudois: For
this, let him consult their Confessions, which assert Obedience and Subjection
to the Higher Powers. I have known several Presbyterians who had that regard to
a Kings Honor, as to quit all their Preferments rather then take the
Engagement, to exclude the King when many Episcopal Men submitted to it. It Is
true, they generally took Part with the Parliament in our unhappy Civil Wars,
and so did abundance of Churchmen: But Passive Obedience and Non-resistance in
1688. have eminently justified Forty One.

If the Republican Principle gets footing, its amongst some of his Jacobite
Brethren, who under Color of that Principle would promote the Interest of
their Old Master. I know not any one Presbyterian who is for a Commonwealth: I
confess, they are not for making Princes Absolute, as the Rector is, who
declares that the King's Coronation Oath is a voluntary Act of Grace, unto
which the King is not obliged by the Fundamental Constitution, and that the
Prince, in Effect, is the sole sovereign Power, if he pleases to usurp and
exercise it Sermon. of Subjection, by the Rector of Bury, p. 21, 22.
.

2ly. It Is no reflection on the King (adds he) to deride the Scots Reason. The
Scotch Parliament Reason for the ACT was their Inclination; the King was to
please them.

I say, it is a reflection on the King to deride their Reason, when he had
approved it, and inserted it into his Letter of Instructions to his
Commissioner in Scotland. The Letters of Princes and their Laws confirmed in
Parliament, ought to be treated with more Respect, or at least with less Scorn,
especially by a Person who not only enjoys his Preferments under His Majesty's
Protection, but has taught us such an entire resignation to the Will of the
Sovereign, that he allows us not the Liberty of Petitioning and Addressing him,
when we are Aggrieved. Nay, we are bound in Conscience to obey, though he should
prove a Tyrant, and it is an Act of Grace in him to oblige himself to govern
according to the Laws: For he is the sole Sovereign Power, and is accountable
to none but God for any Misgovernment. In a Word, he gives the Prince the most
Arbitrary Power, and deprives the Subject from asserting his own Privileges
Sermon. of Subj. p. 13. 21, 22.
.

For such a Man to deride the Acts of his Prince, looks not only Ungrateful and
Inconsistent, but may tempt us to suspect, that either he does not believe his
own Doctrine, or else that he Calculated it for the Episcopal Meridian; that
is, whilst Princes support Episcopacy, which I dare say, is agreeable to his
Inclination, we are to honor and obey them; but if they Favor Presbytery we
may deride their Letters and Royal Acts. In a Word, whilst the King pleases the
Rectors Inclinations he is his Humble Slave, and will allow him an un-bounded
Power; but if he comply with the Scotch Inclination, our Loyal Rector dare
deride the Reason of his Compliance, and ridicule his Royal Wisdom, under
pretense of exposing the Scots Reason. It Is pity but this Gentleman had been of
his Majesty's Council, to advise him how to Pen his Letters, and to instruct
him how to Word his Instructions to his Prime Ministers of State.

ARGUMENT II.
His 2d. Argument to prove the Dissenters Guilty of Corrupting the Word of God,
is this, The Corruption in appearance favors the Dissenters, and their Design,
against Episcopacy.
TO this Argument I answered three Things,

1st. He durst not say, the Corruption favors the Dissenters, for he knows the
Contrary: But he slily says it does in appearance favor them; this appearance
is only to himself, for I believe no Dissenter ever thought of it. This he
takes no notice of.

2ly. I told him that I knew no Principle of any sober Dissenters, that is
favored by this Corruption. I referred him to the Directory for Ordination, and
the Heads of Agreement between the Presbyterians and Congregational Men in
(1691.) in both which the Power of Ordination is lodged in the Ministers, and
not in the People, to whom they ascribe only the Power of Choosing them,
according to this very Text (Acts 6. 3.) and the Rector's concurrent Testimony,
if that were of any Validity Tent. Novum. p. 4.
.

He allows the People as much Power in making their Minister as the Dissenters
do, and therefore by this Argument, must either acquit them, or condemn himself.

Here the Water sticks to the Rector, he knows not which way to turn him about,
rather than retract his malicious Calumny, like a Man hardoned in Sin, he will
make use of any sorry shift to Paliate his Guilt, and Expose the Innocent.

He cannot deny this to be the Judgment of the Dissenters, that Ordination
belongs to Ministers, and Election ordinarily to the People. But says he,
among us the Bishop Institutes and Appoints by an Act altogether distinct from
Ordination, as we believe was the* Case of the Deacons: But among the
Dissenters the Pastors Ordain, and the People choose and appoint 'em. p. 43.

He may believe what he pleases, but the Text mentions no other Appointment of
the Apostles, but what was by Prayer and Imposition of Hands, Acts 6. 3, 6.
which he cannot deny to be meant of Ordination.

He disingenuously mis-represents us, when he says the People Choose and
Appoint, they Choose indeed, but the Ministers Appoint or Ordain 'em to the
Office, which they very rarely or never do Sine Titulo.

I noted, that the Dissenters could be under no Temptation to Corrupt this
Place, the Peoples power of choosing their Ministers* being asserted in this
very Text, Acts 6. 3. Look ye out among you, etc. and v. 5. they chose Stephen,
etc.

To this he ridiculously replies, they chose not the Persons immediately into
the Office designed them. p. 44.

The Presbyterians never asserted such an Election, which he cannot but know,
though he thinks fit to abuse them. The Peoples choice does not appoint or
establish 'em in their Office, nor oblige the Ministers to ordain 'em, if they
judge them not duly qualified. --

As to his granting the Peoples power of choosing their Ministers, he says, he
is of the same Opinion still, being under no necessity to alter it, that he is
sensible of.

I know not what changes in Opinion, his Necessities may oblige him to, but if
his Argument or any other Necessity require it, it seems he can change as there
is Occasion.

It is certain at present he allows the People as much Power in choosing their
Ministers as we do: And therefore this Corruption does no more favor us, than
it does the Rector, who must either honestly acquit us or condemn himself.

3ly. I observed farther, that the Dissenters look on the VII. Deacons, as
Ministers at Tables, and not of the Word. For proof of this I referred him to
the Directory, and inferred that it is not likely they should Corrupt a Text to
assert the Peoples power in making Gospel Ministers, which in their Opinion
speaks not of those that Minister in Gospel Mysteries.

The Rector answers, I cannot help these Men's Judgments if they do not; or will
not see it, it is because there is no light in them. p. 45.

Nor can I help this Man's Obstinacy who shuts his Eyes against the Light, for
the question is not here, whether the Dissenters be in the Right, as to their
Opinion of Deacons, but whether or no they take 'em as Ministers of Tables and
not of the Word?

This I proved and he cannot deny it: Now if this be their Notion of Deacons,
my Inference holds good, they would not Corrupt a Text to assert the Peoples
power, in making Gospel Ministers which in their Opinion speaks not of those
that Minister in Gospel Mysteries.

His Argument is, the Corruption favors the Dissenters, I answer in the
Negative, for which I give this Reason, this Text speaks not of Ministers of
the Word in their Opinion, and therefore they would not Corrupt it to assert
the Peoples power in making Ministers. Here he asks us an impertinent Question,
why do we not Ordian our Deacons, or Overseeres of the Poor as the Apostles
did? p. 45.

We set them not apart by imposition of Hands, for the same Reason that the
Church of England Ordains them not. None will say, that we are necessarily
obliged to use Imposition of Hands in all cases wherein we find it used in
Scripture. Though we condemn not those that Ordain their Deacons, as some
Dissenters do.

I have now dismissed his 2d. Argument, and made it appear that the Corruption
charged upon us does not only not favor any Principles of ours, but is
inconsistent with 'em.

Before I proceed to his 3d. Argument, I must take notice of a base Suggestion,
as if I had not obtained my former Post at Wr. by fair and honest Means, but
had betrayed, and by a paultrey Trick supplanted Mr. B. my Predecessor, and
stepped into his Place, and discovered the Secrets of my inward Friend and
Confident, who disclosed his Heart to me as to a Confessor. p. 45.

I was so far from supplanting and betraying Mr. B. at Wr. that I knew nothing
of the Difference between him and the Congregation, which occasioned his
Deserting them, until Mr. Tongue (now of Coventry) was actually chosen by them,
and rended with them, I being then in London. And my Post there has been and
is hitherto Charitably to supply 'em, and that mostly to my Charge, until they
be settled under a Minister of their own.

I have often recommended Mr. B. to them, but for some Reasons I find 'em not
willing to be farther concerned with him.

I know of no Secrets he ever Committed to me, and I challenge him or any other
Person to mention any Secrets I ever Divulged to his Prejudice. I always
respected him for his true Worth, but we never had any great Intimacy or inward
Friendship, to make me either his Confident or Confessor.

ARGUMENT III.
His 3d. Argument is this, It cannot be that the Episcopal Party designed to
Corrupt this Place* for that would be to destroy, what their Church Government
seems to be built on.
I Answered, this proves nothing against the Dissenters, nor did they charge
the Episcopal Party with any design of Corrupting it, though the Press was in
their Hands, and strictly guarded against the Puritans in the Year. 1638.

The Rector according to his wonted Ingennity replies, if it were designedly
done, or afterward propagated with design, then because Mr. Owen acquitted us,
the Dissenters must confess Guilty. p. 46.

Is this Candid, because we charitably acquit the Episcopal Party from any
Design of Corrupting it, we must therefore acknowledge our selves Guilty.

We do not say it was designedly done, nor do I know any body that says so (and
un-saith it again in another humor) but the inconsistent Rector. We say the
Press was in the Hands of the Church-Party when it was first done, and
therefore in Justice they must be charged with the Error of the Press. Had the
Press been in Presbyterian Hands, the Rector would have urged it for a
Demonstration, that certainly they were Guilty of the Corruption, because it
first happened when they had the Power of the Press: But the Press was in
Episcopal Hands, therefore the Corruption must be at their Door.

If one would allow himself the Liberty of Arguing from the same Topics with
the Rector, he might retort the Charge of Corrupting this Place on the
Episcopal Party, and that designedly too. 1st. The Press was in their Hands in
Thirty Eight, when the first Corruption happened. 2ly. It was in their Hands,
when most of the rest happened, and who should be Guilty of Corrupting the
Place, but those that had Power to do it, without Suspicion? 3ly. The
Corruption favors the Peoples Power in making their own Ministers. Now it is
certain, the Episcopal Party take the Deacons in Acts 6. 3. to be real
Ministers, which the Dissenters do not: Therefore the Corruption favors their
Opinion, and they may be supposed the Guilty Persons. It does not favor the
Dissenters Sense of that Place, and it does that of the Episcopalists. 4. It
favors a Principle much in Vogue among the Church-Party, especially about
Thirty Eight, that all Power is Originally in the People.

This Principle is asserted by Mr. Hooker, the Oracle of the Episcopal-Men, in
his Eccles. Polity, lib. 1. and lib. 8.

Archbishop Cranmer, says in the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a
Bishop or a Presbyter, needs no Consecration by the Scripture, for Election or
Appointing Dr. Stillingfleet, Iren. p. 39.
thereto is sufficient.

And also by Bishop Bilson, and by Mr. Lawson, who expressly Affirms that the
(...) or primary Subject of the Power of the Keys is in the whole Church.
Polit. Sacra. and Civil. cap. 13.
And by Bishop Andrews, Tortura Torti, p. 42.

Now who should be suspected to have designedly Corrupted this Place, but that
Party who so much advance the Popular Principle?

Here is Four Arguments to the Rectors Four Arguments, and every one of them as
good as his, but far be it from me to Charge either the Episcopal or Dissenting
Party with a Design to Corrupt the Word of God. The Error is accidental as many
more are, and proceeds from the carelessness of the Corrector (who I hear is
usually an Episcopal Minister) as well as the unconcerndness of the supreme
Pastors, who ought to depute Persons of Judgment, Diligence and Integrity to
Examine the several Editions of the Bible.

I could easily enlarge upon these Arguments, and make 'em look more Probable
than those of the Rectors, if I were under the influences of a malignant
Jealousy and a suspicious Un-charitableness as he is, or took pleasure in the
sordid Act of exposing a Party to the common Prejudice of Religion, as he does.
But I leave this Artifice to our ill-natured Accuser, and only mention these
Things, to show the Invalidity of his Arguments, and what an easy Thing it is
for a Person, who imploys his Talent to so ill an Intention, to form probable
Arguments that may ground a Suspicion, that the Episcopal Party are Corrupters
of the Word of God: And it would not be impossible to pick up two or three idle
Stories, to confirm so malicious a Charge, as the Rector has done, which make
up his fourth Argument,

ARGUMENT IV.
This 4th. Argument, is deduced from the Cameronian's citing this Corrupt Place
in favor of the Peoples Power, to set up their own Teachers.
TO this I answered, 1st. The Story concerns not the English Presbyterians.
Does our Accuser manage his Evidence with common Honesty? He puts in a Charge
against the Body of English Dissenters, and brings in for Guilty a single
Scotch Cameronian.

2ly. The Scotch Evidence is, by hearsay, without Name, Person, Time or Place.
He promised a good circumstantial Proof, Sermon. p. 23. and he gives us one
Divested of all it is Circumstances.

3ly. It Is scarce Credible, that a Cameronian should assert a Doctrine contrary
to the Presbyterian Principles.

4ly. Suppose some ignorant Cameronian had been abused, or had abused others by
this Corrupt reading -- must the Error of one Man be charged on the whole
Church of Scotland? And must the Error of one Scotch-Man be charged on all the
English Presbyterians? This is such a piece of Justice, as none will defend,
but a Haman, who seeks to be revenged upon all the Jews, because one Mordecai
had offended.

The Rector replies,

1st. That for Matter of Fact, he thinks it unquestionable, it is thus; The
honorable Colonel Fairfax, reported this Fact to Mr. Piggot Vicar of
Rochdale, in the hearing of several, in particular of Mr. Robert Milne, a
Dissenter: And finding several English Bibles, which were sent from private
Houses, Corrupted, declared, that he thought the Presbyterians had some knavish
Design. A German Gentleman in the company pulled a Dutch Testament of Luther's
Translation out of his Pocket, wherein he read we, and added, he was certain
the Presbyterians in Germany and in Scotland (where he had lately been) were
Knaves, and it was well if they were better in England. p. 47.

This Account does not make the Cameronian-Tale a whit the more Credible,
because.

1st. It it uncertain whether Coll. Fairfax reported it. Mr. Milne who is made
a Party to this Story, Affirms he never was in Company with Coll. Fairfax, nor
did he see him when he was at Rochdale, being from home that day, so that the
Report depends upon the single Testimony of Mr. Piggot, which how far it will
pass, I leave to those to judge who know the Man, and the manner of his
Conversation.

2ly. If Coll. Fairfax reported it, it does not at all make it unquestionable,
for it is but a single Evidence, nor does he say, he heard the Cameronian
himself urge this Corrupt reading, perhaps the Story passed twenty Hands before
it reached him; nor does he Name the Person, or Place, or Time, which are
shrewd Evidences, that the Story is Spurious. Such a blind Evidence as this,
would look ridiculous in a Court of Justice, but serves the Rector's turn, who
does not pretend to observe the troublesome Forms of Justice in the Management
of his Charge.

3ly. This Story seems to have been the Entertainment over their Cups (where
every thing that is said is not Gospel), for as he tells us, they sent for
Bibles from private Houses: One may conclude then they were now at a Public
House.

This confirms the Truth of what I suspected in my Remarks, p. 12. That he had
picked up a spurious Story, perhaps in the next Coffee-House, or Alehouse, and
this he legitimates and recommends from the Pulpit, as a Sacred Oracle of God.
The Rector must needs Grace the Pulpit, when he borrows Materials for his
Sermons out of the Cann-Office.

4ly. His German Gentleman is a Stranger, and wants a Voucher for his Varacity,
but by his own Account one may suspect he had been in Scotland assisting at the
Barbarous Butcheries there, and Dragooning the Presbyterians into Conformity:
However it be, he charges not the German Presbyteriaas, no nor the Scotch with
Corrupting the Word of God, though he complements 'em with the Title of Knaves.
Who he means by the Presbyterians in Germany is doubtful, for there are no
Protestant Bishops there of the English Species. If one may judge ex Vngue
Leonem, this German was a Popish Soldier of Fortune, and condemns all the
German Protestants for Knaves: Or he was a bigoted Lutheran, and loved the
Calvinists as the Rector does the Presbyterians. Is not the Rector ashamed to
creep into Alehouses, and there to muster up Red-Coats if not Papists for
Evidence against us? He brings for Evidence against the English, a Scotch
Cameronian, he brings for Evidence against the Scotch a German Papist. Most
Noble Rector! Your way of proving Matters of Fact is very Singular, you prove
your Cameronian Story by one single Witness, and what he Deposes is by
hearsay: You prove the German and Scotch Presbyterians to be all Knaves by
another single Witness and he an outlandish one. We need not go as far as
Germany for Witnesses to prove you Knavish in the Management of your Charge. So
much of his Cameronians STORY.

He has the Impudence to defend his Imputing the unproved Error of one
Cameronian to all the English Presbyterians. Thus, says he, Haman's Offense
was revenged upon many Thousands of Persons, and Saul's upon Seven of his
Children, and the Note-maker fell foul upon the whole Body of the Episcopal
Church, for a supposed Fault of my Lord Bishop of Salisbury. p. 48.

The Jews destroying so many Thousands of Persons, was not to revenge Haman's
Offense, but to defend themselves against those that assaulted them, as is
expressly affirmed in Esth. 8. 11. and 9. 2. The Rector is so taken up with
Cameronian Stories, that he is not at leisure to acquaint himself with
Scripture History.

It Is true Seven of Readiness Sons were hanged up unto the Lord (to whom they had
forfeited their Lives) at the desire of the Gibeonites, whom Saul had destroyed
contrary to the Oath of God: But what is this to the imputing of the Error of
one Man, whose Name no body knows, to all the Presbyterians of England and
Scotland? The Rector is good at proving, I would advise him to pick up some
other Story to prove all the Presbyterians of both Nations, to be the Natural
Offspring of this Cameronian, and when he has done so, let him play the
Gibeonite, and hang them up with the Sons of Saul. It Is well we are not at this
Man's Mercy; the very Gibeonites contented themselves with Seven of Readiness
Sons, but the Rector as if he were of the Remnant of Amaleck, seeks with Haman
to revenge the Fault of One upon a whole Party.

The Note-maker from whom he would borrow a Plea for his Injustice, will do him
no Service, for he does not Charge any Personal Fault of the Bishop of
Salisbury upon the whole Body of the Episcopal Church. He only take occasion
(as far as I remember for it is some time since I read him) from the Bishops
charging the Dissenters with Schism, to retort it upon the Church, which he
thinks Guilty of it.

CHAP. V.
Containing a reply to his Fifth Chapter.
HAVING answered his Four Arguments I offered more Considerations to show the
Falsity of the Rectors Charge, as 1st. No Protestant Dissenters have ever urged
that corrupt reading in favor of a Popular Government of the Church in their
Writings. Let him produce, if he can, any one Argument supported by this false
reading in all their Writings.

All that the Rector pretends to say to this, is, That it is a bold Touch, to
be so Positive in a Negative. p. 48.

Why does not he prove the Affirmative, when I challenge him to it? I will be
bold to maintain the Negative, until he has proved the Affirmative, which I am
sure he can never do.

But one Mr. Jolly (as he tells us) some while ago, since Dead, alleged this
Corrupt reading at Duckenfield Hall, in discourse with Mr. Ellison Rector of
Ashton under Line. p. 48.

The Rector of Bury and his Brother of Ashton under Line, are well advised in
their Reports, the one tells a Story of a Nameless Cameronian in another
Kingdom, the other Names his Person, but you must look for him in another
World. They are resolved to put us out of all Hopes of being ever able to
Examine the Truth of their Tales.

He tells such another Story (in which no Person are named) of some Gentleman
in Bolton, who heard some Dissenters in a dispute about Religion, Cite Acts 6.
as the Cameronian did, and appealed to the Scotch Bibles.

By this last Passage I suspect this Story to have come out of the same Mint
with the Former, for very few of the Scotch Bibles are mis-printed, as we shall
presently make appear.

It Is observable that neither Mr. Ellison, nor the Gentleman at Bolton, do say,
That these Dissenters urged this Corrupt reading to prove the Peoples Power in
making their own Ministers, only that they read ye for we, which they might
ignorantly do (finding it so in their Bibles) and not urge it as an Argument to
support an Error.

Perhaps they might refer to that Place, to prove the Peoples Power to choose
their own Ministers which is there asserted, without this Corrupt reading.

But suppose they mis-applied this False reading, it was their Ignorance, which
no Man will justify.

Ay, but doubtless they had been furnished with this Argument by some of their
Leaders. -- p. 49.

He ought to prove that, before he affirm with such assurance. If any of his
Flock should mistake the Sense of any Scripture, he would think it hard to be
charged with the Error.

Let him Name if he can, any of their Leaders that have ever recommended this
False reading to their People, and I do promise we shall renounce him as
unworthy the Name of a Christian, much more of a Minister.

But he has had named unto him one of their Leaders, Mr. R. Baldwin (his Mr.
Calvin), who detected and censured this Corruption, in an Ordination Sermon
long before his Rectorship.

And there are some who well remember, that the Reverend Mr. Philip Henry many
Years ago in his Exposition of Acts 6. took notice of the Mis-printing of ye
for we in some Editions, and took Care to rectify it.

It Is remarkable here, as he goes on, how the Dissenters more especially
appealed to the Scotch Bibles. I believe Mr. Owen will be Wiser then to give a
Catalogue of the Corrupted Editions in Scotland, though he has in Part promised
it. I shall be beholden to him, if he will be pleased to Answer my Expectation
herein. p. 49.

I am willing to oblige him, if possible, and to perform my Promise, I wrote to
the Reverend Doctor Rule, Principal of the College of Edinburgh, who sent me
this Account of the Scotch Editions; I shall give it in his own Words -- It
required some time to search for our Impressions of the Bible. I find there was
one in 1673. which is out of Print, I can find no Copy of it. One 1676. Octavo,
which in Acts 6. 3. has we. One 1678. Quarto, has we. One 1691. Octavo, has
we. One 1694. Twelves, has we. One 1694. Twelves, being Cann's Bible has we.
One 1694. Quarto, has we. One 1697. Twelves, has we. One 1675. Twelves has
ye. One 1686. has ye: This last was finished in 1688. so that there were none
printed here with that Corruption, save two (some speak of a third, but I could
not find it) and both these under Episcopacy. Thus far the Doctor; I shall
subjoyn the Vote of the General Assembly, which he was pleased also to
Communicate.

At Edinburgh, January 15th School,
THE General Assembly of this National Church being informed that the
Presbyterians (and particularly these of Scotland) are charged in a Sermon
preached by Thomas Gipps Rector of Bury, now printed and published, as
Corrupters of the Word of God, with Design to support the Peoples Power in
setting up Ministers over themselves; And that this Corruption is made by them
Acts 6. 3. by causing it to be Printed, Whom ye may appoint over this Business,
instead of whom We may appoint: Therefore the General Assembly do unanimously
declare, that as they allow no Power in the People, but only in Pastors of the
Church to Appoint and Ordain Church Officers, so they disclaim the above
mentioned Error of the Press, if any such be found in any Bibles Printed in
this Nation, And do declare they do not own any other Reading of that Text, to
be according to the Original, but whom We may appoint, etc. Nor do they know,
nor can learn, that ever any in this Nation did publikly use or apply that Text
to prove the Peoples Power in Ordaining their Ministers. Extracted by me,

J. Bannatyne Cls. Syn. National.

This Vote as Dr. Rule adds, is a full and sufficient Vindication of Scotch
Presbyterians from the Aspersion of Corrupting the Word of God, which the
Author ye mention does with no less Ignorance than Falsehood load us with. For,
nor only do we abhor such Practices, knowing that the Truth of God is not
established by our Lie, But that Corruption of the Text should destroy our
Principle about the Authoritative Mission of Church Officers, so far it is from
affirming it. The Story of the Cameronian Preacher may be looked on as a mere
Fiction: For though in our Assembly are Ministers and Elders from all Parts of
the Nation, none of them do say (though publicly and privately spoken to about
it) that ever they have heard it.

I desire the Reader here to observe.

1st. That the Cameronian Story, with which the Rector has made such a Noise,
is not so much as known in Scotland. It seems then to have been contrived in
England, and perhaps at Rochdale, with design to furnish the Rector with proper
Materials for his Corruption -- Sermon. It was Calculated for the Meridian of
Manchester, though it might indifferently serve for any Part of England. The
Episcopal Dissenters in Scotland have published abundance of extravagant
Stories to reproach the Establishment there, but can any one imagine they would
overlook the Rectors Story, had there been the least Color for it?

2ly. It falls out a little unluckily that the two Scotch Editions, that were
mis-printed, happened under the Bishops there, and that when they were in full
Power.

3ly. Cann's Scotch Edition has we, as the two English ones have, which I
Noted in my Remarks. He was a rigid Brownist, but did not mis-print this Place.
So much of the Scotch Editions.

II. I Remarked that the Dissenters have written several Commentaries on the
New Testament, and not one of them have attempted to confirm the Corrupt
reading in Acts 6. 3.

This Observation which clears 'em from Designing to Corrupt that Place, our
Author overlooks.

III. I argued, that had the Corruption been designed in favor of the
Dissenters, it would have been promoted when they were uppermost.

But having examined most Editions between 1640, and 1684. I can find but three
Corrupt Editions under the Parliament. And no less than thirty three under King
Charles the II. a Table of which I have given in my Remarks. Most of the
Corrupt Editions were in that Reign, when the Episcopal Party were uppermost
and had the sole Management of the Press.

To this he says, 1st. the Dissenters need not when they were uppermost, for
they had gained their Point by the Sword. p. 49.

Was there ever a more impertinent Caviller? His Argument above was, they
Corrupted the Word of God, because Presbytery was in the Ascendent, but now
they are in the Vertical, he knows not whether they would Corrupt it or no:
That is when they had not the Power of the Press he suspects they Corrupted
this Place, but when they had the Power of it, he allows they did not Corrupt
it.

His next Answer is more absurd, which is thus,

2ly. Though most of the faulty Editions were set forth in King Charles II. Days,
when the Dissenters were undermost, yet they may be supposed to have promoted
the Corruption even then. p. 49.

To Suppose is one Thing, to Prove an other, one may suppose twenty ill Things
of the Rector, as that he is unsound in his Principles, secretly Corrupt in his
Morals, and a disguised Adversary to the Government, would he like it, that
some uncharitable Person should report this? And when he calls upon him to
prove it, to come off with telling him, I did but suppose it? In this Manner he
serves us, instead of proving, he supposes. He has forgotten the old Maxim of
the Schools, supponere non ponit esse.

3ly. He adds, the Bishops had not in King Charles II. Reign the Management of
the Press: It Is in the Hands of Patentees, who cannot easily be controlled in
their business. The Bishops have no Authority, so much as to Correct the
Impressions of the Bible.

I said, the Bishops and Episcopal Party (p. 15 and 17.) had the Management of
the Press, and that he cannot deny. It Is certain the Bishops had as much Power
over the Press in King Charles II. time, as the Presbyterians had under the
Parliament. For the State Printers have always Patents.

If the Bishops have no Power to Correct the Impressions of the Bible, they may
depute able Persons to review 'em, and if they find them faulty, they may
Complain to the King, to whom he says the Printers are answerable, and get 'em
punished according to Law.

Let the Bishops Power be what it will, it is nothing to the Argument in Hand,
which is this, The Dissenters cannot be Charged with the Errors of the Press in
King Charles II. time, because the Episcopal Party were uppermost, and had the
Management of the Press, with which the Dissenters had nothing to do: Except it
were in the publishing an Octavo Impression of the British Bible, which was
promoted by the Charity and Pains of that great exemplar of Primitive
Christianity, Mr. Thomas Gouge, and Corrected by Mr. Stephen Hughes, and Mr.
Charles Edwards, two Dissenting Ministers: And this Impression has we in Acts
6. 3. It was Printed by Bill, Barker, etc. London, 1678. There Is another large
Octavo Impression of the British Bible, Printed by Bill and Newcomb, London,
1690. and Corrected by Mr. David Jones, a Dissenting Minister, this also has
we in Acts 6. 3. These deserve the more Consideration, because they are the
only Impressions of the Bible (that I ever could hear of) Corrected by
Dissenting Ministers, and they might have been easily Corrupted without the
Knowledge of the Printers (who are Strangers to the British Language) had the
Dissenters any design to falsify the Scriptures, as the Rector supposes. These
two Impressions, Corrected by Dissenters, are a sufficient Vindication of them,
from the Rector's calumnies.

Observe this Man's Candor, he suggests, that the Bishops who were uppermost in
King Charles II. time, could not Control the King's Printers to prevent
Corruptions, and yet insinuates as if the Dissenters, who were undermost, could
Control 'em, to make Corruptions in the Bible.

4ly. Let the Minister, says he, give us an instance of any other mistake in
Printing, whereupon depends any Controversy in Religion, so frequently
Committed in so many Presses, and in so many distant Places, Cambridge, Oxford,
London, Edinburgh, and it shall suffice. Who can believe an Erratum to be
repeated thus often by chance. p. 50.

1st. I gave a Reason already, why it is very possible an Error in one Edition
of the Bible may be easily propagated, because the Frames are often kept
entire, which is not done, or very rarely in other Books. I gave this Reason in
my Remarks, but he overlooked it, and puts me to the trouble of repeating it.

2ly. I have proved that the frequent repetition of the Mistake was when the
Bishops were in supreme Power, and the Press in the Hands of the Episcopal
Party. They therefore must bear the blame of it, who ought to have given us
more Correct Editions.

3ly. Since he puts me upon it, I will give him an instance of a Corruption, a
thousand times Worse than a mistake in Printing, whereupon a Controversy in
Religion depends, repeated in all the Editions of the Common Prayer, I have yet
met with.

The words are in the Office of Commination, Cursed is the Man that makes any
carved or melten Image to worship it. These Words are said, to be taken out of
Deuteronomy. 27. 15. where they are thus, Cursed be the Man that makes any graven or
molten Image, an abomination unto the Lord, the work of the Hands of the
Crafts-Man, and puts it in a secret Place. --

In the Liturgy the words, to worship it, are added to the Text, which
denounces a Curse upon such as make an Image for any Religious Ends, as
suppose to beget in us good reflections, to be a help to our Devotions, etc.
but the Addition restrains the Curse to the Act or Intention of Adoration.
Now there is a Controversy of greater Consequence than that of ye and we,
depends upon this Addition, viz. whether it be lawful to use Images (as suppose
a Crucifix, etc.) for Religious Ends, provided we don't worship them.

The Papists say, it is not only lawful, but in some Cases necessary, that they
are Laymen's Books and great helps to Devotion: The Protestants affirm
according to the Scripture, they ought not to be made at all for the Ends of
Religion, much less set up either in the Congregation, or in a secret Place.
Deuteronomy. 27. 15. Isa. 44. 10. Habb. 2. 18, 19.

This Addition in the Liturgy seems to favor the Popish Doctrine, that we may
use Images in our Devotions, provided we don't worship them.

I am the more Confirmed in this by the Images of Christ and his Apostles,
which I find Printed in several of our Common Prayers, and I doubt not but they
are intended as helps to Devotion, and I wish they were not designed as an
Introduction to Image Worship in the late Reigns, when projects of that kind
were connived at.

However this be, the making of such Images is against the Scriptures,
especially the 2d. Commandment, as is proved at large in the Book of Homilies.
It Is showed there.

1st. That no Image of Christ can be made but a LYING IMAGE, because he is God
and Man: Nor can any true Image of his Body be made, because it is unknown now
of what Form and Countenance he was; and there be in Greece and at Rome, and in
other Places, diverse Images of Christ, and none of them like to other, and yet
every of them affirms, that theirs is the True, which cannot possibly be.
Therefore as soon as an Image of Christ is made, by and by is a LIE made of
him, which by God's Word is forbidden.

2ly. If an Image of Christ could truly be made, yet it is unlawful that it
should be made, yea or that the Image of any Saint should be made, especially
to be set up in Temples. Ireneus reproves the Heretics called Gnostics for
carrying about the Image of Christ. In the same Homily is proved the
unlawfullness of such Images from Lev. 26. Exodus, 20. and Deuteronomy. 27. and they
quote this last Text aright, without the Addition in the Common Prayer Sermon.
against Peril of Idolatry, Part 3d.
.

One may justly wonder, that such a public Use of Images should be allowed in
our Churches, and no Body that I hear of, reprove or condemn it, though all our
Episcopal Ministers have subscribed to the Book of Homilies, as containing a
Godly and wholesome Doctrine. The having of Images in our Books of public
Devotions is as unjustifiable as the setting 'em up in our public Churches,
nay the former is in this respect Worse than the latter, because in the latter
Case, one Image serves a whole Congregation, but in the former there are as
many Images as there are Worshippers with Pictured Common-Paryer-Books in their
Hands.

Christians should avoid all Occasions and Appearances of Idolatry, but the
Rectors Zeal runs another Way. I will not tempt him to execute the fiery
Sentence (he passed on the Bible) upon his Common Prayer, but I will recommend
to his Reading the learned and pious Homilies against Idolatry, which mention
with Approbation, Epiphanius's renting a painted Cloth; wherein was a Picture
of Christ, or of some Saint, affirming it to be against our Religion, that any
such Image should be had in the Temple or Church. If this Act of Epiphanius
does not raise an Emulation in him to purge his Church of Images, he ought at
least to declare against the Corruption of Scripture to which he is accessory,
by giving his Assent and Consent to all and every Thing contained in the
Liturgy.

Thus I have gratified his Request, and given him such an Instance as he
desires, and yet I will not say, this is a Corruption of which all the
Episcopal Party is Guilty, because I believe few of 'em have taken notice of it.

For a farther Confirmation of his Charge against the Dissenters, he says, out
of Archbishop Laud's Speech that the Puritans expunged part of the XX.
Articles of the Church of England, concerning the Power of the Church to decree
Rites and Ceremonies.

It Is yet Sub-Judice, whether that Clause was added by some of the Bishops
Friends, or expunged by some of their Adversaries, whether it were the one or
the other, it does not concern the Controversy in Hand: Though it may seem more
probable they were added by some Ceremonious Gentleman, for the Puritans
alleged that the Clause was not to be found in the Latin, or English Articles
of King Edward VI. or Queen Elizabeth, ratified by Parliament. The Archbishop
cannot say, that this Clause was in the Articles of King Edward VI. but comes
off with this sly Answer, That the Articles made in the time of King Edward VI.
were not now in Force, and therefore not Material whether that Clause be in or
out Heyl. Life of Laud. p. 339.
.

I thought Articles of Religion were not like Acts of Parliament, to be
repealed at pleasure. However, one may conclude from Archbishop Laud's Words,
that the Clause about Ceremonies was not in the Original Articles of the
Reformed Church of England in King Edward VI. time: If it had been in, he would
have taken notice of it, as he does of all the Editions that had it in Queen
Elizabeth's time. If it was to be found in the Records of Convocation, Anno
1562. as the Archbishop says, it is a sign the Church of England was grown
more Ceremonious than it had been in King Edward VI. time. Be this Matter as it
will, it concerns not us, though the Rector according to his wonted Justice,
reproaches us with it. Remark on Remarks, p. 51. 63.

Mr. Baxter 's Life. p. 639.
Archbishop Usher, Archbishop Williams, Bishop Morton, Bishop Holdsworth,
etc. in a Committee at Westminster, 1641. mention this Article among the
Innovations in Doctrine in the Church of England.

He has a pleasant Digression on these Words of mine, no Dissenters have urged
this Corrupt reading in favor of a Popular Covernment in any of their Writings
against Bishops and Ceremonies. Remark, p. 14. which he thus reports, No
Dissenters have urged this Corrupt reading against Bishops and Ceremonies: And
then adds, who ever thought that ye had any thing to do with the Ceremonies? p.
52.

I spoke of the Corrupt reading as applied to a popular Government, which is
evident by my Words. I Note this as an Instance of his Unfairness, and pass by
his Reflections.

I said, That he confidently Affirms, without Proof, that the Scotch Bibles are
generally Faulty in this Passage: This is an impudent Slander, says he, not to
be Paralleled except, etc.

I see the Rector does not love impudent Slanders, when himself is the Subject
of 'em; though he can be the Author of them to the prejudice of others. Quod tibi
fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris.

But I will make it appear that I have not Slandered him. He owns, he said, he
had just Reason to suspect the Scotch Editions, but takes no notice of his
Saying in another Place, that the Kirk tampers with and refines upon the Word
of God, Sermon. p. 26. and in p. 25. he says, the Cameronian Preacher bid the
Congregation turn to their Bible, and they should find in Acts 6. 3. whom ye
may appoint.

Let any one judge whether all this does not amount to a confident Affirmation
that the Scotch Bibles are Faulty in this Passage. A Man of Truth should not
Affirm what he is ashamed to own.

He vindicates the motion he made in his Sermon to burn the Bible: But why burn
the Holy Bible for one single Corruption? Why? Because an Error which appears
in Masquerade, and under the Disguise of Scripture being discovered deserves no
pity, being of so much the more dangerous Consequence. p. 53.

This Man knows not how to distinguish between Truth and Error. May not an
Error be condemned without sacrificing a whole Volume of Divine Truths to the
Flames? It Is true, an Error deserves no pity, but the Bible deserves our
veneration. The Rector serves the Bible as he has done the Dissenters, condemns
the whole, for one Error of the Press.

Unthinking Soul! He has condemned the Holy Bible to be burnt for one single
Corruption, and in the same Discourse has endeavored to prove that there are
several Corruptions in all our Hebrew, and consequently in all our English
Bibles which are a Translation of the Hebrew.

He says, two Thousand Years are lost in the Chronology of our Hebrew (and so
of all our English) Bibles: He affirms that our Bibles are Corrupt in Genesis 11.
12. and in Psalm. 96. 10. see his Remarks on Remarks. p. 24, 25, 26. which I
shall examine in the Postscript.

Thus he has in effect condemned all our Bibles to the Fire. The very Papists
leave the Original Hebrew and Greek, and their vulgar Version untouched, but
the good Rector of Bury has condemned not only the Hebrew, which he says has
many Corruptions, but the Latin, Greek, English, etc. Bibles which are all
Corrupt in Psalm. 96. 10. according to the Rector, so that he has condemned to
be Burnt all the Bibles in the Christian World, which according to him have at
least a single Corruption, and this is Cause enough why they should be Burnt,
as he would have us believe.

He would do well to tell the World what Religion he is of, for I think all
Christians discover an Affection and Tenderness toward the Holy Bible, which
in us he mis-interprets for an Affection to Error. The very Jews have a
Veneration for the Law and Prophets, the Mahometans for their Alcoran, and so
had the Ancient Pagans for their Oracles and Sacred Annals, which they
carefully reposited in their Temples, but the Rector of Bury, the most Reverend
Rector of Bury would persuade his Superiors to Burn the Holy Bible for one
Corruption, and at the same Time endeavors to prove that all our Bibles have
several Corruptions. p. 53.

CHAP. VI.
Being an Answer to his Sixth Chapter, and containing a Vindication of Mr.
Baxter and others from the Rector's Calumnies.
HIS last Chapter has nothing in it of Argument that concerns the main Subject,
it consists of Invectives and unjust Reflections upon two worthy Persons, Mr.
B. and Mr. P. that are gone to rest, and never that I heard of disturbed his,
when they were alive: Nor do my Remarks give him the least Occasion to
bespatter the Memories of these Good Men, but they were Dissenters, which is
Motive enough to the Pious Rector to embalm their Names with such Perfumes as
his Repository produces.

He begins with Mr. B. whom he had accused of Corrupting the Word of God, in
leaving out the word these in Acts 15. 28.

I answered, 1st. That Mr. B. does not pretend to Cite the Words of the Decree
in Acts 15. 28. but gives the Reason on which it was grounded, had he cited the
words of the Text, he would have rendered 'em in the second Person, it seemed
good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon YOU no greater Burden, but he
speaks in the third Person, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and them, to lay
upon them.

The Rector unfairly suppresses part of the Sentence by an, etc. It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to us, etc. and then cries out, what a goodly Remarker is
this, to US in the second Person, as if I had mistaken one Person for another.
But it is plain by my Words that I refer the second Person to the following
Words to lay upon YOU, which he left out with, etc. that this unfair dealing
might not appear.

He fills half a Page with a goodly declamation upon our Ignorance in the
English Accidence, and would advise us to go to School again to learn the first
Rudiments of all Languages. p, 56.

I could heartily wish his Defects were no worse than those he untruly charges
upon us, but I fear he is yet to learn the first Rudiments of all Religion,
Sincerity and Honesty. I would remit him to the Divinity School to learn the
IX. Commandment, not to bear false Witness, but that he is obstinately resolved
to burn that Book, which only can teach him this Lesson.

However my Defense of Mr. Baxter stands good, that he designed not to Cite the
very Words of the Text, but to refer to them. This the Rector could not deny,
which is enough to justify him against his Charge.

2ly. If Mr. Baxter had mis-quoted Scripture, the Rector of all Men living
should have held his Peace, for he is notoriously Guilty of this Fault, of
which I gave Ten Instances in his Sermon, and he has not been able to deny one
of them, only endeavors to excuse it as well as he can. He mis-quotes his very
Text, diminishes and adds to his Quotations at his Pleasure.

He puts instruction for admonition in 1 Cor. 10. 11. leaves out the words,
which I command you, in Deuteronomy. 4. 2. puts cover for shall be full, in Isa. 11.
9. reads certify for testify, in Rev. 22. 18, 19. leaves out* till all be
fulfilled, in Mat. 5. 18. reads seek out seven Men, instead of look ye out
among you seven Men, in Acts 6. 3. so that he has corrupted this very Scripture
(by leaving out the Words, among you) concerning which he has made such a
Clamor, as if the Dissenters had corrupted it.

There were two Things remarkable in his Sermon about Corrupting the Word of
God; the First was his Text, from which he aggravated his Charge, and this he
has mis-quoted; the Second was the Subject of his Charge in Acts 6. 3. and this
also he has mis-quoted, by putting seek for book, and omitting the Words among
you: And therefore it ill becomes him to aggravate Mr. B's. omitting the word
these.

3ly. I find Acts 15. 28. in the Book of Homilies (to which the Rector has
subscribed) quoted without the words these, In the Acts of the Apostles we read
that they sent word to the brethren, Acts 15. 28. that it seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to them, to charge them with no more than with necessary Things.
Homil. against Whoredom. I. Part, p. 72. edit. Land. 1673. Fol.


If the Omission of the word these be a Corrupting of the Word of God, let him
write an Invective against the Homilies of the Church, and retract his
Subscription by which he has made himself a Party to this Corruption.

He charges Mr. B. with Corrupting a Passage in Jerome in his Fifth Dispute,
which I have not by me, and therefore can say nothing to it: But if it be
mis-quoted, I believe it was by Accident, and not by Design as he suggests. Its
evident that he designedly misrepresented me, in saying I mistook one Person
for another, and to cover his Design suppresseth that Part of the Sentence to
which I referred; and therefore have little Reason to believe his Accusations of
Mr. B. or any body else, and less Reason to believe he has such an Aversion as
he pretends, to that he unjustly Charges us with, viz. a designed
mis-representation of Authors. This he is notoriously Guilty of, and which is a
great deal worse, he has Corrupted the Word of God, which I admonished him of
in my Answer to his Tentamen Novum, in which you may find both Corruptions; one
is in Acts 11. 19. where he reads, the rest preached the Word, etc. instead of
they that were scattered abroad -- preached the Word, etc. so our Bibles have
it according to the Original. This looks like a designed Corruption merely to
support his Argument, as the Reader may see in his Tentam. p. 4.

The other Corruption is of 1 Cor. 5. 4. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ
when ye are gathered together and my Spirit, etc. so our Bibles. The Rector
reads it, -- In the Name of our Lord Jesus -- and of my Spirit, as if the
Construction were in the Name of my Spirit, i. e. by my Authority, intimating
that the whole Power of Excommunication was in the Apostle, and none in the
Church, contrary to 1 Cor. 5. 13, 14. see his Tentam. p. 17.

One would think a Man that is Guilty of Corrupting the Scriptures should not
so severely aggravate a mis-quotation out of the Fathers, which may happen by
the Fault of the Transcriber or Printer, or by the inadvertency of the most
vigilant Author, without any Design. But none are more forward to censure a
Mote in a Brothers Eye, than those Gentlemen that have a Beam in their own. The
Rector is one that does so in his Charge against Mr. B. and my self.

He bestows the two next Pages upon a mis-quoted Passage out of Chrysostom, in
my Plea, in which (...) is mis-printed for (...). The Point I treated of was,
that Evangelists were unfixed Officers, which is Evident in the New Testament,
and is the General Opinion of learned Men, nay the Rector himself cannot deny
but they were at first unfixed. Tentam. p. 118. For the Confirmation of this
received Opinion I quoted Eusebius and Chrysostom as agreeing with him, and by
a mistake (...) is put for (...) in the latter, which makes the Negative an
Affirmative.

I, but says he, if you had cited Chrysostom in the Negative (as you ought) he
would not have agreed with Eusebius. p. 57.

I have proved in my Tutam. Evangel. that they do agree, if Chrysostom be cited
in the Negative, as I confess he ought. Eusebius says, they passed into other
Countries and Nations: Chrysostom says, they did not go up and down every
where (as the Apostles did) but preached the Gospel as Priscilla and Aquila. He
adds a little after, that the Evangelists went about.

(...). in Ephesians. 4. (...).
It Is evident from Chrysostom, that Evangelists went about, but not every
where: So did Aquila and Priscilla go up and down, but not every where, as St.
Paul and other Apostles did. Aquila and Priscilla are Evangelists in
Chrysostom, now it is certain they went up and down, and that as the Apostles
helpers in Christ, Romans 16. 3. Aquila was a Native of Pontus, Acts 18. 2. he
lived with his Wife Priscilla sometime at Rome: Afterward we find them at
Corinth, Acts 18. 1, 2. afterward at Ephesus, Acts 18. 18. 19. 1 Cor. 16. 19.
and after that we meet them at Rome, Romans 16. 3. if the Epistle to the Romans
was written after the 1 Corinthians, as Doctor Lightfoot Affirms. Vol. I. p.
299. and 313.
When the second Epistle to Timothy was written we find 'em in Asia. 2 Timothy 4.
19. It Is most undeniable then that Aquila and Priscilla, Chrysostom's
Evangelists, went up and down, and that into other Countries and Nations (though
not every where) and so Chrysostom agrees with Eusebius.

But suppose Chrysostom should not agree with Eusebius (as it is Evident he
does) this does not prejudice Eusebius's Testimony, nor my Hypothesis of
Evangelists, that they were unfixed Officers, which the Rector himself is
forced to acknowledge. I shall not quarrel with him about Chrysostom, whilst he
owns my Notion of Evangelists, which if he think fit to retract, I will
undertake to maintain without being obliged to Chrysostom.

He thinks, I have no way to come off from his Charge of Corrupting Chrysostom
(for which he is pleased to give me the Character of a Great Rogue) but by
pleading Ignorance or Dishonesty. p. 58.

There is no necessity of either Plea, which are both equally false: But I have
a Third, which is a just one, and will pass with Men of Honesty, whose
Characteristic is Candor, viz. that the mistake (of (...) for (...)) was by
inadvertency or oversight, as we will Charitably hope many of his are; though a
Man must strain his Charity very hard to think so of his Corrupting the Text of
Scripture. It cannot be imagined his Printer would foist whole Words into a
Text without the knowledge of the Author, especially where the Corrupt reading
is adapted to an Argument which cannot be supported without it. Let the World
judge who is the Great R. -- he that happens to mistake a Sentence in the
Fathers, or he that refines upon the Word of God.

Ay, but says he, the Remarker has Corrupted Romans 15. 19. for he affirms
Tutam. Evangel. p. 124, 125.) that Paul preached the Gospel in Illyricum: Here
is a gross and designed Corruption of Scripture to serve a Cause. It Is in the
Original (...), round about unto Illyricum, q. d. as far as Illyricum, but not
in Illyricum, as Mr. Owen aimed to prove. p. 58, 59.

I perceive if a Man does not apply Scripture according to the Rectors mind, he
cannot escape the Censure of Corrupting it. I did not quote the very Words of
the Text, but referred to it, as a Testimony of the Apostles, preaching in
Illyricum, as several learned Men have done before me, who were never charged
with Corrupting this Place. Peter Martyr explains usque ad, by usque in
Illyricum, i. e. into Illyricum, so does Aretius. Vid. Pet. Mart, and Aret. in
loc.
(...) and (...) are used promiscuously, and signify usque ad, as far as, or
unto a Place, sometimes exclusively and often inclusively. Thus the Brethren
conducted Paul, Acts 17. 15. (...), unto Athens, i. e. into Athens. So in Acts
20. 4. there accompanied him (...), as far as Asia, or into Asia, as we well
render it. And that must be the meaning, as appears by v. 5. they tarried for
us at Troas. It Is well if the Rector does not make the Translators of this
Place Corrupters of the Word of God, for rendering (...) (which is the same
with (...)) by into.

I make no doubt but the Apostle preached the Gospel in Illyricum, for he
says, that from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum, he fully preached
the Gospel of Christ. If he preached at Jerusalem, the terminus a quo, why not
at Illyricum, the terminus ad quem, of his Apostolical motion? No Reason can be
given why the end of his Progress should be taken exclusively, when the
Jerusalem, the beginning of it, is taken inclusively.

Suppose the Rector should say, he went from Bury, round about unto Manchester;
would not any body understand him so, as if he had been in Manchester? Or
suppose one should say, King William sailed from England round about unto
Holland, you must imagine according to the Rectors Sense of the Words, that he
touched only upon the Coasts of Holland, but went not into Holland: In like
manner, when the Apostle says, he preached from Jerusalem unto Illyricum, one
would naturally conclude he preached in Illyricum.

Titus, who was Paul's Companion, and Messenger to the Churches he had planted,
We are certain was in Dalmatia; which is part of Illyricum. Ptol. Geogr. Tab.
IX, Europ.
Therefore it is highly probable that Paul planted a Church there.

I find Illyricum mentioned by the Magdebury Historians Eccl. Hist. Cent. 1.
lib. 2. cap. 2. p. 22.
among the Places in which Paul had planted a Church, and they ground their
Opinion upon Romans 15. 19. Ortelius also mentions Illyricum as one of the Places
where St. Paul had preached. Discript. Peregrinat. D. Pauli Apost.


In a Word, the Rector must prove that the Apostle turned back at the very
Borders of Illyricum, before he can disprove my Sense of this Text, which is
neither singular, nor inconsistent with other Scripture: And if he were able to
do this (which he is not) it would amount to no more, than my being mistaken in
the meaning of the Words, unto Illyricum.

As to his Scurrilous Harangue upon Mr. Baxter (for no other Reason but because
I called him that Great Man) I will not defile my Paper with it, but leave him
to be chastised by the Scorpions in his own Breast, which will sooner or latter
find a tender Place in his awakened Conscience. I will only take notice of the
Character given Mr. Baxter by Dr. Wilkins, the Rectors late Diocesan. He
cultivated, says he, every Subject he handled, and if he had lived in the
Primitive Times, he had been one of the FATHERS of the Church. Another time he
said with admiration of him, That it was enough for one Age to produce such a
Person as Mr. Baxter. Baxt. Fun. Sermon. by Dr. Bates, p. 105. 106.


CHAP. VII.
Containing a Recapitulation of some principal Things, with an Idea of the
Rector's four Cardinal Virtues, viz. Justice, Truth, Candor, and Charity.
I Shall sum up what has been largely insisted on, and give the Reader a short
and clear View of the whole, by which he may judge what Credit is to be given
to the Rector's Charge, and what Sort of Man he is.

I. I will begin with his IV. Arguments, which contain the Proof of his Charge.

His First Argument (that the first Error happened in 1638. when Presbytery was
in the Ascendant) he has (1st.) thrown out of doors himself, by acknowledging
it a mere Error of the Press, and an unhappy Mistake. 2ly. I have proved that
Presbytery in that Year was undermost in England, and Episcopacy in the
Vertical. 3ly. And if it had been in the Ascendant, it will not follow that the
Presbyterians were Authors of that Corruption, because, 1st. It does not favor
their Principles. 2ly. Archbishop Laud guarded the Press against the Puritans.
3ly. It was in the Hand of Episcopal Men. 4ly. The University of Cambridge,
where the first Corruption happened, was under the Government of Episcopal
Persons.

As to his II. Argument, That the Corruption favors the Dissenters, I have
proved that it does not favor any Opinion of theirs; that they look on the
VII. Deacons in Acts 6. as Ministers of Tables, and not of the Word and
Sacraments; and that they ascribe the Power of Ordaining or Appointing
Church Officers unto the Ministers and not to the People.

In Answer to his III. Argument, viz. That the Episcopal Party would not
Corrupt this Place, because it does not favor their Principles; I have showed,
that it was Corrupted by them, and that several of 'em have asserted the
Popular Principles, yet I will not be so uncharitable as to affirm, that they
have Corrupted it on Design to advance these Principles: Though it were easy for
a Man of the Rector's temper to aggravate the Matter.

I have sufficiently confuted the Cameronian Story, which makes his IV.
Argument, and confronted the single Testimony of Coll. Fairfax, (which is
against an individuum vagum, without naming Person, Time or Place) with the
Vote of the General Assembly of Scotland: And have showed how unjustly he has
Traduced the Scotch Editions of the Bible, among which I can find but two that
are Faulty, and those under the Bishops there; as it is undeniable the English
Corrupt Editions happened when the Press was in the Hands of Episcopal Persons,
who in Common Justice must Answer for the Errors of it.

These Four Arguments are the Sandy-Foundation, on which he builds so heavy a
Charge: Now the Foundation failing him, the Superstructure falls on his own
Head, and the reputation of this foolish Master Builder lies buried under the
ruins of his Malicious Contrivement.

II. Having showed the weakness of his Arguments, I will give you a Taste of his
Regard to the Word of God. While he is charging us with Corrupting it, he has
made the boldest Attempt perhaps of any Man living to undermine it.

He has endeavored to expunge all the Titles of the Psalms out of the Sacred
Canon. He has affirmed Ps. 72. 20. to be manifestly False. He disparages our
English Bibles, which agree with the Hebrew, and would persuade us that they
are Corrupted by the Jews in material Things, especially in Ps. 96. 10. and in
Genesis 11. 12. He tells us that two Thousand Years are lost in our
Scripture-Chronology, so that according to our Hebrew and English Bibles it
cannot be proved that Christ is come in the Flesh. He stands convicted of
having Corrupted Acts 11. 19. and 1 Cor. 5. 4. to serve a Corrupt Design. He
says that but for Tradition, Plato, Senecae, and the Seven Wise Men of Greece
(and it is pity but he were made the Eighth) might lay claim to Inspiration, as
well as the holy Scripture.

III. I will give an Idea of such Virtues as shine forth in his Remarks on
Remarks, which render him a very remarkable Man.

I will show him the Beauties of his own Face in the best Glass with which he
has accommodated us, hoping that the charming Reflection of his own Form will
not transport him into an Adonic Passion.

1st. His Justice is so transcendent, that it cannot be confined to that vulgar
Rule of suum Cuique No, the Rector has given us a new Rule of Justice, which is
alienum Cuique This is a Tentamen Novum in Ethics.

He has given us an Instance of this new Sort of Justice in his Cameronian
Story, which he imputes to the whole Body of Dissenters. I have read of One
Haman, who sought to be revenged of all the Jews for One Mordecai's Offense,
but this cannot Parallel the Rector's Justice (which scorns to imitate such
imperfect Patterns) for Haman could prove Matter of Fact upon Morde^ai, which
the Rector has not been able to do upon the Cameronian Preacher; and yet he has
the Modesty to Vindicate this piece of Justice by telling us, p. 47. The
English Presbyterians are like to bear the Burden of their Brethren in
Scotland.

2ly. His Truth is as remarkable as his Justice. He has advanced and attempted
to Confirm a False Accusation against the Dissenters in General, especially the
Presbyterians of England and Scotland, that they have Corrupted the Word of
God: And yet would have us believe that his Sermon was preached in Vindication
of the Church of England against Lancashire Dissenters, who are not so much as
named in the whole Sermon. You have another Instance of his Truth, where he
says, That, according to Mr. Owen, the People belike ordained the Deacons.
Remarks on Remarks, p. 4, 45.

This is a notorious Un-truth, which may be looked upon as the Offspring of
his impregnated Wrath, and we may suppose he is the more fond of this Spurious
Brat, because the Sayings of Fathers are a Rule of Faith to him, (we will
suppose of Practice also) and he has quoted a very eminent Father, who, as the
Rector says, cared not what in his Heat he said or wrote for the support of
his own Opinion. p. 29. 18.

The Story he tells of Mr. P. and Mr. B. are farther Evidences of his Regard to
Truth.

3ly. His Candor and Charity are of a Piece with Truth and Justice, for all the
Virtues meet in him.

1st. I will take Notice of his Charity to the Dissenters in General,
concerning whom he is convinced, that Meekness and Charity is due unto them,
and as a rare Instance of it, he would have 'em styled, the Foxes and
Firebrands of the Church and Nation. p. 2, 3.

He makes it Religious Hypocrisy in us to Style our Selves Ministers of the
Gospel, which he and his Brethren seldom or never do, because, I presume, they
reckon themselves dignified by more honorable Titles. p. 6.

He falsely says, That the Socinians and almost all the Nation of Schismatics
and Heretics are in the Interest of the Dissenters. If uncharitableness be a
Characteristic of Schism, I know no such Schismatic in the three Kingdoms as
the Rector is: And if the Obstinate maintaining a single Error in the
Foundation denominate a Heretic, what shall we call the Man, who has
endeavored to overthrow the whole Foundation of Religion by charging our
Bibles with several material Corruptions, and condemning them to be Burnt for a
single One? p. 28.

2ly. We will give some Instances of his Charitable and Candid Temper toward
particular Persons, whom he abuses without the least provocation.

He begins with Jerome, that great Light of the Latin Church, of whom he says,
he is unworthy to be believed in any Thing, that he cared not what in his Heat
he said or wrote. In plain English, he makes a Great R -- gue of him, and yet
at the same time makes such another of Mr. B -- r, for reaping up the Faults of
the Ancient Fathers. I perceive Mr. B's. Fault was that he intruded into the
Rector's Province, whose proper Privilege it is to revile the Ancient Fathers,
though he denies not but Mr. B's. Reports are True, but I have proved his
Character of Jerome to be False. p. 18, 61.

In a Word, Mr. B. either did well or ill in reaping up the Faults of the
Fathers; if well, why does the Rector with so much malignity censure him for
it? If ill, who does he imitate, him? p. 18, 61.

He reflects on the Reverend Mr. Tallents, as if he wanted Integrity, though he
cannot disprove his Account of Cambridge in 1638, which Mr. Fuller justifies.
Here the Rector makes bold to step into the Throne of the Omniscient, whose
Prerogative it is to judge of Men's integrity, Romans 14. 10, 11, 12. He knows
who has done so before him, when he passed the same Censure on upright Job.
chap. 1. v. 9. p. 39.

He reflects on his Majesty's Words, Sermon. p. 25.
and hopes to Excuse it, by telling us, he derided only the Scotch-Reason, Rem.
p. 41, 42.
though he knows the King had approved of it, and inserted it into his Letter of
Instructions to his Commissioner in Scotland. This is an Instance of his
Loyalty, for which his Three Sermons of Subjection have made him Famous in the
Northern-Climate.

He reproaches the late Reverend Mr. P. as if be had Married his Wife without
Consent of Parents, which I am informed is most False. Mr. Robert Milne of
Rochdale affirms, He often heard Mrs. P's. Parents declare to his Father, who
was a Neighbor and Relation unto them, that they had not only given free
Consent, but withal expressed a great deal of Satisfaction in the Marriage,
and looked on it as a very gracious and merciful Providence. p. 60.

I am informed the Class-Rigister, a Copy of which the Rector says is in his
Hands, contains a Vindication of Mr. P. who being accused of an irregular and
clandestine Marriage, produced a Certificate of the Consent of Parents. If this
be so, The Rector is guilty of the basest disingenuity to revive a malicious
Accusation against a Man in his Grave, and to suppress his Compurgation,
whereby his Innocence was cleared. Mrs. P. affirms, and will take it upon her
Oath, if there be occasion, that she had her Parents Consent, and that Morning
before she was Married to Mr. P. she had both Father and Mother's blessing, and
in the Evening they were both entertained and wellcomed by her Parents.

He quarrels with an innocent Passage in the Reverend Mr. O. H's. Family Altar,
the design of which is to persuade Persons to keep up the Worship of God in
their Families. It Is well if the Rector in his Parochial Visitations be as
forward to oblige his Parishoners to Pray in their Families, as he is to
ridicule a judicious Discourse upon the Subject of Family Prayer. It puts me in
Mind of the Jews Treatment of the Christians, of which Just. Martyr gives this
Account, though one should speak Ten Thousand Words never so well, if he happens
to say the least Thing that does not please you, because it is either not
understood, or not carefully heeded, you overlook the abundance of Things that
are well spoken, and get some little Word by the end, and fasten upon it the
most impious Constructions. Just. Mart. adv. Tryphon.


The Rector serves Mr. O. H. much after the same Manner, he over-looks all the
good Things in Mr. H's. excellent Book, the very Subject of which is
recommending to every Devout Christian, and has picked out one Sentence in it
to make Sport with, which is this, God is the Author of all Topography and
Geography, as well as Genealogy and Chronology. p. 37.

Any one but the Candid Rector would have overlooked a Passage of this kind in
a popular Discourse of Practical Religion, wherein Ministers Study not all the
exactness of Expression. But he is One of Just. Mart. Critics, who seeks
Occasion to reproach more useful Men than himself. The words are capable of a
fair Construction. Why may not God be called the Author of Geography, as
Hipparchus call's Homer, hujus peritiae primarium Authorem *, the first and
Chief Author of Geography? Though Homer has not written professedly of that
Subject, but there are a great many Discriptions of Places scattered up and
down in his Poems, and so there are in the Scripture. The Great Bochart has
written a very Learned Book of Sacred Geography.

It Is certain the first Book extant that Treats of Geography, Genealogy and
Chronology is the Bible, of which I hope the Rector will not deny God to be the
Author.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WE find ye for we, in Matt. 20. 22. of a fair Octavo Bible, Printed at Oxford
1679. ye are able, instead of we are able.

THE POSTSCRIPT, Being an Answer to the Rector's 2d. Chapter, wherein he
endeavors to prove the Titles of the Psalms to be no Parts of Scripture, and
the Hebrew Bibles to have been Corrupted in very material Things.
IN pursuance to my promise, I will now examine his Digression, about the
Titles, or Inscriptions of the Psalms, and the Purity of the Hebrew Text, of
which our English Bibles are a Translation.

I must here premise, that the Difference between the Rector and me about the
Hebrew Titles, and Copies is no point of Controversy between the Episcopal
Party and the Dissenters, but I oppose a bold Paradox of his, which he
endeavors to maintain against the Common Sentiments of learned Protestants,
and the more moderate Papists.

I shall begin with the Titles of the Plalms, which because he finds 'em
omitted in the Liturgy Translation of the Psalms, he attempts to exclude out of
the Sacred Canon. We agree that they are very Ancient, but he is of Opinion
they are humane Additions, and that some of 'em are False: I affirm, and
undertake to prove that they are of equal Authority with the rest of the
Psalms, and to be admitted for Canonical Scripture. Before we enter upon the
debate of this Point, let it be considered, 1st. That the Rector's Opinion is
very singular, and has few or no Patrons in the Christian World at this Day. He
has not hitherto been able to produce any one Protestant Writer, or Christian
Commentator that has condemned 'em as Spurious and Un-canonical. A wise Man is
not Ambitious of being thought singular, especially in a doubtful Point, least
of all in an Error, and that of such a Nature as strikes at the Authority of
any Part of the inspired Volumns. 2dly. Though the Titles of the Psalms, be but a
small Part of Scripture, and several of 'em obscure, and hard to be understood,
we must not therefore expunge them out of the Divine Canon, to which we must
neither add nor diminish. Every Word of God ought to be equally precious to us,
as being an Emanation from the same Fountain of un-erring Wisdom and Truth:
Even the more abstruse, and seemingly less useful Parts of Scripture must be
received with the same Veneration, which is paid to those that are more plain,
and do more sensibly concern us. 3dly. If the Titles be Parts of the Holy
Scripture, as I shall prove immediately, the Rector stands convicted by his own
Sermon of being a Corrupter of the Word of God, for he endeavors to diminish
from it.

In prosecuting this Subject, 1st. I will vindicate my Arguments to prove the
Titles of the Psalms to be Canonical. 2dly. I will answer his Objections to the
Contrary.

CHAP. I.
Vindicating my Arguments for the Titles of the Psalms.
THE Rector having challenged us to prove the Titles to be Original and
Essential Parts of Scripture, I proposed a few Arguments for the Affirmative
without Design of entering into this Controversy, as being foreign to his
Charge: These he pretends to Answer, which I shall now Vindicate.

I. My first Argument was this, That they are as Ancient as the Psalms
themselves, for ought appears to the Contrary, they being in all the Hebrew and
Greek Copies that ever I have seen, and that they are most of 'em Translated by
the LXX. and by Theodotion, Symmachus, and Aquila, as also by the Targumist.

Remarks upon Remarks, p. 9.
To this he answers, That the Subscriptions of St. Paul's Epistles are to be
found in all Greek Copies save that of Claromont, and are always Translated
into our modern Versions, and yet the Remarker will not own them for Canonical
Scripture.

Nothing can be inferred from these Subscriptions in prejudice of my Argument,
because, 1st. They are not in all Greek Copies, as Grotius and Beza with many
others have observed, and the Rector is forced to confess; but can he produce
any Copy of the Hebrew Psalms that wants the Titles? The constant Consent of
all Hebrew Copies bespeaks 'em not only ancient but original Parts of
Scriptures.

2. The Postscripts of St. Paul's Epistles are not the same in all ancient
Manuscripts, and therefore says Grotius, they are of no Authority, because
they are not in all ancient Copies, nor the same in those that have 'em, and
they are different in the Syriac and Arabic Copies: Nullius sunt Authoritatis,
quia nec in omnibus exemplaribus apparent, etc. Grot. ad fin. Ep. ad Romans Vid.
Est. in loc.
But the Titles of the Psalms are the same in all our Hebrew Copies, and so
they were in those which Jerome used, which is an Argument they were not added,
but are covered with the Text. When the Rector has produced the like Variety in
the Hebrew Copies concerning the Titles, as is to be found in the Greek
Manuscript concerning the Subscriptions, he does something to the Purpose, in
the mean Time we will dismiss his Argument as Impertinent.

II. My 2d. Argument was, That the Titles of the Psalms were received by the
Jewish Church, and are by the Christian Church, as Canonical Scripture; they
are Translated by the Jewish Doctors into Greek, and by Jerome into Latin, and
they are in the modern Versions.

To this he Answer, That the Subscriptions of Sr. Paul's Epistles are
Translated in the modern Languages, and all Christian Churches receive them yet
not as Canonical Scripture: So the Jews received the Titles, but not as
Essential Parts of Scripture, but as we do the Postscripts, and the Contents of
the Chapters.

I. That the Jewish Church received 'em, but not as essential Parts of
Scripture is barely affirmed, and not proved. I challenge him to give us one
Instance for the confirmation of so bold an Assertion. The Jews received the
Titles and the Body of the Psalms alike, we do not find that they made any
difference in Point of Authority between the one and the other, they that
affirm they did, ought to prove it.

2dly. We reject the Contents of Chapters and the Postscripts of St. Paul's
Epistles from being Canonical, but he cannot prove the Jews did so by the
Titles of the Psalms. They formerly received them as Parts of Scripture, and
they do so still in our modern Hebrew Bibles, in which several of the Titles
make the first Verse of the Psalms, as they do in several modern Translations.
Vid. Jun. and Temell. Piscat Calvin. etc.

3dly. It Is true, the Postscripts are Translated in the modern Languages, but
most Commentators wholly overlook 'em, or censure them as no Parts of
Scripture: But both Jewish and Christian Commentators explain the Titles of the
Psalms, as they do other Scriptures, which is a clear Evidence they take 'em
for Canonical.

I will confirm this 2d. Argument with another, which puts this Matter beyond
all Contradiction.

If the Jewish Church, to whom were committed the Oracles of God, received the
Titles of the Psalms in the Apostles Time, they must needs be Canonical, for
the Scripture, as received by them, is of Divine Inspiration, as the Apostle
declares, 2 Timothy, 3. 16. But they were received by the Jewish Church in the
Apostles Time, and long before, for they were in the Copy which the LXX. used,
who translated some, and transcribed others, that still agree with several of
those in our Hebrew Bibles. They are to be found in the Syriac Version (I mean
that out of the Hebrew) which is generally ascribed to the Age in which the
Apostles lived, though Gabriel Sioni^a refers it to Solomon's Time.

And they are Translated by Theodotion, Symmachus and Aquila, in the next Age
after the Apostles. Therefore they were received in the Jewish Church in the
Apostolical Age, and consequently are of Divine Inspiration.

III. I added, that some of the Titles are undeniably Canonical, as that of
Psalm, 18th, mentioned in 2 Samuel 22. To the Chief Musician, a Psalm of David,
the Servant of the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the Words of this Song, in the
day that the Lord delivered him from the Hand of all his Enemies, and from the
Hand of Saul.

It does not follow, says the Rector, that an inspired Person affixed it unto
the 18 Psalm. So that those Words as placed before the 18 Psalm, may in
strictness be said not to be Canonical there, though they be Canonical, 2 Samuel
22. p. 10.

What a miserable shift is this poor Man put upon to avoid the Evidence of
Truth? The Title of this Psalm is Canonical and not Canonical, Scripture and no
Scripture, inspired, and not inspired: It Is Canonical with him in one Part of
the Bible, it is a humane Addition in another. He does not pretend to give any
Reason for so bold a Suggestion; only you must believe, it is so because it is
so. However, it is enough to my Purpose that he allows the Words of the Title
to be Canonical in 2 Samuel 22. There you have the Psalm and a Canonical Title
prefixed to it by his own Confession. Hence it evidently follows, that some
Psalms have Canonical Titles: And if some be Canonical, the Titles of all the
rest must be so, for no Reason can be given, why some should be Divine, and
others Humane, since all are equally Ancient, and of the same date, for any
thing can be made appear to the Contrary.

If the Words be Canonical in 2 Samuel 22, they are undeniable so in Psalm 18.
until the Rector can prove them added by an un-inspired Person, which he will
never be able to do with all the help that F. Simon, or any of that Tribe can
afford him.

IV. My 4th Argument was, That other Titles must be prefixed by the Penman, or
by a Person Divinely inspired, for they refer to Passages of History not
mentioned in the body of the Psalm. I instanced in Psalm, 3. and 30. and 34.
and 54. and 56. and 90.

To this he answers, Though there be no particular and very obvious Expressions
relating to historical Passages, there are general Ones, which gave the
Collectors of the Book of Psalms occasion of affixing those Titles to them. p.
10.

The general Expressions he talks of could never have directed 'em to such
particular Events as some Titles refer to. As for Instance, in Psalm 3. No
general Passages there can be applied more to Absalom than to Saul, or others
of David's Enemies, but that the Title of the Psalm directs us to refer them to
Absalom, when David fled before him.

The Title of the 30 Psalm, is a Psalm or Song at the Dedication of the House
of David. There is not one Passage in this Psalm that the most observing Man
could have applied to this Occasion, rather than any other joyful Event, if the
Holy Ghost had not prefixed this Inscription.

The like may be said of Pslam 34. which was Penned when David changed his
behavior before Abimelech, as the Title assures us, but there is nothing in
the body of the Psalm but what might be equally applied to other deliverances.

The same may be affirmed of the other Psalms I mentioned above, especially of
Psalm 90. A Prayer of Moses the Man of God.

But says the Rector, though Moses and the Israelites be not mentioned in Psalm
90. yet many Verses of that Psalm, particularly the 9th and 10th, were thought
to allude to the Condition of the Israelites in the Wilderness, whose
Stubbornness God punished by cutting their Lives short, i. e. reducing 'em to
Seventy or Eighty Years.

True, it alludes to the Condition of the People in the Wilderness, but who
would have thought so, if the Title had not directed Interpreters to apply it
to the State of Israel in the Wilderness? The Title occasioned this
Application, and it was not the Application which occasioned the Title, as he
without Reason imagines. Here, as in many other Psalms, the Title is a Key that
opens the design and meaning of the Holy Ghost in the body of the Psalm, as we
find well observed by the late Learned Archbishop Sancroft, in a Sermon upon a
public Occasion on Psalm 57. 1.

But says our Author, if the Titles refer to Passages of History not mentioned
in the body of the Psalm, this is a good Argument that they are not Canonical,
but the Conjectures of mere Men, which is the Reason (I suppose) why many
Psalms have no Titles at all, and many have none to any Purpose at all. p. 11.

1st. Though the historical Passages be not mentioned in the body of the Psalm,
it is sufficient they are mentioned in the Title, and that there is nothing in
the Psalm that is inconsistent with it, nay the whole sweetly agrees therewith,
and is better understood by the help of the Title, that leads us to the Scope
and Occasion of it, which otherwise would be more obscure, and not so
intelligible.

2dly. Several Psalms have no Titles at all, and that is an Argument they are
not additional Conjectures, for the same Hands might have given Conjectural
Titles to all, as well as to some Psalms, at least such Titles as refer to the
Penman, or to the Instruments of Music on which they were sung, etc. but such
Psalms as the Jews found without Titles in their Hebrew Bibles, they left
without, and they remain so to this day; a sign the Titles are not Conjectures
of Men, but the Dictates of the Holy Ghost. It had been an easy thing for bold
Conjecturers to have added some sort of Titles to such as are without, and had
the Wit of Man the ordering of the Matter, it would have rendered 'em more
uniform, and given 'em the same features, and would not have bestowed Titles
upon some, and left others without.

3dly. It would have looked more modest in the Rector to have said, we
understand not the Use of many Titles, than boldly, if not blasphemously to
affirm, that many are to no Purpose at all. There are many obscure Passages in
the Holy Scriptures which we understand not, are they therefore to no Purpose
at all? Must they be expunged out of the sacred Oracles? It Is well, if the
Prophecies of Ezechiel, and John the Divine fall not under the Censure of this
Corrupting expunger, for being abstruse and obscure. It Is no wonder that a Man
who dares thus reproach the Spirit of God, the Author of the Titles of the
Psalms, should make no Conscience of reviling his Brethren. We know who said,
to what Purpose is this waste? I doubt it is to little Purpose, to Reason with
one who is not afraid to Charge the Spirit of God with Impertinencies. It will
prove but a sorry Excuse to say he does not take the Titles of the Psalms for
Parts of Scripture, he aggravates his Sin by excluding 'em first out of the
Canon, and when he has done by exposing 'em to Scorn and Contempt. In like
manner do the Deists treat other Parts of Holy Writ, which they think they may
safely Ridicule, because they don't believe 'em divinely inspired.

CHAP. II.
Containing an Answer to his Objections against the Titles of the Psalms.
HAVING vindicated my Arguments for the Titles, I shall now consider the
Rector's Objections against them.

1st. His first is this, If some or any one Title may be justly questioned,
then this renders all the rest Suspicious: and here he Questions the Titles of
the 90 and 34 Psalms, how justly we shall consider presently. p. 11.

But suppose one or two might be justly suspected to be a Humane Additon, must
all the rest be so? The Rector thinks he may justly Question some Things in the
Genealogies and Chronology of the Old Testament of our English Bibles, does it
follow therefore that all our Scripture-Genealogies and Chronology are
suspicious? It must be so according to the Rector's Logic: Thus by attempting
to overthrow one Part of Scripture, he levels his Argument in effect against
the whole. He tells us in p. 13. That the Book of Psalms has received some
Humane Additions, especially at the end of Psalm 72. Here he puts an Argument
into the Mouth of an Athiest, that if some or any one Part of the Scripture may
be justly questioned (as suppose the Words at the end of Psalm 72. which he
says are manifestly False) then this renders all the rest Suspicious.

How would the Rector Answer his own Argument? He must grant the Consequence of
the Major Proposition, That if some part may be justly questioned, the whole is
suspicious, for it is his own Argument against the Titles of the Psalms. He
argues (absurdly enough) a part ad totum. He cannot deny the Minor, for he
affirms that some part of Scripture may be justly questioned, as the Titles of
Psalm 90. and 34. and the last verse of Psalm 72. He must therefore either
acknowledge the weakness of his Premises, or deny the Conclusion, or yield
unto an Athiest, that all the Scriptures are suspicious. He cannot deny the
Conclusion, without exposing the Reputation of a Scholar, nor can he yield it
in consistency with that of a Christian: Therefore he must confess the weakness
of his Argument, that if one Title be questionable, all the rest are suspicious.

The Rector here treats the Psalms with the same Justice which he has given the
Dissenters; he condemns them all for the supposed Act of One (as in the Story
of the Cameronian) and he condemns all the Titles for the sake of one or two,
which he thinks fit to Question, as follows.

The Title of the 90. Psalm (A Prayer of Moses, etc.) seems not to have been
Composed by Moses, for the Age of Man in v. 10. is said to be between Seventy
and Eighty Years, now the Life of Man in Moses's Time was much longer as
appears by the Age of Job, Kohath, Amram, Aaron, Joshua, Miriam, Moses, etc. p.
11, 12.

He is sensible of the weakness of his own Argument, and therefore adds,

It must be Confessed, That this Point is bandy'd by learned Men, and sundry
Answers are offered to the Arguments produced, which I will not trouble the
Reader with.

It would have been more honest in him, not to have troubled his Reader with
this Argument (which he calls Arguments) produced out of Pool's Synopsis, where
he could not but find the Answers of the Learned Vid. Pool. Synop. in Psalm. 90.
10.
, which doubtless he would have refuted if he had been able. Judge how fairly
Mr. G. deals with the Scriptures, he picks up any trifling Objection against
'em, and takes no Notice of the Answers to it, which he will not trouble his
Reader with. He is willing to trouble him with perplexing prejudices against
the Word of God, but will not trouble him with such Things as may Confirm his
Faith.

I will in a few Words dispatch this Objection.

1st. Dr. Hamond conceive; that Moses speaks not of the Age of Man as such, but
of the short Lives of the Israelites in the Wilderness, where all perished from
twenty years Old and upward (except Caleb and Joshua) some at Seventy, others
at Eighty, which Year, it should seem by the Words of Moses (Psalm 90. 10.) few
exceeded in that State of Pilgrimage.

2dly. If Moses speaks of the Age of Man, as most Interpreters do think he
does, he must be understood of the ordinary Measure of Man's Life, which is
between Seventy and Eighty. He must not be taken strictly, but (...), that this
is the ordinary Length of Man's Age, which not many exceed. The Rector has
found Nine or Ten that lived beyond Eighty in Moses's Time, and I could Name as
many more since that Time that lived above Fourscore Years. Historians report
of Johannes de Temporibus, One of the Live-guard to Charles the Great, that he
lived three hundr'd sixty one Years Vid. Lampad. Mellif. Hist. par. 3. p. 234.
.

Parr Fall. worth.
of Aberbury in Shropshire, was about a hundr'd and fifty Years when he dyed,
and but for Change of Air and Diet in his old Age, might have lived longer. I
have heard it affirmed by some that live near that Place, that he did Penance
for a Bastard Child in Aberbury Church, when he was a hundr'd and twenty Years
Old. Mars^y Stent, who lived within three Miles of Oswestry, was about a
hundr'd and twenty Years Old when she died. Mr. St. Nicholas, a Minister not
far from Coventry was near a hundr'd Years of Age, and I hear he preached
within two Years of his Death. Paul the Hermit lived a hundr'd and thirteen
Years, as Jerome In vit. Paul. Erem.
tells us. The Ethiopians generally lived a hundr'd and twenty Years, and some
beyond, as Herodotus affirms Thal. lib. III.
.

The Rector therefore may as well quarrel with the 90th Psalm it self that
asserts Man's Age to be Fourscore Years, as he does with the Title of it, which
applies this Measure to the Israelites in the Wilderness: For there is scarce a
Country in which one may not find several Old People that live beyond
Fourscore.

He adds, that several Authors in Pool's Synopsis deliver their Opinion very
cautiously, verisimile est Mosem hunc Psalmum composuisse, say they, It Is but
likely then at most.

These several Authors in Pool, to which the Rector refers, are but two, Muis
and Mollerus, and these he mis-represents, for thus they speak, Verisimile est
Mosen, occasion ab cerumnis and miseriis Israelitarum in deserto sumpta, hunc
Psalmum composuisse. It is likely that Moses composed this Psalm upon the
Occasion of the Troubles and Distresses of Israel in the Wilderness.

Their Verisimile refers to the Occasion, not to the Penman of the Psalm, but
our Candid Author leaves out the middle Words, as not to his purpose. Judge by
this what Credit is to be given to his Quotations.

Gregory Nyssen, says he, reckons this Psalm among those which had no Title
according to the Jews.

If Gregory Nyssen says so, whom I have not by me, it is likely he speaks of
some of the Greek Translations: sure I am, the Hebrew Copies and the LXX.
Version have the same Title with that in our English Bibles, and so they had in
Jerome's Time Hierom. in Psalm. 90.
, who flourished about the same Time with Gregery Nyssen. The Targum, Sir. and
Arabit Versions ascribe it to Moses.

Indeed some who allow this Title to be Authentic, conceive that David is the
Author, and that it is accomodated to Moses and the State of the Church under
him. Theodoret mentions some that were of that Opinion, some says he, do say,
That great David wrote it, but that he adapted it to Divine Moses Theodor. in
Psalm. 89. Secund. Gr.
.

That which led 'em to this Error was a prevailing Opinion that all the Psalms
were penned by David, which is certainly a great mistake, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.
Austin, Chrysostom, Bid, and several Jewish Doctors were of this Opinion Vid.
Hotting. The saur. Philoleg. lib. 2. Sect. 3.
.

Thus I have vindicated the Title of the 90th Psalm, against the Rector's
trifling Exceptions.

In the next Place he Questions the Title of the Psalm, 34. A Psalm of David,
when he changed his Behavior before Abimelech, who drove him away, and he
departed. The King of Gath here meant is called Achish, 1 Samuel 21. 10. and not
Abimelech, from whence the Truth of this Title may be doubted. We are told
indeed that Abimelech was a common Name of the Kings of the Philistines, as
Caesar was of the Roman Emperors. But I am not satisfied with this. For I read
but of one, at most two successive Philistine Kings of that Name, Genesis 20. and
26. This was in Abraham and Isaac's days, but to fancy that the Name of
Abimelech was continued among the Philistine Kings unto the days of David about
eight hundred Years is not very likely, we meeting not with any one King so
called in that Interval of Time, save one of the Kings of Israel, Judge. 9. 6.
nor is the Achish King of Gath any where called Abimelech, except in this
Title. That which might give Occasion to this Mistake, is the mention that is
made of Abimelech the High Priest in 1 Samuel 21. whose Congress with David takes
up the nine first Verses of that Chapter. p. 12, 13.

To all this I answer,

1st. It was usual in ancient Times for great Persons to have two Names, so had
Shem, who according to many, is called Melchizedek Light. Vol. 1. p. 12.
So had Joseph, Genesis 41. 45. Jetkro is called Revel, Exodus 2. 18. and 3. 1.
Gideon, Jerubbaal, Judge. 7. 1. Eliakim has a new Name upon his Advancement, 2
Kin. 23. 34. So had Daniel and his three Companions. It was usual with Princes,
especially in the Eastern Countries to assume new Names, when they entered upon
their Government, and they were called afterward indifferently by either of
both Names. Thus Achish seems to be the Name of the King of Gath, when a
private Person, and Abimelech a Name he might assume upon his Advancement to
the Throne, to conciliate the good Will of his Subjects, for Abimelech implies
that a King should be a Father to his People.

2dly. Abimelech seems to have been the common Name of the Philistine Kings
(when they had any) as Pharaoh was of the Kings of Egypt, Agag of Amalek, Number.
24. 7. 1 Samuel 15. 8. Darius and Artaxerxes of the Kings of Persia. This Opinion
is very Ancient, how despicable soever it seems to the Rector, who finding it
in some modern Commentators in Pool's Synopsis, fancied they were the Authors
of it. It Is mentioned by Basil, as the received Opinion of that Age, that the
Kings of the Philistines were called by the common Name of Abimelech, though each
of 'em had a proper Name by which he was called besides: And this Account,
says he, we have (...), by tradition Basil. hom. in Psalm. 33. Gr. edit. Paris.
1618.
.

3dly. But the Rector is not satisfied with this, because he finds no one King
of the Philistines so called from Isaac's days unto David's Time, for about
eight hundr'd Years. And good Reason for it, for he cannot find any King at all
of the Philistines so much as mentioned in all that interval of Time. We read
of the Lord's of the Philistines in Samson's Time, Judge. 16. 5, 30. and in the
days of Samuel, 1 Samuel 5. 8. and 1 Samuel 6. 4. It should seem their Government
was Aristocratical, by the Nobles, as far as we have any Account of it, for the
Time he mentions: And then no wonder, he can find no King called Abimelech
amongst the Philistines. In David's Time the ancient Government by Kings is
revived, and therewith the Name of the ancient Kings, perhaps to render the new
Government more familiar to the People. And it should seem even in David's
Time, their Kings were little more than titular, 1 Samuel 29. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. But
whether they had Kings or no between Isaac's and David's Time is not material
to the Point in Hand; it is enough that none are mentioned in the sacred History
of one Name or another.

4thly. All that are acquainted with History will own that Pharaoh was a common
Name of the Kings of Egypt, and it is Evident from Genesis, Exodus, i. e. two
Books of Kings, etc. And yet we read of no King of Egypt so called from that
Pharaoh which was drowned in the Red Sea, unto another of the same Name in
Solomon's Time for the space of above four hundr'd Years. Does it follow
therefore that Pharaoh was not a common Name of the Kings of Egypt? No more
will it follow that Abimelech was not the common Name of the Kings of the
Philistines. Nothing can be inferred from the silence of Scripture History about
the Continuance of these two Royal Names, for so long a tract of Time, for it
is not the business of the Inspired Historians to give us the Histories of
Egypt and Palestine, nor are they so much as mentioned but with some respect to
the Church of God, whose History they professedly handled.

5thly. It is a very odd Conjecture of his, that Abimelech is inserted for
Abimelech mentioned in 1 Samuel 21. what an ignorant Fellow does he make the
Penman of this Title to be, that he should not only mistake (...) for (...)
which have no affinity either in form or sound, in substituting Abimelech for
Abimelech, but, which is worse, that he should put Abimelech the High Priest of
Israel, for Achish King of Gath, an uncircumcised Philistine? The Jews were not
such Strangers to their own History, or to that of the Philistines, their
implacable Enemies, and near Neighbors, as to know no difference between a
Holy Priest and a Profane Prince.

But suppose some ignorant Hand had put Abimelech for Achish, as he Fancies,
can we imagine the Jewish Church, to whom were Committed the Oracles of God, to
be so careless or perfidious as not to discover and rectify this Error? Could
it possibly escape the Masorites, who observes with the greatest Exactness all
the various Readings, and Anomalies of the Letters and Vowels? This is a new
Discovery, the Honor of which is reserved for our Hypercritical Rector, who
may in good Time set up for a Corrector of the Masora. Perhaps so inquisitive a
Man can tell us who Corrupted this Title, and it is well if the poor Dissenter
can escape his Censure, for here is Abimelech, a High Priest, expunged, and
altered into Abimelech; his profound Sagacity may discover a Design against
Episcopacy in this Corruption also, for one of the Great Arguments for the
Episcopal Eminency is taken from the Levitical Priesthood.

6thly. Suppose I should grant unto him that Abimelech is put for Abimelech,
this might be without any such mistake of Abimelech for Achish as he fancied,
for Abimelech and Abimelech are used of the same Person, 2 Samuel 8. 17. and 1 Chronicles. 18. 16. Dr. Lightfoot Vol. I. p. 57.
conceives that this Title is Applicable to both the Stories in 1 Samuel 21. both
to David's dissembling behavior before Abimelech, who is called Abimelech in 1 Chronicles. 18. 16. and to his changing his Behavior before Achish, the Philistines
King, for those Kings were commonly called by the Name Abimelech, Genesis 20. and
26.

From the whole it appears, that his Cavils against the Title of the 34th
Psalm, are as groundless as those against the 90th Psalm, and farther this
Deponent says not. He does not pretend to except against any of the rest, though
he would have all displaced out of the sacred Canon.

Let Us now review his Argument, If some, or if any one Title may be justly
Questioned, then this renders all the rest Suspicious: To which I oppose this,
If some, or if any one Title be unjustly Questioned (as he has done those of
the 34th and 9th Psalm), then his Suspicions of all the rest are unjust. This
Gentleman is a very Suspicious Man, he not only unjustly questions one or two
of the Sacred Titles, but takes occasion to suspect all the rest. The
Dissenters may well bear the feeble Efforts of his malignant Suspicions, since
the Divine Penman cannot escape them.

2dly. His next Argument to prove the Titles a Human Addition is taken from
those Words tacked to Psalm 72. 20. the Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are
ended, which is manifestly False, if the Titles of the Psalms be True,
especially that of Psalm 142. Besides the Psalms that follow the 72. are as
truly Prayers as they which go before it. Some body then, not inspired, has
either transposed the Psalm or else added to them the foresaid Words, being
either misplaced or thrust into the Text. The like may have been done at the
beginning of the Psalms by prefixing Titles to them. Remarks on Remarks, p. 13.


The Rector is one of those who Affects to Quarrel with the Holy Scriptures,
which he seems to read with Design to seek Occasion against them. He endeavors
to prove Psalm 72. 20. to be manifestly False, because more Prayers of David
are mentioned afterward. This is a very bold Challenge to the inspired
Writings. Would you think this the Language of a Protestant Minister, or of a
Porphyrie, a Celsus, or a Julian? To charge any part of the sacred Scriptures
with manifest Falsehood is to give the Lie to the God of Truth. Suppose we
should not be able to reconcile this Verse to other Passages of the Psalms,
does it follow it is not reconcilable? It had been more modest in the Rector to
have confessed his own Ignorance, than to have charged the Holy Oracles with
Falsehood. There are many seeming Contradictions in the Scripture, which learned
Men have taken as much Pains to reconcile, as the Enemies of Truth have done to
aggravate and expose, to the Reproach and Prejudice of Christianity. I will
imitate the former (as the Rector has done the latter) and Vindicate this Text
from his ignorant or malicious Exceptions.

1st. It Is generally thought that the Psalms were collected into the Order we
have 'em by Ezra, the Scribe, and an inspired Prophet. This is affirmed by
Hilary Prolog. in Psalm.
Athanasius In Synops.
and Jerome In ep. ad Sophron.
And if so, it becomes us not to Quarrel with the Order of the Psalms whosoever
the Gollector was, they have been received by the Jewish and Christian Church,
as digested into the present Order.

2dly. The modern Hebrew Copies have this Verse, so had the Copy which the LXX.
Interpreters used, for it is Translated by them, as it is by Jerome, which is an
Evidence it was in the Ancient Copies. If the Rector could have produced any
one Copy in which this Verse was wanting it might have given some color to his
Exceptions; but if Men may be allowed to Charge the Divine Scripture with
manifest Falsehood, where we find a perfect Harmony in the Hebrew Copies,
Ancient and Modern, I tremble to think what an Advantage is given to the
Enemies of Christianity, which swarm among us, and seek all Occasions to
Reproach the Scriptures. The Rector has been so kind to 'em as to furnish them
with one Instance of a manifest Falsehood in them, for which Piece of Service,
they cannot but reckon themselves highly obliged to him.

3dly. It is True, there is a seeming inconsistency between this Verse, that
affirms the Prayers of David to he ended, and the several Prayers in the
following Psalms, but it is to be observed, that the Ancient Jews divided the
Psalms into five Books, the 1st. Book ending at Psalm 41, with Amen, Amen. The
2d. at 72, with Amen, Amen, and the Verse which the Rector Questions. The 3d at
Psalm 89, with Amen and Amen. The 4th at 106, with Amen, Halelujah. The 5th at
150, with Halelujah. This division is followed by the Syriac, and Arabic
Translators, as also by R. David Kimhi. It Is mentioned by Jerome, Austin, and
several others. If we allow this Division of the Psalms, which I find also in
our Hebrew Bibles, the Sense is clear, the Prayers of David are ended, i. e.
the Prayers contained in this second Book, of which these Words are the
Conclusion, and then follows (...) the third Book of the Psalms, as it is in
several of our Hebrew Copies.

4thly, The learned Grotius conceives that these words refer to the Collection
of the Psalms made by David. Finitur hic Collectio Psalmorum ab ipso Davide
facta, etc. The Collection of Psalms made by David (says he) ends here, those
that follow are added by Asaph, and others, and last of all by Ezra; though there
are amongst these some that are composed by David, but after this Volume of
Collections was finished Grot. in loc. ex Pool. Synops.
. Junius and Tremellius speak to the same purpose. The end of those Prayers (i.
e. Psalms and Hymns) which David gathered together into this Book, and placed
in this Order for the Use of the Church of God, etc. Jun. and Trem. in Ps. 72.
20.


5thly. We may read the Words thus, the Prayers of David are fulfilled, or
consummated. (...) is thus rendered in several Places. Targ. completae sunt
Orationes Davidis filii Issai. According to this reading the Sense is plain and
easy. The blessings of Christ's Kingdom, of which this Psalm treats, contain the
Sum of David's Prayers and Desires, which are Fulfilled and Consummated in the
Glory of Christ's Kingdom.

This Sense well agrees with the scope of this prophetical Psalm, especially
with the foregoing Verse, Psalm 72. 19. let the whole Earth be filled with his
Glory, Amen, Amen. Then it follows Verse, 20. The Prayers of David the Son of
Jesse are ended, or fulfilled, q. d. when this is accomplished, I have my
Prayers fulfilled and answered. In this Sense the Hebrew Doctors understood the
Place, as Muis represents them. When the Messiah comes, and the Things
prophesied in this Psalm come to pass, then shall the Prayers of David be
fulfilled Cum venerit Messiah, and haec contigerint quae hoc carmine
praedicuntur, enimvero tunc implebuntur Orationes seu Vota Davidis. Muis in loc.
.

This is sufficient to Vindicate this Scripture from that manifest Falsehood,
with which the Rector boldly Charges it. Both Jewish and Christian Expositors
receive this Verse with the same Veneration as they do the rest of the Psalm,
and they Comment upon it, instead of expunging it out of the Canon. It Is a new
way of explaining Difficulties and reconciling seeming Contrarieties, to say
the Text is manifestly False. Let the World judge whether this Man be not a
Corrupter of the Word of God, who would expunge a whole Verse out of our
Bibles, for no other Reason but because he either could not reconcile it with
other Scriptures, or was not willing to have it reconciled, that he might have
a colorable Argument against the Titles of the Psalms.

He allows in his Sermon (p. 2.) that we Corrupt the Word of God, when we
Diminsh from it: And though he maliciously Charges the whole Body of Dissenters
with Corrupting the Word of God, he has not been able to Name any one Person
that has Corrupted it: But I can Name unto him a Person that has done so, and
that is one Mr. Thomas Gipps, the Author of Remarks upon Remarks. The Person is
well known in his Country, though I cannot tell whether the Rector knows him or
no: This Man I have taken (...) in the very Fact, Corrupting the Word of God by
Diminishing from it not only the Titles of the Psalms, but a whole Verse, e. g.
Psalm 72. 20. He cannot deny the Fact, for he has published it to the World
under his Hand, he has no way by which he can hope to come off but by
justifying what he has done, and for that he is furnished with as good a Stock
of Impudence as most Men living, for he will not Blush to Affirm that some
Things in the Bible are manifestly False, when it serve to make his Notions
seemingly True.

III. But I proceed to his 3d Argument against the Titles.

There are Titles added to very many Psalms in the LXX. Version, which are not
to be met with in the Hebrew, e. g. Psalm 137. (...) Jeremy composed this Song.
I ask then, is this Title Divinely inspired? and yet Jerome Translates and
Comments upon it. p. 13.

I Answers,

1st. The LXX. Interpreters have added and diminished in abundance of Places
besides the Titles of the Psalms. It were easy to give hundr'ds of Instances of
this kind. Nothing can be inferred from hence but that the Greek Interpreters
took too Great a Liberty of varying from the Original Text.

2dly. It is uncertain who composed the 137. Psalm, nor is it material for us
to know, while we are satisfied he was divinely inspired. Some conceive it was
penned by David prophetically, as Isajah wrote of the Burning of the Temple,
Isa. 64. 11. So did Asaph of the Destruction of the City and Temple, Psalm 79.
and 74. Dr. Hamond is inclined to think it might be penned after the return from
the Captivity; and if so, it could not be by Jeremiah, who was dead before.

3dly. The Addition of (...) was not in the Ancient Copies of the LXX, as
Hilary assures us, for thus he speaks, It seemed good to some to prefix the
Names of Jeremiah, Haggai and Zechariah to the superscriptions of some Psalms,
but none of these are to be found in the Authentic Copies of the LXX. Version
-- Horum nihil in authenticis LXX. Translatorum Libris ita editum reperiatur.
Hill. in Psalm. prol.
.

IV. His last Reason is, The Oriental Versions, the Sir. Arab. and Chaldee
Paraphrase often wants Titles, frequently change 'em, and sometimes add Titles,
where Hebrew and Greek have none, which could never have happened, if they had
been Canonical Scripture.

The Chaldee Paraphrase on the Pentatuch by Onkelos, and that on the Prophets
by Jonathan, which are thought to be written about the Times of Christ, are not
of that Authority as to bring the Hebrew Copy in question, where they differ
from it. I confess they have their Use, both for confirming the Purity of the
Hebrew Text, as in Genesis 3. 15. and the Illustration of it, as in Genesis 4. 8. but
especially in Controversies against the Jews, where they bear Testimony to the
Messiah, as in Genesis 49. 10. Isa. 45. 17, etc. but where they differ from the
Hebrew (as they do in a great many Places) we ought to prefer the Fountain
before the Streams. In the more obscure Places they follow the LXX. Version, as
Munster observes Praefat in Jonam.
, and therefore can be of no greater Authority than the LXX. They are not
without some Jewish Fables, as in Number. 21. 19. In some Places they depart from
the Fountain of Truth, the Hebrew Text, as in Number. 23. 3. and in Deuteronomy. 4. 28.
and 28. 64. where it is foretold that the Israelites should serve other Gods,
the Chaldee Paraphrase transfers the Guilt of this upon the Heathen. A great
deal of this Nature will occur to the observant Reader.

The Targum, or Paraphrase on the Hagiographa, among which the Jews reckoned
the Psalms, was made about the Year of Christ, 600, and is of less Authority
than the two Former. This also varies from the Hebrew Text in multitudes of
Places besides the Titles of the Psalms.

The Syriac, which is Ancient, though in many Places it follows the Hebrew, yet
in others it differs from it, in several of which it follows the LXX.

The Arabic Version generally follows the Syriac Prolegom. in Pol. Synop.
, and therefore deserves no particular consideration.

So that this Argument of the Rector proves nothing in Prejudice of the Titles
of the Psalms, without affecting other Parts of Scripture, which are
differently rendered in the Oriental Versions. Thus our Author by attempting to
destroy the Titles of Psalm, has produced an Argument which equally depreciates
the Authority of most, if not all the Books of the Old Testament, Theodoret
Censures some who thought the Inscriptions of the Psalms to be False, (...),
etc. And adds, To me it seems great Rashness to alter the Inscriptions, which
were in being in the Time of Ptolomy, who reigned in Egypt after Alexander, and
were Translated by the LXX. Elders into the Greek Tongue, as was the rest of
the Holy Scripture Theod. proefat. in Psalm.
.

The Rector adds, that there is not one Title in the Hebrew which is at all
useful to the unfolding any Mysteries relating to Jesus Christ. p. 15.

This is confidently spoken after his Manner, but the Ancient Fathers were of
another Mind. They apply the Title of the 22d. Psalm to Jesus Christ. To the
Chief Musician upon Aijeleth Shahar, i: e. the Morning Hind, so Jerome explains
it, Jesus Christ, says he, is the only Hind or Deer who destroys Serpents and
takes away Poisons, as is Evident by the Contexture of the whole Psalm Sed nos
cervum -- nullum alium nisi Christum intelligimus, sicus-totius Psalmi
contextus ostendit. Hieron. in Psalm. Tom. VIII.
.

He is followed by the greatest part of our modern Learned Commentators, The
LXX. render it, for the Morning Assumption, and this, says the same Learned
Father, signifies the Mystery of the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ
unto the Father Hier. ibid.
.

Theodores also applies this Title to Jesus Christ. (...) -- The Morning
Assumption is the appearance of our Savior, who did shine as the Morning upon
them that sat in Darkness, for the Lord is the true Light Theod. in Psalm. 22.
.

They apply the Title of the 30th Psalm (a Psalm -- at the Dedication of the
House of David) to the Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

(...), etc. The Dedication of the House, the Renovation of the human Nature,
which our Lord Christ perfected, when he dyed for us, and destroyed Death, and
gave us hope of a blessed Resurrection Theod. in Psalm. 29. Gr.
.

To the same purpose speaks Basil, (...), etc. The Spiritual meaning signifies
the Assuming of a Human Body by the Divine Word, and the Title refers to the
Dedication of that House which was built a new, and in a wonderful manner
Basil. in loc.
.

They apply (...), the Greek Title of several Psalms (we render the Hebrew
Chief Musician) to the Resurrection and the End of the World Vid. Basil. hom.
in Psalm. 44. and 45. and 48.
.

Had the Rector been as conversant with Jesus Christ, as the Ancient Fathers
were, he might have found him even in the Titles of the Psalms.

Others of them direct us to the Author, Occasion, Intention and Use of the
Psalm, which greatly contribute to the right Understanding of it. Some others
refer to the Meter and Instruments, on which they were to be Sung: These the
Hebrew Doctors confess their Ignorance of. But it does not follow, if some of
them be unintelligible to us, that all ought to be expunged out of the Canon.
There are several other Things in the Holy Scripture hard to be understood,
which must not therefore be rejected: And many of the Titles are easy and
plain, and are therefore Translated into English.

If the Titles are Original and Essential Parts of Scriptures, as I have
clearly proved, the Rector is yet to Account, why they are left out of the
Liturgy-Psalms, and why a more imperfect Version of the Psalms comes to be
preferred to the more Correct, which came out in King James the I. his Time. The
new Translation which is in our English Bibles, and has the Titles, is never
read in the Congregation; and the old imperfect Translation, which varies in
several Places from it, and in some is contrary to it (as in Psalm 105. 28.) is
constantly used in our public Assemblies. And it is more unaccountable yet,
that we must give our Assent and Consent to the unperfect Translation, when we
have a better in our Bibles: These are Mysteries the Rector is perhaps better
able to unfold, than he is the Mysteries concerning Jesus Christ in the Titles
of the Psalms.

He asked us in his Sermon, why they are not done into English? I answered, the
Bishops could best resolve the Question, whose Translation we Use. The Rector
is pleased with this Concession of Mind, and wishes the Dissenters to take
Notice, That the Scriptures being in the English Tongue is owing to the Bishops
Labors, Learning and Piety.

We think not the worse of any good Thing, because it comes to us through the
Hands of the Bishops, for whose Learning and Piety we have a just Esteem: And
yet as to this Point I must crave his Pardon for that slip of my Pen, in
calling the present English Version, the Bishops Translation, for I don't find
one Bishop among the XLVII. Translators nominated by King James the I. It Is
True, some were made Bishops afterward, and it is as True, that some others, as
Mr. Lively, Dr. Reynolds, etc. Had no great Zeal for imposed Ceremonies.
Several of them were fellows of Emanuel in Cambridge, which the Rector says,
was a Nursery of Puritans. In their Instructions they were to use Tindals,
Matthews, the Geneva, etc. Translations, when they agreed better with the Text
than that which was called the Bishop's Bible. Full. Chapter hist. lib. 10. Sect. 3.
I wish the Rector do not quarrel with his Bible for having some Strokes of the
Geneva, or Presbyterian-Translation.

But, says he, the Dissenters leave the Titles out of their Psalms in Meter,
nor do they Sing 'em.

It Is very True, nor were they designed to be Sung, as all will Acknowledge,
and it is Plain that some of 'em are Directions about the Manner of Singing,
which the Jews themselves are Ignorant of. But it does not follow that because
they are left out of the Psalms in Meter, that they ought to be left out in the
Prose also? Many Passages of Scripture are improper to be Sung, must we not
therefore read them? And I am apt to think the Reason why they were left out of
the Liturgy-Psalms was because they were intended to be Sung, as they are still
in Cathedrals, and the Rubric allows it in Parish Churches: Now since the
Psalms are Read and not Sung in our Parochial Assemblies, the Titles which are
Part of Scripture, ought not to be expunged out of the reading Psalter. They
cannot be well Sung, nor were designed for that End, and therefore are left out
of the Singing Psalms; but they may and ought to be read, as Part of the Word
of God, and therefore should not be left out of the reading Psalms. But this is
not the Controversy between me and the Rector. The not reading of 'em is an
innocent Omission, but the Rector's Attempt of thrusting 'em out of the Holy
Canon is vile and impious.

CHAP. III.
Being a Vindication of Jerome, and of the Purity of the Hebrew Text in Psalm
14. with a short Account of Isaac Vossius, whom the Rector follows in advancing
the LXX. Version above the Hebrew Copies.
THE Rector has two or three Pages in his Sermon to Vindicate the three
additional Verses in the Liturgy-Translation of the Psalms, in Psalm 14. after
Verse the 3d. which run thus, Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, with their
Tongues have they deceived, etc. These he thinks are left out of the Hebrew
Copies by the Carelessness of the Transcribers, rather than thrust into the
Greek by the Translators; and St. Paul in Romans 3. has subjoyned 'em immediately
to the 3d. Verse of the 14th. Psalm.

To this I answered out of Jerome, that these additional Verses were Transcribed
out of the Epistle to the Romans, into the LXX, that they were not in the
Authentic Copies of the LXX, and that none of the Greek Interpreters have
Commented upon them.

Rem. on Rem. p. 18.
The Rector here protests against Jerome, as unfit to be a Witness in this Case,
and says, he cared not what in his Heat he said or wrote for the Support of his
own Opinion.

1st. Why does he not Protest also against the Greek Interpreters for not
Commenting on those Verses, or Produce some that have? If none of the Greek
Interpreters before Jerome's Time have Commented on them, as they did on the
rest of the Psalm, it is a very clear Evidence that either they were not in
their Copies of the LXX. or that they looked upon them as an Addition to the
Psalm.

2dly. I doubt the Rector measures this Holy Man by himself. Indeed some have
thought him too sharp in his Eristical Writings, but the Rector perhaps is the
first Man that ever questioned his Veracity and Honesty. A Man that in his Heat
cares not what he says or writes, is certainly a very ill Man. It may be the
Rector had this venerable Pattern in his Eye when he published his Sermon about
Corrupting the Word of God. He owns himself in a Heat, Sermon, p. 27. and then he
was at Liberty to say or write what he pleased, in imitation of St. Jerome, to
support his own Opinion, or expose a Party.

But the mischief on it is, he mis-represents Jerome as much as he does the
Dissenters. All Men but the Rector will acknowledge Jerome to be one of the
greatest Lights of his Age. Austin, his Cotemporary, says his Divine Eloquence
did shine as a Lamp from East to West Aug. com. Julian. 1. 7.
Cassian calls him, Catholicorum magistrum -- the Master of Orthodox
Catholics, whose Writings shine as Divine Lamps through the whole World. Joh.
Cassian. cont Nestor.
Sulpicius Severus after the highest Encomium of him for the Merit of his
Faith, his eminent Virtues, and incomparable Skill in the learned Languages,
adds, concivit odia perditorum Dialog. 1.
he stirred up the hatred of some wretched Fellows against himself: Heretics
hated him (says he), because he constantly opposed them, the Clergy hated him,
because he Censures their vicious Lives; but all good Men admire and love him.

It Is evident the Rector neither admires, nor loves him, for what Reasons he
knows best, but by what follows, one would be apt to think he hates him, for he
odiously mis-represents in these Words.

Jerome arguing for the Hebrew against the LXX, because forsooth, St. Luke,
(Acts 7. 14.) agreed not with the Hebrew Text but with the LXX, he gives that
holy Evangelist this scurvy Character, Lucae qui ignotus and vilis and non
magnae fidei in nationibus ducebatur. I Will not English the words, because I
will pay some deference to the Presbyterian Father.

And a little after he says, He is unworthy to be believed in any thing be
affirms, upon this point in Controversy, or indeed in any else.

The transcribing of the whole Passage will set this matter in a true light,
and convince the Reader how basely the Rector abuses Jerome.

His Words are these, St. Luke, who is a Writer of that History, and publishes
the Book of the Acts of the Apostles, for the use of the Gentiles, ought not to
write any thing that is inconsistent with that Scripture, which was already
made public to the Nations: For indeed the authority of the LXX Interpreters
was for that time only in more repute than that of Luke, who was unknown, and
of no account, and in no great estimation or credit among the Nations Non enim
debuit Sanctus Lucus, qui ipsius Historiae scriptor est, in gentes actuum
Apostolorum volumen emittens, contrarium aliquid scribere adversus eam
Scripturam quae jam fuerat gentibus divulgata. Et ubique majoris Opinionis ille
duntaxat tempore LXX Interpretum habebatur auctoritas quam Lucae qui ignotis
and vilis, and non magnae fidei in nationibus ducebatur. Quaest. seu Trad.
Hebr. in Genesis
.

Is there any thing in these Words that reflects a scurvy Character upon the
Holy Evangelist? All will own that the Lxx Version was known to the World
before St. Luke was, and the Gentiles had no way to examine the truth of his
Allegations out of the Old Testament, but by comparing 'em with their Greek
Bibles. He was neither known nor esteemed by the generality of the Gentiles,
until his Writings made him so, which were the more esteemed for their
agreement with that Version of the Old Testament which they had among them. Dr.
Lightfoot speaks to the same purpose with Jerome. Whereas the New Testament was
to be wrote in Greek, and come into the hands chiefly of the Gentiles, it was
most agreeable, I may say, most necessary for them to follow the Greek Copies,
as being what the Gentiles were only capable of consulting.

Jerome does not say, that St. Luke was vilus and non magnae fidei, but
ducebatur, he was so accounted in the Nations, who at that time were strangers
to him, and had a greater Veneration for the Lxx than for his Writings. And if
the Gentiles esteemed him ignotus and vilis, it was no more than as the
Athenians esteemed St. Paul, Acts 17. 18. The Rector may as well condemn St.
Luke for saying that St. Paul was accounted a Babbler at Athens, as Jerome for
affirming that St. Luke was accounted ignotus and vilis in nationibus.

Jerome could not impose upon his Reader, when he affirmed the additional
Verses in Psalm 14. were not in the Lxx, for he appeals to the Greek
Commentators, who all set a Mark upon them, and pass them by Denique omnes
Graeciae Tractatores, qui nobis Eruditionis sui in Psalmos Commentarios
reliquerunt, hos versiculos veru annotant, atque praetereunt, liquido
confirentes in Hebraeo non haberi, nec esse in Lxx Inter. Proaem. Hieron. in
lib. 16. in Isa.
.

Nor has the Rector be^n able to produce one that has Commented upon 'em.

Brugensis says, They are not to be found in most of our Greek Copies, both M
S. and Printed, Vatican, and others Non leguntur -- in plerisque Graecis
exemplaribus, tam impressis, tam manuscriptis, Vaticanis and aliis. Brug. in
Pol. Synop. ad Ps. 14.
.

Since the Rector excepts against Jerome as a Man unworthy to be believed in
any thing, I will confirm his Testimony by another of Origen's, who says, the
Apostle took these Verses ex variis Scripturae locis Orig. Com. in epist. ad
Romans
, from several places of Scripture, by which words its evident, that they were
not in the Lxx, nor in the Hebrew Text in the Fourteenth Psalm in Origen's
time, who lived above an Age before Jerome was known in the World. And this
Testimony is the more considerable, because Origin had a genuine Copy of the
Lxx, which he exhibited in his Hexapla, and understood the Hebrew, which very
few of the Fathers did, besides him and Jerome.

Grotius follows Jerome and Origin, and affirms, that St. Paul took these
Verses partly out of the Psalms, partly out of Isaiah Vtitur hic Paulus
diversis sententiis, tum ex Psalmis, rum ex Esaia. Grotius in Rom 3. 10. in
Pol. Syn.
, and this is the received Opinion of the Learned,

But says the Rector, Jerome confesses the Verses are in vulgata Editione
quae Graece (...)) dicitur, and in toto orb diversa est; and adds, I do not
well understand him, but it seems the Copies then in ordinary use had the said
Verses, though Jerome's had 'em not, if he is to be credited, Remark on Remark,
p. 18.

I will charitably relieve the Rector's ignorance, and help him to understand
what Jerome means by his versio (...), or vulgar Version. It was a most corrupt
Version of the Lxx, but the true Copy, says St. Jerome, is to be found in
Origen's Hexapla, and is faithfully translated by me into the Latin Tongue,
and is used at Jerusalem, and in the Eastern Churches, and remains pure and
incorrupt in the Books of the Learned (...) Ipsa est quae and Lxx, sed hoc
interest inter utramque quod (...) pro locis and temporibus, and pro voluntate
scriptorum corruptae editio est. Hieron. ad Sun. and Tretell. Tom. III.
.

This is the Version to which Jerome appealed, and of which he affirms, that it
had not the interpolated Verses in Ps. 14. This genuine Version was publicly
used in the Eastern Churches, and at Jerusalem, which was but 35 Furlongs, or
about 4 Miles 1/2 distant from Bethlehem, where Jerome lived (Just. Mart. Apol.
2.) and therefore any body might easily disprove him, had he misrepresented
matter of Fact.

Now let any Man judge what an indecent thing it is in our Rector to blacken
Jerome's Memory with the Imputation of the most impudent and most foolish Lie,
which Thousands of that Age could have detected, and he wanted not Adversaries
that would have sufficiently exposed him upon such an occasion. His Friend
Rufinus would have aggravated a Crime of this Nature, and made the World
sensible of it long ago.

But whence is all this Spite at poor Jerome? The Rector is a Man that cannot
suppress (though he endeavors it) the reasons of his Resentments. He calls
Jerome, before he was aware, the Presbyterian Father. These Presbyterians are a
sad sort of People, the very mention of their Name puts the Rector into a
visible Disorder, and raises such a Commotion in his Spirits, as if he were
haunted by a Legion of Presbyterian Ghosts. His hatred to them is such, that he
cannot forbear spitting his Venom at every body that seems to favor their
Principles.

This is Father Jerome's fault, which the Rector cannot forgive him. He has
proved Bishops and Presbyters were one and the same in the Apostles times, and
that the difference between them was by Ecclesiastical Custom, and not by
Divine Disposition.

Hier. Comment. in Ep. ad Tit.
Its well if St. Peter, St. Paul and St. John fall not under his displeasure,
as Presbyterian Fathers, for Jerome brings his Proofs out of their Epistles. I
presume the Candid Reader will not believe the Rector when he charges the
Presbyterians with lying and abusing Scripture, for Jerome himself, the
Presbyterian Father, cannot escape his Censure.

He is very angry with me (p. 19.) For endeavoring to make my Party believe he
designed to depress the Authority of the Hebrew Copies. Surely, this Minister,
says he, never considers what he writes.

It Is well if the Rector considers what he does, in giving occasion to this
Charge, which I shall abundantly confirm. He says in his Sermon, p. 9. That it
is more probable the Three controverted Verses might be left out of the Hebrew
Copies, by the carelessness of the Transcribers, than thrust into the Greek by
Translators.

Here he evidently depresseth the Authority of the Hebrew Copies, and prefers
the Lxx before them: Nay, By this Rule we must receive all the Additions of the
Lxx (which are exceeding many) as Canonical, and suppose 'em left out of the
Hebrew Copies by the carelessness of the Transcribers, e. g. they add a whole
Psalm at the end of the Psalm about David's Victory over Goliath: They add a
Verse concerning the Knifes of Stone with which the Israelites were Circumcised
at Gilgal, that they were laid up in Timnath-Serah, and afterward in Joshua's
Grave, Josh. 21. 42. and 24. 30. They add to Exodus 24. 10. Instead of they saw
the God of Israel, they read, they saw the place where God stood. They add a
whole Paragraph at the end of Joshua, Joshua 24. 33. They have a long Verse in
Job 1. 9. in which they represent Job's Wife scolding at her Husband. They add
to the end of Job 42. 17.

I could instance in some Hundreds of Additions to, and Variations from the the
Hebrew Text. Now all these must be admitted to the prejudice of the Hebrew
Copy, and of our English Bibles (which have 'em not) according to the Rector's
way of reasoning.

The Rector obstinately asserts the Authority of the Lxx, which he is inclined
to believe to be divine; vindicates the additional Verses in the fourteenth
Psalm, against the Hebrew Bibles that have them not; professedely charges our
Hebrew Text with several Corruptions, and those in things very material (which
I shall consider presently) and yet confidently tells us, 'twas never in his
thoughts to depress the Hebrew, p. 19.

Sure the Rector does not expect to be believed in what he says. If charging
the Bible with gross Corruptions be not a depressing of it, what is? He would
have it burnt for one Corruption, and yet the charging it with many Corruptions
is no depression to it. We will suppose the Rector at this time had an eye to
the Presbyterian Father, and did not care what he said or wrote.

I told him, If the Lxx be of as good Authority as the Hebrew, it is uncertain
what becomes of the Rector's Text, Prove. 30. 6. for it is not in my Edition of
the Lxx. Cambr. 1665.

Here he mightily triumphs that he has found his Text in the Lxx, and (p. 20.)
charges me with lying, and want of sincerity and honesty.

These are words of Course with the Rector, and signify no more than that he
is a Man of good breeding, and has a Set of mannerly expressions, with which
he accommodates his friends upon all Occasions.

It Is true, the Text is in the Lxx, but not in its proper place. I looked into
the end of the Proverbs, where it ought to be, and not finding it there,
concluded it was not in my Septuagint Bible. I have met with it since in Prove.
24. incerted between the 22 and 23 verses, with the addition of 13 or 14 verses
more of Pro. 30. The rest of the Chapter, and the beginning of the 31st Chap.
to verse 10. I cannot yet find. This Omission and Dislocation is an evidence
that our Copies of the Lxx (which are of divine Authority to the Rector) are
very imperfect, and may ground a Conjecture, that these Verses were thrust into
that place by some ignorant hand, which has made bold with the Lxx in abundance
of other places. I find them mis-placed not only in the Roman, but also in the
Alexandrian Copy.

Its being rightly placed in the Complutensian and Frankford Editions which the
Rector takes notice of (p. 20.) is no Argument that it was in the Ancient
Copies of the Lxx, for the Complutensian Bibles, are a new and mixed Version,
partly from Origen's Additions out of Theodotion, Aquila and Symmachus, Walt.
Prolegom. ad Polygl. ix. 28.
.

The Frankford and other German Editors have taken the liberty to change and
transpose the Order of some Books, Chapters and Verses that they might adapt
them to the Hebrew Text, as Dr. Walton observes, Ibid. 29.
.

He suggests that Isaac Vossius has abundantly proved the Hebrew Copy
corrupted, and that with much Learning and Judgment.

I know not how the Rector comes to espouse the Notions of Isaac Vossius, who
unworthily disparages our Hebrew Bibles, not only contrary to the Sentiments of
his Learned and more Judicious Father Gerhard Vossius, but to the received
Opinion of most Protestant Writers, who have with great Learning and Judgment
asserted the Purity of the Hebrew Text against the Papists.

Lindanus, P. Galatinus, Canus, Jacobus Christopolitanus, Gord. Huntlaeus, and
many more of the Popish Doctors, have endeavored to enervate the Purity of the
Hebrew Text, in favor of the Latin Version, which the Papists prefer above
the Original.

Among our selves, Isaac Vossius, and a few more (among whom the Rector seems
ambitious to make some little Figure) have deserted the Protestant Doctrine,
and conspired with the Romanists to expose the Hebrew Text, as impious and
corrupt; for what reasons and ends they know best.

It will not be much for the Rector's Reputation to lick up Vossius's Spittle,
whose Judgment bore no proportion to his great reading, as may appear by the
following Passages, which I shall transcribe out of him.

That Book, says he, of the Hebrew Bible, is dumb, which no man is able to
read or understand, because one half of it is maimed; neither has it any
Vowels, but what were given it by the enemies of Christianity Codex ille mutus
est, quem nec legere, ne dum intelligere, quisquam sciat. Is. Vos. Resp. ad
Nup. Crit.
.

In another place he passes this arrogant Censure on the Learned Translators of
the Hebrew Bible.

I could produce whole Chapters, especially out of the more obscure Books of
the Holy Scripture, as Ecclesiastes, Job, Hoshea, and others, in which you will
not find so much as one Verse rightly understood, and rendered by the
Interpreters of our Age In quibus ne unicus quidem occurrat versiculus, qui a
nostri saeculi Interpretibus recte acceptus and redditus fuerit. De Sibyll.
Orac. cap. 13. p. 270.
.

If no Man be able to read or understand the Hebrew Bible, how comes Vossius to
understand it? And if he does not understand it, how knows he that the
Interpreters of our Age have not Translated aright? If he does understand it,
why had he not given us a right Translation of those whole Chapters that are
misrendred?

He repeats his bold Assertion, The Hebrew Book is mute, as being destitute of
true Vowels, and though we had Vowels, even this would not enable us to Translate
it, since we have utterly lost the signification of the words, and the sense
which arises from them; even the Jews themselves do not deny this difficulty of
interpreting. Resp. ad Obj. p. 325.

If our Hebrew Bibles be such useless Things as Is. Vossius makes them, it is
hard to determine what they are good for: It Is well if his admirer Mr. G. does
not condemn them to the Flames (as he has done some of our Sermon. p. 27.
English Bibles) for the Corruption he finds in them, and their being
unintelligible at the best, if we may believe his Friend Vossius, for whose
profound Judgment he has so great a Veneration.

The same Vossius thus reflects on Dr. Lightfoot's Horae Hebraicae and
Talmudicae, on 1 Cor. which the learned World justly admires. He seems to me,
says he, to be less faulty who would expound the Gospels out of the Alcoran
than out of the Talmud. And a little after he Charges him (as justly as the
Rector does the Dissenters with Corrupting the Word of God) with preferring the
Authority of the Talmud to that of the Gospel in the Explication of Scripture
Voss. Resp. ad Obj. p. 331. 332.
.

He commends Charles the Great for laying aside the Gothic, Saxon and French
Languages, and for propagating with his Empire the Latin Tongue, and assigning
it the chief Place, Ibid. p. 340.
non in Sacris modo, not only in Religious but in Civil Actions also.

He calls those that defend the Hebrew Bibles Asellos cassos Iumine and
intellectu, Asses void of Judgment and Understanding, girt with a Professors
Gown, and carrying for their Shield the Masoretick Bible with all it is Points
Epist. ad Andr. Colv.
.

Thus much I thought fit to Advertise the Reader concerning Isaac Vossius,
whose great Judgment the Rector applauds, and subscribes to in his Opposition
to the Hebrew Bible.

He that makes our Hebrew Bibles to consist in dumb Letters, which no Man can
read, much less understand, that Censures the Interpreters of his Age as not
rendering so much as one Verse aright in whole Chapters, that speaks favorably
of the Use of the Latin Tongue in Religious Worship, is not the most excellent
Pattern for a Protestant Minister to follow; but the Rector is of Age to choose
his own Masters.

CHAP. IV.
Being a Vindication of my Arguments for the Purity of the Hebrew Text.
I Briefly hinted at two or three Arguments for the Purity of the Hebrew
Copies, which. I will now improve and vindicate from the Rector's Exceptions.

I. I affirmed the Hebrew Copies to have been incorrupt in our Savior's Time,
because he never Charged the Jews with Corrupting the Scriptures.

The Rector takes no Notice of this Argument, but he says afterward (p. 22.)
many Corruptions might steal into the Hebrew Text, and designedly be thrust
into it before Christ's Time.

He dare not say, there were any thrust into it, but he slily insinuates there
might be: He deals here with the sacred Text, as he has done with Dissenters,
he brings it under Suspicion, when he wants direct Proof.

If the Jews before the Birth of Christ had designedly Corrupted the Holy
Bible, doubtless we should have heard of it in the History of the New
Testament. We are told there that the Oracles of God were Committed to them,
Romans 3. 2. They were made the Conservators of the Divine Writings, which were
concredited to them.

Had they betrayed so great a Trust, and perfidiously falsified the Holy
Scriptures, can we imagine that Christ and his Apostles would have overlooked
so horrid a wickedness, attended with a train of the most fatal Consequences?
Jesus Christ was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was in all
his House: Moses as a Servant, but Christ as a Son over his own House. Moses
his Fidelity consisted in his Care to transmit the Divine Laws pure and
incorrupt to the People as he received them in the Mount: Had these Laws been
Corrupted by the wickedness of after Ages, doubtless the Lord Jesus would have
restored 'em to their Original Purity. It cannot be conceived that the Son
should be less concerned for the Laws of his House than the Servant had been.
One great end of his Appearance was to Reform the Corruptions of the Jewish
Church, and would he leave their very Laws Vnteform'd? He came into the World
to bear Witness unto the Truth, and can we think he would have overlooked the
Falsehoods of that Book which is the Standard of Truth, had any been thrust into
it, as the Rector supposes? He who reproves the Jews for lesser Sins, would
never have Connived at so great an Abomination, as the Corrupting of the Hebrew
Copies.

He censures their Corrupt Glosses upon the Law, and Vindicates it from them.
Mat. 5. much more would he have noted the Corruptions of the Original Text.

He bids his Disciples search the Scriptures, hear the Scribes and Pharisees
sitting in the Seat of Moses, who was read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day.
It Is not likely that he would have recommended the Study of corrupted and
depraved Scriptures unto his Followers without a necessary Caution against the
Errors of them.

From the whole it is Evident that the Scripture of the Old Testament was not
Corrupted before the Birth of Christ, nor were they Corrupted after, as appears
by the Testimonies which Christ and his Apostles cite out of 'em, which are all
for Substance to be found in Moses and the Prophets, as they are cited by them.

Thus Origin and Jerome anciently argued for the Purity of the Hebrew Text, If
the Jews Corrupted the Scriptures (say they), they did it either before or
since the coming of Christ: Not before, because Christ and his Apostles do not
Charge 'em with it; not after, because the Allegations made by Christ and his
Apostles out of the Old Testament are all, or most of 'em still to be found
there Orig. lib. 8. in Isa. ut refert Hieron. in Cap. 6. Isa.
.

II. I urged the Testimony of Philo, who flourished about the XLth. Year of
Christ: He writes that even unto his Time for the space of above 2000 Years,
not one Word had been Changed in the Writings of Moses.

To this the Rector answers, that (...), which I rendered Word, sometimes
signifies Sentence, or an entire Proposition. 'Twas the Laws of Moses the Jews
were careful of, and not the Words, Syllables or Letters, according to Philo in
this Place.

(...) is usually rendered Word by all Interpreters, and that is the Primary and
most proper Signification of it, and any one would so render it here that has
no design to expose the Scripture, and does not study to elude such plain
Testimonies as assert it is Purity. He grants that the Jews, according to Philo,
changed not any Sentence of the Law: But who knows not that the change of one
Word, yea of one Letter (as in the instance of ye and we) often alters a whole
Sentence? If Words might be changed, whole Sentences might as easily be
perverted. Philo argues a minore ad majus, that the Ancient Jews were so far
from changing the Law of Moses, (...) -- that they removed, or changed not one
Word of what he had written.

The Rector prevaricates when he says, 'twas the Law of Moses they were
careful of, and not the Words: Doubtless they were careful of both, and Philo
says, they changed not (...), not one Word, with what confidence then dare the
Rector affirm they were not careful of the Words? He confesses they were
careful of the Laws, he would do well to tell us how the Laws could be
preserved without the Words.

It does not follow hence says he, that there was no Alteration in any Word or
Point; this might happen (though the Jews did it not wilfully) for any thing
Philo offers to the contrary. p. 21.

Truth is constant to it self, but the Rectors notions are inconsistent: He
told us above that many Corruptions might be designedly thrust into the Text
before Christ's Time, and now he says, the Jews altered not a Word wilfully.
This he delivers as his own Sense in a Parenthesis, and not as Philo's.

It Is evident the Rector strains the Signification of (...) to elude the Force
of Philo's Testimony for the Purity of the Hebrew Text. It Is true it signifies
a Sentence sometimes, but we ought not to recede from the primary and literal
Signification of Words without necessity.

The Jews were careful not only of the Sentences, but were Religious to
Superstition in counting the very Letters of the Bible to preserve it entire,
as the Rector told us in his Sermon, p. 13. but now he is inclined to think
they took no Care of the Words, Syllables or Letters, but only of the Sentences
of the Law, as he explains Philo.

I leave it to such as can to reconcile the Rector to himself.

Certain it is, that the Jews had of Old, and still have, such a Zeal for their
Law, that the very Words, Syllables and Letters were preserved by them with no
less Care than the Sentences of the Law.

We have a memorable Story in Jerome, which whether True or False shows what a
Zeal the Jews of that Age had for the Words and Letters of the Law. The Story
is this. Joab slew his Master, because he did the Work of the Lord deceitfully,
when he read Deuteronomy. 25. 19. Thou shall blot out (...) the Male of Amalek, when
he ought to have read (...) the Memory of Amalek. Hieron: in Isa. 6.
The Letters of (...) are the same in both readings, all the difference lies in
the Points or Vowels.

The Jewish Rabbis say, that he who makes the least Alteration in the Bible
commits the inexpiable Sin: And they add, that if any One out of Ignorance, or
Malice should change One Word therein, the whole World would be in danger of
Perishing, and returning into it is primitive Chaos: And they give this Reason
for their Opinion (which they endeavor various ways to confirm) that the World
was Created for the Sake of the Holy Scripture: If any one therefore should
Corrupt the Scripture, the World must needs Perish Polan. Syntag. ex Talm. lib.
1. cap. 37. p. 211.
.

This Confirms Philo's Testimony, and explains the meaning of his (...), which
the Rector has weakly endeavored to perplex: But I shall have Occasion
presently to speak more of their Care of the very Words, and Letters of the
Law, agreeable to this Testimony of Philo.

III. I argued from the Masora, which I affirmed to have been a effectual means
to preserve the Purity of the Hebrew Text, and renders it impossible that any
Corruption should have crept into them.

All that the Rector has to say to this Argument is, That 'twas no hard matter
for cunning Rabbis to alter Words and Letters, and still to keep the just
Number of them, as ye and we in Acts. 6. 3. where still remains the same Number
of Words and Letters.

The Rector discovers himself to be a perfect Stranger to the Masora, which
tells us not how many Words and Letters are in every Book, but the Genuine
Writing and Reading, where any diversity Occurs, as also when Words are written
Fully with quiescent Letters, especially (...) and (...), and when defectively
without them: They note when a Word begins, ends, or is to be found in the
Middle of a Verse: They observe all the peculiar Constructions of it, with the
Ambiguous Significations; they remark also the Vowels and Accents: They take
notice of the greater and lesser Letters, and of those that are inverted and
symbolically Pointed; nay they have entered down how often every Letter of the
Alphabet is contained in the whole Scripture. All this and much more the
learned Reader may find in Buxtorf's Tiberias or Commentary upon the Masora, by
which it is Evident the Hebrew Copies could not be Corrupted after the Masora
was Written. This is acknowledged both by Jews and Christians that understand
the Masora.

Elias Levita, a learned Jew, who though he differs from his own Country Men
about the Time of the Masora (which he thinks was invented at Tiberias after
the Year 500.) yet he owns it in concurrence with other Rabbis to be an
effectual Conservatory of the Purity of the Law. I will give you his own Words.
Elias Lev. in Buxt. Tiber. p. 6.
After this Work which the Authors of the Masora performed, it is impossible
that any Change or Corruption should happen to any of our Bibles; hence it is
that our Rabbis of blessed Memory have not said in vain, that the Masora is
the hedge of the Law.

The same is affirmed by Christian Writers, vid. Buxtorf. Tiberiad. Capnion.
ser Reuchlin. in speculo Oculari. Ariam Montan. in praefat. Bibl. Brixian. in
Arca Noe. Nich. Fuller. Miscellan. III. 13.

His Instance of ye and we in Acts 6. 3. is very Impertinent, for if the
Letters w and y were reckoned up in the Acts, the false reading ye would make a
y supernumerary and lesson the Number of w's.

Even those that plead against the Purity of the Hebrew Text, will readily
acknowledge it was not Corrupted since the Invention of the Masora, and
therefore have no way to avoid this Argument but by affirming (with Elias
Levita) that the Masora is a late Invention of the Jews at Tiberias, about the
Year 500; and that the Scripture was Corrupted either before or by those Jews
who drew up the Masoretick Notes and invented the Vowels. This way the Popish
Doctors and Vossius go. But the Rector deserting his learned Friends,
ignorantly affirms the Masora could not preserve the Bibles in Purity. He is
willing to believe they are Corrupted, and that no Art or Care of Man (no not
the admirable Invention of the Masora) could possibly prevent it.

However, he is so kind to us, as to tell us, That he does not affirm, that the
Hebrew was Corrupted in any material Thing till after the destruction of
Jerusalem. p. 22.

He should have informed us, what immaterial Corruptions were got into the
Bible before the destruction of Jerusalem, and what material Ones after.

Nevertheless, adds he, it might have been Corrupted before the Fifth Century,
when the Masora is said to be invented. Rem. ibid.

Here he seems to allow that the Bible has not been Corrupted (at least in any
Thing that is Material) after the penning of the Masora in the Fourth Century.
He would or should have said the Sixth Century, for the Masora, according to
Elias Levita was Penned after the Year 500. Buxt Comment. Masoret. p. 12.
But the Rector who affects to contradict himself, acknowledges in another
Place (Sermon. p. 13.) that the Masora was before the Birth of Christ, for (says
he) the Jews were Religious to Superstition, as may be thought, counting the
very Letters of the Bible to preserve it entire: Hereunto our Lord alludes, in
Matt. 5. 18.

Our Author is so variable, that one knows not where to find him.

One while the Masora was before the Birth of Christ (i. e. Since Ezra's Time)
another while it was invented in the Fifth Century. In one Humor he would have
us believe the Jews were Religious to Superstition, to preserve the Bible
entire; in another Humor, they designedly Corrupted it; in another Mood, they
altered not a Word wilfully. The Rector should blame no Body for differing
from him, since he cannot agree with himself.

Conveniet nulli qui secum dissidet ipse.

He gravely concludes, it is but lately since the Christians received the Hebrew
Bible from the modern Jews, who may very well be suspected to have made bold
with it in prejudice to the Christian Religion. p. 22.

Had the Christians no Hebrew Bibles till of late Years? Were there not Hebrew
Bibles in the Hands of the Ancient Jews, who many of 'em became Christians? The
Apostles were Jews, I hope he will not say they had no Hebrew Bibles, or that they
received them of the modern Jews.

But perhaps he means the present Copies of the Hebrew Bible, and that these
are come from the modern Jews. This is boldly affirmed, and if we call upon him
to prove it, he must have recourse to F. Simons help, who though he has
endeavored to weaken the Authority of our Hebrew Bibles, yet is forced to
Confess the Antiquity of the Copy that goes under R. Hillel's Name, which the
Jews affirm to be Written by R. Hillel himself, some Years before the Birth of
Christ. So does Cunaeus de Repub. Hebr. and Schickard de jure Reg. Hebr. who
are quoted by F. Simon, but he himself thinks it was Written by some Jewish
Rabbi of that Name since the Invention of the Hebrew Points by the Doctors of
the School of Tiberias, because he finds it Pointed and Accented. So that
according to his Confession it may be above 1000. Years Old: And if the Hebrew
Vowels be Coequal with the Letters (as I think the Judicious and Learned
Buxtrof has effectually proved) the Hillelian Copy, with which our modern
Copies agree, may be as Old as the Jews affirm, and written by the Ancient and
Famous Hillel, who flourished about 60. Years before the Birth of Christ.

Doubtless there are many Ancient Copies of the Hebrew Bible in several
Christian Libraries, for which we are not obliged to the modern Jews.

I remember Vossius says he saw seven hundr'd Manuscript Copies of the Hebrew
Bible in one Library. The Rector perhaps can tell what Jewish Doctors they were
borrowed of.

But suppose our present Hebrew Copies had come from the modern Jews, it does
not follow they made bold with them in Prejudice to Christianity, as the Rector
suspects. This suspicious Gentleman ought to show us wherein they have
Corrupted them.

Had they falsified the Scripture in Prejudice of Christianity, doubtless they
would have expunged the Chief Prophecies concerning Jesus Christ: But that they
have not done, for those Places wherein the Greek and Latin Bibles differ from
the Hebrew, seldom concern the Christian Faith, and the Hebrew Copies do often
make more against the Jews than the Greek and Latin Versions; as for instance,
in Psalm, 2. 12. receive discipline, so the Greek and Latin, from which nothing
can be directly urged against the Jews; but the Hebrew, (...) kiss the Son, is
an invincible Argument against them. Have the Jews Corrupted their Copies that
they might give a more express Testimony to the Son of God?

That the Hebrew Copies are not depraved by the modern Jews is evident from
their Agreement with those which Jerome used. It Is apparent to any one that will
be at the Pains to compare them, that wherein our Copies differ from the LXX,
they generally agree with that which Jerome used, as far as we have any Account
of it in his Writings.

The Learned Solomon Glassius, Professor of the Holy Tongues at Jena, speaks of
a very Ancient Manuscript of the Hebrew Bible in their College, curiously
Written in Royal Parchment. This he carefully examined for the greatest Part,
and could not observe it to vary from other Copies in the least tittle, but
that some Words were omitted at the first writing, which upon the review were
supplied -- Ne punctulo quidem a Codicibus aliis discrepare, animadvertere
potui. Philol. Sacrae lib. 1. tract. 1. p. 23.
.

IV. I will add one other Argument for the Purity of the Hebrew Text. If the
Jews neither could nor would have Corrupted the Hebrew Copies, it follows that
they have not Corrupted them.

1st. They could not Corrupt all the Hebrew Copies, if they had been never so
desirous, for there was a pure Copy in every Synagog in the World besides those
in the Hands of Christians. Now, is it possible that so many Copies in distant
Countries and Places should be all Corrupted, and not one left to detect the
Fraud? It is very absurd to fancy a general Conspiracy between the Jewish
Doctors to falsify all their Bibles, and that in such Texts where they had no
Interest to serve, and in the mean Time to leave the great Prophecies
concerning Jesus Christ untouched? Had such a piece of Villainy been attempted,
I doubt not but the World had rung of it long ago. That watchful Providence
which has preserved the Holy Scriptures from the destructive Rage of
Persecutors, and the corrupting Attempts of cunning Heretics, Niceph. Eccl.
hist. IV. 21.
would doubtless have raised up some Instruments to assert the Purity of the
Divine Law; nay rather than so hellish a Combination should take Effect, I
question not but among the very Actors themselves some would have been
influenced by the sovereign Director of humane Intellects, to detect and oppose
so Vile a Practice. To fancy such an universal Corruption of the Hebrew
Copies, is to dream that the World is governed without a Providence, and that
the chiefest Objects of it is peculiar Care, the Scripture and the Church, are
left in the Power of restless and malicious Adversaries.

Justin Martyr takes notice of the providential Care of Heaven in preserving
the Holy Bible in the Jewish Synagogues for the Use of the Christian Church. It
must be assigned to the Divine Providence, says he, that our Religion is at
this Day preserved among the Jews, to whom because we would not give Occasion
to reproach us by Producing the Scriptures out of our Church, we choose rather
to produce 'em out of the Synagogue, of the Jews, etc. Servari autem etiam nunc
apud Judaeos nostram Religionem. Dei erga nos est providentiae. Sermon. ad Gent.
.

Austin thinks it very Incredible, That the Jewish Nation, scattered far and
wide through the World, could conspire together to write a Lie, and while they
envy the Benefit of the Scripture unto others, should deprive themselves of the
Truth -- God forbid that any sensible Man should believe the most perverse and
malicious Jews to be ever able to Effect so much, in so many Copies, and those
dispersed far and wide -- Absit ut prudens aliquis vel Judaeus cujuslibet
perversitatis, atque malitiae tantum potuisse credat in codicibus tam multis,
and tam long lateque dispersis. Aug. de Civ. Dei. XV. 13.
.

Jerome laughs at the Silliness of those who think the Hebrew Copies falsified.
Austin calls the Jews Capsarios nostros, qui studentibus nobis Codices portant.
Aug. in Psam, 40. al. 41.
They are Library-keepers, and Book-carriers to the Students in Christianity.

2dly. As they could not, so we have reason to believe, they would not impose
upon us, for they were Religious even to Superstition in preserving the
Scripture entire, as the Rector has noted. What our Savior says, that one
jot or one. tittle should in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fullfilled,
has been made good. The Jews themselves were of the same Mind: Their own
Expositions, as Dr. Lightfoot observes, will attest to this Truth as to both
those Words that our Savior has, viz. (...) it is little to be doubted, that
our Savior means the letter Jod, concerning which, the Jerusal. Talmud has
this Passage, Sanh. fo. 20. col. 3. The Book of Mishneh Torah (Deuteronomy)
came prostrate to complain that Solomon sought to root Iod out of it (viz.
(...) he shall not multiply Wifes) The holy blessed God says to it, Solomon
and a thousand such as he shall fail, but a Word of the Law shall not fail.

About (...), which signifies one of those little apiculi that distinguish
between Hebrew Letters, they have several Passages. Tanchum Fol. 1. He that
makes (...) a (...) or (...) a (...) destroys the World. See several Instances
of this used in the learned Author. Li. vol. 1. p. 374. 375.

The Jews used the greatest Care and Caution imaginable in Transcribing the
Law. They examined all Copies with a most Religious diligence. If there were
but two or three Faults in every Leaf, one may mend and read them in Private,
say the Masters, but if there were more Faults, such a Bible was not allowed
for private Use. Li. ibid.

In every Synagogue they had a true Copy, and it was their Care every where to
have their Bible as purely Authentic as possible, as may be seen by the
curious Rules that are given to that purpose in Massech. Sopherim, etc. Thus
far Dr. Lightf. in whom you may see much more to the same purpose.

The modern Jews retain the Zeal of their Ancestors for the Purity of the
Divine Law, Romans 10. 2. Act. 21. 20. They have the most Religious regard to
their Bible, they never put it in an unclean Place, nor touch it with defiled
Hands, and if it happens to touch the Ground; they keep a public Fast, to
obviate the Judgment which such an Accident portends.

If a Copy had but one Corruption, it was not admitted into the Synagog, but to
be buried in an Earthen Vessel, and never to be used, but in extreme Necessity
a poor Man might teach his Children to read in it, but must not bring it into
the Synagog, nor apply it to any other Use. To this unparallelled Vigilance and
Care is owing the perfect Harmony and surprising Consent of the Manuscript
Copies of the Hebrew Bible throughout the World at this Day. No one Copy,
written by a Jew, can be produced (as learned Hebricians have affirmed) that
has the least disagreement with their other Copies, except it be in some
Masoretick Notes, and in the Keri's and Kethibs. It were well if the Christians
in their Editions of the Bible did imitate the great Diligence of the Jews,
whose exemplary Zeal, and curious Circumspection in revising and correcting
their Bibles inexcusably condemns the general remisness of Christian Printers.
Maimon. in Polan. ubi supra.

CHAP. V.
Containing an Answer to the Rector's Objections against the Purity of the
Hebrew Text.
HAVING vindicated my Arguments for the Purity of the Hebrew Copies, I shall
now consider what the Rector can say against it.

I. His first Exception to the Purity of the Hebrew is taken out of Just.
Martyn, who charged the Jews with Corrupting the Scriptures. To this I
answered, with Corrupting the Greek, but not the Hebrew. For this the Rector
very scornfully demands my Reason. p. 24.

My reason is, because Just. Mart. expressly mentions their Corrupting the Lxx,
and no where speaks of their Corrupting the Hebrew Copies.

His Words are these, I would have you know that they (the Jews) have expunged
out of the Translation of the Elders that were with Ptolomy many entire Texts,
in which is clearly foretold that this Crucified one should be God and Man, and
that he must be hanged on a Tree and dye for us Ac quod illi multos and
integros locos illarum ex translatione eorum, qui cum Ptolomaeo fuere Seniorum
sustulerint, etc. Just. in Dial. cum Tryphon.
.

When he speaks of the Holy Scriptures indefinitely, we are to understand him
of the Lxx, Version, which was the only Scripture most of the Fathers were
acquainted with. He tells the Jews (among other Corruptions) they had altered
Isa. 7. 14. which in the Lxx. is, behold a Virgin ((...)) shall bring forth;
this they altered into (...) -- behold a Young Woman shall bring forth: And so
it is to this Day in Aquila's Version, which the Jews preferred to that of the
Lxx. It does not appear that they had changed the Original, (...) but the
Controversy was, whether it ought to be rendered (...) a Virgin, with the Lxx,
(...) a Young Woman, as Aquila had corruptly rendered it Vos autem (says he)
and in his mutare expositiones Seniorum vestrorum qui fuere apud Ptolomaeum,
Aegyptiorum Regem, audetis, dicontes non habere Scripturum sicut illi verterunt
sed ecce juvencula in utero concipiet. Just. ibid.
.

The Rector asks, is it no Fault to Corrupt the Lxx? Yes, doubtless, it is the
height of Wickedness to Corrupt the Word of God in any Version; but we owe it
to the special Providence of God that the Original have been preserved entire,
by which all Translations are to be examined, and the Corruptions of 'em
detected.

But, says the Rector, if the Corruption had been only in the Lxx, they would
have let Justin know that their Hebrew Bibles were entire. p. 24.

The Charge being only about Corrupting the Greek Bibles, they had no Occasion
to speak of the Hebrew; and it should seem Justin himself was a Stranger to
that Language, for he says Israel signifies homo vincens Virtutem, Isra is a
Man, and El is Virtue or Stength, according to Justin. A Novice in the Hebrew
knows how to correct this Etymology. Nay the very Hellenists, or the Grecizing
Jews that lived without the borders of their own Land, were generally
unacquainted with the Hebrew, his Friend Vossius affirms that after the
Captivity the Hebrew was lost in Palestine it self, and then no wonder the Jew
that discourses with Justin makes no mention of the Purity of the Hebrew
Bibles, to which he might be as great a Stranger as Justin himself.

II. The passages objected by Justin (as the Rector adds) are still wanting in
our Hebrew Bibles, for instance, Psalm, 96. 10. say among the Heathen the Lord
has reigned, but Justin tells Trypho that (...) had been struck out by the
Jews, and that the Place should run thus, the Lord has reigned from the Wood
or Cross. These Words, from the Cross, are not in the Hebrew or Lxx. at this
Day. The Hebrew Copy in Jerome's days wanted the same Words, and they are to be
found in Austin, Cyprian, Tertull. etc. as Flam. Nobilius assitms. p. 25.

Here the Rector advances a bold Charge against the Catholic Church, as
consenting at least to the Corrupting of God's Word, and that in an illustrious
Prediction of the Manner of Christ's Death, whom they had so little a regard to
(according to the Charitable Rector) as to neglect the restoring so famous a
Prophecy to it is due Place in the Bible, and that after they were told of the
Corruption of Just. Martyr. This is a very severe Charge against the whole
Generation of the Righteous. You see the Dissenters have a great deal of good
Company that suffer with them under the Rector's unjust Criminations of being
Corrupters of the Word of God.

It must be confessed that Justin's Copy of the Lxx. had the Words, from the
Wood, and this was followed by some of the Fathers, but the more Correct Copies
had 'em not. That they were not Originally in the Lxx. will appear, if we
consider,

1. That Jerome, who translatrd both the Hebrew and Lxx into Latin, takes no
notice of them, which doubtless he would have done, if they had been either in
the Hebrew or Greek Copies: he had the genuine Copies of the Lxx, out of
Origen's Hexapla. It may be therefore presumed, that Justin Martyr found these
words in some corrupt Copy of the Lxx, which Jerome calls versio (...), as we
observed before.

2. The Latin Version, which all allow to be Ancient, has 'em not: No more are
they to be found in the Alexandrian or Roman, or any other Copies of the Lxx at
this day; nor in the Arab, Ethiopic (which follow the Lxx in most things) nor
in the Syriac or Chaldee Paraphrase. Have the Jews been able to corrupt all the
Copies of these Versions, that were in the hands of Christians? Did the
Christians treacherously deliver up all the Greek and Latin Bibles, which were
innunterable, to be corrupted by the Jews? If we should suppose 'em to be able
to alter their own Hebrew and Greek Copies, is it pessible they should be able
to falsify all the Bibles through the whole Christian World? Credat Judaeus
Apella!

3. Is it likely that such a clear Prophecy concerning the Cross of Christ had
been over-lookt in the New Testament, where several more obscure ones are
Cited, and applied to his Passion? There Is scarce a circumstance of his
Sufferings but the Evangelists apply some Old-Testament-Prophecy to it, and
they usually note, that such an Event happened for the fulfilling of the
Scriptures. Now had there been such a Prediction as this upon Record, that the
Lord should reign from the Wood, it is highly probable, That Christ and his
Apostles would have taken notice of it, as they do of those that are more dark
and abstruse. This Omission is a plain Evidence, That it was not in the Bible
in Christ's and the Apostle's time; and if not then, it never was in the Hebrew
Bible, which the Rector allows was not corrupted in any material thing before
the Destruction of Jerusalem.

4. Mr. Nich. Fuller, who has a learned Dissertation upon this Subject,
conceives, that some Christian, observing that these Words, the Lord reigns,
treated of the Kingdom of Christ, added in the Margin by way of Explication,
from the Wood, which the next Transcriber, taking it for a various Reading,
boldly incerted into the Text, and so it might easily spread into more Copies,
than the few the Rector mentions, as ye and we in Acts 6. 3. has done. Mr. F.
quotes Faber, saying, that these words are not de Hebraica veritate, but added
by Christian Devotion.

I will conclude with Fuller 's Censure, An vero os aliquod impurum dicere
ausit, etc. But dare any foul mouth affirm, that either those Versions (Gr. and
Lat.) or the Catholic Church (which has approved them for so many Ages) have
conspired in so horrid a wickedness with the perfidious enemies of Jesus
Christ? Full. Miscell. Theol. lib. 3. cap. 13.

III. The Rector believes upon Vossius 's Judicious Authority, that the Hebrew
Chronology is corrupted, his Argument is this, The Jews believed their Messiah
would come about the 6000 Year from the Creation; that the World was 6000 Years
old when Christ came; that the Ancient Hebrew Copies reckoned 6000 Years from
Adam to Jesus, else the Jews could not have expected the Messiah when Jesus was
born, if their Chronology had been the same as it is this day; from the whole
it must be confessed, that the Modern Hebrew Copies are corrupted, the World,
according to them, being at the Birth of Jesus but about 4000 Years old. p. 25
and 26.

The Rector barely proposes this Argument, but neither explains nor attempts to
prove the parts of it. I Will briefly examine each of them.

1. It cannot be proved that the Ancient Jews expected their Messiah about the
6000 Year of the World. Vossius endeavors to prove it from a Talmudical
Tradition, which the Jews ascribe to Elias, and Vossius believes to be Elias
the Prophet.

The Tradition of the house of Elias is this, The World shall last Six Thousand
Years; two Thousand Years before the Law, two Thousand Years of the Law, and
two Thousand Years of the time of the Messiah; but for our iniquities, which
are many, those Years are passed and lapsed. Mundus constrabit, etc. In Tract.
Sanhedr.

Is. Vossius begins these 6000 Years from the Flood, and so reckons forward to
the Birth of Christ; but he ought to begin from the Creation, for the Tradition
speaks of the Age of the World, that it should last six thousand Years,
alluding to the six days of the Creation, accounting 1000 to answer each day.
His reason for reckoning from the Flood, is taken from 2 Pet. 3. 6. who calls
the Old World, the World that then was. This is nothing to the point in hand,
for the Question is not whether the Antediluvian World may be so called, but
whether Elias intended to exclude that State of the World, or the time before
the Flood, from being concerned in this Tradition. This neither is, nor can be
proved. Now if we reckon the 6000 Years from the beginning of the Creation,
it is co-incident with the Chronology of our Hebrew Bibles, which make the World
about 4000 Years old when Christ was born, and so does this Tradition, for it
assigns 2000 years before the Law, and 2000 years under the Law, at the end of
which it makes the Messiah to come.

The Truth is, This is a Rabbinical Figment, and no Prophecy of Elias, as
Vossius affirms without proof. Perhaps the Author might be some Talmudic Doctor
of that Name. It gives a false account of the time before the Law, which was
about 2450 Years, and of the time under the Law, which was about 1500 Years,
and not 2000 as he affirms. Some have calculated the Duration of the World by
this pretended Prophecy, and have been so vain as to affirm, that the Last
Judgment will be at the end of 6000 Years from the Creation, grounding their
Opinion upon this Rabbinical Tradition.

Besides, the Jews acknowledge that the time of the Coming of the Messiah is
already past, though he be hid from them for their sins: This is inconsistent
with their defalking 2000 Years from the Chronology of the Hebrew Bible, that
they may persuade the World the time of his appearance is not yet come.

They are sensible enough, that the time of the Messia's coming is lapsed,
whatever some of them may say to the contrary; and therefore they pronounce a
solemn Curse upon the Computers of Times, Male pereunt (say the Talmudists) qui
temporum articulos suppetunt quibus venturus est Messiah. Let their Bones rot
(says R. Jonathan) who compute the times of the end.

2. It cannot be proved that the World was 2000 years old when Christ came.
According to the Hebrew Copies, which I have proved incorrupt, the World was
about 4000 years old when the Son of God was manifested in the Flesh. There is
no reason why we should esteem the Greek Chronology before the Hebrew Bibles.
It Is absurd to prefer a Translation to the Original, the Streams to the
Fountain. Even those that follow the Lxx Chronology, do not make the World 6000
Years old when Christ came. Theophilus Antiochen and the Oriental Church reckon
about 5507 from the Creation to the Birth of Christ. Ad Antolyc, lib. 3.
Nicephorus reckons 5505. Eccl. Hist. I. 10.

We are sure the Greek Chronology has been either corrupted very early, or
falsified by the Lxx Translators, for it makes Methuselah to live 14 Years
after the Flood; hence came that famous Question, where to lodge him all the
time of the Flood.

Some held (as St. Austin observes) that he was with his Father Enoch, who was
translated. This they held (adds he) as being loath to derogate from the
Authority of those Books, which the Church has entertained into more renowned
Authority, and thinking that the Books of the Jews, rather than these, do
mistake and err. For they say, its not credible, that the Lxx Interpreters,
which translated at one time, and in one sense, could err, or would lie or err,
where it concerned them not; but that the Jews, for envy they bear us -- have
changed some things in their Books, that the Authority of our might be lessened.

This is their Opinion, his own he gives a little after, Let that Tongue be
rather believed, out of which a Translation is made into another by
Interpreters. And in the next Chap. (chap. 14.) The Truth of things must be
fetched out of that Tongue, out of which that that we have is interpreted. Aug.
de Civit. Dei, xv. 11. 13, 14.

It is true; the Fathers generally followed the Greek Chronology, and how could
they do otherwise, since few of 'em were able to read the Bible in Hebrew.

3. The ancient Hebrew Copies did not reckon 6000 Years from Adam to Jesus, as
the Rector affirms. They reckoned, as we do now, as appears by the Copy which
Jerome used, of which he gives this account, That where the Greek Translation
says the Patriarchs before the Flood were so many years above two hundred
years old, when they begat such a Son, the Hebrew Copy s^ith they were so many
years above one hundred years old. So that the 100 years which are added to the
lives of the Antediluvian Patriarchs in the Lxx Version (which make about 600
Years in all) were not in the Ancient Hebrew Copies. Sciendum quod utque ad,
etc. Hieron, in quoest. seu Tradit. Hebr. proem.

But says the Rector out of Vossius, The Jews could not have expected the
Messiah when Jesus was born, if this Chronology had been the same as it is this
day.

Doubtless that Chronology was the same, and they had just reasons to expect
the Messiah then, for Daniel's Weeks were at an end; the Scepter was departed
from Judah; John the Baptist, the forerunner of the Messiah had awakened their
expectations.

Vossius's main Argument (as the Rector calls these) being answered, what
follows is of less Consideration: however, I will make some short reflections
on his two last Arguments, which are as follows:

IV. Cainan the Son of Arphaxad, mentioned Luke 4. 35, 36. is left out in Genesis
11. 12. which is a demonstration says the Rector, that the Jews have corrupted
the Hebrew.

This Argument has been judiciously answered by several Learned Pens, as the
Reader may see in Pool, to whom I remit him. Sin. Crit. in Luc. 3.

I shall only take notice of what Doctor Lightfoot says to it. He affirms it
added to Moses's Text by Interpreters, for these reasons: 1. No reason can be
given why it should be left out of the Hebrew Text. 2. But a probable reason
may be given why it should be added in the Greek, The Jews esteemed the Seventy
Souls that went into Egypt, beyond the Seventy Nations of the World. This
arrogant Doctrine must needs expose 'em to hatred and danger amongst the
Gentiles. To avoid this, the Interpreters added another Cainan, and five souls
to those Lxx in Jacob's retinue. They took care that the Gentiles should not in
the Greek Bibles find exactly the Lxx Nations in Genesis 10. but 72 or 73, (if we
reckon Elisa also) as also not 70 but 75 souls that went down into Egypt.

The same craft they used in Deuteronomy. 32. 8. which they read, according to the
number of the Angels of God, whence the comparison between the 70 souls and the
70 Nations took its rise.

3. Nothing more usual with them than to add according to their pleasure, Genesis
10. 2. Elisa is added, and v. 22. another Cainan among the Sons of Sem. So that
they have added two Cainans to the Original Text, one the Son of Noah, the
other the Son of Arphaxad, and Grandson of Noah. Genesis 46. 20. they have added
five Grandchildren to the Sons of Joseph, and in v. 27. they reckon up 7
Grandchildren to him. Shall we believe the Greek or Hebrew Bibles? Let Reason
and the Nature of the thing judge. If these 5 were with Joseph, when Jacob and
his Family went down into Egypt (and if they were not, why are they numbered
among those that went down into Egypt) then must Manasseh at the age of 9 or 10
at the most, be a Grandfather Ephraim at 8 or 9. But how comes St. Luke to
follow the 70, and to insert this additional Cainan? To that the Dr. answers,

1. Luke wrote to the Gentiles, and therefore must follow the Heathens Bible in
his Quotations. 2. In the Genealogies he was to be a Copier, and not a
Corrector. If he had not inserted it, the Gentiles, who were only capable of
consulting the Gr. Copies, might have called his Varacity in question; as to
the other part of the Genealogy, which had been extracted out of Tables and
Registers not familiarly known, Luke is a faithful Transcriber. Thus Jude
mentions Michael striving with Satan; and the Apostle names James and Jambres
(2 Timothy 3. 9.) they do not deliver these as certain things, but refer to the
common Tradition.

3dly. Aristeas and Josephus say, when the Greek Translation (...), Demetrius
commanded that according to their Custom, they mo(...) Curses upon any that
should by addition, or alteration, or diminution (...) any Change in it. 4thly.
He followed the Lxx. to show that there was not a distinction as was imagined
between Jews and Gentiles, and that he mi(...) fort the Gentiles concerning
their coming in. See more in the learned A(...) 1. p. 488, 490. Vol. II. p.
401, 402, 404.

V. The Rector has one other Corruption to Charge the Hebrew Copy(...) Psalm.
22. 16. As a Lion, instead of, they pierced my Hands and Feet, So (...) 15. 24.
and the Lxx. This Place (if it be a Corruption) has not been (...)ted in all
Hebrew Copies, the Jews themselves being Witnesses. R. Jacob Be(...) the
restorer of the Masora (in Bibl. Venet.) ingenuously confesses that he (...)
the reading (...) or (...) they pierced in some Copies, Johan. Isaac Levita,
(...) Jew became a Christian, affirms the same of a Hebrew Psalter that was
h(...) fathers. Several Hebrew Bibles have both readings (...) in the Text and
(...) Margin, and Grotius acknowledges both to be Ancient, so does Dr.
Hamm(...) observes (as Glassius did before him) that the Chald. joins both
readings (...)dring the Place, mordentes sicut leo manus meas Duplex fuit
antiquitus lectio. Grot. in loc.
. Our English Translator the marginal reading (...) they have pierced, as being
at Liberty to choose eit(...), and the Jews themselves in other Places prefer
the Keri, or margina(...) Of the two readings here no wonder the modern Jews
should prefer that wh(...) most to favor their Cause. The famous and
indefatigable Dan. Bomberg, (...)ned himself in publishing the noble Venetian
Edition of the Masoretic Bible have restored the marginal reading into the
Text, but the Jew that corr(...) Press, diverted him from his Intention, by
threatening to hinder the Sale o(...) among his Countrymen. The learned
Glassius, who was a great Cri(...) Hebrew Tongue, says that (...) as a Lion,
ought to be renderd (as (...) pierced, and that (...) is the 3d. plur. praeter
in Kal of (...) but in an A(...) form, (...) being inserted, as is usual in
other Words, and (...) put in the end for Ezr. 10. 44. (...) they had taken for
(...) He refers to more Examples of t(...) kind, as in Jer. 50. 11. and he
calls this Letter, as Brixianus and others (...) before him, not Jod but a
diminutive Vau, which is therefore thus Writ(...) clare inuat clavorum
Christi stigmara: To signify the Marks of the Nails i(...) Hands and Feet.
Hence it is written in Codregiis (...) as if (...) had been (...) of (...) as
it in Jer. 50. 11. four several Times, and so it is used in other Plac(...).

Thus I have Vindicated the Hebrew Bibles, and our English Bibles, which
Translation of 'em, from the Corruptions with which the Rector has thou(...)
reproach them. I desire the Reader to consider whether this Gentleman d(...) be
Credited in Reflections upon the Dissenters, who so vilely Reflects on th(...)
Bibles, which he would have us believe are Corrupted by the Jews in
materia(...) especially in Ps. 96. 10. Genesis 11. 12. and in the Chronology, in
which above Years are lost. So that according to these Corrupt Bibles we cannot
prove tha(...) is come in the Flesh, for the World must be 6000. Years old when
Christ (...) come (if we may believe the Rector) but according to our English
Bibles but above 4000 Years old when he was Born. In short, the R(...) brought
us to this pass, either we must reject the Authority of our English (...) Point
of Chronology) or deny that Christ is come in the Flesh. Christ (...) come till
the World was 6000 Years old, as the Rector tells us, and accordi(...) our
English Bibles, it is not 6000 Years old to this Day. Mr. Gippes is a (...)tron
to the Christian Cause, which is as much obliged to him as the Dissenters Speak
out your Mind, sweet Sir shall we burn our Corrupt Bibles Sermon. p. 27.
that ma(...) in Jesus Christ? Or shall we deny his Coming, to save our Bibles?
You (...) you please, good Mr. Rector, but I am satisfied the Church of
England, and t(...) the Dissenters, will neither renounce their Christianity,
nor their (...)

Vid. Glass. de Script. still.
FINIS.

