A DISCOURSE Concerning Evangelical Love, Church-Peace and Unity. With the
OCCASIONS and REASONS of present Differences and Divisions about Things Sacred
and Religious. Written in the Vindication of the Principles and Practice of
some Ministers and others.

Speciosum quidem nomen est Pacis, et pulchra opinio Unitatis: sed quis ambigat
eam solam unicam Ecclesiae Pacem esse quae Christi est? Hilar. London, Printed
1672.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Christian Love and Peace.
CHAP. I.
Complaints of want of Love and Unity among Christians, how to be managed, and
whence fruitless. Charge of Guilt on some, why now removed, and for whose
sakes. Personal miscarriages of any not excused. Those who manage the Charge
mentioned not agreed.

THe great Differences that are in the world amongst Professors of the Gospel
about things relating to the Worship of God, do exercise more or less the minds
of the Generality of men of all sorts: For either in themselves, or their
Consequents, they are looked on to be of great importance, Some herein regard
principally that disadvantageous influence which they are supposed to have into
men's spiritual and Eternal Concernments: Others, that Aspect which they fancy
them to have upon the Public Peace and tranquillity of this world. Hence in all
Ages such divisions have caused great thoughts of heart; Judges 5. 15.
especially because it is very difficult to make a right judgment either of
their Nature, or their Tendency. But generally by all they are looked on as
evil; by some, for what they are in themselves; by others, from the
disadvantage which they bring (as they suppose) unto their secular interest.
Hence there are amongst many great Complaints of them, and of that want of Love
which is looked on as their cause. And indeed it seems not only to be in the
Liberty, but to be the Duty of every man soberly to complain of the Evils which
he would, but cannot remedy. For such complaints testifying a Sense of their
Evil, and a desire of their Cure, can be no more than what Love unto the
Public Good requires of us. And if in any case this may be allowed, it must
be so in that of Divisions about sacred things, or the worship of God, with
their causes and manner of mannagement amongst men. For it will be granted that
the Glory of God, the Honor of Christ, the Progress of the Gospel, with the
Edification and peace of the Church, are deeply concerned in them, and highly
prejudiced by them. And in these things all men have, if not an equal, yet such
a special interest, as none can forbid them the due consideration of. No man
therefore ought to be judged as though he did transgress his Rule, or go
beyond his Line, who soberly expresses his sense of their Evil, and of the
Calamities wherewith they are attended. Yet must it not be denied, but that
much Prudence and moderation is required unto the due mannagement of such
Complaints. For those which either consist in, or are accompanied with
Invectives against the Persons or ways of others, instead of a Rational
discourse of the causes of such Divisions, and their Remedies, do not only
open, inflame and irritate former wounds, but prove matters of new contention
and strife, to their great increase. Besides in the manifold Divisions and
Differences of this nature amongst us, all men are supposed to be under an
adherence unto some one Party or other. Herein every Man stands at the same
Distance from others, as they do for him. Now all complaints of this kind,
carry along with them a tacit Justification of those by whom they are made. For
no man can be so profligate as to judge himself and the way of Religious
worship wherein he is engaged, to be the cause of blaneable Divisions amongst
Christians, and yet continue therein: Reflections therefore of Guilt upon
others, they are usually replenished withal. But if those are not attended
with evident Light and unavoidable Conviction, because they proceed from
Persons, supposed not indifferent, yea culpable in this very matter more of
less themselves, by them whom they reflect upon, they are generally turned into
Occasions of new exasperations and contests. And hence it is come to pass, that
although all good men do on all occasions bewail the want of Love, forbearance
and condescension, that is found among Professors of the Gospel, and the
Divisions which follow thereon, yet no comfortable nor advantageous effects do
thence ensue. Yea not only is all Expectation of that blessed fruit, which a
general serious consent unto such Complaints might produce, as yet utterly
frustrated; but the small remainders of Love and Peace amongst us are hazzarded
and impaired, by mutual charges of the want and loss of them, on the Principles
and Practices of each other. We have therefore need of no small Watchfulness
and care, least in this matter it fall out with us, as it did with the
Israelites of old, 2 Samuel 19. 41, 42, 43.
in another occasion. For when they had by a sinful sedition cast out David
from amongst them, and from reigning over them; after a little while, seeing
their folly and iniquity, they assembled together with one consent to bring him
home again. But in the very beginning of their endeavors to this purpose,
falling into a dispute about which of the Tribes had the greatest interest in
him, they not only desisted from their first design, but fell into another
distemper of no less dangerous importance then what they were newly delivered
from. It must be acknowledged that there has been a sinful decay of Love
amongst Professors of the Gospel in this Nation, if not a violent casting of it
out, by such prejudices and corrupt Affections, as wherewith it is wholly
inconsistent. And it would be a matter of no small lamentation, if upon the
blooming of a design for its Recovery and Reduction, with all its trains, as
forbearance, Condescension, Gentleness and Peace, if any such design there be,
by contests about the occasions and causes of its Absence, with too much
seriousness in our own vindication, and pleas of a special Interest in it above
others, new distempers should be raised, hazzarding its everlasting exclusion.

In this state of things we have hitherto contented our selves with the
Testimony of our own hearts unto the sincerity of our desires, as to walk in
Love and Peace with all Men, so to exercise the fruits of them on all occasions
administered unto us. And as this alone we have thus far opposed unto all those
Censures and Reproaches which we have undergone to the contrary; so
therewithal have we supported our selves under other things, which we have
also suffered. Farther to declare our thoughts and Principles in and about the
worship of God, than they are evidenced and testified unto, by our Practice, we
have hitherto forborne; least the most moderate claims of an especial interest
in the common Faith and Love of Christians, should occasion new contests and
troubles unto our selves and others. And we have observed, that sometimes an
overhasty endeavor to extinguish flames of this nature, has but increased
and diffused them; when perhaps if left alone, their fuel would have failed,
and themselves expired. Besides, a peaceable practice, especially if
accompanied with a quiet baring of injuries, gives a greater conviction to
unprejudiced minds, of peaceable principles and inclinations, than any verbal
declaration, whose sincerity is continually obnoxious to the blast of evil
Surmises. In a Resolution therefore to the same purpose we had still continued,
had we not so openly and frequently been called on, either to vindicate our
Innocence, or to confess and acknowledge our Evil. One of these we hope is the
aim and tendency of all those charges or Accusations, for want of Love,
peaceableness, and due compliance with others, of being the Authors and
somentors of Schisms and divisions, that have been published against us, on the
account of our dissent from some Constitutions of the Church of England. For we
do not think that any good men, can please themselves, in merely accusing their
Brethren, whereby they add to the weight of their present troubles, and
evidently expose them unto more. For every charge of Guilt on those who are
already under sufferings, gives new encouragement and fierceness to the minds
of them from whom they suffer. And as no greater encouragement can be given
unto men to proceed in any way wherein they are engaged, then by their
Justification in what they have already done; so the only justification of
those who have stirred up Persecution against others, consists in charging
Guilt on them that are Persecuted. As therefore we shall readily acknowledge
any Evil in our Persons, Principles or ways, which we are, or may be convinced
of; So the sober vindication of Truth and Innocence, that none of the ways of
God be evil spoken of by reason of us, is a Duty, in the care whereof we are no
less concerned. Yea did we design and directly endeavor our own Justification,
we should do no more than the prime dictates of the Law of Nature, and the
Example of some of the best of Men, will give us a sufficient warrant for.
Besides the clearing of Private Persons, especially if they are many, from
undue charges and false accusations, belongs unto public Good; that those who
have the Administration of it committed unto them, may not be misled to make a
wrong Judgment concerning what they have to do; as David was in the Case of
Mephibosheth upon the false suggestions of Ziba. 2 Samuel 16. 4.
Neither could we be justly blamed should we be more than ordinarily urgent
herein; considering how prone the Ears of Men are to receive calumnious
Accusations concerning such as from whom they expect neither Profit nor
Advantage; and how slow in giving admittance to an address of the most modest
defensative. But this is the least part of our present Design. Our only aim is
to declare those Principles concerning mutual Love and Unity among Christians,
and Practices in the Worship of God, wherein our own Consciences do find Rest
and Peace, and others have so much misjudged us about. This therefore we shall
briefly do; and that without such Reflections or Recriminations, as may any way
exasperate the Spirits of others, or in the least impede that Reintroduction of
Love and Concord, which it is the Duty of us all to labor in. Wherefore we
shall herein have no regard unto the Revilings, Reproaches, and threatenings of
them, who seem to have had no regard to Truth, or Modesty, or Sobriety, indeed
to God or Man, in the mannagement of them. With such it is our Duty not to
strive, but to commit our cause to him that Judges Righteously, especially
with respect unto those impure outrages which go before unto Judgment. Furious
Persons, animated by their secular Interests, or desire of Revenge,
unacquainted with the Spirit of the Gospel, and the true nature of the Religion
revealed by Jesus Christ incompassionate toward the Infirmitics of the minds
of Men, whereof yet none in the world give greater Instances than themselves,
who have no thoughts but to trample under foot and destroy all that differ from
them, we shall rather pity and pray for, then either contend withal, or hope
to convince. Such they are, as if outward prevalency were added to their
Principles and desires, they would render all Christians like the Moabites, 2 Chronicles. 20. 23.
Ammonites, and Edomites, who came out to fight against Judah. The two greater
Parties upon some difference or distaste, conspire at first to destroy the
Inhabitants of Seir; not doubting but that when they had dispatched them out of
the way, they should accord well enough among themselves: But the Event
deceived their Expectation; their Rage ceased not until issued in the mutual
destruction of them all. No otherwise would it be with those who want nothing
but force or opportunity to exterminate their next dissenters in matters of
Religion. For when they had accomplished that design, the same Principle and
Rage would arm them to the wasting of the residue of Christians, or their own.
For a conceit of the Lawfulness hereof, is raised from a desire of enlarging
power and dominion, which is boundless. Especially is it so, where an Empire
over the Reason, Faith and Consciences of men is affected; which first produced
the fatal Engine of Papal Infallibility; that nothing also could have strained
the wit of man to invent, and nothing less can support. Unto such as these we
shall not so much as tender satisfaction, until they are capable of receiving
the advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor, and Evil speaking, be put away from you, with all Malice.
For until this be done, men are to be esteemed but as raging waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own shame, whom it is to no purpose to seek to pacify, much
less to contend withal.

It is for the Sake of them alone who really value and esteem, Love, Peace, and
Unity among Christians for themselves, that we here tender an account of our
thoughts and Principles concerning them. For even of them there are some who
unduely charge us with owning of Principles, destructive unto Christian Love
and Condescension, and suited to perpetuate the Schisms and Divisions that are
amongst us. Whether this has been occasioned by an over-valuation of their own
Apprehensions, conceiting that their judgments ought to give Rule and measure
to other men's; or whether they have been, it may be insensibly unto themselves,
biased by Provocations as they suppose unjustly given them, we are not out of
hopes, but that they may be convinced of their mistakes. Upon their Indications
we have searched our Consciences, Principles, and Practices, to find whether
there be any such way of perverseness in them, as we are charged withal; and
may with confidence say, that we have a Discharge from thence, where we are
principally concerned. Having therefore satisfied that Duty which on this
occasion was in the first place incumbent on us, we shall now for their
Satisfaction, and our own Vindication with all impartial Men, declare what are
our thoughts and Judgments, what are our Principles, ways, and Practices, in
and about the great concerns of Christian Love, Unity, and Peace; referring the
final decision of all differences, unto him, who has appointed a day wherein
he will judge the World in Rightcousness, by the Man whom he has ordained.

This being our present Design, none may expect, that we should attempt to
justify or excuse, any of those miscarriages or failings that are charged on
some, or all of those Professors of the Gospel, who at this Day come not up
unto full Communion with the Church of England. For we know that no man lives
and sins not; yea that in many things we all offend. We all know but in
part, and are liable to manifold Temptations, even all such as are common unto
Men. Those only we have no esteem of, who through the fever of Pride have lost
the Understanding of their own weak, frail, and sinful condition. And we do
acknowledge, that there are amongst us, Sins against the Lord our God, for
which he might not only give us up unto the Reproaches and Wrath of Men in this
World, but himself also cast us off utterly and for ever. We shall not
therefore in the least complain of those who have most industriously
represented unto the public view of the world, the weakness miscarriages, that
have really fallen out amongst some or more of them whose Cause we plead, and
discovered those corrupt Affections, from whence, helped on with variety of
Temptations, they might probably proceed; Nor shall we use any Reflections on
them who have severely, and we fear Maliciously laid to their charge things
which they know not; as hoping that by the former the Guilty may learn what to
amend, now they are taught with such thorns and briers as are the scorns and
reproaches of the World; and by the latter the Innocent may know what to avoid.
Such charges and Accusations therefore we shall wholly pass over, with our
hearty prayers that the same or worse evils may never be found amongst them by
whom they are accused. Much less shall we concern our selves in those
Reflections on them, which are raised from the Words, Expressions, or Actions
of particular Persons, as they have been reported and tossed up and down in the
Lips of talkers. The debate of such things tends only to mutual exasperations,
and endless strife. It may be also, that for the most part, they are false, or
misreported inviduously, or misapplyed; and true or false, have been
sufficiently avenged by severe retortions. And in such Altercations few men
understand the sharpness of their own words. Their Edge is toward them whom
they oppose: But when a return of the like Expressions is made unto themselves,
they are sensible how they pierce. So are provocations heightened, and the
first intendment of reducing Love, ends in mutual defamatory contentions. All
things therefore of this nature, we shall pass over, and help to bury by our
Silence.

The principal charge against us, and that whereinto all other are resolved, is
our Nonconformity unto the present Constitutions of the Church of England. For
hence are we accused to be guilty of the want of Christian Love and
peaceableness, of Schism, and an inclination to all sorts of Divisions,
contrary to the Rules and Precepts of the Gospel. Now we think it not
unreasonable to desire, that those who pass such censures on us, would attend
unto the common known Rule, whereby alone a right Judgment in these cases may
be made. For it is not equal that we should be concluded by other Men's
particular Measures, as though by them we were to be regulated in the exercise
of Love, and observance of Peace. And as we doubt not but that they fix those
measures unto themselves in sincerity, according unto their own Light and
Apprehension of things; so we are sure it will be no impeachment of their
Wisdom or Holiness, to judge that others who differ from them, do with an equal
integrity endeavor the direction and determination of their Consciences, in
what they believe and Practice. Yea, if they have not pregnant evidence to the
contrary, it is their duty so to judge. A defect hereof is the spring of all
that want of Love, whereof so great a Complaint is made. And rationally they
are to be thought most sincere and scrupulous herein, who take up with
determinations, that are greatly to their outward disadvantage. For unless it
be from a conviction of present Duty with respect unto God, and their own
eternal Good, men are not easily induced to close with a judgment about sacred
things and religious Worship, which will not only certainly prejudice them, but
endanger their ruin, in things Temporal. It is ordinarily, outward secular
Advantages wherewith the Minds of Men are generally too much affected, that
give an easy admission unto Persuasions and Practices in Religion. By these
are Men turned and changed every day from what before they professed; when we
hear of no turnings unto a suffering profession, but what arise from strong and
unavoidable convictions. Moreover should we endeavor to accommodate our selves
to the Lines of other Men, it may make some change of the Persons with whom we
have to do, but would not in the least relieve us against the charges of guilt
of Schism and want of Love which we suffer under. Some would prescribe this
Measure unto us, that we should occasionally join with Parish Assemblies as now
stated in all their worship and sacred Administrations; but will not require of
us that we should absolutely forbear all other ways and means of our own
Edification. Will this Measure satisfy all amongst us? will it free us from
the imputation we suffer under? shall we not be said any more to want Christian
Love, to be factious or guilty of Schism? It is known unto all how little it
will conduce unto these Ends, and how little the most will grant that Church
Peace is preserved thereby. Yea the Difficulty will be increased upon us beyond
what an ordinary Ability can solve, though we doubt not but that it may be
done. For if we can do so much, we may expect justly to be pressed severely to
answer, why we do no more. For others say immediately, that our Attendance on
the public Worship must be constant, with a forbearance of all other ways of
Religious worship beyond that of a Family; yet this they would have us so to
do, as in the mean time studiously to endeavor the Reformation of what is
judged amiss in the Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship of the Church. This is
the measure which is prescribed unto us by some; and we know not how many
censures are passed upon us for a nonconformity thereunto. Will therefore a
compliance unto this length better our condition? will it deliver us from the
severest Reflections of being Persons unpeaceable and intolerable? shall we
live in a perpetual dissimulation of our Judgments as to what needs
Reformation? will that answer our Duty? or give us peace in our latter End?
Shall we profess the persuasions of our minds in these things; and endeavor by
all Lawful means to accomplish what we desire? shall we then escape the
severest censures, as of Persons inclined to Schisms and Divisions? Yea many
great and wise Men of the Church of England do look on this as the most
pernicious Principle and Practice that any can betake themselves unto. Heyl.
Hist of Presb.
And in reporting the Memorials of former times, some of them have charged all
the calamities and Miseries that have befallen their Church, to have proceeded
from Men of this Principle, endeavoring Reformation according unto Models of
their own, without Separation.

And could we conscientiously betake our selves to the pursuit of the same
Design, we should not, especially under present jealousies and exasperations,
escape the same condemnation, that others before us have undergone. And so it
is fallen out with some, which might teach them that their measures are not
authentic; and they might learn Moderation toward them who cannot come up
unto them, by the security they meet withal, from those that do out go them.
Shall we therefore, which alone seems to remain, proceed yet farther, and
making a Renunciation of all those Principles concerning the Constitution,
Rule, and Discipline of the Church, with the ways and manner of the Worship of
God to be observed in the Assemblies of it, come over unto a full Conformity
unto the present Constitutions of the Church of England, and all the
proceedings of its Rulers thereon? Yea this is that, say some, which is
required of you, and that which would put an End unto all our Differences and
Divisions. We know indeed that an Agreement in any thing or way, right or
wrong, true or false, will promise so to do, and appear so to do, for a season:
But it is Truth alone that will make such Agreements durable, or useful. And we
are not engaged in an inquiry merely after Peace, but after Peace with Truth.
Yea to lay aside the Consideration of Truth, in a disquisition after Peace and
Agreement in and about spiritual things, is to exclude a regard unto God and
his Authority, and to provide only for our selves. And what it is which at
present lays a Prohibition on our Consciences against the compliance proposed,
shall be afterward declared; neither will we here insist upon the
discouragements that are given us, from the present state of the Church it
self, which yet are not a few. Only we must say, that there does not appear
unto us in many that steadiness in the profession of the Truth owned amongst us
upon, and since the Reformation, nor that consent upon the Grounds and Reasons
of the Government and Discipline in it, that we are required to submit unto,
which were necessary to invite any dissentors to a through Conformity unto it.
That there are daily inrodes made upon the ancient Doctrine of this Church, and
that without the least control from them who pretend to be the sole
Conservators of it, until, if not the whole, yet the principal parts of it are
laid waste, is sufficiently evident, and may be easily proved. And we fear not
to own, that we cannot conform to Armianism, Socinianism, on the one hand, or
Popery on the other, with what new or specious pretenses soever they may be
blended. And for the Ecclesiastical Government, as in the hands of mere
ecclesiastical Persons, when it is agreed among themselves, whether it be from
Heaven or of Men, we shall know the better how to judge of it. But suppose we
should wave all such considerations, and come up to a full Conformity unto all
that is, or shall, or may be required of us; will this give us an universally
pleadable acquitment from the charges of the Guilt of want of Love, Schism and
Divisions? We should indeed possibly be delivered from the noise and clamor of
a few, crying out Sectaries, Phanaticks, Schismatics, Church-Dividers; but
withal should continue under the censures of the great, and at present thriving
Church of Rome, for the same supposed Crimes. And sure enough we are, that a
compliance with them who have been the real causes and occasions of all the
Schisms and Divisions that are amongst Christians almost in the whole world,
would yield us no solid relief in the change of our condition. Yet without this
no Men can free themselves from the loudest outcries against them on the
account of Schism. And this sufficiently manifests how little indeed they are
to be valued, seeing for the most part, they are nothing but the steam of
Interest and Party. It is therefore apparent that the Accommodations of our
Judgments and Practices to the measures of other men, will afford us no real
advantage, as to the imputations we suffer under; nor will give satisfaction
unto all Professors of Christianity that we pursue Love and Peace in a due
manner: For what one sort requires of us, anonother will instantly disallow
and condemn. And it is well if the Judgment of the Major Part of all sorts be
not influenced by Custom, prejudices, and secular Advantages. We have
therefore no way left, but that which indeed ought to be the only way of
Christians in these things; namely to seek in sincerity the satisfaction of our
own Consciences, and the approving of our hearts unto the search of them, in a
dilligent attendance unto our own especial Duty, according to that Rule which
will neither, deceive us, nor fail us. And an Account of what we do herein, we
shall now render unto them that follow Truth with Peace.

CHAP. II.
Commendations of Love and Unity. Their proper objects with their geniral Rules
and measures. Of Love toward all mankind in gene^al. Allows not salvation unto
any without faith in Christ Jesus. Of the differences in Religion as to outward
Worship.

THe Foundation of our discourse might be laid in the commendation of Christian
Love, and Unity; and thereon we might easily enlarge; as also abound in a
collection of Testimonies confirming our Assertions. But the old reply in such
a Case, by whom ever were they discommended evidenceth a labor therein to be
needless and superfluous. We shall therefore only say, that they are greatly
mistaken, who from the Condition whereunto at present we are driven and
necessitated, do suppose that we value not these things at as high a Rate as
themselves, or any other Professors of Christian Religion in the world. A
greater noise about them may be made possibly by such as have accommodated
their name and notion to their own Inter^sts, and who point their Pleas about
them, and their pretenses of them, to their own secular Advantage. But as for a
real valuation of the things themselves, as they are required of us, and
prescribed unto us in the Gospel, we shall not willingly be found, to come
behind any that own the name of Christ in the world. We know that God has
styled himself, the God of Love, Peace and Order, in the Church, because they
are eminently from him, and highly accepted with him. And as Love is the new
Commandment which Jesus Christ has given unto his Disciples, so he has
appointed it to be the bond of Perfection unto them; which nothing else will
ever be, however finely invented for them, or forceably imposed on them.
Without this Love, in what relates to Church Communion, whatever else we are,
we are but as founding brass and tinkling Cymbals. And all Unity or Agreement
in outward order not proceeding from, and animated by this Love, are things
wherein neither Christ nor the Gospel are much concerned. Phil. 2. 2.
An endeavor also after one Mind and one Judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
amongst all Believers, for a help unto us, to keep the Unity of the spirit in
the bond of Peace, we acknowledge to be indispensably required of us. And
therefore where any Opinion, or Practice, in or about Religion or the worship
of God, do apparently in themselves impair the Gracious holy principles of Love
and Peace, or obstruct Men in the Exercise of any Duties which those Principles
require or lead unto, it is a great and weighty prejudice against their Truth,
and Acceptance with God. As therefore we shall not boast of the prevalency of
these Principles in our minds; seeing that though we should know nothing to the
contrary by our selves, yet are we not therefore justified; so we are assured
that none can justly condemn us, for the want of them, unless they can make
good their charge by Instances not relating to the peculiar Differences,
between them and us. For what does so, will neither warrant any to make such a
Judgment, nor carry any Conviction in it toward them that are judged. Upon the
whole matter, we shall not easily be diverted from pursuing our claim unto an
equal Interest in these things with any other Professors of the Christian
Religion; although at present we do it not by enlarged Commendations of them.
Much less are we in the least moved or shaken in our Minds from the Accusations
of them, who having the Advantage of Force and Power, do make a Compliance with
themselves, in all their impositions and self-interested Conceptions, the sole
measure of other men's exercise and actings of these Principles. We have a much
safer Rule whereby to make a Judgment of them, whereunto we know we shall do
well to attend, as unto a Light shining in a dark Place. But now whereas all
these things, namely Love, Peace, and Unity, are equally dear unto us; yet
there are different Rules prescribed, for the Exercise and pursuit of them. Our
Love is to be Catholic, unconfined as the beams of the Sun, or as the showrs
of rain that fall on the whole Earth. Nothing of Gods Rational Creation in this
world, is to be exempted from being the Object thereof. And where only any
Exception might seem to be warranted by some Men's causeless hatred, with unjust
and unreasonable persecution of us, there the exercise of it is given us in
especial and strictest charge; which is one of the noble singularities of
Christian Religion. But whereas men are cast into various conditions on the
account of their Relation unto God, the actual exercise of Love toward them is
required of us in a suitable variety. For it is God himself, in his Infinite
Excellencies, who is the first and adequate Object of our Love; which descends
unto others according to their Participations from him, and the especial
Relations created by his Appointment; whereof we shall speak afterward. Our
Duty in the Observance of Peace, is, as unto its Object, equally extended. And
the Rule or Measure given us herein, is the utmost of our endeavors in all
ways of Truth and Righteousness, which are required, or may have a tendency
thereunto. For as we are commanded to follow Peace with all men under the same
indispensible necessity as to obtain and observe Holiness in our own Persons,
Heb. 12. 14.
without which none shall see God; so as to the measure of our endeavors unto
this End, we are directed, if it be possible, Romans 11. 13.
and as far as in us lies, to live peaceably with all Men. The Rule for Unity,
as it is supposed to comprize all Church Communion, falls under many
Restrictions. For herein the especial Commands of Christ, and Institutions of
the Gospel committed unto our Care and Observance falling under consideration,
our Practice is precisely limited unto those Commands, and by the nature of
those Institutions.

These being the things we are to attend unto, and these being their general
Rules and measures, we shall with respect unto the present state of Religious
Affairs in the world, amongst those who make Profession of the Christian
Religion, plainly declare what are our thoughts and Judgments, what we conceive
to be our Duty, and what is our Practice, submitting them unto the present
Apprehensions of unprejudiced Persons, leaving the final Sentence and
determination of our Cause to the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ.

Love toward all Mankind in general we acknowledge to be required of us; and we
are Debtors in the fruits of it to the whole Creation of God. For he has not
only implanted the Principles of it in that nature whereof we are in common
Partakers with the whole Race and Kind, whereunto all hatred and its Effects
were originally foreign and introduced by the Devil; nor only given us his
Command for it, enlarging on its grounds and Reasons in the Gospel; but in his
Design of recovering us out of our lapsed condition unto a Conformity with
himself, proposes in an especial manner the Example of his own Love and
Goodness, which are extended unto all, for our imitation. Mat. 5, 44, 45. His
Philanthropie and Communicative Love, from his own infinite self-fulness,
wherewith all Creatures in all Places, Times, and Seasons, are filled and
satisfied, as from an immeasurable Ocean of Goodness, are proposed unto us to
direct the exercise of that drop from the Divine Nature, wherewith we are
entrusted. Love your Enemies, says our Savior, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despightfully use you and
persecute you; that you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven,
who makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and the Good, and sends rain on the
Just, and on the Unjust. Now all Mankind may be cast into two Ranks or Orders.
For First, there are those who are yet without Christ, being Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2. 12,
and strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and without God
in the World; such we mean as are either Negatively or Privatively Infidels, or
Unbelievers; who have yet never heard the Sound of the Gospel, or do continue
to refuse and reject it, where it is proposed and tendered unto them. And there
are those, Secondly, who have in one way or other received the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and do make profession thereof in the World. To both these sorts we do
acknowledge that we owe the Duty of Love. Even toward the Infidel, Pagan, and
Mahumetan world, Jews and Gentiles, we are Debtors in this Duty; and we desire
to be humbled for it as our Sin, wherein we are wanting in the discharge of it,
or wherein the fruits of it do not abound in us to the Praise of God. Now Love,
in the first notion of it, is the willing of a wanted Good unto the Object of
it, or those that are Loved, producing an endeavor to effect it, unto the
utmost of the Ability of them in whom it is. Where this absent Good is of great
importance, the first natural and genuine Effect of Love is Compassion. This
Good, as unto all Unbelievers, is whatever should deliver them from present or
eternal misery; whatever should lead, guide, or bring them unto Blessedness in
the Enjoyment of God. Besides the absence hereof is accompanied even in this
world, with all that Blindness and Darkness of Mind, all that slavery unto Sin
and the Devil, that can any way concur to make a Rational Being truly
miserable. If we have not hearts like the flint or Adamant, we cannot but be
moved with Compassion toward so many perishing Souls, originally made like our
selves in the Image of God, and from whom that we differ in anything, is an
Effect of mere Sovereign Grace, and not the fruit of our own Contrivance, nor
the Reward of our worth or merit. And those who are altogether unconcerned in
others, are not much concerned in themselves; for the true Love of our selves,
is the Rule of our Love unto other Men. Again, Compassion proceeding from Love
will work by Prayer for Relief: For it is God alone who can supply their wants;
and our only way of treating with him about it, is by our humble Supplications.
And if herein also we should be found wanting, we should more judge our selves
to be defective in true Christian Love and Charity, than we can for many of
those mistakes which are charged on us in other things, were we convinced that
such they are, which as yet we are not. It is therefore our continual Prayer,
that God would send out his Light and his Truth unto the utmost parts of the
Earth, to visit by them those dark places, which are yet filled with
habitations of cruelty; that he would remove the vail of covering which is yet
on the Face of many great and Populous Nations, that the whole Earth may be
filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea; even that
according to his Promise, he would turn to the People a pure Language, that
they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. And
this we desire to be found doing, not in a formal or Customary manner, but out
of a sincere Compassion for the Souls of men, a deep sense of the Interest
herein of the Glory of God, and a desire after the Accomplishment of those
Prophecies and Promises in the Scripture, which speak comfortably toward an
Expectation of abundant Grace to be manifested unto the residue of Sinners,
both Jews and Gentiles, in the latter days. Moreover, unto Compassion and
Supplications, Love requires that we should add also all other possible
Endeavors for their Relief. Herein consists that work and Labor of Love,
which are so much recommended unto us. But the Actings of Love in these most
useful ways, are for the most part obstructed unto us, by the want of
opportunities, which under the Guidance of Divine Providence are the Rule of
our Call unto the Duties wherein such endeavors consist, and whereby they may
be expressed. Only this at present we have to rejoice in, that through the
unwearied Labors of some Holy and Worthy Persons, Sundry Churches of Indians
are lately called and gathered in America, wherein the Natives of those parts
of the World, who for so many Generations sat in Darkness, and in the shadow
of death, do under the guidance of Pastors and Elders of their own, walk in the
Fellowship of the Gospel, giving Glory to God by Jesus Christ. And let it not
seem impertinent that we have given this Account of our Judgments concerning
that Love which we do and ought to bear unto all, even the worst of men; seeing
those by whom our Testimony is received, will not, nay, cannot easily suppose
that we would wilfully neglect the exercise of the same Affections toward
those, concerning whom our Obligations thereunto, are unspeakably greater and
more Excellent.

There is indeed another kind of pretended charity toward this sort of men,
which we profess we have not for them, although we judge we do not want it. For
there can be no want unto any of an Error or mistake, wherein the charity
intended does consist. And this is the judgment of some, that they or some of
them may attain salvation or eternal blessedness in the condition wherein they
are, without the knowledge of Jesus Christ. This we acknowledge we neither
believe, nor hope concerning them; nor, to speak plainly, can desire it should
be so, unless God had otherwise revealed himself concerning Jesus Christ and
them, than yet he has done. And we are so far from supposing that there is in
us on this account any blameable defect of charity, that we know our selves to
be freed by this persuasion from a dangerous error, which if admitted, would
both weaken our own faith, and impair all the due and proper effects of charity
toward others. 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6.
For though there be that are called gods, whether in Heaven or in earth (as
there be gods many, and lords many) yet unto us there is but one God the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by him. Acts 12.
We know there is no salvation in any other but by Jesus Christ; and that there
is no other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. Nor is
this Name given any otherwise amongst men, but by the Gospel: For it is not the
giving of the person of Christ absolutely to be a Mediator, but the
declaration of his Name by the Gospel, as the means of salvation, that is
intended. Hence our Lord Jesus Christ, giving that Commission to his Apostles
to preach it, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, he adds unto it that decretory sentence, concerning the everlasting
condition of all men with respect thereunto; He that believes and is baptized,
Mark. 16. 15. 16.
shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be damned. As the Preaching
of the Gospel, and the belief on Jesus Christ thereon, are the only means of
obtaining salvation; so all those who are not made partakers of them must
perish eternally. So when the Apostle affirms that the Jews would have hindered
them from preaching to the Gentiles that they might be saved, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.
he plainly declares that without it they could not so be. Neither were any of
them ever better, or in a better condition, than they are described by the same
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 12. And in sundry other places, wherein he allows them no
possibility of obtaining eternal blessedness. Neither do we in this matter
consider what God can do, or what he has done to the communicating of grace
and faith in Jesus Christ unto any particular persons at any time, or in any
place, in an extraordinary manner. We are not called to make a judgment
thereof, nor can any Rule be hence collected to regulate the exercise of our
love. Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but revealed things to us and
our children, that we may do his will. When and where such grace and faith do
manifest themselves by their effects, we ought readily to own and embrace them.
But the only inquiry in this matter is, What those that are utterly destitute
of the Revelation of Jesus Christ, either as made originally in the promise, or
as explained in the Gospel, may under the mere conduct of the Light of Nature,
as consisting in the innate principles of Reason, with their improvement, or as
increased by the consideration of the effects of divine power and Providence,
by the strength and exercise of their own moral principles attain unto, as unto
their present acceptance with God, and future eternal salvation. That they may
be saved in every Sect, who live exactly according to the Light of Nature, is a
Doctrine anathematized by the Church of England, Artic. 8. And the Reason given
hereof is, because the Scriptures propose the Name of Jesus Christ alone
whereby we may be saved. And if we do believe that description which is given
in the Scripture of men, their moral abilities, and their works, as they lie in
the common state of Mankind, since the entrance of sin, with respect unto God
and salvation, we shall not be able to be of another mind: For they are said to
be blind, Luke ^. 18.
yea to be darkness, to be dead in trespasses and sins, Acts 26. 18.
not to receive the things of the Spirit of God, because they are foolishness
unto them; Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
and their minds to be enmity against God himself. That there may be any just
expectation concerning such persons, Chapter 4. 18.
that they will work out their salvation with fear and trembling, Romans 8. 8.
we are not convinced: Neither do we think that God will accept of a more
imperfect obedience in them that know not Jesus Christ, than he requires of
them who do believe in him, for then should he prove a disadvantage unto them.
Beside, all their best works are severely reflected on in the Scripture, and
represented as unprofitable: For whereas in themselves they are compared to
evil Trees, Thorns, and Briars, we are assured they neither do, nor can bring
forth good grapes or Figgs. Besides in the Scripture, the whole business of
salvation in the first place turns upon the Hinge of Faith supernatural and
divine; Heb. 11. 6.
for without faith it is impossible to please Gid; and, He that believes not,
shall be damned; Joh. 3. 15 36.
He that believes not in the name of the Son of God is condemned already; for
neither Circumcision avails any thing, Gal. 5. 6.
nor uncircumcision, but faith that works by love: And it is by faith that
the just shall live. That this Faith may be educed out of the obediential
Principle of Nature, 'twas indeed the opinion of Pelagius of old; but 'twill
not now, we hope, be openly asserted by any. Moreover, this Faith is in the
Scripture, if not limited and determined, yet directed unto Jesus Christ as its
necessary peculiar Object: For this is Life eternal, that we may know the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. It seems therefore that the
knowledge of the only true God, is not sufficient to attain eternal life,
unless the knowledge of Jesus Christ also do accompany it: For this is the
record of Heaven, that God has given unto us eternal Life, and this life is in
his Son: He that has the Son has life, 1 John 5. 11, 12.
and he that has not the Son of God has not life. Which is enough to
determine the controversy. And those Assertions, that there is no other Name
given amongst men, whereby they may be saved; and that other foundation can no
man lay, save what is laid, that is, Act. 4. 12
Jesus Christ; are of the same importance; 1 Cor. 3. 11.
and it were needless to multiply the Testimonies that are given us to that
purpose elsewhere. Neither can it be made to appear, that the concatenation of
the saving means, whereby men that are adult are brought unto glory, is not
absolutely universal: And amongst them there is Vocation, Romans 8. 29, 30.
or an effectual Calling to the knowledge of Christ by the Gospel. Neither will
the same Apostle allow a saving invocation of the Name of God to any but those
that are brought to believe by hearing the Word preached. It is said, that God
may by ways secret and unknown to us, Romans 10. 13, 14, 15
reveal Jesus Christ to them, and so by faith in him sanctify their natures,
and endow them with his Spirit; which things, it is granted, we suppose, are
indispensibly necessary unto salvation. Those whom God thus deals withal are
not Pagans, but Christians, concerning whom none ever doubted, but they might
be sa^ed. It is also granted, that men may learn much of the power, wisdom and
goodness of God, which both require and teach many Duties to be performed
toward him; but withal we believe, that without the internal sanctification
of the Spirit, communicated by and with the knowledge of Jesus Christ, no man
can be saved. But we intend not here to dispute about these things. Instead of
an effect of Love and Charity, it is manifest that the Opinion which grants
salvation unto the Heathen, or any of them, upon the due improvement of their
Rational Faculties and moral Principles, arises from a want of due
consideration of the true nature of Sin and Grace, of the Fall of Man and his
Recovery, of the Law and Gospel, and of the Wisdom and Love of God in sending
Jesus Christ to make atonement for sinners, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness. And not only so, but it evidently Prepares the way unto those
noxious Opinions which at this day among many infest and corrupt Christian
Religion, and foment those Seeds of Atheism which spring up so fast as to
threaten the overspreading of the whole Field of Christianity. For hence it
will follow by an easy deduction, that every one may be saved, or attain unto
his utmost happiness in his own Religion, be it what it will, whilst under any
notion or conception he acknowledges a Divine Being, and his own dependence
thereon. And seeing that on this supposition it must be confessed, that
Religion consists solely in moral Honesty, and a fancied internal Piety of mind
toward the Deity, (for in nothing else can a centring of all Religions in the
world unto a certain end be imagined) it follows, that there is no outward
Profession of it indispensibly necessary, but that every one may take up, and
make use of that which is best suited unto his interest in his present
condition and circumstances. And as this being once admitted, will give the
minds of men an Indifferency, as unto the several Religions that are in the
world, so it will quickly produce in them a Contempt of them all. And from an
entertainment of, or an indifferency of mind about these and the like noisome
opinions, it is come to pass, that the Gospel after a continued Triumph for
sixteen hundred years over Hell and the world, does at this day in the midst of
Christendom hardly with multitudes maintain the reputation of its truth and
Divinity; and is by many, living in a kind of outward conformity unto the
Institutes of Christian Religion, despised and laughed to scorn. But the proud
and foolish Atheistical Opiniators of our days, whose sole design is to
fortify themselves by the darkness of their minds, against the charges of
their own consciences upon their wicked and debauched conversations, do but
expose themselves to the scorn of all sober and rational Persons. For what are
a few obscure, and for the most part vicious Renegadoes, in comparison of those
great, wise, numerous and sober persons, whom the Gospel in its first setting
forth in the world, by the evidence of its truth, and the efficacy of its
Power* subdued and conquered? Are they as learned as the renowned Philosophers
of those days, who advantaged by the endeavors and fruits of all the great
Wits of former Ages had advanced solid rational Literature to the greatest
height that ever it attained in this world; or possibly ever will do so; the
minds of men having now something more excellent and noble to entertain
themselves-withall? Are they to be equalled in wisdom and experience, with
those glorious Emperors, Senators and Princes, who then swayed the Scepters and
affairs of the world? Can they produce any thing to oppose unto the Gospel,
that is likely to influence the minds of men, in any degree comparably to the
Religion of these great, learned, wise and mighty Personages, which having
received by their Fathers, from days immemorial, was visibly attended with all
Earthly Gloryes and Prosperities, which were accounted as the reward of their
due observance of it? And yet whereas there was a Conspiracy of all those
persons, and this influenced by the craft of infernal Powers, and managed with
all that wisdom, subtlety, power and cruelty, that the nature of man is
capable to exercise, on purpose to oppose the Gospel, and keep it from taking
Root in the world; yet by the glorious evidence of its divine extract and
original wherewith it is accompanied, by the efficacy and power which God gave
the Doctrine of it in and over the minds of men, all managed by the spiritual
weapons of its Preachers, which were mighty through God, to the pulling down of
those strong holds, casting down imaginations, 2 Cor. 10 4, 5.
and every high thing that exalted it self against the knowledge of God; it
prevailed against them all, and subdued the world unto an acknowledgment of its
truth, with the divine power and authority of its Author. Certainly there is
nothing more contemptible, than that the Indulgence of some inconsiderable
Persons unto their lusts and vices, who are void of all those excellencies in
notion and practice, which have already been triumphed over by the Gospel, when
set up in competition with it, or opposition unto it, should be once imagined
to bring it into question, or to cast any disreputation upon it. But to treat
of these things is not our present design; we have only mentioned them
occasionally, in the account which it was necessary we should give concerning
our Love to all men, in general, with the grounds we proceed upon in the
exercise of it.

CHAP. III.
Nature of the Catholic Church. The first and principal Object of Christian
Love. Differences among the Members of this Church, of what nature, and how to
be managed. Of the Church Catholic as visibly professing: The extent of it, or
who belongs unto it. Of Union and Love in this Church State of the Church of
England with respect hereunto. Of particular Churches: Their institution:
Corruption of that Institution. Of Churches Diocesan, etc. Of separation from
corrupt particular Churches. The just Causes thereof, etc.

IN the second sort of Mankind before mentioned, consists the visible Kingdom
of Christ in this wo^ld. This being grounded in his Death and Resurrection, and
conspicuously settled by his sending of the Holy Ghost after his Ascension, he
has ever since preserved in the world, against all the contrivances of Satan,
or oppositions of the Gates of Hell, and will do so unto the consummation of
all things; For he ^^^st reign until all his enemies are made his Foots^ool.
Toward these on all accounts our Love ought to be intense and fervent, as that
which is the immediate Bond of our Relation unto them, and Union with them. And
this Kingdom or Church of Christ* on the earth, may be, and is generally by
all considered under a threefold notion. (1.) First, as therein, and among the
Members of it, is comprised that real living and spiritual body of his, which
is firstly, peculiarly, and properly the Catholic Church militant in this
world. These are his Elect, Redeemed, justified, and sanctified ones, who are
savingly united unto their Head, by the same quickening and sanctifying Spirit,
dwelling in him in all fullness, and communicated unto them by him, a^cording to
his Promise. This is that Catholic Church which we profess to believe, which
being hid from the eyes of men, and absolutely invisible in its Mystical Form,
or spiritual saving Relation unto the Lord Christ, and its Unity with him, is
yet more or less always visible, by that Profession of Faith in him, and
obedience unto him, which it makes in the world, and is always obliged so to
do. For With the Heart man believes unto Righteousness, Romans 10, 10.
and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. And this Church we
believe to be so disposed over the whole world, that wherever there are any
Societies or Numbers of men who ordinarily profess the Gospel, and subjection
to the Kingly Rule of Christ thereby, with an hope of eternal blessedness by
his Mediation; we no way doubt but that there are among them some who really
belong thereunto. In and by them does the Lord Christ continually fulfill and
accomplish the Promise of his Presence by his Spirit with them that believe in
his name; who are thereby Interested in all the Privileges of the Gospel, and
Authorized unto the Administration and Participation of all the Holy Ordinances
thereof. And were it not* that we ought not to boast our selves against others,
Especially such as have not had the Spiritual Advantages that the Inhabitants
of these Nations have been entrusted withal, and who have been exposed unto
more violent Temptations than they, we should not fear to say, that among those
of all sorts who in these Nations hold the Head, there is probably according
unto a Judgment to be made by the fruits of that Spirit which is savingly
communicated unto the Church in this sense alone, a greater number of Persons
belonging thereunto, than in any One Nation or Church under Heaven. The charge
therefore of some against us, that we Paganize the Nation, by reason of some
different Apprehensions from others, concerning the regular Constitution of
particular Churches for the Celebration of Gospel Worship, is wondrous vain and
ungrounded. But we know that men use such severe Expressions and Reflections,
out of a discomposed habit of Mind which they have accustomed themselves unto,
and not from a sedate Judgment and consideration of the things themselves. And
hence they will labor to convince others of that, whereof, if they would put
it unto a serious Trial, they would never be able to convince themselves.

This then is that Church which on the account of their Sincere faith and
Obedience shall be saved; and out of which, on the account of their Profession,
there is no salvation to be obtained; which things are weakly and arrogantly
appropriated unto any Particular Church or Churches in the World. For it is
possible that men may be Members of it, and yet not belong or relate unto any
particular Church on the Earth; and so it often falls out as we could
manifest by instances, did that work now lie before us. This is the Church
which the Lord Christ loved and gave himself for it; Ephesians ^. 26, 27.
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word;
that he might present it unto himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. And
we must acknowledge that in all things this is the Church, unto which we have
our first and Principal regard, as being the spring from which all other
considerations of the Church do flow. Within the virge and compass of it, do we
endeavor to be found, the End of the Dispensation of the Gospel unto Men being
that they should do so. Neither would we to save our Lives, ( which for the
Members of this Church and their good, 1 John 3, 16.
we are bound to lay down, when justly called thereunto) wilfully live in the
neglect of that Love toward them or any of them, which we hope God has
planted in our hearts, and made natural unto us, by that one and self-same
Spirit, by whom the whole Mystical Body of Christ is animated. We do confess,
that because the best of Men in this Life do know but in part, that all the
Members of this Church are in many things liable to Error, mistakes, and
Miscarriages: And hence it is, that although they are all internally acted and
guided by the same Spirit, in all things absolutely necessary to their Eternal
salvation, and do all attend unto the same Rule of the Word, according as they
apprehend the mind of God in it, and concerning it, have all for the Nature and
Substance of it, the same Divine Faith and Love, and are all equally united
unto their Head; yet in the Profession which they make of the conceptions and
persuasions of their minds, about the things revealed in the Scripture, there
are, and always have been many Differences among them. Neither is it morally
possible it should be otherwise, whilst in their Judgment and Profession they
are left unto the Ability of their own Minds, and Liberty of their Wills, under
that great variety of the Means of Light and Truth, with other Circumstances,
whereinto they are disposed by the Holy Wise Providence of God. Nor has the
Lord Christ absolutely Promised that it shall be otherwise with them; but
securing them all by his Spirit in the foundations of eternal Salvation, he
leaves them in other things to the exercise of mutual Love and forbearance;
with a charge of Duty after a continual endeavor to grow up unto a perfect
Union, by the improvement of the blessed Aids and Assistances which he is
pleased to afford unto them. And those who by ways of Force would drive them
into any other Union or Agreement, than their own Light and Duty will lead them
into, do what in them lies to oppose the whole Design of the Lord Christ
toward them, and his Rule over them. In the mean time it is granted, that they
may fall into Divisions and Schisms, and mutual Exasperations among themselves,
through the Remainders of Darkness in their minds, and the Infirmity of the
flesh. Romans 14. 3.
And in such Cases mutual judgings and despisings are apt to ensue; and that to
the Prejudice and great Disadvantages of that Common faith which they do
profess. And yet notwithstanding all this (such cross entangled wheels are
there in the course of our Nature) they all of them really value and esteem the
things wherein they agree incomparably above those wherein they differ. But
their valuation of the matter of their Union and Agreement is purely spiritual;
whereas their Differences are usually influenced by Carnal and Secular
Considerations, which have for the most part a sensible Impression on the Minds
of poor Mortals. But so far as their Divisions and Differences are unto them
unavoidable, the Remedy of farther Evils proceeding from them, is plainly and
frequently expressed in the Scripture. It is Love, Meckness, forbearance,
bowels of Compassion, with those other Graces of the Spirit, wherein our
Conformity unto Christ does consist, with a true understanding and due
valuation of the Unity of faith, and the common Hope of Believers, which are
the ways prescribed unto us, for the prevention of those Evils which, without
them, our unavoidable Differences will occasion. And this excellent way of the
Gospel, together with a Rejection of evil surmises, and a watchfulness over our
selves against irregular judging and censuring of others, together with a
peaceable walking in consent and Unity so far as we have attained, is so fully
and clearly proposed unto us therein, that they must have their Eyes blinded by
Prejudices and Carnal Interests, or some effectual working of the God of this
world on their minds, into whose understandings the Light of it does not shine
with uncontrollable Evidence and Conviction. That the Sons or Children of this
Church of Jerusalem which is above, and is the Mother of us all, should on the
account of their various Apprehensions of some things relating to Religion or
the worship of God, unavoidably attending their frail and imperfect condition
in this world, yea or of any Schisms or Divisions ensuing thereon; proceeding
from Corrupt and not thoroughly mortified Affections, be warranted to hate,
judge, despise or contemn one another, much more to strive by external force to
coerce, punish or destroy them that differ from them, is as foreign to the
Gospel, as that we should believe in Mahomet, and not in Jesus Christ. Whatever
share therefore we are forced to bare in Differences with, or Divisions from
the Members of this Church, (that is, any who declare and evidence themselves
so to be, by a visible and regular Profession of faith and Obedience) as it is
a continual sorrow and trouble unto us; so we acknowledge it to be our Duty
(and shall be willing to undergo any blame, where we are found defective in the
Discharge of it, unto the utmost of our Power) to endeavor after the strictest
Communion with them in all Spiritual things, that the Gospel does require, or
whereof our condition in this world is capable. In the mean time, until this
can be attained, it is our desire to manage the Profession of our own Light
and Apprehensions, without Anger, Bitterness, Clamours, Evil speaking, or any
other thing that may be irregular in our selves, or give just cause of offense
unto others. Our Prayers are also continually for the spiritual Prosperity of
this Church, for its increase in Faith and Holiness, and especially for the
healing of all breaches that are among them that belong thereunto throughout
the World. And were we not satisfied that the Principles which we own, about
the right Constitution of the Churches of Christ, and the Worship of God to be
observed in them, are singularly suited to the furtherance and Preservation of
Union and due Order among all the members of this Church, we should not need to
be excited by any unto their Renunciation. But our main design in all these
things is, that both they, and we with them, may enjoy that peace which the
Lord Christ has bequeathed unto us, and walk in the way which he has
prescribed for us. And these things we mention, neither to boast of, nor yet to
justify our selves, but only to acknowledge what is our conviction concerning
our Duty in this matter. And might there any sedate, peaceable, unprejudicate
endeavors be countenanced and encouraged, for the allaying of all occasional
distempers, and the composing of all differences among them who belong to this
Church of Christ, so as that they might all of them (at least in these Nations)
not only keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, but also agree and
consent in all ways and Acts of Religious Communion; we doubt not but to
manifest, that no rigid adherence unto the practice of any conceptions of our
own, in things wherein the Gospel allows a condescension and forbearance, no
delight in singularity, no prejudice against persons or things, should obstruct
us in the promotion of it to the utmost of our power and ability. Upon the
whole matter we own it as our duty to follow and seek after peace, unity,
consent and agreement in holy worship, with all the members of this Church, or
those who by a regular profession manifest themselves so to be; and will with
all readiness and alacrity renounce every principle or practice, that is either
inconsistent with such communion, or directly or indirectly is in its self
obstructive of it.

Secondly, The Church of Christ may be considered with respect unto its outward
Profession, as constitutive of its Being, and the formal Reason of its
denomination. And this is the Church Catholic visible, whereunto they all
universally belong, who profess the invocation of the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, their Lord and ours, under the limitations that shall be mentioned
afterward. And this is the visible Kingdom of Christ, which on the account of
its profession, and thereby, is distinguished from that world which lies in
evil, and is absolutely under the power of Satan: And so in common use, the
Church and the world are contradistinguished. Yet on other accounts many who
belong unto this Church, by reason of some kind of profession that they make,
may justly be esteemed to be the world, or of it. So our Lord Jesus Christ
called the generality of the professing Church in his time: John. 15. 18, 19,
25.
The world, says he, hates me; And that we may know that he thereby intended
the Church of the Jews, besides that the circumstances of the place evince it,
he puts it out of question by the Testimony which he produces in the
confirmation of his Assertion concerning their unjust and causless hatred;
namely, It is written in their Law, they have hated me without a cause; which
being taken out of the Psalms, Ps. 35. 19
was part of the Law, or Rule of the Judaical Church only. Now he thus terms
them, because the generality of them, especially their Rulers, although they
professed to know God, and to worship him according to his Word, and the
Tradition of their Fathers, yet were not only corrupt and wicked in their
Lives, but also persecuted him and his Disciples, in whom the Power and Truth
of God were manifested beyond what they were able to bear. And hence a General
Rule is established, that what Profession soever any men do make of the
Knowledge and Worship of God, to what Church soever they do, or may be thought
to belong, yet if they are wicked or ungodly in their Lives, and Persecuters of
such as are better than themselves, they are really of the World,, and with it
will perish, without Repentance. These are they, who receiving on them a Form
or Delineation of Godliness, do yet deny the Power of it; from whom, we are
commanded to turn away: But yet we acknowledge that there is a real difference
to be made between them, who in any way or manner make profession of the Name
of Christ with subjection unto him, and that Infidel world, by whom the Gospel
is totally rejected, or to whom it was never tendered.

In the Catholic visible Church, as comprehensive of all who throughout the
world outwardly own the Gospel, there is an acknowledgment of one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, which are a sufficient Foundation of that Love, Union and
Communion among them, which they are capable of, or are required of them. For
in the joint Profession of the same Lord, Faith and Baptism, consists the Union
of the Church, under this consideration, that is, as Catholic and visibly
professing, and in nothing else. And hereunto also is required as the principle
animating that Communion, and rendering it acceptable, mutual Love with its
occasional Exercise; as a fruit of that Love which we have unto Jesus Christ,
who is the Object of our Common Profession. And setting aside the consideration
of them who openly reject the Principal Fundamentals of Christian Religion, (as
denying the Lord Christ to be the Eternal Son of God, with the use and efficacy
of his death, as also the Personal subsistence and Deity of the Holy Spirit,)
and there is no known Community of these Professors in the world, but they own
so much of the Truths, concerning one Lord, one Faith, and one baptism, as are
sufficient to guide them unto Life and Salvation. And hereon we no way doubt,
but that among them all there are some really belonging to the Purpose of Gods
Election, who by the means that they do enjoy, shall at length be brought unto
everlasting Glory. For we do not think that God by his Providence would
maintain the Dispensation of the Gospel in any Place, or among any People,
among whom there are none whom he has designed to bring unto the Enjoyment of
Himself. For that is the Rule of his sending and continuing of it; Acts. 18. 9,
10, 11.
whereon he enjoined the Apostle Paul to stay in such places where he had much
People whom he would have to be converted. He would not continue from
Generation to Generation, to scatter his Pearls where there were none but
rending Swine, nor send Fishers unto waters wherein he knew there were nothing
but Serpents and Vipers. Mat. 24. 14.
It is true, the Gospel as preached unto many is only a Testimony against them,
2 Cor. 2. 16.
leaving them without excuse; and proves unto them a Savor of Death unto
Death. But the first, direct, and principal Design of the Dispensation of it,
being the Conversion of Souls, and their eternal salvation, it will not
probably be continued in any Place, nor is so, where this Design is not pursued
nor accomplished toward any. Neither will God make use of it any where merely
for the Aggravation of Men's Sins and Condemnation; nor would his so doing
consist with the Honor of the Gospel its self, or the Glory of that Love and
Grace which it professes to declare. Where it is indeed openly rejected, there
that shall be the Condemnation of Men; but where it finds any admittance, there
is has somewhat of its genuine and proper work to effect. And the Gospel is
esteemed to be in all Places dispensed and admitted, where the Scripture being
received as the word of God, Men are from the Light, Truth, and Doctrine
contained therein, by any means so far instructed, as to take upon them the
profession of subjecting their Souls to Jesus Christ, and of observing the
Religious Duties by him prescribed, in opposition to all false Religions in the
World. Amongst all these the Foundations of saving Faith are at this day
preserved: For they universally receive the whole Canonical Scripture, and
acknowledge it to be the word of God, on such motives as prevail with them to
do so sincerely. Herein they give a tacit consent unto the whole Truth
contained in it; for they receive it as from God without exception or
limitation. And this they cannot do without a General Renunciation of all the
falsities and Evils that it does condemn. Where these things concur, men will
not believe nor practice any thing in Religion, but what they think God
requires of them, and will accept from them. And we find it also in the Event,
that all the Persons spoken of, wherever they are, do universally profess,
that they believe in the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in his
only and Eternal Son. They all look also for Salvation by him, and profess
obedience unto him, believing that God raised him from the Dead. They believe
in like manner that the Holy Spirit is the Spirit of the Father and the Son,
with many other sacred Truths of the same importance; as also, that without
Holiness no Man shall see God. However therefore they are differenced and
divided among themselves, however they are mutually esteemed Heretics and
Schismatics, however through the Subtlety of Satan they are excited and
provoked to Curse and Persecute one another, with wonderful Folly, and by an
open contradiction unto other Principles which they profess; yet are they all
Subjects of the Visible Kingdom of Christ, and belong all of them to the
Catholic Church, making profession of the name of Christ in the World, in which
there is Salvation to be obtained, and out of which there is none.

We take not any consideration at present of that absurd foolish and
uncharitable Error, which would confine the Catholic Church of Christ unto a
particular Church of one single Denomination; or indeed rather unto a
combination of some Persons, in an outward mode of Religious Rule and Worship;
where of the Scripture is as silent, as of things that never were, nor ever
shall be. Yea we look upon it as intolerable Presumption, and the utmost
height of Incharitableness, for any to judge, that the constant Profession of
the name of Christ, made by Multitudes of Christians, with the lasting miseries
and frequent Martyrdomes which for his sake they undergo, should turn unto no
advantage either of the Glory of God, or their own Eternal Blessedness, because
in some things they differ from them. Yet such is the Judgment of those of the
Church of Rome; and so are they bound to judge by the fundamental Princiciples
and Laws of their Church Communion. But men ought to fear least they should
meet with Judgment without Mercy, who have showed no Mercy. Jam. 2. 13.
Had we ever entertained a thought uncharitable to such a Prodigy of
insolence, had we ever excluded any sort of Christians absolutely from an
interest in the Love of God or Grace of Jesus Christ, or hopes of Salvation,
because they do not, or will not comply with those ways and terms of outward
Church Communion which we approve of, we should judge our selves as highly
criminal in want of Christian Love, as any can desire to have us esteemed so to
be.

It is then the universal Collective Body of them that profess the Gospel
throughout the world which we own as the Catholic Church of Christ. How far
the Errors in Judgment, or miscarriages in sacred worship, which any of them
have superadded unto the Foundations of Truth which they do profess, may be of
so pernicious a nature as to hinder them from an Interest in the Covenant of
God, and so prejudice their Eternal Salvation, God only knows. But those
Notices which we have concerning the Nature and will of God in the Scripture,
as also of the Love, Care and Compassion of Jesus Christ, with the Ends of his
Mediation, do persuade us to believe, that where Men in sincerity do improve
the Abilities and Means of the Knowledge of Divine Truth where with they are
entrusted, endeavoring withal to answer their Light and Convictions with a
suitable Obedience, there are but few Errors of the Mind, of so malignant a
nature, as absolutely to exclude such Persons from an Interest in Eternal
Mercy. And we doubt not, but that men out of a Zeal to the Glory of God, real
or pretended, have imprisoned, banished, killed, burned others for such Errors,
as it has been the Glory of God to pardon in them, and which he has done
accordingly. But this we must grant, and do, that those whose Lives and
Conversations are no way influenced by the Power of the Gospel, so as to be
brought to some Conformity thereunto; or who under the Covert of a Christian
Profession, do give themselves up unto Idolatry and Persecution of the true
Worshipers of God; are no otherwise to be esteemed but as Enemies to the Cross
of Christ. Heb. 12. 14.
For as without Holiness no Man shall see God, so no Idolater, or Murderer,
has eternal Life abiding in him. Rev. 21. 8.


With respect unto these things we look upon the Church of England, 1 John 3.
15.
or the Generality of the Nation professing Christian Religion, (measuring them
by the Doctrine that has been preached unto them, and received by them, since
the Reformation,) to be as sound and healthful a part of the Catholic Church
as any in the world. For we know no Place, nor Nation, where the Gospel for so
long a season has been preached with more Diligence, Power, and Evidence for
Conviction; nor where it has obtained a greater Success or Acceptance. Those
therefore who perish amongst us, do not do so, for want of Truth, and a right
belief, or Miscarriages in Sacred worship, but for their own Personal
Infidelity and Disobedience. For according to the Rules before laid down, we do
not judge that there are any such Errors publicly admitted among them, nor any
such Miscarriages in Sacred Administration, as should directly or absolutely
hinder their eternal Salvation. That they be not any of them, through the
Ignorance or Negligence of those who take upon them the conduct of their Souls,
encouraged in a State or way of Sin, or deprived of due Advantages to farther
their spiritual Good, or are lead into Practices in Religion neither acceptable
unto God, nor tending to their own Edification, whereby they may be betrayed
into Eternal Ruin, is greatly incumbent on themselves to consider.

Unto this Catholic Church we owe all Christian Love, and are obliged to
exercise all the Effects of it, both toward the whole, and every Particular
Member, as we have Advantage and Occasion. And not only so, but it is our Duty
to live in constant Communion with it. This we can no otherwise do, but by a
Profession of that Faith, whereby it becomes the Church of Christ in the notion
under Consideration. For any failure herein, we are not that we know of charged
by any Persons of Modesty or Sobriety. The Reflections that have been made of
late by some on the Doctrines we teach or own, do fall as severely on the
Generality of the Church of England, (at least until within a few years last
past) as they do on us. And we shall not need to own any especial Concernment
in them, until they are publicly discountenanced by others. Such are the
Doctrines concerning Gods Eternal Decrees, Justification by Faith, the Loss of
Original Grace, and the Corruption of Nature, the Nature of Regeneration, the
Power and Efficacy of Grace in the Conversion of Sinners, that we say not of
the Trinity and satisfaction of Christ. But we do not think that the Doctrines
publicly taught and owned among us, ever since the Reformation, will receive
any great damage by the impotent assaults of some few; especially considering
their mannagement of those assaults, by tales, railing, and ralliery, to the
lasting reproach of the Religion which themselves profess, be it what it will.

Thirdly, The Church of Christ, or the visible Professors of the Gospel in the
world, may be considered as they are disposed of by Providence, or their own
choice, in Particular Churches. These at present are of many sorts, or are
esteemed so to be. For whereas the Lord Christ has instituted sundry solemn
Ordinances of Divine Worship to be observed jointly by his Disciples, unto his
honor and their edification, this could not be done but in such Societies,
Communities, or Assemblies of them to that purpose. And as none of them can be
duly performed, but in and by such Societies; so some of them do either express
the Union, Love, and common Hope that is among them, or do consist in the means
of their preservation. Of this latter sort are all the ways whereby the Power
of Christ is acted in the Discipline of the Churches. Wherefore we believe that
our Lord Jesus Christ, as the King, Ruler, and Lawgiver of his Church, has
ordained that all his Disciples, all persons belonging unto his Church in the
former notions of it, should be gathered into distinct Societies, and become as
Flocks of Sheep in several Folds, under the eye of their Great Shepherd, and
the respective Conducts of those employed under him. And this conjunction of
Professors in and unto particular Churches, for the celebration of the
Ordinances of sacred Worship appointed by Christ, and the participation of his
Institutions for their edification, is not a matter of accident, or merely
under the disposal of common Providence; but is to be an act in them of choice,
and voluntary obedience unto the commands of Christ. By some this Duty is more
expressly attended unto than by others; and by some it is totally neglected. For
neither antecedently nor consequentially unto such their Conjunction, do they
consider what is their duty unto the Lord Christ therein, nor what is most meet
for their own edification: They go in these things with others, according to
the custom of the Times and Places wherein they live, confounding their Civil
and spiritual Relations. And these we cannot but judge to walk irregularly,
through ignorance, mistakes, or prejudices: Neither will they in their least
secular concernments, behave themselves with so much regardlesness ot
negligence. For however their Lot previously unto their own choice, may be cast
into any place or Society, they will make an after-judgment whether it be to
their advantage, according to the Rules of prudence, and by that judgment
either abide in their first station, or otherwise dispose of themselves. But a
Liberty of this nature regulated by the Gospel, to be exercised in and about
the great concernments of men's souls, is by many denied, and by most neglected.
Hence it is come to pass, that the Societies of Christians are for the most
part mere effects of their Political Distributions by Civil Laws, aiming
principally at other ends and purposes. It is not denied but that Civil
Distributions of Professors of the Gospel, may be subservient unto the ends of
Religious Societies and Assemblies: But when they are made a means to take off
the minds of men from all regard to the Authority of the Lord Christ,
instituting and appointing such Societies, they are of no small disadvantage
unto true Church Communion and Love.

The Institution of these Churches, and the Rules for their disposal and
Government throughout the world, are the same, stable and unalterable. And
hence there was in the first Churches, planted by the Apostles, and those who
next succeeded them in the care of that work, great Peace, Union and Agreement.
For they were all gathered and planted alike, according unto the Institution of
Christ; all regulated and ordered by the same common Rule. Men had not yet
found out those things which were the Causes of Differences in after-Ages, and
which yet continue so to be. Where there was any difference, it was for the
most part on the account of some noysom foolish Fantastical Opinions, vented
by Impostors, in direct opposition to the Scripture, which the generality of
Christians did with one consent abhor. But on various occasions, and by sundry
degrees, there came to be great variety in the conceptions of men about these
Particular Churches appointed for the Seat and Subject of all Gospel
Ordinances, and wherein they were authoritatively to be administered in the Name
of Jesus Christ: For the Church in neither of the former notions is capable of
such administrations. Some therefore rested in particular Assemblies, or such
Societies, who did or might meet together under the guidance and inspection of
their own Elders, Act. 14, 23.
Overseers, Guides, or Bishops: And hereunto they added the occasional meetings
of those Elders and others, Chap. 20. 28.
to advise and determine in common about the especial necessities of any
particular Church, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.
or the general concernments of more of them, Act. 15. 2
as the matter might require. Phil. 1. 1.
These in name, and some kind of resemblance, are continued throughout the
World in Parochial Assemblies. Others suppose a particular Church to be such a
one as is now called Diocesan; though that name in its first use and
application to Church Affairs was of a larger extent, than what it is now
applied unto, for it was of old the name of a Patriarchal Church. And herein
the sole Rule, Guidance, and Authoritative inspection of many, perhaps a
multitude of particular Churches, assembling for sacred Worship and the
Administration of Gospel Ordinances distinctly, is committed unto one man, whom
in contradistinction from others they call the Bishop. For the joining of
others with him, or their subordination unto him in the exercise of
Jurisdiction, hinders not, but that the sole Ecclesiastical Power of the
Diocese, may be thought to reside in him alone: For those others do either act
in his name, or by power derived from him, or have no pretense unto any
Authority merely Ecclesiastical; however in common use, what they exercised may
be so termed. But the nature of such Churches, with the Rule and Discipline
exercised in them and over them, is too well known to be here insisted on. Some
rest not here; but unto these Diocesan add Metropolitical Churches, which also
are esteemed particular Churches, though it be uncertain by what warrant, or on
what grounds. In these one person has in some kind of Resemblance, a respect
unto, and over the Diocesan Bishops, like that which they have over the
Ministers of Particular Assemblies. But these things being animated and
regulated by certain Arbitrary Rules and Canons, or Civil Laws of the Nations,
the due bounds and extent of their power cannot be taken from any Nature or
Constitution peculiar unto them. And therefore are there, wherever they are
admitted, various Degrees in their Elevation. But how much or little the Gospel
is concerned in these things, is easy for any one to judge. Neither is it by
wise men pretended to be so, any further, than that as they suppose, it has
left such things to be ordered by humane wisdom, for an expediency unto some
certain ends. One or more of these Metropolitical Churches, have been required
in latter Ages, to constitute a Church National. Though the truth is, that
Apellation had originally another occasion; whereunto the invention of these
Metropolitical Churches was accommodated: For it arose not from any respect
unto Ecclesiastical Order or Rule, but unto the supreme Political Power,
whereunto the Inhabitants of such a Nation as gives Denomination to the Church,
are Civilly subject. Hence that which was Provincial at the first Erection of
this Fabric, which was in the Romish Empire, whilst the whole was under the
power of one Monarch, became National when the several Provinces were turned
into Kingdoms, with absolute Sovereign power among themselves, wholly
independent of any other. And he who in his own Person and Authority, would
erect an Ecclesiastical Image of that demolished Empire, will allow of such
Provincial Churches as have a dependence upon himself; but cares not to hear of
such National Churches, as in their first notion include a Sovereign Power unto
all intents and purposes within themselves. So the Church of England became
National in the days of King Henry the Eighth, which before was but Provincial.

Moreover, the consent of many had prevailed, that there should be Patriarchal
Churches, comprehending under their Inspection and Jurisdiction many of these
Metropolitical and Provincial Churches. And these also were looked on as
Particular; for from their first invention there having been four or five of
them, no one of them could be imagined to comprize the Catholic Church;
although those who presided in them, according to the pride and vanity of the
declining Ages of the Church, styled themselves Ecumenical and Catholic.
Things being carried thus far, about the Fifth and Sixth Century of years after
Christ, One owned as Principal or chief of this latter sort, set up for a
Church denominated Papal, from a Title he had appropriated unto himself. For by
Artifices innumerable he ceased not from endeavoring to subject all those
other Churches and their Rulers unto himself: And by the advantage of his
Pre-eminence over the other Patriarks, as theirs over Metropolitans, and so
downwards, whereby all Christians were imagined to be comprised within the
Precincts of some of them, he fell into a claim of a Sovereignty over the whole
Body of Christianity, and every particular member thereunto belonging. This he
could have had no pretense for, but that he thought them cast into such an
Order, as that he might possess them on the same grounds, on which that Order
it self was framed: For had not Diocesan, Metropolitical, and Patriarchal
Churches made way for it, the thought of a Church Papal, comprehensive of all
believers, had never befallen the minds of mind. For it is known, that the
prodigious Empire which the Pope claimed and had obtained over Christianity,
was an emergency of the contests that fell out among the Leaders of the greater
sorts of Churches, about the Rights, Titles, and Pre-eminences among
themselves, with some other occasional and intestine Distempers. Only he had
one singular advantage for the promotion of his Pretense and desire. For
whereas this whole contiguation of Churchts into all these Stories, in the top
whereof he emerged and lifted up himself, was nothing but an accommodation of
the Church and its Affairs unto the Government of the Roman Empire, or the
setting up of an Ecclesiastical Image and Representation of its Secular Power
and Rule, the centring therein of all subordinate Powers and Orders in one
Monarch, inclined the minds of men to comply with his Design, as very
reasonable. Hence the principal Plea for that Power over the whole Church which
at present he claims, lies in this, that the Government of it ought to be
Monarchial. And therein consists a chief part of the mystery of this whole
work; that whereas this Fabric of Church Rule was erected in imitation of, and
compliance with the Roman Empire; that he could never effect his Sovereignty
whilst that Empire stood in its strength and union, under the command of one or
more Emperors by consent; yet when that Empire was destroyed, and the
Provinces thereof became parcelled out unto several Nations, who erected
absolute independent Soveraignties among themselves, he was able by the
Reputation he had before obtained, so to improve all emergencies and
advantages, as to gather all these new Kingdoms into one Religious Empire
under himself, by their common consent. In the mean time, by the Original
Divisions of the Empire, and the Revolutions that happened afterward amongst
the Nations of the World, the greatest number of Christians were wholly
inconcerned in this new Church Sovereignty which was erected in the Western
Provinces of that Empire. So was the Mystery of Iniquity consummated; for
whereas the Pope, to secure his new Acquisitions, endeavored to empale the
Title and Privileges of the Catholic Church, unto those Christians which
professed Obedience unto himself, unto an exclusion of a greater number; there
ensued such a confusion of the Catholic, and a particular Church, as that both
of them were almost utterly lost.

Concerning these several sorts of conceited particular Churches, it is evident
that some of them, as to their nature and kind, have no Institution in, nor
warrant from the Scripture, but were Prudential Contrivances of the men of the
Days wherein they were first formed; which they effected by various degrees,
under the conduct of an Apprehension, that they tended unto the increase of
Concord and Order among Christians. Whether really and effectually they have
attained that end, the event has long since manifested. And it will be one day
acknowledged, that no Religious Union or Order among Christians will be
lasting, and of spiritual use or advantage unto them, but what is appointed and
designed for them by Jesus Christ. The truth is, the mutual intestine
Differences and Contests among them who first possessed the Rule of such
Churches, about their Dignities, Pre-eminences, Privileges, and Jurisdictions,
which first apparently let in Pride, Ambition, Revenge, and Hatred, into the
Minds and Lives of Church-Guides, lost in the peace of Christendom; and the
degeneracy of the^r Successors more and more, into a secular Interest and
worldly frame of Spirit, is one great means of continuing us at a loss for its
retrival.

How far any man may be obliged in Conscience unto communion with these
Churches in those things wherein they are such, and as such behave themselves
in all their Rule and Administrations, may be enquired into by them who are
concerned. What respect we have unto them, or what Duty we may owe them, as
they may in any place be established by the Civil Laws of the Supreme
Magistrate, is not of our present consideration. But whereas in their Original
and Rise, they have no other warrant, but the Prudential contrivance of some
men, who unquestionably might be variously influenced by corrupt Pre^ud^ces and
Affections in the finding out and mannagement of their Inventions; what ground
there is for holding a Religious communion with them, and wherein such
communion may consist, is not easy to be declared. For the notion that the
Church Communion of the generality of Christians and Ministers, consists only
in a quiet subjection unto them, who by any means may pretend to be set over
them, and claim a right to rule them, is fond and impious. In the mean time, we
wholly deny, that the Mistakes or Disorders of Christians in complying with, or
joining themselves unto such Churches as have no warrantable institution, ought
to be any cause of the diminishing of our Love toward them, or of withdrawing
it from them. For notwithstanding their Errors and Wanderings from the Paths of
Truth in this Matter, they do, or may continue interested in all that Love
which is due from us unto the Church of Christ, upon the double account before
insisted on: For they may be yet persons born of God, united unto Christ, made
partakers of his Spirit, and so belong to the Church Catholic, Mystical, which
is the first principal Object of all Christian Love and Charity. The Errors
wherewith they are supposed to be overtaken, may befall any persons under those
Qualifications, the admittance of them, though culpable, being not inconsistent
with a state of Grace and acceptance with God. And they may also by a due
profession of the fundamental Truths of the Gospel, evince themselves to be
professed Subjects of the visible Kingdom of Christ in the world, and so belong
to the Church Catholic v^sibly professing; under which notion, the Disciples
of Christ are in the next place commended unto our Love. And it is the fondest
imagination in the world, that we must of necessity want Love toward all those
with whom we cannot join in all acts of Religious Worship; or that there need
be any Schism between them and us, on the sole account thereof, taking Schism
in the common received notion of it. If we bear unkindness toward them in our
minds and hearts, if we desire, or seek their hurt, if we persecute them, or
put them to trouble in the world for their Profession, if we pray not for them,
if we pity them not in all their Temptations, Errors, or Sufferings, if we say
unto any of them when naked, be thou clothed; and when hungry, be thou fed;
but relieve them not according unto our abilities and opportunities; if we have
an aversation to their Persons, or judge them any otherwise than as they cast
themselves openly and visibly under the sentence of Natural Reason, or
Scripture-Rule, we may be justly thought to fail in our Love toward them. But
if our Hearts condemn us not in these things, it is not the difference that is
or may be, between them and us, about ChurchConstitutions or Order, that ought
be a cause, or can be an evidence of any want of Love on our parts: There will
indeed be a distinct and separate practice in the things wherein the difference
lies, which in it self, and without other avoidable evils, need not on either
side to be Schismatical. If by censures or any kind of power, such Churches or
Persons would force us to submit unto, or comply with such things or ways in
Religious Worship, as are contrary unto our Light, and which they have no
Authority from the Lord Christ to impose upon us, the whole state of the Case
is changed, as we shall see afterward.

As for those Particular Churches, which in any part of the world, consist of
Persons assembling together for the worship of God in Christ, under the
Guidance of their own Lawful Pastors and Teachers, we have only to say, that we
are full well assured, that wherever two or three are gathered together in
the name of Christ, there he is present with them; and farther than this, there
are very few concerning whom we are called to pass any other Censure or
Judgment. So we hope it is with them, and so we pray that it may be. And
therefore we esteem it our Duty to hold that Communion with all these
Assemblies, when called thereunto, which is required of any Christians in the
like cases and Circumstances. Unless we are convinced that, with respect unto
such or such Instances, it is the Mind of Christ that neither among our selves,
nor in Conjunction with others, nor for the sake of present Communion with
them, we should observe them in his worship, we judge our selves under an
Obligation to make use of their Assemblies in all Acts of Religion, unto our
Edification, as occasion shall require. But where the Authority of Christ in
the things of sacred worship does intervene, all other considerations must be
discarded; and a compliance therewith will secure us from all irregular Events.

It must be acknowledged that many of these Churches have woefully degenerated,
and that any of them may so do, both from their Primitive Institution, and also
the sole Rule of their worship. And this they may do, and have done, in such
various Degrees and ways, as necessarily requires a great variety in our
Judgments concerning them, and our Communion with them. The whole Christian
world gives us Instances hereof at this Day; yea, we have it confirmed unto us
in what is recorded concerning sundry Churches mentioned in the Scripture its
self. They were newly planted by the Apostles themselves, and had Rules given
by them, to attend unto, for their Direction. And besides, they were obliged in
all Emergencies to enquire after and receive those Command* and Directions,
which they were enabled infallibly to give unto them. And yet notwithstanding
these great Advantages, we f^nd that sundry of them were suddenly fallen into
si^ful neglects, disorders, and miscarriages, both in Doctrine, Discipline, and
worship. Some of these were reproved and reformed by the Great Apostle, Rev. 2.
3.
in his Epistles written unto them for that End: And some of them were rebuked
and threatened by the Lord Christ himself immediately from Heaven. That in
process of Time they have increased in their Degeneracy, waxing worse and
worse, their present state and Condition in the world, or the Remembrance of
them which are now not at all, with the severe dealings of God with them in his
Holy wise Providence, do sufficiently manifest. Yea some of them, though yet
continuing under other Forms and shapes, have by their Superstition, false
worship, and Express Idolatry, joined with wickedness of Life, and Persecution
of the true worshipers of Christ, as also by casting themselves into a new
worldly Constitution, utterly foreign unto what is appointed in the Gospel,
abandoned their Interest in the State and Rights of Churches of Christ. So are
sundry faithful Cities become Harlots; and where Righteousness inhabited,
there dwells Pers^c^ting Murderers. Such Churches were planted of Christ wholly
noble vines, but are degenerated into those that are bitter and wild. Whatever
our Judgment may be concerning the Personal condition of the Members of such
apostatized Churches, or of any of them* all Communion with them, as they would
be esteemed the Seat of Gospel Ordinances, and in their pretended
Administrations of them, is unlawful for us; and it is our indispensible Duty
to separate from them. For whatever Indifferency many may be growing into, in
matter of outward worship, which arises from ignorance of the Respect that is
between the Grace and Institutions of Christ, as that, from an Apprehension
that all internal Religion consists in Moral Honesty only; yet we know not any
other way whereby we may approve our selves faithful in our Profession, Mat.
28. 20.
but in the Observance of all whatever Christ has commanded, and to abstain
from what he condemns. For both our Faith and Love, John 15. 10, 14.
whatever we pretend, will be found vain, if we endeavor not to keep his
Commandments.

Such was the state of things in the Church of Israel of old, after the
Defection under Jeroboam. It was no more a true Church, nor any Church at all,
by virtue of positive Institution: For they had neither Priests, nor
Sacrifices, nor any Ordinances of Publi^k worship, that God approved of. Hence
it was the Duty of all that feared God in the Ten Tribes, not to join with the
Leaders and Body of the People in their worship; as also to observe those
Sacred Institutions of the Law, which were forbidden by them, in the Order that
they should not go up to Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11.
but attend unto all their Sacred Solemnities in the Places where the Calves
were set up. Chap. 13.
Accordingly many of the most Zealous Professors among them, 1 Kings 12.
with the Priests and Levites, Chap. 13.
and with a great Multitude of the People, openly separated from the Rest, and
joined themselves unto Judah in the worship of God, continued therein. Others
amongst them secretly in the worst of times preserved themselves from the
Abominations of the whole People. In like manner under the new Testament, Rev.
18. 4.
when some have deserved the Title of Babylon, because of their Idolatry, false
worship and Persecution, we are commanded to come out from among them, in an
open visible professed Separation, that we be not Partakers of their Sins, and
Plagues. But this Judgment we are not to make, nor do make concerning any, but
such as among whom Idolatry spreads its self over the Face of all their Solemn
Assemblies, and who join thereunto the Persecution of them who desire to
worship God in Spirit and in Truth. The Constitution of such Churches, as to
their being acceptable Assemblies of worshipers before God, is lost and
dissolved: Neither is it Lawful for any Disciple of Christ to partake with them
in their Sacred Administrations; For so to do, is plainly to disowne the
Authority of Christ, or to set up that of wicked and Corrupt men above it.

Yet all this hinders not but that there may in such Apostatical Churches
remain a profession of the fundamental Truths of the Gospel. And by virtue
hereof, as they maintain the interest of Christ's visible Kingdom in the
world; so we no way doubt but that there may be many amongst them, who by a
saving faith in the Truths they do profess, do really belong to the Mistical
Church of Christ.

An instituted Church therefore may by the Crimes and wickedness of its Rulers,
and the generality of its Members, and their Idolatrous Administrations in holy
things, utterly destroy their Instituted Estate, and yet not presently all of
them cease to belong unto the Kingdom of Christ. For we cannot say, that those
things which will certainly annul Church Administrations, and render them
abominable, will absolutely destroy the salvation of all individual persons who
partake in them; and many may secretly preserve themselves from being defiled
with such abominations. So in the height of the Degeneracy and Apostasy of the
Israelitish Church, there were seven thousand who kept themselves pure from
Baalish Idolatry, of whom none were known to Elijah. And therefore did God
still continue a respect unto them as his people, because of those secret ones,
and because the Token of his Covenant was yet in their flesh; affording unto
them an extraordinary Ministry by his Prophets, when the ordinary by Priests
and Levites was utterly ceased. This we are to hope concerning every place
where there is any Profession made of the Name of Christ; seeing it was the
Passion of Elijah which caused him to oversee so great a Remnant as God had
left unto himself in the Kingdom of Israel. And from his example we may learn,
that good men may sometimes be more severe in their censures for God, than he
will be for himself.

Moreover, such as were baptized in those Churches, were not baptized into them
as particular Churches, nor initiated into them thereby: But the Relation which
ensued unto them thereon, was unto the Catholic Church visible, together with
a separation from the Infidel world, lying wholly in darkness and evil, by a
dedication unto the Name of Christ. Upon a personal avowment of that Faith
whereinto they were baptized, they became complete Members of that Church.
Whatever state they are hereby admitted into, whatever benefit or privilege
they are personally interested in, they lose them not by the miscarriage of
that particular Church whereunto they do relate: Yea, losing the whole
advantage of an Instituted Church State, they may still retain whatever belongs
unto their Faith and Profession. Were Baptism only an Initiation into a
Particular Church, upon the failure of that Church, Baptism as to all its
benefits and Privileges, must cease also. We do therefore own, that amongst
those whose Assemblies are rejected by Christ, because of their false worship
and wickedness, there may be persons truly belonging to the Mystical Church of
God, and that also by their Profession are a portion of his Visible Kingdom in
the World. How far they do consent unto the Abominations of the Churches
whereunto they do belong, how far they have Light against them, how far they do
bewail them, how far they repent of them, what God will bear withal in them,
we know not, nor are called to judge. Our Love is to be toward them as persons
relating unto Jesus Christ in the capacity mentioned; but all Communion with
them in the Acts of false Worship is forbidden unto us. By virtue also of that
Relation which they still continue unto Christ and his Church as believers,
they have Power, and are warranted, (as it is their Duty) to reform themselves,
and to join together anew in Church Order, for the due celebration of Gospel
Ordinances, unto the Glory of Christ, and their own edification. For it is fond
to imagine, that by the sins of others, any Disciples of Christ in any place of
the world, should be deprived of a Right to perform their Duty toward him,
when it is discovered unto them. And these are our thoughts concerning such
Churches, as are openly and visibly Apostatical.

Again, There are Corruptions that may befall or enter into Churches that are
not of so heinous a nature, as those before insisted on: Especially if, as it
often falls out, the whole Lump be not leavened; if the whole Body be not
infected, but only some Part or Parts of it, which others more sound do resist,
and give their Testimony against: And these may have none of the pernicious
consequences before mentioned. Thus many Errors in Doctrines, Disorders and
Miscarriages in sacred Administrations, irregular walking in conversation, with
neglect or abuse of Discipline in Rulers, may fall out in some Churches, which
yet may be so far from evacuating their Church state, as that they give no
sufficient Warrant unto any person, immediately to leave their Communion, or to
separate from them. The Instances that may be given of the failings of some of
the Primitive Churches, in all these things, with the consideration of the
Apostolical Directions given unto them on such Occasions, render this Assertion
evident and incontroulable. Nor do we in the least approve of their practice
(if any such there be, that are considerable) who upon every failing in these
things in any Church, think themselves sufficiently warranted, immediately of
their own minds, to depart from its Communion. Much more do we condemn them who
suffer themselves in these things to be guided by their own surmises and
misapprehensions. For such there may be, as make their own hasty conceptions to
be the Rule of all Church Administrations, and Communion; who unless they are
in all things pleased, can be quiet no where. Wherefore when any Church,
whereof a man is by his own consent antecedently a Member, does fall in part or
in whole from any of those Truths which it has professed, or when it is
overtaken with a neglect of Discipline, or irregularities in its
administration, such a one is to consider, that he is placed in his present
state by divine Providence, that he may orderly therein endeavor to put a stop
unto such Defections, and to exercise his charity, Love and Forbearance toward
the persons of them whose Miscarriages at present he cannot Remedy. In such
cases there is a large and spacious Field, for Wisdom, Patience, Love and
prudent Zeal to exercise themselves. And it is a most perverse Imagination,
that Separation is the only cure for Church-disorders. All the Gifts and Graces
of the Spirit, bestowed on Church Members, to be exercised in their several
stations at such a season, all Instructions given for their due improvement
unto the good of the whole; the Nature, Rules and Laws of all Societies,
declare that all other Remedies possible and lawful, are to be attempted,
before a Church be finally deserted. But these Rules are to be observed,
provided always, that it be judged unlawful for any Persons, either for the
sake of Peace, or Order, or Concord, or on any other consideration, to join
actually in any thing that is sinful, or to profess any Opinion which is
contrary to Sound Doctrine, or the form of wholesome words, which we are bound
to hold fast on all Emergencies. And farther, if we may suppose, as sure enough
we may, that such a Church so corrupted shall obstinately persist in its
Errors, Miscarriages, Neglects, and Mal-administrations; that it shall refuse
to be warned or admonished, or being so by any means, shall wilfully reject and
despise all Intruction; that it will not bear with them that are yet sound in
it, whether Elders or Members, in peaceable Endeavors to reduce it unto the
order of the Gospel, but shall rather hurt, persecute and seek their trouble
for so doing, whereby their Edification comes continually to be obstructed, and
their Souls to be hazarded through the loss of Truth and Peace; we no way doubt
but that it is lawful for such persons to withdraw themselves from the
Communion of such Churches, and that without any apprehension that they have
absolutely lost their Church State, or are totally rejected by Jesus Christ.
For the means appointed unto any end, are to be measured and regulated
according unto their usefulness unto that end. And let men's present
Apprehensions be what they will, it will one day appear, that the end of all
Church Order, Rule, Communion and Administrations, is not the Grandeur or
secular Advantages of some few, not outward Peace and Quietness, unto whose
preservation the Civil Power is ordained; but the Edification of the Souls of
men in Faith, Love, and Gospel-Obedience. Where therefore these things are so
disposed of and managed, as that they do not regularly further and promote
that End, but rather obstruct it, if they will not be reduced unto their due
Order and Tendency, they may be laid aside, and made use of in another way.
Much more may any refuse the communion of such Churches, if they impose on them
their Corruptions, Errors, Failings and Mistakes, as the coudition of their
Communion: For hereby they directly make themselves Lords over the Faith and
Worship of the Disciples of Christ, and are void of all Authority from him in
what they so do or impose. And it is so far, that any men's withdrawing of
themselves from the communion of such Churches, and entering into a way of
Reformation for their own good, in obedience to the Laws of Christ, should
infer in them a want of Love and Peaceableness, or a Spirit of Division, that
to do otherwise, were to divide from Christ, and to cast out all true Christian
Love, embracing a Cloud of slothful negligence and carelessness in the great
concernments of the Glory of God, and their own Souls, in the room thereof. We
are neither the Authors nor the Guides of our own Love: He who implants and
works it in us, has given us Rules how it must be exercised, and that on all
emergencies. It may work as regularly by sharp cutting Rebukes, as by the most
silken and compliant expressions; by manifesting an aversation from all that is
evil, as by embracing and approving of what is good. In all things and cases it
is to be directed by the Word: And when under the pretense of it we leave that
Rule, and go off from any Duty which we owe immediately unto God, it is Will,
Pride, and Self-conceit in us, and not Love. And among all the Exhortations
that are given us in the Scripture unto Unity, and Concord, as the Fruits of
Love, there is not one that we should agree or comply with any in their sins or
evil practices. But as we are commanded in our selves to obtain from all
appearance of evil, so are we forbidden a participation in the sins of other
men, and all fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness: Our Love toward
such Churches is to work by Pity, Compassion, Prayer, Instructions, which are
due means for their healing and recovery; not by consent unto them, or
communion with them, whereby they may be hardened in the Error of their way, and
our own Souls be subverted: For if we have not a due respect unto the Lord
Christ, and his Authority, all that we have, or may pretend to have unto any
Church, is of no value. Neither ought we to take into consideration any terms
of Communion, whose foundation is not laid in a regard thereunto.

Moreover, (as has been declared) there is no such society of Christians in
the world, whose Assemblies, as to Instituted Worship, are rejected by Christ,
so that they have a Bill of Divorce given unto them by the Declaration of the
Will of the Lord Jesus to that purpose in the Scripture; but that until they
are utterly also as it were extirpate by the Providence of God (as are many of
the Primitive Plantations) we are persuaded of them, that there are yet some
secret hidden ones among them, that belong unto the purpose of Gods Grace. For
we do judge that wherever the Name of Jesus Christ is called upon, there is
salvation to be obtained; however the ways of it may be obstructed unto the
most* by their own Sins and Errors. They may also retain that Profession which
distinguishes them from the Infidel world. In these things we are still to
hold communion with them; and on these accounts is our Love to be continued
unto them. Some kind of communion we may hold with them, that that are of no
Instituted or Particular Churches, or whose Church State is rejected, even as a
person excommunicated is to be admonished as a Brother. And some kind of
communion we may lawfully refuse with some true Churches; Instances whereof
shall be given afterward.

There is therefore no necessity that any should deny all them to be true
Churches, from whom they may have just reason to withdraw their communion. For
such as are so, may require such things thereunto, as it is not lawful for them
to accept of, or submit unto. What Assemblies of Christians we behold visibly
worshipping God in Christ, we take for granted to be true visible Churches. And
when we judge of our own communion with them, it is not upon this Question,
whether they are true Churches or no, as though the determination of our
practice did depend solely thereon: For as we are not called to judge of the
being of their Constitution, as to the substance of it, unless they are openly
judged in the Scripture, as in the case of Idolatry and Persecution persisted
in, so a determination of the Truth of their constitution, or that they are
true Churches, will not presently resolve us in our Duty as to communion with
them, for the Reasons before given. But in such a case, two things are by us
principally to be considered. 1. That nothing sinful in it self, or unto us, be
required of us as the condition of communion. 2. That we may in such Churches
obtain the immediate end of their Institution, and our Conjunction with them,
which is our Edification in Faith, Love and Obedience.

And the things whereof we have discoursed, comprize our. Thoughts concerning
those Societies of Christians, whose degeneracy from their primitive Rule and
Institution is most manifest and notorious. Whilst there is any Profession of
the Gospel, any subjection of Souls unto Jesus Christ avowed, or any
expectation of help from him continued among them, we cannot but hope that
there are in all of them, at least some few Names that are written in the Lambs
Book of Life, and which shall be saved eternally: For as a Relation unto a
particular visible Church walking according to the Order and Rule of the
Gospel, is the Duty of every Believer to give himself up unto; as that which is
a means appointed and sanctified to the furtherance of his Edification and
Salvation; so where it cannot be obtained through invincible outward
Impediments, or is omitted through ignorance of Duty, or is on just Causes
refused where opportunities make a tender of it; or where the being and benefit
of it is lost through the Apostasy of those Churches whereunto any persons did
belong, the utter want of it, and that always, is not such as necessarily
infers the eternal loss of their Souls who suffer under it.

Other Churches there are in the world, which are not evidently guilty of the
Enormities in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, before discoursed of. These all
we judge to be true Churches of Christ; and do hope that his promised presence
is with them in their Assemblies. Answerable hereunto is our Judgment
concerning their Officers or Rulers, and all their Sacred Administrations. It
becomes us to think and believe, that the one have Authority from Christ; and
that the other are accepted with him: For it is most unwarrantable rashness and
presumption, yea an evident fruit of Ignorance, or want of Love, or secular
private Interest, when, upon lesser Differences men judge Churches to be no
true Churches, and their Ministers to be no true Ministers, and consequently
all their Administrations to be invalid. So do some judge of Churches, because
they have (...) Bishops; and so do more of others, because they have none. But
the Validity or Invalidity of the Ordinances of Christ, which are the Means of
Union and Communion with him unto all his Disciples, depend not on the
determination of things highly disputable in their Notion, and not inconsistent
with true Gospel-Obedience in their Practice. And we are unduly charged with
other Apprehensions. God forbid that any such thought should ever enter into
our heorts, as though the Churches constituted in all things according unto our
Light, and the Rules we apprehend appointed in the Scripture for that purpose,
should be the only true Churches in the world. They do but out of design,
endeavor to expose us to popular envy and hatred, who invent and publish such
things concerning us, or any of us: But whatever be the Judgment of others
concerning us, we intend not to take from thence any such provocation as might
corrupt our Judgments concerning them; nor to relieve our selves by returning
the like censures unto them, as we receive from them: Scripture Rule and Duty
must in these matters regulate our thoughts on all occasions. And whilst we
judge others to be true Churches, we shall not be much moved with their
judgment that we are none, because we differ from them: We stand to the
judgment of Christ and his Word. We cannot but judge indeed that many Churches
have missed, and do miss in some things the precise Rules of their due
constitution and walking; that many of them have added useless, superfluous
Rites to the Worship of God among them; that there is in many of them a sinful
neglect of Evangelical Discipline, or a carnal Rule erected in the stead of it;
that Errors in Doctrines of importance and danger, are prevalent in sundry of
them; that their Rulers are much influenced by a spirit of bitterness and envy
against such as plead for Reformation beyond their measure or interest; yet
that hereupon they should all or any of them immediately forfeit their
Church State, so as to have no lawful Ministers, nor acceptable sacred
Administrations, is in it self a false Imagination, and such as was never by us
entertained.

In particular, as to those Churches in Europe, which are commonly called
Reformed; we have the same thoughts of them, the same Love toward them, the
same readiness for communion with them, as we would desire any Disciples of
Christ in the world to have, bear, or exercise toward our selves. If we are
found negligent in any Office of Love toward them, or any of their Members, in
compassion, help or assistance, or such supplies in outward or inward things,
as we have opportunity or ability for, we are willing to bear the guilt of it
as our Sin, and the reproach of it as our shame. And herein we desire to fulfill
the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. The same we say concerning all the Churches in England of the same mould
and constitution with them* especially if it be true which some say, that
Parochial Churches are under a force and power, whereby they are enjoined the
practice of sundry things, and forbidden the performance of others, wherein the
compliance of some is not over-voluntary, nor pleasing to themselves. Neither
is there a Nullity or Invalidity in the Ordinances administered in them, any
otherwise, than as some render them ineffectual unto themselves by their
unbelief. And this is the Paganizing of England, which some of us are traduced
for. We believe, that among the visible professors in this Nation, there is as
great a number of sincere Believers as in any Nation under Heaven; so that in
it are treasured up a considerable portion of the invisible Mystical Church of
Christ. We believe, that the Generality of the Inhabitants of this Nation, are
by their Profession constituted an eminent part of the Kingdom of Christ in
this world. And we judge not, we condemn not those, who walking according to
their Light and Understanding in Particularities, do practice such things in
the Worship of God, as we cannot comply withal. For we do not think that the
things wherein they fail, wherein they miss, or out go the Rule, are in their
own nature absolutely destructive of their particular Church State. And what
more can reasonably be required of us, or expected from us in this matter, we
know not. The causes of the Distance that does remain between us and them,
shall be afterward enquired into. For our Duty in particular presential
communion, at the celebration of the same individual Ordinances, with such
Churches as are remote from us in Asia or Africa; we shall we hope be directed
to determine aright concerning it, when we are called thereunto. In the mean
time, what are our Thoughts concerning them, has been before declared: To love
them as Subjects of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in the world, to pray for them,
that they may have all needful supplies of Grace, and the Holy Spirit, from
above, that God would send out his Light and Truth to guide them in their
Worship and Obedience, and to help them in things spiritual and temporal, as we
have opportunity, is the Sum of the Duty which is required in us toward them.
Those we are more concerned in, who are within the Lines of our ordinary
Communication, among whom we walk and converse in the world: Unto any of these
it is in the Liberty and power of every Believer to join himself by his own
consent: And no more is required hereunto, in the present constitution of
Churches among our selves, but that a man remove his habitation, to comply with
his own desires herein: And this choice is to be regulated by a judgment, how a
man may best improve and promote his own Edification. We see not therefore how
any man with the least pretense of Sobriety or Modesty, can charge us with the
want of an esteem and valuation of Evangelical Unity: For we embrace it on all
the Grounds, that it is in the Gospel recommended unto us. And we do know
within what narrow bounds the Charity and Unity of some are confined, who yet
advantage themselves by a noise of their pretense. But that we do not in the
least disturb, break, or dissent from the Catholic Church, either as it is
invisible, in its internal form, by Faith and the Renovation of the Holy Ghost;
or as visibly professing necessary Fundamental Truths of the Gospel, we have
sufficiently evinced. And the Principles laid down concerning particular
Churches, Congregations, Assemblies or Parishes, have not as yet been detected
by any to spring from want of Love, or to be obstructive of the exercise of it.
Having therefore thus briefly given some account of what we conceive to be our
duty in relation unto the whole Church of God, we can with confidence and much
assurance of mind, own as dear a valuation of Love, Unity and Peaceableness in
the Profession of the Gospel, as any sort of Professors whatever. And we are
persuaded that our Principles do as much tend and and conduce unto the
improvement of them, as any that are, or can be proposed unto that end. For we
either do, or are in a readiness to embrace every thing or way, that the Lord
Christ has appointed, or does bless thereunto.

We doubt not, as has been before acknowledged, but that there have been many
failings and sinful miscarriages among all sorts of Professors, who separate,
or are rather driven from the present Public worship. There is no question but
that in them all, there are some remainders of the bitter Root of corrupt
affections, which under the various temptations and provocations they have been
exposed unto, has brought forth fruit of an unpleasant relish. It is no new
thing that irregular prejudices should be found acting themselves in Professors
of the Gospel: It has been so among them from the Beginning. And we hope that
where there is, or has been any guilt of this nature, that the Reproofs which
have been publicly given unto it (with what Spirit or Intention soever
managed) may be useful to the amendment of them who have offended. But for our
own Parts, we must bear this Testimony unto our sincerity, that we not only
condemn, but abhor all evil surmises among Professors, all rash and
uncharitable censures, all causless aversations of Mind and Affections, all
strife, wrath, anger, and debate, upon the account of different apprehensions
and practices in and about the concerns of Religious worship. Much more do we
cast out all thoughts of judging men's eternal state and condition, with respect
unto such differences; nor do we, nor dare we, give countenance unto any thing
that is in the least really opposite to love, Peace, Unity, or Concord, amongst
the Disciples of Christ. And as we shall not excuse any of those Extravagancies
and intemperate Heats, in words or otherwise, which some it may be have been
guilty of, who until their Repentance must bear their own Judgment; so we will
not make a recharge on others who differ in Persuasion from us, of the same or
the like crimes; nor indeed need we so to do, their Principles and Practices,
contrary unto all Christian Love and Charity, being written as with the beams
of the Sun. And we do not complain of our Lot in the world, that the appearance
of such things iu any of us would be esteemed a scandalous crime, which others
that condemn them in us, indulg in themselves without the least check or
control. The Law of this condition is put upon us by the Profession which we
do avow. Only we are not willing that any should make advantage against us by
their Pleas, for Love, Unity, and Concord, as if indeed they were for Peace,
but that we make our selves ready for war. Could they convince us that we come
behind them in the valuation and secking after these things by all ways and
means blessed by Christ to that purpose, we should judge our selves with a
severity at least commensurate to the utmost they are able to exercise against
us, whilst free from malice and evil designs. Only we must add, that there is
no true measure of Love, to be taken by the Accessions that men can make
toward them who depart from Truth. If it were so, those must be judged to
abound most with it, who can most comply with the practices of the Church of
Rome. But we are persuaded that such Discourses, with the application of them
unto those who differ from their Authors, do proceed from sincerity in them;
only, as we fear, somewhat leavened with an apprehension that their Judgments
and Practices being according unto truth, ought to be the Standard and Measure
of other men's; perhaps no less sincere and confident of the Truth than
themselves, though differing from them. And hence it is unhappily fallen out,
that in the Reproofs which some do manage on the foundations mentioned, and in
the way of their mannagement, many do suppose that there is as great an
appearance, if not evidence of evil surmises, ungrounded temerarious censures,
of self-conceit and elation of mind, of hard thoughts of, undue charges on, and
the contempt of others, and in all of a want of real love, condescension, and
compassion, as in any things that are true, and to be really found among
Professors blamed by them. For these things, both as charged and recharged,
have a double appearance. Those from whom they proceed look on them in the
light of that sincerity and integrity which they are conscious of to
themselves, wherein they seem amiable, useful, and free from all offense;
whereas others that are concerned viewing of them in the disordered Reflections
of their opposition unto them, and the disadvantage which they undergo by them,
do apprehend them quite of another nature. And it is a matter of trouble unto
us, to find that when some are severely handled for those Principles and ways
wherein they can, and do commend their Consciences unto God, and thereby
apprehending that their Intentions, Purposes, Principles and Affections, are
injuriously traduced and perverted, they fall with an equal severity on them by
whom they are reproved, though their Reproofs proceed from an equal Sincerity
unto what themselves profess, and expect to be believed in. Especially are such
mutual Reflections grievous and irksome unto Men, when they apprehend that in
them, or by them, Professed Friends do industriously expose them to the
contempt and wrath of Professed Adversaries.

CHAP. IV.
Want of Love and Unity among Christians justly complained of. Causes of
Divisions and Schisms. 1. Misapprehensions of Evangelical Unity. Wherein it
does truly consist. The ways and means whereby it may be obtained and
preserved. Mistakes about both. 2. Neglect in Churches to attend unto known
Gospel-Duty. Of preaching unto Conversion and Edification. Care of those that
are really Godly. Of Discipline: How neglected, how corrupted. Principles
seducing Churches and their Rulers into miscarriages. 1. Confidence of their
place. 2. Contempt of the people. 3. Trust unto worldly Grandeur. Other causes
of Divisions. Remainders of corruption from the General Apostasy. Weakness and
Ignorance. Of Readiness to take offenses. Remedies hereof. Pride. False
Teachers.

UPon the whole matter, it is generally acknowledged that there is a great
Decay of Love, a great want of Peace and Unity among Professors of the Gospel
in the world. And it is no less evident, nor less acknowledged, that these
things are frequently commanded and enjoined unto them in the Scripture. Might
they be obtained it would greatly further the Ends of the Gospel, and answer
the mind of Christ: And their Loss is obstructive unto the one, and no less
dishonorable unto that Profession which is made of the Name of the other. For
the Divisions of Christians (occasioned chiefly by false notions of Unity, and
undue means of attaining it) are the chief cause of Offenses unto them who are
yet strangers from Christianity. The Jews object unto us the Wars among
Christians, which they suppose shall have no place under the Kingdom and Reign
of the true Messiah. And we have been reproached with our intestine Differences
by Gentiles and Mahumetans. For those who never had either Peace or Love, or
Unity among themselves, do yet think meet to revile us with the want of them;
because they know how highly we are obliged unto them. But any Men may be
justly charged with the neglect of that Duty which they profess, if they be
found defective therein. Under the sad Effects of the want of these things we
may labor long enough, if we endeavor not to take away ihe Causes of it. And
yet in the entrance of our Disquisition after them we are again entangled.
Christians cannot come to an Agreement about these Causes, and so live under
the severity of their Effects, as not being able to conclude on a Remedy. The
multitude of them is here divided, and one cries one thing, another another:
Most place the Cause of all our Differences in a dissent from themselves, and
their Judgments: Yea they do so apparently, who yet disavow their so doing. And
it may be here expected that we should give some account of our thoughts as to
the Causes of these Differences whereof we also have now complained, so far as
they are contrary to the nature, or Obstructive of the Ends of the Gospel. We
shall therefore briefly endeavor the satisfaction of such as may have those
Expectations. Particular Evils which contribute much unto our Divisions, we
shall not insist upon; much less shall we reflect upon, and aggravate the
failings of others, whether Persons or Societies. Some of the Principal and
more General Reasons, and Causes of them, especially amongst Protestants, it
shall suffice us to enumerate.

The Principal Cause of our Divisions and Schisms is no other than the
Ignorance or Misapprehension that is among Christians, of the true nature of
that Evangelical Unity, which they ought to follow after, with the ways and
means whereby it may be attained and preserved. Hence it is come to pass, that
in the greatest Pleas for Unity, and endeavors after it, most men have pursued
a shadow, and fought uncertainly, as those that beat the Air. For having lost
the very notion of Gospel Unity, and not loving the thing its self, under what
terms soever proposed unto them, they consigned the Name of it unto, and
clothed with its ornaments and Privileges a vain Figment of their own, which
the Lord Christ never required, nor ever blessed any in their Endeavors to
attain. And when they had changed the End, it was needful for them also to
change the Means of attaining it; and to substitute those in their Room which
were suited to the new Mark and Aim they had erected. Farther to evidence these
things we shall give some account of the Nature of Evangelical Unity, the means
of attaining it; with the false notion of it that some have embraced, and the
corrupt means which they have used for the compassing of the same.

First, that Unity which is recommended unto us in the Gospel is spiritual; and
in that which is purely so, lies the Foundation of the whole. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.
Hence it is called the Unity of the Spirit, which is to be kept in the bond of
Peace; because there is one Body, John 17. 21, 22.
and one Spirit, whereby that Body is animated. Thus all true Believers become
one in the Father and the Son; or perfect in one. It is their Participation of,
and quickening by the same Spirit that is in Christ Jesus, whereby they become
his Body, or Members of it, Ephesians. 5. 30
even of his flesh and of his bones; that is, no less really Partakers of the
same Divine Spiritual Nature with him, 2 Pet. 1. 4
than Eve was of the Nature of Adam, when she was made of his flesh and his
bones. Genesis 5 2. 3
The real Union of all true Believers unto the Lord Christ as their Head,
wrought by his Spi^i^ which dwells in them, and communicates of his Grace
unto them, is that which we intend. For as hereby they become one with, and in
him, so they come to be one among themselves, as his Body; and all the Members
of the Body being many are yet but one Body, wherein their oneness among
themselves does consist. The Members of the Body have diverse forms or shapes,
diverse uses and Operations, much more may be diversely clothed and adorned; yet
are they one Body still, wherein this Unity does consist. And it were a
ridiculous thing to attempt the appearance of a dead useless Unity among the
Members of the Body, by clothing of them all in the same kind of Garments or
Covering. But granting them their Unity by their Relation unto the Head, and
thence to one another, unto the Constitution of the whole; and their different
Forms, shapes, Uses, Operations, ornaments, all tend to make them serviceable
in their Unity unto their proper Ends. And says the Apostle, as the Body is
one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body being many are
one body, 1 Cor. 12 12, 13.
so also is Christ. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit. And he does elsewhere so describe this
Fundamental Unity of Believers in one Body, under and in dependence on the same
Head, as to make it the only means of the usefulness and Preservation of the
whole. Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
They grow up into him in all things which is the Head even Christ: From whom
the whole Body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint
supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the Body unto the Edifying of its self in Love. The
conjunction of all the Members into one Body, their mutual usefulness unto one
another, the Edification of the whole, with its increase, the due exercise of
Love, (which things contain the whole nature* and the utmost Ends of all
Church Communion) do depend merely and solely upon, and flow from, the Relation
that the Members have to the Head, and their Union with him. He speaks again
to the same purpose in the reproof of them who hold not the Head, Col. 2. 19
from which all the Body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered and
knit together, increases with the increase of God. This is the Foundation of
all Gospel Unity among Believers, whereunto all other things which are required
unto the completing of it, are but accessory; nor are they without this, of
any value or acceptance in the sight of God. Whatever Order, Peace, Concord,
Union in the Church, any one may hold or keep, who is not interested herein, he
is but like a Stone in a building, laid it may be in a comely order, but not
cemented and fixed unto the whole, which renders its station useless to the
building, and unsafe unto its self: or like a dead, mortifyed part of the Body,
which neither receives any vital Influence from the Head, nor administers
nourishment unto any other part. Now it cannot be denied but that in the
Contests that are in the world about Church Union and Divisions, with what is
pleaded about their nature and Causes, there is little or no consideration had
thereof. Yea those things are principally insisted on, for the constituting of
the One, atd the according of the Other, which cast a neglect, yea a contempt
upon it. It is the Romanists who make the greatest outcryes about Church Union,
and who make the greatest Advantage by what they pretend so to be. But hereunto
they contend expressly on the one side, that it is indispensibly necessary that
all Christians should be subject to the Pope of Rome, and united unto him; and
on the other, that it is not necessary at all that any of them be spiritually
and savingly united unto Christ. Others also place it in various Instances of
Conformity unto, and Compliance with the Commands of Men, which if they are
observed, they are wondrous cold in their enquiries after this Relation unto
the Head. But the truth is, that where any one is interested in this Foundation
of all Gospel Unity, he may demand Communion with any Church in the world, and
ought not to be refused, unless in Case of some present Offense or scandal. And
those by whom such Persons are rejected from Communion, to be held on Gospel
terms, on the account of some Differences not entrenching on this Foundation,
do exercise a kind of Church Tyranny, and are guilty of the Schism which may
ensue thereon. So on the other side, where this is wanting, men's compliance
with any other terms or conditions that may be proposed unto them, and their
obtaining of Church Communion thereon, will be of little Advantage unto their
Souls.

Secondly, Unto this Foundation of Gospel Unity among Believers, for and unto
the due improvement of it, there is required an Unity of Faith; or of the
belief and Profession of the same Divine Truth. For as there is one Lord, so
also one Faith and one Baptism unto Believers. And this arises from, and
follows the other. For those who are so united unto Christ, are all taught of
God to believe the Truths which are necessarily required thereunto. And however
by the Power of Temptation they may fall in it, or from it for a season, as did
Peter, yet through the Love and care of Jesus Christ, they are again recovered.
Now unto this Unity of Faith two things are required. First, a precise and
express Professio 1 of the Fundamental Articles of Christian Religion. For we
outwardly hold the Head by a consent unto the form of wholesome words wherein
the Doctrine of it is contained. Of the Number and Nature of such Fundamental
Truths, whose express Acknowledgment belongs unto the Unity of Faith, so much
has been discoursed by others, as that we need not add any thing thereunto.
The sum is, that they are but few, plainly delivered in the Scripture;
evidencing their own necessity; all conducing to the begetting and increase of
that Spiritual Life, whereby we live unto God. Secondly, It is required
hereunto, that in other things and Duties, Romans 14. 5.
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, and walking according to what he
has attained, Phil. 3. 15
do follow Peace and Love, with those who are otherwise persuaded than he is.
For the Unity of Faith did never consist in the same precise Conceptions of all
revealed Objects: Neither the nature of Man, nor the means of Revelation, will
allow such a Unity to be morally Possible. And the figment of supplying this
variety by an implicit Faith, is ridiculous. For herein Faith is considered as
professed; and no man can make profession of what he knows not. It is
therefore condescension and mutual forbearance whereby the Unity of Faith
consisting in the joint belief of necessary Truths, is to be preserved with
respect unto other things about which Differences may arise.

Yet is not this so to be understood, as though Christians, especially
Ministers of the Gospel, should content themselves with the knowledge of such
Fundamentals, or confine their Scripture inquiries unto them. Whatever is
written in the Scripture* 1 Cor. 10. 12.
is written for our instruction; and it is our duty to search diligently into
the whole Counsel of God therein revealed: 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Yea to inquire with all diligence, in the use of all means, and the
improvement of all advantages, with fervent supplications for light and aid
from above, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
into the whole Mystery of the will of God, as revealed in the Scripture, and
all the Parts of it 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11.
, is the principal duty that is incumbent on us in this world. And those who
take upon them to be Ministers and Instructors of others, by whom this is
neglected, who take up with a superficiary knowledge of general Principles, and
those such for the most part as have a coincidence with the Light of Nature, do
but betray the souls of those over whom they usurp a charge, and are unworthy
of the Title and Office which they bear. Neither is there any thing employed in
the means of preserving the Unity of Faith, that should hinder us from
explaining, confirming and vindicating, any Truth that we have received,
wherein others differ from us; provided that what we do, be done with a spirit
of meekness and love: Yea, our so doing is one principal means of ministering
nourishment unto the Body, whereby the whole is increased as with the increase
of God.

But in the Room of all this, what contendings, fightings, destructions of men,
body and soul, upon variety of Judgments about sacred things, have been
introduced by the Craft of Satan, and the carnal interest of men of corrupt
minds, is known to all the world.

Thirdly, There is an Unity of Love, that belongs unto the Evangelical Unity
which we are in the description of. For Love is the bond of perfection; that
whereby all the Members of the Body of Christ are knit together among
themselves, and which renders all the other ingredients of this Unity useful
unto them. And as we have discoursed of the nature of this Love before, so the
exercise of it, as it has an actual influence into Gospel Unity among
Christians, may be reduced unto two Heads. For, First, it works effectually
according to the measure of them in whom it is, in the Contribution of supplies
of Grace and Light, and helps of obedience, unto other Members of the body.
Every one in whom this Love dwells, according to his Ability, Call, and
Opportunities, which make up his measure, will communicate the spiritual
supplies which he receives from the Head Christ Jesus unto others, by
Instructions, Exhortations, Consolations and Example, unto their Edification.
This he will do in Love, and unto the ends of Love; namely, to testify a joint
Relation unto Christ the Head of all, and the increase of the whole by supplies
of life from him. Instead hereof, some have invented bonds of Ecclesiastical
Unity, which may outwardly bind men together in some appearance of order,
whilst in the mean time they live in envy, wrath, and malice, biting and
devouring one another; or if there be any thing of Love among them; it is that
which is merely natural, or carnal and sensual, working by a joint consent in
delights and pleasure, or at best in Civil things, belonging unto their
conversation in this world. The love that is among such persons in this world,
is of the world, and will perish with the world, But it is a far easier thing
to satisfy Conscience with a pretense of preserving Church Unity, by an
acquiescency in some outward Rules and Constitutions, wherein men's minds are
little concerned, than to attend diligently unto the due exercise of this Grace
of Love, against all Oppositions and Temptations unto the contrary: For indeed
the exercise of this Love requires a sedulous and painful labor, Heb. 6. 10.
But yet this is that alone which is the Bond of Perfection unto the Disciples
of Christ, and without which, all other pretenses or appearances of Unity, are
of no value with him. Secondly, This Love acts it self by forbearance and
condescension toward the Infirmities, mistakes, and faults of others; wherein,
of what singular use it is for the Preservation of Church Peace, and Order, the
Apostle at large declares, 1 Cor. 13.

Fourthly, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
The Lord Christ by his Kingly Authority has instituted Orders for Rule, and
Ordinances for Worship, Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
to be observed in all his Churches. That they be attended unto, and celebrated
in a due manner, belongs unto the unity which he requires among his Disciples.
To this end he communicates supplies of spiritual ability and wisdom, or the
Gifts of his Spirit, unto the Guides and Rulers of his Churches, for their
administration unto edification. And hereon, if a submission unto his Authority
be accompanied with a due attendance unto the Rule of the Word, no such variety
or difference will ensue, as shall impeach that Unity which is the Duty of them
all to attend unto.

In these things does consist that Evangelical Church Unity which the Gospel
recommends unto us, John 17. 20, 21, 22.
and which the Lord Christ prayed for with respect unto all that should believe
on his Name. One Spirit, one Faith, one Love, one Lord, there ought to be in
and unto them all. In the possession of this Unity, and no other, were the
first Churches left by the Apostle: And had they in succeeding Generations
continued according to their Duty, in the preservation and liberty of it, all
those scandalous Divisions which afterward fell out among them on the account
of Pre-eminences, Jurisdictions, Liturgies, Rites, Ceremonies, violently or
fraudulently obtruded on their Communion, had been prevented.

The ways and means whereby this Unity may be obtained and preserved amongst
Christians, 2 Cor. 10 4, 5.
are evident from the Nature of it: For whereas it is Spiritual, none other are
suited thereunto; nor has the Lord Christ appointed any other, Mat. 28. 20.
but his Spirit and his Word. For to this end does he promise the presence of
his Spirit among them that believe, Joh. 14. 16.
unto the consummation of all things. And this he does, both as to lead and
guide them into all Truth necessary unto the Ends mentioned; so to assist and
help them in the orderly performances of their Duties in and about them. His
Word also, as the Rule which they are to attend unto, he has committed unto
them; and other ways and means for the compassing of this end, besides the due
improvement of spiritual Assistances, in a compliance with the holy Rule, he
has not designed or appointed.

This is that Gospel-Vnity which we are to labor after; and these are the
means whereby we may do so. But now through the mistake of the minds of men,
with the strong influence which carnal and corrupt Interests have upon them, we
know how it has been despised, and what has been set up in the room thereof;
and what have been the means whereby it has been pursued and promoted. We may
take an Instance in those of the Church of Rome. No sort of Christians in the
world (as we have already observed) do at this day more pretend unto Unity, or
more press the necessity of it, or more fiercely judge, oppose and destroy
others for the breach of it, which they charge upon them; nor more prevail or
advantage themselves by the pretense of it, than do they: But yet
notwithstanding all their Preten^es, it will not be denied, but that the Unity
which they so make their boast of, and press upon others, is a thing utterly
foreign to the Gospel, and destructive of that Peace, Union and Concord among
Christians, which it does require. They know how highly Unity is commended in
the Scripture, how much it is to be prized and valued by all true Believers,
how acceptable it is to Jesus Christ, and how severely they are condemned who
break it, or despise it: These things they press, and plead, and make their
advantage by. But when we come to enquire what it is that they intend by
Church-Vnity, they tell us long Stories of Subjection unto the Pope, to the
Church in its Dictates and Resolutions, without farther examination, merely
because they are theirs. Now these things are not only of another nature and
kind than the Unity and Concord commended unto us by Jesus Christ, but
perfectly inconsistent with them, and destructive of them. And as they would
impose upon us a corrupt confederacy for their own secular Advantage, in the
room of the spiritual Unity of the Gospel; so it was necessary that they should
find out means suitable unto its Accomplishment and Preservation; as distant
from the means appointed by Christ, for the attaining of Gospel-Vnion, as their
carnal Confederacy is from the thing its self. And they have done accordingly:
For the enforcing men by all ways of deceit and outward violence, unto a
compliance with, and submission unto their Orders, is the great Expedient for
the establishment and preservation of their perverse Union, that they have
fixed on. Now that this Fictitious Unity, and corrupt carnal pursuit of it,
have been the greatest occasion and causes of begetting, fomenting and
continuing the Divisions that are among Christians in the world, has been
indeniably proved by Learned men of all sorts. And so it will fall out,
wherever any reject the Union of Christ's Institutions, and substitute in the
room thereof, an Agreement of their own Invention; as his will be utterly lost,
so they will not be able to retain their own.

Thus others also not content with those bounds and measures which the Gospel
has fixed unto the Unity of Christians and Churches, will have it to consist
almost wholly in an outward Conformity unto certain Rites, Orders, Ceremonies,
and Modes of Sacred Administrations, which themselves have either invented and
found out, or do observe and approve. Whoever dissents from them in these
things, must immediately be branded, as a Schismatic, a Divider of the
Churches Unity, and an enemy unto the Peace and Order of it. Howbeit, of
Conformity unto such Institutions and Orders of men, of Uniformity in the
observation of such external Rites in the worship of the Church, there is not
one word spoken, nor any thing of that nature intimated, in all the Commands
for Unity which are given unto us, nor in the Directions that are sanctified
unto the due preservation of it. Yet such an Uniformity, being set up in the
room of Evangelical Unity and Order; Means suited unto the preservation of it,
but really destructive of that whose name it bears, and whose Place it
possesses, have not been wanting. And it is not unworthy consideration, how
men endeavor to deceive others, and are deceived themselves, by manifold
Equivocations in their arguings about this Matter. For first, they lay down the
necessity of Unity among Christians, with the evil that is in Breaches,
Divisions and Schisms; which they prove from the Commands of the one, and the
Reproofs of the other, that abound in the Scripture. Then, with an easy
deduction, they prove that it is a Duty incumbent on all Christians in their
several Capacities to observe, keep, further, and promote this Unity, and to
prevent, oppose, resist and avoid all Divisions that are contrary thereunto. If
so, the Magistrate must do the same in his place and capacity. Now seeing it is
his Office, and unto him of God it is committed, to exercise his power, in Laws
and Penalties, for the promoting of what is good, and the punishing of what is
contrary thereunto, it is his Duty to coerce, restrain and punish all those who
oppose, despise, or any way break or disturb the Unity of the Church. And this
Ratiocination would seem reasonable, were it not doubly defective: For first,
the Unity intended in the first Proposition, whose necessity is confirmed by
Scripture-Testimonies, is utterly lost before we come to the Conclusion; and
the outward Uniformity mentioned, is substituted in the room thereof. And
hereby, in the second place, are they deceived to believe, that external force
and penalties are a means to be used by any for the attaining or preserving of
Gospel-Vnity. It is not improbable indeed, but that it may be suited to give
countenance unto that external Uniformity which is intended; but that it should
be so unto the promotion of Gospel-Vnion among Believers, is a weak
imagination. Let such persons keep themselves and their Argument unto that
Union which the Scripture commends amongst the Disciples of Christ, and his
Churches, with the means fitted and appointed unto the preservation of it, and
they shall have our compliance with any Conclusion that will thence ensue.

Herein therefore lies the Fundamental Cause of our Divisions, which will not
be healed, until it be removed and taken out of the way. Leave Believers or
Professors of the Gospel unto their Duty in seeking after Evangelical Unity in
the use of other Means instituted and blessed unto that End; impose nothing on
their Consciences or Practice under that Name which indeed belongs not
thereunto; and although upon the Reasons and Causes afterward to be mentioned,
there may for a season remain some Divisions among them, yet there will be a
way of healing continually ready for them, and agreed upon by them as such.
Where indeed men propose unto themselves different Ends, though under the same
Name, the use of the same Means for the compassing of them, will but increase
their variance. As where some aim at Evangelical Union, and others at an
External Uniformity, both under the name of Unity and Peace. in the use of the
same Means, for these Ends, they will be more divided among themselves. But
where the same End is aimed at, even the debate of the Means for the attaining
of it, will insensibly bring the Parties at difference into a Coalition, and
work out in the issue a complete Reconciliation. In the mean time, were
Christians duly instructed, how, many lesser Differences in Mind, Judgment and
Practice, are really consistent with the Nature, Ends, and genuine Fruit of the
Unity that Christ requires among them, it would undoubtedly prevail with them
so to manage themselves in their Differences by mutual forbearance and
condescension in Love, as not to contract the guilt of being Disturbers or
Breakers of it. For suppose the Minds of any of them to be invincibly
prepossessed with the Principles wherein they differ from others; yet all who
are sincere in their Profession, cannot but rejoice to be directed unto such a
Mannagery of them, as to be preserved from the guilt of dissolving the Unity
appointed by Christ to be observed. And to speak plainly, among all the
Churches in the world which are free from Idolatry and Persecution, it is not
different Opinions, or a difference in Judgment about revealed Truths, nor a
different practice in sacred Administrations, but Pride, Self-interest, Love of
Honor, Reputation, and Dominion, with the influence of Civil or Political
Intrigues and Considerations, that are the true cause of that defect of
Evangelical Unity that is at this day amongst them. For set them aside, and the
real differences which would remain, may be so managed in Love, Gentleness and
Meekness, as not to interfere with that Unity which Christ requires them to
preserve: Nothing will from thence follow, which shall impeach their common
Interest in one Lord, one Faith, one Love, one Spirit, and the Administration
of the same Ordinances according to their Light and Ability. But if we shall
cast away this Evangelical Union among the Disciples and Churches of Christ, if
we shall break up the Bounds and Limits fixed unto it, and set up in its place
a compliance with, or an agreement in the Commands and Appointments of men,
making their Observations the Rule and measure of our Ecclesiastical Concord,
it cannot be, but that innumerable and endless Divisions will ensue thereon. If
we will not be contented with the Union that Christ has appointed, it is
certain we shall have none in this world. For concerning that which is of men's
finding out, there have been and will be Contentions and Divisions, whilst
there are any on the one side who will endeavor its imposition; and on the
other, who desire to preserve their Consciences entire unto the Authority of
Christ in his Laws and Appointments.

There is none who can be such a Stranger in our Israel, as not to know that
these things have been the great Occasion and Cause of of the Divisions and
Contentions that have been among us, near an hundred years, and which at this
day make our Breaches wide like the Sea; that they cannot be healed. Let
therefore those who have Power and Ability, be instrumental to restore to the
minds of men the true Notion and Knowledge of the Unity which the Lord Christ
requires among his Churches and Disciples; and let them be left unto that
Liberty which he has purchased for them, in the pursuit of that Unity which he
has prescribed unto them; and let us all labor to stir up those Gracious
Principles of Love and Peace, which ought to guide us in the use of our
Liberty, and will enable us to preserve Gospel-Unity, and there will be a
greater Progress made toward Peace, Reconciliation and Concord, amongst all
sorts of Christians, than the spoiling of the Goods, or imprisoning of the
Persons of Dissenters, will ever effect. But it may be such things are required
here unto, as the world is yet scarce able to comply withal. For whilst men do
hardly believe that there is an efficacy and power accompanying the
Institutions of Christ, for the compassing of that whole end which he aims at
and intends; whilst they are unwilling to be brought unto the constant
exercise of that spiritual Diligence, Patience, Meekness, Condescension,
Self-Denial, Renunciation of the world, and Conformity thereunto, which are
indispensibly necessary in Church-Guides, and Church Members, according to
their measure, unto the attaining and preservation of Gopel-Unity; but do
satisfy themselves in the disposal of an Ecclesiastical Union, into a
subordination unto their own secular Interests, by external force and power; we
have very small expectation of success in the way proposed. In the mean time we
are herewith satisfied. Take the Churches of Christ in the world that are not
infected with Idolatry or Persecution, and restore their Unity unto the Terms
and Conditions left unto them by Christ and his Apostles; and if in any thing
we are found uncompliant therewithal, we shall without repining, bear the
reproach of it, and hasten an amendment.

Another Cause of the evil Effects and Consequents mentioned, is the great
neglect that has been in Churches, and Church-Rulers, in the pursuance of the
open direct Ends of the Gospel, both as to the Doctrine and Discipline of it.
This has been such, and so evident in the world, that it is altogether in vain
for any to deny it, or to attempt an Excuse of it. And men have no reason to
flatter themselves, that whilst they live in an open neglect of their own Duty,
others will always, according to their wills or Desires, attend with diligence
unto what they prescribe unto them. If Churches or their Rulers would excuse or
justify their Members, in all the evils that may befall them through their
Miscarriages and Mal-administrations, it might justly be expected that they
should go along with them, under their conduct, whither-ever they should lead
them. But if it can never be obliterated out of the Minds and Consciences of
men, that they must every one live by his own Faith, and every one give an
account of himself unto God, and that every one, notwithstanding the
interposition of the help of Churches and their Rulers, is obliged immediately
in his own person, to take care of his whole Duty toward God; it cannot be,
but that in such cases, they will judge for themselves, and what is meet for
them to do. In case therefore that they find the Churches whereunto they do
relate under the guilt of the neglect mentioned, it is probable that they will
provide for themselves and their own safety. In this state of things it is
morally impossible, but that Differences and Divisions will fall out, which
might all of them have been prevented, had there been a due attendance unto the
Work, Doctrine, Order and Discipline of the Gospel, in the Churches that were
in possession of the Care and Administration of them. For it is hard for men to
believe, that by the Will and Command of Christ they are inevitably shut up
under spiritual disadvantages; seeing it is certain that he has ordered all
things in the Church for their Edification. But the consideration of some
particular Instances, will render this Cause of our Divisions more evident and
manifest.

The first End of Preaching the Gospel is the Conversion of the Souls of men
unto God, Acts 26. 17, 18. This we suppose will not be questioned, nor denied.
That the work hereof in all Churches ought to be attended and pursued with
Zeal, Diligence, Labor and Care, all accompanied with constant and fervent
Prayers for success in and by the Ministers and Rulers of them, (1 Timothy 5. 17.
2 Timothy 4. 1, 2.) is a Truth also that will not admit of any Controversy among
them that believe the Gospel. Herein principally do men in Office in the
Church, exercise and manifest their Zeal for the Glory of God, their compassion
toward the Souls of men, and acquit themselves faithfully in the Trust
committed unto them by the great Shepherd of the Sheep, Christ Jesus. If now in
any Assembly, or other Societies professing themselves to be Churches of
Christ, and claiming the Right and Power of Churches toward all persons living
within the bounds or limits which they have prescribed unto themselves, this
work be either totally neglected, or carelessly and perfunctorily attended unto;
if those on whom it is immediately incumbent, do either suppose themselves free
from any Obligation thereunto, upon the pretense of other Engagements; or do so
dispose of themselves in their relation unto many Charges or Employments, as
that it is impossible they should duly attend unto it, or are unable and
insufficient for it; so that indeed there is not in such Churches a due
representation of the Love, Care and Kindness of the Lord Jesus Christ toward
the Souls of men, which he has ordained the Administrations of his Gospel to
testify; it cannot be, but that great thoughts of heart, and no small disorder
of mind, will be occasioned in them, who understand aright how much the
principal end of constituting Churches in this world is neglected among them.
And although it is their duty, for a season patiently to bear with, and quietly
seek the Reformation of this Evil in the Churches whereunto they do belong; yet
when they find themselves excluded, it may be by the very Constitution of the
Church its self, it may be by the iniquity of them that prevail therein, from
the performance of any thing that tends thereunto, it will increase their
disquietment. And whereas men do not join themselves; nor are by any other ways
joined unto Churches, for any Civil or Secular Ends or Purposes, but merely for
the promotion of Gods Glory, and the Edification of their own Souls in Faith
and Gospel-Obedience; it is altogether vain for any to endeavor a satisfaction
of their Consciences, that it is sin to withdraw from such Churches, wherein
these ends are not pursued nor attainable. And yet a confidence hereof is that
which has countenanced sundry Church-Guides into that neglect of Duty, which
many complain of, and groan under at this day.

The second end of the Dispensation of the Gospel in the Assemblies of the
Churches of Christ by the Ministers of them, is the Edification of them that
are converted unto God, and do believe. Herein consists that feeding of his
Sheep and Lambs that the Lord Christ has committed unto them: And it is
mentioned as the principal end for which the Ministry was ordained; or for
which Pastors and Teacher's are granted unto the Church, Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. And the Scripture abounds in the Declaration of what skill and knowledge in
the Mystery of the Gospel, what Attendance unto the Word and Prayer, what Care,
watchfulness and diligent Labor in the Word and Doctaine, are required unto a
due discharge of the Ministerial Duty. Where it is omitted, or neglected, where
it is carelessly attended unto, where those on whom it is incumbent, to act
more like Hirelings than true Shepherds, where they want skill to divide the
Word aright, or wisdom and knowledge to declare from it the whole Counsel of
God, or diligence to be urgent continually in the Application of it; there the
principal end of all Church Communion is ruined and utterly lost. And where it
so falls out, let any man judge what thoughts they are like to be exercised
withal, who make Conscience of the performance of their own Duty, and
understand the necessity of enjoying the Means that Christ has appointed for
their edification. And it is certain, that such Churches will in vain, or at
least unjustly expect that Professors of the Gospel should abide in their
particular communion, when they cannot or do not provide food for their Souls,
whereby they may live to God. Unless all the Members of such Churches are
equally asleep in security, Divisions among them will in this case ensue. Will
any Disciple of Christ esteem himself obliged to starve his own Soul, for the
sake of communion with them who have sinfully destroyed the principal end of
all Church Communion? Is there any Law of Christ, or any Rule of the Gospel, or
any Duty of Love, that require them so to do? The sole immediate end of men's
joining in Churches, being their own edification, and usefulness unto others,
can they be bound in Conscience always to abide there, or in the communion of
those Churches, where it is not to be attained, where the means of it are
utterly cast aside? This may become such as know not their duty, nor care to be
instructed, in it, and are willing to perish in, and for the company of others.
But for them which in such Cases shall provide according to the Rules of the
Gospel for themselves, and their own safety, they may be censured, judged and
severely treated by them whose Interest and Advantage it is so to do; they may
be despised by Riotous Persons who sport themselves with their own Deceivings;
but with the Lord Christ, the Judge of all, they will be accepted. And they do
but increase the dread of their own Account, who under pretense of Church Power
and Order, would forcibly shut up Christians in such a condition, as wherein
they are kept short of all the true ends of the Institution of Churches. To
suppose therefore that every voluntary departure from the constant Communion of
such Churches, made with a design of joining unto those, where the Word is
dispensed with more diligence and Efficacy, is a Schism from the Church of
Christ, is to suppose that which neither the Scripture, nor Reason will give
the least Countenance unto. And it would better become such Churches to return
industriously unto a faithful Discharge of their Duty, whereby this occasion of
Divisions may be removed out of the way, than to attempt their own
Justification by the severe prosecution of such as depart from them.

Thirdly, In pursuit of the Doctrine of the Gospel so improved and applied, it
is the known and open Duty of Churches in their Guides or Ministers, by all
means to countenance and promote the Growth of Light, Knowledge, Godliness,
strictness and fruitfulness of Conversation, in those Members of them, in whom
they may be found, or do appear in an especial manner: Such are they to own,
encourage, and make their companions, and endeavor that others may become like
unto them. For unless men in their ordinary and common conversation, in their
affections, and the interest which they have in the Administration of
Discipline, do uniformly answer the Doctrine of Truth which they preach, it
cannot be avoided but that it will be matter of offense upto others, and of
Reproach to themselves. Much more will it be so, if instead of these things,
those who Preside in the Churches, shall beat their fellow servants, and eat
and drink with the drunken. But by all ways it is their duty to separate the
precious from the vile, if they intend to be as the Mouth of the Lord, even in
their Judgments, Affections, and Conversations: And herein what Wisdom,
Patience, Diligence, Love, Condescension and Forbearance are required, they
alone know, and they full well know, who for any season have in their places
conscientiously endeavored the Discharge of their Duty. But whatever be the
Labor which is to be undergone therein, and the trouble wherewith it is
attended, it is that which by the appointment of Christ all Ministers of the
Gospel are obliged to attend unto. They are not by contrary actings to make sad
the hearts of them whom God would not have made sad, nor to strengthen the
hands of them whom God would not have encouraged, as they will answer it at
their peril. The hearts of Church Guides, and of those who in an especial
manner fear God, thriving in Knowledge and Grace under the Dispensation of the
Word, ought to be knit together in all holy affections, that they may together
grow up into him who is the Head. For where there is the greatest evidence and
manifestation of the power and presence of Christ in any, there ought their
Affections to be most intense. For as such persons are the Crown, the Joy and
rejoicing of their Guides, and will appear to be so in the Day of the Lord; so
they do know, or may easily do so, what Obligations are on them, to honor and
pay all due respects unto their Teachers, how much on all accounts they owe
unto them, whereby their mutual Love may be confirmed. And where there is this
Uniformity between the Doctrine of the Gospel as Preached, and the Duties of it
as practiced, then are they both beautiful in the eyes of all Believers, and
effectual unto their proper ends. But where things in Churches, through their
negligence or corruption, or that of their Guides, are quite otherwise, it is
easy to conjecture what will ensue thereon. If those who are forwardest in
Profession, who give the greatest evidence that they have received the power of
that Religion which is taught and owned among them, who have apparently
attained a growth in spirituol Light and Knowledge above others, shall be so
far from being peculiarly cherished and regarded, from being loved, liked, or
associated withal, as that on the other side they shall be marked, observed,
reproached, and it may be on every slight provocation put even to outward
trouble; whilst men of worldly and profane Conversations, ignorant, perhaps
riotous and debauched, shall be the delight and companions of Church Guides and
Rulers, it cannot be that such Churches should long continue in peace; nor is
that peace wherein they continue much to be valued. An Agreement in such ways
and practices, is rather to be esteemed a Conspiracy against Christ and
Holiness, than Church Order or Concord. And when men once find themselves
hated, and it may be Persecuted, for no other cause, as they believe, but
because they labor in their Lives and Professions to express the power of that
Truth wherein they have been instructed, they can hardly avoid the
entertainment of severe thoughts concerning them, from whom they had just
reason to expect other usage; as also to provide for their own more peaceable
encouragement and edification.

Fourthly, Hereunto also belongs the due exercise of Gospel Discipline,
according to the mind of Christ. It is indeed by some called into question,
whether there be any Rule or Discipline appointed by Christ to be exercised in
his Churches. But this doubt must respect, such outward forms and modes of the
Administration of these things, which are supposed, but not proved necessary.
For whether the Lord Christ has appointed some to Rule, and some to be ruled;
whether he has prescribed Laws or Rules, whereby the One should govern, and
the other obey; whether he has determined the Matter, Manner, and End of this
Rule and Government, cannot well be called into Controversy by such as profess
to believe the Gospel. Of what nature or kind these Governors or Rulers are to
be, what is their Office, how they are to be invested therewith, and by what
Authority, how they are to behave themselves in the Administration of the Laws
of the Church, are things determined by him in the Word. And for the Matters
about which they are to be conversant, it is evidently declared of what nature
they are, how they are to be managed, and to what end. The Qualifications and
Duties of those who are to be admitted into the Church, their deportment in it,
their removal from it, are all expressed in the Laws and Directions given unto
the same end. In particular it is ordained, That those who are unruly or
disorderly, who walk contrary unto the Rules and ways of holiness prescribed
unto the Church, shall be rebuked, admonished, instructed; and if after all
means used for their amendment they abide in impenitency, that they be ejected
out of Communion. For the Church, as visible, is a Society gathered and erected
to express and declare the Holiness of Christ, and the power of his Grace, in
his Person and Doctrine: And where this is not done, no Church is of any
advantage unto the interests of his Glory in this World. The Preservation
therefore of Holiness in them, whereof the Discipline mentioned is an effectual
means, is as necessary, and of the same importance with the preservation of
their Being. The Lord Christ has also expressly ordained. That in case
Offenses should arise in and among his Churches, that in and by them they
should be composed, according to the Rules of the Word, and his own Laws; and
in particular, that in sinful miscarriages causing offense or scandal, there be
a regular proceeding, according unto an especial Law and Constitution of his,
for the removal of the offense, and recovery of the offender; as also that
those who in other cases have fallen by the power of temptation, should be
restored by a spirit of meekness; and, not to instance in more Particulars,
that the whole Flock be continually watched over, exhorted, warned, instructed,
comforted, as the necessities or occasions of the whole, or the several Members
of it, do require. Now supposing these, and the like Laws, Rules, and
Directions, to be given and enjoined by the Authority of Christ (which gives
Warranty for their Execution, unto men prudent for the ordering of affairs
according to their necessary circumstances, and Believers of the Gospel, doing
all things in obedience unto him) we judge that a complete Rule or Government is
erected thereby in the Church. However we know that the exercise of Discipline
in every Church, so far as the Laws and Rules of it are expressed in the
Scripture, and the Ends of it directed unto, is as necessary as any Duty
enjoined unto us in the whole course of our Gospel Obedience. And where this is
neglected, it is in vain for any Churches to expect Peace and Unity in their
Communion, seeing it self neglects the principal means of them. It is
pleaded, that the mixture of those that are wicked and ungodly in the sacred
Administrations of the Church, does neither defile the Administrations
themselves, nor render them unuseful unto those who are rightly interested in
them, and duly prepared for the participation of them: Hence that no Church
ought to be forsaken, nor its Communion withdrawn from merely on that account,
many of old and of late have pleaded. Nor do we say, that this solely of its
self, is sufficient to justify a separation from any Church. But when a Church
shall tolerate in its Communion, not only evil men, but their evils, and
absolutely refuse to use the Discipline of Christ for the Reformation of the
One, and the taking away of the other, there is great danger least the whole
Lump be leavened, and the edification of particular persons be obstructed,
beyond what the Lord Christ requires of them to submit unto, and to acquiesce
in.

Neither will things have any better success where the Discipline degenerates
into an outward forcible Jurisdiction and Power. The things of Christ are to be
administered with the Spirit of Christ. Such a frame of heart and mind as was in
him, is required of all that act under him, and in his Name. Wherefore Charity,
Pity, Compassion, Condescension, Meekness and Forbearance, with those other
Graces, which were so glorious and conspicuous in him, and in all that he did,
are to bear sway in the minds of them who exercise this Care and Duty for him
in the Church. To set up such a Form of the Administration of Discipline; or to
commit the exercise of it unto such persons, as whereby, or by whom, the Lord
Christ in his Rule of the Church, would be represented as furious, captious,
proud, covetous, oppressive, is not the way to honor him in the world, nor to
preserve the peace of the Churches. And indeed some while they boast of the
Imitation of Christ and his Example in opposition to his Grace, do in their
Lives and Practices make unco the world a Representation of the Devil. But an
account of this Degeneracy is given so distinctly by Peitro Suave, the Author
of the History of the Council of Trent, lib. 4: ad Ann. 1551. that we think it
not unmeet to express it in his own words. He says therefore, that, Christ
having commanded his Apostles to preach the Gospel and administer the
Sacraments, he left also unto them, in the person of all the faithful, this
principal precept, to love one another, charging them to make peace between
those that dissented, and for the last Remedy giving the care thereof to the
Body of the Church; promising it should be bound and loosed in Heaven, whatever
they did bind and loose on earth; and that whatever they did ask with a common
consent, should be granted by the Father. In this charitable office, to give
satisfaction to the offended, and pardon to the offender, the Primitive Church
was always exercised. And in conformity to this, St. Paul ordained, that
brethren having Civil Suits one against another, should not go to the Tribunals
of Infidels; but that wise men should be appointed to judge the Differences; and
this was a kind of Civil Judgment, as the other had the similitude of a
Criminal; but were both so different from the Judgments of the world, that as
these are executed by the Power of the Judge who enforces submission, so those
only by the will of the guilty to receive them; who refusing of them, the
Ecclesiastical Judge remains without execution, and has no power but to
foreshew the Judgment of God, which according unto his omnipotent good pleasure
will follow in this life or the next. And indeed the Ecclesiastical Judgment
did deserve the name of Charity, in regard that it did only induee the guilty
to submit, and the Church to judge with such sincerity, that neither in the one
any bad effect could have place, nor just complaint in the other; and the
excess of charity in correcting, did make the Corrector to feel greater pain
than the corrected; so that in the Church no punishment was imposed, without
lamentation of the multitude, and greater of the better sort. And this was the
cause why to correct was called to Lament. So St. Paul rebuking of the
Corinchians, for not chastising the incestuous, said, you have not lamented to
separate such a Transgressor from you. And in another Epistle, I fear that when
I come unto you, I shall not find you such as I desire, but in contentions and
tumults, and that at my coming I shall lament many of those who have sinned
before. The Judgment of the Church (as it is necessary in every multitude) was
fit that it should be conducted by one, who should preside and guide the
action, propose the matters, and collect the points to be consulted on. This
care due to the most principal and worthy psrson, was always committed to the
Bishop: And when the Churches were many, the propositions and deliberations
were made by the Bishop, first in the College of the Priests and Deacons,
which they called the Presbitery, and there were ripened, to receive afterward
the last resolution in the general Congregation of the Church. This form was
still on foot in the year 250, and is plainly seen by the Epistles of Cyprian,
who in the matter concerning those who did eat of meats offered to Idols, and
subscribe to the Religion of the Gentiles, writes to the Presbitery, that he
does not think to do any thing without their counsel, and consent of the
people, and writes to the people, that at his return he will examine the
causes and merits thereof in their presence, and under their judgment; and he
wrote to those Priests, who of their own brain had reconciled some, that they
should give an account to the people.

The Goodness and Charity of the Bishops made their Opinion for the most part
to be followed, and by little and little, was cause, that the Church, Charity
waxing cold, not regarding the Charge laid upon them by Christ, did lean the
ear to the Bishop; and Ambition, a witty Passion, which does insinuate it self
in the show of Virtue, did cause it to be readily embraced. But the principal
cause of the change was the ceasing of the Persecutions: For then the Bishops
did erect, as it were a Tribunal, which was much frequented; because as
Temporal Commodities, so Suits did increase. This Judgment, though it were not
as the former, in regard of the Form, to determine all by the Opinion of the
Church, yet it was of the same Sincerity. Whereupon Constantine seeing how
profitable it was to determine Causes, and that by the Authority of Religion,
captious actions were discovered, which the Jadges could not penetrate, made a
Law that there should lie no Appeal from the Sentences of Bishops, which should
be executed by the Secular Judge. And if, in a Cause depending before a Secular
Tribunal, in any state thereof, either of the Parties, though the other
contradict, shall demand the Episcopal Judgment, the Cause shall be immediately
remitted to him. Here the Tribunal of the Bishop began to be a common Pleading
Place, having Execution by the Ministry of the Magistrate, and to gain the name
of Episcopal Jurisdiction, Episcopal Audience, and such like. The Emperor
Valence did enlarge it; who, in the Year 365. gave the Bishop the care over all
the Prizes of vendible things: This Judicial Negotiation pleased not the good
Bishops. Possidonius does recount, that Austin, being employed herein,
sometimes until Dinnertime, sometimes longer, was wont to say, that it was a
trouble, and did divert him from doing things proper unto him; and himself
writes, that it was to leave things profitable, and to attend things
tumultuous and perplexed. And St. Paul did not take it unto himself, as being
not fit for a Preacher; but would have it given to others. Afterward, some
Bishops beginning to abuse the Authority given them by the Law of Constantine,
that was seventy years after, revoked by Horcadius and Honorius; and an
Ordination made, that they should judge Causes of Religion, and not Civil,
except both Parties did consent, and declared that they should not be thought
to have a Court: Which Law being not much observed in Rome, in regard of the
great power of the Bishops, Valentinian being in the City in the year 452. did
renew it, and made it to be put in execution. But a little after, some part of
the Power taken away, was restored by the Princes that followed; so that
Justinian did establish unto them a Court and Audience, and assigned unto them
the Causes of Religion, the Ecclesiastical Faults of the Clergy, and diverse
voluntary Jurisdictions also over the Laity. By these Degrees, the charitable
correction of Christ, did degenerate into Domination, and made Christians lose
their ancient Reverence and Obedience. It is denied in words, That
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is Dominion; as is the Secular; yet one knows not
how to put a difference between them. But St. Paul did put it, when he wrote to
Timothy, and repeated it to Titus, that a Bishop should not be greedy of gain,
nor a Striker. Now on the contrary, they made men pay for Processes, and
imprison the Parties, as is done in the Secular Court, etc.

This Degeneracy of Discipline was long since esteemed burdensome, and looked
on as the cause of innumerable troubles and grievances unto all sorts of
people: Yea, it has had no better esteem among them who had little or no
acquaintance with what is taught concerning these things in the Scripture: Only
they found an Inconsistency in it with those Laws and Privileges of their
several Countries, whereby their Civil Liberties and Advantages were confirmed
unto them. And if at any time it take place or prevail amongst Persons of more
Light and Knowledge, who are able to compare it, or the practice of it, with
the I^stitutions of Christ in the Gospel, and the manner of the Admistration
therein also directed, it greatly alienates the minds of men from the Communion
of such Churches. Especially it does so, if set up unto an exclusion of that
benign, kind, spiritual, and every way useful Discipline, that Christ has
appointed to be exercised in his Church. When Corruptions and Abuses were come
to the height in the Papacy in this matter, we know what ensued thereon.
Divines indeed, and sundry other Persons Learned and Godly, did principally
insist on the Errors and Heresies which prevailed in the Church of Rome, with
the Defilements and Abominations of their Worship. But that which alienated the
minds of Princes, Magistrates, and whole Nations from them, was the
Ecclesiastical Domination which they had craftily erectsd, and cunningly
managed unto the ends of their own Ambition, Power and Avarice, under the name
of Church-Rule and Discipline. And wherever any thing of the same kind is
continued, that a Rule under the same Pretense is erected and exercised in any
Church, after the nature of Secular Courts, by force and power, put forth in
Legal Citations, Penalties, Pecuniary Mulcts, without an open evidence of men's
being acted in what they do herein, by Love, Charity, Compassion toward the
Souls of men, Zeel for the Glory of God, and Honor of Christ, with a Design
for the Purity, Holiness and Reformation of the Members of it, that Church may
not expect Unity and Peace any longer than the terror of its Proceedings does
overbalance other Thoughts and Desires proceeding from a sense of Duty in all
that belong unto it. Yea, whatever is, or is to be the manner of the
Administration of Discipline in the Church, about which there may be doubtful
Disputations, which men of an ordinary capacity may not be able clearly to
determine; yet if the avowed end of it be not the Purity and Holiness of the
Church, and if the Effects of it in a tendency unto that End be not manifest,
it is hard to find out whence our Obligation to a compliance with it, should
arise. And where an outward Conformity unto some Church Order is aimed at
alone, in the room of all other things, it will quickly prove it self to be
nothing, or of no value in the sight of Christ. And these things do alienate
the minds of many from an acquiescencie in their Stations, or Relations to such
Churches. For the principal Enforcements of men's Obedience and Reverence unto
the Rulers of the Church, is because they watch diligently for the good of
their Souls, Heb. 13. 27.
as those that must give an Account. And if they see such set over them as give
no evidence of any such watchful Care acting its self according to those
Scripture-Directions which are continually read unto them; but rather rule them
with force and rigor, seeking theirs, not them, they grow weary of the Yoke,
and sometimes regularly, sometimes irregularly, contrive their own Freedom and
Deliverance.

It may not here be amiss to enquire into the Reasons and Occasions that have
seduced Churches and their Rulers into the Miscarriages insisted on. Now these
are chiefly some Principles with their Application that they have trusted unto;
but which indeed have really deceived them, and will yet continue so to do. And
the first of these is, that whereas they are true Churches, and thereon
entrusted with all Church Power and Privileges, they need not further concern
themselves to seek, for Grounds or Warranty to keep up all their Members unto
their Communion. For be they otherwise what they will, so long as they are True
Churches, it is their duty to abide in their Peace and Order. If any call their
Church State into question, they take no consideration of them, but how they
may be punished; it may be, destroyed, as perverse Schismatics. And they are
ready to suppose that upon an acknowledgment that they are True Churches, every
dissent from them in any thing, must needs be criminal: As if it were all one
to be a True Church, and to be in the Truth and Right in all things; a
supposition whereof, includes a Nullity in the state of those Churches which in
the least differ from them; than which, there is no more uncharitable, nor
Schismatical Principle in the world: But in the common Definition of Schism,
that it is a causeless Separation from a true Church; that term of causless, is
very little considered or weighed, by them whose Interest it is, to lay the
Charge of it on others. And hence it is come to pass, that wherever there
have been complaints of Faults, Miscarriages, Errors, Defections of Churches,
in late Ages their Counsels have only been how to destroy the Complainers, not
in the least how they should reform themselves; as though in Church Affairs,
Truth, Right and Equity, were entailed on Power and Possession. How the
Complaints concerning the Church of Rome, quickened by the Outcries of so many
Provinces of Europe, and Evidence in matter of Fact, were eluded and frustrated
in the Council of Trent, leaving all tfiings to be tried out by Interest and
force, is full well known. For they know that no Reformation can be attempted
and accomplished, but it will be a business of great Labor, Care and Trouble,
things not delightful unto the minds of men at ease. Besides, as it may
possibly ruffle or discompose some of the Chiefs in their present ways or
enjoyments; so it will as they fear, tend to their Disreputation; as though
they had formerly been out of the way, or neglective of their Duty: And this,
as they suppose, would draw after it another Inconvenience, by reflecting on
them and their Practices, as the Occasions of former Disorders and Divisions,
They choose therefore generally to flatter themselves under the Name and
Authority of the Church, and lay up their Defense and Security against an
humble painful Reformation, in a Plea that they need it not. So was it with the
Church of Laodicea of old, who in the height of her decaying condition, Rev. 3.
17.
flattered her self, That she was rich, and increased in Goods, and had need of
nothing; and knew not, or would not acknowledge, that she was wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Now it cannot but seem exceeding
strange unto men who wisely consider these things, that whereas the Churches
which were planted and watered by the Apostles themselves, and enjoyed for some
good season the presence and advantage of their infallible Guidance to preserve
them in their original purity and order, did within a few years, many of them,
so degenerate, and stand in need of Reformation, that our Lord Jesus Christ
threatened from Heaven to cast them off and destroy them, unless they did
speedily reform themselves according to his mind; that those now in the world,
ordered at first by persons fallible, and who in many things were actually
deceived, should so continue in their purity and holiness, from Age to Age, as
to stand in need of no Reformation or Amendment. Well will it be, if it prove
so at the great Day of Visitation. In the mean time it becomes the Guides of
all the Churches in the world, to take care that there do not such Decays of
Truth, Holiness and Purity in Worship, fall out under their hand in the
Churches wherein they preside, as that for them they should be rejected by our
Lord Jesus Christ; as he threatens to deal with those who are guilty of such
defections. For the state of the Generality of Churches is such at this day in
the world, as he who thinks them not to stand in need of any Reformation, may
justly be looked on as a part of their sinful Degeneracy. We are not ignorant
what is usually pleaded in Bar unto all endeavors after Church-Reformation:
For, they say, if upon the Clamours of a few humorous, discontented Persons,
whom nothing will please, and who, perhaps are not agreed among themselves, a
Reformation must instantly be made or attempted, there will be nothing stable,
firm or sacred left in the Church. Things once well established, are not to be
called into question upon every ones Exceptions. And these things are
vehemently pleaded, and urged to the exclusion of all thoughts of changing any
thing, though evidently for the better. But long continued complaints, and
Petitions of Multitudes, whose Sincerity has received as great an attestation
as Humane Nature, or Christian Religion can give, it may be deserve not to be
so despised: However the Jealousy which Churches and their Rulers ought to
have over themselves, their state and condition, and the presence of the Glory
of Christ amongst them, or its departure from them, especially considering the
fearful example of the Defection and Apostasy of many Churches, which is
continually before their Eyes, seems to require a readiness in them on every
Intimation or Remembrance, to search into their state and condition, and to
redress what they find amiss: For suppose they should be in the Right, and
blameless as to those Orders and Constitutions, wherein others dissent from
them; yet there may be such Defects and Declensions, in Doctrine, Holiness, and
the Fruits of them in the world, as the most strict observation of outward
Order will neither countenance, nor compensate: For to think to preserve a
Church by Outward Order, when its internal Principles of Faith and Holiness are
decayed, is but to do like him, who endeavoring to set a Dead Body upright,
but failing in his Attempt, concluded, that there was somewhat wanting within.

Another Principle of the same importance, and applied unto the same purpose,
is, that the people are neither able, nor fit to judge for themselves, but
ought in all things to give themselves up unto the conduct of their Guides, and
to rest satisfied in what they purpose and prescribe unto them. The imbibing of
this Apprehension, which is exceedingly well suited to be made a Covering to
the Pride and Ignorance of those unto whose Interests it is accommodated, makes
them impatient of hearing any thing, concerning the Liberty of Christians in
common, to judge of what is their Duty, what they are to do, and what they are
not to do in things Sacred and Religious. Only it is acknowledged, there is so
much Ingenuity in the management of this Principle and its Application, that it
is seldom extended by any beyond their own Concernments: For whereas the Church
of Rome has no way to maintain its self in its Doctrine and Essential Parts of
its Constitution, but by an implicit Faith and Obedience in its Sub^ects:
seeing the animating Principles of its Profession, will endure no kind of
impartial Test or Trial, they extend it unto all things as well in Matters of
Faith, as of Worship and Discipline. But those who are secure, that the Faith
which they profess will endure an examination by the Scripture, as being
founded therein, and thence educed, they will allow unto the people, at least a
Judgment of discerning Truth from Falsehood, to be exercised about the Doctrines
which they teach: But as for the things which concern the Worship of God, and
Rule of the Church, wherein they have an especial Interest and Concern, there
they betake themselves for relief unto this Principle. Now as there is more
Honesty and Safety in this latter way than in the former; so it cannot be
denied, but that there is less of ingenuity and self-consistency: For if you
will allow the people to make a judgment in and about any thing that is Sacred
or Religious, you will never know how to hit a Joint aright, to make a
separation among such things; so as to say with any pretense of Reason, about
these things they may judge for themselves, but not about those. And it is a
little too open to say, that they may exercise a Judgment about what God has
appointed, but none about what we appoint our selves. But without offense be it
spoken, this Apprehension in its whole Latitude, and under its restrictions, is
so weak and ridiculous, that it must be thought to proceed from an excess of
prejudice, if any man of Learning should undertake to patronize it. Those who
speak in these things out of Custom and Interest, without a due examination of
the Grounds and Reasons of what they affirm or deny, as many do, are of no
consideration: And it is not amiss for them to keep their distance, and stand
upon their Guard, lest many of those whom they exclude from judging for
themselves, should be found more compe^ent Judges in those Matters than
themselves. And let Churches and Church-Rulers do what they please, every man
at last will be determined in what is meet for him to do, by his own Reason and
Judgment. Churches may inform the minds of men, they cannot enforce them. And
if those that adhere unto any Church, do not do so, because they judge that it
is their duty, and best for them so to do, they therein differ not much from an
Herd of Creatures, that are called by another name. And yet a secret
Apprehension in some, that the Disposal of the Concernments of the Worship of
God, is so left and confined unto themselves, as that nothing is left unto the
people but the Glory of Obedience, without any sedulous enquiry after what is
their own duty, with respect unto that account which every one must give of
himself unto God, does greatly influence them into the neglects insisted on.
And when any of the people come to know their own Liberty and Duty in these
things, as they cannot but know it, if at all they apply their minds unto the
consideration of them, they are ready to be alienated from those who will
neither permit them to judge for themselves, nor are able to answer for them,
if they should be misled. For if the blind lead the blind, as well he that is
led, as he that leads, will into the Ditch.

Add hereunto the thoughts of some, that Secular Grandeur, and outward Pomp,
with a Distance and Reservedness from the Conversation of ordinary men, are
necessary in Ecclesiastics, to raise and preserve that popular veneration,
which they suppose to be their due. Without this it is thought Government will
not be carried on, nor the minds of men awed unto Obedience. Certain it is that
this was not the Judgment of the Apostles of old, nor of the Bishops or Pastors
of the Primitive Churches. It is certain also, that no Direction is given for
it, in any of the Sacred, or ancient Ecclesiastical Writings. And yet they all
of them abound with Instructions how the Guides of the Church should preserve
that respect which is their due. The sum of what they teach us to this purpose
is, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3.
Readiness to take up the Cross, Acts 20. 18, 19, 20, 21, 31.
in Labors, Kindness, Compassion and Zeal in the exercise of all the Gifts and
Graces of the Holy Spirit, they should excel and go before the Flock as their
Example. This way of procuring veneration unto Church Guides by worldly State,
Greatness, seeming Domination or Power, was, as far as we can find, an utter
stranger unto the primitive times: Yea, not only so, but it seems to be
expressly prohibited, Lnk. 22. 24, 25. 26.
in that Direction of our Savior unto them, for avoiding Conformity in these
things unto the Rulers of the world. But those times they say are past and
gone: There remains not that piety and Devotion in Christians, as to reverence
their Pastors, for their Humility, Graces, Labors and Gifts. The good things
of this world are now given them to be used; and it is but a Popular Levelling
Spirit that envies the Dignities and Exaltation of the Clergy. Be it so
therefore, that in any place they are justly and usefully, at least as unto
themselves, possessed of Dignities and Revenues; and far be it from us, or any
of us to envy them their Enjoyments; or to endeavor their deprivation of them:
But we must crave leave to say, that the use of them to the End mentioned is
vain; and wholly frustrate. And if it be so indeed, that Christians, or
professors of the Gospel, will not pay the Respect and Duty which they owe unto
their Pastors and Guides upon the account of their Office, with their work and
labor therein, it is an open evidence how great a necessity there is for all
men to endeavor the reduction of primitive Light, Truth, Holiness and
Obedience into Churches: For this is that which has endangered their Ruin,
and will effect it, if continued; namely, an Accommodation of Church Order and
Discipline, with the State and Deportment of Rulers, unto the Decays and
Irreligion of the people, which should have been corrected and removed by their
Reformation: But we hope better things of many Christians, whose Faith and
Obedience are rather to be imitated, than the corrupt Degeneracy of others to
be complied with, or provided for. However, it is evident that this corrupt
persuasion has in most Ages, since the days of Paulus Samosatenus, let out and
given countenance unto the Pride, Covetousness, Ambition and Vainglory of
several Ecclesiastics. For how can it be otherwise with them, who being
possessed of the Secular Advantages which some Churches have obtained in the
world, are otherwise utterly destitute of those Qualifications, which tue Names
of the places they possess, do require. And yet all this while it will be
impossible to give one single Instance, where that Respect and Estimation which
the Scripture tequires in the people toward their Spiritual Guides, were ever
ingenerated or improved by that worldly Grandeur, Pomp and Domination, which
some pretend to be so useful unto that end and purpose: For that Awe which is
put thereby on the Spirits of the common fort of men; that Terror which these
things strike into the minds of any who may be obnoxious unto Trouble and
Disadvantage from them; that outward Observance which is by some done unto
persons vested with them, with the Admission which they have thereby into an
equality of Society with great men in the world, are things quite of another
Nature. And those who satisfy and please themselves herewith, instead of that
Regard which is due unto the Officers or Guides of the Churches of Christ, from
the people that belong unto them, do but help on their Defection from their
Duty incumbent on them. Neither were it difficult to manifest, what innumerable
scandalous offenses, proceeding from the Pride and Elation of Mind that is
found among many, who being perhaps Young and Ignorant, it may be corrupt in
their Conversations, having nothing to bear up themselves withal, but an
Interest in Dignities and worldly Riches, have been occasioned by this corrupt
Persuasion. And it is not hard to judge how much is lost hereby from the true
Glory and Beauty of the Church. The people are quietly suffered to decay in
that Love and Respect toward their Pastors, which is their Grace and Duty,
whilst they will pay that outward Veneration which worldly Grandeur does
acquire; and Pastors satisfying themselves therewith, grow neglective of that
exemplary Humility and Holiness, of that Laborious Diligence in the
dispensation of the Word, and care for the Souls of the Flock, which should
procure them that Holy Respect which is due unto their Office by the
Appointment of Jesus Christ. But these things are here mentioned only on the
occasion of what was before discoursed of.

Another great Occasion of Schisms and Divisions among Christians, arises
from the Remainders of that Confusion which was brought upon the Churches of
Europe, by that general Apostasy from Gospel Truth, Purity, and Order, whereiu
they were for sundry Ages involved: Few Churches in the world have yet totally
freed themselves from being influenced by the Relics of its Disorders: That
such an Apostasy did befall these Churches, we shall not need to prove. A
supposition of it, is the foundation of the present Church State of England.
That things should so fall out among them, was of old foretold by the Holy
Ghost. 2 These. 2.
That many Churches have received a signal Deliverance from the principal Evils
of that Apostasy in the Reformation, we all acknowledge: For therein by
several ways, and in several degrees of success, a return unto their pristine
Faith and Order was sincerely endeavored. And so far was there a Blessing
accompanying of their endeavors, as that they were all of them delivered from
things in themselves pernicious and destructive to the Souls of men.
Nevertheless it cannot be denied, but that there do yet continue among them
sundry Remainders of those Disorders, which under their fatal Declension they
were cast into. Nor does there need any further proof hereof, than the
incurable Differences and Divisions that are found among them: For had they all
attained their primitive condition, such Divisions with all their Causes had
been prevented. And the Papists, upbraiding Protestants with their intestine
Differences and Schisms, do but reproach them that they have not been able in
an hundred years to rectify all those Abuses, and remove all those Disorders,
which they were inventing, and did introduce in a thousand. There is one thing
only of this Nature, or that owes it self unto this Original, which we shall
instance in, as an occasion of much Disorder in the present Churches, and of
great Divisions that ensue thereon. It is known, none were admitted unto the
fellowship of the Church in the Days of the Apostles, but upon their
Repentance, Faith, and turning unto God. The plain Story of their Preaching,
the Success which they had therein, and their Proceedings to gather and plant
Churches thereon, puts this out of the reach of all sober Contradiction. None
will say, that they gathered Churches of Jews and Gentiles, that is, whilst
they continued such, nor of open Sinners, continuing to live in their sins. An
evidence therefore, and Confession of Conversion to God, was unavoidably
necessary to the Admission of Members in the first Churches. Neither will we
ever contend with such importune Prejudices, as, under any pretenses capable of
a wrangling Countenance, shall set up against this evidence. Hence, in the
judgment of Charity, all the Members of those Churches, were looked on as
persons really justified and sanctified, as effectually converted unto God; and
as such, were they saluted and treated by the Apostles: As such, we say they
were looked on and owned; and as such, upon their Confession, it was the duty
of all men, even of the Apostles themselves, to look on them, and own them;
though absolutely in the sight of God, who alone is the Searcher of the hearts
of men, some among them were Hypocrites, and some proved Apostates. But this
Profession of Conversion unto God, by the Ministry of the Word, and the mutual
acknowledgment of each other as so converted unto God in a way of Duty, was the
foundation of holy spiritual Love and Unity among them. And although this did
not, nor could preserve all the first Churches absolutely free from Schisms
and Divisions, yet was it the most Sovereign Antidote against that Infection,
and the most effectual means for the reduction of Unity, after that by the
violent interposition of men's Corruptions and Temptations, it had been lost for
a season. Afterward in the Primitive times, when many more took on them the
profession of Christian Religion, who had not such eminent and visible
Conversions unto God, as most of those had who were changed by the Ministry of
the Apostles, that persons unfit and unqualified for that state and condition,
of being Members of Churches, might not be admitted into them, unto the
disturbance of their Order, and disreputation of their Holy Conversation, they
were for some good season kept in the condition of Expectants, and called
Catechumens, or persons that attended the Church for Instruction. In this state
they were taught the Mysteries of Religion, and trial was made of their Faith,
Holiness, and Constancy, before their Admission: And by this means was the
preservation of the Churches in Purity, Peace, and Order, provided for:
Especially were they so in conjunction with that severe Discipline which was
then exercised toward all the Members of them. But after that the Multitudes
of the Gentile world, in the times of the first Christian Emperors, pressed
into the Church, and were admitted on much easier terms than those before
mentioned, whole Nations came to claim successively the privilege of
Church Membership, without any personal duty performed, or profession made unto
that purpose on their part. And so do they continue to do in many places to
this day. Men generally trouble themselves no farther about a Title to
Church Membership and Privileges, but rest in the prepossession of their
Ancestors, and their own Nativity in such or such places: For whatever may be
owned or acknowledged concerning the necessity of a visible Profession of Faith
and Repentance, and that credible as to the sincerity of it in the judgment of
Charity, it is certain for the most part, no such thing is required of any, nor
performed by them. And they do but ill consult for the edification of the
Church, or the good of the Souls of men, who would teach them to rest in an
outward formal Representation of things, instead of the reality of Duties, and
the power of Internal Grace. And no small part of the present ruin of
Christian Religion owes it self unto this corrupt Principle. For whereas the
things of it which consist in Powers Internal, and effectual Operations of
Grace, have outward Representations of them, which from their Relation unto
what they represent, are called by the same names with them, many take up with,
and rest in these external things, as though Christianity consisted in them;
although they are but a dead Carcass, where the quickening life and Soul of
internal Grace is wanting. Thus it is in this matter, where there is a shadow
and appearance of Church Order, when the truth and substance of it is far away.
Men come together unto all the Ends of Church Assemblies where unto they are
admitted, but on no other grounds, with no other hearts, nor designs, but on
and with what they partake in any Civil Society, or jointly engage in any other
worldly Concern. And this Fundamental Error in the Constitution of many
Churches, is the occasion as of other Evils, so in particular of Divisions
among professed Christians. Hence originally was the Discipline of the Church
accommodated by various degrees to the Rule and Government of such persons, as
understood little, or were little sensible of the Nature, Power, and Efficacy
of that spiritual Discipline which is instituted in the Gospel, which thereby
at last degenerated into the outward way of Force and Power before described:
For the Churches began to be composed of such as could no otherwise be ruled.
And instead of reducing them to their Primitive Temper and Condition where unto
the Evangelical Rule was suited, there was invented a way of Government
accommodate unto that state whereinto they were lapsed, which those concerned
found to be the far easier work of the two. Hence did sincere mutual Love with
all the fruits of it begin to decay among Church Members; seeing they could not
have that tolerable persuasion of that Truth of Profession in each other which
is necessary to preserve it without Dissimulation, and to provoke it unto a due
Exercise. Hence did private spiritual Communion fail amongst them, the most
being strangers unto all the ways and means of it; yea despising and contemning
it in all the instances of its exercise; which will yet be found to be as the
Life and Soul of all useful Church Communion. And where public Communion is
only attended unto with a neglect hereof, it will quickly wither and come to
nothing: For on this occasion do all duties of Watchfulness, Exhortations and
Admonitions, proceeding from mutual Love and Care of each others condition, so
frequently recommended unto us in the Scripture, utterly cease and become
disused. Hence Members of the same Church began to converse together as men
only, or at the best Civil Neighbors; and if at all as Christians, yet not
with respect unto that especial relation unto a particular Church, 1 Cor. 12.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
wherein their usefulness as Members of the same Organical Body is required.
Hence some persons looking on these things as intolerable, and not only
obstructive of their Edification, but destructive unto all really useful
Church Communion, we ought not to wonder if they have thought meet to provide
otherwise for themselves. Not that we approve of every departure or withdrawing
from the Communion of Churches, where things continue under such disorders, but
only show what it is that occasioneth many so to do. For as there may sometimes
be just cause hereof, and persons in so doing may manage what they do
according unto Scripture-Rule; so we doubt not but that some may rashly and
precipitately, without due attendance unto all the Duties which in such
Undertakings are required of them, without that Charity and Forbearance which
no Circumstances can absolve them from, make themselves guilty of a blameable
separation. And these are some of those things which we look upon as the
General Causes or Occasions of all the Schisms and Divisions that are at this
day found among Professors of the Gospel. Whether the guilt of them will not
much cleave unto them by whom they are kept on foot and maintained, is worth
your enquiry, For so does it befall our Humane Nature, apt to be deceived and
imposed on by various Pretenses and Prejudices, that those are oftentimes
highly guilty themselves of those miscarriages, whose chiefest satisfaction and
glory consists in charging them on others. However if these things do not
absolutely justify any in a Secession from the Churches where unto they did
relate; yet they render the matter so highly questionable, and the things
themselves are so burdensome unto the minds of many, as that Divisions will
thereon undoubtedly ensue. And when it is so fallen out, to design and contrive
the reduction of all unto outward Unity and Concord, by forcing them, who on
such occasions have dissented and withdrawn themselves from the Communion of
any Church, without endeavoring the removal of these Occasions of their so
doing, and the Reformation of those abuses which have given cause thereunto, is
severe, if not unjust. But when the Lord Jesus Christ in his Care toward his
Churches, and watchfulness over them, shall be pleased to remove these and the
like Stumbling Blocks out of the way, there will, we hope, be a full return
unto Gospel-Unity and Peace among them that serve and worship him on the Earth.

In this state of things, wherever it be found, it is no wonder if the
Weaknesses, Ignorance, Prejudices and Temptations of men do interpose
themselves unto the increase and heightning of those Divisions, whose Springs
and Occasions lie elsewhere. When none of these Provocations were given them, 1
Cor. 1. 11.
yet we know there was enough in Professors themselves to bring forth the
bitter fruit of Differences and Schisms, Chap. 3. 3.
even in the days of the Apostles. How much more may we fear the like fruits
and effects from the like Principles and corrupt affections? Now the Occasions
of drawing them forth are more, Temptations unto them greater, Directions
against them less evident and powerful; and all sense of Ecclesiastical
Authority, through its abuse and maladministration, is, if not lost and
ruined, yet much weakened and impaired. But from the darkness of the minds of
men, and their unmortified affections, (as the best know but in part, nor are
they perfectly sanctified) it is, that they are apt to take offense one at
another, and thereon to judge and censure each other temerariously; and which
is worst of all, every one to make his own understanding and persuasion
thereon, the Rule of Truth and Worship unto others. All such ways and courses
are against us in the matter of Love and Union, all tending to make and
increase Divisions among us. And the Evil that is in them, we might here
declare, but that it falls frequently under the chastisement of other hands:
Neither indeed can it well meet with too much severity of reproof. Only it were
desirable that those by whom such reproofs are managed, would take care not
to give advantages of Retortion or self-justification unto them that are
reproved by them: But this they do unavoydably, whilst they seem to make their
own Judgments and Practices the sole Rule and measure of what they approve or
disallow. In what complyes with them there is nothing perverse, and in what
differs from them there is nothing sincere. And on this foundation whilst they
reprove, censuring, rash-judging and reproaching of others, with pride,
self-conceitedness, false Opinions, irregular practices in Church worship, or
any other concerns of Religion, backbiting, easiness in taking up false reports
with the like evils, as they deserve severely to be rebuked, those reproved by
them are apt to think, that they see the guilt of many of the crimes charged on
themselves, in them by whom they are reproved. So on all hands things gendor
unto farther strife; whilst every Party being conscious unto their own
sincerity, according unto the Rule of their present Light, which is the only
measure they can take of it, are ready to impeach the sincerity of them by whom
they suppose themselves causlesly traduced and condemned. This evil therefore
is to be diligently watched against by all that love Unity, Truth, Holiness, or
Peace. And seeing there are Rules and Precepts given us in the Scripture to
this purpose, it may not be unmeet to call over some of them. One Rule of this
nature and import, is that we should all of us study to be quiet, and to do our
own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
in things Civil and Sacred. Who will harm men, who will be offended with them,
whilst they are no otherwise busied in the world? And if any attempt to do them
evil, what need have they to be troubled thereat? Duty and Innocence will give
peace to a worthy soul in the midst of all storms, and whatever may befall it.
Now will any one deny, or can they, but that it is the duty, and ought to be
the business of every man to seek his own edification, and the saving of his
soul? Deny this unto any man, and you put your self in the place of God to him,
and make him more miserable than a Beast. And this, which no man can forbid, no
man can otherwise do, than according to that Light and knowledge of the will of
God which he has received: If this therefore be so attended to, as that we do
not thereby break in upon the concerns of others, nor disturb them in what is
theirs, but be carried on quietly and peaceably with an evidence in what we do,
that it is merely our own personal duty, that we are in the pursuance of; all
cause of offense will be taken away. For if any will yet be offended with men,
because they peaceably seek the savation of their own souls, or do that in
order thereunto, which they cannot but do, unless they will cast off all sense
of Gods authority over them, it is to seek occasion of offense against them,
where none are given. But when any persons are acted by a Pragmatical Curiosity
to interpose themselves in the Ways, Affairs, and Concerns of other men,
beyond what the Laws of Love, usefulness, and mutual Christian aid, do require,
tumults, disorders, vexations, strife, emulations, with a world of evils, will
ensue thereon; especially will they do so, when men are prone to dwell on the
real or supposed faults of others, which on various pretenses of pity for
their persons, or a detestation of their evils, or public reproof of them,
they will aggravate, and so on all occasions expose them to public censures,
perhaps, as they think, out of zeal to Gods glory, and a desire for the
Churches good: For the passions and interests of such persons, are ready to
swell over the bounds of modesty, sobriety and peace, though through the
blindness which all self-love is accompanied withal, they seldom see clearly
what they do. Would we therefore labor to see a beauty, desireableness and
Honor in the greatest confinement of our thoughts, words and actions, unto our
selves and our own occasions, that express Duty will admit of, it might tend
very much to the preservation of Love and Peace among Professors, for unto this
end it is prescribed unto us.

Secondly, it is strictly commanded us that we should not judge, Mat. 6. 1. 2.
that we be not judged. There is no Rule for mutual Conversation and Communion,
Luke 6. 37.
in the Scripture, that is oftener repeated, or more earnestly inculcated: Nor
is there any of more Use, Romans 14. 3. 4. 10.
nor whose Grounds and Reasons, are more evident or more cogent. Judging and
determining in our selves, Jam. 4. 12.
or divulging Censures concerning others, their Persons, States, and Conditions
toward God, their Principles as to truth and sincerity, their ways as to
Righteousness and Holiness, whether past or present, any otherwise than by the
perfect Law of Liberty, and that only when we are called thereunto in a way of
Duty, is the Poison of common Love and Peace, and the ruin of all Communion
and Society, be it of what Nature it will. For us to judge and determine
whether these or those Churches are true Churches or no, whether such Persons
are Godly or no, whether such of their Principles and actions are regular or
no, and so condemn them in our Minds, (unless where open wickedness will
justify the severest Reflections) is to speak Evil of the Law, and to make our
selves Judges of it, as well as of them who together with our selves are to be
judged by it. Nor is a judgment of that Nature necessary unto our Advantage in
the Discharge of any Duty required at our hands. We may order all our
Concernments toward Churches and Persons without making any such Judgment
concerning them. But so strong is the Inclination of some Persons unto an
Excess in this kind, that no consideration can prevail with them to cast it out
according to its desert. Whether they do it as approving and justifying
themselves in what they condemn in others, or as a thing conducing unto their
Interest, or out of Faction and an especial Love to some one Party of Men, or
some secret Animosities and hatred against others, it is a matter they seldom
well quit themselves of, whilst they are in this world. Yea so far do some
suffer themselves to be transported, as that they cannot restrain from charging
of others with the Guilt of such things as they know to be charged on
themselves, by them who pretend to be the only competent Judges in such Cases.
And so will they also reflect upon, and complain of other men for Miscarriages
by severities, in Instances exceedingly inferior, as by themselves represented,
unto what it is known they were engaged in. But men are apt to think well of
all they do themselves, or those whom they peculiarly regard, and to aggravate
whatever they conceive amiss in such as they dislike. Were it not better by
Love to cover a multitude of faults, and to leave the Judgment of Persons and
things, wherein we are not concerned, unto him who judges Righteously, and
will render unto every Man according to his works? However certain it is, that
until the Evil Fountain of bitter waters be stopped, until we cease to bless
God even the Father, and at the same time to curse Men made after the
Similitude of God, the wounds that have been given to the Love and Peace of
Professors will not be healed.

Thirdly, unto the same End are all Men forbidden to think that they have a
Dominion over the Faith of others, or that the ordering and disposal of it is
committed unto them. It is Christ alone who is the Lord of the Consciences of
his Disciples. And therefore the best and greatest of the Sons of Men, who have
been appointed by him to deal with others in his Name, 2 Cor. 1. 24.
have constantly disclaimed all thoughts of Power or Rule, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
over the Consciences or Faith of the meanest of his Subjects. How many ways
this may be done, we are filled with Experiences; for no way whereby it may be
so, has been left unattempted. And the Evil of it has invaded both Churches
and Particular Persons: Some whereof who have been active in casting of the
Dominion of others, seem to have designed a Possession of it in themselves. And
it is well, if where one Pope is rejected, many do not rise in his Place, who
want nothing but his Power and Interest, to do his work. The Indignation of
some, that others do not in all things comply with their Sentiments, and
subject themselves unto their Apprehensions and Dictates, arises from this
Presumption: And the Persecutions wherein others engage, do all grow out of the
same bitter Root. For men can no otherwise satisfy their Consciences herein,
but by a supposition that they are warranted to give measures unto the Minds
and Practices of others, that is, their Faith and Consciences, in Sacred
things. And whilst this Presumptious Supposition under any Pretense or color
possesses the Minds of Men, it will variously act its self unto the
Destruction of that Gospel Unity, which it is our Duty to preserve. For when
they are persuaded that others ought to give up themselves absolutely to their
Guidance in the things of Religion, either because of their Office and Dignity,
or because they are Wiser than they, or it may be are only able to dispute more
then they, if they do not immediately so do, especially seeing they cannot but
judge themselves in the Right in all things, they are ready to charge their
Refusal on all the Corrupt Affections, Principles and Practices, which they can
surmize, or, their supposed just indignation suggest unto them. That they are
proud, ignorant, self-conceited, wilful, factious, is immediately concluded;
and a semblance unto such Charges shall be diligently sought out, and improved.
Nothing but a deceiving Apprehension that they are some way or other meet to
have a Dominion over the Faith of their Brethren and Fellow Servants, would
prevail with men, otherwise Sober and Learned, so to deal with all that dissent
from them, as they are pleased to do.

Fourthly, All these Evils mentioned are much increased in the minds of men,
Romans 12* 3.
when they are puffed up with a conceit of their own Knowledge and Wisdom: 1
Cor. 8. 1.
This therefore we are warned to avoid, that the Edification of the Church may
be promoted, and Love preserved: For hence are very many apt to take false
measures of things, especially of themselves, and thereon to cast themselves
into many mischievous Mistakes. 2 Cor. 10* 12.
And this is apt to befall them, who for ends best known unto themselves, have
with any ordinary diligence attended to the study of Learning. For upon a
supposal of some competent furniture with Natural Abilities, they cannot but
attain some skill and knowledge that the common sort of unstudied persons are
unacquainted withal. Ofttimes indeed, their Pre-eminence in this kind, consists
in matters of very small consequence or importance. But whatever it be, it is
ready to make them think strange of the Apostles advice, 1 Cor. 3. 18.
If any man seems to be wise in this world, let him become a Fool, that he
may be wise; apt it is to puff them up, to influence their minds with a good
conceit of themselves, and a contempt of others. Hence may we see some, when
they have gotten a little skill in Languages, and through custom advantaged by
the reading of some Books, are able readily to express some thoughts, perhaps
not originally their own, presently conceit themselves to be so much wiser than
the multitude of unlettered persons, that they are altogether impatient, that
in any thing they should dissent from them: And this is a common frame with
them whose Learning and Wit being their All, do yet reach but half way toward
the useful ends of such things. Others also there are, and of them, not a few,
who having been in the ways wherein the Skill and Knowledge mentioned are
usually attained, yet through their Incapacity or Negligence, or some depraved
Habit of Mind, or course of Life, have not really at all improved in them. And
yet these also, having once attained the countenance of Ecclesiastical Offices
or Preferments, are as forward as any, to declaim against, and pretend a
contempt of that Ignorance in others, which they are not so stupid, as not to
know that the guilt of it may be reflected on themselves. However these things,
at best, and in their highest improvement, are far enough from solid Wisdom;
especially that which is from above, and which alone will promote the Peace and
Edification of the Church. Some have no advantage by them, but that they can
declare and speak out their own weakness; others that they can rail, and lie,
and falsely accuse, in Words and Language wherewith they hope to please the
vilest of men. And certain it is, that Science, which whatever it be without
the Grace of God, is but falsely so called, and oftentimes falsely pretended
unto, for this evil end of it alone is apt to lift up the minds of men above
others, who perhaps come not behind them in any useful understanding. Yea,
suppose men to have really attained a singular degree in useful knowledge and
wisdom, and that either in things spiritual and divine, or in Learning and
Sciences, or in Political p^udence; yet Experience shows us, that an hurtful
elation of mind is apt to arise from them, if the Souls of men be not well
balanced with Humility, and this evil particularly watched against. Hence
arises that Impatience of Contradiction, that Jealousy and tenderness of men's
own Names and Reputations, those sharp revenges they are ready to take of any
supposed Inroads upon them, or disrespects toward them, that contempt and
undervaluation of other men's Judgments, those Magisterial Impositions and
censures which proceed from men under a Reputation of these Endowments. The
Cautions given us in the Scripture against this frame of Spirit, the Examples
that are proposed unto us to the contrary, even that of Christ himself, the
Commands that are multiplied for Lowliness of mind, Jealousy over our selves,
the Sovereignty of God in choosing whom he pleases to reveal his Mind and Truth
unto and by, may in the consideration of them be useful to prevent such
Surprizals with Pride, Self-conceit, and contempt of others, as supposed or
abused knowledge are apt to cast men into, whereby Divisions are greatly
fomented and increased among us. But it may be these things will not much
prevail with them, who pretending a Zeal and Principle above others in
Preaching, and urging the Examples of Christ, do in most of their ways and
actings, and in some of their Writings, give us an unparalled Representation
of the Devil.

Lastly, It is confessed by all, that False Teachers, Seducers, Broachers of
Novel Corrupt and Heretical Doctrines, have caused many Breaches and Divisions
among such as once agreed in the Profession of the same Truths and Points of
Faith: By means of such persons, whether within the present Church State, or
without, there is scarce any Sacred Truth, which had formerly secured its
station and possession in the minds of the generality of Christians in this
Nation, but what has been solicited, or opposed. Some make their Errors the
principal Foundation, Rule and Measure in Communion: Whoever complies with them
therein, is of them; and whosoever does not, they avoid; so at once they shut up
themselves from having any thing to do with them that love Truth and Peace. And
where these consequents do not ensue, men's Zeal for their Errors being
overballanced by their love of, and concern in their secular interest, and
their minds influenced by the novel prevailing Opinion of a great Indifferency
in all things appertaining unto Outward Worship; yet the advancing and
fomenting of Opinions contrary unto that Sound Doctrine which has been
generally owned and taught by the Learned and Godly Pastors, and received by
the People themselves, cannot but occasion Strife, Contentions, and Divisions
among Professors. And it may be, there are very few of those Articles or Heads
of Religion, which in the beginning of the Reformation, and a long time after,
were looked on as the most useful, important and necessary parts of our
Profession, that have not been among us variously opposed and corrupted. And in
these Differences about Doctrine, lie the hidden Causes of the Animosities
whereby those about Worship and Discipline are managed. For those who have the
advantage of Law and Power on their side in these lesser things, are not so
unwise as to deal openly with their Adversaries about those things, wherein the
Reputation of established and commonly received Doctrines lie against them. But
under the pretense and shelter of contending for Legal Appointments, not a few
do exercise an Enmity against those who profess the Truth, which they think it
not meet as yet openly to oppose.

Such are the Causes, and such are the Occasions of the Differences and
Divisions in and about Religious Concerns, that are among us; by such means
have they been fomented and increased: Heightened they have been by the personal
faults and miscarriages of many of all sorts and parties. And as the reproof of
their sinful failings is in its proper season a necessary duty; so no
Reformation or Amendment of persons will give a full relief, nor free us from
the evil of our Divisions, until the Principles and ways which occasion them,
be taken out of the way.

CHAP. V.
Grounds and Reasons of Nonconformity.

HAving briefly declared our Sense concerning the general Causes and Occasions
of our Differences, and that present want of Christian Love which is complained
of by many; we shall now return to give some more particular account concerning
our Inconformity unto, and Noncompliance with the Observances and
Constitutions of the Church of England. It is acknowledged, that we do in
sundry things dissent from them; that we do not, that we cannot come up unto a
joint Practice with others in them. It is also confessed, that hereon there
does ensue an appearance of Schism between them and us, according as the
common notion of it is received in the world. And because in this distance and
difference, the Dissent unto Compliance is on our parts; there is a semblance
of a voluntary relinquishment of your Communion: And this we know exposes us,
in Vulgar Judgments and Apprehensions, unto the Charge of Schism, and
necessitateth us unto self-defence; as though the only matter in question were,
whether we are guilty of this evil or no. For that advantage have all Churches
which have had an opportunity to fix terms of Communion, right or wrong, just
or unequal; the Differences which ensue thereon, they will try out on no other
terms, but only whether those that dissent from them, are Schismatics or not.
Thus they make themselves Actors oft-times in this Cause, who ought in the
first place to be charged with In^ury; and a Trial is made merely at the hazard
of the Reputation of those, who are causelessly put upon their Purgation and
Defense. Yea with many, a kind of Possession and Multitude, do render
Dissenters unquestionably Schismatical; so that it is esteemed an unreasonable
Confidence in them, to deny themselves so to be. So deals the Church of Rome
with those that are Reformed. An open Schism there is between them; and if
they cannot sufficiently fix the Guilt of it on the Reformed, by confidence and
clamours, with the advantage of Prepossession; yet, as if they they were
perfectly innocent themselves, they will allow of no other Enquiry in this
Matter, but what consists in calling the Truth and Reputation of the other
Party, into question. It being our present condition to lie under this Charge
from many, whose Interest it is to have us thought guilty thereof, we do deny
that there is any culpable secession made by us, from the Communion of any that
profess the Gospel in these Nations, or that the blame of the appearing Schism
that is among us, can duly or justly be reflected on us; which in the Remainder
of our Discourse, we shall make to appear.

What are our Thoughts and Judgments, concerning the Church State and Interest
of the Professors of the Gospel in this Nation, we have before declared. And we
hope they are such, that in the Judgment of persons sober and impartial, we
shall be relieved from those clamorous Accusations, which are without number or
measure, by some cast upon us. Our Prayers are also continually unto the God of
Love and Peace for the taking away of all Divisions and their Causes from among
us. Nor is the satisfaction which arises from our sincerity herein, in the
least taken off, or rent from us, by the uncharitable Endeavors of some, to
rake up pretenses to the contrary. And should those, in whose power it is,
think meet to imitate the Pastors and Guides of the Churches of old, and to
follow them in any of the ways which they used for the Restoration of Unity
and Agreement unto Christians, when lost or endangered, we should not decline
the contribution of any assistance, by Counsel or Fraternal Compliance, which
God should be pleased to supply us withal. But whilst some whose advantages
render them considerable in these matters, seem to entertain no other Thoughts
concerning us, but what issue in Violence and Oppression, the principal duty
incumbent on us is, quietly to approve our Consciences unto God, that in
sincerity of heart we desire in all things to please him, and to conform our
Lives, Principles and Practices to his Will, so far as he is graciously pleased
to make it known unto us. And as for men, we hope so to discharge the Duty
required of us, as that none may justly charge us with any Disorders,
Vnpeaceableness, or other evils: For we do not apprehend that we are either the
cause or culpable occasion of those Inconveniences and Troubles which some have
put themselves unto by their endeavors for our disturbance, impoverishing and
ruin. Let none imagine, but that we have considered the Evils, and evil
Consequents of the Schisms and Divisions that are among us; and those who do
so, do it upon the forfeiture of their Charity. We know how much the great work
of Preaching the Gospel unto the Conversion of the Souls of men is impeded
thereby; as also what prejudice arises thence against the Truth, wherein we
are all agreed; with what Temptations, and mutual exasperations, to the loss of
Love, and the occasioning of many sinful Miscarriages in persons of all sorts,
do hereon ensue: But we deny that it is in our power to remove them, or take
them out of the way, nor are we conscious unto our selves of any Sin or Evil,
in what we do, or in what we do not do, by our not doing of it in the Worship
of God. It is Duty alone unto Jesus Christ, whereunto in these things we
attend, and wherein we ought so to do. And where Matters of this nature are so
circumstanced, as that Duty will contribute nothing toward Unity, we are at a
loss for any progress toward it. The Sum of what is objected unto us, (as has
been observed) is our Nonconformity, or our forbearance of actual personal
Communion with the present Church-Constitutions, in the Modes, Rites, and
Ceremonies of its Worship: Hence the Schism complained of, does ensue. Unless
this Communion be total, constant, without endeavor of any Alteration or
Reformation, we cannot in the judgment of some, be freed from the guilt hereof.
This we deny, and are persuaded that it is to be charged elsewhere: For,

First, All the Conditions of absolute and complete Communion with the Church
of England, which are proposed unto us, and indispensibly required of us,
especially as we are Ministers, are Unscriptural; such as the Word of God does
neither warrant, mention, nor intimate, especially not under any such
consideration, as necessary Conditions of Communion in or among the Churches of
Christ. We dispute not now about the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness or things in
themselves; nor whether they may be observed or no, by such as have no
conviction of any Sin or Evil in them. Neither do we judge or censure them, by
whom they are observed: Our Enquiry is solely about our own Liberty and Duty.
And what concerns them, is resolved into this one Question, as to the
Argument in hand: Whether such Things or Observances in the Worship of God, as
are wholly unscriptural, may be so made the indispensible Condition of
Communion with any particular Church, as that they by whom they are so made and
imposed on others, should be justified in their so doing; and that if any
Differences, Divisions or Schisms, do ensue thereon, the guilt and blame of
them must necessarily fall on those who refuse submission to them, or to admit
of them as such? That the Conditions proposed unto us, and imposed on us
indispensibly, if we intend to enjoy the Communion of this Church, are of this
nature, we shall afterward prove by an induction of Instances. Nor is it of
any concernment in this matter, what place the things enquired after do hold,
or are supposed to hold in the Worship of God; our present Enquiry is about
their warranty to be made conditions of Church Communion. Now we are persuaded
that the Lord Christ has set his Disciples at liberty from accepting of such
terms of Communion from any Churches in the world: And on the same Grounds we
deny, that he has given or granted unto them Authority, to constitute such
Terms and Conditions of their Communion, and indispensibly to impose them upon
all that enjoy it, according to their several capacities and concerns therein:
For,

First, The Rule of Communion among the Disciples of Christ in all his
Churches, is invariably established and fixed by himself. His Commission,
Direction and Command, given out unto the first Planters and Founders of them,
containing an obliging Rule unto all that should succeed them throughout all
Generations, has so established the Bounds, Limits and Conditions of
Church Communion, as that it is not lawful for any to attempt their Removal or
Alteration. Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Go ye, says he to them, and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all
things whatever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world. All the Benefits and Blessings, all the Comfort and use
of Church Assemblies and Communion, depends alone on the promise of the
Presence of Christ with them. Thence does all the Authority that may be
exercised in them proceed; and thence does the efficacy of what they do unto
the edification of the Souls of men, arise and flow. Now that any one may thus
enjoy the Presence of Christ in any Church, with the Fruits and Benefits of it,
no more can be required of him, but that through the Preaching of the Gospel,
and Baptism, being made a professed Disciple, he do, or be ready to do and
observe all whatsoever Christ has commanded. This has he established as the
Rule of Communion among his Disciples and Churches in all Generations: In all
other things which do relate unto the Worship of God, he has set them, and
left them at liberty, Gal. 6. 1.
which so far as it is a Grant and Privilege purchased for them, they are
obliged to make good and maintain. We know it will be here replied, that among
the Commands of Christ, it is, that we should hear the Church, and obey the
Guides and Rulers thereof: Whatever therefore is appointed by them, we are to
submit unto, and observe, even by virtue of the Command of Christ. And indeed
it is certainly true, that it is the Will and Command of the Lord Jesus, that
we should both hear the Church, and obey the Guides of it: But by virtue of
this Rule, neither the Church nor its Guides can make any thing necessary to
the Disciples of Christ, as a condition of Communion with them, but only what
he has commanded. For the Rule here laid down is given unto those Guides or
Rulers; who are thereby bound up, in the Appointments of what the Disciples are
to observe, unto the Commands of Christ. And were a Command included herein, of
obeying the Commands or Appointments of Church-Guides, and the promise of the
Presence of Christ annexed thereunto; as he had given them all his own Power,
and placed them in his Throne, so we had been all obliged to follow them
whither ever they had carried or led us, although it were to Hell it self, as
some of the Canonists; on this Principle, have spoken concerning the Pope. Here
therefore is a Rule of Communion fixed, both unto them that are to rule in the
Church, and them that are to obey. And whereas, perhaps it may be said, that if
the Rulers of the Church may appoint nothing in and unto the Communion of the
Church, but what Christ has himself commanded, then indeed is their Authority
little worth, yea, upon the matter none at all: For the Commands of Christ are
sufficiently confirmed and fixed by his own Authority; and to what end then
serves that of the Rulers of the Church? We must say, that their whole
Authority is limited in the Text, unto Teaching of men to observe what Christ
has commanded. And this they are to do with Authority; but under him, and in
his Name; and according to the Rules that he has given them. And those who
think not this Power sufficient for them, must seek it elsewhere; for the Lord
Christ will allow no more in his Churches.

To make this yet more evident, we may consider that particular Instance,
wherein the Primitive Christians had a Trial, in the Case as now stated before
us: And this was in the Matter of Mosaical Ceremonies and Institutions, which
some would have imposed on them, as a condition of their Communion in the
Profession of the Gospel: In the determination hereof, was their Liberty
asserted by the Apostles, and their Duty declared to abide therein. And this
was the most specious Pretense of imposing on the Liberty of Christians, that
ever they were exercised withal. For the Observation of these things had
countenance given unto it, from their Divine Original, and the condescending
Practice of the Apostles for a good season. That other Instances of the like
nature should be condemned in the Scripture is impossible, seeing none had then
endeavored the Introduction of any of that Nature. But a general Rule may be
established in the determination of one Case, as well as in that of many;
provided it be not extended beyond what is eminently included in that case.
Herein therefore was there a Direction given for the Duty and Practice of
Churches in following Ages; and that in pursuit of the Law and Constitution of
the Lord Christ beforementioned. Neither is there any force in the Exception,
that these things were imposed under a pretense of being commanded by God
himself: For they say, to require any thing under that Notion, which indeed he
has not commanded, is an Adding to his Command, which ought not to be
admitted: But to require things Indifferent, without that pretense, may be
allowed. But as in the former way, men add unto the Commands of God Formally,
so in this latter, they do it Materially, which also is prohibited: For in his
Worship, we are forbidden to add to the things that he has appointed, no less
than to pretend commands from him which he has not given. He therefore who
professes and pleads his willingness to observe and do in Church Communion,
whatever Christ has instituted and commanded, cannot regularly be refused the
Communion of any Church, under any pretense of his refusal to do other things,
which confessedly are not so required.

It is pleaded indeed, that no other things, as to the Substance of the Worship
of God, can or ought to be appointed, besides what is instituted by Jesus
Christ: But as to the Manner or Modes of the Performance of what he does
command, with other Rites and Ceremonies to be observed for Order and Decency,
they may lawfully be instituted by by the Rulers of the Church. Let it
therefore at present be granted, that so they may be by them who are persuaded
of the Lawfulness of those Modes, and of the things wherein they consist;
seeing that is not the question at present under agitation. Neither will this
Concession help us in our present Enquiry, unless it be also granted, that
whatever may be lawfully practiced in the worship of God, may be lawfully made
a necessary Condition of Communion in that Worship: But this will not be
granted, nor can it ever be proved. Besides, in our present Difference, this is
only the Judgment of one Party, that the things mentioned may be Lawfully
observed in and among Sacred Administrations: And thereon the Conclusion must
be, that whatever some think may be lawfully practiced in Divine Worship, may
lawfully be made an indispensible condition of Communion unto the whole. Nor
will it give force unto this Inference, that those who judge them lawful are
the Rulers and Guides of the Church, unto whose determination the Judgment of
private persons is not to be opposed: For we have showed before, that a
Judgment concerning what any one is to do or practice in the worship of God,
belongs unto every man who is to do or practice ought therein; and he who makes
it not, is brutish. And the Judgment which the Rulers of the Church are to make
for the whole, or to go before it, is, in what is c^mmanded, or not so, by
Jesus Christ, not in what is fit to be added ^hereunto by themselves. Besides
if it must be allowed that such things may be made the conditions of
Church Communion, then any who are in place of Authority, may multiply such
conditions according unto the utmost extent of their Judgments, until they
become burdensome and intolerable unto all, or really ridiculous in themselves,
as it is fallen out in the Church of Rome: But this would prove expressly
destructive unto that certain and unvariable Rule of Church Communion, which
the Lord Christ has fixed and established; whereof we shall speak again
afterward.

Neither will that Plea, which is by some insisted on in this case, yield any
solid or universal relief. It is said, that some may warrantably and duly
observe in the Worship of God, what is unduly and unwarrantably imposed on them
by others. And indeed all Controversies about Church-Constitution, Discipline,
and external Worship, are by some reduced unto these two Heads; that the
Magistrate may appoint what he pleases, and the People may observe whatever he
appoints: For as there is no Government of the Church determined in the
Scripture, it is meet it should be erected and disposed by the supreme
Magistrate, who, no doubt, upon that supposition, is only fit and qualified so
to do: And for outward worship, and the Rites thereof, both it and they are so
far indifferent, as that we may comply with whatever is imposed on us; whether
they be good, or useful, or evil, lies at the doors of others to answer about.
But this seems to rise up in express contradiction unto those Commands which
are given us, to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free;
and in these things, not to be servants of men, For what do we do less, than
renounce the Privilege of our Liberty purchased for us at an high rate and
Price, or what are we less than Servants of Men, whilst we bring our selves in
bondage unto the observation of such things in the worship of God, as we judge
neither commanded by him, nor tending unto our own Edification, but merely
because by them ordained? Moreover, suppose it be the Judgment of some, as it
is of many, that the things mentioned, though in their own nature indi^ferent,
do become unlawful unto them to observe when imposed as necessary conditions of
all Church Communion, contrary to the command and appointment of Christ? We
know this is exceedingly declaimed against as that which is perverse and
froward. For what, say many, can be more unreasonable, than that things in
their own nature indifferent should become unlawful because they are commanded?
But it is at least no less unreasonable, that things confessedly indifferent
should not be left so, but be rendered necessary unto practice, though useless
in it, by arbitrary commands. But the opinion traduced, is also much mistaken.
For although it be granted that the things themselves are indifferent in their
own nature, not capable, but as determined by circumstances, of either moral
good or evil; yet it is not granted that the observation of them, even as
uncommanded, is indifferent in the Worship of God. And although the command
does not alter the Nature, and make that which was indifferent become evil, yet
that command of its self being contrary to many divine commands and
instructions given us in the Scripture, a compliance with the things commanded
therein may become unlawful to us. And what shall they do whose judgment this
is? shall they admit of them as lawful, upon the consideration of that change
about them, which renders them unlawful? This they will not easily be induced
to give their assent unto.

Let therefore the Rule of Church Communion be observed which our Lord Jesus
Christ has fixed; and no small occasion of our strifes and divisions will be
removed out of the way. But whilst there is this contest among us, If one
pleads his readiness to do and observe whatever the Lord Christ has commanded,
and cannot be convinced of insincerity in his profession, or of want of
understanding in any known Institution of his, and thereon requires the
Communion of any Church; but others say nay, you shall observe and do sundry
other things that we our selves have appointed, or you shall have no communion
with us: as it cannot be but that Divisions and Schisms will ensue thereon; so
it will not be difficult for an indifferent by-stander, to judge on whether
side the occasion and guilt of them does remain.

Secondly, We have the Practice of the Apostles in the pursuance of the
Direction and Command of their Lord and ours, for our Guide in this Case. And
it may be well and safely thought, that this should give a certain Rule unto
the proceedings and actings of all Church-Guides in future Ages. Now they did
never make any thing unscriptural, or what they had not received by divine
Revelation, to be a condition of Communion in Religious Worship and Church
Order among Christians. For as they testified of themselves, ^ct. 6. 4.
that they would continually give themselves unto prayer, and the Ministry of
the word; so it was of old observed concerning them, that their constant labor
was for the good of the souls of men in their conversion unto God, S^crat.
H^st. lib. 5.
and edification in faith and holiness; but as for the Institution of Festivals
or Fasts, of Rites or Ceremonies to be observed in the Worship of the Churches,
they intermedled with no such things. And thence it came to pass, that in the
first entrance and admission of Observances about such things, there was a
great and endless variety in them, both as to the things themselves observed,
and as to the manner of their observation. And this was gradually increased
unto such an height and excess, as that the burden of them became intolerable
unto Christendom. Nor indeed could any better success be expected in a
relinquishment and departure from the Pattern of Church Order, given us in
their example and practice. Neither is the Plea from hence built merely on this
consideration, that no man alive, either from their Writings, or the approved
Records of those Times, can manifest that they ever prescribed unto the
Churches, or imposed on them the observance of any uninstituted Rit^, to be
observed as a measure and Rule of their Communion; but also it so fell out in
the good providence of God, that the Case under debate, was proposed unto them,
and jointly determined by them. For being called unto advice and counsel, in
the case of the difference that was between the Jewish and Gentile Converts,
and Professors, wherein the former labored to impose on the latter the
observation of Moses Institutions, as the condition of their joint Communion,
as was mentioned even now, they not only determine against any such Imposition,
but also expressly declare that nothing but necessary things (that is, such as
are so from other Reasons antecedently unto their Prescriptions and
Appointments) ought to be required of any Christians, in the Communion or
Worship of the Church. Acts 15.
And as they neither did nor would on that great occasion, in that Solemn
Assembly, appoint any one thing to be observed by the Disciples and Churches
which the Lord Christ had not commanded; so in their Direction given unto the
Gentile Believers for a temporary abstinence from the use of their Liberty in
one or two Instances whereunto it did extend, they plainly intimate, that it
was the avoydance of a present Scandal, which might have greatly retarded the
progress of the Gospel, that was the reason of that Direction. And in such
Cases it is granted, that we may in many things for a season forgo the use of
our Liberty. This was their way and Practice, this the Example which they left
unto all that should follow them in the Rule and Guidance of the Church. Whence
it is come to pass in After-Ages, that men should think themselves wiser than
they, or more careful to provide for the peace and unity of the Church, we know
not. But let the bounds and measures of Church Communion fixed in and by their
Example, stand unmoved, and many causes of our present Divisions will be taken
away. But it may be it will be offered, that the Present state of things in the
World, requires some alteration in, or variation from the precise Example of
the Apostles in this matter. The due observation of the Institutions of Christ
in such manner as the nature of of them required, was then sufficient unto the
Peace and Unity of the Churches. But Primitive Simplicity is now decayed
amongst the most; so that a multiplication of Rules and Observances is needful
for the same ends. But we have showed before, that the Accommodation of Church
Rule and Communion to the Degeneracy of Christians or Churches, or their
Secular Engagements, is no way advantageous unto Religion. Let them whose Duty
it is, endeavor to reduce Professors and Profession to the Primitive Standard
of Light, Humility, and Holiness, and they may be ordered in all Church
concerns, according to the Apostolical Pattern. Wherefore when Christians unto
the former Plea of their readiness to observe, and do, whatsoever Christ has
commanded them, do also add their willingness to comply with whatever the
Apostles of Christ have either by Precept, or Example in their own practice,
commended unto them, or did do or require in the first Churches, and cannot be
convinced of failing to make good their Profession; we do not know whence any
can derive a Warranty enabling them to impose any other conditions of communion
on them. The Institution therefore of the Lord Christ, and the Practice of the
Apostles, lie directly against the imposing of the conditions enquired about.
And first to invent them, then to impose them, making them necessary to be
observed, and then to judge and censure them as Schismatics, as enemies to Love
and Peace, who do not submit unto them, looks not unlike the exercise of an
unwarrantable Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of the Disciples of
Christ.

Thirdly, not only by their Example and Practice, but they have also
Doctrinally declared, what is the Duty of Churches, and what is the Liberty of
Christians in this matter. The Apostle Paul discourses at large hereon; Romans
14. 15. Chap. The attentive Reading of those two Chapters, is sufficient to
determine this Cause among all uninterested and unprejudiced Persons. He
supposes in them, and it is the Case which he exemplifies in sundry Instances,
that there were among Christians and Churches at that time, different
Apprehensions and Observances about some things appertaining unto the worship
of God: And these things were such, as had some seeming Countenance of a Sacred
and Divine Authority, for such was their Original Institution. Some in the
consideration hereof, judged that they were still to be observed; and their
Consciences had been long exercised in an holy subjection unto the Authority of
God in the Observance of them. Nor was there yet any express and Positive Law
erected for their Abrogation; but the ceasing of any Obligation unto their
Observance from their Primitive Institution, was to be gathered from the nature
of Gods Economy toward his Church. Many therefore continued to observe them,
esteeming it their Duty so to do. Others were persuaded and satisfied that they
were freed from any Obligation unto the owning and observance of them. And
whereas this Liberty was given them by Jesus Christ in the Gospel, they were
resolved to make use of it, and not to comply with the other sort, who pressed
Conformity upon them in their Ceremonies and Modes of Divine worship. So it may
fall out in other Instances. Some may be persuaded, that such or such things
may be Lawful for them to observe in the worship of God; they may be so unto
them, and, as is supposed, in their own Nature. On the Consideration of some
Circumstances they may judge that it is convenient or expedient to attend unto
their Observance; Lastly, all Coincidencies weighed, that it is necessary that
so they should do; and that others also that walk with them in the Profession
of the Gospel should conform themselves unto their Order and Practice. On the
other hand some there are, who because the things of the joyntpractice
required, are not appointed by Jesus Christ, nor does it appear unto them, that
he has given Power unto any others to appoint them, do not judge it expedient,
nor yet, all Circumstances considered, Lawful to observe them. Now whereas this
Case answers unto that before proposed, the Determination thereof given by the
Apostle, may safely be applied unto this also. What Rule therefore does he give
therein, which he would have attended unto, as the means for the Preservation
of Love, Peace, and Unity among them? Is it that the former sort of Persons,
provided they be the most, or have the most Power, ought to impose the Practice
of those things which they esteem Lawful and Convenient, on those who judge them
not so; when it is out of Question, that they are not appointed by Christ; only
it is pretended that they are not forbidden by him? Where indeed the Question
was about the Institutions of Christ, he binds up the Churches precisely unto
what he had received from him. But in cases of this nature, 1 Cor. 11. 23.
wherein a direct command of Christ cannot be pleaded nor is pretended, he
absolutely rejects and condemns all thoughts of such a procedure. But
supposing, that Differences in Judgment and Practice were and would be among
Christians, the Sum of his Advice is, that all Offenses and Scandals ought to
be diligently avoided; that censuring, judging, and despisings on the account
of such Differences, be cast out; that tenderness be used toward them that are
weak, and nothing severely pressed on them that Doubt; and for their different
Apprehensions and Ways, they should all walk in Peace, condescending unto, and
bearing with one another. Nothing can more evidently determine the unlawfulness
of imposing on Christians unscriptural Conditions of Communion, than do the
Discourses of that Great Apostle to this Purpose. Yea better it is, and more
agreeable unto the mind of Christ, that Persons and particular Churches, should
be left unto different Observations in sundry things relating unto Sacred
worship, wherein they cannot join with each other, nor communicate together,
endeavoring in the mean time to keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of
Peace; than that they should be enforced unto an Uniformity in the Practice of
things that have not the immediate Authority of Christ enstamped on them.
Accordingly it so fell out among them unto whom the Apostle gave these
Directions, and that suitably unto his Intention in them. For the Dissenting
Parties, agreeing in the common Faith and Profession of the Gospel, did yet
constantly meet in distinct Assemblies or Churches, for the Celebration of Holy
worship, because of the different Rites wherein they did not agree. And in this
Posture were Peace and Love continued among them, until in process of Time,
their Differences through mutual forbearance being extinguished, they Coalesced
into one Church state and Order: And the former Peace which they had in their
Distances, was deemed sufficient, whilst things were not measured nor regulated
by secular Interest or Advantages. But it is a part of our present unhappiness,
that such a Peace among Christians and particular Churches, is mistaken to have
an ill Aspect upon the concerns of some belonging unto the Church in Power,
Honor, and Revenue. But as we apprehend there is, as things are now stated
among us, a plain mistake in this surmize, so if the Glory of God, and the
Honor of the Gospel were chief in our Consultations about Church Affairs, it
would be with us of no such consideration, as to hinder us from committing
quietly the success and events of duty unto the Providence of God.

Fourthly, There was also a signal Vindication of the Truth pleaded for, in an
Instance of Fact among the Primitive Churches. There was an opinion which
prevailed very early among them, about the necessary observation of Easter, in
the room of the Jewish Passover; for the solemn commemoration of the Death and
Resurrection of our Savior: And it was taken for granted by most of them, that
the observance hereof was countenanced, if not rendered necessary unto them, by
the example of the Apostles: For they generally believed that by them it was
observed, and that it was their Duty to accommodate themselves unto their
practice; only there was a difference about the precise Time or Day, which they
were to solemnize, as the Head and Rule of their Festival; as every undue
presumption has one Lameness or other accompanying it: It is Truth alone which
is square and steady. Some therefore pleaded the example of John the Apostle
and Evangelist, who as it was strongly asserted and testified by multitudes,
kept his Easter at such a time, and by such a Rule, whom they thought meet to
follow and imitate. Others, not inferior unto them in number or Authority,
opposed unto their Time the example of Peter, whom they affirmed (on what
grounds and Reasons they know best, for they are now lost) to have observed his
Easter at another Time, and according unto a different Rule. And it is scarcely
imaginable how the Contests hereabouts troubled the Churches both of Europe and
Asia; who certainly had things more material to have exercised themselves
about. The Church of Rome embraced that Opinion, which at length prevailed over
the other, and obtained a kind of Catholicisme against that which was
countenanced only by the Authority of St. John; as that Church was always
wondrous happy in reducing other Churches unto an acquiescency in its
sentiments, as seldom wanting desire or skill dexterously to improve its
manifold advantages. Now this was that Easter to be celebrated on the Lords Day
only, and not by the Rule of the Jewish Passover, on the 14 day of the first
month, what day of the week soever it fell out upon. Hereon Victor the Bishop
of that Church, being confident that the Truth was on his side, namely that
Easter was to be observed on the Lords Day, resolved to make it a Condition of
Communion unto all the Churches; for otherwise he saw not how there could be
either Union, Peace, or Uniformity among them. He did not question but that he
had a good Foundation to build upon: For that Easter was to be observed
byvertue of Apostolical Tradition, was generally granted by all. And he took it
as unquestionable upon a current and prevalent Rumor, that the observation of
it was confined to the Lords day by the example of St. Peter. Hereupon he
refused the Communion of all that would not conform unto his resolution for the
observation of Easter on the Lords day; and cast out of Communion all those
Persons and Churches, who would observe any other day; which proved to be the
condition of the principal Churches of Asia, amongst whom the Apostle John did
longest con^erse. Here was our present case directly exemplified, or
represented so long before hand; the Success only of this fact of his,
remains to be enquired into. Now it is known unto all what entertainment this
his new Rule of Communion found among the Churches of Christ. The Reproof of
his Precipitancy, and irregular fixing new bounds unto Church Communion, was
famous in those days: Especially the R^buke given unto him, and his practice,
by one of the most Holy and Learned Persons then living, is eminently
celebrated, as consonant to Truth and Peace, by those who have transmitted unto
us the Reports of those Times. He who himself first condemned others rashly,
was for his so doing generally condemned by all. Suppose now that any Persons
living at Rome, and there called into Communion with the Church, should have
had the condition thereof proposed unto them, namely that they should assent
and declare, that the observation of Easter by Apostolical Tradition was to be
on the Lords day only; and upon their refusal so to do, should be excluded from
Communion, or on their own accords should refrain from it; where should the
Guilt of this Disorder and Schism be charged? And thus it fell out, not only
with those who came out of Asia to Rome, who were not received by that
Diotrephes; but also with sundry in that Church its self, as Blastus and
others; as what great Divisions were occasioned hereby between the Saxons and
Britains, has been by many declared. But in the Judgment of the primitive
Churches, the Guilt of these Schisms, was to be charged on them that coined and
imposed these new Rules and Conditions of Communion. And had they not been
judged by any, the pernicious consequences of this temerarious Attempt are
sufficient to reflect no inconsiderable Guilt upon it. Neither could the whole
Observance its self, from first to last, ever compensate that loss of Love and
Peace among Christians, and Churches, which was occasioned thereby; Nor has
the Introduction of such things ever obtained any better success in the Church
of God. How free the Churches were until that time, after they were once
delivered from the Attempt of the Circumcised Professors to impose upon them
the Ceremonies of Moses; from any appearance of unwritten Conditions of
Communion, is manifest unto all, who have looked into the Monuments which
remain of those times. It is very true, that sundry Christians took upon them
very early, the Observation of sundry Rites and Usages in Religion, whereunto
they had no Guidance or Direction by the word of God. For as the corrupted
Nature of Man, is prone to the Invention and use of sensible present things in
Religion, especially where Persons are not able to find satisfaction in those
that are purely spiritual, requiring great intention of mind and Affections in
their Exercise; so were they many of them easily infected by that Tincture
which remained in them from the Judaisme or Gentilism from which they were
converted. But these observances were free, and taken up by Men of their own
accord; not only every Church, but every Person, in the most of them, as far as
it appears, being left unto their own Liberty. Some Ages it was before such
things were turned into Laws and Canons; and that perhaps first by Heretics,
or at least under such a Degeneracy, as our minds and Consciences cannot be
regulated by. The Judgment therefore and Practice of the first Churches are
manifest against such Impositions.

Fifthly, upon a supposition that it should be Lawful for any Persons or
Churches to assign unscriptural Conditions of their Communion, it will follow,
that there is no certain Rule of Communion amongst Christians fixed and
determined by Christ. That this is otherwise, we have before declared, and
shall now only manifest the evil Consequences of such a Supposition. For if it
be so, no Man can claim an Admission into the Society or Communion of any
Church, or a Participation in the Ordinances of the Gospel with them, by virtue
of the Authority of Jesus Christ. For notwithstanding all his Pleas, of
submission to his Institutions, and the Observation of his Commands, every
Church may propose something, yea many things unto him, that he has not
appointed, without an admission whereof, and subjection thereunto, he may be
justly excluded from all Church Privileges among them. Now this seems not
consonant unto the Authority that Christ has over the Church, nor that Honor
which ought to be given unto him therein. Nor on the same supposition are his
Laws sufficient to rule and quiet the Consciences, or to provide for the
Edification of his Disciples. Now if Diotrephes is blamed, for not receiving
the Brethren, 3. Joh. 9, 10.
who were recommended unto the Church by the Apostle, probably because they
would not submit to that pre-eminence which he had obtained among them; they
will scarcely escape without reproof, who refuse those whom the Lord Christ
commends unto them by the Rules of the Gospel, because they will not submit
unto such new Impositions as by virtue of their Pre-eminence they would put
upon them. And what endless Perplexities they must be cast into, who have
learned in these things to call him only Lord and Master, is apparent unto all.
Baptism, with a voluntary credible Profession of Faith, Repentance and
Obedience unto the Lord Christ in his Commands and Institutions, is all the
warranty which he has given unto any of his Disciples, to claim their
Admission into his Churches, which are instituted and appointed to receive
them, and to build them up in their Faith. And if any Person who produces this
warranty, and thereon desires, according to order, the Communion of any
Church; if he may be excluded from it, or forbidden an entrance into it, unless
it be on grounds sufficient in the Judgment of Charity to evince the falseness
and hypocrisy of his Profession, little regard is had to the Authority of
Christ, and too much unto Men's own. Churches indeed may more or less insist
upon the Explicitness of this Profession, and the Evidences of its sincerity,
as they find it tend to their Peace and Edification, with a due Attendance unto
the Rule and Example left unto them in this matter, in the Gospel. And that the
exercise of this Power in any Churches may not turn to the Prejudice of any,
every Professor is allowed, with reference unto particular Assemblies, to make
his choice of the Measure he will comply withal; at least if he will make the
choice of his habitation subservient unto his Edification. Hereby the Peace and
Duty, both of Churches and private Persons are secured. And this Rule of Church
Admission and Communion, furnished Christians with Peace, Love and Unity for
many Ages, setting aside the Ruffle given them in the rashness of Victor before
mentioned. It was also rendered practicable and easy, by virtue of their
Communion as Churches among themselves: For from thence, Commendatory Letters,
supplied the Room of actual Profession in them who having been admitted into
one Church, did desire the same Privilege in any other. And on this Rule were
Persons to be received, though weak in the Faith, To. 14. 1.
thought it may be in some things otherwise minded than the generality of the
Church, Phil. 3. 15.
though babes, and unskilful, as to degrees, He. 5. 12 13, 14.
in the word of Truth. But this Rule was always attended with a Proviso, that
men did not contradict, or destroy their own Profession by an unholy
Conversation: For such Persons never were, nor ever are to be admitted unto the
especial Ordinances of the Church; and a neglect of due Attendance hereunto, is
that which principally has cast us into all our Confusions, and rendered the
Institutions of Christ ineffectual. And if this warranty which the Lord Christ
has given unto his Disciples, of claiming a Participation in all the
Privileges of his Churches, and an Admission unto a joynt-performance of all
the Duties required in them, may, upon the supposition of a Power left to
impose other Conditions of Communion on them, be rejected and rendered useless,
all Church Communion is absolutely resolved into the variable wills of Men. The
Church no doubt may judge and determine upon the Laws of Christ, and their due
Application unto particular Occasions; as whether such Persons may according to
them be admitted into their Fellowship. To deprive Churches of this Litberty,
is to take away their Principal Use and service. But to make Laws of their own,
the subject matter whereof shall be things not commanded by Christ, and to make
them the Rule of admitting professed Christians unto their Communion, is an
Assumption that cannot be justified. And it is certain, that the assuming of an
Authority by some Churches for such like Impositions, is that which has
principally occasioned many to deny them so to be; so at once to overthrow the
foundation of all that Authority, which in so many Instances they find to be
abused. And although the Church of Rome may prevail on weak and credulous
Persons, by proposing unto them an absolute Acquiescency in their Dictates and
Determinations, as the best, readiest and most facile means of satisfaction;
yet there is nothing that does more alienate wise and conscientious persons
from them, than does that unreasonable Proposal, Moreover, it is highly
probable that endless Disputes will arise on this supposition, about what is
meet and convenient, and what not, to be added unto the Scripture-Rules of
Communion. They have done so in the Ages past, and continue yet so to do. Nor
can any man on this Principle know, or probably conjecture, when he has a firm
station in the Church, or an indefensable interest in the Privileges thereof.
For supposing that he has concocted the Impositions of one Church, on the
first removal of his habitation, he may have new conditions of communion
prescribed unto him. And from this perplexity nothing can relieve him, but a
resolution to do in every place whereunto he may come, according to the manner
of the place, beit good or bad, right or wrong. But neither has the Lord
Christ left his Disciples at this Uncertainty which the Case supposes; nor
will accept of that Indifferency which is in the Remedy suggested. They
therefore who regulate their Communion with any Churches, by the firm stated
Law of their Right and Privilege, if they are not received thereon, do not by
their abstinence from it, contract the Guilt of Schism or any blameable
Division.

Moreover, upon a supposition of such a Liberty and Power to prescribe and
impose unwritten conditions of Church Communion on Christians, who, or what Law
does, or shall prescribe bounds unto men, that they do not proceed in their
Prescriptions, beyond what is useful unto edification, or unto what will be
really burdensome and intolerable unto Churches. To say that those who claim
this Power may be securely trusted with it, for they will be sure not to fall
into any such Excesses, will scarcely give satisfaction: For besides that such
a kind of Power is exceedingly apt to swell and extend it self unmeasurably,
the common Experience of Christendom lies against this Suggestion. Was not an
Excess of this kind complained of by Austin of old, when yet the observation of
Ecclesiastical Customs was much more voluntary than in after Ages; neither
were they made absolutely conditions of communion, unless among a very few? Do
not all Protestants grant and plead that the Papal Church has exceeded all
bounds of moderation and Sobriety herein; so that from thence they take the
principal warranty of their secession from it? Do not other Churches mutually
charge one another on the same account? Has not a charge of this Ex^^ss been
the Ball of Contention in this Nation ever since the Reformation? If then there
be such a Power in any, either the exercise of it is confined unto certain
Instances by some power superior unto them. or it is left absolutely, as unto
all Particulars whereunto it may be extended, unto their own Prudence and
Discretion. The first will not be asserted, nor can be so, unless the Instances
intended can be recounted, and the confirming power be declared. If the latter
be affirmed, then let them run into what Excesses they please, unless they
judge themselves that so they do, which is morally impossible that they should,
none ought ever to complain of what they do: For there is no failure in them
who attend unto their Rule; which in this case is supposed to be men's own
Prudence and Discretion. And this was directly the state of things in the
Church of Rome; whence they thought it always exceedingly unequal that any of
their Ecclesiastical Laws should be called in question; since they made them
according to their own Judgment, the sole Rule of exercising their Authority in
such things. Where is the certainty and stability of this Rule? Is it probable
that the communion and peace of all Churches, and all Christians, are left to
be regulated by it? And who will give assurance, that no one Condition directly
unlawful in it self shall be prescribed and imposed by persons enjoying this
pretended power? Or who can undertake that the number of such Conditions as may
be countenanced by a Plea of being things in their own nature indifferent,
shall not be increased until they come to be such a burden and yoke, as are too
heavy for the Disciples of Christ to bear, and unlawful for them to submit
themselves unto? May any make a Judgment but themselves, who impose them, when
the number of such things grows to a blameable excess? If others may judge, at
least for themselves, and their own practice, and so of what is lawful or not,
it is all that is desired. If themselves are the the only Judges, the case
seems very hard, and our secession from the Church of Rome scarcely
warrantable. And who sees not what endless Contests and Differences will ensue
on these Suppositions, if the whole Liberty of men's Judgments, and all
apprehensions of Duty in Professors, be not swallowed up in the Gulf of
Atheistical Indifferency, as to all the Concerns of outward worship.

The whole of what has been pleaded on this Head, might be confirmed with the
testimony of many of the Learned writers of the Church of England, in the
defense of our Secession from that of Rome. But we shall not here produce them
in particular. The sum of what is pleaded by them, is, That the Being of the
Catholic Church lies in Essentials; that for a particular Church to disagree
from all other particular Churches in some extrinsecal and accidental things,
is not to separate from the Catholic Church, so as to cease to be a Church;
but still whatever Church makes such extrinsecal things the necessary
conditions of Communion, so as to cast men out of the Church, who yield not to
them, is Schismatical in its so doing, and the Separation from it is so far
from being Schism, that being cast out of that Church on those terms only,
returns them unto the Communion of the Catholic Church. And nothing can be
more unreasonable, than that the Society imposing such conditions of communion,
should be Judge whether those conditions be just and equitable or no. To this
purpose do they generally plead our common Cause. Wherefore, from what has
been discoursed, we doubt not but to affirm, that where unscriptural conditions
of communion, indispensibly to be submitted unto and observed, are by any
Church imposed on those whom they expect or require to join in their
Fellowship, Communion and Order; if they on whom they are so imposed, do
thereon withold or withdraw themselves from the communion of that Church,
especially in the Acts, Duties and Parts of Worship, wherein a submission unto
these conditions is exdressed either verbally or virtually, they are not
thereon to be esteemed guilty of Schism; but the whole fault of the Divisions
which ensue thereon, is to be charged on them who insist on the necessity of
their Imposition.

That this is the condition of things with us at present, especially such as
are Ministers of the Gospel, with reference unto the Church of England, as it
is known in its self, so it may be evidenced unto all, by an enumeration of the
Particulars that are required of us, if we will be comprehended in the
Communion and Fellowship thereof.

For 1. It is indispensibly enjoined that we give a solemn Attestation unto the
Liturgy, and all contained in it, by the subscription or declaration of our
Assent and Consent thereunto; which must be accompanied with the constant use
of it in the whole Worship of God. As was before observed, we dispute not now
about the Lawfulness of the use of Liturgies, in the public Service of the
Church; nor of that in particular which is established among us by the Laws of
the Land. Were it only proposed, or recommended unto Ministers for the use of
it in whole or in part, according as it should be found needful unto the
edification of their people, there would be a great Alteration in the case
under consideration. And if it be pretended, that such a Liberty would produce
great diversity, yea and confusion in the Worship of God, we can only say, that
it did not so of old, when the Pastors of Churches were left wholly to the
exercise of their own Gifts and Abilities in all Sacred Administrations. But it
is the making of an Assent and Consent unto it, with the constant use of it, or
attendance unto it, a necessary condition of all Communion with the Church,
which at present is called into question. It will not, we suppose, be denied,
but that it is so made unto us all, both Ministers and People; and that by such
Laws both Civil and Ecclesiastical, as are sufficiently severe in their
Penalties. For we have Rules and Measures of Church Communion assigned unto us,
by Laws merely Civil. Were there any color or pretense of denying this to be
so, we should proceed no farther in this Instance; but things are evidently and
openly with us as here laid down. Now this condition of communion is
unscriptural; and the making of it to be such a condition, is without warranty
or countenance from the word of God, or the practice of the Apostolical and
Primitive Churches. That there are no footsteps of any Liturgy, or prescribed
Forms for the administration of all Church-Ordinances to be imposed on the the
Disciples of Christ in their Assemblies, to be found in the Scripture, no
intimation of any such thing, no direction about it, no command for it, will,
we suppose, be acknowledged. 1 Timothy 2. 1.
Commanded indeed we are to make Prayers and supplications for all sorts of men
in our Assemblies, to instruct, Acts 20. 28.
lead, guide, and feed the Flock of Christ, to administer the holy Ordinances
instituted by him, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
and to do all these things decently and in order. The Apostles also describing
the work of the Ministry in their own attendance unto it, affirm that they
would give themselves continually unto Prayer and the Ministry of the Word.
Act. 6. 4.
But that all these things should be done (the Preaching of the word only
excepted) in and by the use or reading of a Liturgy, and the prescribed Forms
of it, without variation or receding from the Words and Syllables of it in any
thing, that the Scripture is utterly silent of. If any one be otherwise minded,
it is incumbent on him to produce Instances unto his purpose. But withal he
must remember, that in this case it is required not only to produce a warranty
from the Scripture for the use of such Forms or Liturgies, but also that Rules
are given therein, enabling Churches to make the constant attendance unto them,
to be a necessary condition of their communion. If this be not done, nothing is
offered unto the Case as at present stated. And whatever confidence may be made
use of herein, we know that nothing unto this purpose can be thence produced.
It is pleaded indeed that our Savior himself composed a Form of Prayer, and
prescribed it unto his Disciples: But it is not proved that he enjoined them
the constant use of it in their Assemblies, nor that they did so use it, nor
that the repetition of it should be a condition of communion in them, though
the owning of it as by him proposed, and for the Ends by him designed, may
justly be made so; least of all is it, or can it be proved, that any Rule or
just encouragement can hence be taken for other men, who are neither Jesus
Christ nor his Apostles, but weak and fallible as our selves, to compose entire
Liturgies, and impose the necessary use of them in all the worship of the
Church.

Neither is there the least countenance to be obtained unto such Impositions,
from the practice or example of the first Churches. Liturgies themselves were
an Invention of after-Ages, and the use of them now enquired after of a much
later date. For those which pretend unto Apostolical antiquity, have long since
been convicted to be spurious and feigned: Nor is there scarce any Learned man
who has the confidence to assert them to be genuine. And on a supposition that
so they are, no tolerable reason can be given why the use of them should be
neglected, and such others taken up as are of a most uncertain Original. The
first condition therefore of communion proposed unto us, is not only
unscriptural, which is sufficient unto our present Argument, but also destitute
of any ancient Example or Usuage among the Churches of Christ, to give
countenance unto it. This if we admit not of, if we attend not unto, we are not
only refused communion in other things, but also excommunicated, or cast out of
the whole communion of the Church, as many are at this day; yea some are so,
not only for refusing compliance with the whole of it in general; but for not
observing every particular Direction belonging unto it (as might be manifested
in Instances) of no great importance. If therefore any Divisions or Schisms do
ensue among us on this account; that some indispensibly require an Assent and
Consent unto the Liturgy, and all things contained in it, as the condition of
complete Church Communion, or a necessary attendance on the whole Religious
worship thereby performed, and therein prescribed, which others refuse to admit
of as such, and thereon forbear the communion proposed unto them, it is evident
from the Rules laid down, where the guilt of them is to be charged. And we do
not discourse of what any may do among themselves, judging it meet for their
edification, nor of what a Civil Law may constitute with respect unto public
places, Employments and Preferments, but only where lies the lin, and evil,
that attends Divisions arising on these Impositions, and which, by their
removal, would be taken away. And there seems to be an aggravation of this
Disorder, in that not only all men are refused communion, who will not submit
unto these Terms of it; but also they are sought out and exposed unto severe
Penalties, if they will not admit of them, though expressly contrary to their
Consciences and Persuasions.

2. Canonical Submission unto the present Ecclesiastical Government of the
Church, and the Administration of the Discipline thereof, in their hands by
whom the Power of it is possessed, with an Acquiescency therein, are to the
same purpose required of us, and expected from us. Who these are, and what are
the Ways and Means of their Administrations, we shall not repeat, as unwilling
to give offense unto any. We cannot but know how, and in what sense these
things are proposed unto us, and what is expected from us thereon. Neither dare
we give another sense of them in our minds, than what we judge to be the sense
and intention of them who require our submission and obedience unto them. It is
not certainly their design nor mind, that we should look on the Offices of the
Church as unwarrantable, and on their Rule as inconvenient, so as to endeavor
a Reformation in the one, and of the other. It is such a conformity they
intend, as whereby we do, virtually at least, declare our approbation of all
these things in the Church, and our acquiescency in them. Neither can we be
admitted to put in any Exception, nor discharge our Consciences by a plain
Declaration of what we dislike or dissent from, or in what sense we can submit
unto any of these things. We take it therefore for granted, that in the
conformity required of us, we must cordially and sincerely approve the p^esent
Ecclesiastical Government, and the Administration of Church Discipline thereby.
For it is the profession of our Acceptance of it, as proposed unto us; and if
we acquiesce not therein, but express an uneasiness under it, we do it at the
hazard of the Reputation of our Sincerity and Honesty in conforming. Now this
condition of communion with the Church of England, is also unscriptural; and
consequently unlawful to be made so. This is by many now plainly acknowledged:
For they say there is no Government determined in the Scripture. But this now
in force amongst us, is erected by the Authority of the Magistrate, who has
supreme power in things Ecclesiastical: And on that ground a lawful Government
they plead it to be, and lawful to be exercised, and so also by others to be
submitted to. But we have now sundry times declared that this is not our
present Question. We enquire not whether it be Lawful or no, or on what account
it may be so esteemed, or how far it may be submitted unto, or wherein: But we
say the professed acknowledging of it with submission unto it, as the
Government of the Church, is required of us as a necessary condition of our
communion. If they are not so give us liberty to declare our sense concerning
it, without prejudice. And if it be so, then may we refuse this condition, as
unscrptural. For in the case of Conformity, there is not only a submission to
the Government required, but expressly (as was said) an approbation of it, that
it is such as it ought to be. For in Religious things our practice declares a
cordial approbation; as being a part of our Profession, wherein we ought to be
sincere. Some again make some Pleas, that Bishops, and some Government by them,
are appointed by the Apostles; and therefore a submission unto them may be
justly required as a condition of communion. For we will not now dispute, but
that whatever is so appointed* may be so required; although we believe that
every particular Instance of this nature, is not rigidly to be insisted on, if
it belong not unto the Essentials of the Church, and it be dubious to some
whether it be so appointed or no. But yet neither does an admittance of this
Plea, give us any relief in this matter. For suppose it should or might be
proved, that there ought to be, according to the mind of Christ in all
Churches, Bishops with a preeminence above Presbyters in Order or Degree; and
that the Rule of the Church does principally belong unto them that are so; yet
will not this Concession bear an application to the present Question, so as to
afford us any Relief. For the granting of things so dubious and questionable,
can never give them such an evidence of Truth and firmitude in the Church, as
to warrant the making of them necessary conditions of communion unto all
Christians. Neither does it follow from any thing that pretends to fall under
Scripture Proof, that such Bishops should be Diocesan; that they should depend
on Archbishops over them; that they should assume the whole power of
Church-Rule and Discipline into their hands; that they should administer it by
Chancellors, Archdeacons, Commissaries, and the like; that this should be done
by Presentiments, or Indictments, Citations, Processes, Litigious Pleadings,
after the manner of Secular or Civil Courts, to the Exclusion of that Rule and
Discipline which the Gospel directs unto, with the management of it in Love and
Brotherly compassion in the Name and by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But these things we shall not in particular insist upon, for the Reason before
given. This we must say, that take the whole of the Government, and the
Administration thereof together, which by the conformity required of us we must
testify our Approbation of, and Acquiescence in, or we deal hypocritically
with them that require it of us; and we know it to be so far unscriptural, as
that an acknowledgment of it, and submission unto it, cannot duly and justly be
made a necessary condition of communion unto us. It may be it will be said,
that submission unto the Government of the Church, is not so much a condition
of communion with it, as it is that wherein our communion it self with it, does
consist; and it is but a Fancy to think of communion with a Church without it.
But this is otherwise; as appears in those Churches where all Rule and
Government being left in the hand of the Civil Magistrate, there communion is
merely spiritual in the Administration of Evangelical Ordinances. And might but
that be admitted, which, Nature, Reason, the Law of the Christian Faith, and
Gospel-Obedience, do require, namely, that Church Fellowship and Communion be
built upon men's own Judgment and Choice; and this would go a great way toward
the pacification of our Differences. But if this be so, and that all
Church Communion consists in submission to the Government of it, or at least
that it does so principally, it becomes them by whom it is owned and avowed so
to do, to take care, that, that Government be derived from the Authority of
Christ, and administered according to his Mind, or all Church Communion,
properly so called, will be overthrown.

Thirdly, We are required to use and observe the Ceremonies in Worship which
the present Church has appointed, or does use and observe. This also is made a
necessary condition of Communion unto us. For many are at this day actually
cast out of all Communion for not observing of them. Some are so proceeded
against for not observing of Holy days; some for not Kneeling at the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper* some for not using the Sign of the Cross in Baptism; and
what would become of Ministers that should neglect or omit to wear the Surplice
in Sacred Administrations, is easy to conjecture. But these things are all of
them unwritten and unscriptural. Great and many indeed have been the Disputes
of learned men, to prove that although they have no Divine Institution, nor yet
example of Apostolical or Primitive practice, yet that they may be Lawfully
used for Decency and Order in the Worship of God. Whether they have evinced
what they aimed at, is as yet undetermined. But supposing in this Case all to
be as they would pretend, and plead that it should be, yet because they are all
granted to be Arbitrary inventions of men, and very few of those who make use
of them are agreed what is their proper use and signification, or whether they
have any or no, they are altogether unmeet to be made a necessary condition of
Communion. For enquiry may be made, on what Warranty, or by what Rule they may
be appointed so to be? Those who preside in, and over the Churches of Christ,
do so in his Name, and by his Authority. And therefore they can impose nothing
on them as a Condition of their Communion together, but what his Name is upon,
or what they have his Authority for: And it will be dangerous to set his Seal
unto our own Appointments. For what men think meet to do themselves in the
matters of the House of God and his Worship, it may be measured and accepted
with him according to their Light and Design. But for what they impose on
others, and that under no less penalty than the deprivation of the outward
Administration of all the Privileges procured for them by Jesus Christ, they
ought to have his Warrant and Authority for. And their Zeal is to be bewailed,
who not only cast men out of all Church Communion, so far as in them lies, for
a refusal to observe those voluntarily imposed Ceremonies in sacred Worship,
but also prosecute them with outward force to the Ruin of them and their
Families; and we cannot but wonder that any should as yet think meet to make
use of Prisons, and the destruction of men thereby, as an Appendix of their
Ecclesiastical Discipline, exercised in the highest severity, on no greater
Occasions than the omission of the observance of these Ceremonies. Whether such
proceedings are measured by present Inte^est, or the due consideration of what
will be pleasing to the Lord Jesus Christ at the last day, is not difficult to
determine.

Fourthly, As we are Ministers there is in some cases required of us under the
same penalty, an Oath of Canonical obedience. We need not labor to prove this
to be unscriptural; nor, to avoid provocations, shall at present declare the
Rise, Nature and Use of it, with the fierce Digladiations that have formerly
been about it. We can look upon it no otherwise* but as that which is contrary
to the Liberty, and unworthy of the Office of a Minister of the Gospel.

We know not any thing else which is required of us unto the end mentioned,
unless it be of some a Subscription unto the Articles of Religion. And this,
because the Scripture enjoins unto all a Consent unto sound Doctrine, and a
Form of wholesome words, may be admitted so far as those Articles concern only
Points of Faith; But whereas there is annexed unto them, and enjoined with
other things, an Approbation of all those Instances of Conditions of Communion,
before insisted on, a Subscription unto the whole becomes of the same Nature
with the things themselves therein approved of.

These are the Conditions of Communion with the Church of England, which are
proposed unto us, and which we are indispensibly to submit unto* if we intend
to be partakers thereof; and these are all which we know, of that nature. That
any of these are in particular prescribed in the Word of God, much less that
they can derive any Warranty from thence to be made necessary conditions of
Church Communion, will not we suppose be pretended by any. If therefore any
Divisions do ensue on the refusal of some to admit of these Conditions, the
Guilt of them cannot by any Rule of Scripture, or from any example of the first
Churches, be charged on them who make that refusal. Other groundless
Accusations and Charges we value not; for this is but Man's Day, the Judgment
whereof we neither stand nor fall unto. Yea, we esteem our selves obliged, in
all peaceableness and sobriety to bear witness against such impositions, and
unto that Liberty wherewith the Lord Christ has made his Churches and
Disciples free. And if once things were come unto that state, that men would
assign no other Terms of Church Communion, than what Christ has appointed, it
would quickly appear where the guilt of our Divisions would remain, if any such
Divisions would yet remain. But so long as there is a desire to make the Wills
and Wisdoms of some men, fallible even as others, the Rule and measure of
obedidience in spiritual things, an end of strife and contention among
Christians, will be expected in vain. And this we say, with hearts in some
measure sensible, and pained, to see the Body of Christ torn in pieces by the
lusts, passions, and carnal interests of men. Could we contribute any thing to
the healing of the Wounds and Ruptures that are amongst Christians, provided it
may have a consistency with the mind of Christ, and the Duty we owe unto him,
(as indeed nothing else will really contribute any thing thereunto) we should
with all readiness and faithfulness give up our best endeavors therein. And
where we can do nothing else, we hope we shall bear with Patience those
disdainful Reproaches which the Pride of men blown up by a confluence of
secular perishing advantages, prompts them to pour out upon us, for our
noncompliance with their Impositions.

Secondly, By the Conformity required of us, we must consent unto the Omission
of sundry Duties, which are made so unto us by the Command and Appointment of
Jesus Christ. If we are at any time hindered in the discharge of any necessary
Duty by others, we have somewhat to plead in our own excuse: But if we our
selves voluntarily consent to the neglect or omission of them, we cannot avoid
the guilt of sin. And the worst way whereby such a consent may be expressed, is
by compact and agreement with others; as though it were in our Power to bargain
with other men, what Duties we will observe, and what we will omit in the
Worship of God. Now in the Conformity required of us, we are to give this
consent, and that as it were by Compact and Agreement, which deprives us of all
pretense of excuse in our omissions. It is no time afterward to plead that we
would discharge such Duties, were we not hindered or forbidden. We have our
selves antecedently and voluntarily renounced a concern in such forbidden
Duties. For no man can honestly conform, but it is with a declared Resolution
to accept of all the Terms and Consequents of it, with an Approbation of them.
Under this Notion it is, that we look on Conformity; and what others apprehend
thereby, or understand therein, who seem to press men to conform unto what they
do not approve, we know not. If then there be any omission of known Duties
inseparably accompanying our Conformity, that thereby we solemnly consent unto.

This therefore we are obliged to refuse, because without sin in the voluntary
neglect and omission of Duty, we cannot comply with it; which therefore can be
no Schism in us, nor what might in any way render us blameable. The Lord Christ
has prescribed no such Law of Unity and Peace unto his Churches, as that his
Disciples should be bound constantly to neglect any known Duty, which they owe
to himself for their sakes. Nor do his Institutions interfere, that the
observance of any one, should exclude a due attendance unto another. Neither
does he by his commands, bring any one into a necessity of doing that which is
evil, or of omitting any thing that is required of him in the way of Duty.
However therefore we value Church-Peace and Union, we dare not purchase it, by
an Abrenunciation of any Duty we owe to Jesus Christ, nor would an Agreement
procured on such Terms be of any use unto us, or of advantage to the Church its
self. Wherefore that compliance in Church communion which would be obstructive
of any necessary Duties, is not by the Lord Christ enjoined us, and therefore
its omission cannot be culpable in us, but it would its self be our sin:
Especially would it be thus, where the Duties so to be omitted, are such as are
incumbent on us, by virtue of especial Office, wherein we are peculiarly
required to be faithful. It remains therefore only* that we declare wherein
we should by conformity engage unto the omission of such Duties as are
indispensibly required of us. And this we shall do in some few Instances.

(1) Every Minister of the Gospel has by the Appointment of Jesus Christ, the
whole immediate Care of the Flock, whereof he is Overseer, committed unto him.
That no part hereof which belongs unto their Edification is exempted from him,
Acts 20. 17. 28.
the Charge that is given unto him, and the Account which will be expected from
him, 1 Timothy 3. 5.
do sufficiently evidence. For as Ministers are called Overseers, Rulers, 1
Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Guides, Pastors, and the like; so are they commanded to feed the Flock, to
take the Oversight of it, and to Rule the House of God, Heb. 5. 17.
a discharge of all which must come into their Account. Nor is there any word
spoken in the whole Scripture, relating to the Rule and Government of the
Church, which is not spoken principally with respect unto them. Nor is there
the least Intimation of an Exemption of any Part of the Discipline of the
Gospel, from their Office or Care. If it be pretended that there is, let the
Places be produced wherein such an Exemption is made, or any Instances of it
among the first Churches, and they shall be considered; for hitherto no such
thing has been attempted, that we know of. Nor is it at all concluded, from
the Plea, that some are appointed unto a Superior Degree above others in the
Rule of the Church. For a man may have the whole Rule of his Flock committed
unto him, although he should be obliged to give an Account unto others of his
Discharge thereof. It is therefore the Duty of all Ministers of the Gospel, not
only to to Teach, Instruct and Preach to their Flocks, but to go before them
also in Rule and Government, and in the Exercise of the Spiritual Discipline
appointed in the Gospel, in the Order wherein it is appointed for their
Edification. The keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are committed unto them, or
they are not: If they are not, by what Authority do they take upon them to open
and shut in the House of God, in Ministerial teaching, and authoritative
Administration of sacred Ordinances? For these things belong unto the Authority
which is given by Christ under the Metaphorical Expression of the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; the Reason of the Allusion and its Application, being
obvious. And if these are not received by any, they are Usurpers, if they
undertake to administer unto the Church authoritatively in the Name of Jesus
Christ. If they are given or granted unto them, how may it be made to appear
that they are so, for the Ends mentioned only, but not for the Rule and
Government of the Church, which also belongs unto them? where is the Exception
in the grant made to them? where are the Limits assigned unto their Power, that
they shall exercise it in some concerns of the Kingdom of Heaven, but not in
others? And whereas the greatest and most necessary Parts of this Power, such
as are Ministerial Teaching, and the Administration of the Sacraments, are
confessedly committed unto them, how comes it to pass that the less should be
reserved from them? For whereas the former are necessary to the very Being of
the Church, the latter are esteemed by some scarcely to belong unto it. To say
that Bishops only receive these Keys, and commit or lend the Use of them to
others, for such Ends and Purposes as they are pleased to Limit, is both
foreign to the Scripture, and destructive of all Ministerial Power. And if
Ministers are not the Ministers of Christ, but of Men; if they have not their
Authority from him, but from others; if that may be parcelled out unto them
which they have from him, at the Pleasure of any over them, there needs not
much contending about them or their Office.

Besides, the Relation of these things one to another is such, as that if they
are absolutely separated, their Efficacy unto Edification will be exceedingly
impaired, if not destroyed. If those who have the Dispensation of the word
committed unto them, have not Liberty and Authority; if it be not part of their
Office, Duty, to watch over them unto whom it is dispensed, and that
accompanied with Spiritual weapons, Mighty through God, toward the fulfilling
of the Obedience of some, and the revenging of Disobedience in others; if they
have no Power to Judge, admonish or Censure them that walk unanswerably to the
Doctrine of the Gospel preached unto them, and whose Profession they have taken
upon them; they will be discouraged in the pursuit of their work, and the Word
it self be deprived of an helpful Means appointed by Christ himself to farther
its Efficacy. And those who shall content themselves with the Preaching of the
Word only, without an Enquiry after its Success in the Minds and Lives of them
that are committed to their Charge, by virtue of that Care and Authoritative
Inspection which indeed belongs to their Office, will find that as they do
discharge but one Part of their Duty, so they will grow cold and Languid
therein also. And when there has been better Success, as there has, where
some against their wills have been hindered by Power from the Exercise of the
Charge laid on them by Christ in this matter, making up as they were able by
private Solicitude and Persuasion, what they were excluded from attending unto
in public Ministerial Acts, it has been an Effect of especial favor from
God, not to be ordinarily expected on the account of any Rule. And thence it
is, that for the most part things openly and visibly do fall out otherwise; the
People being little reformed in their Lives, and Preachers waxing cold and
formal in their work. And if the Censures of the Church, are administered by
them who preach not the Word unto the People, they will be weak and enervous as
unto any Influence on the Consciences of Men. Their minds indeed may be
affected by them, so far as they are attended with outward Penalties; but how
little this tends unto the Promotion of Holiness, or the Reformation of Men's
Lives, Experience does abundantly testify. Church Discipline and Censures are
appointed merely and solely, to second, confirm, and establish the word, and to
vindicate it from abuse and contempt, as expressing the sense that Jesus Christ
has of them by whom it is received, and of them by whom it is despised. And it
is the word alone which gives Authority unto Discipline and Censures. Where
therefore they are so separated, as that those by whom the Word is administered,
are excluded from an Interest in the Exercise of Discipline; and those unto
whom the Administration of Discipline is committed, are such as neither do, nor
for the most part ought to preach the word, it cannot be, but that the Efficacy
and success of them both will be impeded.

It is so also as to the Administration of the Sacraments, especially that of
the Supper of the Lord. These are the principal Mysteries of our Religion, as
to its external Form and Administration; the Sacred Rites whereby all the
Grace, Mercy, and Privileges of the Gospel are sealed and confirmed unto them
who are in a due manner made partakers of them. About them therefore, and their
orderly Administration, did the Primitive Church always use their utmost care
and diligence: And these in an especial manner did they make use of, with
respect unto them, to whom they were to be communicated. For they feared,
partly, lest men should be made partakers of them to their disadvantage, being
not so qualified, as to receive them to their benefit; as knowing, that where
persons through their own defaults, obtain not Spiritual profit by them, they
are in no small danger of having them turned into a Snare; and partly, that
these holy and sacred Institutions themselves might neither be profaned,
contaminated, nor exposed unto contempt. Hence, of those who gave up their
Names unto the Church, and took upon them the Profession of the Gospel, the
greatest part were continued for a long season under their Care and Inspection,
but were not admitted into the Society of the Church in those Ordinances, until
upon good trial they were approved. And if any one after his Admittance, was
found to walk unanswerably unto his Profession, or to fall into any known Sin,
whence Offense did ensue among the Faithful, he was immediately dealt withal in
the Discipline of the Church; and in case of Impenitency, separated from the
Congregation. Nor did the Guides or Pastors of the Churches think they had any
greater Trust committed unto them, than in this, that they should use their
utmost Care and Diligence, that persons unmeet and unworthy might not be
admitted into that Church-Relation, wherein they should have a right to
approach unto the Table of the Lord; and to remove from thence, such as had
demeaned themselves unworthy of that communion. This they looked on as
belonging unto their Ministerial Office, and as a Duty required of them in the
discharge thereof, by Jesus Christ. And herein they had sufficient Direction,
both in the Rule of the Word, as also in the Nature of the Office committed
unto them, and of the work wherewith they were entrusted, For all Ministers are
Stewards of the Mysteries of Christ, of whom it is required that they should be
faithful. Now as it belongs unto a faithful Steward to distribute unto the
Household of his Lord the provision which he has made for them, and allows unto
them, in due season; so also to keep off those from partaking in them, who
without his Masters Order and Warrant, would intrude themselves into his
Family, and unjustly possess themselves of the Privileges of it. In these
things does the Faithfulness of a Steward consist. And the same is required in
Ministers of the Gospel, with respect unto the Household of their Lord and
Master, and the Provision that he has made for it. These therefore being
undeniably parts of of the duty of faithful Pastors or Ministers, it is evident
how many of them we must solemnly renounce a concernment in, upon a compliance
with the conformity, in matter and manner, required of us. Neither are these
Duties such as are of light importance; or such as may be omitted without any
detriment unto the Souls of men. The Glory of Christ, the Honor of the Gospel,
the Purity of the Church, and its Edification, are greatly concerned in them.
And they in whose minds a neglect of these things is countenanced by their
attendance unto some outward Forms and Appearances of Order, have scarcely
considered him aright, with whom they have to do. Some therefore of these
Duties we shall instance in. First, It is the Duty of all faithful Ministers of
the Gospel, to consider aright who are so admitted into the Church, as to
obtain a Right thereby unto a Participation of all its Holy Ordinances. Take
care they must, that none who have that Right granted them by the Law of
Christ, be discouraged or excluded; nor any altogether unworthy admitted. And
hereunto, as it is generally acknowledged, a credible Profession of Repentance,
Faith and Obedience, that is of those which are sincere and saving, is
required. To neglect an Enquiry after these things, in those that are to be
admitted unto the Table of the Lord, is to prostitute the Holy Ordinances of
the Gospel unto contempt and abuse; and to run cross to the constant practice
of the Church in all Ages, even under its greatest degeneracy. And the Right
Discharge of this Duty, if we may be allowed to be in earnest in spiritual
things; if it be believed, that it is internal Grace and Holiness, for the sake
whereof, all outward Administrations are instituted, and celebrated; is of
great weight and importance to the Souls of men. For on the part of persons to
be admitted, if they are openly and visibly unworthy, what do we thereby, but
what lies in us, to destroy their Souls? It cannot be, but that their hardening
and impenitency in sin, will be hazarded thereby. For whereas they have granted
unto them the most Solemn Pledge of the Lord Christ's Acceptance of them, and
of his Approbation of their state toward God, that the Church is authorized to
give; what reason have they to think that their condition is not secure, or to
attend unto the Doctrine of the Church, ^ressing them to look after a change
and relinquishment of it? For although the administration of the Sealing
Ordinances does not absolutely set the Approbation of Christ unto every
individual person made partaker of them; yet it does absolutely do so to the
Profession which they make. They witness in the Name of Christ, his Approbation
of it, and therewithal of all persons according to their real Interest in it,
and answering of it. But those who in no considerable Instances do answer this
Profession, can obtain nothing unto themselves but an occasion of hardening, and
rendering them secure in a state of Impenitency. For tell men whilst you please
of the necessity of Conversion to God, of Reformation and a holy Life, yet if
in the course of their Unholiness, you confirm unto them the Love of Christ,
and give them Pledges of their salvation by him, they will not much regard your
other Exhortations. And thence it is come to pass in the world, that the
conformity (worth that we contend about ten thousand times over) which ought to
be between the Preaching of the Word, the Adninistration of the Sacraments, and
the Lives of them who are Partakers of them, is for the most part lost. The
Word still declares, that without Regeneration, without saving Faith,
Repentance and Obedience, none can enter into the Kingdom of God. In the
Adninistration of the Other Ordinances, there is an abatement made of this
rigorous determination, and men have their salvation assured unto them without
a credible profession, yea, or a pretense of these Qualifications: And the
Lives of the most who live in the enjoyment of these things, seem to declare,
that they neither believe the one, nor much regard the other.

In the mean time, the Church it self, as to its Purity, and the holiness of
its communion, is dammaged by the neglect of a careful inspection into this
Duty: For it cannot be, but that Ignorance, Worldliness, and Profaneness will
spread themselves as a Leprosy over such a Church; whence their communion will
be of very little use and advantage unto Believers. And hereby do Churches,
which should be the Glory of Christ, by their expression of the Purity,
Holiness and excellency of his Person and Doctrine, become the principal Means
and Occasions of his Dishonor in the world; Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
and he that shall read that Christ loved his Church, and gave himself* for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word;
that he might present it unto him self a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish;
will be much to seek after the Effects of this Design of Christ in his Love and
Death, if he measure them by what appears in Churches under the power and
influence of this neglect. Nor do those who plead for the continuance of things
in such a state without Reformation, sufficiently consider the Representation
that the Lord Christ made of himself, when he was about to deal with his
Churches, some of which were overtaken with carelessness and negligence in this
matter: And yet has he therein laid down a Rule, as to what kind of
proceedings Particular Churches are to expect from him in all Generations. And
it is a matter of no small Amazement, that any Churches dare approve and
applaud themselves in such a state of impurity and defection, as is evidently
condemned by him, in those primitive patterns. Do men think he is changed, or
that he will approve in them, what he judged and condemned in others? Or do
they suppose he minds these things no more; and because he is unseen, that he
sees not; But we shall all find at length that he is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever; and that as the Judge of all, he stands at the door.

Now this Duty, by conformity we renounce a concernment in, so as to attend
unto it, by virtue of Ministerial Authority; whence the guilt of all the evil
consequents thereof before mentioned, must fall on us. For it is known, that a
mere shadow of the work of this Duty, and not so much as a shadow of Authority
for it, would be left unto us: For what is allowed in case of a sudden
emergency, upon an Offense taken by the whole Congregation at the wickedness of
any, (which is instructed beforehand, that this ought to be no matter of
offense unto them) as it may be it cannot be proved ever to have been observed
in any one Instance, so the allowed exercise of it would yield no relief in
this case. And if any one should extend the Rule beyond the interpretation that
is put upon it by the present current administration of Church Discipline,
there is no great question to be made what entertainment he would meet withal
for his so doing. And it is to no purpose to come into the Church, as it were
on purpose to go out again. And if instead of dealing with the Souls and
Consciences of men, in the Name and Authority of Christ, as Stewards of his
Mysteries, any can content themselves, to be Informers of Crimes unto others,
we desire their pardon, if we cannot comply with them therein. And this is the
Sum of what at present we are pleading about. It is the duty of Ministers of
particular Churches, to judge and take care concerning the fitness of them,
according unto the Rules of the Gospel, and the Nature of the Duty required of
them, who are to be admitted into the Fellowship of the Church, and thereby
unto a participation of all the holy Ordinances thereof. This Charge the Lord
Christ has committed unto them, and hereof will require an Account from them.
Upon the neglect, or right discharge of this Duty, Consequents of great moment
do depend; yea the due attendance unto it, has a great Influence into the
Preservation of the Being of the Church, and is the Hinge whereon the
well-being of it does turn. But the power of exercising Ministerial Authority
in a just attendance unto this Duty, we must renounce in our conformity, if we
should submit thereunto. For we have showed before, that after we have
conformed, we can pretend no excuse from what is enjoined us, or forbidden unto
us by virtue thereof, all being founded in our own voluntary act and consent.
Hence the guilt of this Omission must wholly fall on us, which we are not
willing to undergo.

There are we know many Objections raised against the committing of this Power
and Trust unto the Ministers of particular Congregations. Great Inconveniences
are pretended as the consequents of it. The Ignorance and Unfitness of most
Ministers for the discharge of such a Trust, if it should be committed unto
them, the Arbitrariness and partiality which probably others will exercise
therein, the Yoke that will be brought on the people thereby, and disorder in
the whole, are usually pleaded to this purpose, and insisted on.

But 1. This Trust is committed unto some or other by Christ himself, and it is
necessary that so it should be. Never did he appoint, nor is it meet, nor was
it ever practiced in the Primitive Church, that every one should at his
pleasure, on his own presumptions, intrude himself into a participation of the
holy things of the House of God. The consideration of Men's Habitations, with
their Age, and the like, are of no consideration with respect unto any Rule of
the Gospel. Either therefore it must be left unto the pleasure and will of
every man, be he never so ignorant, wicked or profligate, to impose himself on
the communion of any Church of Christ, or there must be a Judgment in the
Church, concerning them who are to be admitted unto their communion.

2. From the first planting of Christian Religion, those who preached the
Gospel unto the conversion of the Souls of men; were principally entrusted with
this Power, and it was their duty to gather them who were so converted, into
that Church Order and Fellowship wherein they might partake of the Sacred
Mysteries, or solemn Ordinances of the Christian Worship. And this course of
proceeding continued uninterrupted, with some little variation in the manner of
the exercise of this Power and Duty, until Corruption had spread it self over
the face of the whole professing Church in the world: But still a shadow and
resemblance of it was retained, and in the Papal Church it self to this day,
particular Confessors are esteemed competent Judges of the meetness of their
Penitents for an admission unto the Sacraments of their Church. And who shall
now be esteemed more meet for the discharge of this duty, than those who
succeed in the Office and Work of Preaching the Word, whereby men are prepared
for Church-Society? And as it is a thing utterly unheard of in Antiquity, that
those who dispensed the Word unto the Illumination and Conversion of men,
should not have the power of their disposal as to their being added to the
Church, or suspended for a time, as there was occasion; so it is as uncouth,
that those who now sustain the same Place and Office unto the several
Congregations attending on their Ministry, should be deprived of it.

3. If there be that Ignorance and Disability in Ministers, as is pretended,
the blame of it reflects on them by whom they are made. And we are not obliged
to accommodate any of the Ways or Truths of Christ unto the Sins and Ignorance
of men. And if they are insufficient for this work, how come they to be so
sufficient for that which is greater, namely to divide the Word aright unto all
their Hearers? But we speak of such Ministers as are competently qualified
according to the Rule of the Gospel, for the discharge of their Office; and no
other ought there to be. And such there are, blessed be God, through the
watchful care of our Lord Jesus Christ over his Church, and his Supplies of the
Gifts of his Spirit unto them. And such as these know it is their Duty to
study, meditate, pray, ask Counsel and advice of others, perhaps of more Wisdom
and Experience than themselves, that they may know how in all things to behave
themselves in the House of God. Nor will God be wanting unto them who in
sincerity seek direction from him, for the discharge of any Duty which he calls
them unto. Other security of regular, orderly, and useful proceedings in this
matter, Christ has not given us; nor do we need: For the due Observance of his
Appointments, will not fail the attaining of his Ends; which ought to be ours
also.

4. The Judgment and acting of the Church Officers in the Admission of persons
into the complete Society of the Faithful, is not arbitrary, as is pretended.
They have the Rule of the Scripture, which they are diligently to attend unto.
This is the entire Rule which the Lord Christ has left unto his Church, both
for their Doctrine and Discipline: Whatever is beyond this, or beside it, is
not his, nor owned by him. What is not done according to this Rule, is of no
force in the Consciences of men, though it may stand, until lawfully recalled,
for the preservation of outward Order. And whatever Arbitrariness may be
supposed, in making a judgment upon the Rule of the Word, or in the Application
of its rule unto the present Case, it must abide in some or other. And who
shall be thought more meet, or able to make a right determination thereon, than
those whose Duty it is, and who have the advantage to be acquainted with all
Circumstances belonging to the Case proposed. Besides, there is the Judgment of
the Church, or the Congregation it self, which is greatly to be regarded. Even
in the Church of England a suspension of any from the Lords Supper, is allowed
unto the Curate, upon the Offense of the Congregation; which is a sufficient
evidence, that a Judgment in this Case is owned to be their due: For none can
take Offense, but upon a Judgment of the Matter at which he is offended; nor in
this case, without a right to determine that some Offenses ought to debar
Persons from a participation of the holy Ordinances; as also what those
Offenses are. This therefore is to be considered as an Aid and Assistance unto
Ministers in the discharge of their Duty. It is the Church into whose communion
persons are to be admitted. And although it be no way necessary, that
determinations in this Case should be always made by Suffrage, or a Plurality
of Votes in the Body of the Church; yet if the Sense or Mind of the
Congregation may be known, or is so, (upon the Enquiry that ought to be made
unto that purpose) that any persons are unmeet for their communion, it is not
convenient they should be received; nor will their Admission in this case be of
any advantage to themselves or the Church. The Light of Reason, and the
Fundamental constitutive Principles of all Free Societies, such as the Church
is, ascribe this Liberty unto it; Acts 9. 26, 27, 28.
and the Primitive Church practiced accordingly: So also is the judgment and
Desire of the Congregation to be considered in the admission of any, To. 14. 1.
if they are made known to the Guides of it. For it is expected from them, they
should confirm their Love unto them without dissimulation, as Members of the
same Body; and therefore in their approbation of what is done, their Rulers
have Light and Encouragement in their own Duty. Besides, there is appointed,
and ought to be preserved a communion among Churches themselves: By virtue
hereof, they are not only to make use of mutual Aid, Advice and Counsel,
antecedently unto a actings of Importance; but each particular Church is upon
just demand to give an account unto other Churches of what they do in the
Administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel among them; and if in any thing
it has mistaken or miscarried, to rectify them upon their Advice and
Judgment. And it were easy to manifest how through these Means and Advantages,
the Edification of the Church, and the Liberty of Christians, is sufficiently
secured, in that discharge of Duty which is required in the Pastors of the
Churches, about the Admission of persons unto a Participation of holy
ordinances in them.

5. This Duty therefore, must either be wholly neglected, which will
unavoidably tend to the corrupting and debauching of all Churches, and in the
end unto their Ruin; or it must be attended unto by each particular Church
under the conduct of their Guides and Rulers; or some others must take it upon
themselves. What has been the issue of a Supposal, that it may be discharged
in the latter way, is too well known, to be insisted on: For whilst those who
undertake the Exercise of Church Power, are such as do not dispense the Word,
or preach it unto them, toward whom it is to be exercised, but are strangers
unto their spiritual state, and all the Circumstances of it; whilst they have
no way to act or exercise their presumed Authority, but by Citations,
Processes, Informations and Penalties, according to the manner of Secular
Courts of Judicature in Causes Civil and Criminal; and whilst the
Administration of it is committed unto men, utterly unacquainted with, and
inconcerned in the Discipline of the Gospel, or the preservation of the Church
of Christ in Purity and Order; and whilst herein, many, the most, or all of
them who are so employed, have thereby outward Emoluments and Advantages, which
they do principally regard; the due and proper care of the right Order of the
Churches, unto the Glory of Christ, and their own Edification, is utterly
omitted and lost. It is true, many think this the only decent, useful and
expedient way for the Government of the Church, and think it wondrous
unreasonable that others will not submit thereunto, and acquiesce therein. But
what would they have us do? or what is it that they would persuade us unto? Is
it that this kind of Rule in and over the Church, has Institution given it in
the Scripture, or countenance from Apostolieal Practice? Both they and we know,
that no pretense of any such Plea can be made: Is it, that the first Churches
after the Apostles, or the Primitive Church, did find such a kind of Rule to be
necessary, and therefore erected it among themselves? There is nothing more
remote from Truth. Would they persuade us, that as Ministers of the Gospel, and
such as have, or may have the care of particular Churches committed unto us,
that we have no such concernment in these things, but what we may solemnly
renounce, and leave them wholly to the mannagement of others? We are not able
to believe them. The Charge that is given unto us, the Account that will be
required of us, the nature of the Office we are called unto, continually
testify other things unto us. Wherefore we dare not voluntarily engage into
the neglect or omission of this Duty, which Christ requires at our hands, and
of whose neglect we see so many sad Consequents and Effects. The Lord Christ,
we know has the same Thoughts, and makes the same Judgment of his Churches, as
he did of old, when he made a solemn Revelation and Declaration of them: And
then we find that he charged the Failings, Neglects, and Miscarriages of the
Churches principally upon the Angels or Ministers of them. And we would not
willingly by our neglect, render our selves obnoxious unto his Displeasure, nor
betray the Churches whereunto we do relate, unto his just indignation, for
their declension from the Purity of his Institutions, and the vigor of that
Faith and Love, which they had professed. We should moreover by the Conformity
required of us, and according to the Terms on which it is proposed, engage our
selves against the exercise of our Ministerial Office and Power, with respect
unto them who are already Members of Particular Churches. For this we carry
along with us, that by Conforming we voluntarily consent unto the whole state
of Conformity, and unto all that we are to do, or not to do, by the Law
thereof. Now it is not to be expected, that all who are duly initiated or
joined unto any Church, shall always walk blameless according unto the
Evangelical Rule of obedience, without giving offense unto others. The state of
the Church, is not like to be so blessed in this World, that all who belong
unto it should be constantly and perpetually inoffensive. This indeed is the
Duty of all, but it will fall out otherwise. It did so amongst the Primitive
Churches of old, and is not therefore otherwise to be expected amongst us, on
whom the ends of the world are come, and who are even pressed with the Decays
and Ruins of it. Many Hypocrites may obtain an admission into Church
Societies, by the strictest Rules that any can proceed upon therein: And these
after they have known and professed the ways of Righteousness, may, and often
do turn aside from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, and fall again
into the Polutions of the world. Many good men, and really sincere Believers,
may through the power of Temptations, be surprised into faults and sins,
scandalous to the Gospel, and offensive to the whole Congregation, whereof they
are Members. Has the Lord Christ appointed no Relief in and for his Churches
in such Cases; 1 Cor. 5. 1, 6, 7.
no way whereby they may clear themselves from a participation in such
impieties, 2 Cor. 2. 6.
or deliver themselves from being looked on as those who give countenance unto
them, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
as they who continue in this Communion may and ought to be; Mat. 16. 18.
no Power whereby they may put forth from among them, the old Leaven which
would otherwise infect the whole; Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, Rev. 2 2.
no way to discharge themselves and their Societies of such Persons as are
impenitent in their Sins? No Means for the awakening, conviction, Humiliation,
and Recovery of them that have offended; no way to declare his Mind and
Judgment in such Cases, with the Sentence that he denounces in Heaven against
them that are impenitent? If he has done none of these things, it is evident,
that no Churches in this world can possibly be preserved from disorder and
Confusion. Nor can they by Love and the Fruits of an holy Communiou, be kept in
such a condition, as wherein he can be pleased with them, or continue to walk
amongst them: For let men please themselves whilst they will, with the Name of
the Church, it is no otherwise with them, where Persons Obstinately and
impenitently wicked, and whose Lives are wholly discrepant from the Rule of the
Gospel, are suffered to abide without control. But if he has made the
Provision enquired after in this Case, as it is evident that he has; both the
Authority he has granted unto his Church for these Ends, his Commands to
exercise it with Care and Watchfulness, with the Rules given them to proceed
by, with the known End of all Instituted Churches for the Promotion of
Holiness, being all open and plain in the Scripture; it must then be enquired,
unto whom this Trust is firstly committed, and of whom these Duties are
principally required.

For Private Members of the Church, what is their Duty, and the way how they
may regularly attend unto the Discharge of it according to the Mind of Christ,
in case of scandalous Sins and Offenses among them, they are so plainly and
particularly laid down and directed, as that setting aside the Difficulties
that are cast on the Rule herein, by the extremely forced and unproveable
exceptions of some interested Persons; that none can be ignorant of what is
required of them, Mat. 18. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And a Liberty to
discharge their Duty herein, they are bound by the Law of Christ in due Order
to provide for. If they are abridged hereof, and deprived thereby of so great a
Means of their own Edification, as also of the usefulness required in them
toward the Church, whereof they are Members, it is a spiritual Oppression that
they suffer under. And where it is voluntarily neglected by them, Lev. 19. 17.
not only the Guilt of their own, but of other Men's sins also lies upon them. 1 John 2. 9, 10. and ^. 15.
Neither is their own Guilt small herein; For suffering sin to abide on a
Brother without reproof, is a fruit of hatred in the Interpretation of the Law;
and this hatred is a sin of an heinous Nature, in the sense of the Gospel. The
Duty also of the whole Church in such Cases is no less evidently declared. For
from such Persons as walk disorderly, and refuse to reform, on due Admonition,
they are to withdraw, and to put from amongst them such obstinate Offenders; as
also previously thereunto, to watch diligently least any root of bitterness
spring up among them, whereby they might be defiled. And hereunto also are
subservient all the Commands that are given them to exhort and admonish one
another, that the whole Church may be preserved in Purity, Order, Holiness and
Faithfulness. But the chief enquiry is, with whom rests the Principal Care and
Power, according to the Mind of Christ, to see the Discipline of the Church in
Particular Congregations exercised, and to exercise it accordingly. If this
should be found to be in the Ministers, and through their neglect in the
Administration of it, Offenders be left in their sins and Impenitency, without
a due Application of the means for their Healing and Recovery; if the Church
its self come to be corrupted thereby, and to fall under the Displeasure of
Jesus Christ; as these things, in one Degree or other, more or less will ensue
on that neglect, it will not turn unto their Comfortable Account at the great
Day. That this is their Duty, that this Authority and Inspection is committed
unto them, the Reasons before insisted on, in the Case of Admission, do
undeniably evince. And if those Ministers who do Conscientiously attend unto
the Discharge of their Ministerial Office toward particular Flocks, would but
examine their own hearts by the Light of open and plain Scripture Testimonies,
with the Nature of their Office, and of the work they are engaged in, there
would need little arguing to convince them, of what Trust is committed unto
them, or what is required from them. If the Consciences of others are not
concerned in these things, if they have no Light into the Duty which seems to
be incumbent on them, their Principles and Practices, or as we think mistakes
and neglects, can be no Rule unto us. What we may be forbidden, what we may be
hindered in, is of another Consideration. But for us voluntarily to engage unto
the Omission of that Duty, which we cannot but believe that it will be required
of us, is an Evil which we are every way obliged to avoid.

There are also sundry Particular Duties, relating unto these that are more
general, which in like manner, on the Terms of Communion proposed unto us, must
be foregone and omitted. And where by these means or neglects some of the
Principal ways of Exercising Church Communion are cast out of the Church, some
of the means of the Edification of its Members are wholly lost, and sundry
Duties incumbent on them are virtually prohibited unto them, until they are
utterly grown into disuse, it is no wonder if in such Churches where these
Evils are inveterate and Remediless, Particular Persons do peaceably provide
for their own Edification by joining themselves unto such Societies as wherein
the Rule of the Gospel is more practically attended unto. It is taken for
granted that the Church is not corrupted by the wicked Persons that are of its
Communion; nor its Administrations defiled by their Presence and Communication
in them; nor the Edification of others prejudiced thereby, because it has been
so said by some of the Ancients; 1 Cor. 5. 6, 9, 10.
though whether suitably unto the Doctrine of the Apostles or no, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6.
is very questionable. But suppose this should be so; yet where wicked Persons
are admitted, without Distinction or Discrimination, unto the Communion of the
Church where they are tolerated therein, without any procedure with them, or
against them, contrary to express Rules of the Scripture given to that purpose;
so that those who are really Pious among them can by no means prevail for the
Reformation of the whole, they may, not only without breach of Charity,
impairing of Faith or Love, or without the least suspicion of the Guilt of
Schism, forsake the Communion of such a Congregation, to join unto another,
where there is more Care of Piety, Purity, and Holiness; but if they have any
Care of their own Edification, and a due Care of their Salvation, they will
understand it to be their Duty so to do.

And we may a little touch hereon once for all. The General End of the
Institution of Churches, as such, is the visible mannagement of the Enmity on
the part of the seed of the Woman, Christ the Head, and the Members of his Body
mystical, against the Serpent and his Seed. In the pursuit of this End, God
ever had a Church in the world, separate from persons openly profane, doing the
work of the Devil their Father. And there is nothing in any Church
Constitution, which tends unto, or is compliant with, the mixing and
reconciling these distinct seeds, whilst they are such, and visibly appear so
to be. And therefore as the Types, Prophecies and Promises of the Old
Testament, did declare that when all things were actually brought unto an Head
in Christ Jesus, the Churches and all things that belong unto it should be
Holy; that is, visibly so; Isa. 26. 2.
so the Description generally, and uniformally given us of the Churches of the
New Testament, Ezekiel. 43. 12.
when actually called and erected, is, Chap. 44. 9.
that they consisted of Persons called, sanctified, justified, ingrafted into
Christ; or Saints, Believers, Levit. 11. 44.
faithful ones, purified and separate unto God. Such they professed themselves
to be, Romans 1. 6.
such they were judged to be by them that were concerned in their Communion; 1
Cor. 1. 1, 2.
and as such they engage themselves to walk in their Conversation. Chap. 12. 13.
By what Authority so great a Change should be now wrought in the Nature and
Constitution of Churches, Phil 1. 4
that it should be altogether indifferent of what sort of persons they do
consist, Col. 2. 11.
we know not. Yea, to speak plainly, we greatly fear that both the Worship and
Worshipers are defiled, 2 Timothy 2. 22.
where open impenitent sinners are freely admitted unto all sacred
Administrations, without control. And we are sure, that as God complains
that his Sanctuary is polluted, when there are brought into it, Ezekiel 44. 1.
strangers uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh; so the true
Members of the Church are warned of the Evil and dangers of such defiling
mixtures, 1 Cor. 5. 6.
and charged to watch against them.

We might yet further insist on the great evil it would be in us, Heb. 12. 15,
16.
if we should give a seeming outward Approbation unto those things, and their
use, which we cannot but condemn, and desire to have removed out of the Worship
of God. And moreover, there is, as we believe, an Obligation upon us, to give a
Testimony unto the Truth about the Worship of God, in his Church, and not
absolutely to hide the Light we have received therein under a Bushel. Nor would
we render the Reformation of the Church absolutely hopeless, by our professed
compliance with the Things that ought to be reformed. But what has been
pleaded already is sufficient to manifest, that there neither is, nor can be a
Guilt of Schism charged either on Ministers or People who withold themselves
from the Communion of that Church, or those Churches, whereof the things
mentioned are made Conditions necessary and indispensible; and wherein they
must be denied the Liberty of performing many Duties made necessary unto them
by the Command of Jesus Christ. And as the rigid Imposition of unscriptural
Conditions of Communion, is the principal Cause of all the Schisms and
Divisions that are among us; so let them be removed and taken out of the way,
and we doubt not, but that among all that sincerely profess the Gospel, there
may be that peace, and such an Agreement obtained, as in observance whereof,
they may all exercise those Duties of Love, which the strictest Union does
require. These we profess our selves ready for, so far as God shall be pleased
to help us in the Discharge of our Duty; as also to renounce every Principle or
Opinion whereof we may be convinced that they are in the least opposite unto,
or inconsistent with* the Royal Law of Love, and the due exercise thereof. If
men will continue to charge, accuse or revile us, either out of a causeless
distaste against our persons, or Misunderstanding of our Principles and ways,
or upon uncertain Reports, or merely prompted thereunto, through a vain elation
of mind arising from the Distance wherein, through their Secular Advantages,
they look upon us to stand from them; as we cannot help it, so we shall
endeavor not to be greatly moved at it: For it is known, that this has been
the Lot and Portion of those who have gone before us, in the Profession of the
Gospel, and sincere endeavors to vindicate the Worship of God from the
Disorders and Abuses that have been introduced into it; and probably will be
theirs who shall come after us. But the whole of our care is, that in godly
simplicity and sincerity we may have our conversation in the World, not
corrupting the Word of God, nor using our Liberty as a cloak of maliciousness,
but as becomes the Servants of God.

But perhaps it will yet be pleaded, that this is not the whole which we are
charged withal: For it is said that we do not only withdraw our selves from
the communion of the Church of of England, but also that we assemble in
separate Congregations for the Celebration of the whole Worship of God; whereby
we evidently make a Division in the Church, and contract unto our selves the
guilt of Schism; For what can there be more required thereunto. But what would
those who make use of* this Objection have us to do? would they have us starve
our souls, by a wilful neglect of the means appointed for their nourishment? Or
would they have us live in a constant omission of all the Commands of Christ?
By them, or those whose Cause they plead, we are cast out and excluded from
Church Communion with them, by the unscriptural Conditions of it which they
would force upon us. The Distance between us that ensues hereon, they are the
Causes of, not we; for we are ready to join with them, or any others, upon the
Terms of Christ and the Gospel. And do they think it meet that we should
revenge their fault upon our selves, by a voluntary abstinence from all the
ways and means of our edification? Does any man think that Jesus Christ leaves
any of his Disciples unto such a condition, as wherein it is impossible they
should observe his Commands and Institutions without sin? That we should join
in some Societies, that in them we should assemble together for the worship of
God in him, and that we should in them do and observe whatever he has
appointed, we look upon as our indispensible Duty, made so unto us by his
Commands. These things, say some, you shall not do with us, if you will do no
more; and if you do them among your selves, you are Schismatics. But this is a
severity, which we know we shall not meet with at the last Day. We stand at the
Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ.

It will, it may be, be demanded, by what Warrant or Authority we do assemble
our selves in Church Societies for the Administration of Gospel Ordinances; and
who gave us this Authority? We answer, That it is acknowledged there is a
Difference between them and us, so that with them we cannot enjoy the Worship
of God. But of this Difference we are not the Cause, nor do give occasion to
any blameable Divisions, by our Principles or Practices. Where the Cause is
found, there the guilt remains. This being the state of things with us, it is
fond to imagine that any Professors of the Gospel do absolutely want a Warranty
or Authority to obey Jesus Christ, to observe his Commands, and to serve him
according to his revealed Will. His Command in his Word, his Promise of the
acceptance of them, and of his presence among them, in all the Acts of their
holy obedience; the assistance and guidance of his holy Spirit, which he
affords graciously unto them; are a sufficient Warranty and Authority for what
they do in express compliance with his Commands, and more they will not plead a
power for. Where the Spirit and Word of Christ are, there is his Authority.
And this is no otherwise committed unto men, but to enable them to act
obedientially toward him, and Ministerially toward others. And were Church
Actings considered more with respect unto the Obedidience that in them is
performed unto Christ, which is their first and principal Consideration, it
would quickly be evident whence men might have Authority for their performance.
And by the same means are we directed in their Order and Manner. Besides the
Ministers who go before the people in their Assemblies, are all of them (so far
as we know) solemnly set apart unto their Office and Work, according unto what
Christ has appointed; and their Duty it is, to teach unto all men the good
ways of Christ, and to go before them who are convinced and persuaded by them,
in their practice. These things has their Lord and Master required of them,
and an account concerning them will he call them unto at the last Day. A
Dispensation is committed unto them, and a necessity is thence incumbent on
them to preach the Gospel; and who shall excuse them if they neglect so to do?
For that all those who are Ministers of the Gospel, are called to preach the
Gospel, and that diligently; every one, according as he has received the Gift
of the Grace of God; is out of question with them that do believe the Gospel:
And of the Stewardship which is committed unto them herein, are they to give an
Account. And we do know that it is a fearful thing for sinners, that is, wilful
neglecters of his Commands, to fall into the hands of the living God. Our Lord
Jesus Christ also has testified beforehand, that he who sets his hand to
this Plough, and looks back again, is not fit for the Kingdom of God. He alone
who calls them to this work, can discharge them of it; and that either by the
Rule of his Word, or his Providence. And when men are invincibly hindered, as
many are at this day, it is their suffering, but not their sin. Otherwise none
can absolve them from the Duty they owe to Jesus Christ in this matter; and
that Debt which they owe to the Souls of men, in undertaking the work of the
Ministry. Some indeed suppose, or pretend to suppose, that a Prohibition given
them by Superiors, forbidding them to preach, though not by, nor according unto
any Rule of the Gospel, does discharge them from any Obligation so to do, that
it shall be no more their Duty. It would do so no doubt, had they received no
other command to preach the Gospel, nor from any other Authority, than that of
and from those Superiors by whom they are forbidden. But being persuaded that
they have so from him who is higher than the highest, they cannot acquiesce in
this Discharge, nor being bought with a price, can they now be Servants of men.
But by whom are they thus forbidden to preach? It will be supposed, that the
Church which differs from them, and which originally makes it self a part in
these Differences, by the conditions of communion which it would impose upon
them, is no competent Judge in this case: Nor will their Prohibitions, who
apparently thereby revenge their own Quarrel, influence the Consciences of them
that dissent from them. For we speak not of what will or may take place; but
what the Consciences of men will or may be concerned in. By the Civil
Magistrate they are not forbidden to preach, that we know of: It is true, they
are prohibited to preach in the Legal Public Meeting Places or Churches; and
these places being in the power and care of the Magistrate, it is meet his
Terms and conditions of their use should be accepted of, or his Prohibition
observed, or his Penalty quietly undergone, where a peaceable occasion is made
use of contrary unto it. As to other places, Ministers are not absolutely
forbid to preach in them; no such power is as yet assumed or exercised: Only
the Manner of Assemblies for Sacred Worship, and the Number of them that may
assemble, are regulated by Laws for Secular Ends, or Civil Security; and that
under express Penalties incurred on a contrary practice. But the Consciences of
Ministers cannot be concerned in such Laws, so far as to be exempted by them
from the Obligation that lies upon them from the command of Christ to preach
the Gospel. This they are commanded by him to do, and others know the penalties
from men, under the danger whereof they must attend unto them. Besides the
reason of these Legal Prohibitions, so far as they do extend, are taken, from
Civil considerations alone; namely, of the Peace and quiet of the Nation; and
not from any Scripture or Religious Rules. And were these Prohibitions only
temporary, or occasional, suited unto such Emergencies as may give countenance
unto their necessity, there might be a proportionable compliance with them. But
whereas they respect all times alike, it is no doubt incumbent on them, who act
any thing contrary unto such Prohibitions, to secure their own Consciences,
that they no way interfere with the Intention and End of the Law, by giving the
least countenance or occasion unto civil disturbances; and others also, by
their peaceable deportment in all they do. But whereas they have received a
Talent from the Lord Christ to trade withal, have accepted of his Terms, and
engaged into his Service, without any condition of exception in case of such
Prohibitions, it is not possible they should satisfy their Consciences in
desisting from their work on such Occurrences, any farther than in what they
must yield unto outward force and necessity. It is pretended by some, that if
such a Legal Prohibition were given unto all the Ministers of the Gopel, it
would not be obligatory unto them: For if it should be so esteemed, it were in
the power of any Supreme Magistrate lawfully to forbid the whole work of
Preaching the Gospel unto his Subjects; which is contrary to the Grant made by
God the Father, unto Jesus Christ, that all Nations should be his Inheritance;
and the Commission he gave thereon unto his Apostles to teach all Nations, and
to preach the Gospel to every creature under heaven. But it being some only
that are concerned in this Prohibition, it is their duty for Peace sake, to
acquiesce in the will of their Superiors therein, whilst there are others
sufficient to carry on the same work. That Peace is or may be secured on other
Terms, has been already declared: But that one man's Liberty to attend unto his
Duty, and his doing it accordingly, should excuse another from that which is
personally incumbent on himself, is a matter not easily apprehended, nor can be
readily digested. Besides, what is pretended of the sufficient number of
Preachers without any contribution of aid from the Non-conformists, is indeed
but pretended: For if all that are found in the Faith, gifted, and called to
the work of the Ministry in these Nations, were equally encouraged unto, and in
their work, yet would they not be able to answer the necessities of the Souls
of men, requiring an attendance unto it, in a due measure and manner; And those
who have exercised themselves unto compassionate thoughts toward the
multitudes of poor Sinners in these Nations, will not be otherwise minded.
Wherefore these things being premised, we shall shut up these Discourses, with
a brief Answer unto the foregoing Objection which was the occasion of them. And
we say;

1. That Schism being the Name of a Sin, or somewhat that is evil; it can in no
Circumstances be any maes Duty, But we have manifested, as satisfactorily unto
our own Consciences, so we hope unto the minds of unprejudiced persons, that in
our present condition, our Assemblies for the Worship of God, are our express
Duty, and so can have no Affinity with any sin or evil. And those who intend to
charge us with Schism, in or for our Assemblies, must first prove them not to
be our Duty.

2. Notwithstanding them, or any thing by us performed in them, we do preserve
our communion entire with the Church of England (that is, all the visible
Professors of the Gospel in this Nation) as it is a part of the Catholic
Church, in the Unity of the Faith owned therein, provided it be not measured by
the present* Opinions of some, who have evidently departed from it. Our
Non-admittance of the present Government and Discipline of the Church, as
apprehended National, and as it is in the hands of merely Ecclesiastical
persons, or such as are pretended so to be, we have accounted for before. But
we are One with the whole Body of the Professors of the Protestant Religion, in
a public avowment of the same Faith.

3. Into Particular Churches we neither are, nor can be admitted, but on those
terms and conditions, which not only we may justly, but which we are bound in a
way of Duty to refuse. And this also has been pleaded before. Besides, no man
is so obliged unto communion with any Particular or Parochial Church in this
Nation, but that it is in his own power at any time to relinquish it, and to
secure himself also from all Laws which may respect that communion, by the
removal of his Habitation. It is therefore evident that we never had any
relation unto any Parochial Church, but what is Civil and Arbitrary, a
relinquishment whereof is practiced at pleasure every day, by all sorts of men.
Continuing therefore in the constant Profession of the same Faith, with all
other Protestants in the Nation, and the whole Body thereof, as united in the
Profession of it under one Civil or Political Head; and having antecedently no
Evangelical Obligation upon us unto Local communion in the same Ordinances of
Worship numerically with any particular or Parochial Church; and being
prohibited from any such communion by the Terms, Conditions and Customs
indispensibly annexed unto it, by the Laws of the Land, and the Church, which
are not lawful for us to observe, being Christ's Freemen: It being moreover our
duty to assemble our selves in Societies for the Celebration of the Worship of
God in Christ, as that which is expressly commanded; we are abundantly
satisfied, that however we may be censured, judged, or condemned by men, in and
for what we do; yet that he does both accept us here, and will acquit us
hereafter, whom we serve and seek in all things to obey. Wherefore we are not
convinced that any Principle or practice which we own or allow, is in any thing
contrary to that Love, Peace, and Unity, which the Lord Christ requires to be
kept and preserved among his Disciples, or those that profess Faith in him, and
Obedience unto him according to the Gospel. We know not any thing in them but
what is consistent and compliant with that Evangelical Union, which ought to be
in, and among the Churches of Christ, the terms whereof we are ready to hold
and observe, even with them that in sundry things differ from us; as we shall
endeavor also to exercise all Duties of the same Love, Peaceableness, and
Gentleness, toward them by whom we are hated and reviled.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 21. read. from him: p. 5. l. 9. r. train of. l. 12. for
seriousness, r. fierceness, p. 16, l. 26. for security, r. severity. l. 33, of
it (add) which we have hitherto professed. p. 19. l, 23. r. searcher. p. 31. l.
23. r. 18. p. 32. l. 29, r. principles. p. 38. l. 9. r. Church state. p. 49. l.
1. r. in this. p. 66. l. 4. r. lost us. p. 87. l. 19. for particularities, r.
particular Rites. p 98. l. 12. for this, r. their. p. 100* l: 10, for
according, r. avoiding. p. 116. l. 2. r. could. p. 130. 17. r. Ascadius p. 152.
l. 20. for your. r. their. p. 155. l. 6. r. gender. p. 156. l. 16. r.
occasions. p. 159. l. 12. r. this. p. 167. l. 21. r. their. 186. l. 2. for
erected, r. enacted. p. 190. l. 28. r. Easter was. p. 198. l. 13. r.
indeseazable. p. 202. l. 20. r. expressed.


