A Practical EXPOSITION ON THE 130th. Psalm. WHEREIN The Nature of the
Forgiveness of Sin is declared, the truth and reality of it asserted. AND, The
Case of a Soul distressed with the Guilt of Sin, and relieved by a discovery of
Forgiveness with God, is at large discoursed.

By John Owen, D. D.

John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for
Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street. 1669.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE ensuing Exposition and Discourses are intended for the benefit of those,
whose spiritual state and condition is represented in the Psalm here explained.
That these are not a few, that they are many; yea, that to some part or parts
of it, they are all who believe, both the Scriptures and their own Experience
will bear Testimony. Some of them it may be will inquire into, and after their
own concernments as they are here declared. To be serviceable to their Faith,
Peace, and Spiritual consolation, has been the whole of my design. If they
meet with any discovery of Truth, any due application of it to their
consciences, any declaration of the sense and mind of the Holy Ghost in the
Scriptures suitable unto their condition, and useful to their edification,
much of my end and purpose is obtained. I know some there are that dislike all
discourses of this nature, and look upon them with contempt and scorn. But why
they should so do, I know not, unless the Gospel it self, and all the mysteries
of it be folly unto them. Sin and Grace in their original causes, various
respects, consequents, and ends, are the principal subjects of the whole
Scripture, of the whole Revelation of the Will of God to Mankind. In these do
our present and eternal concernments lie, and from and by them has God
designed the great and everlasting exaltation of his own Glory. Upon these do
turn all the transactions that are between God and the souls of men. That it
should be an endeavor needless, or superfluous, to inquire into the Will of
God about, and our own interest in these things, who can imagine? Two ways
there are whereby this may be done. First, Speculatively, by a due
investigation of the nature of these things, according as their Doctrine is
declared in the Scripture. An endeavor according to the mind of God herein, is
just and commendable, and comprehensive of most of the chief heads of Divinity.
But this is not to be engaged in for its own sake. The knowledge of God and
spiritual things have this proportion unto practical Sciences, that the end of
all its notions and Doctrines consists in practice. Wherefore, Secondly, These
things are to be considered practically, that is, as the souls and consciences
of men are actually concerned in them, and conversant about them. How men
contract the guilt of sin, what sense they have, and ought to have thereof,
what danger they are liable unto thereon, what perplexities and distresses
their souls and consciences are reduced to thereby, what courses they fix upon
for their relief, as also what is that Grace of God whereby alone they may be
delivered, wherein it consists, how it was prepared, how purchased, how it is
proposed, and how it may be attained; what effects and consequents a
participation of it does produce, how in these things Faith and obedience unto
God, dependence on him, submission to him, waiting for him, are to be
exercised, is the principal work that those who are called unto the
dispensation of the Gospel ought to enquire into themselves, and to acquaint
others withal. In the right and due management of these things, whether by
writing, or oral-instruction, with prudence, diligence, and zeal, does consist
their principal usefulness in reference unto the Glory of God, and the
everlasting welfare of the Souls of men: And they are under a great mistake,
who suppose it an easy and a common matter to treat of these practical things
usefully, to the edification of them that do believe. Because both the nature
of the things themselves, with the concerns of the souls and consciences of all
sorts of Persons in them, require that they be handled plainly, and without
those intermixtures of secular Learning, and additions of ornaments of speech,
which discourses of other natures may, on ought to be composed and set off
withal; some judging by mere outward appearances, especially if they be of
them from whom the true nature of the things themselves treated of are hid, are
ready to despise and scorn the plain management of them, as that which has
nothing of wisdom or learning accompanying of it, no effects of any commendable
ability of mind for which it should be esteemed. But it is not expressible how
great a mistake such persons through their own darkness and ignorance do labor
under. In a right spiritual understanding, in a due perception and
comprehension of these things, the things of the sins of Men and Grace of God,
consists the greatest part of that wisdom, of that soundness of mind, of that
knowledge rightly so called, which the Gospel commands, exhibits and puts a
valuation upon. To reveal and declare them unto others in words of Truth and
Soberness, fit and meet to express them unto the understandings of men opened
and enlightened by the same spirit, by whom the things themselves are originally
revealed, to derive such sacred spiritual Truths from the Word, and by a due
preparation to communicate and apply them to the Souls and Consciences of men,
contains a principal part of that ministerial skill and ability which are
required in the dispensers of the Gospel; and wherein a severe exercise of
sound learning, judgment, and care is necessary to be found, and may be fully
expressed. Into this Treasury toward the Service of the House of God, it is,
that I have cast my mite in the ensuing Exposition and discourses on the 130th.
Psalm. The design of the Holy Ghost was therein to express and represent in the
Person and condition of the Psalmist the case of a soul entangled, and ready to
be overwhelmed with the guilt of sin, relieved by a discovery of Grace and
Forgiveness in God, with its deportment upon a participation of that relief.
After the Exposition of the words of the Text, my design and endeavor has
been only to enlarge the Pourtraicture here given us in the Psalm, of a
Believing soul in and under the condition mentioned; to render the lines of it
more visible, and to make the Characters given in its description more legible;
and withal to give unto others in the like condition with the Psalmist, a
light to understand and discern themselves in that Image and representation,
which is here made of them in the Person of another. To this end have I been
forced to enlarge on the two great heads of Sin and Grace; especially on the
latter here called the forgiveness that is with God. An Interest herein, a
participation hereof being our principal concernment in this World, and the
sole foundation of all our expectations of a blessed portion in that which is
to come, it certainly requires the best and utmost of our endeavors, as to
look into the nature, causes, and effects of it, so especially into the ways
and means whereby we may be made partakers of it; and how that participation
may be secured unto us unto our peace and consolation; as also into that Love,
that Holiness, that obedience, that fruitfulness in good works, which on the
account of this Grace God expects from us, and requires at our hands. An
Explication of these things is that which I have designed to ensue and follow
after in these discourses, and that with a constant eye, as on the one hand to
the sole rule and Standard of Truth, the Sacred Scriptures, especially that
part of it which is under peculiar consideration; so on the other to the
Experience and Service unto the edification of them that do believe, whose
spiritual benefit and advantage without any other consideration in the World,
is armed at in the publishing of them.

Imprimatur,

October. 12. 1668. Rob. Grove. R. P. Humph. Dom. Episc. Land. a sac. Dom.

AN EXPOSITION UPON PSALM CXXX.
Psalm 130.
OUt of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.
Lord, hear my voice, let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.
If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared.
I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope.
My soul waits for the Lord, more than they, that watch for the morning, I
say, more than they that watch for the morning.
Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous Redemption.
And he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities.
A PARAPHRASE.
Verse 1, 2.
1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.

2. Lord, hear my voice, let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.


O Lord, through my manifold sins and provocations I have brought my self into
great distresses. Mine Iniquities are always before me, and I am ready to be
overwhelmed with them, as with a flood of waters, for they have brought me into
depths, wherein I am ready to be swallowed up. But yet although my distress be
great and perplexing; I do not, I dare not utterly despond and cast away all
hopes of relief or recovery. Nor do I seek unto any other remedy, way or means
of relief, but I apply my self to thee Jehovah, to thee alone. And in this my
Application unto thee, the greatness and urgency of my troubles makes my soul
urgent, earnest, and pressing in my supplications. Whilst I have no rest, I can
give thee no rest; Oh therefore attend and hearken unto the voice of my crying
and supplications.

Ver. 3.
3. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
IT is true O Lord, thou God great and terrible, that if thou should deal with
me in this Condition, with any man living, with the best of thy Saints,
according to the strict and exact tenor of the Law, which first represents it
self to my guilty Conscience, and troubled soul; If thou should take notice
of, observe, and keep in Remembrance, mine, or their, or the Iniquity of any
one, to the end that thou might deal with them, and recompense unto them
according to the sentence thereof; there would be neither for me, nor them, any
the least expectation of deliverance; all flesh must fail before thee, and the
spirits which thou have made, and that to Eternity; for who could stand before
thee, when thou should so execute thy displeasure.

Ver. 4.
4. But there is forgiveness with thee: that thou may be feared.
BUt O Lord, this is not absolutely and universally the state of things between
thy Majesty and poor sinners; Thou art in thy Nature infinitely Good and
Gracious, ready and free in the purposes of thy will to receive them. And there
is such a blessed way made for the exercise of the holy inclinations and
purposes of thy heart toward them, in the mediation and blood of thy dear Son,
That they have assured foundations of concluding and believing, that there is
pardon and forgiveness with thee for them; and which in the way of thine
appointments they may be partakers of. This way therefore will I, with all that
fear thee persist in: I will not give over, leave thee, or turn from thee,
through my fears, discouragements, and despondencies; but will abide constantly
in the observation of the worship which thou have prescribed; and the
performance of the Obedience which thou do require; having great
encouragements so to do.

Ver. 5.
5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope.
ANd herein, upon the account of the forgiveness that is with thee, O Lord, do I
wait with all patience, quietness and perseverance. In this work is my whole
soul engaged; even in an earnest expectation of thy approach unto me, in a way
of grace and mercy. And for my encouragement therein, have thou given out unto
me a blessed word of Grace, a faithful word of promise, wherein my hope is
fixed.

Ver. 6.
6. My soul waits for the Lord, more than they, that watch for the morning, I
say, more than they that watch for the morning.
YEa, in the performance, and discharge of this duty, my soul is intent upon
thee, and in its whole frame turned toward thee, and that with such diligence
and watchfulness in looking out after every way, and means of thy appearance,
of thy manifestation of thy self, and coming unto me, that I excel therein
those who with longing desire, heedfulness, and earnest expectation, do wait
and watch for the appearance of the morning; and that either that they may rest
from their night watches, or have light for the duties of thy Worship in the
Temple, which they are most delighted in.

Ver. 7, 8.
7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him
is plenteous Redemption.

8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities.


HErein have I found that Rest, peace, and satisfaction unto my own soul, that I
cannot but invite and encourage others, in the like Condition to take the same
course with me. Let then all the Israel of God, all that fear him, learn this
of me, and from my experience. Be not hasty in your distresses; despond not,
despair not, turn not aside unto other remedies; but hope in the Lord; for I
can now in an especial manner, give testimony unto this, that there is mercy
with him suited unto your relief. Yea, whatever your distress be, the
Redemption that is with him, is so bounteous, plenteous and unsearchable, that
the undoubted issue of your performance of this duty will be; that you shall be
delivered from the guilt of all your sins; and the perplexities of all your
troubles.

General Scope of the whole Psalm.
General Scope of the whole Psalm.
THE design of the Holy Ghost in this Psalm is to express in the Experience of
the Psalmist, and the working of his faith, the state and condition of a soul
greatly in it self perplexed, relieved on the account of Grace, and acting it
self toward God and his Saints, suitably to the discovery of that Grace unto
him. A great design, and full of great Instruction.

And this general Prospect gives us the parts, and scope of the whole Psalm:
for (1.) We have the state and condition of the soul therein represented, with
his deportment in and under that state and condition, in ver. 1, 2. Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee O Lord, Lord, hear my voice, let thine ears be
attentive to the voice of my supplications.

(2.) His enquiry after relief; and therein are two things that present
themselves unto him; the one whereof, which first offers the consideration of
its self to him in his distress, he deprecates, ver. 3. If thou Lord should
mark iniquity, O Lord who shall stand?

The other he closes withal, and finds relief in it, and supportment by it,
ver. 5. But there is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared.

Upon this his discovery and fixing on relief, there is the acting of his
Faith, and the deportment of his whole Person;

1. Toward God; ver. 5, 6. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his
word do I hope.
My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning, I say
more than they that watch for the morning.


2. Toward the Saints, ver. 7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the
Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption.
And he shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities.


All which parts, and the various concernments of them, must be opened
severally.

And this also gives an account of what is my design from, and upon the words
of this Psalm; namely, to declare the perplexed intanglements which may befall
a gracious soul, such a one as this Psalmist was; with the nature and proper
workings of Faith in such a condition: Principally aiming at what it is, that
gives a soul relief and supportment in, and afterward deliverance from, such a
perplexed estate.

The Lord in Mercy, dispose of these Meditations in such a way and manner, as
that both he that writes, and they that read, may be made partakers of the
benefit, relief, and consolation, intended for his Saints in this Psalm by the
Holy Ghost.

The State and Condition of the soul represented in the Psalm. The two first
Verses opened.

The two first Verses opened.
The State and Condition of the soul here represented, as the Basis on which the
process of the Psalm is built; with its deportment, or the general acting of
its Faith in that state, is expressed in the two first Verses. Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee O Lord.
Lord hear my voice; let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications.


1. The present state of the soul under consideration is included in that
expression, out of the Depths.

Some of the Ancients, as Chrysostom, suppose this expression to relate unto
the depths of the heart of the Psalmist; (...); not from the mouth or tongue
only, (...); but from the depth and bottom of the heart; (...), from the
deepest recesses of the mind.

And indeed the word is used to express the depths of the hearts of Men; but
utterly in another sense; Psalm. 64. 6. The heart is deep.

But the obvious sense of the place, and the constant use of the word will not
admit of this Interpretation: e Profund is, from (...) profundus fuit, is (...)
in the plural number, Profunditates, or depths. It is commonly used for Valleys
or any deep places whatever, but especially of Waters. Valleys and deep Places,
because of their Darkness and Solitariness, are accounted places of horror,
helplesness and trouble, Psalm. 23. 4. When I walk in the Valley of the shadow
of Death, that is, in the extremity of danger and trouble.

The Moral use of the word, as expressing the state and condition of the souls
of men, is metaphorical. These Depths then, are difficulties, or pressures,
attended with fear, horror, danger and trouble.

And they are of two sorts:

1. Providential; in respect of outward distresses, Calamities, and
Afflictions, Psalm. 69. 1. Save me O God, for the waters are come in unto my
soul; I stick in the mire of the deep, and there is no standing, I am come,
(...), into the depths of waters, and the flood overflows me. It is trouble and
the extremity of it, that the Psalmist complains of, and which he thus
expresses. He was brought by it into a condition like unto a man ready to be
drowned; being cast into the bottom of deep and miry waters; where he had no
firm foundation to stand upon, nor ability to come out: as he farther explains
himself, ver. 15.

2. There are internal Depths. Depths of Conscience upon the account of sin,
Psalm. 88. 6. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.
What he intends by this expression, the Psalmist declares in the next words, v.
7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me. Sense of Gods wrath upon his conscience upon
the account of sin, was the deep he was cast into. So v. 15. speaking of the
same matter; says he; I suffer thy terrors, and v. 16. Thy fierce wrath goes
over me. Which he calls water, waves, and deeps; according to the Metaphor
before opened.

And these are the deeps that are here principally intended. Clamat sub molibus
and fluctibus iniquitatum suarum, says Austin on the place. He cries out under
the weight and waves of his sins.

This the ensuing Psalm makes evident. Desiring to be delivered from these
depths out of which he cried; he deals with God wholly about mercy and
forgiveness; and it is sin alone, from which forgiveness is a Deliverance. The
Doctrine also that he preaches upon his Delivery, is that of Mercy, Grace and
Redemption, as is manifest from the close of the Psalm. And what we have
deliverance by, is most upon our hearts when we are delivered.

It is true indeed, that these deeps do oftentimes concur: as David speaks,
Deep calls upon deep, Psalm. 4. 2. 7. The deeps of Affliction, awaken the
Conscience to a deep sense of sin. But sin is the Disease; Affliction only a
Symptom of it; and in attending a Cure, the disease it self is principally to
be heeded, the symptom will follow, or depart of its self.

Many Interpreters think that this was now David's condition; by great trouble
and distress, he was greatly minded of sin; and we must not therefore wholly
pass over that intendment of the word, though we are chiefly to respect that,
which he himself in this address unto God, did principally regard.

This in general is the state and condition of the soul managed in this Psalm;
and is as the key to the ensuing discourse, or the hinge on which it turns. As
to my intendment from the Psalm: That which arises from hence, may be
comprised in these two Propositions. 1. Gracious souls, after much Communion
with God, may be brought into inextricable depths and intanglements on the
account of sin. For such the Psalmist here expresses his own condition to have
been; and such he was. 2. The inward root of outward distresses, is principally
to be attended in all pressing trials; sin, in Afflictions.


Depths of trouble on the account of Sin.
Gracious souls may be brought into depths on the account of sin. What those
Depths are.

Before I proceed at all in the farther opening of the words; they having all
of them respect unto the Proposition first laid down, I shall explain and
confirm the truth contained in it; that so it may be understood, what we say,
and whereof we do affirm in the whole process of our Discourse.

It is a sad Truth that we have proposed unto consideration. He that hears it
ought to tremble in himself, that he may rest in the day of trouble; It speaks
out the Apostles advice, Romans 11. 20. Be not high minded, but fear: and that
also, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.
When Peter had learned this truth by woeful experience, after all his boldness
and forwardness, he gives this Council to all Saints: that they would pass the
time of their sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1. 14. Knowing how near in our
greatest peace and serenity, evil and danger may lie at the door.

Some few instances of the many that are left on record, wherein this Truth is
exemplified may be mentioned. Genesis 6. 9. Noah was a just man, perfect in his
Generation, and Noah walked with God. He did so a long season, and that in an
evil time, amidst all sorts of Temptations, When all flesh had corrupted its
way upon the earth, ver. 12. This put an eminency upon his obedience; and
doubtless rendered the Communion which he had with God in walking before him,
most sweet and precious to him. He was a gracious soul upon the redoubled
Testimony of God himself. But we know what befell this holy Person. He that
shall read the story that is recorded of him, Genesis 9. 21. will easily grant,
that he was brought into inextricable distress on the account of sin. His own
drunkenness, ver. 21. with the consequent of it, gives scandal unto, and
provokes the unnatural lust of his Son, v. 22. and this leads him to the
devoting of that Son, and his Posterity unto Destruction, v. 24, 25. all which,
joined with the sense of Gods just indignation, from whom he had newly received
that tremendously miraculous deliverance; must needs overwhelm him with sorrow
and anxiety of Spirit.

The matter is more clear in David. Under the Old Testament none loved God more
than he, none was loved of God more than he. The Paths of Faith and Love
wherein he walked, are unto the most of us, like the way of an Eagle in the
Air, too high and hard for us. Yet to this very day, do the cries of this Man
after Gods own heart, sound in our Ears. Sometimes he complains of broken
bones, sometimes of drowning depths, sometimes of waves and water-spouts,
sometimes of wounds and diseases, sometimes of Wrath, and the sorrows of Hell,
every where of his sins, the burden and trouble of them. Some of the occasions
of his, Depths, Darkness, Intanglements and Distresses, we all know. As no man
had more Grace than he, so none is a greater instance of the power of sin, and
the effects of its guilt upon the conscience than he. But Instances of this
kind are obvious, and occurr to the thoughts of all, so that they need not be
repeated. I shall then show,

Depths of Sin, wherein they consist.
First, What in particular is intended by the depths and intanglements on the
account of sin, whereinto gracious souls after much Communion with God may be
cast.

Secondly, Whence it comes to pass, that so they may be, and that oftentimes so
they are.

First, For the First, some or all of these things following do concur to the
Depths here complained of.

First, Loss of the wonted sense of the Love of God which the soul did formerly
enjoy. There is a twofold sense of the Love of God, whereof Believers in this
world may be made partakers. There is the transient affecting of the heart by
the Holy Ghost, with ravishing unspeakable joys, in apprehension of Gods Love,
and our Relation unto him in Christ. This, or the immediate effect of it, is
called, joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. The Holy Ghost shining
into the heart, with a clear evidence of the souls interest in all Gospel
Mercies, causes it to leap for joy, to exult, and triumph in the Lord; as
being for a season carried above all sense and thought of sin, self,
temptation, or trouble. But as God gives the bread of his House unto all his
Children, so these dainties, and high Cordials he reserveth only for the
seasons, and Persons, wherein, and to whom he knows them to be needful, and
useful. Believers may be without this sense of Love, and yet be in no depths. A
man may be strong and healthy, who has wholesome food, though he never drink
Spirits and Cordials.

Again, There is an abiding, dwelling sense of Gods Love upon the hearts of the
most of those of whom we speak, who have had long communion with God,
consisting in a prevailing Gospel persuasion, that they are accepted with God
in Christ. Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. I call
it a prevailing persuasion, denoting both the opposition that is made unto it,
by Satan and unbelief, and its efficacy in the conquest thereof. This is the
root from whence all that peace, and ordinary consolation which Believers in
this world are made partakers of, do spring and grow. This is that which
quickens and enlivens them unto Duty, Psalm. 116. 12, 13. and is the salt that
renders their Sacrifices and Performances savoury to God, and refreshing to
themselves. This supports them under their trials, gives them peace, hope and
comfort in Life and Death. Psalm. 23. 4. Though I walk in the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me. A sense of Gods
Presence in Love, is sufficient to rebuke all anxiety and fears, in the worst
and most dreadful condition. And not only so, but to give in the midst of them,
solid Consolation and Joy. So the Prophet expresses it; Hab. 3. 17, 18.
Although the Fig Tree shall not blessom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines,
the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the
flocks shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the
stalls; yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.
And this is that sense of Love, which the choicest Believers may lose on the
account of sin. This is one step into their depths. They shall not retain any
such Gospel apprehension of it, as that it should give them rest, peace, or
consolation; that it should influence their souls with delight in Duty, or
supportment in trial; And the Nature hereof will be afterward more fully
explained.

Secondly, Perplexed thoughtfulness about their great and wretched unkindness
toward God, are another part of the Depths of sin-intangled souls. So David
complains, Psalm. 77. 3. I remembered God, says he, and was troubled. How comes
the Remembrance of God to be unto him a matter of trouble? in other Places he
professes, that it was all his relief and supportment. How comes it to be an
occasion of his trouble? All had not been well between God and him; and whereas
formerly in his Remembrance of God, his thoughts were chiefly exercised about
his Love and Kindness, now they were wholly possessed with his own sin and
unkindness. This causes his trouble. Herein lies a share of the intanglements
occasioned by sin. Says such a soul in its self; foolish creature, have thou
thus requited the Lord? Is this the return that thou have made unto him for all
his love, his kindness, his consolations, mercies? Is this thy kindness for
him, thy love to him? Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? Is this thy boasting
of him, that thou had found so much Goodness and Excellency in him and his
Love, that though all men should forsake him, thou never would do so? Are all
thy Promises, all thy Engagements which thou made unto God, in times of
distress, upon prevailing obligations, and mighty impressions of his Good
Spirit upon thy soul, now come to this, that thou should so foolishly forget,
neglect, despise, cast him off? Well! now he is gone; he is withdrawn from
thee, and what will thou do? Art thou not even ashamed to desire him to return?
They were thoughts of this nature, that cut Peter to the heart upon his fall.
The soul finds them cruel as Death, and strong as the Grave. It is bound in the
chains of them, and cannot be comforted, Psalm 38. 3, 4, 5, 6. And herein
consists a great part of the depths enquired after. For this consideration
excites, and puts an edge upon all grieving, straightning, perplexing
Affections, which are the only means whereby the soul of a man may be inwardly
troubled, or trouble it self; such are sorrow and shame, with that
self-displicency and Revenge wherewith they are attended. And as their Reason
and Object in this case do transcend all other occasions of them, so on no
other account do they cause such severe and perplexing reflections on the soul
as on this.

Thirdly, A revived sense of justly deserved wrath, belongs also to these
depths. This is as the opening of old wounds. When men have passed through a
sense of wrath, and have obtained deliverance and rest through the blood of
Christ, to come to their old thoughts again, to be trading afresh with Hell,
Curse, Law, and Wrath, it is a depth indeed. And this often befalls gracious
souls on the account of sin, Psalm 88. 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, says
Heman. It pressed and crushed him sorely. There is a self-judging as to the
desert of wrath, which is consistent with a comforting persuasion of an
Interest in Christ. This the soul finds sweetness in, as it lies in a
subserviency to the exaltation of Grace. But in this case, the soul is left
under it without that relief. It plungeth it self into the Curse of the Law and
flames of Hell, without any cheering supportment from the blood of Christ. This
is walking in the valley of the shadow of death. The soul converseth with
death, and what seems to lie in a tendency thereunto. The Lord also to increase
his perplexities, puts new life and spirit into the Law; gives it a fresh
Commission as it were to take such a one into its Custody; and the Law will
never in this world be wanting unto its Duty.

Fourthly, Oppressing Apprehensions of temporal Judgments, concur herein
also; for God will Judge his People. And Judgment often begins at the House of
God. Though God, says such a one, should not cast me off for ever, though he
should pardon my iniquities, yet he may so take vengeance of my inventions, as
to make me feed on gall and wormwood all my days Psalm. 119. 120. faith David,
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. He
knows not what the great God may bring upon him; and being full of a sense of
the guilt of sin, which is the bottom of this whole condition, every Judgment
of God is full of terror unto him. Sometimes he thinks, God may lay open the
filth of his heart, and make him a scandal and a reproach in the world; Psalm.
39. 8. Oh, says he, make me not a reproach to the foolish. Sometimes he
trembles lest God should strike him suddenly with some signal Judgment, and
take him out of the world, in darkness and sorrow; so says David, take me not
away in thy wrath. Sometimes he fears lest he shall be like Jonah, and raise a
storm in his Family, in the Church whereof he is a Member, or in the whole
Nation. Let them not be ashamed for my sake. These things make his heart soft
as Job speaks, and to melt within him. When any Affl^ction or public Judgment
of God, is fastened to a quick living sense of sin in the Conscience, it
overwhelms the soul; whether it be only justly feared, or be actually
inflicted; as was the case of Joseph's Brethren in Egypt. The soul is then
rolled from one deep to another. Sense of sin, casts it on the consideration of
its Affliction; and Affliction turns it back on a sense of sin. So deep calls
unto deep, and all Gods billows go over the soul. And they do each of them make
the soul tender, and sharpen its sense unto the other. Affliction ^^^^ens the
soul; so that the sense of sin cuts the deeper, and makes the larger wounds;
and the sense of sin weakens the soul, and makes Affliction sit the heavier,
and so increases its burden. In this case, that Affliction which a man in his
usual state of spiritual peace, could have embraced as a sweet pledge of Love,
is as goads and thorns in his side, depriving him of all rest and quietness;
God makes it, as thorns and briars wherewith he will teach stubborn souls their
duty, as Gideon did the Man of Succoth.

Fifthly, There may be added hereunto, prevailing fears for a season, of being
utterly rejected by God, of being found a Reprobate at the last day. Jonah
seems to conclude so, Chap. 3. 4. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight. I am
lost for ever, God will own me no more. And Heman, Psalm 88. 4, 5. I am counted
with them that go down into the pit: Free among the dead, like the slain that
lie in the grave, whom thou remembrest no more, and they are cut off from thy
hand. This may reach the soul, until the sorrows of Hell encompass it, and lay
hold upon it; until it be deprived of comfort, peace, rest, until it be a
terror to its self, and be ready to choose strangling rather than life. This
may befall a gracious soul on the account of sin. But yet because this fights
directly against the Life of Faith, God does not, unless it be in extraordinary
cases, suffer any of his to lie long in this horrible pit, where there is no
water, no refreshment. But this often falls out, that even the Saints
themselves are left for a season to a fearful expectation of judgment, and
fiery indignation, as to the prevailing apprehension of their minds. And,

Sixthly, God secretly sends his Arrows into the soul that wound and gall it,
adding pain, trouble, and disquietness to its disconsolation. Psalm 38. 2.
Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. Ever and anon in
his walking, God shot a sharp piercing arrow, fixing it on his soul that
galled, wounded, and perplexed him, filling him with pain and grievous
vexation. These arrows are Gods rebukes, Psalm. 39. 11. When thou with rebukes
do correct man for iniquity. God speaks in his Word, and by his Spirit in the
Conscience, things sharp and bitter to the soul, fastening them so as it cannot
shake them out. These Job so mournfully complains of, Chap. 6. 4. The Lord
speaks words, with that efficacy, that they piecce the heart quite through; and
what the issue then is, David declares, Psalm. 38 3. There is no soundness,
says he, in my flesh, because of thine anger, nor is there any rest in my
bones because of my sin. The whole person is brought under the power of them,
and all health and rest is taken away; and

Seventhly, Unspiritedness and disability unto Duty, in doing or suffering,
attend such a condition, Psalm. 40. 12. Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me,
so that I am not able to look up. His spiritual strength was worn away by sin,
so that he was not able to address himself unto any communion with God. The
soul now cannot pray with life and power; cannot hear with joy and profit;
cannot do good and communicate with cheerfulness and freedom; cannot meditate
with delight and heavenly mindedness; cannot act for God with zeal and liberty;
cannot think of suffering with boldness and resolution; but is sick, weak,
feeble and bowed down.

Now, I say, a gracious soul after much communion with God, may on the account
of sin, by a sense of the guilt of it, be brought into a state and condition,
wherein some, more, or all of these, with other the like perplexities, may be
its portion. And these make up the Depths whereof the Pfalmist here complains.
What are the sins, or of what sorts, that ordinarily cast the souls of
Believers into these depths shall be afterward declared. I shall now show both
whence it is, that Believers may fall into such a condition; as also whence it
is that oftentimes, they actually do so.

The Nature and Extent of supplies of Grace according to the Covenant.
Whence it is that Believers may be brought into depths on the account of sin.
Nature of the supplies of Grace given in the Covenant. How far they extend.
Principles of the power of sin.

First, The Nature of the Covenant wherein all Believers now walk with God, and
wherein all their whole provision for obedience is enwrapped, leaves it
possible for them to fall into these depths that have been mentioned. Under the
first Covenant, there was no mercy or forgiveness provided for any sin. It was
necessary then that it should exhibit a sufficiency of Grace to preserve from
every sin, or it could have been of no use at all. This the Rigteousness of God
required, and so it was. To have made a Covenant wherein there was no provision
at all of pardon, and not a sufficiency of Grace to keep the Covenanters from
need of pardon, was not answerable to the Goodness and Righteousness of God.
But he made man upright who of his own accord sought out many inventions.

It is not so in the Covenant of Grace; There is in it pardon provided in the
blood of Christ; It is not therefore of indispensible necessity that there
should be administered in it, Grace effectually preserving from every sin: Yet
is it on all accounts to be preferred before the other. For besides the relief
by pardon which the other knew nothing of, there is in it also much provision
against sin which was not in the other.

First, There is provision made in it, against all and every sin that would
disannull the Covenant, and make a final separation between God and a soul that
has been once taken into the bond thereof. This provision is absolute; God
has taken upon himself the making of this good, and the establishing this Law
of the Covenant, that it shall not by any sin be disannulled, Jor. 32. 40. I
will (says God) make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear into their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me. The security hereof depends not on any thing in
our selves. All that is in us is to be used as a means of the accomplishment of
this Promise; but the event or issue depends absolutely on the faithfulness of
God. And the whole certainty and stability of the Covenant depends on the
efficacy of the Grace administered in it, to preserve men from all such sins as
would disanull it.

Secondly, There is in this Covenant provision made for constant peace and
consolation, notwithstanding, and against the guilt of such sins, as through
their infirmities and temptations believers are daily exposed unto. Though they
fall into sins every day, yet they do not fall into depths every day. In the
tenor of this Covenant, there is a consistency between a sense of sin unto
humiliation and peace, with strong consolation. After the Apostle had described
the whole conflict that Believers have with sin, and the frequent wounds which
they receive thereby, which makes them cry out for deliverance, Romans 7. 24. He
yet concludes, Chap. 8. 1. that there is no condemnation unto them, which is a
sufficient and stable foundation of Peace. So 1 John 2. 1. These things have I
written unto you, that you sin not; and if any man sin we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. Our great business and care ought to
be, that we sin not; but yet when we have done our utmost, if we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, Chap. 1. 8. What then shall poor, sinful, guilty
creatures do? why let them go to the Father, by their Advocate, and they shall
not fail of pardon and peace. And says Paul, Heb 6. 17, 18. God is abundantly
willing that we might have strong consolation who fly for resuge to lay hold on
the hope set before us. What was his condition who fled of old to the City of
refuge for safety, from whence this expression is taken? He was guilty of
blood, though shed at unawares; and so, as that he was to dye for it, if he
escaped not to the City of Refuge. Though we may have the guilt of sins upon
us, that the Law pronounces death unto, yet flying to Christ for refuge, God
has provided not only safety, but strong consolation for us also. Forgiveness
in the blood of Christ, does not only take guilt from the soul, but trouble
also from the conscience. And in this respect does the Apostle at large set
forth the Excellency of his Sacrifice, Heb. 10. The Sacrifices of the Old Law,
he tells us, could not make perfect the worshippers, v. 1. which he proves, v.
2. because they did never take away, thoroughly and really, Conscience of sin,
that is, depths or distresses of conscience about sin; But now, says he, Jesus
Christ in the Covenant of Grace has for ever perfected them that were
sanctified, v. 14. providing for them such stable peace and consolation, as
that they shall not need the renewing of Sacrifices every day, v. 18. This is
the great mystery of the Gospel in the blood of Christ; that those who sin
every day, should have peace with God all their days. Provided their sins fall
within the compass of those infirmities, against which this consolation is
provided.

Thirdly, There is provision made of Grace, to prevent and preserve the soul
from great and enormous sins, such as in their own nature, are apt to wound
conscience, and cast the person into such depths and intanglements as wherein
he shall have neither rest nor peace. Of what sort these sins are, shall be
afterward declared. There is in this Covenant Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. and
abundance of Grace, administered from the All-fulness of Christ. Grace reigns
in it, Romans 6. 6. destroying and crucifying the body of sin.

But this Provision in the Covenant of Grace against peace-ruining,
soul-perplexing sins, is not as to the administration of it, absolute. There
are Covenant Commands and Exhortations, on the attendance whereunto, the
administration of much Covenant-Grace does depend. To watch, pray, improve
faith, to stand on our guard continually, to mortify sin, to fight against
temptations, with stedfastness, diligence, constancy, are every where
prescribed unto us; and that in order unto the ensurance of the Grace
mentioned. These things are on our part, the condition of the Administration of
that abundant Grace, which is to preserve us from soul-entangling sins, So
Peter informs us, 2 Ep. 1. v. 3. The divine power of God has given unto us all
things that pertain unto life and godliness. We have from it an habitual
furnishment and provision for obedience at all times. Also says he, v. 4. He
bath given unto us great and precious promises, that by them we might be
partakers of the Divine Nature; What then is in this blessed estate and
condition required of us, that we may make a due improvement of the provision
made for us, and enjoy the comforting influence of those Promises? that he
prescribes unto us, v. 5, 6, 7. Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue,
and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and
to brotherly kindness charity; That is carefully and diligently attend to the
exercise of all the Graces of the Spirit, and unto a conversation in all things
becoming the Gospel. What then shall be the issue, if these things are attended
unto? v. 8. If these things be in you, and abound, ye shall be neither barren
nor unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is not enough
that these things be in you; that you have the seed and root of them from and
by the Holy Ghost; but you are to take care that they flourish and abound;
without which, though the root of the matter may be in you, and so you be not
wholly devoid of spiritual life, yet you will be poor, barren, sapless,
withering creatures, all your days. But now suppose that these things do
abound, and we be made fruitful thereby: Why then says he, v. 10. If you do
these things ye shall never fall: What never fall into sin? Nay, that is not in
the Promise; and he that says, when he has done all, that he has no sin, he
is a Liar. Or is it never fall totally from God? No, the preservation of the
Elect, of whom he speaks, from total Apostasy, is not suspended on such
conditions, especially not on any degree of them, such as their abounding
imports. But it is that they shall not fall into their old sins from which they
were purged, v. 9. Such Conscience wasting, and defiling sins, as they lived
in, in the time and state of their Unregeneracy. Thus though there be in the
Covenant of Grace through Jesus Christ, Provision made of abundant supplies for
the souls preservation from entangling sins; yet their Administration has
respect unto our diligent attendance unto the means of receiving them appointed
for us to walk in.

And here lies the latitude of the New Covenant; here lies the exercise of
renewed Free Will. This is the field of free voluntary obedience under the
Administration of Gospel Grace. There are extremes which in respect of the
event it is not concerned in. To be wholly perfect, to be free from every sin,
all failings, all infirmities, that is not provided for, not promised in this
Covenant. It is a Covenant of mercy and pardon, which supposes a continuance
of sin. To fall utterly and finally from God, that is absolutely provided
against. Between these two extremes of absolute perfection, and total
Apostasy, lies the large Field of Believers obedience and walking with God.
Many a sweet heavenly passage there is, and many a dangerous depth in this
field. Some walk near to the one side, some to the other; yea, the same person
may sometimes press hard after Perfection, sometimes be cast to the very border
of destruction. Now between these two, lie many a soul-plunging sin, against
which no absolute provision is made, and which for want of giving all diligence
to put the means of preservation in practice, Believers are oftentimes
overtaken withal.

Fourthly, There is not in the Covenant of Grace, Provision made of ordinary
and abiding consolation, for any under the guilt of great sins, or sins greatly
aggravated, which they fall into by a neglect of using and abiding in the
forementioned conditions of abounding actual Grace. Sins there are, which
either because in their own nature they wound and waste conscience, or in their
effects break forth into scandal, causing the name of God and the Gospel to be
evil spoken of, or in some of their circumstances, are full of unkindness
against God, do deprive the soul of its wonted consolation. How, by what means,
on what account such sins come to terrify conscience, to break the bones, to
darken the soul, and to cast it into inextricable depths, notwithstanding the
relief that is provided of pardon in the blood of Christ, I shall not now
declare; that they will do so, and that Consolation is not of equal extent with
safety, we know. Hence God assumes it to himself as an act of mere Sovereign
Grace, to speak peace and refreshment unto the souls of his Saints in their
depths of sin entanglements, Isa. 57. 18, 19. And indeed if the Lord had not
thus provided, that great provocations, should stand in need of special
reliefs, it might justly be feared, that the negligence of Believers, might
possibly bring forth much bitter fruit.

Only this must be observed by the way, that what is spoken relates to the
sense of sinners in their own souls, and not to the nature of the thing it
self. There is in the Gospel, consolation provided against the greatest, as
well as the least sins. The difference arises from Gods Sovereign
communication of it, according to that tenor of the Covenants Administration,
which we have laid down. Hence because under Moses's Law there was an exception
made of some sins, for which there was no Sacrifice appointed, so that those
who were guilty of them could no way be justified from them, that is carnally,
as to their interest in the Judaical Church and Polity; Paul tells the Jews,
Acts 13. 38, 39. That through Jesus Christ was preached unto them the
forgiveness of sins, and that by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. There is
now no exception of any particular sins, as to pardon, and peace; but what we
have spoken relates unto the manner and way, wherein God is pleased to
administer consolation to the souls of sinning Believers.

And this is the Evidence which I shall offer to prove, that the souls of
Believers, after much Gracious Communion with God, may yet fall into
inextricable depths on the account of sin; whence it is that actually they
oftentimes do so, shall be farther declared.

The Power of Indwelling Sin.
The Principles of this Assertion, are known, I shall therefore only touch upon
them.

First, The nature of Indwelling-sin, as it remains in the best of the Saints
in this life, being a little considered, will evidence unto us, from whence it
is that they are sometimes surprised, and plunged into the depths mentioned.
For,

First, Though the strength of every sin be weakened by Grace, yet the root of
no sin, is in this life wholly taken away. Lust is like the stubborn
Canaanites, who after the general conquest of the Land, would yet dwell in it
still, Judge. 17. 12. Indeed when Israel grew strong they brought them under
tribute, but they could not utterly expel them. The Kingdom and Rule belongs
to Grace; and when it grows strong it brings sin much under; but it will not
wholly be driven out. The Body of Death, is not utterly to be done away, but in
and by the Death of the Body. In the flesh of the best Saints there dwells no
good thing, Romans 7. 8. but the contrary is there; that is the root of all evil.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, as the Spirit lusts against the flesh.
Gal. 5. 17. As then there is an Universality in the actings of the Spirit in
its opposing all evil, so also there is an Universality in the actings of the
flesh for the furtherance of it.

Secondly, Some Lusts or branches of original corruption, do obtain in some
persons such advantages, either from Nature, Custom, Employment, Society, or
the like Circumstances, that they become like the Canaanites that had iron
Chariots; it is a very difficult thing to subdue them. Well it is, if War be
maintained constantly against them, for they will almost always be in actual
Rebellion.

Thirdly, Indwelling-Sin though weakened, retains all its properties; the
properties of a thing follow its nature. Where the nature of any thing is,
there are all its natural properties. What are these properties of Indwelling
Sin, I should here declare, but that I have handled the whole power and
efficacy, the nature and properties of it, in a Treatise to that only purpose.
In brief they are such, as it is no wonder, that some Believers are by them
cast into depths; but it is indeed, that any do escape them. But hereof the
Reader may see at large my Discourse on this particular subject.

Secondly, Add hereunto, the power and prevalency of temptation; which because
also, I have already in a special Discourse to that purpose insisted on, I
shall not here farther lay open.

Gods Sovereignty in dealing with Believers in their sins.
Thirdly, The Sovereign pleasure of God in dealing with sinning Saints must also
be considered. Divine Love and Wisdom work not toward all in the same manner.
God is pleased to continue Peace unto some with a non-obstante, for great
provocations. Love shall humble them, and rebukes of kindness shall recover
them from their wanderings. Others he is pleased to bring into the depths we
have been speaking of. But yet I may say generally signal provocations, meet
with one of these two events from God.

First, Those in whom they are, are left unto some signal barrenness, and
fruitlesness in their Generations; they shall wither, grow barren, worldly,
sapless, and be much cast out of the hearts of the people of God. Or Secondly,
They shall be exercised in these depths, from whence their way of deliverance
is laid down in this Psalm. Thus I say, God deals with his Saints in great
variety: Some shall have all their bones broken, when others shall have only
the gentle strokes of the rod. We are in the hand of Mercy, and he may deal
with us as seems good unto him; but for our parts, great sins, ought to be
attended with expectations of great depths and preplexities.

And this is the state of the soul proposed in this Psalm, and by us, unto
consideration. These are the depths wherein it is entangled; these the ways
and means whereby it is brought into these depths. Its deportment in, and under
this state and condition, lies next in our way. But before I proceed thereunto,
I shall annex some few things, unto what has been delivered, tending to the
farther opening of the whole Case before us. And they are (1.) What are, or of
what sort those sins are which usually cast the souls of Believers into these
depths; and then (2.) Insist on some Aggravations of them.

Sins occasioning great distresses.
What sins usually bring Believers into great spiritual distresses. Aggravations
of those sins.

First, Sins in their own nature wasting Conscience are of this sort. Sins that
rise in opposition unto all of God that is in us; that is the light of Grace
and Nature also. Such are the sins that cast David into his depths. Such are
the sins enumerated 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Be not deceived, says the Apostle,
neither Fornicators; nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with Mankind. Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Certain it is,
that Believers may fall into some of the sins here mentioned. Some have done
so, as is left on record. The Apostle says not, those who have committed any of
these sins, but such sinners shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; that is, who
live in these, or any of these sins, or any like unto them. There is no
provision of mercy made for such sinners. These and the like are sins which in
their own nature, without the consideration of aggravating circumstances,
(which yet indeed really, in Believers they can never be without) are able to
plunge a soul into depths. These sins cut the locks of men's spiritual strength;
and it is in vain for them to say, we will go, and do as at other times. Bones
are not broken without pain; nor great sins brought on the Conscience without
trouble. But I need not insist on these. Some say that they deprive even true
Believers of all their interest in the Love of God, but unduly; all grant that
they bereave them of all comforting evidence, and well grounded Assurance of
it. So they did David and Peter, and herein lies no small part of the depths we
are searching into.

Secondly, There are sins which though they do not rise up in the conscience
with such a bloody guilt, as those mentioned, yet by reason of some
circumstances and aggravations, God takes them so unkindly, as to make them a
root of disquietness and trouble to the soul all its days. He says of some
sins of ungodly men, as I live this iniquity shall not be purged from you until
ye dye? If you are come to this height, you shall not escape, I will not spare
you. And there are Provocations in his own People, which may be so
circumstantiated, as that he will not let them pass, before he have cast them
into depths, and made them cry out for deliverance. Let us consider some of
them.

First, Miscarriages under signal Enjoyments of love and kindness from God, are
of this sort. When God has given unto any one expressive manifestations of his
Love, convinced him of it, made him say in the inmost parts of his heart, this
is undeserved love and kindess, then for him to be negligent in his walking
with God, it carries an unkindness with it, that shall not be forgotten. It is
a remark upon the miscarriages of Solomon, that he fell into them after God had
appeared unto him twice. And all sins under or after especial mercies, will
meet at one time or other especial rebukes. Nothing does more distress the
conscience of a sinner, then the remembrance in darkness of abused light; in
desertions of neglected love. This God will make them sensible of. Though I
have redeemed them, says God, yet they have spoken lies against me, Hos. 7.
15. So Chap. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. When God has in his Providence dealt graciously
with a Person, it may be delivered him from straights and troubles, set him in
a large place, prevented him with many fruits and effects of his goodness,
blessed him in his Person, Relations, and Employments, dealt well with his
soul, in giving him a gracious sense of his love in Christ; for such a one to
fall under sinful miscarriages, it goes to the heart of God, and shall not be
passed over. Undervaluations of Love are great provocations. Has Nabal thus
requited my kindness says David? I cannot bear it. And the clearer the
convictions of any in this kind were, the more severe will their reflections be
upon themselves.

Secondly, Sins under, or after great Afflictions, are of this importance also.
God does not afflict willingly, or chasten us merely for his pleasure. He does
it to make us partakers of his Holiness. To take so little notice of his hand
herein, as under it, or after it, not to watch against the workings and
surprizals of sin, it has unkindness in it; I smote him, says God, and he
went on frowardly in the ways of his own heart. These provocations of his Sons
and Daughters, he cannot bear with. Has God brought thee into the Furnace, so
that thou have melted under his hand, and in pity and compassion has given
thee enlargement; if thou have soon forgotten his dealings with thee, is it any
wonder, if he mind thee again, by troubles in thy soul?

Thirdly, Breaking off from under strong convictions, and dawnings of Love
before Conversion, are oftentimes remembered upon the conscience afterward.
When the Lord by his Spirit shall mightily convince the heart of sin, and make
withal some discoveries of his Love, and the Excellencies of Christ unto it, so
that it begins to yield, and be overpowred, being almost persuaded to be a
Christian; if then through the strength of lust, or unbelief, it goes back to
the world, or self righteousness; its folly has unkindness with it, that
sometimes shall not be passed by. God can, and often does put forth the
greatness of his power, for the recovery of such a soul; but yet he will deal
with him, about this contempt of his Love, and the Excellency of his Son, in
the dawnings of them revealed unto him.

Fourthly, Sudden forgetfulness of endearing manifestations of special Love.
This God cautions his people against; as knowing their proneness thereunto.
Psalm. 85. 8. God the Lord, will speak peace to his People and his Saints; but
let them not turn again to solly. Let them take heed of their aptness to forget
endearing manifestations of special Love. When God at any time draws nigh to a
soul by his Spirit, in his Word, with gracious words of peace and love, giving
a sense of his kindness upon the heart by the Holy Ghost, so that it is filled
with joy unspeakable and glorious thereon; for this soul, upon a temptation, a
diversion, or by mere carelessness and neglect, which oftentimes falls out, to
suffer this sense of Love to be as it were obliterated, and so to lose that
influencing efficacy unto obedience which it is accompanied withal, this also
is full of unkindness. An account hereof we have, Cant. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In
the first Verse the Lord Jesus draws nigh with full provision of Gospel Mercies
for his Beloved; I am come unto thee, says he, O my Sister; I have brought
myrrh and spice, honey and Wine with me: What ever is spiritually sweet and
delightful; Mercy, Grace, Peace, Consolation, Joy, Assurance, they are all here
in a readiness for thee, v. 2. The Spouse in her drowsy indisposition takes
little notice of this gracious visit; she is diverted by other matters, and
knows not how to attend fully and wholly to the blessed Communion offered unto
her; but excuses her self as otherwise engaged. But what is the issue? Christ
withdraws, leaves her in the dark, in the midst of many disconsolations, and
long it is before she obtain any recovery.

Fifthly, Great opportunities for service neglected, and great gifts not
improved, are oftentimes the occasion of plunging the soul into great depths.
Gifts are given to trade withal for God. Opportunities, are the market days
for that trade. To napkin up the one, and to let slip the other, will end in
trouble and disconsolation. Disquietments and perplexities of heart, are worms
that will certainly breed in the rust of unexercised Gifts. God loses a
revenue of glory and honor by such slothful souls; and he will make them
sensible of it. I know some at this day, whom omissions of opportunities for
service, are ready to sink into the grave.

Sixthly, Sins after especial warnings, are usually thus issued. In all that
variety of special warnings which God is pleased to use toward sinning Saints,
I shall single out one only. When a soul is wrestling with some Lust or
Temptation, God by his Providence causes some special word, in the Preaching
of the Gospel, or the Administration of some Ordinance thereof, peculiarly
suited to the state and condition of the soul, by the ways of rebuke, or
persuasion, to come nigh and enter the inmost parts of the heart. The soul
cannot but take notice that God is nigh to him, that he is dealing with him;
and caling on him to look to him for assistance. And he seldom gives such
warnings to his Saints, but that he is nigh them in an eminent manner to give
them relief and help, if in answer unto his call, they apply themselves unto
him; but if his care, and kindness herein be neglected, his following reproofs
are usually more severe.

Seventhly, Sins that bring scandal, seldom suffer the soul to escape depths.
Even in great sins, God in chastening takes more notice oft-times of the
scandal, than the sin: as 2 Samuel 12. 14. Many professors take little notice of
their worldliness, their pride, their passion, their lavish tongues; but the
world does, and the Gospel is disadvantaged by it; and no wonder if themselves
find from the hand of the Lord, the bitter fruits of them in the issue.

And many other such Aggravations of sins there are which heighten provocations
in their own nature, not of so dreadful an aspect as some others, into a guilt
plunging a soul into depths. Those which have been named may suffice in the way
of instance; which is all that we have aimed at, and therefore forbear
enlargements, on the several heads of them.

Aggravations of sins causing distresses.
The consideration of some Aggravations of the guilt of these sins, which bring
the soul usually into the condition before laid down, shall close this
discourse.

First, The soul is furnished with a Principle of Grace, which is continually
operative and working for its preservation from such sins.

The new Creature, is living, and active for its own growth, increase and
security, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, Gal. 5. 17. it
lusts against the flesh. It is naturally active for its own preservation and
increase; as new born Children, have a natural inclination to the food that
will keep them alive, and cause them to grow, 1 Pet. 2. 2. The soul then cannot
fall into these entangling sins, but it must be with an high neglect, of that
very Principle, which is bestowed upon it, for quite contrary ends and
purposes. The labourings, lustings, desires, crying of it, are neglected. Now
it is from God, and of God, and is the Renovation of his Image in us; that
which God owneth and cares for; the wounding of its vitals, the stifling its
operations, the neglect of its endeavors for the souls preservation, do
always attend sins of the importance spoken unto.

Secondly, Whereas this new Creature, this principle of life and obedience is
not able of it self to preserve the soul from such sins as will bring it into
depths; there is full provision for continual supplies made for it, and all its
wants in Jesus Christ. There are treasures of relief in Christ, whereunto the
soul may at any time repair and find succor against the incursions of sin. He
says to the soul as David unto Abiathar; when he fled from Doeg: Abide with
me, fear not; he that seeks my life, seeks thy life, but with me thou shall
be in safety. Sin is my Enemy no less than thine; it seeks the life of thy
soul, and it seeks my life; abide with me, for with me thou shall be in
safety. This the Apostle exhorts us unto, Heb. 4. 16. Let us come boldly to the
Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need. If ever it be a time of need with a soul, it is so when it is under the
assaults of provoking sins. At such a time there is suitable and seasonable
help in Christ for succor and relief. The new Creature beggs with sighs and
groans, that the soul would apply it self unto him. To neglect him with all his
Provision of Grace, whilst he stands calling unto us, open unto me, for my head
is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, to despise the
sighing of the poor Prisoner, the new Creature, by sin appointed to dye, cannot
but be an high provocation. May not God complain and say; see these poor
creatures; they were once entrusted with a stock of Grace in themselves; this
they cast away, and themselves into the utmost misery thereby. That they might
not utterly perish a second time, their portion and stock is now laid up in
another; a safe Treasurer; in him are their lives and comforts secured. But see
their wretched negligence; they venture all, rather than they will attend to
him for succor. And what think we is the heart of Christ, when he sees his
Children giving way to conscience wasting sins, without that application unto
him, which the life and peace of their own souls calls upon them for. These are
not sins of daily infirmity which cannot be avoided; but their guilt is always
attended, with a neglect more or less, of the relief provided in Christ against
them. The means of preservation from them is blessed, ready, nigh at hand; the
concernment of Christ in our preservation great, of our souls unspeakable; to
neglect and despise, means, Christ, souls, peace and life, must needs render
guilt very guilty.

Thirdly, Much to the same purpose may be spoken about that signal provision
that is made against such sins as these in the Covenant of Grace, as has been
already declared. But I shall not farther carry on this discourse.

And this may suffice, as to the state and condition of the soul in this Psalm
represented. We have seen what the depths are wherein it is entangled, and by
what ways and means any one may come to be cast into them. The next thing that
offers it self unto our consideration, is the deportment of a gracious soul in
that state and condition; or what course it steers toward a delivery.

The Duty and Actings of a Believer under distresses from a sense of sin. His
Application unto God. To God alone. Earnestness and intention of mind therein.

The second Verse opened.
The words of these two first Verses declare also the deportment of the soul in
the condition that we have described; that is, what it does, and what course it
steers for relief. I have cried unto thee O Lord, Lord hear my voice, let thine
ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications.

There is in the words a General Application made in a tendency unto relief;
wherein is first to be considered, to whom the Application is made; and that is
JEHOVAH. I have cried unto thee Jehovah. God gave out that Name to his people
to confirm their faith in the stability of his Promises; Exodus 3. He who is
BEING himself, will assuredly give being and subsistence to his promises. Being
to deal with God, about the promises of grace, he makes his Application to him
under this name. I call upon thee Jehovah.

In the Application it self, may be observed,

First, The Anthropopathy of the Expression. He prays that God would cause his
ears to be attentive: after the manner of men who seriously attend to what is
spoken to them, when they turn aside from that which they regard not.

Secondly, The Earnestness of the soul in the work it has in hand, which is
evident both from the Reduplication of his request, Lord hear my voice, let
thine ears be attentive to my voice, and the Emphaticalness of the words he
makes use of. Let thine ears says he, be (...) Diligently Attentive. The word
signifies the most diligent heedfulness and close attention; let thine ears be
very attentive; and unto what; (...) to the voice of my supplications:
deprecationum mearum generally say Interpreters; of my Deprecations; or earnest
prayers for the averting of evil, or punishment. But the word is from (...)
Gratiosus suit; to be gracious or merciful; so that it signifies properly
supplications for grace. Be attentive, says he, O Lord, unto my supplications
for grace and mercy, which according to my extreme necessity, I now address my
self to make unto thee. And in these words does the Psalmist set forth in
general the frame and working of a gracious soul, being cast into depths and
darkness by sin.

The foundation of what I shall farther thence pursue, lies in these two
Propositions.

First, The only attempt of a sinful entangled soul for relief lies in an
application to God alone. To thee Jehovah have I cried, Lord hear.

Secondly, Depths of sin intanglements will put a gracious soul on intense and
earnest application unto God; Lord hear, Lord attend. Dying men do not use to
cry out slothfully for relief.

What may be thought necessary in general for the direction of a soul in the
state and condition described, shall briefly be spoken unto from these two
Propositions.

Actings of a Believer under distress from sin.
First, Trouble, danger, disquietment, arguing not only things evil, but a sense
in the mind and soul of them, will of themselves put those in whom they are
upon seeking relief. Every thing would naturally be at rest: A drowning man
needs no Exhortation to endeavor his own deliverance and safety. And spiritual
troubles will in like manner put men on attempts for relief. To seek for no
remedy, is to be senslesly obdurate or wretchedly desperate, as Cain and Judas.
We may suppose then that the principal business of every soul in depths, is to
endeavor deliverance. They cannot rest in that condition, wherein they have no
rest. In this endeavor what course a gracious soul steers, is laid down in the
first Proposition, negatively and positively. He applies himself not to any
thing but God, he applies himself unto God. An eminent instance we have of it
in both parts; or both to the one side and the other, Hos. 14. 3. Ashur, say
those poor distressed returning sinners, shall not save us, we will not ride
upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our
Gods, for in thee the fatherless finds mercy. Their application unto God, is
attended with a renunciation of every other way of relief.

False ways of relieving souls in distress.
Several things there are that sinners are apt to apply themselves unto for
relief in their perplexities, which prove unto them as waters that fail. How
many, things have the Romanists invented to deceive souls withal? Saints, and
Angels, the Blessed Virgin, Wood of the Cross, Confissions, Rennances, Masses,
Pilgrimages, Dirges, Purgatories, Papal Pardons, Works of Compensation, and the
like, are made entrances for innumerable souls into everlasting ruin. Did they
know the terror of the Lord, the nature of Sin, and of the mediation of Christ,
they would be ashamed and confounded in themselves for these abominations; they
would not say unto these their Idols, ye are our Gods, come and save us. How
short do all their contrivances come of his, that would fain be offering Rivers
of Oil, yea, the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul, his first born for
his transgression, Mich. 6. 7. Who yet gains nothing, but an Aggravation of his
sin and misery thereby: Yea, the Heathen went beyond them in devotion and
expense. It is no new enquiry what course sin perplexed souls should take for
relief. From the foundation of the world, the minds of far the greatest part of
mankind, have been exercised in it. As was there light or darkness, such was
the course they took; Among those who were ignorant of God, this Enquiry
brought forth all that Diabolical Superstition which spread it self over the
face of the whole world. Gentilism being destroyed by the power and Efficacy of
the Gospel, the same enquiry working in the minds of darkened men in conjunction
with other lusts, brought forth the Papacy. When men had lost a spiritual
acquaintance with the Covenant of Grace, and Mystery of the Gospel, the design
of eternal love, the efficacy of the blood of Christ, they betook themselves in
part, or in whole for relief under their entanglements, unto the broken
Cisterns mentioned. They are of two sorts: Self, and other things. For those
other things, which belong unto their false Worship, being abominated by all
the Saints of God, I shall not need to make any farther mention of them. That
which relates unto self, is not confined unto Popery, but extends it self to
the limits of Humane Nature, and is predominate in all that are under the Law;
that is, to seek for relief in sin distresses by self-endeavours,
self-righteousness. Hence many poor souls in straights apply themselves, to
themselves. They expect their cure, from the same hand that wounded them. This
was the life of Judaism, as the Apostle informs us, Romans 10. 3. And all men
under the Law, are still animated by the same principle. They return, but not
unto the Lord. Finding themselves in depths, in distresses about sin, what
course do they take? This they will do, that they will do no more; this shall
be their ordinary course, and that they will do in an extraordinary manner; as
they have offended, whence their trouble arises, so they will amend, and look
that their peace should spring from thence, as if God and they, stood on equal
terms. In this way some spend all their days; sinning and amending, amending
and sinning, without once coming to repentance and peace. This the souls of
believers watch against. They look on themselves as fatherless; in thee the
fatherless finds mercy; that is, helpless; without the least ground of hopes
in themselves, or expectation from themselves. They know their repentance,
their amendment, their supplications, their humiliations, their fastings, their
mortifications; will not relieve them. Repent they will, and amend they will,
and pray, and fast, and humble their souls, for they know these things to be
their duty; but they know that their goodness extends not to him with whom they
have to do, nor is he profited by their righteousness. They will be in the
performance of all duties, but they expect not deliverance by any duty. It is
God, say they, with whom we have to do: our business is to hearken what he will
say unto us.

There are also other ways whereby sinful souls destroy themselves by false
reliefs. Diversions from their perplexing thoughtfulness pleases them. They
will fix on something or other, that cannot cure their disease, but shall only
make them forget that they are sick. As Cain under the terror of his guilt,
departed from the presence of the Lord, and sought inward rest in outward
labor and employment; he went and built a City, Genesis 4. 6. Such courses Soul
fixed on; first Music, then a Witch. Nothing more ordinary than for men thus
to deal with their convictions. They see their sickness, feel their wound, and
go to the Assyrian, Hos. 5. 13. And this insensibly leads men into Atheism.
Frequent Applications of Creature diversions unto convictions of sin, are a
notable means of bringing on final impenitency. Some Drunkards had it may be
never been so, had they not been first convinced of other sins. They strive to
stifle the guilt of one sin, with another. They fly from themselves, unto
themselves, from their consciences unto their lusts; and seek for relief from
sin by sinning. This is so far from Believers, that they will not allow lawful
things to be a diversion of their distress. Use lawful things they may and
will, but not to divert their thoughts from their distresses. These they know
must be issued between God and them. Wear off they will not, but must be taken
away. These rocks, and the like whereof there are innumerable, I say, a
gracious soul takes care to avoid. He knows it is God alone who is the Lord of
his Conscience, where his depths lie; God alone against whom he has sinned;
God alone who can pardon his sin. From dealing with him he will be neither
enticed, nor diverted. To thee O Lord, says he, do I come; thy word concerning
me must stand; upon thee will I wait; if thou have no delight in me I must
perish. Other remedies I know are vain. I intend not to spend my strength for
that which is not bread. Unto thee do I cry. Here a sin-intangled soul is to
fix its self. Trouble excites it to look for relief. Many things without it
present themselves as a diversion; many things within it, offer themselves for
a remedy. Forget thy sorrow say the former; ease thy self of it by us, say the
latter; the soul refuses both, as Physicians of no value; and to God alone,
makes its Application. He has wounded, and he alone can heal. And until any
one that is sensible of the guilt of sin, will come off from all reserves to
deal immediately with God, it is in vain for him to expect relief.

Earnestness of a distressed soul in its Applications unto God.
Secondly, Herein it is intense, earnest, and urgent, which was the second thing
observed. It is no time now to be sloathful. The souls All, its greatest
concernments are at the stake. Dull, cold, formal, customary Applications to
God will not serve the turn. Ordinary actings of says, love, servency; usual
seasons, opportunities, duties, answer not this condition. To do no more than
ordinary now, is to do nothing at all. He that puts forth no more strength and
activity for his deliverance when he is in depths, ready to perish, than he
does, or has need to do, when he is at liberty in plain and smoorths paths, is
scarcely like to escape. Some (in such conditions) are careless and negligent;
they think in an ordinary course, to wear off their distempers; and that
although at present they are sensible of their danger; they shall yet have
peace at last; in which frame there is much contempt of God. Some despond and
languish away under their pressures. Spiritual sloth influenceth both these
sorts of persons. Let us see the frame under consideration exemplified in
another. We have an instance in the Spouse, Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3. She had lost the
presence of Christ; and so was in the very state and condition before
described, v. 1. It was night with her, a time of darkness and disconsolation;
and she seeks for her Beloved: By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul
loves. Christ was absent from her, and she was left unto depths and darkness
upon that account. Wherefore she seeks for him; but as the most are apt to do
in the like state and condition. She mends not her pace, goes not out of, or
beyond her course of ordinary duties; nor the frame she was usually in at other
times. But what is the issue? says she, I found him not. This is not a way to
recover a sense of lost Love; nor to get out of her entanglements. And this
puts her on another course; she begins to think that if things continue in this
estate, she shall be undone; I go on indeed with the performance of duties
still, but I have not the presence of my Beloved; I meet not with Christ in
them. My darkness and trouble abides still; if I take not some other course, I
shall be lost. Well says she, I will rise now, v. 2. I will shake off all that
ease and sloth, and customariness, that cleave to me. Some more lively,
vigorous course must be fixed on. Resolutions for new, extraordinary, vigorous,
constant Applications unto God, are the first general step and degree, of a sin
entangled soul acting toward a recovery, I will rise now. And what does she do
when she is thus resolved? I will, says she, go about the streets, and in the
broad ways, and seek him whom my soul loves. I will leave no ways or means
unattempted, whereby I may possibly come to a fresh enjoyment of him. If a man
seek for a Friend, he can look for him only in the streets and in the broad
ways; that is either in Towns, or in the Fields. So will I do says the
Spouse; in what Way, Ordinance, or Institution soever, in or by what duty
soever, public or private, of communion with others, or solitary retiredness,
Christ ever was, or may be found, or peace obtained, I will seek him, and not
give over until I come to an enjoyment of him. And this frame, this Resolution,
a soul in depths must come unto, if ever it expect deliverance. For the most
part, men's wounds stink and are corrupt because of their foolishness. As the
Psalmist complains, Psalm. 38. 5. They are wounded by sin; and through spiritual
sloth they neglect their cure; this weakens them, and disquiets them day by
day; yet they endure all, rather than they will come out of their carnal ease
to deal effectually with God in an extraordinary manner. It was otherwise with
David, Psalm. 22. 1, 2. Why, says he, art thou so far from helping me, and from
the words of my roaring! O my God, I cry in the day time, and in the night
season, and am not silent. What ails the Man? Can he not be quiet night nor
day? never silent, never hold his peace? And if he be somewhat disquieted, can
he not contain himself, but that he must roar, and cry out? Yea, must he roar
thus all the day long, as he speaks, Psalm. 32. 3. and groan all the night, as
Psalm. 6. 6. What is the matter with all this roaring, sighing, tears, roaring
all the day, all night long? Ah let him alone, his soul is bitter in him; he is
fallen into depths; the Lord is withdrawn from him, trouble is hard at hand,
yea, he is full of anxiety on the account of sin; there is no quietness nor
soundness in him; and he must thus earnestly and restlessy apply himself for
relief. Alas, what strangers for the most part are men now adays to this
frame? How little of the workings of this Spirit is found amongst us? And is
not the reason of it, that we value the world more, and Heaven and heavenly
things less than he did? that we can live at a better rate without a sense of
the love of God in Christ, than he could do? and is it not hence that we every
day see so many withering Professors, that have in a manner lost all Communion
with God, beyond a little lip-labor, or talking; the filthy savor of whose
wounds are offensive to all but themselves; and so will they go on ready to dye
and perish, rather than with this holy man thus stir up themselves to meet the
Lord. Heman was also like unto him, Psalm. 88 11; 13. What sense he had of his
depths, he declares, v. 3. My soul, says he, is full of troubles, and my life
draws nigh unto the grave. And what course does he steer in this heavy,
sorrowful, and disconsolate condition? Why says he, O Lord God of my
salvation, I have cried day and night unto thee, let my prayer come before
thee, incline thine ear unto my cry, v. 1, 2. Day and night he cries to the God
of his salvation, and that with earnestness and importunity. This was his
business, this was he exercised about all his days.

This is that which is aimed at; if a gracious soul be brought into the depths
before mentioned and described, by reason of sin, when the Lord is pleased to
lead him forth toward a recovery, he causes him to be vigorous, and restless
in all the duties whereby he may make Application to him for deliverance. Now
wherein this intensness and earnestness of the soul in its Applications unto
God, does principally consist, I shall briefly declare, when I have touched a
little upon some considerations and grounds that stir it up thereunto.

Grounds of earnestness in Applications unto God.
First, The greatness of men's concernments may well put them on this
earnestness. Men do not use to deal with dull and slothful spirits about their
greatest concerns. David tells us, that he was more concerned in the light of
Gods countenance, than the men of the world could be in their Corn and Wine,
Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Suppose a man of the world, should have his house, wherein all
his stock and riches are laid up, set on fire, and so the whole be in danger
under his eye to be consumed; would he be calm and quiet in the consideration
of it? Would he not bestir himself with all his might, and call in all the help
he could obtain? and that because his portion, his all, his great concernment
lies at stake. And shall the soul be slothful, careless, dull, secure, when
fire is put to its eternal concernments? when the light of Gods countenance,
which is of more esteem unto him, than the greatest increase of Corn and Wine,
can be to the men of the world, is removed from him? It was an argument of
prodigious security in Jonah, that he was fast asleep when the Ship wherein he
was, was ready to be cast away for his ^^ke. And will it be thought less in any
soul, who being in a storm of wrath and displeasure from God, sent out into the
deep after him, shall neglect it, and sleep, as Solomon says on the top of a
Mast in the midst of the Sea? How did that poor creature whose heart was mad on
his Idols, Judge. 18. 24. cry out, when he was deprived of them? You have taken
away my Gods, says he, and what have I more? And shall a gracious soul lose
his God, through his own folly, the sense of his love, the consolation of his
presence, and not with all his might follow hard after him? Peace with God, joy
in believing, such souls have formerly obtained; Can they live without them
now, in their ordinarily walking, can they choose but cry out with Job, O that
it were with us, as in former days, when the candle of the Lord was upon our
Tabernacle, Chap. 29. 2, 3, 4. and with David, O Lord restore unto me the joy
of salvation, Psalm. 51. 12. for Oh my God, I remember former enjoyments, and my
soul is cast down within me, Psalm. 42. 6. They cannot live without it. But
suppose, they might make a sorry shift to pass on in their pilgrimage, whilst
all is smooth about them; what will they do in the time of outward trials and
distresses; when deep calls unto deep, and one trouble excites and sharpens
another: Nothing then will support them, they know, but that which is wanting
to them; as Hab. 3. 17, 18. Psalm. 23. 4. So that the greatness of their
concernment, provokes them to the earnestness mentioned.

Secondly, They have a deep sense of these their great concernments. All men
are equally concerned in the Love of God, and pardon of sin. Every one has a
soul of the same immortal constitution, equally capable of bliss and woe. But
yet we see most men are so stupidly sottish, that they take little notice of
these things. Neither the guilt of sin, nor the wrath of God, nor death, nor
Hell, are thought on or esteemed by them; they are their concernments, but they
are not sensible of them. But gracious souls, have a quick living sense of
spiritual things. For,

First, They have a saving spiritual light whereby they are able to discern the
true nature of sin, and the terror of the Lord. For though they are now
supposed to have lost the comforting light of the Spirit; yet they never loose
the sanctifying light of the Spirit; the light whereby they are enabled to
discern spiritual things in a spiritual manner, this never utterly departs from
them. By this they see sin to be exceeding sinful, Romans 7. 13. By this they
know the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 15. 11. And that it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. By this they discover the
excellency of the love of God in Christ, which passes knowledge, the present
sense whereof they have lost. By this they are enabled to look within the vail,
and to take a view of the blessed consolations which the Saints enjoy, whose
communion with God was never interrupted. This represents to them all the
sweetness, pleasure, Joy, Peace, which in former days they had whilst God was
present with them in Love: By this, are they taught to value all the fruits of
the blood of Jesus Christ, of the enjoyment of many whereof they are at present
cut short and deprived. All which, with other things of the like nature and
importance make them very sensible of their concernments.

Secondly, They remember what it cost them formerly to deal with God about sin;
and hence they know it is no ordinary matter they have in hand. They must again
to their old work; take the old cup into their hands again. A recovery from
depths is as a new conversion.

Oft-times in it, the whole work, as to the souls apprehension, is gone over
afresh. This the soul knows to have been a work of dread, terror and trouble,
and trembles in it self, at its new trials. And,

Thirdly, The Holy Ghost gives unto such poor souls, a fresh sense of their
deep concernments, on purpose that it may be a means to stir them up unto these
earnest Applications unto God. The whole work is his, and he carries it on, by
means suited to the compassing of the end he aims at. And by these means is a
gracious soul brought into the frame mentioned. Now there are sundry things
that concur in and unto this frame.

Earnestness etc. wherein it consists.
First, There is a continual thoughtfulness about the sad condition wherein the
soul is in its depths. Being deeply affected with their condition they are
continually ruminating upon it, and pondering it in their minds. So David
declares the case to have been with him, Psalm. 38. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Thine
arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore; there is no soundness
in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones
because of my sins; for mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy
burden they are too heavy for me, my wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of
my foolishness; I am troubled, I am bowed down, I go mourning all the day long;
I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared for the disquietness of my heart.
Restlestness, deep-thoughtfulness, disquietness of heart, continual heaviness
of soul, sorrow and anxiety of mind, lie at the bottom of the Applications we
speak of. From these Principles their prayers flow out; as David adds, v. 9.
Lord all my desire is before thee, and my groaning, is not hid from thee. This
way all his trouble wrought. He prayed out of the abundance of his meditation
and grief. Thoughts of their state and condition lie down with such Persons,
and rise with them; and accompany them all the day long. As Reuben cried, The
child is not, and I whither shall I go? So does such a soul; the Love of God is
not, Christ is not, and I whither shall I cause my sorrow to go? God is
provoked, death is nigh at hand, relief is far away, darkness is about me; I
have lost my peace, my joy, my Song in the night; what do I think of duties?
Can two walk together unless they be agreed? Can I walk with God in them,
whilst I have thus made him mine enemy? What do I think of Ordinances? Will it
do me any good to be at Jerusalem, and not see the face of the King? to live
under Ordinances, and not to meet in them with the King of Saints? May I not
justly fear, that the Lord will take his holy Spirit from me, until I be left
without remedy? With such thoughts as these are sin-entangled souls exercised,
and they lie rolling in their minds, in all their applications unto God.

Secondly, We see the Application it self consists in, and is made by the
prayer of Faith; or crying unto God; now this is done with intenseness of mind;
which has a twofold fruit or property; (1.) Importunity; and (2.) Constancy.

It is said of our blessed Savior, that when he was in his depths, about our
sins, that he offered up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears,
Heb. 5. 7. Strong cries and tears, express the utmost intension of Spirit. And
David expresses it by roaring, as we have seen before; as also by sighing,
groaning and panting. A soul in such a condition lies down before the Lord,
with sighs, groans, mourning, cries, tears and roaring, according to the
various working of his heart, and its being affected with the things that it
has to do; and this produces,

First, Importunity. The power of the importunity of Faith our Savior has
marvelously set out, Luke 11. 8, 9, 10. as also, Chap. 18. 1. Importunate
prayer is certainly prevailing. And importunity is as it were made up of these
two things: frequency of interposition, and variety of arguings. You shall have
a man that is importunate come unto you, seven times a day about the same
business, and after all, if any new thought come into his mind, though he had
resolved to the contrary, he will come again. And there is nothing that can be
imagined to relate unto the business he has in hand, but he will make use of
it, and turn it to the furtherance of his plea. So is it in this case. Men will
use both frequency of interposition, and variety of arguings, Psalm. 86. 1. I
cry unto thee daily, or rather, all the day. He had but that one business, and
he attended it to the purpose. By this means we give God no rest, Isa. 62. 7.
which is the very character of importunity. Such souls go to God; and they are
not satisfied with what they have done; and they go again; and somewhat abides
still with them, and they go to him again; and the heart is not yet emptied;
they will go again to him; that he may have no rest. What variety of arguments are
pleaded with God in this case, I could also manifest in the same David. But it
is known to all; there is not any thing almost that he makes not a plea of; the
Faithfulness, Righteousness, Name, Mercy, Goodness and kindness of God in Jesus
Christ; the concernment of others in him, both the friends and foes of God; his
own weakness, and helplesness, yea, the greatness of sin it self: Be merciful
to my sin, says he, for it is great. Sometimes he begins with some Arguments
of this kind; and then being a little diverted by other considerations, some
new plea is suggested unto him by the Spirit, ane he returns immediately to his
first employment and design, all arguing great intension of mind and spirit.

Secondly Constancy also flows from intenseness. Such a soul will not give
over, until it obtain what it aims at, and looks for: as we shall see in our
process in opening this Psalm.

And this is in general the deportment of a gracious soul in the condition here
represented unto us. As poor creatures love their peace, as they love their
souls, as they tender the glory of God, they are not to be wanting in this
duty. What is the reason that controversies hang so long between God and your
souls, that it may be you scarce see a good day all your lives? Is it not for
the most part from your sloth and despondency of spirit? you will not gird up
the loins of your minds, in dealing with God, to put them to a speedy issue in
the blood of Christ. You go on and off, begin and cease, try and give over; and
for the most part, though your case be extraordinary, content your selves with
ordinary and customary Applications unto God. This makes you wither, become
useless, and pine away in and under your perplexities. David did not so; but
after many and many a breach made by sin, yet through quick, vigorous, restless
actings of Faith, all was repaired, so that he lived peaceably and dyed
triumphantly. Up then and be doing; let not your wounds corrupt because of your
folly; make through work of that which lies before you; be it long, or
difficult, it is all one, it must be done, and is attended with safety; What
you are like to meet withal in the first place shall nextly be declared.

Verse 3.
The words of the Verse explained; and their meaning opened.

Verse 3. opened.
THE general frame of a gracious soul in its perplexities about sin, has been
declared. Its particular actings, what it does, what it meets withal, are
nextly represented unto us.

First, Then in particular it cries out, If thou Lord should mark iniquities,
O Lord who shall stand?

There is in the words a Supposition; and an Inference on that Supposition. In
the Supposition; there is, first, the Name of God that is fixed on as suited
unto it. And Secondly, The thing it self supposed. In the Inference, there is
expressed the matter of it; to stand; and the manner of its proposal; Wherein
two things occur, (1.) That it is expressed by way of Interrogation: (2.) The
Indefiniteness of that Interrogation; Who shall stand?

If thou Lord; He here fixes on another name of God; which is Jah. A name
though from the same root with the former, yet seldom used, but to intimate and
express the terrible Majesty of God. He rides on the Heavens, and is extolled
by his name Jah. Psalm. 68. 4. He is to deal now with God about the guilt of
sin; and God is represented to the soul as great and terrible; that he may know
what to expect and look for, if the matter must be tried out according to the
demerit of sin.

What then says he to J A H? (...) If thou should mark iniquities. (...) is
to observe and keep as in safe custody. To keep, preserve and watch diligently.
So to remark and observe, as to retain that which is observed, to ponder it,
and lay it up in the heart, Genesis 37. 11. Jacob observed Joseph's dream: that is,
he retained the memory of it, and pondered it in his heart.

The marking of Iniquities then here intended, is Gods so far considering and
observing of them, as to reserve them for punishment and vengeance. In
opposition unto this marking, he is said not to see sin, to overlook it, to
cover it, to forget it, or remember it no more; that is, to forgive it, as the
next Verse declares.

I need not show that God so far marks all sins in all persons, as to see them,
know them, disallow them, and to be displeased with them. This cannot be denied
without taking away of all grounds of his fear and Worship. To deny it, is all
one as to deny the very Being of God; deny his Holiness and Righteousness, and
you deny his Existence. But there is a day appointed, wherein all the men of
the world shall know, that God knew and took notice of all and every one of
their most secret sins. There is then a double marking of sin in God, neither
of which can be denied in reference unto any sins, in any persons. The first is
Physical, consisting in his omniscience whereunto all things are open and
naked. Thus no sin is hid from him; the secretest are before the light of his
countenance. All are marked by him. Secondly, Moral; in a displicency with, or
displeasure against every sin, which is inseparable from the nature of God,
upon the account of his Holiness. And this is declared in the sentence of the
Law, and that equally to all men in the world. But the marking here intended,
is that which is in a tendency to Animadversion and punishment according to the
tenor of the Law. Not only the sentence of the Law, but a Will of punishing
according to it is included in it. If says the Psalmist, thou the great and
dreadful God, who art extolled by thy glorious name Jah, should take notice
of iniquities, so as to recompense them unto sinners that come unto thee
according to the severity and exigence of thy holy Law. What then? It is
answered by the matter of the Proposal, who can stand? That is, none can so do;
(...) says Chrysostom; This WHO, is NONE. No man, not one in the world. (...)
quis stabit, or consistet; who can stand, or abide and endure the trial? Every
one on this supposition must perish, and that eternally. This the desert of
sin, and the Curse of the Law, which is the Rule of this marking of their
iniquity, does require. And there is a notable emphasis in the interragation,
which contains the manner of the Inference. Who can stand? is more than if he
had said, none can abide the trial, and escape without everlasting ruin. For
the Interrogation is indefinite; not how can I? but, who can stand? When the
Holy Ghost would set out the certainty, and dreadfulness of the perishing of
ungodly men, he does it by such a kind of expression, wherein there is a deeper
sense intimated into the minds of men, than any words can well cloth or
declare. 1 Pet. 4. 17. What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel?
and v. 18. Where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? So here. Who can
stand? there is a deep insinuation of a dreadful ruin, as unto all, with whom
God shall so deal, as to mark their iniquities. See Psalm. 1. 5.

The Psalmist then addressing himself to deal with God about sin, lays down in
the first place in the general how things must go, not with himself only, but
with all the world, upon the supposition he had fixed. This is not my case
only; but it is so with all mankind, every one who is partaker of flesh and
blood; whether their guilt answer that, which I am oppressed withal or no; all
is one; guilty they are all, and all must perish: How much more must that needs
be my condition, who have contracted so great a guilt as I have done. Here then
he lays a great Argument against himself, on the supposition before laid down.
If none, the Holiest, the humblest, the most believing soul, can abide the
trial, can endure; how much less can I, who am the chiefest of sinners, the
least of Saints, who come unspeakably behind them in holiness, and have equally
gone beyond them in sin?

This is the sense and importance of the words; Let us now consider how they
are expressive of the actings of the soul whose state and condition is here
represented unto us, and what directions they will afford unto us, to give unto
them who are fallen into the same state.

What first presents it self to a soul in distress on the account of sin. This
opened in four Propositions. Thoughts of Gods marking sin according to the
tenor of the Law full of dread and terror.

Propositions from Verse 3.
What depths the Psalmist was in, has been declared; in them, what Resolution
he takes upon himself to seek to God alone for relief and recovery, has been
also showed; and what earnestness in general he uses therein; Addressing
himself unto God in that frame, with that purpose and resolution, the first
thing he fixes on in particular is the greatness of his sin, and guilt,
according to the tenor of the Law. It appears then, that,

First, In a sin perplexed souls addresses unto God, the first thing that
presents it self unto him, is Gods marking sin according to the tenor of the
Law. The case is the same in this matter with all sorts of sinners; whether
before conversion, or in relapses and entanglements after conversion. There is
a proportion between Conversion and Recoveries. They are both wrought by the
same means and ways; and have both the same effects upon the souls of sinners,
although in sundry things they differ, not now to be spoken unto. What then is
spoken on this he^d, may be applied unto both sorts; to them that are yet
unconverted, and to them who are really delivered from their state and
condition; but especially unto those who know not whether state they belong
unto, that is, to all guilty souls. The Law will put in its claim to all. It
will condemn the sin, and try what it can do against the sinner. There is no
shaking of it off; it must be fairly answered, or it will prevail. The Law
issues out an arrest for the debt; and it is to no purpose to bid the Sergeant
be gone, or to entreat him to spare. If payment be not procured, and an
acquittance produced, the soul must to prison. I am going unto God says the
soul. He is great and terrible, a marker of sin, and what shall I say unto him?
This makes him tremble, and cry out, O Lord who shall stand? so that it appears
hence, that,

Secondly, Serious thoughts of Gods marking sin according to the tenor of the
Law, is a thing full of dread and terror to the soul of a sinner. But this is
not all; he is not swallowed up in this amazement, crying out only who can
stand? there is included in the words, a through sincere Acknowledgement of his
own sin, and the guilt thereof. Mentioning the desert of sin, in his own case,
he acknowledges his own. So that,

Thirdly, Sincere sense and Acknowledgement of sin, with selfcondemnation in
the Justification of God, is the first peculiar especial working of a gracious
soul rising out of its entanglements. All this is included in these words. He
acknowledges both his own guilt, and the Righteousness of God, if he should
deal with him according to the demerit of sin.

And these things lie in the words absolutely considered; But the state of the
soul here represented, carries us on farther. He rests not here, as we shall
see in the opening of the next Verse, the chief thing aimed at in the whole.
And as a transition from the one to the other, that we may still carry on the
general design at the entrance laid down; we must take along with us this
farther observation.

Fourthly, Though self-condemnation be an eminent preparation for the discovery
of forgiveness in God, yet a poor distressed soul is not to rest in it, nor to
rest upon it, but to pass on to the embracing of forgiveness it self.

There is yet a general proposition lying in the words, that we may make use of
in our passage; and it is this, Gods marking of iniquities, and man's salvation
are everlastingly inconsistent. I mean his marking them in the persons of the
sinners, for the ends before mentioned.

Of some of these I shall farther treat, according as the handling of them
conduces to the purpose in hand.

That which I shall begin withal, is that which was first laid down about the
effects of serious thoughts concerning Gods marking sin according to the tenor
of the Law; which as I said, is the first thing that presents it self unto a
sin entangled soul in its addresses unto God.

But this shall not pass alone. I shall draw the two first Observations into
one, and make use of the first only in the confirmation of the other; which
will express the sense of the words absolutely considered. The third and fourth
will lead us on in the progress of the soul, toward the relief sought after,
and proposed. That therefore which first is to be insisted on, comes up to this
Proposition. In a sin perplexed souls addresses unto God, the first thing that
presents it self unto him is, Gods marking of sin according to the Tenor of the
Law, which of its self is apt to fill the soul with dread and terror.

I shall first somewhat speak unto it in This; as considering in its self, and
then enquire into the concernment of the soul in it, whose condition is here
described.

Terror arising from a sense of the guilt of sin.
The Lord speaks of some who when they hear the words of the curse, yet bless
themselves, and say they shall have peace; Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Let men preach, and
say what they please of the terror of the Lord, they will despise it; which God
threatens with utter extermination: And he notes it again, as an amazing
wickedness, and the height of obdurateness, Jer. 36. 24. Generally it is with
sinners, as it was with Gaal the Son of Ebed, Judge. 9. when he was fortifying
of Sichem against Abimelech; Zebul tells him that Abimelech will come and
destroy him. Let him come says Gaal, I shall deal well enough with him, let
him bring forth his Army, I fear him not; but upon the very first appearance of
Abimelech's Army, he trembles for fear, v. 36. Tell obdurate sinners of the
wrath of God, and that he will come to plead his cause against them; for the
most part they take no notice of what you say; nor have any serious thoughts
about it; but go on as if they were resolved they should deal well enough with
him. Notwithstanding all their stoutness, a day is coming wherein fearfulness
shall surprise them, and make them cry out, who amongst us shall dwell with
devouring fire, who amongst us shall inhabit with everlasting burnings? Yea, if
the Lord be pleased in this life in an especial manner to draw nigh to any of
them, they quickly see, that their hearts cannot endure, nor can their hands be
strong, Ezekiel. 22. 14. Their hands hang down, and their stout hearts tremble
like an aspen leaf.

He who first sinned, and had first occasion to have serious thoughts about
Gods marking sin, gives us a notable instance of what we have assirmed. And the
first in every kind, is the measure of all that follows in the same kind, Genesis
3. 8. He heard the voice of God: so he had done before without the least
trouble or consternation of Spirit; He was made for communion with God; and
that he might hear his voice was part of his blessedness. But now says he, I
heard thy voice and was afraid, and hid my self. He knew that God was coming in
the inquest of sin, and he was not able to bear the thoughts of meeting him;
could he have gone into the bowels of the earth from whence he was taken, and
have been there hid from God, he would not have failed to have attempted it.
Things are now altered with him; in that God whom he loved before, as a good,
holy, powerful, Righteous Creator, Preserver, Benefactor and Rewarder, he saw
nothing now, but wrath, indignation, vengeance and terror. This makes him
tremble out those dreadful words, I heard thy voice, and was afraid, and hid my
self.

The giving out of the Law afterward, evinces what effects the consideration
of Gods proceeding with sinners, according to the tenor of it, must needs
produce, Exodus 20. 18, 19. All the people saw the thundrings and the
lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet, and the Mountain smoking; as the
Apostle also describes it, Heb. 12. 18. In this manner came forth from the Lord
that fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. So that all who were concerned in it, did
exceedingly quake and tremble. And yet all this respects but the severity of
the Law in general, without the application of it unto any soul in particular.
There is a solemnity, that carries an awe with it, in the preparation of an
Assize to be kept and held by poor worms like our selves; but the dread of it,
is peculiar to the Malefactors, for whose trial and execution all this
preparation is made. When a soul comes to think, that all this dreadful
preparation, this appearance of terrible Majesty, these streams of the fiery
Law are all pointed toward him, it will make him cry out, Lord who can stand?
And this Law is still in force toward sinners, even as it was on the day
wherein it was given on Mount Sinai. Though Moses grew old, yet his strength
never failed. Nor has his Law, the Law given by him, lost any thing of its
strength, power, or Authority toward sinners. It is still accompanied with
thundrings and lightnings as of old. And it will not fail to represent the
terror of the Lord to a guilty soul.

Among the Saints themselves I could produce instances to manifest that they
have found it to be thus. The cases of Job, David, Heman are known. I shall
only consider it in Christ himself. From himself he had no occasion of any
discouraging thought; being holy, harmless, undefiled. He fulfilled all
Righteousness, did his Fathers will in all things, and abode in his Love. This
must needs be attended with the highest peace, and most blessed Joy. In the
very entrance of his trials, he had a full persuasion of a comfortable issue
and success; as we may see, Isa. 50. 7, 8. But yet when his soul was exercised
with thoughts of Gods marking our iniquities upon him, it was sorrowful unto
the death. He was amazed and very heavy, Mark 14. 33. His Agony, his bloody
sweat, his strong cries and supplications, his reiterated prayers, if it be
possible let this cup pass from me, his last dreadful cry, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me, all manifest what apprehensions he had, of what it was
for God to mark iniquities. Well may poor sinners cry out, Lord who shall
stand? when the Son of God himself, so trembled under the weight of it.

In serious thoughts of Gods marking sin, he is represented unto the soul under
all those glorious terrible Attributes and Excellencies which are apt to beget
a dread and terror in the hearts of sinners, when they have no relief from any
Covenant engagements in Christ. The soul looks upon him as the great Lawgiver,
James 4. 12. able to revenge the breach of it, by destroying body and soul in
Hell fire; as one terrible in holiness, of purer eyes than to behold iniquity;
So also in Greatness and in power; the Living God, into whose hands it is a
fearful thing to fall; as attended with vindictive Justice, saying Vengean^e is
mine, and I will recompense, Heb. 10. 30. Now for a soul to consider God,
clothed with all these dreadful and terrible Excellencies, coming to deal with
sinners according to the tenor of his fiery Law, it cannot but make him cry out
with Moses, I exceedingly quake and tremble.

These things work on their minds the conclusion mentioned before, as asserted
in these words; namely, that Gods marking of sin according to the tenor of the
Law, and man's salvation, are utterly inconsistent; a conclusion, that must
needs shake a soul, when pressed under a sense of its own guilt.

Gods marking sin, and man's salvation inconsistent.
When a Person who is really guilty, and knows himself to be guilty, is brought
unto his trial, he has but these four grounds of hope that his safety and his
trial may be consistent. He may think that either (1.) The Judge will not be
able to find out, or discover his crimes; or (2.) That some one will powerfully
intercede for him with the Judge: or (3.) That the Rule of the Law is not so
strict as to take notice of his miscarriages; or (4.) That the penalty of it,
is not so severe but that there may be a way of escape. Cut him short of his
expectations from some, one, or all of these, and all his hopes must of
necessity perish. And how is it in this case?

First, Of the Judge we have spoken somewhat already. The present enquiry is,
whether any thing may be hid from him or no; and so a door of escape be opened
to a sinner. The Apostle tells us, that all things are open and naked unto him,
Heb. 4. 12. and the Psalmist, that there is not a thought in our hearts, nor a
word in our tongue, but he understands it asar off, and knows it
altogether, Psalm. 139. 2, 4. What the sinner knows of himself, that may cause
him to fear, that God knows. And what he knows not of himself, that deserves
his fear, that God knows also; for he is greater than our hearts, and knows
all things, 1 John 3. 20. When God shall not only set in order before the
sinner, the secret sins, which he retains some remembrance of; but also brings
to mind and represents unto him, that world of filth and folly, which either he
never took any real notice of, or has utterly forgotten, it will trouble him,
yea confound him.

Secondly, But may not this Judge be entreated to pass by what he knows, and to
deal favorably with the sinner? May not an Intercessor be obtained to plead in
the behalf of the guilty soul? Eli determines this matter, 1 Samuel 2. 25. If one
man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him? There is not, says Job between us (...)
one that might argue the case, in pleading for me, and so make up the matter,
laying his hand upon us both, Job 9. 33. We now consider a sinner purely under
the Administration of the Law; which knows nothing of a Mediator. In that case
who shall take upon him to intercede for the sinner? Besides, that all
creatures in Heaven and Earth are engaged in the quarrel of God against
sinners; and besides the greatness and terror of his Majesty, that will
certainly deterr all or any of them from undertaking any such work; what is the
request that in this case must be put up unto God? Is it not that he would
cease to be Holy, leave off from being Righteous, relinquish his Throne, deny
himself, and his Sovereignty, that a Rebel, a Traitor, his cursed enemy may
live and escape his Justice: Is this request reasonable? Is he fit to intercede
for sinners that shall make it? Would he not by so doing prove himself to be
the greatest of them? The sinner cannot then expect any door of escape to be
opened unto him? All the world is against him; and the case must be tried out
nakedly between God and him: but,

Thirdly, It may be the Rule of the Law whereby the sinner is to be tried, is
not so strict, but that in the case of such sins as he is guilty of, it may
admit of a favorable Interpretation; or that the good that he has done, may
be laid in the balance against his Evil, and so some relief be obtained that
way. But the matter is quite otherwise; There is no good Action of a sinner,
though it were perfectly good, that can lie in the balance with, or compensate
the evil of the least sin committed. For all good is due on another account,
though no guilt were incurred. And the payment of money that a man owes, that
he has borrowed, makes no satisfaction for what he has stole; no more will
our duties compensate for our sins. Nor is there any good Action of a sinner,
but it has evil and guilt enough attending it, to render it self unacceptable;
so that men may well cease from thoughts of their supererrogation. Besides
where there is any one sin, if all the good in the world might be supposed to
be in the same person, yet in the indispensible order of our dependence on God,
nothing of that good could come into consideration, until the guilt of that sin
were answered for unto the utmost. Now the penalty of every sin, being the
eternal ruin of the sinner, all his supposed good can stand him in little
stead. And for the Law it self, it is an issue of the Holiness, Righteousness,
and Wisdom of God; so that there is not any evil, so great or small, but is
forb dden in it, and condemned by it. Hereupon David so states this whole
matter, Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified. That is, if things are to be tried out
and determined by the Law, no sinner can obtain acquitment; as Paul declares
the sense of that place to be, Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16. but yet,

Fourthly, It may be the sentence of the Law is not so fierce and dreadful, but
that though guilt be found, there may be yet a way of escape. But the Law
speaks not one word on this side death to an offender. There is a greatness,
and an Eternity of wrath in the sentence of it; and it is God himself who has
undertaken to see the vengeance of it executed. So that on all these accounts
the conclusion mentioned must needs be fixed in the soul of a sinner, that
entertains thoughts of drawing nigh to God.

Though what has been spoken, may be of general use unto sinners of all sorts,
whether called home to God, or yet strangers to him, yet I shall not insist
upon any general improvement of it, because it is intended only for one special
end or purpose. That which is aimed at, is to show what are the first thoughts
that arise in the heart of a poor entangled soul, when first he begins to
endeavor a recovery in a returnal unto God. The Law immediately puts in its
claim unto him, and against him. God is represented unto him, as angry,
displeased, provoked; and his terror more or less besets him round about. This
fills him with fear, shame, and confusion of face; so that he knows not what to
do: These troubles are greater or lesser, according as God sees it best for
the poor creatures present humiliation, and future safety. What then does the
sinner? What are his thoughts hereupon? does he think to fly from God, and to
give over all endeavors of recovery? Does he say this God is an holy and
terrible God, I cannot serve him, it is to no purpose for me to look for any
thing but fury and destruction from hira; and therefore I had as good give
over, as persist in my desing of drawing nigh to him? It cannot be denied but
that in this case, thoughts of this nature will be suggested by unbelief: and
that sometimes great perplexities arise to the soul by them. But this is not
the issue and final product of this exercise of the soul; it produces another
effect; it calls for that which is the first particular working of a gracious
soul arising out of its sin intanglements. This is, as was declared; a sincere
sense of sin, and acknowledgement of it, with self condemnation in the
justification of God: This is the first thing that a soul endeavoring a
recovery from its depths is brought and wrought unto. His general resolution to
make serious and through work, with what he has in hand, was before unfolded.
That which in the next place we are directed unto in these words, is the
Reflection on its self, upon the consideration of Gods marking iniquity, now
mentioned. This is Faiths great and proper use of the Law; The nature whereof
shall be farther opened in the next discourse.

The first particular actings of a soul toward a recovery out of the depths of
sin. Sense of sin, wherein it consists. How it is wrought. Acknowledgement of
sin; its nature and properties. Self-condemnation.

The souls. actings toward a Recovery.
What is the frame of the soul in general, that is excited by grace, and
resolves in the strength thereof to attempt a recovery out of the depths of sin
entanglements, has been declared. We have also showed what entertainment in
general such a soul had need to expect, yea, ordinarily shall be sure to meet
withal. It may be he goes forth at first like Sampson with his locks cut, and
thinks he will do as at other times; but he quickly finds, his peace lost, his
wounds painful, his Conscience restless, God displeased, and his whole
condition, as to the utmost of his own Apprehension, hazardous. This fills him
with the thoughts expressed in this third Verse, and fixes the conclusion in
his mind, discoursed of before. He finds now that he has the Law afresh to
deal withal. Thence arises that sense and acknowledgement of sin, that
self-condemnation, in the Justification of God, whereof we now speak. He grows
not sullen, stubborn, displeased, and so runs away from God; he does not
utterly saint, despond and give over; he pleads not any thing in his own
Justification, or for the extenuation of his sin and guilt; he quarrelleth not
with, he repineth not against the Holiness, Severity and Righteousness of the
Law of God; but reflects wholly on himself, his own unworthiness, guilt and
desert; and in a sense of them lies down at the foot of God, in expectation of
his word and sentence.

Sense of sin, wherein it consists.
Three things in this condition we ascribe unto such a soul. First, A sincere
sense of sin. There is a twofold sense of sin. The one is general and notional,
whereby a man knows what sin is, that himself is a sinner; that he is guilty of
this or that, these or those sins; only his heart is not affected
proportionably to that discovery and knowledge which he has of these things.
The other is active and efficacious. The soul being acquainted with the nature
of sin, with its own guilt in reference unto sin in general, as also to this or
that sin, is universally influenced by that apprehension unto suitable
Affections and Operations.

Of both these we have an instance in the same person. David before Nathans
coming to him, had the former, afterward he had the latter also. It cannot be
imagined but that before the coming of the Prophet, he had a general knowledge
and sense not only absolutely of the nature of sin, but also, that himself was
a sinner, and guilty of those very sins which afterward he was reproved for.
To think otherwise is to suppose, not only that he was un-sainted, but
un-manned also, and turned into a Beast. But yet this wrought not in him any
one Affection suitable to his condition. And the like may be said of most
sinners in the world. But now when Nathan comes to him and gives him the latter
efficacious sense whereof we speak, we know what effects it did produce.

It is the latter only that is under consideration; and that also is twofold:
(1.) Legal or Antecedaneous unto conversion; (2) Evangelical, and previous to
the recovery from depths, whereof we treat. How these two differ, and how they
may be discerned one from the other, being both of them in their kind sincere,
is not my business to declare.

Nature and Causes of Gospel convictions of sin.
Now this taste, which we assign as the first duty, work, or acting of a
returning soul, is a deep and practical apprehension wrought in the mind and
heart of a believing sinner by the Holy Ghost, of sin and its evils, in
reference unto the Law, and Love of God, the Cross, and blood of Christ, the
communion and consolation of the Spirit, and all the fruits of Love, Mercy, or
Grace, that it has been made partaker of, or on Gospel grounds. hoped for.

First, The principal efficient cause of it is the Holy Ghost. He it is who
convinces of sin, John 16. 8. He works indeed by means. He wrought it in David
by the Ministry of Nathan; and he wrought it in Peter, by the look of Christ.
But his work it is. No man can work it upon his own soul. It will not spring
out of men's rational considerations. Though men may exercise their thoughts
about such things, as one would think were enough to break the hearts of
stones, yet if the Holy Ghost put not forth a peculiar efficacy of his own,
this sense of sin will not be wrought or produced. As the waters at the Pool of
Bethesda were not troubled, but when an Angel descended and moved them; no more
will the Heart for sin, without a saving elapse of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, It is a deep Apprehension of sin, and the evils of it. Slight
transient thoughts about them, amount not to the sense of which we speak. My
sorrow, says David, is continually before me, Psalm. 38. 17. It pressed him
always and greatly. Hence he compares this sense of sin wrought by the Holy
Ghost, to arrows that stick in the flesh, v. 2. They pain sorely, and are
always perplexing. Sin in this sense of it, lays hold on the soul, so that
the sinner cannot look up, Psalm. 40. 12. And it abides with him, making his
sore run in the night without ceasing, Psalm. 77. 2. and depriveth the soul of
rest; my soul says he, refused to be comforted. This Apprehension of sin, lies
down, and rises with him in whom it is. Transient thoughts attended with
infrequent sighs and ejaculations, little become a returning soul. And

Thirdly, It is Practical. It is not seated only in the speculative part of the
mind, hovering in general notions; but it dwel's in the practical
understanding, which effectually influenceth the Will and Affections. Such an
Apprehension as from which sorrow and humiliation are inseparable. The acts of
the practical understanding, do so necessarily produce, together with them
suitable acts of the Will and Affections, that some have concluded that those
are indeed proper acts of the Will, which are usually ascribed to the
Understanding. It is so in the mind, as that the whole soul is cast into the
mould and likeness of it, humiliation, sorrow, self-abhorrency, do live and dye
with it.

Fourthly, It has in the first place, respect unto the Law of God. There can
be no due consideration of sin, wherein the Law has not its place. The Law
calls for the sinner, and he willingly gives up his sin to be judged by it.
There he sees it to be exceeding sinful, Romans 7. 17. Though a Believer be less
under the power of the Law than others, yet he knows more of the Authority and
nature of it than others. He sees more of its spirituality and holiness. And
the more a man sees of the excellency of the Law, the more he sees of the
vileness of sin. This is done by a soul in its first endeavor for a recovery
from the entanglements of sin. He labors thoroughly to know his disease, that
he may be cured. It will do him no good, he knows, to be ignorant of his
distemper, or his danger. He knows that if his wounds be not searched to the
bottom, they will stink and be corrupt. To the Law then he brings himself and
his sin. By that, he sees the vileness of the one, and the danger of the other.
Most men lie still in their depths, because they would willingly escape the
first step of their rising. From the bottom of their misery, they would fain at
once be at the top of their felicity. The soul managed in this work by the Holy
Ghost does not so. He converseth with the Law; brings his sin unto it; and
fully hears the sentence of it. When the sin is thoroughly condemned, then he
farther takes care of the sinner. As ever you desire to come to rest, avoid not
this entrance of your passage unto it. Weigh well, and attend unto what the Law
speaks of your sin and its desert, or you will never make a due application to
God for forgiveness. As ever you would have your souls justified by Grace, take
care to have your sins judged by the Law.

Secondly, There is a respect in it to the Love of God. And this breaks the
heart of the poor returning sinner. Sorrow from the Law, shuts it self up in
the soul, and strangleth it. Sorrow from the thoughts of the Love of God opens
it, and causseth it to flow forth. Thoughts of sinning against the Love of God,
managed by the Holy Ghost; what shall I say? their effects in the heart are not
to be expressed. This made Ezra cry out, O my God I blush and am ashamed to
lift up my face to thee, Chap. 9. 6. and v. 10. What shall we say after this?
After what? why all the fruits of love and kindness they had been made
partakers of. Thoughts of love and sin laid together, make the soul blush,
mourn, be ashamed and confounded in its self. So Ezekiel. 36. 31. Then shall you
remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good; When shall
they do so? when thoughts and apprehensions of love shall be brought home to
them; and says he, then shall you loath your selves in your own sight. The
soul now calls to mind, what Love, what kindness, what mercy, what grace, what
patience has been exercised toward it, and whereof it has been made
partaker. The thoughts of all these now come in upon him as streams of water.
Such Mercy, such Communion, such Privileges, such hopes of Glory, such tastes
of Heaven, such Peace, such Consolation, such Joy, such Communications of the
Spirit, all to a poor, wretched, cursed, lost, forlorn sinner; and all this
despised, neglected, the God of them all provoked, forsaken. Ah says the soul,
Whither shall I cause my sorrow to go? This fills him with shame and confusion
of face; makes him mourn in secret, and sigh to the breaking of the loins; and
then,

Thirdly, The blood and Cross of Christ is also brought to remembrance by the
Holy Ghost. Ah, says the soul, have I thus requited the wonderful astonishing
Love of my Redeemer? Is this the return, the requital, I have made unto him?
Are not Heaven and Earth astonished at the despising of that Love, at which
they are astonished? This brake Peter's heart upon the look of Christ. Such
words as these from Christ, will in this condition, sound in the ears of the
soul. Did I love thee, and leave my glory to become a scorn and reproach for
thy sake? Did I not think my life, and all that was dear unto me too good for
thee, to save thee from the wrath to come? Have I been a Wilderness unto thee,
or a land of darkness? What could I have done more for thee; when I had nothing
left but my life, blood and soul, they went all for thee that thou might
live by my death, be washed in my blood, and be saved through my souls being
made an offering for thee? And have thou thus requited my love? to prefer a
lust before me, the world before me, or by mere sloth and folly to be turned
away from me; go unkind and unthankful soul, and see if thou can find another
Redeemer: This overwhelms the soul, and even drowns it in tears and sorrow. And
then the bitterness also of the sufferings of Christ, are brought to mind. They
look on him whom they have pierced and mourn, Zech. 12. 10. They remember his
gall and wormwood; his cries and tears; his agony and sweat, his desertion and
anguish; his blood and death; the sharpness of the Sword that was in his soul,
and the bitterness of the Cup that was put into his hand. Such a soul now looks
on Christ, bleeding, dying, wrestling with wrath and curse for him, and sees
his sin in the streams of blood that issued from his side. And all this
increases that sense of sin whereof we speak. Also,

Fourthly, It relates to the communion and consolations of the Holy Ghost, with
all the privileges, and fruits of Love we are by him made partakers of. The
Spirit is given to Believers upon the promise of Christ to dwell in them. He
takes up their hearts to be his dwelling place; to what ends and purposes? that
he may purify and sanctify them, make them holy, and dedicate them to God; to
furnish them with Graces and gifts, to interest them in privileges; to guide,
lead, direct, comfort them; to seal them unto the day of Redemption. Now this
Spirit is grieved by sin, Ephesians. 4. 30. and his dwelling place defiled thereby,
1 Cor. 6. 19. and 3. 17. Thoughts hereof greatly sharpen the spiritual sense of
sin in a recovering soul. He considers, what Light, what Love, what Joy, what
Consolation, what Privileges it has by him been made partaker of; what
motions, warnings, workings to keep it from sin, it has found from him; and
says within it self; What have I done, whom have I grieved, whom have I
provoked; what if the Lord should now for my folly and ingratitude utterly take
his holy Spirit from me? What if I should have so grieved him that he will
dwell in me no more, delight in me no more? What dismal darkness and
disconsolation, yea, what utter ruin should I be left unto? However, what
shame and confusion of face belongs to me for my wretched disingenuity, and
ingratitude toward him?

This is the first thing that appears in the returning souls actings and frame;
a sincere sense of sin on the accounts mentioned wrought in it by the Holy
Ghost. And this a soul in the depths described, must come unto, if ever it
expect or look for deliverance, and a recovery. Let not such persons expect to
have a renewed sense of mercy, without a revived sense of sin.

Acknowledgement of sin, the true nature of it.
Secondly, From hence proceeds an ingenious, free, gracious Acknowledgement of
sin. Men may have a sense of sin, and yet suffer it to lie burning as a fire
shut up in their bones, to their continual disquietment, and not be able to
come off unto a free soul opening acknowledgement. Yea, confession may be made
in general, and mention therein of that very sin wherewith the soul is most
entangled, and yet the soul come short of a due performance of this Duty.
Consider how the case stood with David, Psalm. 32. 3. When I kept silence, my
bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long. How could David keep
silence, and yet roar all the day long? What is that silence which is
consistent with roaring? It is a mere negation of that duty, which is
expressed, v. 5. that is intended. I acknowledge my sins unto thee, and mine
iniquities I have not hid. It was not a silence of submission and waiting on
God that he intends. That would not have produced a wasting of his spiritual
strength, as he complains, this silence did; My bones waxed old; nor yet was it
a sullen, stubborn and contumacious frame that was upon him; but he notes,
says Calvin, (and he says well) affectum qui medius est inter tolerantiam and
contumaciam, vitio and vertuti affinis; An affection between patience and
stubborness bordering on the one and other. That is, he had a deep sense of
sin; this disquieted and perplexed him all the day long; which he calls his
roaring; It weakened and wearied him, making his bones wax old, or his strength
decay; yet was he not able to bring his heart to that ingenious gracious
acknowledgement, which like the launcing of a festered wound, would have given
at least some ease to his soul. Gods children are oft-times in this matter like
ours. Though they are convinced of a fault, and are really troubled at it, yet
they will hardly acknowledge it. So do they. They will go up and down, sigh and
mourn, roar all the day long; but an evil and untoward frame of spirit under
the power of unbelief and fear, keeps them from this duty.

Now that this acknowledgement may be acceptable unto God it is required,
First, that it be free, then that it be full.

First, It must be free and spiritually ingenious. Cain, Pharaoh, Ahab, Judas,
came all to an acknowledgement of sin; but it was whether they would or no. It
was pressed out of them; it did not flow from them. The confession of a person
under the convincing terrors of the Law, or dread of imminent Judgments, is
like that of Malefactors on the rack; who speak out that, for which themselves
and friends must dye. What they say, though it be the truth, is a fruit of
force and torture, not of any ingenuity of mind. So is it with merely convinced
persons. They come not to the acknowledgment of sin with any more freedom. And
the Reason is because all sin has shame; and for men to be free unto shame, is
naturally impossible, shame being natures shrinking from it self, and the
posture it would appear in. But now the returning soul, has never more
freedom, liberty and amplitude of spirit, than when he is in the
acknowledgement of those things whereof he is most ashamed. And this is no
small evidence that it proceeds from that spirit which is attended with
liberty, for where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. When
David was delivered from his silence, he expresses this frame in the
performance of this Duty, Psalm. 32. 5. I acknowledged my sin, and mine
iniquities. I have not hid; I said I will confess my transgression. His mouth
is now open, and his heart enlarged. And he multiplies one expression upon
another, to manifest his enlargement. So does a soul rising out of its depths,
in this beginning of his address unto God. Having the sense of sin, before
described wrought in him by the Holy Ghost, his heart is made free and enlarged
unto an ingenious acknowledgement of his sin before the Lord. Herein he pours
out his soul unto God; and has not more freedom in any thing, than in dealing
about that, whereof he is most ashamed.

Secondly, Full also it must be. Reserves ruin confession. If the soul have
any secret thought of rolling a sweet morsel under its tongue, of a bow in the
house of Rimmon, it is like part of the price kept back, which makes the whole
robbery, instead of an offering. If there be remaining a bitter root of
favoring any one lust or sin, of any occasion of, or temptation unto sin, let
a man be as open, free, and earnest as can be imagined in the acknowledgement
of all other sins and evils, the whole duty is rendered abominable. Some
persons when they are brought into depths and anguish about any sin, and are
thereon forced to the acknowledgement of it, at the same time they are little
concerned, with their other follies and iniquities, that it may be, are no less
provoking unto God, than that is from whence their present trouble does arise.
Let not, as James speaks in another case, such a man think, that he shall
receive any thing from God. It must be full and comprehensive, as well as free
and ingenious.

And of such importance is the right performance of this duty, that the promise
of pardon is oft-times peculiarly annexed unto it, as that which certainly
carries along with it, the other duties which make up a full returnal unto God,
Prove. 28. 13. 1 John 1. 9. and that place in Job is remarkable, Chap. 33. 27,
28. He looks upon men, and if any say I have sinned, and perverted that which
was right, and it profited me not; He will deliver his soul from going into the
pit, and his life shall see the light. He shall not only be made partaker of
pardon, but of consolation also, and joy in the light of Gods countenance.

Self-condemnation, wherein it consists.
Thirdly, There yet remains, self-condemnation with the Justification of God,
which lies expressly in the words of the Verse under consideration, and hereof
are two parts.

First, Self-abhorrency or dislike. The soul is now wholly displeased with it
self, and reflects upon it self with all affections of regret and trouble. So
the Apostle declares it to have been with the Corinthians when their godly
sorrow was working in them, 2 Cor. 7. 11. among other things, it wrought in
them indignation and revenge; or a reflection on themselves with all manner of
dislike and abhorrency. In the winding up of the Controversy between God and
Job, this is the point he rests in. As he had come in general to a free, full,
ingenious acknowledgement of sin, Chap. 40. 4, 5. So in particular he gives up
his whole contest, in this abhorrency of himself, Chap. 42. 6. I abhor my self
and repent in dust and ashes. What a vile wretched creature have I been, says
the soul; I blush and am ashamed to think of my folly, baseness and
ingratitude; is it possible that I should deal thus with the Lord? I abhor, I
loath my self, I would fly any where from my self, I am so vile and loathsome;
a thing to be despised of God, Angels and Men; and

Secondly, There is self-judging in it also. This the Apostle invites the
Corinthians unto, 1 Ep. Chap. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves we should
not be judged. This is a persons pronouncing sentence on himself according to
the tenor of the Law. The soul brings not only its sin, but it self also to the
Law. It puts it self as to merit and desert under the stroke and severity of
it. Hence arises a full justification of God, in what sentence soever he shall
be pleased to pronounce in the case before him. And these three things which we
have passed through, compose the frame and first actings of a gracious soul,
rising from its depths. They are all of them signally expressed in that place
where we have a signal recovery exemplified, Hos. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4. And this
makes way for the exaltation of grace, the great thing in all this dispensation
aimed at by God. Ephesians. 1. 6. That which he is now doing, is to bring the soul
to glory in him, 1 Cor. 1. 31. which is all the return he has from his large
and infinitely bountiful expense of Grace and Mercy. Now nothing can render
Grace conspicuous and glorious, until the soul come to this frame. Grace will
not seem high, until the soul be laid very low. And this also suits or prepares
the soul for the receiving of mercy, in a sense of pardon, the great thing
aimed at on the part of the sinner. And it prepares it for every duty that is
incumbent on him in that condition wherein he is. This brings the soul to
waiting with diligence and patience. If things presently answer not our
expectation, we are ready to think, we have done what we can; if it will be no
better we must bear it as we are able; which frame God abhors. The soul in this
frame is contented to wait the pleasure of God, as we shall see in the close of
the Psalm? Oh says such an one; if ever I obtain a sense of Love, if ever I
enjoy one smile of his countenance more, it is of unspeakable Grace. Let him
take his own time, his own season; it is good for me quietly to wait, and to
hope for his salvation. And it puts the soul on prayer; yea a soul always in
this frame, prays always. And there is nothing more evident, than that want
of a through engagement into the performance of these duties, is the great
cause why so few come clear off from their entanglements all their days. Men
heal their wounds slightly; and therefore after a new painful festering, they
are brought into the same condition of restlesness and trouble, which they were
in before.

Grounds of miscarriages when persons are convinced of sin and humbled. Resting
in that state. Resting on it.

Miscarriages in persons convinced of sin.
The soul is not to be left in the state before described. There is other work
for it to apply it self unto, if it intend to come unto Rest and peace. It has
obtained an eminent advantage for the discovery of Forgiveness. But to rest in
that state wherein it is, or to rest upon it, will not bring it into its
harbor. Three things we discovered before in the souls first serious address
unto God for deliverance; sense of sin, acknowledgement of it, and
self-condemnation. Two evils there are which attend men oftentimes, when they
are brought into that state. Some rest in it, and press no farther; some rest
upon it, and suppose that it is all which is required of them: The Psalmist
avoids both these, and notwithstanding all his pressures reaches out toward
forgiveness, as we shall see in the next verse. I shall briefly unfold these
two evils, and show the necessity of their avoidance.

First, By resting or staying in it, I mean the souls desponding through
discouraging thoughts that deliverance is not to be obtained. Being made deeply
sensible of sin, it is so overwhelmed with thoughts of its own vileness and
unworthiness, as to sink under the burden; Such a soul is afflicted and tossed
with tempests and not comforted, Isa. 54. 11. until it is quite weary. As a
Ship in a storm at Sea; when all means of contending are gone, men give up
themselves to be driven and tossed by the Winds and Seas at their pleasure.
This brought Israel to that state wherein he cried out, My way is hid from the
Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my God, Isa. 40. 27. and Zion; The
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me, Chap. 49. 14. The soul
begins secretly to think there is no hope; God regards it not; it shall one
day perish, relief is far away, and trouble nigh at hand. These thoughts do so
oppress them, that though they forsake not God utterly to their destruction,
yet they draw not nigh unto him effectually to their consolation.

This is the first evil that the soul in this condition is enabled to avoid. We
know how God rebukes it in Sion. Sion said the Lord has forsaken me, and my
Lord has forgotten me, Isaiah 49. 14. But how foolish is Sion, how froward,
how unbelieving in this matter; what ground has she for such sinful
despondencies, such discouraging conclusions? Can a woman, says the Lord,
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb, yea, they may forget, but I will not forget thee. The like reproof he
gives to Jacob upon the like complaint, Chap. 40. 28, 29, 30. There is nothing
that is more provoking to the Lord, nor more disadvantagious unto the soul,
than such sinful despondency. For,

First, It insensibly weakens the soul, and disenables it, both for present
duties, and future endeavors. Hence, some poor creatures mourn, and even pine
away in this condition, never getting one step beyond a perplexing sense of sin
all their days. Some have dwelt so long upon it, and have so entangled
themselves with a multitude of perplexed thoughts, that at length their natural
faculties have been weakened, and rendered utterly useless; so that they have
lost both sense of sin and every thing else. Against some, Satan has taken
advantage to cast in so many intangling objections into their minds, that their
whole time has been taken up in proposing doubts and objections against
themselves; with these they have gone up and down, to one and another, and
being never able to come unto a consistency in their own thoughts, they have
spent all their days in a fruitless, sapless, withering comfortless condition.
Some with whom things come to a better issue, are yet for a season brought to
that discomposure of Spirit, or are so filled with their own apprehensions,
that when the things which are most proper to their condition are spoken to
them, they take no impression in the least upon them. Thus the soul is weakened
by dwelling too long on these considerations; until some cry with those in
Ezekiel. 33. 10. Our sins are upon us, we pine away in them, and how should we
then live?

Secondly, This frame, if it abides, by its self, will insensibly give
countenance unto hard thoughts of God, and so to repining, and weariness in
waiting on him. At first the soul neither apprehends nor fears any such issue.
It supposes that it shall condemn and abhor it self, and justify God, and
that for ever. But when relief comes not in, this resolution begins to weaken.
Secret thoughts arise in the heart, that God is austere, inexorable, and not to
be dealt withal. This sometimes casts forth such complaints, as will bring the
soul unto new complaints, before it comes to have an issue of its trials. Here,
in humiliations antecedaneous to conversion, many a convinced person perishes.
They cannot wait Gods season, and perish under their impatience. And what the
Saints of God themselves have been overtaken withal in their depths and trials,
we have many examples and instances. Delight and Expectation are the grounds of
our abiding with God. Both these are weakened by a conquering prevailing sense
of sin, without some relief from the discovery of forgiveness, though at a
distance. And therefore our perplexed soul stays not here, but presses on
toward that discovery.

Secondly, There is a resting on this frame, that is noxious and hurtful also.
Some finding this sense of sin, with those other things that attend it wrought
in them, in some measure, begin to think that now all is well, this is all that
is of them required. They will endeavor to make a life, from such arguments of
comfort, as they can take from their trouble. They think this a ground of
peace, that they have not peace. Here some take up before conversion, and it
proves their ruin. Because they are convinced of sin, and troubled about it,
and burdened with it, they think it shall be well with them: But were not Cain,
Esau, Saul, Ahab, Judas, convinced of sin, and burdened with it? Did this
profit them? Did it interest them in the promises? Did not the wrath of God
overtake them notwithstanding? So is it with many daily, they think their
conviction is conversion; and that their sins are pardoned, because they have
been troubled.

This then is that which we reject, which the soul in this condition does
carefully avoid; so to satisfy it self with its humiliation, as to make that a
ground of supportment and consolation, being thereby kept off from exercising
faith for forgiveness, For this is,

First, A fruit of self-righteousness. For a soul to place the spring of its
peace or comfort in any thing of its own, is to fall short of Christ, and to
take up in self. We must not only be justified, but glory in him also, Isa. 45.
25. Men may make use of the evidence of their graces; but only as mediums to a
farther end; not as the rest of the soul in the least. And this deprives men's
very humiliations of all Gospel humility. True humility consists more in
believing, than in being sensible of sin. That's the souls great self-emptying
and abasing; this may consist with an obstinate resolution to scamble for
something upon the account of self endeavors.

Secondly, Though Evangelical sense of sin, be a Grace, yet it is not the
uniting Grace, it is not that which interests us in Christ, not that which
peculiarly, and in its own nature exalts him. There is in this sense of sin,
that which is natural, and that which is spiritual; or the matter of it, and
its spirituality. The former consists in sorrow, trouble, self-abasement,
dejection and anxiety of mind, with the like passions. Of these I may say as
the Apostle of Afflictions, they are not joyous but grievous. They are such as
are accompanied with the aversation of the object which they are conversant
about. In their own nature they are no more but the souls retreat into it self,
with an abhorrency of the objects of its sorrow and grief. When these
Affections are spiritualized, their nature is not changed. The soul in and by
them, acts according to their nature; and does by them as such, but retreat
into it self with a dislike of that they are exercised about. To take up here
then, must needs be to sit down short of Christ; whether it be for life, or
consolation.

Let there be no mistake. There can be no Evangelical sense of sin, and
humiliation, where there is not Union with Christ, Zech. 12. 10. Only in its
self, and in its own nature it is not availing. Now Christ is the only rest of
our souls: in any thing, for any end or purpose, to take up short of him, is to
lose it. It is not enough that we be prisoners of hope, but we must turn to our
strong hold, Zech. 9. 12. not enough that we are weary and laden, but we must
come to him, Matthew. 11. 27, 28. It will not suffice that we are weak, and know
we are weak, but we must take hold on the strength of God, Isa. 27. 4, 5.

Thirdly, Indeed pressing after forgiveness, is the very life and power of
Evangelical humiliation. How shall a man know that his humiliation is
Evangelical, that his sorrow is according to God? Is it not from hence he may
be resolved, that he does not in it, as Cain did, who cried his sin was greater
than he could bear, and so departed from the presence of God; nor as Judas did,
who repented, and hanged himself; nor as Felix did, tremble for a while, and
then return to his lusts; nor as the Jews did in the Prophet, pine away under
his iniquities, because of vexation of heart; nor does he divert his thoughts
to other things, thereby to relieve his soul in his trouble; nor fix upon a
Righteousness of his own; nor slothfully lie down under his perplexity; but in
the midst of it, he plyes himself to God in Christ for pardon and mercy. And it
is the souls Application unto God for forgiveness, and not its sense of sin,
that gives unto God the glory of his Grace.

Thus far then have we accompanied the soul in its depths; it is now looking
out for forgiveness; which what it is, and how we come to have an interest in
it, the principal matter in this discourse intended, is nextly to be considered.

Verse 4.
The Words explained, and the design or scope of the Psalmist in them
discovered.

The fourth Verse opened.
THe state and condition of the soul making Application unto God in this Psalm
is recounted, v. 1. It was in the depths; not only Providential depths of
Trouble, Affliction, and perplexities thereon; but also depths of conscience,
distress on the account of sin, as in the opening of those words has been
declared.

The Application of this soul unto God, with restless fervency and earnestness,
in that state and condition; its consideration in the first place of the Law
and the severity of Gods Justice in a proceedure thereon; with the inevitable
ruin of all sinners, if God insist on that way of dealing with them, have also
been opened and manifested from the foregoing Verses.

Being in this estate, perplexed in its self, lost in and under the
consideration of Gods marking iniquity according to the tenor of the Law; that
which it fixes on, from whence any relief, stay or supportment might be
expected in such a condition, is laid down in this Verse.

Ver. 4.

But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

I shall first open the words as to their signisication and importance; then
show the design of the Psalmist in them, with reference to the soul whose
condition is here represented; and lastly propose the general Truths contained
in them, wherein all our concernments do lie.

There is forgiveness, (...) say the LXX. and Hierom accordingly Propitiatio;
propitiation: which is somewhat more than venia, or pardon, as by some it is
rendered.

(...) condonatio ipsa; forgiveness its self. It is from (...) to spare, to
pardon, to forgive, to be propitious: and is opposed to (...), a word composed
of the same letters varied (which is common in that Language) signifying to cut
off, and destroy.

Now it is constantly applied unto Sin, and expresses every thing that
concurrs to its pardon, or forgiveness. As,

First, It expresses the Mind or Will of pardoning, or Gods gracious readiness
to forgive, Psalm. 86. 5. Thou Lord art good (...) and ready to forgive; (...);
benign and meek; or sparing, propitious. Of a gracious merciful heart and
nature. So Nehem. 9. 17. Thou art O God (...) propitiationum, of propitiations
or pardons; or as we have rendered it, ready to forgive; a God of
forgivenesses; or all plenty of them is in thy gracious heart, Isa. 55. 8. So
that thou art always ready to make out pardons to sinners. The word is used
again Dan. 9. 9. to the same purpose.

Secondly, It regards the act of pardoning; or actual forgiveness it self,
Psalm. 103. 3. (...) who forgiveth all thine iniquities; actually discharges
thee of them: which place the Apostle respecting renders the word by (...),
Col. 3. 13. Having freely forgiven you (for so much the word imports) all your
trespasses.

And this is the word that God uses in the Covenant, in that great Promise of
Grace and Pardon, Jer. 31. 34.

It is warrantable for us, yea necessary to take the word in the utmost extent
of its signification and use. It is a word of favor, and requires an
interpretation tending toward the enlargement of it. We see it may be rendered
(...) or propitiation; (...) or Grace; and venia or pardon; and may denote
these three things.

First, The gracious, tender, merciful Heart and Will of God; who is the God of
pardons and forgiveness; or one ready to forgive, to give out mercy, to add to
pardor.

Secondly, A respect unto Jesus Christ, the only (...), or propitiation for
sin, as he is expressly called, Romans 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2. And this is that which
interposeth between the gracious heart of God, and the actual pardon of
sinners: All forgiveness is founded on propitiation.

Thirdly, It denotes condonation or actual forgiveness it self, as we are made
partakers of it; comprizing it both actively, as it is an Act of Grace in God,
and passively as terminated in our souls, with the deliverance that attends it.
In this sense as it looks downwards, and in its effects respects us, it is of
mere Grace; as it looks upwards to its causes and respects the Lord Christ, it
is from propitiation or atonement. And this is that pardon which is
administered in the Covenant of Grace.

Now as to the place which these words enjoy in this Psalm, and their Relation
to the state and condition of the soul here mentioned, this seems to be their
importance.

O Lord, although this must be granted, that if thou should mark iniquities
according to the tenor of the Law, every man living must perish, and that for
ever; yet there is hope for my soul, that even I who am in the depths of
sin-entanglements, may find acceptance with thee; for whilst I am putting my
mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope; I find that there is an
Atonement, a propitiation made for sin, on the account whereof thou say
thou have found a Ransom, and wilt not deal with them that come unto thee
according to the severity and exigence of thy Justice; but art gracious,
loving, tender, ready to forgive and pardon, and do so accordingly; THERE IS
FORGIVENESS WITH THEE.

The following words, therefore thou shall be feared, or that thou may be
feared, though in the Original free from all Ambiguity, yet are so signally
varyed by Interpreters, that it may not be amiss to take notice of it in our
passage.

The Targum has it, that thou may be seen. This answers not the word, but it
does the sense of the place well enough. God in his displeasure is said to hide
himself, or his face, Isaiah 8. 17. The Lord hides his face from the house of
Jacob. By forgiveness we obtain again the light of his countenance. This
dispels the darkness, and clouds that are about him; and gives us a comfortable
prospect of his face and favor. There is forgiveness with him that he may be
seen. Besides, there is but one letter different in the Original words; and
that which is usually changed for the other.

The LXX. render them, (...); for thy names sake; or thy own sake, that is,
freely, without any respect unto any thing in us. This also would admit of a
fair and sound construction, but that there is more than ordinary evidence of
the places being corrupted. For the Vulgar Latin, which as to the Psalms was
translated out of the LXX. renders these words, propter legem tuam; for thy
Laws sake; which makes it evident, that that Translator reads the words (...),
and not (...), as now we read. Now though this has in its self, no proper
sense (for forgiveness is not bestowed for the Laws sake) yet it discovers the
original of the whole mistake. (...) The Law, differs but in one letter from
(...) that thou may be feared; by a mistake whereof this (...) for thy Law
sake, crept into the Text. Nor does this any thing countenance the corrupt
figment of the novelty of the Hebrew Vowels and Accents; as though this
difference might arise, from the LXX. using a copy that had none, that is
before their invention, which might occasion mistakes and differences; for this
difference is in a Letter as well as the Vowels; and therefore there can be no
color for this conceit, unless we say also, that they had Copies of old with
other Consonants than those we now enjoy. Bellarmine in his Exposition of this
place, endeavors to give countenance unto the reading of the Vulgar Latin; for
thy Laws sake; affirming that by the Law here, not the Law of our Obedience, is
intended; but the Law or Order of Gods dealing with us; that is his Mercy and
Faithfulness; which is a mere new Invention to countenance an old error, which
any tolerable ingenuity would have confessed, rather than have justified by so
sorry a pretense. For neither is that expression, or that word, eyer used in
the sense here by him feigned, nor can it have any such signification.

Hierom renders these words, utsis terribilis; that thou may be dreadful or
terrible, doubtless not according to the intendment of the place. It is for the
relieving of the soul, and not for the increasing of its dread and terror, that
this observation is made; there is forgiveness with thee.

But the words are clear, and their sense is obvious; (...) therefore thou
shall be feared, or that thou may be feared.

By the Fear of the Lord, in the Old Testament, the whole Worship of God, moral
and instituted, all the Obedience which we owe unto him, both for matter and
manner, is intended. Whatever we are to perform unto God, being to be carried
on and performed with Reverence and godly fear, by a Metonymy of the Adjunct,
that name is given to the whole. That thou may be feared, then, is that thou
may be served, worshipped; that I who am ready to faint and give over on the
account of sin, may yet be encouraged unto, and yet continue in that Obedience
which thou requirest at my hands; And this appears to be the sense of the whole
Verse; as influenced by, and from those foregoing.

Although O Lord, no man can approach unto thee, stand before thee, or walk
with thee, if thou should mark their sins and follies according to the tenor
of the Law, nor could they serve so great and holy a God as thou art; yet
because I know, from thy Revelation of it, that there is also with thee on the
account of Jesus Christ the propitiation, pardon and forgiveness; I am
encouraged to continue with thee, waiting for thee, worshipping of thee, when
without this discovery, I should rather choose to have Rocks and Mountains fall
upon me, to hide me from thy presence.

But there is forgiveness with thee, and therefore thou shall be feared. The
words being thus opened, we may take a full view in them of the state and
condition of the soul expressed in this Psalm; and that answering the
experiences of all who have had any thing to do with God, in and about the
Depths and Entanglements of sin.

Having in, and from his great depths, v. 1. addressed himself with servent
redoubled cries, yea, outcryes, to God, and to him alone for relief, v. 1, 2.
having also acknowledged his iniquities, and considered them according to the
tenor of the Law, v. 3. he consesseth himself to be lost and undone for ever on
that account, v. 3. But he abides not in this state of self-condemnation and
dejection of soul; He says not there is no hope, God is a jealous God, an holy
God, I cannot serve him; his Law is a fiery Law, which I cannot stand before,
so that I had as good give over, sit down and perish, as contend any longer!
no, but searching by faith into the discovery that God makes of himself in
Christ through the Covenant of Grace, he finds a stable foundation of
encouragement, to continue waiting on him, with expectation of mercy and pardon.

Propositions or Observations from the former Exposition of the words. The
first proposed to confirmation. No encouragement for any sinner to approach
unto God, without a discovery of forgiveness.

Doctrinal Observations from V. 4.
From the words unfolded as they lie in their contexture, in the Psalm, the
ensuing Propositions do arise. 1. Faiths discovery of forgiveness in God,
though it have no present sense of its own peculiar interest therein, is the
great supportment of a sin perplexed soul. 2. Gospel Forgiveness, whose
discovery is the sole supportment of sin distressed souls, relates to the
gracious heart, or good will of the Father, the God of forgiveness, the
propitiation that is made by the blood of the Son, and free condonation or
pardon according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace. 3. Faiths discovery of
Forgiveness in God, is the sole bottom of adherence to him, in acceptable
Worship and reverential obedience.


The first of these, is that whose confirmation and improvement I principally
aim at; and the other only so far as they have a coincidence therewith, or may
be used in a subserviency to the illustration or demonstration thereof.

In the handling then of this truth, that it may be of the more advantage unto
them whose good is sought, and intended in the proposal and management of it, I
shall steer this course, and show, 1. That there is not the least encouragement
to the soul of a sinner to deal with God without this discovery. 2. That this
discovery of forgiveness in God is a matter great, holy and mysterious; and
which very few on Gospel abiding grounds, do attain unto. 3. That yet this is a
great, sacred and certain Truth, as from the manifold Evidences of it, may be
made to appear. 4. That this is a stable supportment unto a sin distressed
soul, shall be manifested; and the whole applied, according to the several
concernments of those who shall consider it.


No approaching unto God, without a discovery of forgiveness.
First, There is not the least encouragement for the soul of a sinner, to
entertain any thoughts of approaching unto God without this discovery. All the
rest of the world, is covered with a deluge of wrath. This is the only Ark
whereunto the soul may repair and find rest. All without it, is darkness, curse
and terror.

We have an instance and example of it, beyond all exception in Adam. When he
knew himself to be a sinner, and it was impossible for him, as we shall show
afterward, to make a discovery of any such thing as forgiveness with God, he
laid aside all thoughts of treating with him; the best of his foolish
contrivance was for an escape; Genesis 3. 10. I heard thy voice (says he to God)
in the Garden, and was AFRAID, because I was naked; and I HID my self. Nothing
but thou shall dye the death, founded in his ears. In the morning of that day,
he was made by the hand of God: a few hours before, he had converse and
communion with him, with boldness and peace; why then does nothing now but
FEAR, Flying and HIDING possess him? Adam had sinned, the Promise was not yet
given, no Revelation made of forgiveness in God, and what other course, than
that vain and foolish one, to fix upon, he knew not. No more can any of his
Posterity without this Revelation. What else any of them has fixed on in this
case, has been no less foolish than his hiding; and in most, more pernicious.
When Cain had received his sentence from God, it is said he went out (...) from
the presence or face of the Lord, Genesis 4. 16. From his providential presence he
could never subduct himself: So the Psalmist informs us at large, Psalm. 139. 7,
8, 9. The very Heathen knew by the light of nature, that guilt could never
drive men out of the reach of God.

Quo fugis Encelade, quascunque accesseris oras
Sub Jove semper eris.
They knew that (...) (the Vengeance of God) would not spare sinners; nor could
be avoided, Acts 28. 4. From Gods Gracious Presence, which he never enjoyed, he
could not depart. It was then his Presence as to his Worship; and all outward
acts of Communion that he forsook, and departed from. He had no discovery by
faith, of forgiveness, and therefore resolved to have no more to do with God,
nor those who cleaved to him; for it respects his course, and not any one
particular action.

This also is stated, Isa. 33. 14. The sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness
has surprised the Hypocrites; who among us shall dwell with the devouring
fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? The persons spoken
of are sinners, great sinners and Hypocrites; conviction of sin, and the desert
of it was fallen upon them; a light to discern forgiveness they had not; they
apprehend God as devouring fire and everlasting burnings only; One that would
not spare, but assuredly inflict punishment according to the desert of sin; and
thence is their conclusion, couched in their Interrogation, that there can be
no intercourse of peace between him and them; there is no abiding, no enduring
of his Presence. And what condition this consideration brings the souls of
sinners unto, when conviction grows strong upon them, the Holy Ghost declares,
Mich. 6. 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and how my self before
the high God? shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with Calves of a
year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Ramms, or with ten
thousands of Rivers of Oil? shall I give my first born for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Sense of sin presses, forgiveness
is not discovered, (like the Philistines on Saul, Samuel not coming to his
direction) and how does the poor creature perplex it self in vain, to find out
a way of dealing with God? Will a sedulous and diligent observation of his own
Ordinances and Institutions relieve me; Shall I come before him with
burnt-offerings and Calves of a year old? Alas thou art a sinner, and these
Sacrifices cannot make thee perfect or acquit thee, Heb. 10. 1. Shall I do more
than ever he required of any of the Sons of men? O that I had thousands of
Ramms, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil to offer to him? Alas, if thou had
all the Bulls and Goats in the world, it is not possible that their blood
should take away sins, v. 4. But I have heard of them who have snatched their
own Children from their Mothers breasts, and cast them into the fire, until
they were consumed, so to pacify their consciences in expiating the guilt of
their iniquities; shall I take this course? Will it relieve me? I am ready to
part with my first born into the fire, so I may have deliverance from my
Transgressions. Alas, this never came into the heart of God to approve, or
accept of. And as it was then, whilst that kind of Worship was in force, so is
it still as to any duties, really to be performed, or imaginarily. Where there
is no discovery of forgiveness; they will yield the soul no relief, no
supportment; God is not to be treated upon such terms.

Greatness and rareness of the Discovery of Forgiveness in God. Reasons of it.
Testimonies of Conscience, and Law against it, etc.

Forgiveness a great Mystery.
Secondly, This discovery of Forgiveness in God is great, holy and Mysterious,
and which very few on Gospel grounds do attain unto.

All men indeed say there is; most men are persuaded that they think so. Only
men in great and desperate extremities, like Cain, or Spira, seem to call it
into question. But their thoughts are empty, groundless, yea, for the most part
wicked, and Atheistical. Elihu tells us, that to declare this aright to a
sinful soul, it is the work of a Messenger, an Interpreter, one among a
thousand, Job 33. 23. that is indeed, of Christ himself. The common thoughts of
men about this thing are slight and foolish; and may be resolved into those
mentioned by the Psalmist, Psalm. 50. 21. They think that God is altogether such
a one as themselves. That indeed he takes little or no care about these things,
but passes them over as slightly as they do themselves; That, notwithstanding
all their pretenses, the most of men never had indeed, any real discovery of
forgiveness, shall be afterward undeniably evinced; and I shall speedily show
the difference that is between their vain credulity, and a Gracious, Gospel
discovery of forgiveness in God. For it must be observed, that by this
Discovery, I intend, both the Revelation of it made by God, and our
understanding, and Reception of that Revelation to our own advantage, as shall
be showed immediately.

Now the grounds of the difficulty intimated, consist partly in the
hindrances, that lie in the way of this discovery; and partly in the nature of
the thing it self, that is discovered; of both which I shall briefly treat.

But here before I proceed, somewhat must be premised to show what it is, that
I particularly intend by a discovery of forgiveness. It may then be considered
two ways; First, For a doctrinal, objective discovery of it in its truth; 2.
An experimental subjective discovery of it in its power. In the first sense,
forgiveness in God, has been discovered ever since the giving out of the first
Promise: God revealed it in a word of Promise, or it could never have been
known, as shall be afterward declared. In this sense after many lesser degrees
and advancements of the light of it, it was fully and gloriously brought forth
by the Lord Jesus Christ in his own Person; and is now revealed, and preached
in the Gospel, and by them to whom the Word of Reconciliation is committed. And
to declare this is the principal work of the Ministers of the Gospel. Herein
lie those unsearchable Treasures and Riches of Christ, which the Apostle
esteemed as his chiefest Honor and Privilege that he was entrusted with the
declaration and dispensation of, Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. I know by many it is despised,
by many traduced, whose Ignorance and blindness is to be lamented. But the day
is coming which will manifest every man's work of what sort it is. In the latter
sense how it is made by faith in the soul, shall in its proper place be further
opened and made known. Here many men mistake, and deceive themselves. Because
it is so in the Book, they think it is so in them also. Because they have been
taught it, they think they believe it. But it is not so; They have not heard
this voice of God at any time, nor seen his shape; it has not been revealed
unto them in its power; to have this done is a great work: For,

Testimony of a natural consciscience, against the forgiveness of sin.
First, The constant voice of Conscience lies against it. Conscience (if not
seared) inexorably condemns, and pronounces Wrath and Anger upon the soul
that has the least guilt cleaving to it. Now it has this advantage; it lies
close to the soul, and by importunity, and loud speaking it will he heard in
what it has to say. It will make the whole soul attend, or it will speak like
thunder. And its constant voice is, that where there is guilt there must be
judgment, Romans 2. 14, 15. Conscience naturally knows nothing of forgiveness.
Yea, it is against its very trust, work, and office to hear any thing of it. If
a man of courage and honesty be entrusted to keep a Garrison against an Enemy,
let one come and tell him, that there is peace made between those whom he
serves, and their Enemies, so that he may leave his Guard, and set open the
Gates, and cease his watchfulness; how wary will he be, lest under this
pretense he be betrayed? No says he, I will keep my hold, until I have express
order from my Superiors. Conscience is entrusted with the power of God in the
soul of a sinner, with command to keep all in subjection with reference unto
the Judgment to come; it will not betray its trust in believing every report
of peace. No! but this it says, and it speaks in the name of God; Guilt and
punishment are inseparable twins. If the soul sin, God will judge. What tell
you me of forgiveness, I know what my commission is; and that I will abide by;
you shall not bring in a Superior Commander, a cross Principle into my trust;
for if this be so, it seems I must let go my Throne; another Lord must come in;
not knowing as yet how this whole business is compounded in the blood of
Christ. Now whom should a man believe if not his own Conscience, which as it
will not flatter him, so it intends not to affright him, but to speak the truth
as the matter requires. Conscience has two works in reference unto sin; one
to condemn the Acts of sin: another to judge the Person of the sinner; both
with reference to the Judgment of God. When forgiveness comes, it would sever
and part these employments, and take one of them out of the hand of conscience.
It would divide the spoil with this strong one. It shall condemn the fact, or
every sin; but it shall no more condemn the sinner, the Person of the sinner;
that shall be freed from its sentence. Here Conscience labors with all its
might to keep its whole dominion; and to keep out the power of forgiveness from
being enthroned in the soul. It will allow men to talk of forgiveness, to hear
it preached, though they abuse it every day; but to receive it in its power,
that stands up in direct opposition to its dominion; in the Kingdom, says
Conscience, I will be greater than thou; and in many, in the most, it keeps its
possession, and will not be deposed.

Nor indeed is it an easy work so to deal with it. The Apostle tells us, that
all the Sacrifices of the Law could not do it, Heb. 10. 2. they could not bring
a man into that estate, wherein he should have no more conscience of sin; that
is, Conscience condemning the Person; for conscience in a sense of sin, and
condemnation of it, is never to be taken away. And this can be no otherwise
done but by the blood of Christ, as the Apostle at large there declares.

It is then no easy thing to make a discovery of forgiveness unto a soul, when
the work and employment which Conscience upon unquestionable grounds
challenges unto it self, lies in opposition unto it. Hence is the souls great
desire to establish its own Righteousness, whereby its natural Principles may
be preserved in their power. Let self-righteousness be enthroned, and natural
conscience desires no more; it is satisfied, and pacified. The Law it knows;
and Righteousness it knows, but as for forgiveness it says, whence is it? Unto
the utmost, until Christ perfects his conquest, there are on this account
secret struglings in the heart against free pardon in the Gospel, and
fluctuations of mind and Spirit about it. Yea, hence are the doubts and fears
of believers themselves: They are nothing but the strivings of Conscience to
keep its whole dominion; to condemn the sinner as well as the sin. More or less
it keeps up its pretensions against the Gospel, whilst we live in this world.
It is a great work that the blood of Christ has to do upon the Conscience of a
sinner; for whereas, as it has been declared, it has a power, and claims a
right to condemn both sin and sinner, the one part of this its power is to be
cleared, strengthened, made more active, vigorous and watchful, the other to be
taken quite away. It shall now see more sins than formerly, more of the
vileness of all sins than formerly, and condemn them with more abborrency than
ever, upon more, and more glorious accounts than formerly; but it is also made
to see an interposition between these sins, and the Person of the sinner, who
has committed them; which is no small or ordinary work.

Testimony of the Law against the forgiveness of sin.
Secondly, The Law lies against this discovery. The Law is a beam of the
Holiness of God himself. What it speaks unto us, it speaks in the name and
Authority of God; And I shall briefly show concerning it these two things.

1. That this is the voice of the Law; namely, that there is no forgiveness for
a sinner. 2. That a sinner has great reason to give credit to the Law in that
Assertion.
1. It is certain that the Law knows neither mercy nor forgiveness. The very
sanction of it lies wholly against them: The soul that sins shall dye.
Cursed is he that continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law
to do them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Hence the Apostle pronounces universally without
exception, that they who are under the Law, are under the curse, Gal. 3. 10.
And says he, v. 12. The Law is not of faith. There is an inconsistency between
the Law, and believing; they cannot have their abode in power together. Do this
and live; fail and dye; is the constant immutable voice of the Law. This it
speaks in general to all; and this in particular to every one.

2. The sinner seems to have manifold and weighty Reasons to attend to the
voice of this Law, and to acquiesce in its sentence. For,

1. The Law is connatural to him; his Domestic, his old acquaintance. It came
into the world with him, and has grown up with him from his Infancy. It was
implanted in his heart by nature; is his own Reason; he can never shake it off,
or part with it. It is his Familiar, his Friend, that cleaves to him as the
flesh to the bone; so that they who have not the Law written, cannot but she^
forth the work of the Law, Romans 2. 14. 15. and that because the Law it self is
inbred to them; and all the faculties of the soul are at peace with it, in
subjection to it. It is the bond. and ligament of their union harmony and
correspondency among themselves, in all their moral actings. It gives life,
order, motion to them all. Now the Gospel, that comes to control this sentence
of the Law, and to relieve the sinner from it, is foreign to his nature, a
strange thing to him, a thing he has no acquaintance or familiarity with; it
has not been bred up with him; nor is there any thing in him, to side with it,
to make a party for it, or to plead in its behalf. Now shall not a man rather
believe a Domestic, a Friend, indeed himself; than a forraigner, a stranger,
that comes with uncouth Principles, and such as suit not its Reason at all, 1
Cor. 1. 18.

2. The Law speaks nothing to a sinner, but what his Conscience assures him to
be true. There is a constant concurrence in the Testimony of the Law and
conscience. When the Law says, this or that is a sin, worthy of death,
conscience says it is even so, Romans 1. 42. And where the Law of it self, as
being a general Rule, rests, Conscience helps it on, and says, This and that
sin, so worthy of death, is the soul guilty of; then dye says the Law as thou
have deserved. Now this must needs have a mighty efficacy to prevail with the
soul to give credit to the report and Testimony of the Law; it speaks not one
word but what he has a witness within himself to the truth of it. These
witnesses always agree; and so it seems to be established for a truth, that
there is no forgiveness.

3. The Law, though it speak against the souls interest, yet it speaks nothing
but what is so just, righteous and equal, that it even forces the souls
consent. So Paul tells us, that men know this voice of the Law to be the
Judgment of God, Romans 1. 32. They know it, and cannot but consent unto it,
that it is the Judgment of God; that is, good, righteous, equal, not to be
controlled. And indeed what can be more righteous than its sentence? It
commands Obedience to the God of life and death; promises a Reward, and
declares that for nonperformance of duty, death will be inflicted. On these
terms the sinner comes into the world, they are good, righteous, holy; the
soul accepts of them, and knows not what it can desire better or more equal.
This the Apostle insists upon, Romans 7. 12, 13. Wherefore the Law is holy, and
the commandment holy and just and good; was then that which was good made death
unto me? Godforbid; but sin that it might appear sin, working death in me, by
that which is good; that sin by the commandment might become exceeding sinful.
Wherever the blame falls, the soul cannot but acquit the Law, and confess that
what it says, is righteous, and uncontrollably equal. And it is meet things
should be so; Now though the Authority and credit of a Witness, may go very far
in a doubtful matter; when there is a concurrence of more witnesses it
strengthens the Testimony; but nothing is so prevalent to beget belief, as when
the things themselves that are spoken are just and good, not liable to any
reasonable exception; And so is it in this case; unto the Authority of the Law,
and concurrence of conscience, this also is added, the Reasonableness, and
equity of the thing it self proposed, even in the Judgment of the sinner;
namely, that every sin shall be punished, and every transgression receive a
meet recompense of reward.

4. But yet further. What the Law says, it speaks in the name and authority of
God. What it says then, must be believed, or we make God a Liar. It comes not
in its own name, but in the name of him who appointed it; you will say then, is
it so indeed? Is there no forgiveness with God? for this is the constant voice
of the Law, which you say speaks in the name and Authority of God, and is
therefore to be believed. I answer briefly with the Apostle; What the Law
speaks, it speaks to them that are under the Law. It does not speak to them
that are in Christ, whom the Law of the Spirit of life, has set free from the
Law of sin and death; but to them that are under the Law it speaks, and it
speaks the very Truth; and it speaks in the name of God, and its Testimony is
to be received; It says there is no forgiveness in God, namely, to them that
are under the Law; and they that shall flatter themselves with a contrary
persuasion will find themselves woefully mistaken at the great day.

On these and the like considerations, I say, there seems to be a great deal of
Reason, why a soul should conclude that it will be according to the testimony
of the Law; and that he shall not find forgiveness. Law and Conscience close
together, and insinuate themselves into the thoughts, mind, and judgment of a
sinner. They strengthen the Testimony of one another, and greatly prevail. If
any are otherwise minded, I leave them to the trial. If ever God awaken their
Consciences to a through performance of their duty; if ever he open their
souls, and let in the light and power of the Law upon them, they will find it
no small work to grapple with them. I am sure, that eventually they prevail so
far, that in the preaching of the Gospel, we have great cause to say, Lord who
has believed our report? We come with our Report of forgiveness; but who
believes it? by whom is it received? neither does the light, nor conscience,
nor conversation of the most, allow us to suppose it is embraced.

Thirdly, The ingrafted notions that are in the minds of men, concerning the
Nature and Justice of God, lie against this discovery also. There are in all
men by nature indelible characters of the Holiness and purity of God; of his
Justice and hatred of sin, of his invariable Righteousness in the Government of
the world, that they can neither depose nor lay aside. For notions of God,
whatever they are, will bear sway and rule in the heart, when things are put to
the trial. They were in the Heathens of old; they abode with them in all their
darkness; as might be manifested by innumerable instances. But so it is in all
men by nature; their inward thought is, that God is an Avenger of sin; that it
belongs to his Rule and Government of the world, his Holiness and
Righteousness, to take care, that every sin be punished; This is his Judgment
which all men know, as was observed before, Romans 1. 32. They know, that it is a
Righteous thing with God to render tribulation unto sinners. From thence is
that dread and fear which surprizeth men at an apprehension of the Presence of
God; or of any thing under him, above them, that may seem to come on his
errand. This notion of Gods avenging all sin, exerts it self, secretly, but
effectually. So Adam trembled, and hid himself. And it was the saying of old, I
have seen God, and shall dye. When men are under any dreadful Providence;
thundrings, lightnings, tempests, in darkness, they tremble, not so much at
what they see, or hear, or feel, as from their secret thoughts that God is
nigh, and that he is a consuming fire.

Now these inbred notions lie universally against all Apprehensions of
forgiveness; which must be brought into the soul from without doors; having no
Principle of nature to promote them.

It is true! Men by nature have presumptions, and common ingrafted notions; of
other properties of God, besides his Holiness and Justice; as of his Goodness,
Benignity, Love of his Creatures* and the like; But all these have this
supposition inlaid with them in the souls of men; namely, that all things stand
between God and his Creatures, as they did at their first Creation; and as they
have no natural notion of forgiveness, so the interposition of sin, weakens,
disturbs, darkens them, as to any improvement of those Apprehensions of
Goodness and Benignity which they have. If they have any notion of forgiveness,
it is from some corrupt Tradition, and not at all, from any universal
Principle, that is inbred in nature; such as are those, which they have of Gods
Holiness, and Vindictive Justice.

And this is the first ground from whence it appears, that a real, solid
discovery of forgiveness, is indeed a great work; many difficulties and
hindrances, lie in the way of its accomplishment.

False Presumptions of Forgiveness discovered. Differences between them, and
Faith Evangelical.

False Presumptions of Forgiveness.
Before I proceed to produce and manage the remaining Evidences of this Truth,
because what has been spoken, lies obnoxious and open to an Objection which
must needs rise in the minds of many, that it may not thereby be rendered
useless unto them, I shall remove it out of the way, that we may pass on to
what remains.

It will then be said, does not all this lie directly contrary to our daily
experience? Do we not find all men full enough, most too full of Apprehensions
of Forgiveness with God? What so common as God is merciful? Are not the
Consciences, and Convictions of the most stifled, by this Apprehension? Can you
find a man that is otherwise minded? Is it not a common complaint that men
presume on it, unto their eternal ruin? Certainly then, that which all men do,
which every man can so easily do, and which you cannot keep men off from doing,
though it be to their hurt, has no such difficulty in it as is pretended. And
on this very account has this weak endeavor to demonstrate this Truth been by
some laughed to scorn; men who have taken upon them the teaching of others, but
(as it seems) had need be taught themselves, the very first Principles of the
Oracles of God.

Answ. All this then I say is so, and much more to this purpose may be spoken.
The solly and presumption of poor souls herein, can never be enough lamented.
But it is one thing to embrace a cloud, a shadow, another to have the truth in
reality. I shall hereafter show the true nature of forgiveness, and wherein it
does consist, whereby the vanity of this self-deceiving will be discovered and
laid open. It will appear in the issue that notwithstanding all their
pretensions, that the most of men know nothing at all, or not any thing to the
purpose of that which is under consideration. I shall therefore for the
present, in some few Observations, show how far this delusion of many, differs
from a true Gospel discovery of forgiveness, such as that we are enquiring
after.

First, The common notion of forgiveness that men have in the world, is
twofold. (1.) An Atheistical Presumption on God, that he is not so Just and
Holy, or not Just and Holy in such a way and manner as he is by some
represented, is the ground of their persuasion of forgiveness. Men think that
some Declarations of God, are fitted only to make them mad. That he takes
little notice of these things, and that what he does, he will easily pass by,
as they suppose better becomes him. Come, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow
we shall dye. This is their inward thought, the Lord will not do good, nor will
he do evil; which says the Psalmist, is men's thinking that God is such a one
as themselves, Psalm. 50. 21. They have no deep nor serious thoughts of his
Greatness, Holiness, Purity, Severity, but think that he is like themselves; so
far as not to be much moved with what they do. What thoughts they have of sin,
the same they think God has. If with them a slight ejaculation, be enough to
expiate sin, that their consciences be no more troubled, they think it is
enough with God, that it be not punished. The generality of men make light work
of sin; and yet in nothing does it more appear what thoughts they have of God.
He that has slight thoughts of sin, had never great thoughts of God. Indeed
mens-undervaluing of sin, arises merely from their contempt of God. All sins
concernments flow from its Relation unto God. And as men's apprehensions are of
God, so will they be of sin, which is an Opposition to him. This is the frame
of the most of men; they know little of God, and are little troubled about any
thing that relates unto him. God is not reverenced, sin is but a trifle,
forgiveness a matter of nothing; who so will may have it for asking. But shall
this Atheistical wickedness of the heart of man be called a discovery of
forgiveness? Is not this to make God an Idol? He who is not acquainted with
Gods Holiness and Purity, who knows not sins desert and sinfulness knows
nothing of forgiveness.

Secondly, From the doctrine of the Gospel commonly preached and made known,
there is a general notion begotten in the minds of men, that God is ready to
forgive. Men I say from hence, have a doctrinal Apprehension of this truth,
without any real satisfactory foundation of that Apprehension, as to
themselves. This they have heard, this they have been often told, so they
think, and so they are resolved to do. A general persuasion hereof, spreads it
self over all to whom the sound of the Gospel does come. It is not fiducially
resolved into the Gospel, but is an Opinion growing out of the Report of it.

Some relief men find by it, in the common course of their Conversation, in the
duties of Worship which they do perform, as also in their troables and
distresses, whether internal and of conscience, or external and of Providence,
so that they resolve to retain it.

And this is that which I shall briefly speak unto; and therein manifest the
differences between this common prevailing Apprehension of forgiveness, and
Faiths discovery of it to the soul in its power.

First, That which we reject is loose, and general, not fixed, ingrafted, or
planted on the mind. So is it always, where the minds of men receive things,
only in their notion, and not in their power. It wants fixedness and
foundation: which defects accompany all notions of the mind that are only
retained in the memory, not implanted in the Judgment. They have general
thoughts of it, which they use as occasion serves. They hear that God is a
merciful God, and as such they intend to deal with him. For the true bottom,
rise and foundation of it, whence or on what account, the pure and holy God who
will do no iniquity, the Righteous God, whose judgment it is, that they that
commit sin are worthy of death, should yet pardon iniquity transgression and
sin, they weigh it not, they consider it not; or if they do, it is in a slight
and notional way, as they consider the thing it self. They take it for granted
that so it is; and are never put seriously upon the enquiry, how it comes to be
so; and that because indeed they have no real concernment in it. How many
thousands may we meet withal, who take it for granted, that forgiveness is to
be had with God, that never yet had any serious exercise in their souls, about
the grounds of it, and its consistency with his holiness and justice. But those
that know it by faith, have a sense of it fixed particularly and distinctly on
their minds. They have been put upon an enquiry into the rise and grounds of it
in Christ; so that on a good and unquestionable foundation they can go to God,
and say, there is forgiveness with thee. They see how, and by what means, more
glory comes unto God by forgiveness, then by punishing; of sin; which is a
matter that the other sort of men are not at all solicitous about. If they may
escape punishment, whether God have any glory or no, for the most part, they
are indifferent.

Secondly, The first Apprehension arises without any trial upon enquiry in the
Consciences of them in whom it is. They have not by the power of their
convictions, and distresses of Conscience, been put to make enquiry whether
this thing be so or no. It is not a persuasion that they have arrived unto, in
a way of seeking satisfaction to their own souls. It is not the result of a
deep enquiry after peace and rest. It is antecedent unto Trial and Experience,
and so is not Faith, but Opinion. For although Faith be not Experience, yet it
is inseparable from it, as is every practical habit. Distresses in their
consciences have been prevented by this Opinion, not removed. The reason why
the most of men are not troubled about their sins to any purpose, is from a
persuasion that God is merciful and will pardon; when indeed none can really,
on a Gospel account, ordinarily, have that persuasion, but those who have been
troubled for sin, and that to the purpose. So is it with them that make this
discovery by faith. They have had conflicts in their own spirits, and being
deprived of peace, have accomplished a diligent search, whether forgiveness
were to be obtained or no. The persuasion they have of it, be it more or less,
is the issue of a trial they have had in their own souls, of an enquiry how
things stood between God and them, as to peace, and acceptance of their
Persons. This is a vast difference; the one sort might possibly have had
trouble in their consciences about sin, had it not been for their Opinion of
forgiveness; this has prevented, or stifled their convictions, not healed
their wounds, which is the work of the Gospel; but kept them from being wounded
which is the work of security. Yea, here lies the ruin of the most of them who
perish under the preaching of the Gospel. They have received the general notion
of pardon; it floats in their minds, and presently presents it self to their
relief, on all occasions. Does God at any time, in the dispensation of the
Word, under an Affliction, upon some great sin against their ruling light begin
to deal with their consciences; before their conviction can ripen, or come to
any perfection, before it draw nigh to its perfect work, they choke it, and
heal their consciences with this notion of pardon. Many a man between the
Assembly, and his dwelling house is thus cured. You may see them go away
shaking their heads, and striking on their breasts, and before they come home,
be as whole as ever: Well! God is merciful, there is pardon, has wrought the
cure. The other sort, have obtained their persuasion, as a result of the
discovery of Christ in the Gospel, upon a full conviction. Trials they have
had, and this is the issue.

Thirdly, The one (which we reject) works no Love to God, no Delight in him,
no Reverence of him, but rather a contempt, and commonness of Spirit in dealing
with him. There are none in the world that deal worse with God, than those who
have an ungrounded persuasion of forgiveness. And if they do fear him, or love
him, or obey him in any thing, more or less, it is on other motives and
considerations, which will not render any thing they do acceptable, and not at
all on this. As he is good to the Creation they may love, as he is great and
powerful they may fear him; but sense of pardon, as to any such ends or
purposes, has no power upon them. Carnal boldness, formality, and despising of
God, are the common issues of such a notion and persuasion. Indeed this is the
generation of great sinners in the world; men who have a general apprehension,
but not a sense of the special power of pardon, openly, or secretly, in fleshly
or spiritual sins, are the great sinners among men. Where faith makes a
discovery of forgiveness, all things are otherwise. Great Love, Fear, and
Reverence of God, are its attendants. Mary Magdalen loved much, because much
was forgiven. Great Love will spring out of great forgiveness. There is
forgiveness with thee, says the Psalmist, that thou may be feared. No
unbeliever, does truly and experimentally know the truth of this inference. But
so it is when men fear the Lord, and his Goodness, Hos. 3. 5. 1 say then, where
pardoning mercy is truly apprehended, where faith makes a discovery of it to
the soul, it is endeared unto God, and possessed of the great springs, of Love,
Delight, Fear, and Reverence, Psalm. 116. 1, 5, 6, 7.

Fourthly, This notional apprehension of the pardon of sin, begets no serious
through hatred and detestation of sin; nor is prevalent to a relinquishment of
it; nay, it rather secretly insinuates into the soul encouragements unto a
continuance in it. It is the nature of it to lessen and extenuate sin, and to
support the soul against its convictions. So Jude tells us, that some turn the
Grace of God into lasciviousness, v. 4. and says he, they are ungodly men; let
them profess what they will, they are ungodly men; But how can they turn the
grace of our God into lasciviousness? Is Grace capable of a conversion into
Lust or Sin? Will what was once Grace, ever become Wantonness? It is Objective
not Subjective Grace; the Doctrine, not the real substance of Grace, that is
intended. The Doctrine of forgiveness, is this Grace of God, which may be thus
abused. From hence do men who have only a general notion of it, habitually draw
secret encouragements to sin and folly. Paul also lets us know, that carnal men
coming to a doctrinal acquaintance with Gospel Grace, are very apt to make such
conclusions, Romans 6. 1. And it will appear at the last day, how unspeakably
this glorious Grace has been perverted in the world. It would be well for
many, if they had never heard the name of forgiveness. It is otherwise where
this Revelation is received indeed in the soul by believing, Romans 6. 14. Our
being under Grace, under the power of the belief of forgiveness, is our great
preservative from our being under the power of sin. Faith of forgiveness is the
Principle of Gospel Obedience, Titus 2. 11, 12.

Fifthly, The general notion of forgiveness brings with it no sweetness, no
Rest to the soul. Flashes of joy it may, abiding rest it does not. The truth of
the Doctrine fluctuates to and fro in the minds of those that have it, but
their Wills and Affections, have no solid delight nor rest by it. Hence not
withstanding all that profession that is made in the world of forgiveness, the
most of men ultimately resolve their peace and comfort into themselves. As
their apprehensions are of their own doing good or evil, according to their
ruling light whatever it be, so as to peace and rest are they secretly tossed
up and down. Every one in his several way pleases himself with what he does in
answer unto his own convictions, and is disquieted as to his state and
condition, according as he seems to himself, to come short thereof. To make a
full life of contentation upon pardon, they know not how to do it. One duty
yields them more true repose, than many thoughts of forgiveness. But faith
finds sweetness and Rest in it; being thereby apprehended, it is the only
harbor of the soul. It leads a man to God as Good, to Christ as Rest. Fading
evanid joys, do oft-times attend the one; but solid delight, with constant
Obedience, are the fruits only of the other.

Sixthly, Those who have the former only, take up their persuasion on false
grounds, though the thing it self be true; and they cannot but use it unto
false ends and purposes, besides its natural and genuine tendency. For their
grounds they will be discovered when I come to treat of the true nature of
Gospel forgiveness. For the End, it is used generally only to fill up what is
wanting. Self-righteousness is their bottom; and when that is too short, or
narrow to cover them, they piece it out by forgiveness. Where conscience
accuses, this must supply the defect. Faith lays it on its proper foundation;
of which afterward also; and it uses it to its proper End; namely to be the
sole and only ground of our Acceptance with God. That is the proper use of
forgiveness, that all may be of Grace; for when the foundation is pardon, the
whole superstructure must needs be Grace. From what has been spoken it is
evident, that notwithstanding the pretenses to the contrary, insinuated in the
Objection now removed, it is a great thing to have Gospel forgiveness
discovered unto a soul in a saving manner.

The true Nature of Gospel forgiveness. Its Relation to the Goodness, Grace,
and Will of God. To the blood of Christ. To the Promise of the Gospel. The
Considerations of Faith about it.

The true Nature of Gospel forgiveness.
The difficulties that lie in the way of faiths discovery of forgiveness, whence
it appears to be a matter of greater weight and importance, than it is commonly
apprehended to be, have been insisted on in the foregoing Discourse. There is
yet remaining another ground of the same Truth. Now this is taken from the
Nature and Greatness of the thing it self discovered, that is, of forgiveness.
To this end I shall show, what it is, wherein it does consist, what it
comprizes and relates unto, according to the importance of the second
Proposition before laid down.

I do not in this place take forgiveness, strictly and precisely, for the act
of pardoning; nor shall I dispute what that is, and wherein it does consist.
Consciences that come with sin entanglements unto God, know nothing of such
disputes. Nor will this Expression, there is forgiveness with God, bear any
such restriction, as that it should regard only actual condonation or pardon.
That which I have to do, is to enquire into the nature of that pardon, which
poor convinced troubled souls seek after; and which the Scripture proposes to
them, for their relief and rest. And I shall not handle this absolutely
neither, but in Relation to the Truth under consideration; namely, that it is a
great thing, to attain unto a true Gospel discovery of forgiveness.

Forgiveness, as it relates to the Nature of God.
First, As was showed in the opening of the words, the forgiveness enquired
after, has Relation unto the Gracious Heart of the Father. Two things I
understand hereby.

1. The Infinite Goodness and Graciousness of his Nature. 2. The Sovereign
purpose of his Will and Grace.
There is considerable in it, the infinite Goodness of his nature. Sin stands
in a contrariety unto God. It is a Rebellion against his Sovereignty, an
Opposition to his Holiness, a Provocation to his Justice, a Rejection of his
yoke, a casting off, what lies in the sinner, of that dependence which a
Creature has on its Creator. That God then should have pity and compassion on
sinners, in every one of whose sins, there is all this evil, and inconceivably
more than we can comprehend, it argues an infinitely Gracious, Good, and loving
heart and nature in him. For God does nothing, but suitably to the Properties
of his Nature, and from them. All the Acts. of his Will, are the Effects of his
Nature.

Now what ever God proposes as an encouragement for sinners to come to him,
that is of, or has a special influence into the Forgiveness that is with him.
For nothing can encourage a sinner as such, but under this consideration, that
it is, or it respects forgiveness. That this Graciousness of Gods nature, lies
at the head or spring, and is the root from whence forgiveness does grow, is
manifest from that solemn Proclamation which he made of old of his name, and
the Revelation of his nature therein, (for God assuredly is; what by himself he
is called,) Exodus 34. 6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniuity and transgression and sin. His forgiving of iniquity flows
from hence; that in his nature, he is merciful, gracious, long-suffering,
abundant in goodness. Were he not so, infinite in all these, it were in vain to
look for forgiveness from him. Having made this known to be his Name, and
thereby declared his Nature, he in many places proposes it as a relief, a
refuge for sinners, an encouragement to come unto him, and to wait for mercy
from him, Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy name, will put their trust in thee.
It will encourage them so to do; others have no foundation of their confidence;
but if this name of God be indeed made known unto us by the Holy Ghost, what
can hinder why we should not repair unto him, and rest upon him. So Isa. 50.
10. Who is among you, that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Not only sinners, but sinners in great
distress are here spoken unto. Darkness of state or condition, in the Scripture
denotes every thing of disconsolation and trouble. To be then in darkness,
where yet there is some light, some relief, though darkness be predominant is
sad and disconsolate; but now not only to be, but also to walk, that is to
continue a course in darkness, and that with no light, no discovery of help or
relief; this seems an overwhelming condition; yet sinners in this estate are
called to trust in the name of the Lord. I have showed before, that nothing but
forgiveness, or that which influenceth it, and encourages to an Expectation of
it, is of any use unto a sinner, much more one in so great distress upon the
account of sin: yet is such an one here sent only to the NAME of the Lord,
wherein his gracious heart and nature is revealed; That then is the very
Fountain and Spring of forgiveness. And this is that which John would work a
sense of upon our souls, where he tells us, that God is Love, 1 Ep. Chap. 4. 8.
or one, of an infinitely Gracious, Tender, Good, Compassionate, Loving Nature.
Infinite Goodness and Grace is the soil wherein forgiveness grows. It is
impossible this flower should spring from any other root. Unless this be
revealed to the soul, forgiveness is not revealed. To consider pardon merely as
it is terminated on our selves, not as it flows from God; will bring neither
profit to us, nor Glory to God.

And this also (which is our design in hand) will make it appear, That this
discovery of forgiveness whereof we speak, is indeed no common thing, is a
great discovery. Let men come with a sense of the guilt of sin, to have deep
and serious thoughts of God, they will find it no such easy and light matter,
to have their hearts truly and thoroughly apprehensive of this loving and
gracious nature of God, in reference unto pardon. It is an easy matter to say
so in common, but the soul will not find it so easy to believe it for it self.
What has been spoken before concerning the ingrafted notions that are in the
minds of men about the Justice, Holiness and severity of God, will here take
place. Though men profess that God is Gracious, yet that Aversation which they
have unto him, and communion with him, does abundantly manifest that they do
not believe what they say and profess; if they did, they could not but delight
and trust in him, which they do not; for they that know his name will put their
trust in him. So said the slothful servant in the Gospel, I knew that thou wast
austere, and not for me to deal withal; it may be he professed otherwise
before, but that lay in his heart when it came to the trial. But this I say, is
necessary to them, unto whom this discovery is to be made; even a spiritual
apprehension of the gracious, loving heart and nature of God. This is the
spring of all that follows; And the fountain must needs be infinitely sweet
from whence such streams do flow. He that considers the glorious fabric of
Heaven and Earth, with the things in them contained, must needs conclude that
they were the product of infinite Wisdom and Power; nothing less, or under them
could have brought forth such an effect. And he that really considers
forgiveness, and looks on it with a spiritual eye, must conclude, that it comes
from infinite Goodness and Grace. And this is that which the Hearts of sinners
are exercised about, when they come to deal for pardon. Psalm. 86. 5. Thou Lord
art good and ready to forgive. Nehem. 9. 17. Thou art a God ready to pardon,
gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness. And Micah 7. 19.
Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity -- because he delights
in Mercy. And God encourages them hereunto, wherever he says, that he
forgives sins and blots out iniquities, for his own sake, or his names sake;
that is, he will deal with sinners according to the Goodness of his own
Gracious Nature. So Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of mine
Anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I am God, and not Man. Were
there no more Mercy, Grace, Compassion, to be showed in this case, than it is
possible should be treasured up in the heart of a man, it would be impossible
that Ephraim should be spared; But says he, I am God and not Man; Consider the
infinite largeness, bounty, and goodness of the heart of God, and there is yet
hope. When a sinner is in good earnest seeking after forgiveness, there is
nothing he is more solicitous about than the heart of God toward him; nothing
that he more labors to have a discovery of; There is nothing that Sin and
Satan labor more to hide from him; This he rolls in his mind, and exercises
his thoughts about; and if ever that voice of God, Isa. 27. 4. Fury is not in
me, sound in his heart, he is relieved from his great distresses. And the fear
of our hearts in this matter, our Savior seems to intend the prevention or a
removal of, John 16. 26, 27. I say not that I will pray the Father for you, for
the Father himself loves you. They had good thoughts of the tender heart and
care of Christ himself, the Mediator, toward them; but what is the heart of
the Father, what acceptance shall they find with him? Will Christ pray that
they may find favor with him? Why, says he, as to the Love of his heart there
is no need of it; for the Father himself loves you. If this then belongs to
forgiveness, as who ever has sought for it, knows that it does, it is
certainly no common discovery to have it revealed unto us.

To have all the clouds and darkness that are raised by sin, between us and the
Throne of God, dispelled; to have the fire and storms, and tempests that are
kindled and stirred up about him by the Law removed; to have his glorious face
unvailed, and his holy heart laid open, and a view given of those infinite
treasures and stores of Goodness, Mercy, Love and Kindness, which have had an
unchangeable habitation therein from all Eternity; to have a discovery of these
eternal springs of sorbearance and forgiveness, is that which none but Christ
can accomplish and bring about, John 17. 6.

Forgiveness as it relates to the free Acts of Gods Will.
Secondly, This is not all. This eternal Ocean that is infinitely satisfied with
its own fullness and perfection, does not naturally yield forth streams for our
refreshment. Mercy and pardon do not come forth from God, as Light does from
the Sun, or Water from the Sea, by a necessary consequence of their natures,
whether they will or no. It does not necessarily follow that any one must be
made partaker of forgiveness, because God is infinitely Gracious. For may he
not do what he will with his own? Who has given first unto him that it should
be recompensed unto him again? Romans 11. 35. All the fruits of Gods Goodness,
and Grace, are in the sole keeping of his own Sovereign Will and pleasure. This
is his great Glory, Exodus 33. 18, 19. Show me thy glory, says Moses. And he
said, I will make all my Goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the
name of the Lord before thee; and I will be Gracious to whom I will be
Gracious. Upon that proclamation of the name of God, that he is merciful,
gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness, some might conclude that it
could not be otherwise with any but well; he is such a one, as that men need
scarce be beholding to him for Mercy; Nay says he, but this is my great glory,
that I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious. There must be an
interposition of a free Act of the Will of God, to deal with us according to
this his abundant goodness, or we can have no interest therein. This I call the
purpose of his Grace; or the good pleasure that he has purposed in himself;
Ephesians. 1. 9. or as it is termed, v. 5, 6. The good pleasure of his Will, that
he has purposed to the praise of his glorious grace. This free and gracious
pleasure of God, or purpose of his Will to act toward sinners according to his
own abundant goodness, is another thing that influences the forgiveness of
which we treat. Pardon flows immediately from a Sovereign Act of free Grace.
This free purpose of Gods will and Grace, for the pardoning of sinners, is
indeed that which is principally intended, when we say, there is forgiveness
with him. That is, he is pleased to forgive; and so to do is agreeable unto his
nature. Now the Mystery of this Grace is deep; It is eternal, and therefore
incomprehensible. Few there are whose hearts are raised to a contemplation of
it. Men rest and content themselves in a general notion of mercy, which will
not be advantageous to their souls; freed they would be from punishment, but
what it is to be forgiven they enquire not. So what they know of it, they come
easily by, but will find in the issue, it will stand them in little stead. But
these fountains of Gods actings, are revealed that they may be the fountains of
our comforts.

Now of this purpose of Gods Grace, there are several Acts, all of them
relating unto Gospel forgiveness.

First, There is his purpose of sending his Son to be the great means of
procuring, of purchasing forgiveness. Though God be infinitely and
incomprehensibly gracious, though he purpose to exert his Grace and Goodness
toward sinners, yet he will so do it, do it in such a way, as shall not be
prejudicial to his own Holiness and Righteousness. His Justice must be
satisfied, and his holy indignation against sin made known. Wherefore he
purposes to send his Son, and has sent him, to make way for the exercise of
Mercy; so as no way to eclipse the glory of his Justice, Holiness, and hatred
of sin. Better we should all eternally come short of forgiveness, than that God
should lose any thing of his glory. This we have, Romans 3. 25. God set him forth
to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past. The Remission of sins is the thing
aimed at; but this must be so brought about, as that therein, not only the
mercy, but the Righteousness of God may be declared; and therefore must it be
brought forth by a propitiation, or making of an Atonement, in the blood of
Christ. So John 3. 16. 1 John 4. 9. Romans 5. 8. This, I say, also lies in the
mystery of that forgiveness that is administered in the Gospel; It comes forth
from this eternal purpose of making way by the blood of Christ to the
dispensation of pardon. And this greatly heightens the excellency of this
discovery. Men who have slight thoughts of God, whose hearts were never awed
with his dread or greatness, who never seriously considered his purity and
holiness, may think it no great matter that God should pardon sin. But do they
consider the way whereby it was to be brought about; even by the sending of his
only Son, and that to dye, as we shall see afterward. Neither was there any
other way whereby it might be done. Let us now lay aside common thoughts,
Assent upon reports and tradition, and rightly weigh this matter. Doubtless we
shall find it to be a great thing, that forgiveness should be so with God, as
to be made out unto us, (we know somewhat what we are) by sending his only Son
to dye. Oh how little is this really believed, even by them who make a
profession of it? and what mean thoughts are entertained about it, when men
seek for pardon? Immunity from Punishment is the utmost that lies in the aims
and desires of most, and is all that they are exercised in the consideration
of, when they deal with God about sin. Such men think and will do so, that we
have an easy task in hand; namely, to prove that there is forgiveness in God;
but this ease lies in their own ignorance and darkness; If ever they come to
search after it indeed, to enquire into the Nature, Reasons, Causes, fountain
and springs of it, they will be able to give another account of these things.
Christ is the center of the mystery of the Gospel, and forgiveness is laid up
in the heart of Christ, from the love of the Father; in him are all the
Treasures of it hid. And surely it is no small thing to have the heart of
Christ revealed unto us. When Believers deal about pardon, their faith
exercises it self about this, that God with whom the soul has to do, has sent
the Lord Christ to dye, for this end, that it may be freely given out. General
notions of impunity they dwell not on, they pass not for: They have a closer
converse with God than to be satisfied with such thoughts. They enquire into
the graciousness of his Nature, and the good pleasure of his Will, the purpose
of his Grace; they ponder, and look into the mystery of his Wisdom and Love in
sending his Son. If these springs be not clear unto them, the streams will
yield them but little refreshment. It is not enough that we seek after
salvation; but we are to enquire and search diligently, into the nature and
manner of it. These are the things that the Angels desire to bow down and look
into, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12, 13. And some think, if they have got a form of words
about them, they have gotten a sufficient comprehension of them. It is
doubtless one Reason why many who truly believe, do yet so fluctuate about
forgiveness all their days; that they never exercised says to look into the
springs of it, its eternal fountains; but have merely dwelt on actual
condonation. However, I say, these things lie utterly out of the consideration,
of the common pretenders to an acquaintance with the truth we have in hand.

Secondly, There is another Sovereign Act of Gods Will to be considered in this
matter; and that is his eternal designation of the persons who shall be made
partakers of this mercy. He has not left this thing to hazard and
uncertainties, that it should as it were be unknown to him who should be
pardoned, and who not. Nay, none ever are made partakers of forgiveness, but
those whom he has eternally and graciously designed thereunto. So the Apostle
declares it, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 7. the rise is his eternal Predestination; the end,
the glory of his Grace, the means, Redemption in the blood of Christ; the thing
it self forgiveness of sins. None ever are, or can be made partakers thereof,
but by virtue of this Act of Gods Will and Grace; which thereupon has a
peculiar influence into it, and is to be respected in the consideration of it.
I know this may be abused by pride, profaneness and unbelief; and so may the
whole work of Gods Grace; and so it is, even the blood of Christ in an especial
manner; but in its proper place and use, it has a signal influence into the
glory of God, and the consolation of the souls of men.

There are also other Acts of this purpose of Gods Grace, as of giving sinners
unto Christ, and giving sinners an interest in Christ, which I shall not insist
upon, because the nature of them is sufficiently discovered in that one
explained already.

Forgiveness as it has respect to the blood of Christ.
Secondly, Forgiveness has respect unto the Propitiation made in and by the
blood of Christ the Son of God. This was declared in the opening of the words.
Indeed here lies the knot and center of Gospel forgiveness. It flows from the
Cross, and springs out of the Grave of Christ.

Thus Elihu describes it, Job 33. 24. God is gracious unto him, and says,
deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. The whole of
what is aimed at, lies in these words. (1.) There is Gods gracious and merciful
heart toward a sinner; He is gracious unto him. (2.) There is Actual
Condonation it self, of which we shall treat afterward; He says, deliver him
from going down to the pit. And (3.) There is the center of the whole, wherein
Gods gracious heart and actual pardon do meet; and that is the ransom, the
propitiation or atonement that is in the blood of Christ, of which we speak, I
have found a ransom.

The same is expressed, Isa. 53. 11. My rightoous servant shall justify many,
for he shall bear their iniquities. Of the justification of sinners, Absolution
or pardon is the first part. This arises from Christ's bearing of their
iniquities. Therein he finished the transgression, made an end of sin, and made
Reconciliation for iniquity; Dan. 9. 24. Even all the Sacrifices, and so
consequently the whole worship of the Old Testament, evinced this Relation
between forgiveness and bloodshedding; whence the Apostle concludes, that
without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. that is, all
pardon arises from bloodsheding, even of the blood of the Son of God. So that
we are said in him to have Redemption, even the forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1.
17. Our Redemption in his blood is our forgiveness; not that we are all
actually pardoned in the blood of his Cross, for thereunto must be added Gospel
condonation, of which afterward; but thereby it is procured, the grant of
pardon is therein sealed, and security given, that it shall in due time be made
out unto us. To which purpose is that discourse of the Apostle, Romans 3. 24, 25,
26. The work there mentioned, proceeds from Grace, is managed to the interest
of Righteousness, is carried on by the blood of Christ, and issues in
forgiveness; now the blood of Christ relates variously to the pardon of sin.

First, Pardon is purchased and procured by it. Our Redemption is our
forgiveness; as the cause contains the effect. No soul is pardoned but with
respect unto the blood of Christ as the procuring cause of that pardon. Hence
he is said to have washed us in his blood, Rev. 1. 5. In himself, to have
purged our sins, Heb. 1. 3. by one offering to have taken away sin, and for
ever to have perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. to be the ransom and
propitiation of our sins, 1 John 2. 2. to have made an end of sin, Dan. 9. 24.
and to have made Reconciliation for the sins of his people, Heb. 2. 17. God
has enclosed his rich stores of pardon and mercy in the blood of Jesus.

Secondly, Because in his blood the Promise of pardon is ratified and
confirmed, so that nothing is wanting to our complete forgiveness, but our
pleading the Promise by faith in him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. All the Promises of God,
are in him Yea, and in him Amen; that is, faithfully, and irrevocably, and
immutably established. And therefore the Apostle having told us, that this is
the Covenant of God, that he would be merciful to our sins and iniquities, Heb.
8. 12. He informs us, that in the undertaking of Christ, this Covenant is
become a Testament, Chap. 9. 15, 16, 17. So ratified in his blood, that mercy
and forgiveness of sin is irrevocably confirmed unto us therein.

Thirdly, Because he has in his own Person as the Head of the Church, received
an acquitment for the whole body; His Personal discharge upon the
accomplishment of his work, was a pledge of the discharge which was in due time
to be given to his whole mystical body. Peter tells us, Acts 2. 24. That it was
impossible he should be detained by death. And why so? because death being
penally inflicted on him, when he had paid the debt, he was legally to be
acquitted; Now for whom, and in whose name and stead he suffered, for them, and
in their name and stead, he received his acquitment.

Fourthly, Because upon his death, God the Father has committed unto him the
whole management of the business of forgiveness, Acts 5. 31. He (now) gives
repentance and the forgiveness of sins. It is Christ that forgives us, Col. 3.
13. All forgiveness is now at his disposal, and he pardons whom he will; even
all that are given unto him of the Father, not casting out any that come to God
by him. He is entrusted with all the stores of his Fathers purpose, and his own
purchase; and thence tells us, that all things that the Father has are his,
John 16. 15.

In all these respects does forgiveness relate to the blood of Christ. Mercy,
Pardon and Grace, could find no other way to issue forth from the heart of the
Father, but by the heart blood of the Son, and so do they stream unto the heart
of the sinner.

Two things are principally to be considered in the respect that forgiveness
has to the blood of Christ. (1.) The way of its Procurement; (2.) The way of
its Administration by him: The first is deep, mysterious, dreadful. It was by
his blood; the blood of the Cross, the travel of his soul; his undergoing wrath
and curse. (2.) The other is gracious, merciful and tender; whence so many
things are spoken of his mercifulness, and faithfulness, to encourage us to
expect forgiveness from him.

This also adds to the mysterious depths of forgiveness; and makes its
discovery a great matter. The soul that looks after it in earnest, must
consider what it cost. How light do most men make of pardon? What an easy
thing is it to be acquainted with it? and no very hard matter to obtain it. But
to hold Communion with God, in the blood of his Son, is a thing of another
nature than is once dreamed of by many, who think they know well enough what it
is to be pardoned. God be merciful is a common saying; and as common, to desire
he would be so for Christ's sake. Poor Creatures are cast into the mould of such
expressions, who know neither God, nor Mercy, nor Christ, nor any thing of the
mystery of the Gospel. Others look on the outside of the Cross; to see into
the mystery of the Love of the Father, working in the blood of the Mediator,
to consider by faith the great transaction of Divine Wisdom, Justice and Mercy
therein, how few attain unto it? To come unto God, by Christ for forgiveness,
and therein to behold the Law issuing all its threats and curses in his blood,
and loosing its sting, putting an end to its obligation unto punishment in the
Cross, to see all sins gathered up in the hand of Gods Justice, and made to
meet on the Mediator; and eternal love springing forth triumphantly from his
blood, flourishing into Pardon, Grace, Mercy, Forgiveness, this the heart of a
sinner can be enlarged unto only by the Spirit of God.

Forgiveness as it relates unto the Promise.
Thirdly, There is in forgiveness, free condonation, discharge, or pardon,
according to the tenor of the Gospel; and this may be considered two ways.

First, As it lies in the Promise it self; and so it is Gods gracious
declaration of pardon to sinners, in and by the blood of Christ; his Covenant
to that end and purpose; which is variously proposed, according as he knew
needful for all the ends and purposes of ingenerating faith, and communicating
that consolation which he intends therein.

This is the Law of his Grace; the declaration of the mystery of his love,
before insisted on.

Secondly, There is the bringing home, and Application of all this mercy to the
soul of a sinner by the Holy Ghost; wherein, we are freely forgiven all our
Trespasses, Col. 2. 13.

What faith respects in Forgiveness.
Gospel Forgiveness I say, respects all these things, these Principles, they
have all an influence into it. And that which makes this more evident,
wherewith I shall close this consideration of the nature of it, is, that Faith
in its Application of it self unto God about and for Forgiveness, does
distinctly apply it self unto, and close with, sometimes one of these severally
and singly, sometimes another; and sometimes jointly takes in the consideration
of them all expressly. Not that at any time it fixes on any or either of them
exclusively to the others; but that eminently it finds some special
encouragement at some season, and some peculiar attractive from some one of
them, more than from the rest; and then that proves an inlet, a door of
entrance unto the treasures that are laid up in the rest of them. Let us go
over the severalls by Instances.

First, Sometimes faith fixes upon the Name and infinite Goodness of the nature
of God, and draws out forgiveness from thence. So does the Psalmist, Psalm. 86.
6. Thou Lord art good and ready to forgive. He rolls himself in the pursuit and
expectation of pardon, on the infinite goodness of the nature of God, So Nehem.
9. 17. Thou art a God of pardons, or ready to forgive; of an infinite,
gracious, loving nature; not severe and wrathful; And this is that which we are
encouraged unto, Isa. 50. 10. to stay on the name of God, as in innumerable
other places.

And thus Faith oftentimes finds a peculiar sweetness and encouragement in and
from the consideration of Gods gracious nature. Sometimes this is the first
thing that it fixes on, and sometimes the last that it rests in; and oft-times
it makes a stay here, when it is driven from all other holds; It can say,
however it be, yet God is gracious; and at least make that conclusion which we
have from it, Joel 2. 13, 14. God is gracious and merciful, who knows but he
will return. And when faith has well laid hold on this consideration, it will
not easily be driven from its expectation of relief and forgiveness, even from
hence.

Secondly, Sometimes the soul by says addresseth it self in a peculiar manner
to the Sovereignty of Gods Will; whereby he is gracious to whom he will be
gracious, and merciful to whom he will be merciful, which as was showed, is
another considerable Spring or Principle of forgiveness. This way David's faith
steared him in his great straight and perplexity, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. If I shall
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again; but if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do unto me as seems
good unto him. That which he has in consideration is, whether God have any
delight in him or no; that is, whether God would graciously remit and pardon
the great sin against which at that time he manifested his indignation. Here he
lays himself down before the Sovereign Grace of God, and awaits patiently the
discovery of the free Act of his Will concerning him; and at this door, as it
were, enters into the consideration of those other springs of pardon, which
Faith enquires after and closes withal. This sometimes is all the cloud that
appears to a distressed soul, which after a while fills the Heavens by the
addition of the other considerations mentioned, and yields plentifully
refreshing showers. And this condition is a sin entangled soul oft-times
reduced unto in looking out for relief; It can discover nothing but this, that
God is able, and can if he graciously please relieve and acquit him. All other
supportments, all springs of relief are shut up, or hid from him. The springs
indeed may be nigh, as that was to Hagar, but their eyes are withheld, that
they cannot see them. Wherefore they cast themselves on Gods Sovereign
pleasure, and say with Job, though he slay us, we will put our trust in him, we
will not let him go. In our selves we are lost, that is, unquestionable; how
the Lord will deal with us we know not; we see not our signs and tokens any
more; evidences of Gods Grace in us, or of his Love and favor unto us, are all
out of sight. To a present special interest in Christ we are strangers; and we
lie every moment at the door of Eternity; what course shall we take, what way
shall we proceed? If we abide at a distance from God, we shall assuredly
perish; who ever hardened himself against him and prospered? Nor is there the
least relief to be had but from and by him; for who can forgive sins but God?
We will then bring our guilty souls into his presence, and attend the pleasure
of his Grace; what he speaks concerning us, we will willingly submit unto. And
this sometimes proves an Anchor to a tossed soul; which though it gives it not
rest and peace, yet it saves it from the rock of despair. Here it abides until
Light do more and more break forth upon it.

Thirdly, Faith dealing about forgiveness, does commonly eye in a peculiar
manner its relation to the mediation and blood of Christ. So the Apostle
directs, 1 John 2. 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. If any one has
sinned, and is in depths and entanglements about it; what course shall he take,
how shall he proceed to obtain deliverance? why he must unto God for pardon;
but what shall he rely upon to encourage him in his so doing? says the
Apostle, consider by faith the Atonement and propitiation made for sin by the
blood of Christ, and that he is still pursuing the work of Love to the suing
out of pardon for us; and rest thy soul thereon. This I say most commonly is
that which faith in the first place immediately fixes on.

Fourthly, Faith eyes actual pardon or condonation. So God proposes it as a
motive to further believing, Isa. 44. 22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud
thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins; return unto me, for I have
redeemed thee. Actual pardon of sin is proposed to faith, as an encouragement
unto a full returning unto God in all things, 2 Samuel 23. 5. And the like may be
said of all the other particulars which we have insisted on. There is not any
of them, but will yield peculiar relief unto a soul dealing with God about
forgiveness, as having some one special concernment or other of forgiveness in
wrapped in them. Only as I said, they do it not exclusively, but are the
special doors, whereby believing enters into the whole. And these things must
be spoken unto afterward.

Let us now take along with us, the end for which all these considerations have
been insisted on. It is to manifest, that a real discovery of Gospel
Forgiveness, is a matter of greater consequence and importance than at first
proposal, (it may be) it appeared unto some to be. Who is not in hopes, in
expectation of pardon? Who thinks not that they know well enough at least what
it is, if they might but obtain it? But men may have general thoughts of
impunity, and yet be far enough from any saving acquaintance with Gospel mercy.

Forgiveness discovered, or Revealed only to Faith. Reasons thereof.

Forgiveness discovered to Faith alone.
For a close of this Discourse, I shall only add, what is included in that
Proposition which is the foundation of the whole; namely, that this discovery
of forgiveness is, and can be made to faith alone. The nature of it is such, as
that nothing else can discover it or receive it. No Reasonings, no enquiries of
the heart of man can reach unto it. That guess or glimpse which the Heathens
had of old of somewhat so called, and which false Worshippers have at present,
is not the forgiveness we insist upon, but a mere imagination of their own
hearts.

This the Apostle informs us, Romans 1. 17. The Righteousness of God, is (in the
Gospel) revealed from faith to faith. Nothing but faith has any thing to do
with it. It is that Righteousness of God whereof he speaks, that consists in
the forgiveness of sins by the blood of Christ, declared in the Gospel. And
this is revealed from the faith of God in the Promise, to the faith of the
Believer; to him that mixes the Promise with faith. And again more fully, 1
Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man the things which God has prepared for them that love him. The ways
whereby we may come to the knowledge of any thing, are by the seeing of the
eye, or the hearing of the ear, or the Reasonings and meditations of the heart;
but now none of these will reach to the matter in hand; by none of these ways
can we come to an acquaintance with the things of the Gospel that are prepared
for us in Christ. How then shall we obtain the knowledge of them? that he
declares, v. 10. God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit. Now it is faith
only that receives the Revelations of the Spirit; nothing else has to do with
them.

To give evidence hereunto, we may consider, that this great mystery,

1. Is too Deep, 2. Is too Great, for ought else to discover: and 3. That
nothing else but faith is suited to the making of this discovery.
First, It is too deep and mysterious to be fathomed and reached by any thing
else. Reasons line is too short to fathom the depths of the Fathers Love, of
the blood of the Son, and the Promises of the Gospel built thereon, wherein
forgiveness dwells. Men cannot by their rational considerations launch out into
these deeps, nor draw water by them from these Wells of Salvation. Reason
stands by amazed, and cries how can these things be? it can but gather Cockle
shells, like him of old, at the shore of this Ocean; a few Criticisms upon the
outward letter; and so bring an evil report upon the Land, as did the Spies.
All it can do, is but to hinder faith from venturing into it; crying spare thy
self, this attempt is vain, these things are impossible. It is among the things
that faith puts off, and lays aside, when it engages the soul into this great
work. This then, that it may come to a discovery of forgiveness, causes the
soul to deny it self, and all its own Reasonings, and to give up it self to an
infinite fullness of Goodness and Truth. Though it cannot go into the bottom of
these depths, yet it enters into them, and finds rest in them. Nothing but
faith is suited to rest, to satiate, and content it self, in mysterious,
bottomless, unsearchable depths. Being a soul emptying, a Reason denying Grace,
the more it meets withal beyond its search and reach, the more satisfaction it
finds. This is that which I looked for, says Faith; even for that which is
infinite and unsearchable: When I know that there is abundantly more beyond me
that I do not comprehend, than what I have attained unto; for I know that
nothing else will do good to the soul. Now this is that which really puzzles
and overwhelms Reason, rendering it useless. What it cannot compass, it will
neglect or despise. It is either amazed and confounded, and dazzled like weak
eyes at too great a light; or fortifying of it self by inbred pride and
obstinacy, it concludes, that this preaching of the Cross, of forgiveness from
the Love of God, by the blood of Christ is plain folly, a thing not for a wise
man to take notice of, or to trouble himself about; So it appeared to the wise
Greeks of old, 1 Cor. 1. 24. Hence when a soul is brought under the power of a
real conviction of sin, so as that it would desirously be freed from the
galling intanglements of it, it is then the hardest thing in the world to
persuade such a soul of this forgiveness. Any thing appears more rational unto
it; any self Righteousness, in this world, any Purgatory hereafter.

The greatest part of the world of convinced Persons have forsaken forgiveness
on this account; Masses, Penances, Merits, have appeared more eligible. Yea,
men who have no other desire but to be forgiven, do choose to close with any
thing rather than forgiveness. If men do escape these Rocks, and resolve that
nothing but pardon will relieve them, yet it is impossible for them to receive
it in the Truth and power of it, if not enabled by faith thereunto. I speak not
of men that take it up by hearsay, as a common report; but of those souls who
find themselves really concerned to look after it; When they know it is their
sole concernment, all their hope and relief; when they know that they must
perish everlastingly without it, and when it is declared unto them in the words
of truth and soberness, yet they cannot receive it; What is the Reason of it;
What staves off these hungry creatures from their proper food? Why, they have
nothing to lead them into the mysterious depths of eternal Love, of the blood
of Christ, and Promises of the Gospel? How may we see poor diseased souls
standing every day at the side of this Pool, and yet not once venture
themselves into it all their days.

Secondly, It is too Great for any thing else to discover. Forgiveness is a
thing chosen out of God from all Eternity, to exalt and magnify the glory of
his Grace; and it will be made appear to all the world at the day of Judgment
to have been a great thing. When the soul comes in any measure to be made
sensible of it, it finds it so great, so excellent and astonishable, that it
sinks under the thoughts of it. It has dimensions, a length, breadth, depth
and height, that no line of the rational soul can take or measure. There is
exceeding Greatness in it, Ephesians. 1. 19. That is a great work which we have
prescribed, Ephesians. 3. 19. Even to know the Love of Christ that passes
knowledge. Here, I suppose, Reason will confess it self at a stand, and an
issue; to know that which passes knowledge, is none of its work. It cannot be
known says Reason, and so ends the matter. But this is faiths proper work;
even to know that which passes knowledge. To know that, in its power, virtue,
sweetness, and efficacy, which cannot be thoroughly known in its nature and
excellency; to have by believing all the Ends of a full comprehension of that
which cannot be fully comprehended. Hence, Heb. 11. 1. It is said to be the
(...) of things not seen: their subsistence; though in themselves absent, yet
faith gives them a present subsistence in the soul. So it knows things that
pass knowledge; by mixing it self with them it draws out, and communicates
their benefit to the soul. From all which is evident, what in the third place
was proposed; of faiths being only suited to be the means of this discovery, so
that I shall not need farther to insist thereon.

Discovery of Forgiveness in God a great supportment to sin entangled souls.
Particular Assurance attainable.

Discovery of Forgiveness a great supportment.
There yet remains a brief confirmation of the Position at first laid down, and
thus cleared, before I come to the improvement of the words especially aimed
at. I say then, this discovery of forgiveness in God, is a great supportment
for a sin entangled soul, although it has no special persuasion of its own
particular interest therein. Somewhat is supposed in this Assertion, and
somewhat affirmed.

Particular Assurance attainable.
First, It is supposed that there may be a gracious persuasion and Assurance of
faith, in a man, concerning his own particular interest in forgiveness. A man
may, many do believe it for themselves; so as not only to have the benefit of
it, but the comfort also. Generally all the Saints mentioned in Scripture had
this Assurance, unless it were in the case of depths, distresses, and
desertions, such as that in this Psalm. David expresses his confidence of the
Love and favor of God unto his own soul hundreds of times. Paul does the same
for himself, Gal. 2. 20. Christ loved M E and gave himself FOR ME, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
There is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day. And that this boasting in the Lord and his Grace,
was not an enclosure to himself, he shows Romans 8. 38, 39.

Nothing can be more vain, than what is usually pleaded, to remove this Sheat
Anchor of the Saints Consolation; namely that no man's particular name is in the
Promise. It is not said to this or that man by name, that his sins are forgiven
him. But the matter is far otherwise. To think that it is necessary, that the
names whereby we are known among our selves, and are distinguished here one
from another, should be written in the Promise, that we may believe in
particular every one for himself, is a fond conceit. The new name of every
Child of God is in the Promise. And believing makes it very legible to him.
Yea, we find by Experience that there is no need of Argumentation in this case.
The soul by a direct Act of faith believes its own forgiveness, without making
inferences or gathering conclusions; and may do so, upon the Proposition of it
to be believed in the Promise. But I will not digress from my work in hand; and
therefore shall only observe one or two things upon the Supposition laid down.

Duty of Believers to endeavor Assurance.
First, It is the duty of every Believer, to labor after an Assurance of a
Personal interest in forgiveness; and to be diligent in the cherishing and
preservation of it when it is attained. The Apostle exhorts us all unto it,
Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near in full Assurance of faith; that is, of our
Acceptance with God through forgiveness in the blood of Jesus. This he plainly
discourses of. And this Principle of our faith and confidence, he would have
us to hold fast unto the end, Chap. 3. 14. It is no small evil in Believers not
to be pressing after perfection in believing and obedience. Oft-times some
sinful indulgence to self or the world or sloth is the cause of it. Hence few
come up to Gospel Assurance. But yet most of our Privileges, and upon the
matter all our comforts depend on this one thing. A little by the way, to
encourage unto this duty, I shall desire you to consider both whence this
Assurance is produced, and what it does produce; what it is the fruit of, and
what fruit it bears.

Causes and Effects of Assurance.
First, It is in general the product of a more plentiful communication of the
Spirit than ordinary, as to a sense and participation of the choice fruits of
the death of Christ, procured for those who are justified by their acceptance
of the Atonement.

It flourishes not without his sealing, witnessing, establishing, and shedding
abroad the Love of God in our hearts. See Romans 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. And what Believer
ought not to long for, and press after the enjoyment of these things. Nay to
read of these things in the Gospel not experiencing them in our own hearts, and
yet to sit down quietly on this side of them, without continual pressing after
them, is to despise the blood of Christ, the Spirit of Grace, and the whole
work of Gods Love. If there are no such things, the Gospel is not true: if
there are, and we press not after them, we are despisers of the Gospel. Surely
he has not the Spirit, who would not have more of him, all of him that is
promised by Christ. These things are the hundred fold that Christ has left us
in this world, to counterpoise our sorrows, troubles and losses: And shall we
be so foolish as to neglect our only abiding riches and treasures? In
particular, it is the product of an exercised, vigorous, active faith. That our
faith should be such, always, in every state and condition, I suppose it our
duty to endeavor. Not only our comforts, but our Obedience also depends upon
it. The more faith; that is true, and of the right kind, the more obedience.
For all our obedience, is the obedience of faith.

(2.) For its own fruit, and what it produces, they are the choicest actings
of our souls toward God; as Love, delight, rejoicing in the Lord, Peace, Joy,
and Consolation in our selves, readiness to do, or suffer, cheerfulness in so
doing; If they grow not from this root, yet their flourishing wholly depends
upon it. So that surely it is the duty of every Believer to break through all
difficulties in pressing after this particular Assurance. The Objections that
persons raise against themselves, in this case, may afterward be considered.

(2.) In ordinary dispensations of God toward us, and dealings with us, it is
mostly our own negligence and sloth that we come short of this Assurance. It is
true, it depends in a peculiar manner on the Sovereignty of God. He is as
absolute in giving Peace to believers, as in giving Grace to sinners. This
takes place, and may be proposed as a relief, in times of trials and distress.
He creates light, and causes darkness, as he pleases. But yet considering
what Promises are made unto us; What encouragements are given us, what love and
tenderness there is in God to receive us, I cannot but conclude, that
ordinarily the cause of our coming short of this Assurance is where I have
fixed it. And this is the first thing that is supposed, in the foregoing
Assertion.

Saving Faith where there is no Assurance.
Secondly, It is supposed, that there is, or may be a saving persuasion or
discovery of forgiveness in God, Where there is no Assurance of any particular
interest therein; or that our own sins in particular are pardoned. This is that
which has a Promise of gracious Acceptance with God, and is therefore saving,
Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of
his Servant, that walks in darkness and has no light; Let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Here is the fear of the Lord and
Obedience, with a blessed encouragement to rest in God, and his Alsufficiency,
yet no Assurance, nor light, but darkness, and that walked in, or continued in
for a long season. For he cannot walk in darkness, meet with nothing but
darkness, without any beam or ray of Light, as the words signify, who is
persuaded of the Love of God in the pardon of his sins. And yet the faith of
such an one, and his Obedience springing from it, have this Gracious Promise of
Acceptance with God. And innumerable testimonies to this purpose might be
produced, and instances in great plenty. I shall only tender a little Evidence
unto it, in one Observation concerning the nature of faith, and one more, about
the proposal of the thing to be believed, or forgiveness. And,

1. Faith is called, and is a cleaving unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4. 4. Ye that did
cleave, or adhere unto the Lord; that is, who did believe. Josh. 23. 8. cleave,
or adhere unto the Lord your God. The same word is used also in the New
Testament, Acts 11. 23. He exhorted them that with purpose of heart they would
cleave unto the Lord, or continue steadfast in believing. It is also often
expressed by trusting in the Lord, rolling our burden, or casting our care upon
him, by committing our selves, or our ways unto him. Now all this goes no
further than the souls Resignation of it self unto God to be dealt withal by
him according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, ratified in the blood of
Christ. This a soul cannot do without a discovery of forgiveness in God. But
this a soul may do, without a special Assurance of his own interest therein.
This faith that thus adheres to God, that cleaves to him, will carry men to
conclude, that it is their Duty, and their Wisdom, to give up the disposal of
their souls unto God, and to cleave and adhere unto him as revealed in Christ,
waiting the pleasure of his Will; It enables them to make Christ their choice;
and will carry men to Heaven safely, though it may be at some seasons not very
comfortably.

2. The Revelation and discovery of forgiveness that is made in the Gospel,
evidenceth the same truth. The first proposal of it, or concerning it, is not
to any man, that his sins are forgiven. No but it is only that there is
Redemption and forgiveness of sins in Christ. So the Apostle lays it down,
Acts 13. 38, 39. Be it known unto you therefore Men and Brethren, that through
this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that
believe are justified from all things; from which they could not be justified
by the Law of Moses. All this may be believed, without a man's Assurance of his
own personal interest in the things mentioned. Now where they are believed with
the faith the Gospel requires, that faith is saving, and the root of Gospel
acceptable Obedience. The Ransom, I say, the Atonement by Christ, the fullness
of the Redemption that is in him, and so Forgiveness in his blood for
Believers, from the Good Will, Grace, and Love of the Father, is the first
Gospel discovery that a sinner in a saving manner closes withal. Particular
Assurance arises, or may arise afterward, and this also is supposed in the
Assertion.

Discovery of forgiveness a great supportment to entangled souls.
2. That which is affirmed in it, is, That a discovery of forgiveness in God,
without any particular Assurance of personal interest therein, is a great
supportment to a sin entangled soul. And let no man despise the day of this
small thing, small in the eyes of some, and those good men also, as if it did
not deserve the name of faith. Now as has been made to appear, this discovery
of forgiveness, is the souls persuasion, on Gospel grounds, that however it be
with him, and whatever his state and condition be, or is like to be, yet that
God in his own Nature is infinitely gracious, and that he has determined in a
Sovereign Act of his Will from Eternity, to be gracious to sinners; and that he
has made way for the Administration of forgiveness by the Blood of his Son,
according as he has abundantly manisested, and declared in the Promises of the
Gospel. However it be with me, yet thus it is with God; There is forgiveness
with him. This is the first thing that a soul in its depths rises up unto: And
it is a supportment for it; enabling it unto all present duties until
consolation come from above.

Thus has it been to, and with the Saints of old, Hos. 14. 3. Ashur shall not
save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work
of our hands, ye are our Gods, for in thee the fatherless finds mercy. A
solemn Renunciation we have of all other helps, Reliefs or Assistances, Civil
or Religious, that are not Gods. Therein a solemn Resolution in their great
distress of cleaving unto God alone. Both which are great and blessed effects
of faith. What is the bottom and foundation of this blessed Resolution? namely,
that Proposition, in thee the fatherless finds mercy; that is, there is
forgiveness with thee, for helpless sinners. This listed up their hearts in
their depths, and supported them in waiting, unto the receiving of the blessed
Promises, of Mercy, Pardon, Grace and Holiness, which ensue in the next Verses.
Until they came home unto them in their Efficacy and Effects, they made a Life
on this; in thee the fatherless finds mercy.

The state and condition of things seems to lie yet lower in that proposal we
have, Joel 2. 13, 14. Rend your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto
the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repents him of the evil, who knows if he will return, and
repent, and leave a blessing. That which is proposed to the faith of those here
spoken unto is, that the Lord is gracious and merciful; that there is
forgiveness in him, The Duty they are provoked unto hereupon, is Gospel
Repentance. The Assent unto the Proposition demanded, as to their own interest
amounts but unto this, who knows, but that the Lord may return and leave a
blessing, or deal with us according to the manifestation he has made of
himself, that he is merciful and gracious. This is far enough from any
comfortable persuasion of a particular interest in that Grace, mercy or Pardon.
But yet says the Prophet, come but thus far, and here is a firm foundation of
dealing with God about further discoveries of himself, in a way of Grace and
Mercy. When a soul sees but so much in God, as to conclude; well, Who knows
but that he may return, and have mercy upon me also, it will support him, and
give him an entrance into further light.

The Church in the Lamentations gives a sad account of her state and condition
in this matter. For she makes that hard conclusion against her self, Chap. 3.
8. My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. And when I cry and shout,
he shuts out my prayer, v. 18. So far is she from a comfortable persuasion of a
particular interest in Mercy and Acceptance; that under her Pressures, and in
her Temptations, she is ready positively to determine on the other side;
namely, that she is rejected and cast off for ever. What course then shall she
take? Shall she give over waiting on God, and say there is no hope? no says
she, I will not take that way; for v. 26. It is good that a man should both
hope and quietly wait for the salvation of God. But yet there seems small
encouragement for her so to do, if things be with her as was expressed; Things
indeed, says she, are very sad with me, My soul has them still in
remembrance, and is bowed down in me, v. 20. but yet, somewhat I recall to
mind, and therefore have I hope, v. 21. It is of the Lords mercy that we are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not. There is mercy and never
failing compassion in God; so that though my own present condition be full of
darkness, and I see no deliverance, Yet I purpose still to abide waiting on
him: who knows what those infinite stores and treasures of mercy and relief
that are with him, may at length afford unto me: and many instances of the like
kind might be added.

We may observe by the way, how far this Relief extends it self; and what it
enables the soul unto. As,

Effects of the Discovery of Forgiveness in God.
1. The soul is enabled thereby to resign it self unto the disposal of Sovereign
Grace, in self-abhorrency, and a Renunciation of all other ways of Relief.
Lam. 3. 29. He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. What
God will, is his Language. Here he lies at his disposal, humble, broken, but
abiding his pleasure. Though he slay me, says Job, yet I will trust in him,
Chap. 13. 15. It is all one, how he deals with me; whatever be the event I will
abide cleaving unto him. I will not think of any other way of extricating my
self from my distress. I will neither fly like Jonah, nor bide like Adam, nor
take any other course for deliverance. Says the soul, God is a God that hides
himself from me, Isa. 45. 15. I walk in darkness and have no light, Chap. 50.
10. My flesh fails, and my heart fails, Psalm. 73. 26. So that I am
overwhelmed with trouble. Mine Iniquities have taken such hold on me, that I
cannot look up, Psalm. 40. 12. The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has
forgotten me; Every day am I in dread and terror, and am ready utterly to
saint, and no relief can I obtain. What then shall I do? Shall I curse God and
dye? or cry this evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for him any longer?
Shall I take the course of the world, and seeing it will be no better, be
wholly regardless of my latter end? No; I know what ever my lot and portion be,
that there is forgiveness with God: This and that poor man trusted in him, they
cried unto him, and were delivered. So did David in his greatest distress, he
encouraged his heart in the Lord his God, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. It is good for me
to cast my self into his arms; it may be, he will frown; it may be he is wroth
still; but all is one, this way I will go; as it seems good unto him to deal
with me, so let it be: And unspeakable are the Advantages which a soul obtains
by this self Resignation, which the faith treated of, will infallibly produce.

2. It extends it self unto a Resolution of waiting in the condition wherein
the soul is. This the Church comes unto, Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a man
should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. I will not
give over my expectation, I will not make haste, nor limit God; but I will lie
at his foot, until his own appointed time of mercy shall come. Expectation and
Quietness make up waiting. These the soul attains unto, with this supportment.
It looks upwards, as a servant that looks to the hands of his Master, still
fixed on God to see what he will do, to hear what he will speak concerning him;
missing no season, no opportunity wherein any discovery of the Will of God may
be made to him. And this he does in quietness, without repining, or murmuring,
turning all his complaints against himself and his own vileness, that has cut
him short from a participation of that fullness of Love and Grace which is with
God. That this Effect also attends this Faith, will fully appear in the close
of the Psalm.

3. It supports unto waiting in the use of all means for the attainment of a
sense of forgiveness, and so has its Effect in the whole course of our
obedience. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. To fear
the Lord, is an expression comprehensive of his whole Worship; and all our
duty. This I am encouraged, says the Psalmist unto, in my depths; because
there is forgiveness with thee, I will abide in all duties, in all the ways of
thy Worship, wherein thou may be found. And however it be for a while, the
latter end of that soul who thus abides with God, will be peace. Let us then
nextly see by what ways and means it yields this supportment.

Means whereby a Discovery of Forgiveness yields supportment.
1. It begets a liking of God in the soul; and consequently some love unto him.
The soul apprehends God, as one infinitely to be desired and delighted in by
those who have a share in forgiveness. It cannot but consider him as good and
gracious, however its own estate be hazardous, Psalm. 73. 1, 2. Yet God is good
to Israel, to such as are of a clean heart, as for me, my feet were almost
gone, my steps had well nigh slipped. However the state stands with me, yet I
know that God is good, good to Israel; and therewith shall I support my self.
When once this ground is got upon the soul, that it considers God in Christ as
one to be delighted in, and loved, great and blessed effects will ensue. (1.)
Self-abhorrency and Condemnation, with Resignation of all to God, and
permanency therein, do certainly attend it. (2.) Still somewhat or other in God
will be brought to mind to relieve it under faintings, some new springs of hope
will be every day opened. (3.) And the soul will be insensibly wrought upon to
delight it self in dealing with God. Though in its own particular, it meets
with frowns, chidings and repulses, yet this still relieves him, that God is so
as has been declared; so that he says, however it be, yet God is good; and it
is good for me to wait upon him. Without this discovery the soul likes not God,
and whatever it does with respect unto him, it is because it dares do no
otherwise, being overawed with his terror and greatness. And such Obedience God
may have from Devils.

2. It removes sundry overwhelming difficulties, that lie in the souls way
before it close with this discovery of forgiveness. As,

1. It takes away all those Hindrances that were formerly insisted on, from
the Greatness, Holiness and severity of God, the inexorableness and strictness
of the Law, and the natural actings of conscience, rising up against all hopes
of forgiveness. All these are by this faith removed, and taken out of the way.
Where this faith is, it discovers not only forgiveness, as has been showed,
but also the true nature of Gospel forgiveness. It reveals it as flowing from
the Gracious Heart of the Father, through the blood of the Son. Now this
Propitiation in the blood of the Son, removes all these difficulties, even
antecedently unto our special sense of an interest therein. It shows how all
the properties of God may be exalted, and the Law fulfilled, and yet
forgiveness given out to sinners. And herein lies no small advantage unto a
soul in its approaches unto God. All those dreadful Apprehensions of God, which
were wont to beset him in the first thoughts of coming to him, are now taken
out of the way; so that he can quietly apply himself unto his own particular
concernments before him.

2. In particular, it removes the overwhelming consideration of the unspeakable
greatness of sin; This presses the soul to death when once the heart is
possessed with it. Were not their sins so great, such as no heart can imagine,
or tongue declare, it might possibly be well with them, say distressed sinners.
They are not so troubled that they are sinners, as that they are great sinners;
Not that these, and those sins they are guilty of, but that they are great sins
attended with fearful aggravations. Otherwise they could deal well enough with
them. Now though this discovery free men not from the entanglement of their
sins as theirs; yet it does, from the whole entanglement of their sins, as
great and many. This consideration may be abstracted. The soul sees enough in
God to forgive great sins, though it does not as yet, to forgive his sins. That
great sins shall be pardoned, this discovery puts out of Question. Whether his
sin shall be pardoned, is now all the enquiry. Whatever any faith can do, that
this faith will do, unless it be the making of particular Application of the
things believed unto it self. The soul then can no longer justly be troubled
about the greatness of sin; the infiniteness of forgiveness that he sees in God
will relieve him against it. All that remains, is, that it is his own sin,
about which he has to deal; whereof afterward. These, and the like
difficulties are removed by it.

3. It gives some Life in, and Encouragement unto duty. And that ( First) Unto
duty as duty; Eying God by faith in such a fullness of Grace, the soul cannot
but be encouraged to meet him in every way of duty, and to lay hold upon him
thereby. Every way leading to him, as leading to him, must be well liked and
approved of; and ( Secondly,) To all duties; and herein lies no small
advantage. God is oftentimes found in duties; but in what, or of what kind he
will be found of any one in particular, is uncertain. This faith puts the soul
on all: So it did the Spouse in the parallel to that in hand. Cant. 3. 2, 3, 4.
Now what supportment may be hence obtained is easily apprehended; supportment
not from them, or by them, but in them, as the means of intercourse between God
and the soul.

From these Effects of this discovery of forgiveness in God, there things will
ensue, which are sufficient to maintain the spiritual life of the soul.

1. A Resolution to abide with God, and to commit all unto him. This the word,
as was observed, teaches us; There is forgiveness with thee, and therefore thou
shall be feared. Because this I found, this I am persuaded of, therefore I will
abide with him in the way of his Fear and Worship. This our Savior calls unto,
John 15. 4. Abide in me; except you do so, ye can hear no fruit. So the Lord
representing his taking of the Church unto himself, under the Type of the
Prophets taking an Adulteress in vision, does it on these terms, Hos. 3. 3.
Thou shall abide for me many days; Thou shall not play the Harlot, and thou
shall not be for another man, so will I also be for thee. Now this abiding with
God, intimates two things: (1.) Oppositions, Solicitations, and Temptations
unto the contrary: (2.) Forbearing to make any other choice, as unto that end
for which we abide with God.

Abiding with God, wherein it consists.
1. It argues Oppositions. To abide, to be stable, and permanent, is to be so,
against Oppositions. Many discouragements are ready to rise up in the soul
against it: In Fears especially that it shall not hold out, that it shall be
rejected at last, that all is naught and ^ypocritical with it; that it shall
not be forgiven, that God indeed regards it not, and therefore it may well
enough give over its hopes, which seem often as the giving up of the Ghost,
will assault it. Again, Oppositions arise from corruptions and temptations unto
sin, contrary to the Life of faith. And these often proceed to an high degree
of prevalency, so that the guilt contracted upon them is ready to cast the soul
quite out of all expectation of mercy: I shall one day perish, by these means,
says the soul, if I am not already lost.

But now where faith has made this discovery of forgiveness, the soul will
abide with God against all these discouragements and Oppositions. It will not
leave him, it will not give over waiting for him. So David expresses the
matter in the instance of himself, Psalm. 73. 2. But as for me, my feet were
almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped: and v. 13. Verily I have cleansed my
heart in vain; but yet after all his conflicts, this at last he comes unto, v.
26. Though my flesh and my heart fails, yet (v. 28.) It is good for me to
draw near unto God. I will yet abide with God, I will not let go his fear, nor
my profession. Although I walk weakly, lamely, unevenly, yet I will still
follow after him. As it was with the Disciples, when many upon a strong
temptation went back from Christ, and walked no more with him; Jesus said unto
them, will ye go away also? to which Peter replies in the name of the rest of
them, Lord, to whom shall we go, thou have the words of Eternal Life, John 6.
66, 67, 68. It is thus and thus with me, says the soul, I am tossed and
afflicted, and not comforted; little life, little strength, real guilt, many
sins, and much disconsolation. What then, faith God by his word, Will thou go
away also? no, says the soul, there is forgiveness with thee, thou have the
words of Eternal Life, and therefore I will abide with thee.

2. This abiding with God argues a forbearance of any other choice. Whilst the
soul is in this condition having not attained any evidences of its own special
interest in forgiveness: Many Lovers will be soliciting of it to play the
harlot by taking them into its embraces. Both self-righteousness and sin will
be very importunate in this matter. The former tenders it self as exceeding
useful to give the soul some Help, Assistance, and supportment in its
condition. Samuel does not come says Saul, and the Philistines invade me, I
will venture and offer Sacrifice my self contrary to the Law. The Promise does
not come to the soul for its particular relief, it has no evidence as to an
especial interest in forgiveness: Temptation invades the mind; try thy self,
says it, to take relief in somewhat of thine own providing. And this is to
play the harlot from God. To this purpose self-righteousness variously
disguises it self, like the Wise of Jeroboam when she went to the Prophet.
Sometimes it appears as duty, sometimes as signs, and tokens; but its end is to
get somewhat of the faith and trust of the soul to be fixed upon it. But when
the soul has indeed a discovery of forgiveness, it will not give ear to these
solicitations. No says it, I see such a Beauty, such an Excellency, such a
desireableness and suitableness unto my wants and condition, in that
forgiveness that is with God, that I am resolved to abide in the Gospel desire
and expectation of it, all the days of my life; here my choice is fixed; and I
will not alter. And this Resolution gives glory to the Grace of God. When the
soul without an evidence of an interest in it, yet prefers it above that which
with many reasonings and pretenses offers it self as a present relief unto it,
Hereby is God glorified, and Christ exalted, and the spiritual life of the soul
secured.

Waiting on God from a Discovery of Forgiveness.
2. This discovery of forgiveness in God with the effects of it before
mentioned, will produce a Resolution of waiting on God for peace and
consolation, in his own time and way. He that believes will not make haste,
Isa. 28. 16. not make haste; to what? not to the enjoyment of the thing
believed. Haste argues precipitation and impatience; this the soul that has
this discovery is freed from, resolving to wait the time of Gods appointment,
for peace and consolation; God speaking of his accomplishment of his Promises,
says, I the Lord will hasten it, Isa. 60. 22. Well then, if God will hasten
it, may not we hasten to it? nay, says he, I will hasten it, but in its time.
All oppositions and impediments considered it shall be hastened, but in its
time, its due time, its appointed time. And this the soul is to wait for, and
so it will.

As when Jacob had seen the beauty of Rachel and loved her, he was contented to
wait seven years for the enjoyment of her to be his wife; and thought no time
long, no toil too hard that he might obtain her; so the soul having discovered
the beauty and excellency of forgiveness, as it is with God, as it is in his
gracious Heart, in his eternal purpose, in the Blood of Christ, in the Promise
of the Gospel, is resolved to wait quietly and patiently for the time wherein
God will clear up unto it, its own personal interest therein; Even one
experimental embracement of it, even at the hour of death, does well deserve
the waiting, and obedience of the whole course of a man's life.

And this the Psalmist manifests to have been the Effect produced in his heart
and spirit; For upon this discovery of forgiveness in God, he resolves both to
wait upon him himself, and encourages others so to do.

Discovery of Forgiveness prepares the soul to receive it.
3. This prepares the soul, for the receiving of that consolation and
deliverance out of its pressures, by an evidence of a special interest in
forgiveness, which it waits for.

1. For this makes men to hearken after it; It makes the soul like the Merchant
who has great Riches, all his wealth in a far Country, which he is
endeavoring to bring home safe unto him. If they come he is well provided for;
if they miscarry, he is lost and undone. This makes him hearken after tidings
that they are safe there; and as Solomon says, Good news in this case from a
far Country is as cold water to a thirsty soul, ( Prove. 25. 25.) full of
refreshment. Though he cannot look upon them as his own, yet absolutely because
he has them not in possession, he is glad they are safe there. So is it with
the soul; These Riches that it so values are as to its apprehensions in a far
Country: So is the Promise, that he shall behold the Land that is very far off,
Isa. 33. 17. He is glad to hear news that they are safe; to hear forgiveness
preached, and the Promises insisted on, though he cannot as yet look upon them
as his own.

The Merchant resis not here, but he hearkeneth with much solicitousness after
the things that should bring home his riches, especially if they have in them
his All. Hence such Ships are called Ships of desire, Job 9. 26. Such a man
greatly desires the speeding of them to their Port. He considers the Wind and
the Weather, all the occasions and inconveniences and danger of the way; And
blame him not; his All is at stake. The soul does so in like manner; it
hearkneth after all the ways and means whereby this forgiveness may be
particularly brought home unto it; is afraid of sin, and of Temptation, glad to
find a fresh Gale of the Spirit of Grace, hoping that it may bring in his
Return from the Land of Promise. This prepares the heart for a spiritual sense
of it, when it is revealed.

Secondly, It so prepares the soul, by giving it a due Valuation of the Grace
and Mercy desired. The Merchantman in the Gospel was not prepared to enjoy the
Pearl himself, until it was discovered to him to be of great price; then he
knew how to purchase it, procure it, and keep it. The soul having by this
acting of faith upon the discovery of forgiveness insisted on, come to find
that the pearl hid in the field is indeed precious, is both stirred up to seek
after possession of it, and to give it its due. Says such a soul, How
excellent, how precious is this forgiveness that is with God? Blessed, yea ever
blessed are they who are made partakers of it! What a life of Joy, Rest, Peace,
and Consolation do they lead? Had I but their Evidence of an interest in it,
and the spiritual consolation that ensues thereon, How would I despise the
world, and all the temptations of Satan, and rejoice in the Lord in every
condition? And this Apprehension of Grace, also exceedingly prepares and fits
the soul, for a receiving of a blessed sense of it, so as that God may have
glory thereby.

3. It fits the soul by giving a Right Understanding of it; of its Nature, its
Causes, and Effects. At the first, the soul goes no further, but to look after
impunity, or freedom from punishment, any way. What shall I do to be saved, is
the utmost it aims at, Who shall deliver me, how shall I escape? And it would
be contented to escape any way; by the Law, or the Gospel, all is one, so it
may escape. But upon this discovery of forgiveness treated of, which is made by
faith of Adherence unto God, a man plainly sees the nature of it, and that it
is so excellent that it is to be desired for its own sake. Indeed when a soul
is brought under trouble for sin, it knows not well what it would have. It has
an uneasiness, or disquietment that it would be freed from; a dread of some
evil condition that it would avoid. But now the soul can tell what it desires,
what it aims at, as well as what it would be freed from. It would have an
interest in Eternal Love, have the gracious kindness of the heart of God turned
toward it self; a sense of the everlasting purpose of his Will shed abroad in
his heart; have an especial interest in the precious blood of the Son of God,
whereby Atonement is made for him, and that all these things be testified unto
his Conscience in a word of promise mixed with faith. These things he comes
for, this way alone he would be saved and no other; It sees such a Glory of
Wisdom, Love, and Grace in forgiveness, such an Exaltation of the Love of
Christ in all his Offices, in all his undertaking, especially in his Death,
Sacrifice, and bloodshedding whereby he procured or made Reconciliation for us,
that it exceedingly longs after the participation of them.

All these things in their several degrees, will this discovery of forgiveness
in God, without an evidence of an especial interest therein produce. And these
will assuredly maintain the spiritual life of the soul, and keep it up unto
such an obedience as shall be accepted of God in Christ. Darkness, sorrow,
storms, they in whom it is may meet withal, but their eternal condition is
secured in the Covenant of God; their souls are bound up in the bundle of life.

From what has been spoken, we may make some Inferences in our passage
concerning the true notion of believing. For,

Vain pretenses of Faith discovered.
(1.) These Effects ascribed to this faith of forgiveness in God and always
produced by it, make it evident that the most of them who pretend unto it, who
pretend to believe that there is forgiveness with God, do indeed believe no
such thing. Although I shall on set purpose afterward evince this, yet I
cannot here utterly pass it by. I shall then only demand of them who are so
forward in the profession of this faith, that they think it almost impossible
that any one should not believe it; what Effects it has produced in them, and
whether they have been by it enabled to the performance of the duties before
mentioned? I fear with many, things on the account of their pretended faith are
quite otherwise. They love sin the more for it, and God never the better;
supposing that a few barren words will issue the controversy about their sins,
they become insensibly to have slight thoughts of sin, and of God also. This
persuasion is not of him that calls us. Poor souls, your faith is the Devils
greatest Engine for your ruin; the highest contempt of God and Christ and
forgiveness also, that you can be guilty of; a means to let you down quietly
into Hell; the Pharisees Moses, trusted in, and will condemn you; As none is
saved but by faith, so you if it were not for your faith, (as you call it)
might possibly be saved. If a man's Gold prove counterfeit, his Jewels painted
Glass, his Silver lead or dross, he will not only be found poor when he comes
to be tried, and want the benefit of Riches, but have withal a fearful
aggravation of his poverty by his disappointment and surprizal. If a man's faith
which should be more precious than Gold, be found rotten and corrupt, if his
light be darkness, how vile is that faith, how great is that darkness? Such it
is evident will the faith of too many be found in this business.

2. The work we are carrying on, is the rising of a sin entangled soul out of
its depths, and this we have spoken unto, is that which must give him his first
relief. Commonly when souls are in distress, that which they look after is
Consolation. What is it that they intend thereby? that they may have Assurance
that their sins are forgiven them, and so be freed from their present
perplexities. What is the issue? Some of them continue complaining all their
days, and never come to Rest or Peace; so far do they fall short of
Consolation and Joy. And some are utterly discouraged from attempting any
progress in the ways of God. What is the Reason hereof? Is it not, that they
would fain be finishing their building, when they have not laid the foundation.
They have not yet made through work in believing forgiveness with God, and they
would immediately be at Assurance in themselves. Now God delights not in such a
frame of Spirit; for,

1. It is selfish; The great design of faith is to give glory unto God, Romans 4.
20. The end of Gods giving out forgiveness, is the praise of his glorious
grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. But let a soul in this frame have peace in it self, it is
very little solicitous about giving glory unto God. He cries like Rachel, Give
me children or I dye; give me peace, or I perish. That God may be honored, and
the forgiveness he seeks after be rendered glorious, It is cared for in the
second place, if at all. This selfish earnestness, at first to be thrusting our
hand in the side of Christ, is that which he will pardon in many, but accepts
in none.

2. It is impatient. Men do thus deport themselves, because they will not wait.
They do not care for standing afar off for any season, with the Publican. They
love not to submit their souls to lie at the foot of God, to give him the glory
of his Goodness, Mercy, Wisdom, and Love, in the disposal of them, and their
concernments. This waiting comprizeth the universal subjection of the soul unto
God, with a resolved Judgment that it is meet and right that we and all we
desire and aim at, should be at his Sovereign disposal. This gives glory to
God; a duty which the impatience of these poor souls will not admit them to the
performance of; and both these arise,

3. From weakness; it is weak; it is weakness in any condition that makes men
restless and weary. The state of Adherence is as safe a condition, as the state
of Assurance; only it has more combats and wrestling attending it. It is not
then fear of the event, but weakness and weariness of the combat that make men
anxiously solicitous about a deliverance from that state, before they are well
entered into it.

Let then the sin entangled soul remember always, this Way, Method, and Order
of the Gospel, that we have under consideration. First, Exercise faith on
forgiveness in God, and when the soul is fixed therein, it will have a ground
and foundation whereon it may stand securely, in making Application of it unto
it self. Drive this principle in the first place unto a stable issue upon
Gospel evidences; Answer the Objections that lie against it, and then you may
proceed. In believing, the soul makes a conquest upon Satan's Territories. Do
then as they do, who are entering on an Enemies Country; secure the passages,
fortify the Strong holds as you go on, that you be not cut off in your
progress. Be not as a Ship at Sea which passes on, and is no more possessed or
Master of the Water it has gone through; than of that whereunto it is not yet
arrrived. But so it is with a soul, that fixes not on these foundation
principles; he presses forwards and the ground crumbles away under his feet,
and so he wilders away all his days in uncertainties. Would men but lay this
principle well in their souls, and secure it against assaults, they might
proceed though not with so much speed as some do, yet with more safety. Some
pretend at once to fall into full Assurance, I wish it prove not a broad
presumption in the most. It is to no purpose for him to strive to fly, who
cannot yet go; to labor to come to Assurance in himself who never well
believed forgiveness in God. Now that we may be enabled to fix this persuasion
against all opposition, that which in the next place I shall do, is to give out
such unquestionable evidences of this Gospel truth, as the soul may safely
build and rest upon: And these contain the confirmation of the principal
Proposition before laid down.

Evidences of Forgiveness in God. No inbred Notions of any free Acts of Gods
Will. Forgiveness not revealed by the Works of Nature, nor the Law.

Essential properties of Gods nature how made known.
1. The things that are spoken, or are to be known of God are of two sorts: (1.)
Natural and Necessary; such as are his Essential properties, or the Attributes
of his nature, his Goodness, Holiness, Righteousness, Omnipotency, Eternity,
and the like. These are called, (...), Romans 1. 19. That which may be known of
God. And there are two ways, as the Apostle there declares, whereby that which
he there intimates of God may be known, (1.) By the inbred light of Nature;
(...), v. 19. It is manifest in themselves; in their own hearts; They are
taught it by the common conceptions and presumptions which they have of God by
the light of nature. From hence do all mankind know concerning God, that He is,
that he is Eternal, infinitely Powerful, Good, Righteous, Holy, Omnipotent.
There needs no special Revelation of these things that men may know them. That
indeed they may be known savingly there is; and therefore they that know these
things by nature, do also believe them on Revelation, Heb. 11. 6. He that
comes unto God must BELIEVE that he is, and that he is a rewarder. Though men
KNOW God by the light of nature, yet they cannot COME to God by that knowledge.

2. These Essential properties of the nature of God are revealed by his WORKS.
So the Apostle in the same place, ver. 20. The invisible things of God from the
creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead: See also, Psalm 19. 1, 2, 3. And
this is the first sort of things that may be known of God.

Free Acts of Gods Will, how they may be known.
2. There are the free Acts of his Will and Power; or his free eternal purposes,
with the temporal dispensations that flow from them. Now of this sort, is the
forgiveness that we are enquiring after; It is not a property of the Nature of
God, but an Act of his Will, and a Work of his Grace. Although it has its rise
and spring in the infinite Goodness of his Nature, yet it proceeds from him,
and is not exercised but by an absolute free and Sovereign Act of his Will. Now
there is nothing of God, or with him, of this sort that can be any ways known,
but only by especial Revelation: For,

1. There is no inbred notion of the Acts of Gods Will in the heart of man,
which is the first way whereby we come to the knowledge of any thing of God.
Forgiveness is not revealed by the light of nature. Flesh and blood, which
nature is, declares it not: By that means, No man has seen God at any time,
John 1. 8. that is, as a God, of mercy and pardon, as the Son reveals him.
Adam had an intimate acquaintance, according to the limited capacity of a
creature, with the properties and excellencies of the nature of God. It was
implanted in his heart, as indispensibly necessary unto that natural worship,
which by the Law of his creation he was to perform. But when he had sinned, it
is evident, that he had not the least apprehension that there was forgiveness
with God. Such a thought would have laid a foundation of some further treaty
with God about his condition. But he had no other design but of flying and
hiding himself, Genesis 3. 10. so declaring that he was utterly ignorant of any
such thing as pardoning mercy. Such, and no other, are all the first, or purely
natural conceptions of sinners; namely, that it is (...), the Judgment of God,
Romans 1. 32. that sin is to be punished with death. It is true, these
conceptions in many are stifled, by Rumors, Reports, Traditions, that it may be
otherwise; but all these are far enough from that Revelation of forgiveness,
which we are enquiring after.

2. The consideration of the Works of Gods creation will not help a man to this
knowledge; that there is forgiveness with God. The Apostle tells us, Romans 1.
20. what it is of God that his works reveal; even his eternal power and
Godhead; or the Essential Properties of his nature; but no more: Not any of the
purposes of his Grace, not any of the free Acts of his Will; not pardon and
forgiveness. Besides God made all things in such an estate and condition,
namely, of Rectitude, Integrity, and Uprightness, Eccles. 7. 29. that it was
impossible they should have any respect unto sin, which is the Corruption of
all, or to the Pardon of it, which is their Restituion, whereof they stood in
no need. There being no such thing in the world, as sin, nor any such thing
supposed to be, when all things were made of nothing, how could any thing
declare or reveal the forgiveness of it.

3. No works of Gods Providence can make this discovery. God has indeed born
Testimony to himself and his Goodness in all Ages from the foundation of the
world in the works of his Providence: So Acts 14. 15, 16, 17. We preach unto
you, that you should turn from these vanities, unto the living God, which made
Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that are therein; who in times
past, suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways: nevertheless he left not
himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from Heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness: (...), He left not
himself without witness; that is, by the works of his Providence there
recounted, he thus far bare Testimony to himself, that he is, and is good, and
does good, and rules the world, so that they were utterly inexcusable who
taking no notice of these works of his, nor the fruits of his goodness, which
they lived upon, turned away after (...), vain things, as the Apostle there
calls the Idols of the Gentiles. But yet these things did not discover pardon
and forgiveness. For still God suffered them to go on in their own ways, and
winked at their Ignorance. So again, Acts 17. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Whom you
ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you, God that made the world, and all
things therein, seeing that he is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in
Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he
needs any thing, seeing he gives unto all life and breath, and all things,
and has made of one blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of
the Earth (where by the way there is an allusion to that of Genesis 11. 8. the
Lord scattered them abroad upon the face of the Earth) and has determined the
times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation, that they should
seek the Lord, if happily they might seek after him, and find him, though he be
not far from every one of us. By Arguments taken from the works of God both of
Creation and Providence; the Apostle proves the Being and properties of God.
Yea, he lets them know with whom he had to do, that God designed by his works
so far to reveal himself unto them, as the true and living God, the Maker and
Governor of all things, as that they ought to have enquired more diligently
after him, and not to look on him alone as the Unknown God, who alone might be
known: all their Idols being vain and nothing. But of the discovery of Pardon
and forgiveness in God by these ways and means, he speaks not; yea, he plainly
shows that this was not done thereby. For the Great Call to saving Repentance
is by the Revelation of forgiveness. But now by these works of his Providence
God called not the Gentiles to saving Repentance. No says he, he suffered them
to walk still in their own ways, Chap. 14. 16. and winked at the times of
their ignorance; but now, that is, by the Word of the Gospel, commands them
to Repent, Chap. 17. 30.

Forgiveness not revealed by the work of Providence about the first sin.
II. Whereas there had been one signal Act of Gods Providence about sin, when
man first fell into the snares of it: It was so far from the revealing
forgiveness in God that it rather severely intimated the contrary. This was
Gods dealing with sinning Angels. The Angels were the first sinners; and God
dealt first with them about sin. And what was his dealing with them, the Holy
Ghost tells us, 2 Pet. 2. 4. (...), he spared not the sinning Angels, he spared
them not; It is the same word which he uses where he speaks of laying all our
iniquities on Christ, he undergoing the punishment due unto them, Romans 8. 32.
(...), he spared him not; that is, he laid on him the full punishment that by
the Curse and sanction of the Law was due unto sin. So he dealt with the Angels
that sinned; he spared them not but inflicted on them the punishment due to
sin, shutting them up under chains of darkness for the Judgment of the great
Day. Hitherto then God keeps all thoughts of forgiveness in his own Eternal
Bosom. There is not so much as the least dawning of it upon the world. And this
was at first no small prejudice against any thoughts of forgiveness. The world
is made, sin enters by the most glorious part of the Creation, whose recovery
by pardon might seem to be most desirable, but not the least appearance of it
is discovered. Thus it was hid in God from the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 3.
9.

III. God gave unto Man a Law of Obedience immediately upon his Creation. Yea,
for the main of it, he implanted it in him by, and in his Creation. This Law it
was supposed that man might transgress. The very nature of a Law prescribed
unto free Agents, attended with Threatenings and Promises of Reward, requires
that supposition. Now there was not annexed unto this Law, or revealed with it,
the least intimation of pardon to be obtained, if Transgression should ensue.
Genesis 2. 17. we have this Law, In the day thou eatest thou shall surely dye:
dying thou shall dye; or bring upon thy self assuredly the guilt of death
temporal and eternal. There God leaves the sinner under the power of that
commination. Of forgiveness or pardoning mercy there is not the least
intimation. To this very day, that Law, which was then the whole Rule of life
and Acceptance with God knows no such thing. Dying thou shall dye, O sinner, is
the precise and final voice of it. From these previous considerations, added to
what was formerly spoken, some things preparatory to the ensuing discourse may
be inferred: as,

1. That it is a great and rare thing to have forgiveness in God discovered
unto a sinful soul. A thing it is, that, as has been showed, Conscience and
Law, with the inbred Notions that are in the heart of man about Gods Holiness
and Vindictive Justice do lie against. A matter whereof we have no natural
presumption; whereof there is no common notion in the mind of man. A thing
which no consideration of the Works of God, either of Creation or Providence
will reveal, and which the great Instance of Gods dealing with sinning Angels
renders deep, admirable and mysterious. Men who have common and slight thoughts
of God, of themselves, of Sin, of Obedience, of the Judgment to come, of
Eternity, that feed upon the ashes of rumors, reports, hearsayes, traditions,
without looking into the reality of things, may, and do take this to be an
ordinary and acknowledged truth, easy to be entertained, which upon the matter
no man disbelieves. But convinced sinners, who make a trial of these things, as
running into Eternity, have other thoughts of them. And as to that which it is
pretended every one believes, we have great cause to cry out, Lord who has
believed our report, to whom has this arm of the Lord been revealed?

2. That the discovery of forgiveness in God, being a matter of so great
difficulty, is a thing precious and excellent, as being the foundation of all
our Communion with God here, and of all undeceiving Expectation of our
enjoyment of him hereafter. It is a pure Gospel truth that has neither
shadow, footstep, nor intimation elsewhere; the whole creation has not the
least obscure impression of it left thereon; so that,

3. It is undoubtedly greatly incumbent on us to enquire diligently as the
Prophets did of old into this Salvation; to consider what sure Evidences faith
has of it, such as will not, as cannot fail us. To be slight and common in
this matter, to take it up at random, is an Argument of an unsound rotten
heart. He that is not serious in his enquiry into the Revelation of this
matter, is serious in nothing wherein God or his soul is concerned. The Holy
Ghost knows what our frame of heart is, and how slow we are to receive this
blessed truth in a gracious saving manner. Therefore does he confirm it unto us
with such weighty considerations, as Heb. 6. 17, 18. God willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it by an oath; that by two immutable things in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation. It is of
forgiveness of sin that the Apostle treats, as has been made evident by the
description of it before given. Now to give evidence hereunto, and to beget a
belief of it in us, he first engages a Property of Gods Nature in that
business. He with whom we deal, is (...) -- as Tit. 1. 2. The God that cannot
lie, that cannot deceive, or be deceived. It is impossible it should be so with
him. Now as this extends it self in general, to all the Words and Works of God,
so there is peculiarly in this whereof he treats (...), an especial
immutability of his counsel. Men may think that although there be words spoken
about forgiveness, yet it is possible it may be otherwise; no says the
Apostle, it is spoken by God, and it is impossible he should lie. Yea, but upon
the manifold provocations of sinners he may change his mind and thoughts
therein; no, says the Apostle, there is a peculiar immutability in his counsel
concerning the execution of this thing, there can be no change in it. But how
does this appear that indeed this is the counsel of his will? Why, says he? he
has declared it by his Word; and that given in a way of promise; which as in
its own nature it is suited to raise an expectation in him or them to whom it
is made or given; so it requires exact faithfulness in the discharge and
performance of it, which God on his part will assuredly answer. But neither is
this all; but that no place might be left for any cavilling Objection in this
matter, (...), he interposed himself by an oath; Thus we have this Truth
deduced from the veracity of Gods nature, one of his Essential Excellencies,
established in the immutable purpose of his Will, brought forth by a word of
promise, and confirmed by Gods interposing himself against all occasions of
exception, (so to put an end unto all strife about it) by an Oath, swearing by
himself that so it should be. I have mentioned this only to show what weight
the Holy Ghost lays upon the delivery of this great Truth, and thence how
deeply it concerns us to enquire diligently into it, and after the grounds and
evidences which may be tendered of it, which among others are these that follow.

Discovery of Forgiveness in the first Promise. The Evidence of the Truth that
lies therein. And by the Institution of Sacrifices. Their Use and End. Also by
the prescription of Repentance unto sinners.

Forgiveness discovered in the first Promise.
The first Discovery of forgiveness in God, (and which I place as the first
Evidence of it) was made in his first dealing with our Parents after their
shameful sin and fall. Now to make it appear, that this is an evidence that
carries along a great conviction with it, and is such as faith may securely
rest upon and close withal, the ensuing Observations are to be considered.

The first sin in the world, was on many accounts the greatest sin that ever
was in the world. It was the sin as it were of Humane Nature, wherein there was
a conspiracy of all Individuals; omnes eramus unus ille homo; in that one man,
or that one sin, we all sinned, Romans 5. 12. It left not God one subject as to
moral obedicnce on the earth, nor the least ground for any such to be unto
Eternity. When the Angels sinned the whole race or kind did not prevaricate.
Thousand thousands of them, and ten thousand times ten thousands continued in
their obedience, Dan. 7. 10. But here, all and every individual of mankind (he
only excepted which was not then in Adam) were embarked in the same crime and
guilt. Besides it disturbed the Government of God in and over the whole
Creation. God had made all things in number, weight, and measure, in order and
beauty: pronouncing himself concerning his whole work that it was (...)
exceeding beautiful and good, Genesis 1. 31. Much of this beauty lay in the
subordination of one thing to another, and of all to himself by the mediation
and interposition of man, through whose Praises and Obedience the rest of the
Creation being made subject unto him, was to return their tribute of Honor and
Glory unto God. But all this Order was destroyed by this sin; and the very
creation made subject to vanity, Romans 8. 20. On which, and the like accounts,
it might be easily made to appear that it was the greatest sin that ever was in
the world.

2. Man who had sinned subscribed in his heart and consctence unto the
righteous sentence of the Law. He knew what he had deserved, and looked for
nothing but the immediate Execution of the sentence of death upon him. Hence he
meditates not a defense, expects no pardon, stays not for a trial, but flies
and hides, and attempts an escape. Genesis 3. 10. I was afraid, says he, and hid
my self; than which never were there words of greater horror in the world, nor
shall be until the day of Judgment. Poor Creature, he was full of expectation
of the vengeance due for a broken Covenant.

3. God had newly declared in the sinning Angels what his Justice required, and
how he could deal with sinning man without the least impeachment of his
Government, Holiness or Goodness. See 2 Pet. 2. 4.

4. There was nothing without God himself that should move him in the least, so
much as to suspend the execution of his wrath for one moment; he had not done
so with the Angels. All things lay now under wrath, curse, confusion, and
disorder: nothing was left good, lovely, or desirable in his eye. As in the
first Creation, that which was first brought forth from nothing was (...)
without form and void, empty of all order and beauty; nothing was in it to
induce or move God to bring forth all things in the glory that ensued, but the
whole design of it, proceeded from his own infinite Goodness and Wisdom; so was
it now again. There was an Emptiness and Vanity brought by sin upon the whole
creation. Nothing remained that might be a motive unto a merciful Restoration,
but all is again devolved on his Sovereignty. All things being in this state
and condition wherein all doors stood open to the Glory of Gods Justice in the
punishing of sin, nothing remaining without him to hold his hand in the least;
the whole creation, and especially the sinner himself lying trembling in
Expectation of a dreadful doom, what now comes forth from him? the blessed
word which we have, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents
head. It is full well known that the whole mystery of forgiveness is wrapped up
in this one word of promise. And the great way of its coming forth from God by
the blood of the Messiah, whose heel was to be bruised, is also intimated. And
this was the first discovery that ever was made of forgiveness in God. By a
word of pure Revelation it was made, and so faith must take it up and receive
it. Now this Revelation of forgiveness with God in this one Promise, was the
bottom of all that Worship that was yielded unto him by sinners for many Ages.
For we have showed before, that without this, no sinner can have the least
encouragement to approach unto him; and this will continue to the end of the
world, as a notable evidence of the truth in hand a firm foundation for faith
to rest and build upon. Let a sinner seriously consider the state of things as
they were then in the world laid down before, and then view God coming forth
with a word of pardon and forgiveness, merely from his own Love, and those
counsels of peace that were between the Father and the Son, and he cannot but
conclude under his greatest difficulties, that yet there is forgiveness with
God that he may be feared. Let now the Law and Conscience, let Sin and Satan
stand forth and except against this Evidence; enough may be spoken from it,
whatever the particular case be, about which the soul has a contest with them,
to put them all to silence.

Sacrifices an Evidence of Forgiveness.
II. God revealed this Sacred Truth by his Institution of Sacrifices. Sacrifices
by blood, do all of them respect Atonement, Expiation, and consequentially
forgiveness. It is true indeed, they could not themselves take away sin, nor
make them perfect who came unto God by them, Heb. 10. 1. but yet they
undeniably evince the taking away of sin, or the forgiveness of it, by what
they did denote and typisie. I shall therefore look a little back into their
Rise and Intendment.

1. The Original and first spring of Sacrifices is not in the Scripture
expressly mentioned, only the practice of the Saints is recorded. But it is
certain from infallible Scripture Evidences, that they were of Gods immediate
Institution and Appointment. God never allowed that the Will or Wisdom of man,
should be the spring and Rule of his Worship. That solemn word where with he
Fronts the command that is the Rule of his Worship, (...) Thou shall not make
to thy self, which is the life of the command, (that which follows being an
explanation and confirmation of the Law it self by Instances) cuts off all such
pretenses, and is as a flaming sword turning every way to prevent men's
arbitrary approaches to Gods Institutions. God will not part with his glory of
being the only Lawgiver as to the whole concernment of his Worship, or any
part of it, unto any of the sons of men.

2. Neither is the time of their Institution mentioned. Some of the Papists
dispute (as there are a generation of philosophi^^^ disputers amongst them, by
whom their tottering cause is supported) that there should have been Sacrisices
in Paradise, if man had not sinned. But as in all their opinions, our first
enquiry ought to be, what do they get by this or that, their whole Religion
being pointed unto their carnal interest; so we may in particular do it, upon
this uncouth Assertion, which is perfectly contradictious to the very Nature
and End of most Sacrifices; namely, that they should be offered where there is
no sin. Why, they hope to establish hence a general rule, that there can be no
true Worship of God in any state or condition without a Sacrifice. What then I
pray? Why then it is evident that the continual Sacrifice of the Mass is
necessary in the Church, and that without it there is no true Worship of God;
and so they are quickly come home to their advantage and profit; the Mass being
that inexhaustible Spring of Revenue which feeds their pride and lust
throughout the world. But there is in the Church of Christ an Altar still, and
a Sacrifice still, which they have rejected for the a bominable figment of
their Mass; namely, Christ himself as the Apostle informs us, Heb. 13. 10. But
as the Sacrifices of Beasts could not have been before the entrance of sin, so
it may be evidenced that they were instituted from the foundation of the world,
that is presently after the entrance of sin. Christ is called the Lamb of God,
John 1. 29. which he was in reference unto the Sacrifices of old, as 1 Pet. 2.
18, 19. whence he is represented in the Church, as a Lamb slain, Rev. 5. 6. or
giving out the efficacy of all Sacrifices to his Church. Now he is said to be a
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13. 8. which could not be,
unless some Sacrifice prefiguring his being slain had been then offered. For it
denotes not only the efficacy of his Mediation, but the way. Besides the
Apostle tells us, that without shedding of blood there was no remission, Heb.
9. 22. That is, God to demonstrate that all pardon and forgiveness related to
the blood of Christ from the foundation of the world, gave out no word of
pardon, but by and with blood. Now I have showed before, that he revealed
pardon in the first promise, and therefore there ensued thereon the shedding of
blood and Sacrifices; and thereby that Testament or Covenant was dedicated with
blood also, ver. 18. Some think that the Beasts, of whose skins God made
garments for Adam, were offered in Sacrifices. Nor is their conjecture vain.
Yea, it seems not to want a shadow of a Gospel Mystery; that their nakedness
which became their shame upon their sin, (whence the pollution and shame of sin
is frequently so termed) should be covered with the skins of their Sacrifices.
For in the true Sacrifice, there is somewhat answerable thereunto. And the
Righteousness of him whose Sacrifice takes away the guilt of our sin, is called
our clothing, that hides our pollution and shame.

3. That after the giving of the Law, the greatest, most noble, and solemn part
of the Worship of God consisted in Sacrifices. And this kind of Worship
continued with the approbation of God in the world about four thousand years;
that is, from the entrance of sin until the death of the Messiah, the true
Sacrifice, which put an end unto all that was typical.

These things being premised, we may consider what was the mind and aim of God
in the Institution of this Worship. One instance, and that of the most solemn,
of the whole kind, will resolve us in this enquiry, Lev. 16. 5. Two Kids of the
Goats are taken for an offering for sin. Consider only (that we do not enlarge
on particulars) how one of them was dealt withal, ver. 20, 21, 22. He shall
bring the live Goat, and Aaron shall lay both his hands on the head of the live
Goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and
all their transgression in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the
Goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the Wilderness, and
the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a Land not inhabited.

Let us see to what end is all this Solemnity, and what is declared thereby.
Wherefore should God appoint poor sinful men to come together, to take a Goat
or Lamb, and to confess over his head all their sins and transgressions, and to
devote him to destruction under that confession? Had men invented this
themselves, it had been a matter of no moment. But it was an Institution of God
which he bound his Church to the observation of upon the penalty of his highest
displeasure. Certainly this was a solemn declaration that there is forgiveness
with him. Would that God who is infinitely Good, and so will not, who is
infinitely True, holy and faithful, and so cannot deceive, call men out whom he
loved, to a solemn Representation of a thing wherein their chiefest, their
eternal concernment did lie, and suffer them to feed upon Ashes? Let men take
heed that they mock not God; for of a Truth God mocketh not man, until he be
finally rejected by him. For four thousand years together then, did God declare
by Sacrifices, that there is forgiveness with him, and lead his people by them
to make a public Representation of it in the face of the world. This is a
second uncontrolable Evidence of the Truth asserted, which may possibly be of
use to souls that come indeed deeply and seriously to deal with God; for though
the Practice be ceased, yet the Instruction intended in thern continues.

Forgiveness with God, manifested by his Prescription of Repentance.
III. Gods appointment of Repentance unto sinners, does reveal that there is
forgiveness in himself. I say the prescription of Repentance is a Revelation of
forgiveness. After the Angels had sinned, God never once called them to
Repentance. He would not deceive them, but let them know what they were to look
for at his hands; he has no forgiveness for them, and therefore would require
no Repentance of them. It is not, nor ever was a duty incumbent on them to
repent. Nor is it so unto the damned in Hell God requires it not of them, nor
is it their duty. There being no forgiveness for them, what should move them to
repent? Why should it be their duty so to do? Their eternal anguish about sin
committed, has nothing of Repentance in it. Assignation then of Repentance is
a Revelation of forgiveness. God would not call upon a sinful creature to
humble it self and bewail its sin, if there were no way of recovery, or relief.
And the only way of recovery from the guilt of sin, is pardon, so Job 33. 27,
28. He looks on men, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted that which
was right, and it profited me not; he will deliver his soul from going into the
pit, and his life shall see the light. In the foregoing Verses he declares the
various ways that God used to bring men unto Repentance. He did it by dreams,
ver. 15, 16. by Afflictions, ver. 19. by the preaching of the Word, ver. 23.
What then does God aim at in and by all these various ways of teachings? It is
to cause man to say, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right. It is
to bring him to Repentance: What now, if he obtain his end, and man comes to
that which is aimed at? Why then there is forgiveness for him, as is declared,
ver. 28. To improve this evidence, I shall confirm by some few obvious
considerations these two things.

1. That the prescription of Repentance does indeed evince that there is
forgiveness with God. 2. That every one in whom there is Repentance wrought
toward God, may certainly conclude that there is forgiveness with God for him.
1. No Repentance is acceptable with God but what is built, or leans on the
faith of forgiveness. We have a cloud of witnesses unto this Truth in the
Scripture. Many there have been, many are recorded who have been convinced of
sin, perplexed about it, sorry for it, that have made open confession and
acknowledgement of it, that under the pr^ssing sense of it, have cried out even
to God for deliverance, and yet have come short of mercy pardon and acceptance
with God. The cases of Cain, Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Judas, and others, might be
insisted on. What was wanting that made all that they did abominable? Consider
one instance for all: It is said of Judas that he repented, Mat. 27. 3. (...),
he repented himself; but wherein did this repentance consist? he was convinced
of his sin in general; (...), says he, I have sinned, ver. 4. 2. He was
sensible of the particular sin whereof he stood charged in conscience before
God. I have says he, betrayed innocent blood: I am guilty of blood, innocent
blood, and that in the vilest manner, by treachery; so that he comes (3.) To a
full and open confession of his sin: (4.) He makes Restitution of what he was
advantaged by his sin, he brought again the thirty pieces of silver, v. 3. all
testifying an hearty sorrow that spirited the whole. Methinks now Judas his
Repentance looks like the young man's Obedience, who cried out, all these things
have I done; Is there any thing yet lacking? Yea, one thing was wanting to that
young man, he had no true faith nor love to God all this while, which vitiated
and spoiled all the rest of his performances. One thing also is wanting to this
Repentance of Judas; he had no faith of forgiveness in God; that he could not
believe; and therefore after all this sorrow instead of coming to him, he bids
him the utmost defiance, and goes away and hangs himself.

Indeed says of forgiveness, as has been showed, has many degrees. There is
of them, that which is indispensibly necessary to render Repentance acceptable.
What it is in particular, I do not dispute. It is not an Assurance of the
Acceptance of our persons in general. It is not that the particular sin
wherewith it may be, the soul is perplexed, is forgiven. A general, so it be a
Gospel discovery that there is forgiveness in God, will suffice. The Church
expresses it, Hos. 14. 3. In thee the fatherless finds mercy, and Joel 2.
14. Who knows but he will return and repent. I have this ground, says the
soul; God is in himself gracious and merciful; the fatherless, the destitute
and helpless that come to him by Christ, find mercy in him. None in Heaven and
earth can evince but that he may return to me also. Now let a man's convictions
be never so great, sharp, wounding, his sorrow never so abundant, overflowing,
abiding, his confession never so full, free or open, if this one thing be
wanting, all is nothing but what tends to death.

2. To prescribe Repentance as a duty unto sinners, without a foundation of
pardon and forgiveness in himself; is inconsistent with the Wisdom, Holiness,
Goodness, Faithfulness, and all other glorious Excellencies and Perfections of
the nature of God: for,

1. The Apostle lays this as the great foundation of all consolation; that God
cannot lie or deceive, Heb. 6. 18. And again, he engages the faithfulness and
veracity of God to the same purpose. Tit. 1. 2. God who cannot lie has
promised it. Now there is a lie, a deceit in Things as well as in Words. He
that does a thing, which in its own nature is apt to deceive them that consider
it, with an intention of deceiving them, is no less a liar, than he which
affirms that to be true, which he knows to be false. There is a lie in Actions
as well as in Words. The whole life of an hyocrite is a lie; so says the
Prophet of Idolaters, there is a lie in their right hand, Isa. 44. 20.

2. The proposal of Repentance, is a thing fitted and suited in its own nature,
to beget thoughts in the mind of a sinner that there is forgiveness with God.
Repenting is for sinners only. I came not, says our Savior, to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. It is for them, and them only. It was no
duty for Adam in Eden; it is none for the Angels in Heaven, nor for the damned
in Hell. What then may be the language of this appointment? O sinners, come and
deal with God by Repentance: Does it not openly speak forgiveness in God? and
if it were otherwise could men possibly be more frustrated or deceived? would
not the Institution of Repentance be a lie? Such a delusion may proceed from
Satan, but not from him who is the fountain of Goodness, Holiness and Truth.
His Call to Repentance, is a full Demonstration of his readiness to forgive,
Acts 17. 30, 31, 32. It is true, many do thus deceive themselves. They raise
themselves unto an expectation of immunity, not on Gospel grounds; and their
disappointment is a great part of their punishment. But God deceives none:
whoever comes to him on his proposal of Repentance, shall find forgiveness. It
is said of some indeed, that he will laugh at their calamity, and mock when
their fear comes, Prove. 1. 26. He will aggravate their misery, by giving them
to see what their pride and folly has brought them unto. But who are they?
only such as refuse his Call to Repentance, with the Promises of Acceptance
annexed.

3. There is then no cause, why those who are under a Call to Repentance,
should question whether there be forgiveness in God or no. This concerns my
second Proposition. Come, says the Lord, unto the souls of men; leave your
sinful ways, turn unto me, humble your selves with broken and contrite hearts:
Alas, say poor convinced sinners, we are poor, dark and ignorant creatures; or
we are old in sin, or great sinners, or backsliders, or have fallen often into
the same sins; can we expect there should be forgiveness for us? Why you are
under Gods Invitation to Repentance; and to disbelieve forgiveness, is to call
the Truth, Holiness and Faithfulness of God into question. If you will not
believe forgiveness, pretend what you please, it is in truth because you hate
Repentance. You do but deceive your souls when you pretend you come not up to
Repentance, because you cannot believe forgiveness. For in the very Institution
of this duty God engages all his Properties to make it good that he has
pardon and mercy for sinners.

4. Much less cause is there to doubt of forgiveness, where sincere Repentance
is in any measure wrought. No soul comes to Repentance but upon Gods call. God
calls none but whom he has mercy for upon their coming. And as for those who
sin against the Holy Ghost, as they shut themselves out from forgiveness, so
they are not called to Repentance.

5. God expressly declares in the Scripture, that the forgiveness that is with
him, is the foundation of his prescribing repentance unto man. One instance may
suffice, Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way ((...) a perverse wicked
one; (...)) and the man of iniquity his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy, and to our God, for (...) he will multiply to
pardon. You see to whom he speaks; to men perversely wicked, and such as make a
trade of sinning. What does he call them unto? plainly to Repentance, to the
duty we have insisted on. But what is the ground of such an invitation, unto
such profligate sinners? Why, the abundant forgiveness and pardon that is with
him, super-abounding unto what the worst of them can stand in need of: as Romans
5. 20.

And this is another way whereby God has revealed that there is forgiveness
with him: and an infallible bottom for says to build upon in its approaches
unto God it is. Nor can the certainty of this Evidence be called into question,
but on such grounds as are derogatory to the Glory and Honor of God. And this
connection of Repentance and forgiveness is that principle from whence God
convinces a stubborn unbelieving people, that all his ways and dealings with
sinners are just and equal, Ezekiel. 18. 25. And should there be any failure in it
they could not be so. Every soul then that is under a call to Repentance,
whether out of his natural condition, or from any backsliding into folly after
Conversion, has a sufficient foundation to rest on, as to the pardon he
enquires after. God is ready to deal with him on terms of mercy; if out of love
to sin, or the power of unbelief, he refuse to close with him on these terms,
his condemnation is just. And it will be well that this consideration be well
imprinted on the minds of men. I say notwithstanding the general presumptions
that men seem to have of this matter; yet these principles of it ought to be
inculcated. For,

Confirmation of the Truth of Forgiveness necessary.
1. Such is the Atheism that lies lurking in the hearts of men by nature, that
notwithstanding their pretenses, and professions, we have need to be pressing
upon them Evidences of the very Being and Essential Properties of God. In so
doing we have the assistance of inbred notions in their own minds. which they
cannot eject, to help carry on the work. How much more is this necessary in
reference unto the free Acts of the Will of God, which are to be known only by
mere Revelation. Our Word had need be line upon line: And yet when we have
done, have cause enough to cry out, as was said, Lord who has believed our
report, and to whom has this arm of the Lord been revealed?

2. What was spoken before of the obstacles that lie in the way hindering souls
from a saving reception of this Truth, ought to be remembered. Those who have no
experience of them between God and their souls, seem to be ignorant of the true
nature of Conscience, Law, Gospel, Grace, Sin and Forgiveness.

3. Many who are come to a saving persuasion of it, yet having not received it
upon clear and unquestionable grounds, and so not knowing how to resolve their
faith of it into its proper principles, are not able to answer the Objections
that lie against it in their own Consciences, and so do miserably fluctuate
about it all their days. These had need to have these principles inculcated on
them. Were they pondred aright, some might have cause to say with the
Samaritans, who first gave credit to the report of the woman, John 4. They had
but a report before, but now they find all things to be according unto it, yea
to exceed it. A little experience of a man's own unbelief, with the Observation
that may easily be made of the uncertain progresses and fluctuations of the
spirits of others, will be a sufficient conviction of the necessity of the work
we are engaged in.

But it will yet be said, that it is needless to multiply Arguments and
Evidences in this case. The Truth insisted on being granted as one of the
fundamental principles of Religion. As it is not then by any called in
question, so it does not appear that so much time and pains is needful for the
confirmation of it. For what is granted and plain, needs little confirmation.
But several things may be returned in Answer hereunto: all which may at once be
here pleaded for the multiplication of our Arguments in this matter.

Necessity of producing Arguments to prove forgiveness.
That it is generally granted by all, is no Argument that it is effectually
believed by many. Sundry things are taken for granted in point of opinion, that
are not so believed as to be improved in practice. We have in part showed
before, and shall afterward undeniably evince, that there are very few that
believe this Truth, with that faith that will interest them in it, and give
them the benefit of it. And what will it avail any of us, that there is
forgiveness of sin with God, if our own sins be not forgiven? no more than that
such or such a King is rich, whilst we are poor and starving. My aim is not to
prove it as an opinion, or a mere speculative Truth; but so to evidence it in
the principles of its Being and Revelation; as that it may be believed, whereon
all our blessedness depends.

2. It needs never the less confirmation because it is a plain fundamental
Truth; but rather the more; and that because both of the Worth and Weight of
it. This is a faithful saying, says the Apostle, worthy of all acceptance,
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners. So say I of this, which
for the substance of it, is the same with that. It is worthy of all
acceptance, namely that there is forgiveness with God. And therefore ought it
to be fully confirmed. Especially whilst we make use of no other demonstrations
of it, but those only which God has furnished us withal to that purpose; and
this he would not have done, but that he knew them needful for us. And for the
plainness of this Truth, it is well if it be so unto us. This I know, nothing
but the Spirit of God can make it so. Men may please themselves and others
sometimes with curious notions, and make them seem to be things of great search
and attainment, which when they are well examined, it may be they are not true,
or if they are, are yet of a very little consequence or importance. It is these
fundamental Truths that have the mysteries of the Wisdom and Grace of God in
wrapped in them; which who so can unfold aright, will show himself a workman
that needs not be ashamed. These still waters are deep; and the farther we dive
into them, the greater discovery shall we make of their depths. And many other
Sacred Truths there are, whose mention is common, but whose depths are little
searched, and whose efficacy is little known.

3. We multiply these Evidences, because they are multitudes that are concerned
in them. All that do believe, and all that do not believe are so. Those that do
believe, that they may be established; and those that do not believe, that they
may be encouraged so to do. Among both these sorts some evidences may be more
profitable and useful, one to one, some to another. It may be amongst all, all
will be gathered up, that no fragments be lost. They are all (I hope)
instruments provided by the Holy Ghost for this end; and by this Ordinance do
we endeavor to put them into his hand, to be made effectual as he will. One
may reach one soul, another another, according to his pleasure. One may be of
use to establishment, another to consolation, a third of encouragement,
according as the necessities of poor souls do require. However God who has
provided them, knows them all to be needful.

4. They are so also upon the account of the various conditions wherein the
Spirits of Believers themselves may be. One may give help to the same soul at
one season, another at another; one may secure the soul against a temptation,
another stir it up to Thankfulness and Obedience.

These things have I spoken, that you may not think we dwell too long on this
consideration. And I pray God that your Consolation and Establishment may
abound in the reading of these Meditations, as I hope they have not been
altogether without their fruit in their preparation.

Further Evidences of Forgiveness with God. Testimonies that God was well
pleased with some that were sinners. The Patience of God toward the world; an
evidence of Forgiveness. Experience of the Saints of God to the same purpose.

Some sinners actually pardoned and accepted with God.
IV. Let us then in the fourth place, as a fourth Evidence of this truth,
consider those, both under the Old Testament and the New, concerning whom we
have the greatest Assurance that God was well pleased with them, and that they
are now in the enjoyment of him. And this Argument unto this purpose the
Apostle insists upon, and presses from sundry instances, Heb. 11. How many
does he there reckon up who of old obtained a good report, and this Testimony,
that they pleased God: ver. 2. 5. All these inherited the Promises through
believing; that is, obtained the forgiveness of sin. For whereas by nature they
were children of wrath, and under the Curse as well as others, obtaining an
infallible interest in the favor of God, and this Testimony, that they pleased
him, it could no otherwise be. For without this, on a just account, every one
of them would have continued in the state wherein Adam was, when he heard the
voice of God and was afraid. Wherefore it being evident that some persons in
all Generations, have enjoyed the friendship, love and favor of God in this
world, and at their departure out of it have entered into Glory; it makes it
evident that there is forgiveness of sin with him, without which these things
could not be.

Let us, after the example of the Apostle, mention some particular instances in
this matter. Look unto Abraham. He was the friend of God, and walked with God;
God made a solemn Covenant with him, and takes it for his memorial throughout
all generations, that he is the God of Abraham. And he is doubtless now at rest
with God. Our Savior calls the place or condition whereinto blessed souls are
gathered, Abraham's Bosom; He is at rest with whom others are at rest.

The condition was the same with Isaac and Jacob. They also are Heaven, being
alive unto, and with God. Our Savior proves it from the tenor of the
Covenant, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God
is not the God of the dead but of the living, Matthew. 22. 32. They are yet
alive, alive unto God, and with him, by virtue of the Covenant; or after their
death, God would not be said, to be their God. This is the force of our
Saviors Argument in that place; that after their death, God was still their
God. Then death had not reached their whole persons. They were still alive with
God in Heaven; and their bodies by virtue of the same Covenant, were to be
recovered out of the dust.

The same is the state with David. He was a man after Gods own heart, that did
all his Will, and fulfilled all his pleasure. And although he dyed and his body
saw corruption, yet he is not lost, he is with God in Heaven. Hence he ended
his days triumphantly in a full apprehension of Eternal Rest, beyond what
could in this world be attained, and that by virtue of the Covenant. For these
are the last words of David, Although my house be not so with God, yet he has
made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ascertaining unto him sure and eternal
mercies, 2 Samuel 23. 5

Peter also is in Heaven. Christ prayed for him that his faith should not fail;
and in his death he glorified God, John 21. 19.

So is Paul. He also is in Heaven; he knew that when he wis dissolved he should
be with Christ. Here then we are encompassed about with a cloud of witnesses.
For,

1. It is most certain, that they were all sinners; They were all so by nature;
for therein there is no difference between any of the Children of men. And
personally they were sinners also. They confessed so of themselves, and some of
the sins of all of them stand upon record. Yea some of them were great sinners,
or guilty of great and signal miscarriages. Some before their Conversion, as
Abraham who was an Idolater, Josh. 24. 2, 3. and Paul who was a Persecutor and
a Blasphemer. Some after their Conversion. Some in sins of the flesh against
their Obedience, as David; and some in sins of Profession against says, as
Peter. Nothing then is more evident, than that no one of them came to rest with
God but by forgiveness. Had they never been guilty of any one sin, but only
what is left upon Record concerning them in Holy Writ, yet they could be saved
no other way. For he that transgresses the Law in any one point is guilty of
the breach of the whole, James 2. 10.

What shall we now say? Do we think that God has forgiveness only for this or
that individual person? No man questions but that all these were pardoned. Was
it by virtue of any especial personal privilege that was peculiar unto them?
Whence should any such privilege arise, seeing by nature they were no better
than others, nor would have been so personally, had not they been delivered
from sin, and prepared for Obedience by Grace, Mercy and Pardon? Wherefore they
all obtained forgiveness by virtue of the Covenant from the forgiveness which
is with God. And this is equally ready for others, who come to God the same way
that they did; that is, by faith and Repentance.

2. Many of those concerning whom we have the Assurance mentioned, were not
only sinners, but great sinners, as was said, which must be also insisted on,
to obviate another objection. For some may say, that although they were
sinners, yet they were not such sinners as we are. And although they obtained
forgiveness, yet this is no Argument that we shall do so also, who are guilty
of other sins than they were, and those attended with other Aggravations than
theirs were. To which I say, that I delight not in aggravating, no nor yet in
Repeating the sins and faults of the Saints of God of old. Not only the Grace
of God, but the sins of men have by some been turned into lasciviousness; or
been made a cloak for their lusts. But yet for the ends and purposes for which
they are recorded by the Holy Ghost, we may make mention of them. That they may
warn us of our duty, that we take heed lest we also fall, that they may yield
us a relief under our surprizals, are they written. So then where the mention
of them tends to the advancement of Sovereign Grace and Mercy, which is the
case in hand, we may insist on them. I think then that without mention of
particulars, I may safely say, that there is no sin, no degree of sin, no
aggravating circumstance of sin, no kind of continuance in sin, (the one only
sin excepted) but that there are those in Heaven who have been guilty of them.

It may be yet, some will say that they have considered the sins and falls of
Lot, David, Peter, Paul, and the Thief himself on the Cross, and yet they find
not their own condition Exemplified, so as to conclude, that they shall have
the same success with them.

A. 1. I am not showing that this or that man shall be pardoned, but only
demonstrating that there is forgiveness with God, and that for all sorts of
sins and sinners which these Instances do assuredly confirm. And moreover they
manifest, that if other men are not pardoned; it is merely because they make
not that Application for forgiveness which they did.

2. Yet by the way to take off this Objection also, consider what the Apostle
says in particular concerning the several sorts of sinners that obtained mercy,
1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were some of you. But you are washed, but
you are sanctified, but you are justified. Hell can scarce in no more words
yield us a sadder Catalogue. Yet some of all these sorts were justified and
pardoned.

3. Suppose this Enumeration of sins does not reach the condition of the soul,
because of some especial Aggravation of its sin, not expressed. Let such a one
add that of our Saviors, Matthew. 12. 31. I say unto you, all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost.
They are not, they shall not be all actually remitted, and pardoned unto all
men; but they are all pardonable, unto those that seek to obtain pardon for
them according unto the Gospel. There is with God forgiveness for them all. Now
certainly there is no sin, but only that excepted, but it comes within the
compass of all manner of sins and blasphemy, and so consequently some that have
been guilty of it are now in Heaven.

We take it for a good token and evidence of a virtuous healing water, when
without fraud or pretense, we see the crutches of cured Criples, and impotent
persons hung about it, as a memorial of its efficacy. And it is a great
demonstration of the skill and ability of a Physician, when many come to a sick
person and tell him, that we had the same distemper with you, it had the same
symptoms, the same effects, and by his skill and care we are cured: Oh says
the sick man bring him unto me, I will venture my life in his hand. Now all the
Saints of Heaven stand about a sin sick soul; for in this matter we are
compassed with a cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12. 1. And what do they bear witness
unto? What say they unto a poor guilty sinner? As thou art, so were we; so
guilty, so perplexed, so obnoxious to wrath, so fearing destruction from God.
And what way did you steer, what course did you take to obtain the blessed
condition wherein now you are? Say they, We went all to God through Christ for
forgiveness, and found plenty of Grace, Mercy and Pardon in him for us all. The
rich man in the Parable thought it would be a great means of conversion, if one
should rise from the dead and preach. But here we see that all the Saints
departed, and now in glory do jointly preach this fundamental Truth, that there
is forgiveness with God.

Poor souls are apt to think that all those whom they read or hear of to be
gone to Heaven, went thither because they were so good and so holy. It is true
many of them were eminently and exemplarily so in their generations. All of
them were so according to their degrees and measures: for without holiness no
man can see God. And it is our duty to labor to be like unto them in Holiness,
if ever we intend to be so in Happiness and Glory. But yet not one of them, not
any one that is now in Heaven, Jesus Christ alone excepted, did ever come
thither any other way but by forgiveness of sin; and that will also bring us
thither, though we come short of many of them in Holiness and Grace.

And this Evidence of forgiveness I the rather urge, because I find the Apostle
Paul doing of it eminently in his own person, 1 Timothy 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. I
thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me, for that he counted me
faithful, putting me into the Ministry; who was before a Blasphemer and a
Persecutor and injurious. But I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in
unbelief. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Howbeit for
this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering for a pattern to them that should hereafter believe on him to
life everlasting. A great sinner says he, the chiefest of sinners I was, which
he manifests by some notable instances of his sin. I was says he a blasphemer,
the highest sin against God; a Persecutor, the highest sin against the Saints;
Injurious, the highest wickedness, toward mankind. But says he, I obtained
mercy, I am pardoned, and that with a blessed effect. First, That he should
after all this be so accounted faithful as to be put into the Ministry. And
then that the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in him and toward him was
exceeding abundant. And what was the Reason, what was the cause, that he was
thus dealt withal? Why it was that he might be a pattern, an Evidence, an
Argument, that there was Grace, Mercy, Forgiveness to be had for all sorts of
sinners that would believe to life Everlasting.

To conclude then this Evidence. Every one who is now in Heaven has his pardon
sealed in the blood of Christ. All these pardons are as it were hanged up in
the Gospel; they are all enrolled in the Promises thereof, for the
encouragement of them that stand in need of forgiveness to come and sue out
theirs also. Fear not then the Guilt of sin, but the Love of it, and the power
of it. If we love and like sin better than forgiveness, we shall assuredly go
without it. If we had but rather be pardoned in Gods way, than perish, our
condition is secure.

Patience of God toward the World, an evidence of forgiveness.
V. The same is evident from the Patience of God toward the world, and the end
of it. For the clearing hereof we may observe.

1. That upon the first entrance of sin and breach of that Covenant which God
had made with mankind in Adam, he might immediately have executed the Threatened
Curse, and have brought eternal death upon them that sinned. Justice required
that it should be so, and there was nothing in the whole creation to interpose
so much as for a reprieve or a respite of vengeance. And had God then sent
sinning man with the Apostate Angels that induced him into sin, immediately
into eternal destruction, he would have been glorified in his Righteousness and
Severity, by and among the Angels that sinned not; or he could have created a
new race of innocent creatures to have worshipped him and glorified him for his
Righteous Judgment; even as all the Elect at the last day, shall do for the
destruction of ungodly men.

2. God has not taken this course. He has continued the race of mankind for a
long season on the earth; he has watched over them with his Providence, and
exercised exceeding Patience, forbearance and longsuffering toward them. This
the Apostle Paul at large discourses on, Acts 14. 15, 16, 17. Chap. 17. 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. as also Romans 2. 4. And it is open and manifest in their
event. The whole world is every day filled with tokens of the power and
patience of God. Every Nation, every City, every Family is filled with them.

3. That there is a common Abuse of this patience of God visible in the world
in all Generations. So it was of old; God saw it to be so, and complained of
it, Genesis 6. 5, 6. All the evil, sin, wickedness, that has been in the world,
which no heart can conceive, no tongue can express, has been all an abuse of
this patience of God. This with the most is the consequent of Gods patience and
forbearance. Men count it a season to fulfill all the abominations that their
evil hearts can suggest unto them, or Satan draw them into a combination with
himself in. This the state of things in the world proclaims, and every ones
experience confirms.

4. Let us therefore consider what is the true and proper end of this patience
of God toward the world, enduring it in sin and wickedness, for so long a
season, and suffering one Generation to be multiplied after another. Shall we
think that God has no other design, in all this Patience toward mankind in
all Generations, but merely to suffer them all and every one without Exception,
to sin against him, dishonor him, provoke him, that so he may at length
everlastingly destroy them all? It is confessed that this is the Consequent,
the event of it with the most, through their perverse wickedness, with their
love of sin and pleasure. But is this the design of God? his only design? has
he no other purpose but merely to forbear them a while in their folly, and then
to avenge himself upon them? Is this his intendment not only toward those who
are obstinate in their Darkness, Ignorance and Rebellion against him, whose
damnation is just and sleeps not; but also toward those whom he stirs up by
his Grace to seek after a Remedy and Deliverance from the state of sin and
death? God forbid; yea, such an apprehension would be contrary to all those
notions of the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God which are ingrafted upon our
hearts by nature, and which all his works manifest and declare. Whatever
therefore it be, this cannot be the design of God, in his patience toward the
world. It cannot be, but that he must long since have cut off the whole race of
mankind, if he had no other thoughts and purposes toward them.

5. If this Patience of God has any other Intention toward any, any other
effect upon some, upon any, that is to be reckoned the principal End of it, and
for the sake whereof it is evidently extended unto some others consiquentially
unto all. For those concerning whom God has an especial design in his
patience, being to be brought forth in the world after the ordinary way of
mankind, and that in all Ages during the continuance of the world from the
beginning unto the end thereof, the patience which is extended unto them must
also of necessity reach unto all, in that variety wherein God is pleased to
exercise it. The whole world therefore is continued under the patience of God,
and the fruits of it, for the sake of some that are in it.

6. Let us therefore see what is the End of this Patience, and what it teaches
us. Now it can have no end possible but only that before rejected, unless there
be forgiveness of sins with God. Unless God be ready and willing to forgive the
sins of them that come to him according unto his appointment, his patience is
merely subservient unto a design of wrath, anger, severity and a Resolution to
destroy. Now this is an abomination once to suppose, and would reflect
unspeakable dishonor upon the Holy God. Let a Man but deal thus, and it is a
token of as evil an habit of mind, and perverse, as any can befall him. Let him
bear with these that are in his power in their faults, for no other end, or
with no other design, but that he may take advantage to bring a greater
punishment and revenge upon them, and what more vile affection, what more
wretched corruption of heart and mind, can he manifest? and shall we think that
this is the whole design of the Patience of God? God forbid.

It may be objected that this Argument is not cogent, because of the instance
that lies against it in Gods dealing with the Angels, that sinned. It is
evident that they fell into their transgression and Apostasy, before mankind
did so: For they lead and seduced our first Parents into sin. And yet God bears
with them and exercises patience toward them to this very day, and will do so
unto the consummation of all things, when they shall be cast into the fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And yet it is granted, that there is no
forgiveness in God for them; so that it does not necessarily follow, that there
is so for man, because of his patience toward them.

I answer, That this must be more fully spoken unto when we come to remove that
great Objection against this whole Truth which was mentioned before, taken from
Gods dealing with the sinning Angels, whom he spared not; at present two or
three Observations will remove it out of our way. For,

1. That the case is not the same with the sinning Angels, and the race of
mankind in all Generations. There are no other Angels in this condition, but
only those individuals who first sinned in their own persons. They are not in
the Providence and Patience of God, multiplied and increased in ensuing times
and seasons; but they continue the same individual persons who first sinned and
no more. So that immediate execution of the whole punishment due unto their
sin, would not have prevented any increase of them. But now with man it is
otherwise. For God continues his patience toward them to the production of
millions of other persons who were not actually in the first sin. Had not God
so continued his forbearance, their Being and consequently their sin and misery
had been prevented; so that the case is not the same with sinning Angels and
Men.

2. Indeed God exercises no patience toward the Angels that sinned; and that
because he had no forgiveness for them. So Peter tells us; 2 Epistle 2. 6. God
spared not the Angels that sinned but cast them down into Hell, and delivered
them into chains of darkness. Immediately upon their sin they were cast out of
the presence of God whose vision and enjoyment they were made for, and which
they received some experience of. And they were cast into Hell, as the place of
their ordinary retention, and of their present anguish under the sense of Gods
curse and displeasure. And although they may some of them be permitted to
compass the earth, and to walk to and fro therein to serve the ends of Gods
holy wise Providence, and so to be out of their prison; yet they are still in
their chains: for they were delivered unto chains of darkness to be kept unto
the last Judgment. And in these things they lie actually under the execution
of the curse of God: So that there is indeed no patience exercised toward
them. If a notorious Malefactor, or Murderer be committed unto a Dungeon, and
kept bound with Iron chains to prevent his escape, until the appointed day of
his solemn Judgment and Execution, without the least intention to spare him;
None will say, there is patience exercised toward him; Things being disposed
only so, as that his punishment may be secure and severe. And such is the case,
such is the condition of the Angels that sinned, who are not therefore to be
esteemed objects of Gods patience.

3. The reason why the full and final punishment of these Angels is reserved
and respited unto the appointed season, is not for their own sakes, their good,
benefit, or advantage at all; but merely that the end of Gods patience toward
mankind might be accomplished. When this is once brought about, they shall not
be spared a day, an hour, a moment. So that Gods dispensation toward them, is
nothing but a mere withholding the infliction of the utmost of their
punishment, until he has accomplished the blessed ends of his patience toward
mankind.

But you will say (Secondly) Is it not said, that God willing to show his
wrath, and to make his power known, endures with much long-suffering, the
Vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, Romans 9. 22. So that it seems that the
End of Gods endurance and longsuffering, to some at least, is only their
fitting unto destruction.

Answ. 1. It is one thing to endure with much long suffering, another thing to
exercise and declare patience. The former only intimates Gods withholding for a
season of that destruction which he might justly inflict, which we speak not
of; the other denotes an acting in a way of Goodness and kindness for some
especial end.

2. The next Verse declares the great end of Gods patience, and answers this
Objection. That he might make known the riches of his glory in the vessels of
mercy which he had prepared for glory, ver. 23. This is the great End of Gods
patience, which whilst he is in the pursuit of toward the Vessels of mercy; he
endures others with much long-suffering, and forbearance. This then is fully
evident, that there could be no sufficient Reason assigned of the patience of
God toward sinners, but that there is forgiveness prepared for them that come
to him by Christ.

And this the Scripture clearly testifies unto, 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Question is,
what is the reason why God forbears the Execution of his Judgment upon wicked
and ungodly men. Some would have it, that God is slack; that is regardless of
the sins of men; and takes no notice of them. No, says the Apostle, God has
another design in his patience, and long-suffering; what is this? It is to
manifest, that he is not willing we should perish. That is it which we have
proved. For our freedom from destruction is by Repentance, which necessarily
infers the forgiveness of Sin. So Paul tells us, that in the Gospel is declared
what is the End of Gods patience and forbearance; it is says he, the remission
of sins, Romans 3. 25.

Let us therefore also mind this Evidence in the Application of our selves to
God for pardon. It is certain that God might have taken us from the womb, and
have cast us into utter darkness. And in the course of our lives we have been
guilty of such provocations, as God might justly have taken the Advantage of,
to glorify his Justice and Severity in our ruin. But yet we have lived thus
long in the patience and forbearance of God. And to what end hat he thus spared
us, and let pass those Advantages for our destruction, that we have put into
his hand? Is it not that he might by his patience, give us leave and space to
get an interest in that forgiveness which he thus testifies to be in himself?
Let us then be encouraged by it, to use it unto the end and purpose for which
it is exercised toward us. You that are yet in doubt of your condition,
consider that the patience of God was extended unto you this day, this very
day, that you might use it for the obtaining of the remission of your sins.
Lose not this day, not one day more, as you love your souls. For wosul will be
their condition, who shall perish for despising or abusing of the patience of
God.

Experience of the Saints giveing Testimony to Forgiveness.
VI. The faith and experience of the Saints in this world, give in testimony
unto this truth; and we know that their Record in this matter is true. Let us
then ask of them what they believe, what they have found, what they have
Experience of, as to the forgiveness of sin. This God himself directs and leads
us unto, by appealing unto our own experience, whence he shows us that we may
take relief and supportment in our distresses, Isa. 40. 28. Have thou not
heard; have not thou known? Have not thou thy self, who now cryest out that
thou art lost and undone, because God has forsaken thee, sound and known by
experience the contrary from his former dealings with thee? And if our own
Experiences may confirm us against the workings of our unbelief, so may those
of others also. And this is that which Eliphas directs Job unto, Chap. 6. 1.
Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou look. It is not a supplication to them for help, that is intended, but an
enquiry after the Experience in the case in hand, wherein he wrongfully thought
they could not justify Job. (...) to which of the Saints, on the right hand or
left, will thou have regard in this matter? Some would foolishly hence seek to
confirm the Invocation of the Saints departed; when indeed if they were
intended, it is rather forbidden and discountenanced than directed unto. But
the (...) here, are the (...) Psalm. 16. 2. The Saints that are in the Earth
whose experiences Job is directed to enquire into and after. David makes it a
great encouragement unto waiting upon God, as a God hearing prayers, that
others had done so and found success, Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried unto the
Lord, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of his troubles. If he did so,
and had that blessed Issue, why should not we do so also? The experiences of
one, are often proposed for the confirmation and establishment of others: so
the same David, Come says he, and hear all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done for my soul. He contents not himself to mind them of
the Word, Promises, and Providence of God, which he does most frequently; but
he will give them the encouragement and supportment also of his own Experience.
So Paul tells us, that he was comforted of God in all his tribulation, that he
might be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort
wherewith he himself was comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 4. That is, that he might
be able to communicate unto them his own experience of Gods dealing with him,
and the satisfaction and Assurance that he found therein. So also he proposes
the example of Gods dealing with him in the pardon of his sins, as a great
motive unto others to believe, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. And this mutual
communication of satisfying experiences in the things of God, or of our
spiritual sense and evidence of the Power, Efficacy and Reality of Gospel
Truths, being rightly managed, is of singular use to all sorts of Believers. So
the same Great Apostle acquaints us in his own Example, Romans 1. 11, 12. I long
to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end you may
be established; that is, that I may be comforted together with you by the
mutual faith both of you and me: He longed not only to be instructing of them
in the pursuit of the work of the Ministry committed unto him, but to confer
also with them about their mutual faith, and what Experiences of the peace of
God in Believing, they had attained.

We have in our case called in the Testimony of the Saints in Heaven, with whom
these on earth do make up one family, even that one family in Heaven and Earth
which is called after the name of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.
14, 15. And they all agree in their Testimony, as becomes the Family and
Children of God. But these below, we may deal personally with; whereas we
gather the Witness of the other, only from what is left upon record concerning
them. And for the clearing of this Evidence, sundry things are to be observed,
As,

The Evidence that is in Spiritual Experience.
1. Men living under the profession of Religion, and not experiencing the power,
virtue, and efficacy of it in their hearts are, whatever they profess, very
near to Atheism, or at least exposed to great temptations thereunto. If they
profess they know God, but in works deny him, they are abominable, and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. Let such men lay
aside Tradition and Custom, let them give up themselves to a free and a
rational consideration of things, and they will quickly find that all their
profession is but a miserable self-deceiving; and that indeed they believe not
one word of the Religion which they profess. For of what their Religion affirms
to be in themselves, they find not any thing true or real. And what Reason have
they then to believe that the things which it speaks of that are without them,
are one jot better? If they have no Experience of what it affirms to be within
them, what confidence can they have of the Reality of what it reveals to be
without them? John tells us, that he who says he loves God whom he has not
seen, and does not love his Brother whom he has seen, is a liar. Men who do
not things of an equal concernment unto them wherein they may be tried, are not
to be believed in what they profess about greater things whereof no trial can
be had. So he that believes not, who experienceth not the power of that which
the Religion he professes affirms to be in him, if he says that he does
believe other things which he can have no Experience of, he is a liar. For
instance, he that professes the Gospel, avows that the death of Christ does
crucify sin, that faith purifieth the heart, that the Holy Ghost quickens and
enables the soul unto duty; that God is good and gracious unto all that come
unto him; that there is precious Communion to be obtained with him by Christ;
that there is great Joy in believing. These things are plainly, openly,
frequently insisted on in the Gospel? Hence the Apostle presses men unto
Obedience on the account of them; and as it were leaves them at liberty from
it, if they were not so, Phil. 2. 11. Now if men have lived long in the
profession of these things, saying that they are so, but indeed find nothing of
Truth, Reality, or Power in them, have no experience of the effects of them, in
their own hearts or souls, what stable ground have they of believing any thing
else in the Gospel whereof they cannot have experience? A man professes that
the death of Christ will mortify sin, and subdue corruption; Why does he
believe it? because it is so affirmed in the Gospel: How then, does he find it
to be so? Has it this effect upon his soul, in his own heart? not at all; he
finds no such thing in him. How then can this man believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, because it is affirmed in the Gospel; seeing that he finds no
real truth of that which it affirms to be in himself? So our Savior argues,
John 3. 12. If I have told you earthly things and ye believe not; how will you
believe, if I tell you heavenly things? If you believe not the doctrine of
Regeneration, which you ought to have experience of, as a thing that is wrought
in the hearts of men on the earth; how can you assent unto those heavenly
mysteries of the Gospel, which at first are to be received by a pure Act of
faith, without any present sense or experience.

Of all dangers therefore in profession, let professors take heed of this;
namely, of a customary, traditional, or doctrinal owning such truths, as ought
to have their effects and accomplishment in themselves, whilst they have no
experience of the reality and efficacy of them. This is plainly to have a form
of godliness, and to deny the power thereof. And of this sort of men do we see
many turning Atheists, Scoffers, and open Apostates; they find in themselves
that their profession was a lie; and that in truth they had none of those
things which they talked of; And to what end should they continue longer in the
avowing of that which is not? Besides finding these things which they have
professed to be in them, not to be so; they think that what they have believed
of the things that are without them, are of no other nature, and so reject them
altogether.

You will say then, What shall a man do who cannot find or obtain an experience
in himself of what is affirmed in the Word? he cannot find the death of Christ
crucifying sin in him, and he cannot find the Holy Ghost sanctifying his
nature, or obtain Joy in believing. What shall he then do? Shall he not
believe, or profess those things to be so, because he cannot obtain a blessed
Experience of them? I answer, Our Savior has perfectly given direction in
this case, John 7. 17. If any man will do his will he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Continue in
following after the things revealed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and you
shall have a satisfactory experience that they are true, and that they are of
God; cease not to act faith on them and you shall find their effects; for then
shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, Hoseah 6. 3. Experience will
ensue upon permanency in faith and obedience. Yea, the first Act of sincere
believing, will be accompanied with such a taste, will give the soul so much
experience as to produce a firm adherence unto the things believed. And this is
the way to prove, what is that good and acceptable and perfect Will of God,
which is revealed unto us, Romans 12. 2.

2. Where there is an inward spiritual Experience of the power, reality and
efficacy of any supernatural truth; It gives great satisfaction, stability and
Assurance unto the soul. It puts the soul out of danger, or suspicion of being
deceived; and gives it to have the Testimony of God in it self. So the Apostle
tells us, He that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself, 1
John 5. 9. He had discoursed of the manifold testimony that is given in Heaven
by all the holy Persons of the Trinity, and on earth by Grace and Ordinances,
unto the forgiveness of sin, and eternal life to be obtained by Jesus Christ.
And this Record is true, firm, and stable, an abiding foundation for souls to
rest upon, that will never deceive them. But yet all this while it is without
us; It is that which we have no Experience of in our selves: Only we rest upon
it, because of the Authority and faithfulness of them that give it. But now he
that actually believes, he has the Testimony in himself; he has by
experience a real evidence and assurance of the things testified unto, namely
that God has given us eternal life. And that this life is in the Son, v. 12.
Let us then a little consider, wherein this evidence consists, and from
whence this Assurance arises. To this end some few things must be considered:
As,

1. That there is a great Answerableness, and Correspondency between the heart
of a Believer, and the truth that he does believe. As the Word is in the
Gospel, so is Grace in the heart; yea, they are the same thing variously
expressed, Romans 6. 17. You have obeyed from the heart, (...), the form of
Doctrine delivered unto you. As our Translation does not, so I know not how in
so few words to express that which is emphatically here insinuated by the Holy
Ghost. The meaning is, that the Doctrine of the Gospel begets the form, figure,
image, or likeness of it self in the hearts of them that believe: So they are
cast into the mould of it. As is the one, so is the other. The principle of
Grace in the heart, and that in the Word, are as children of the same Parent,
completely resembling and representing one another. Grace is a living Word, and
the Word is figured, limned Grace: As is Regeneration, so is a Regenerate
heart: As is the Doctrine of faith, so is a Believer. And this gives great
Evidence unto, and Assurance of the things that are believed. As we have heard,
so we have seen and found it; such a soul can produce the duplicate of the
Word, and so adjust all things thereby.

2. That the first Original Expression of Divine Truth is not in the Word, no
not as given out from the infinite Abyss of Divine Wisdom and Veracity, but it
is first hid, laid up, and expressed in the Person of Christ. He is the (...),
the first pattern of truth which from him is expressed in the Word, and from,
and by the Word, impressed on the hearts of Believers; so that as it has
pleased God that all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge should be in him,
dwell in him, have their principal residence in him, Col. 2. 3. So the whole
Word is but a Revelation of the Truth in Christ, or an expression of his Image
and likeness to the Sons of men. Thus we are said to learn the Truth as it is
in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21. It is in Jesus originally, and from really, and from him
it is communicated unto us by the Word. We are thereby taught, and do learn it;
for thereby as the Apostle proceeds, we are renewed in the Spirit of our mind,
and do put on the new man which after God is created in Righteousness, and true
Holiness, ver. 23, 24. First, the Truth is in Jesus; then it is expressed in
the Word; this Word learned, and believed, becomes Grace in the heart, every
way answering unto the Lord Christ his Image from whom this transforming Truth
did thus proceed. Nay, this is carried by the Apostle yet higher, namely unto
God the Father himself whose Image Christ is, and Believers his, through the
Word, 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory by the Spirit of
the Lord, whereunto add, Chap. 4. 6. God who commanded light to shine out of
darkness, has shined into our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of God
in the face of Jesus Christ. The first pattern or example of all Truth and
Holiness is God himself: hereof Christ is the Image. ver. 4. Christ is the
Image of God, The brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person,
Heb. 1. 3. The Image of the invisible God, Col. 1. 15. Hence we are said to see
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; because he being his Image, the
Love, Grace, and Truth of the Father are represented and made conspicuous in
him. For we are said to behold it in his face, because of the open and
illustrious manifestation of the glory of God in him. And how do we behold this
glory? in a Glass ( as in a glass) that is, in the Gospel, which has the Image
and likeness of Christ, who is the Image of God reflected upon it, and
communicated unto it. So have we traced Truth, and Grace, from the Person of
the Father, unto the Son as Mediator, and thence transfused into the Word. In
the Father it is Essentially; in Jesus Christ originally and exemplarily; and
in the Word as in a transcript or Copy. But does it abide there? No, God by the
Word of the Gospel shines into our hearts, Chap. 4 6. He irradiates our minds
with a saving light into it, and apprehension of it. And what thence ensues?
the soul of a believer is changed into the same Image by the effectual working
of the Holy Ghost, Chap. 3. 18. that is, the likeness of Christ implanted on
the Word, is impressed on the soul it self, whereby it is renewed into the
Image of God, whereunto it was at first created. This brings all into a perfect
Harmony. There is not where Gospel Truth is effectually received, and
experienced in the soul, only a consonancy merely between the soul and the
Word, but between the soul and Christ by the Word, and the soul and God by
Christ. And this gives assured establishment unto the soul in the things that
it does believe. Divine Truth so conveyed unto us, is firm, stable, and
immovable. And we can say of it in a spiritual sense, that which we have
heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and
our hands have handled of the word of life, we know to be true. Yea, a Believer
is a Testimony to the certainty of truth in what he is, much beyond what he is
in all that he says. Words may be pretended; Real effects have their Testimony
inseparably annexed unto them.

3. Hence it appears that there must needs be great Assurance of those Truths
which are thus received, and believed. For hereby are the senses exercised to
discern good and evil. Heb. 15. 14. Where there is a spiritual sense of Truth,
of the Good and Evil that is in Doctrines, from an inward experience of what is
so good, and from thence an Aversation unto the contrary; and this obtained
(...), by reason of an habit, or an habitual frame of heart, there is strength,
there is stedfasiness, and Assurance. This is the teaching of the Unction,
which will not, which cannot deceive. Hence many of old and of late, that could
not dispute, could yet dye for the truth. He that came to another, and went
about to prove by Sophistical reasonings that there was no such thing as
motion; had only this return from him, who either was not able to answer his
cavilling, or unwilling to put himself to trouble about it, he arose and
walking up and down gave him a real confutation of his Sophystrie. It is so in
this case; when a soul has a real experience of the Grace of God, of the
Pardon of sins, of the Virtue and Efficacy of the death of Christ, of
Justification by his blood, and peace with God by believing; let men or Devils,
or Angels from Heaven oppose these things, if it cannot answer their Sophisms,
yet he can rise up and walk: he can with all holy confidence and Assurance
oppose his own satisfying experience unto all their arguings and suggestions. A
man will not be disputed out of what he sees and feels. And a Believer will
abide as firmly by his spiritual sense, as any man can by his natural.

This is the meaning of that Prayer of the Apostle, Col. 2. 2. That your hearts
might be comforted, being knit together in love, unto all riches of the full
Assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and
of the Father and of Christ. Understanding in the mysteries of the Gospel they
had; but he prays that by a farther experience of it, they might come to the
Assurance of understanding. To be true, is the property of the Doctrine it
self, to be certain or assured is the property of our minds. Now this
experience does so unite the mind and truth, that we say, such a Truth is most
certain, whereas certainty is indeed the property of our minds or their
knowledge, and not of the truth known. It is certain unto us, that is, we have
an assured knowledge of it, by the Experience we have of it. This is the
Assurance of Understanding here mentioned. And he further prays, that we may
come to the Riches of this Assurance; that is to an abundant plentiful
Assurance. And that (...), to the acknowledgement of the Mystery of God,
owning it from a sense and experience of its excellency and worth.

And this is in the Nature of all Gospel Truths; they are fitted and suited to
be experienced by a believing soul. There is nothing in them so sublime and
high, nothing so mysterious, nothing so seemingly low and outwardly
contemptible, but that a gracious soul has experience of an Excellency,
Reality, Power and Efficacy in it all. For instance; look on that which
concerns the Order and Worship of the Gospel: This seems to many to be a mere
external thing, whereof a soul can have no inward sense or relish. Notions
there are many about it, and endless contentions, but what more? why let a
gracious soul in simplicity and sincerity of Spirit, give up himself to walk
with Christ according to his Appointment, and he shall quickly find such a
taste and relish in the fellowship of the Gospel, in the Communion of Saints,
and of Christ amongst them, as that he shall come up to such Riches of
Assurance in the Understanding and Acknowledgement of the ways of the Lord, as
others by their disputing can never attain unto. What is so High, Glorious, and
Mysterious as the Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity? Some wise men have
thought meet to keep it veiled from ordinary Christians: And some have
delivered it in such terms, as that they can understand nothing by them. But
take a Believer who has tasted how gracious the Lord is, in the Eternal Love
of the Father, the great Undertaking of the Son in the work of Mediation and
Redemption, with the Almighty work of the Spirit creating Grace and comfort in
the soul, and has had an experience of the Love, Holiness and Power of God in
them all, and he will with more firm confidence adhere to this mysterious
Truth, being lead into it and confirmed in it, by some few plain Testimonies of
the Word than a thousand Disputers shall do, who only have the notion of it in
their minds. Let a real Trial come, and this will appear. Few will be found to
sacrifice their lives on bare speculations. Experience will give Assurance and
Stability.

We have thus cleared the credit of the Testimony, now to be improved. It is
evident on these grounds, that there is a great certainty in those Truths,
whereof Believers have experience. Where they communicate their power unto the
heart, they give an unquestionable Assurance of their Truths. And when that is
once realized in the soul, all disputes about it are put to silence.

These things being so, let us enquire into the faith and experience of the
Saints on the Earth, as to what they know of the Truth proposed unto
confirmation; namely, that there is forgiveness with God. Let us go to some
poor soul that now walks comfortably under the Light of Gods countenance, and
say unto him, Did we not know you some while since to be full of sadness, and
great anxiety of Spirit; yea, sorrowful almost to death and bitter in soul?

Answ. Yes says he, so it was indeed; my days were consumed with mourning,
and my life with sorrow; and I walked heavily in fear and bitterness of Spirit
all the day long.

Why what ayled you, what was the matter with you; seeing as to the outward
things you were in Peace?

Answ. The Law of God had laid hold upon me, and slain me; I found my self
thereby a woeful sinner, yea, overwhelmed with the guilt of sin. Every moment I
expected Tribulation and wrath from the hand of God; My sore ran in the night
and ceased not, and my soul refused comfort.

How is it then that you are thus delivered that you are no more sad? Where
have you found ease and peace? have you been by any means delivered, or did
your trouble wear off, and depart of its own accord?

Answ. Alas no; had I not met with an effectual Remedy, I had sunk and
everlastingly perished.

What course did you take?

Answ. I went unto him by Jesus Christ against whom I have sinned, and have
found him better unto me, than I could expect, or ever should have believed,
had not he overpowred my heart by his Spirit. Instead of wrath which I feared,
and that justly because I had deserved it, he said unto me in Christ, fury is
not in me. For a long time I could not believe it; I thought it impossible that
there should be mercy and pardon for me, or such a one as I. But he still
supported me, sometimes by one means, sometimes by another: until taking my
soul near to himself, he caused me to see the folly of my unbelieving heart,
and the vileness of the hard thoughts I had of him, and that indeed there is
with him forgiveness and plenteous Redemption. This has taken away all my
sorrows, and given me quietness with Rest and Assurance.

But are you sure now that this is so, may you not possibly be deceived?

Answ. Says the soul; I have not the least suspicion of any such matter; and
if at any time ought does arise to that purpose, it is quickly overcome.

But how are you confirmed in this persuasion?

Answ. That sense of it which I have in my heart, that sweetness and rest which
I have experience of, that influence it has upon my soul, that Obligation I
find laid upon me by it unto all thankful Obedience; that Relief, Supportment
and Consolation that it has afforded me in trials and troubles, in the mouth
of the Grave, and Entrances of Eternity, all answering what is declared
concerning these things in the Word, will not suffer me to be deceived. I could
not indeed receive it, until God was pleased to speak it unto me. But now let
Satan do his utmost, I shall never cease to bear this Testimony, that there is
mercy and forgiveness with him.

How many thousands may we find of these in the world, who have had such a seal
of this Truth in their hearts, as they cannot only securely lay down their
lives in the confirmation of it, if called thereunto, but also do cheerfully
and triumphantly venture their Eternal Concernments upon it. Yea, this is the
rise of all that peace, serenity of mind, and strong consolation which in this
world they are made partakers of.

Now this is to me, on the principles before laid down, an evidence great and
important. God has not manifested this Truth unto the Saints, thus copied it
out of his word, and exemplified it in their souls, to leave them under any
possibility of being deceived.

Institution of Religious Worship an Evidence of Forgiveness.

Religious Worship of sinners, an Evidence of Forgiveness with God.
6. Gods Institution of Religious Worship and Honor therein to be rendered unto
him by sinners, is another Evidence, that there is forgivenesswith him. I have
instanced before in one particular of Worship to this purpose; namely, in that
of Sacrifices. But therein we intended only their particular nature and
signification, how they declared and manifested Reconciliation, Atonement, and
Pardon. That now aimed at, is to show, how all the Worship that God has
appointed unto us, and all the Honor which we give unto his holy Majesty
thereby, is built upon the same foundation, namely, a supposition of
forgiveness; and is appointed to teach it, and to ascertain us of it, which
shall briefly be declared. To this end observe,

1. That the General End of all Divine and Religious Worship is to raise unto
God a Revenue of glory out of the creation. Such is Gods infinite natural
self-sufficiency, that he stands in need of no such Glory and Honor. He was in
himself no less infinitely and eternally glorious, before the Creation of all
or any thing whatever, than he will be, when he shall be encompassed about with
the praises of all the works of his hands. And such is his absolute perfection,
that no Honor given unto him, no Admiration of him, no Ascription of Glory and
praise, can add any thing unto him. Hence says the Psalmist, My goodness
extends not unto thee, Psalm. 16. 2. It does not so reach thee, as to add unto
thee, to profit thee, as it may do the Saints that are on the Earth. As he in
Job, Chap. 22. 23. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be
profitable unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
righteous, or is it gain unto him that thou make thy ways perfect? There is
no doubt, but that it is well pleasing unto God, that we should be righteous
and upright. But we do him not a pleasure therein, as though he stood in need
of it, or it were advantage or gain unto him. And again, Chap. 35. 7. If thou
be Righteous what give thou him, or what receives he at thine hand? And the
Reason of all this the Apostle gives us, Romans 11. 36. Of him, and through him,
and to him are all things. Being the first Sovereign Cause, and last absolute
End of all things, every way perfect and self-sufficient, nothing can be added
unto him. Or as the same Apostle speaks; God that made the world and all things
therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, is not worshipped with
men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives unto all life and
breath, and all things, Acts 17. 24, 25. As he himself pleads at large, Psalm.
50. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

2. Wherefore, All the Revenue of Glory that God will receive by his Worship,
depends merely on his own voluntary Choice and Appointment. All Worship, I say,
depends now on the Sovereign Will and pleasure of God. It is true there is a
natural Worship due from rational creatures, by the Law of their Creation. This
was indispensably and absolutely necessary at first. The very Being of God, and
order of things required that it should be so. Supposing that God had made such
creatures as we are, it could not be, but that Moral Obedience was due unto
him; namely, that he should be believed in, trusted and obeyed as the First
Cause, Last End, and Sovereign Lord of all. But the entrance of sin, laying the
sinner absolutely under the Curse of God, utterly put an end to this Order of
things. Man was now to have perished immediately, and an end to be put unto the
Law of this Obedience. But here, in the Sovereign Will of God an Interposition
was made between sin and the sentence; and man was respited from destruction.
All Worship following hereon, even that which was before natural by the Law of
creation, is now resolved into an Arbitrary Act of Gods will.

And unto this end is all worship designed, namely to give glory unto God. For
as God has said, that he will be sanctified in all that draw nigh unto him,
that is in his worship, and that therein he will be glorified, Lev. 10. 3. and
that he that offers him praise, that is performs any part of his Worship
and Service, Glorifieth him, Psalm. 50. 23. So the nature of the thing it self
declares that it can have no other end. By this he has all his glory even
from the inanimate Creation.

4. Consider, That God has not prescribed any Worship of himself, unto the
Angels that sinned. They are indeed under his Power, and he uses them as he
pleases to serve the ends of his holy Providence. Bounds he prescribes unto
them by his Power, and keeps them in dread of the full execution of his Wrath.
But he requires not of them that they should believe in him. They believe
indeed and tremble. They have a natural Apprehension of the Being, Power,
Providence, Holiness and Righteousness of God, which is inseparable from their
Natures; and they have an expectation from thence of that punishment, and
vengeance which is due unto them, which is inseparable from them as sinners.
And this is their faith. But to believe in God, that is, to put their trust in
him, to resign up themselves unto him, God requires it not of them. The same is
the case with them also, as to Love, and Fear, and Delight, all inward
Affections which are the proper Worship of God. These they have not, nor does
God any longer require them in them. They eternally cast them off in their
first sin. And where these are not, where they are not required, where they
cannot be, there no outward Worship can be prescribed or appointed. For
External instituted Worship is nothing but the way that God assigns, and
chooses to express and exercise the inward Affections of our minds toward
him. He rules the fallen Angels per nutum Providentiae, not per verbum
praecepti. Now as God dealt with the Angels, so also would he have dealt with
mankind, had he left them all under the Curse without remedy or hope of relief.
As he does with them, he eternally satisfies himself in that Revenue of Glory
which arises unto him in their punishment; so also he would have done with
these, had there been no forgiveness with him for them. He would not have
required them to fear, love or obey him, or have appointed unto them any way of
Worship, whereby to express such affections toward him. For to what end should
he have done it? What Righteousness would admit, that Service Duty and
Obedience should be prescribed unto them, who could not, ought not to have any
Expectation or hope of Acceptance or Reward? This is contrary to the very first
notion which God requires in us of his Nature. For he that comes unto God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of all them that diligently
seek him, Heb. 11. 6. which would not be so, should he appoint a voluntary
Worship, and not propose a Reward to the Worshippers. Wherefore,

3. It is evident that God by the prescription of a Worship unto sinners, does
fully declare that there is forgiveness with him for them. For,

1. He manifests thereby that he is willing to receive a new Revenue of Glory
from them. This, as we have proved is the end of Worship. This he would never
have done, but with a design of Accepting and Rewarding to his creatures. For
do we think that he will be beholding unto them? That he will take and admit of
their voluntary reasonable service according to his Will and Command, without
giving them a Reward, yea, and such on one as their Obedience holds no
proportion unto? no such thing would become his infinite sell sufficiency
Goodness and Bounty. This the Wife of Manoah well pleads, Judge. 13. 23. If
says she, the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a meat
offering, and a burnt-ofsering, at our hands. His Acceptance of Worship from
us, is an infallible Demonstration, that he will not execute against us the
severity of the first curse. And this is clearly evidenced in the first Record
of solemn instituted Worship performed by sinners, Genesis 4 4. God had Respect
unto Abel and his Offering. Some think that God gave a visible pledge of his
acceptance of Abel and his Offering; it may be it was by fire from Heaven. For
how else should Cain so instantly know, that his Brother and his Offering were
accepted, but that he and his were refused? However it were, it is evident that
what Testimony God gave of the Acceptance of his Offering, the same he gave
concerning his Person; and that in the first place he had respect unto Abel and
then to his Offering. And therefore the Apostle says, that hereby he obtained
witness that he was Righteous, Heb. 11. 4. that is, the Witness or Testimony of
God himself. Now this was in the forgiveness of his sins; without which, he
could neither be Righteous nor accepted, for he was a sinner. This God declared
by Acceptance of his Worship. And thus we also, if we have any Testimony of
Gods Acceptance of us in any part of his Worship, should employ it to the same
end. Has God enlarged our hearts in prayer? has he given us an Answer unto
any of our supplications; has he refreshed our hearts in the preaching and
dispensation of the Word, or any other Ordinance? We are not to rest in the
particular, about which our communion with him has been. Our doing so is the
cause why we lose our experiences. They lie scattered up and down, separated
from their proper root, and so are easily lost. But this is that which we
should first improve such particular experiences in the Worship of God unto;
namely, that God has pardoned our sins, and accepted our persons thereon; for
without that, none of our Worship or Service would please him, or be accepted
with him.

2. Hereby God lets us know, that he deals with us upon new Terms, so that
notwithstanding sin, we may enjoy his love and favor. For this we have the
engagement of his Truth and Veracity, and he cannot deceive us; but yet by this
command of his for his Worship, we should be deceived if there were not
forgiveness with him. For it gives us encouragement to expect, and Assurance of
finding Acceptance with him, which without it cannot be obtained. This then God
declares by his Institution of, and command for his Worship, namely, that there
is nothing that shall indispensably hinder those who giveup themselves unto the
Obedience of Gods commands, from enjoying his love, and favor, and communion
with him.

4. For matter of fact; it is known and confessed that God has appointed a
Worship for sinners to perform. All the Institutions of the Old and New
Testament bear witness hereunto. God was the Author of them. And men know not
what they do, when either they neglect them, or would be intermixing their own
Imaginations with them. What can the mind of man conceive or invent that may
have any influence into this matter, to secure the souls of Believers of their
Acceptance with God? Is there any need of their Testimony to the Truth,
Faithfulness, and Goodness of God? These things he has taken upon himself.
This then is that which is to be fixed on our souls, upon our first Invitation
unto Religious Worship; namely that God intends a new Revenue of Glory from us,
and therefore declares that there is a way for the taking away of our sins,
without which we can give no Glory to him by our Obedience, and this is done
only by forgiveness.

Especial Ordinances evidencing forgiveness.
5. There are some Ordinances of Worship appointed for this very end and purpose
to confirm unto us the forgiveness of sin. Especially in that Worship which is
instituted by the Lord Jesus under the New Testament. I shall instance in one
or two.

First, The Ordinance of Baptism. This was accompanied with the dawning of the
Gospel, in the Ministry of John Baptist. And he expressly declared in his
Sermons upon it, that it was instituted of God to declare the Remission of
sins, Mark 1. 4.

It is true, the Lord Christ submitted unto that Ordinance, (and was baptized
by John) who had no sin. But this belonged unto the Obedience which God
required of him, as for our sakes, he was made under the Law. He was to observe
all Ordinances and Institutions of the Worship of God; not for any need he had
in his own Person of the especial Ends and significations of some of them; yet
as he was our Sponsor, surety, and Mediator standing in our stead in all that
he so did, he was to yield obedience unto them, that so he might fulfill all
Righteousness, Matthew. 3. 13. So was he circumcised, so he was baptized, both
which had respect unto sin, though absolutely free from all sin in his own
Person; and that because he was free from no Obedience unto any Command of God.

But as was said, Baptism it self as appointed to be an Ordinance of Worship
for sinners to observe, was a Declaration of that forgiveness that is with God.
It was so in its first Institution. God calls a man in a mavelous and
miraculous manner; gives him a Ministry from Heaven; commands him to Go and
Baptize all those who confessing their sins, and professing Repentance of them,
should come to him, to have a Testimony of forgiveness. And as to the especial
nature of this Ordinance, he appoints it to be such, as to represent the
certainty and truth of his Grace in pardon, unto their senses by a visible
pledge. He lets them know that he would take away their sin, wherein their
spiritual defilement does consist, even as Water takes away the outward filth
of the body; and that hereby they shall be saved, as surely as Noah and his
Family were saved in the Ark swimming upon the waters, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Now how
great a deceit must needs in this whole matter have been put upon poor sinners,
if it were not infallibly certain, that they might obtain forgiveness with God.

After the Entrance of this Ordinance in the Ministry of John, the Lord Christ
takes it into his own hand, and commands the observation of it unto all his
Disciples. I dispute not now, who are the proper immediate objects of it;
whether they only who actually can make profession of their faith, or Believers
with their infant seed. For my part, I believe that all whom Christ loves and
pardons are to be made partakers of the pledge thereof. And the sole Reason
which they of old insisted on, why the infants of Believing Parents should not
be baptized; was because they thought they had no sin, and therein we know
their mistake. But I treat not now of these things; only this I say is certain,
that in the prescription of this Ordinance unto his Church, the great Intention
of the Lord Christ was to ascertain unto us the forgiveness of sins. And
sinners are invited to a participation of this Ordinance for that End, that
they may receive the pardon of their sins; that is an infallible pledge and
Assurance of it, Acts 2. 38. And the very nature of it declares this to be its
End, as was before intimated. This is another engagement of the Truth and
Faithfulness and Holiness of God, so that we cannot be deceived in this matter.
There is, says God forgiveness with me; says the soul, how Lord shall I know,
how shall I come to be assured of it, for by reason of the perpetual
Accusations of Conscience, and the Curse of the Law upon the guilt of my sin, I
find it a very hard matter for me to believe: Like Gideon I would have a Token
of it: why behold says God, I will give thee a pledge and a token of it which
cannot deceive thee. When the world of old had been overwhelmed with a deluge
of waters by reason of their sins, and those who remained, though they had just
cause to fear that the same Judgment would again befall them or their
posterity, because they saw there was like to be the same cause of it, the
thoughts and imaginations of the hearts of men being evil still, and that
continually; to secure them against these fears, I told them that I would
destroy the earth no more with water; and I gave them a token of my
faithfulness therein, by placing my bow in the cloud. And have I failed them?
though the sin and wickedness of the world has been since that day unspeakably
great, yet mankind is not drowned again, nor ever shall be: I will not deceive
their expectation from the token I have given them. Wherever then there is a
word of promise confirmed with a token, never fear a disappointment. But so is
this matter. I have declared that there is forgiveness with me, and to give you
assurance thereof, I have ordained this pledge and sign, as a seal of my word,
to take away all doubts and suspicion of your being deceived. As the world
shall be drowned no more, so neither shall they who believe, come short of
forgiveness.

And this is the Use which we ought to make of this Ordinance. It is Gods
security of the pardon of our sins, which we may safely rest in.

2. The same is the End of that other Great Ordinance of the Church, the Supper
of the Lord. The same thing is therein confirmed unto us by another Sign,
Pledge, Token, or Seal. We have showed before, what respect Gospel forgiveness
has unto the death or blood of Jesus Christ. That is the Means whereby for us
it is procured, the Way whereby it comes forth from God, unto the Glory of his
Righteousness and Grace, which afterward must be more distinctly insisted on.
This Ordinance therefore designed and appointed on purpose for the
Representation and calling to Remembrance of the death of Christ, with the
communication of the benefits thereof unto them that believe; does principally
intend our faith and comfort in the Truth under consideration. And therefore in
the very Institution of it, besides the General End before mentioned, which had
been sufficient for our security, there is moreover added an especial mention
of the forgiveness of sin; for so speaks our Savior in the Institution of it
for the use of the Church unto the end of the world, Matthew. 26. 28. This is my
blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the Remission of sins. As
if he had said, The end for which I have appointed the Observance of this Duty
and Service unto you, is that I may testify thereby unto you, that by my
Blood, the Sacrifice of my self, and the Atonement made thereby, I have
purchased for you the Remission of your sins, which you shall assuredly be made
partakers of. And more I shall not add unto this consideration, because the
death of Christ respected in this Ordinance, will again occurr unto us.

3. What is the end of all Church Order, Assemblies, and Worship? What is a
Church? Is it not a company of sinners gathered together according unto Gods
appointment, to give glory and praise to him for pardoning Grace, for the
forgiveness of sins, and to yield him that obedience which he requires from us,
on the account of his having so dealt with us? This is the nature, this is the
end of a Church. He that understands it not, he that uses it not unto that
End, does but abuse that great Institution. And such abuse the world is full
of. Some endeavor to make their own secular Advantages by the pretense of the
Church. Some discharge the duty required in it, with some secret hopes that it
shall be their Righteousness before God. Some answer only their Light and
Convictions in an empty profession. This alone is the true end, the true Use of
it. We assemble our selves to learn that there is forgiveness with God through
Christ; to pray that we may be made partakers of it. To bless and praise God
for our Interest in it, to engage our selves unto that Obedience which he
requires upon the account of it. And were this constantly upon our minds, and
in our designs, we might be more established in the faith of it, than it may be
the most of us are.

Prayer for the Pardon of sin commanded.
4. One particular instance more of this nature shall conclude this Evidence:
God has commanded us, the Lord Christ has taught us to pray for the pardon of
sin, which gives us unquestionable security that it may be attained, that it is
to be found in God; for the clearing whereof observe,

1. That the Lord Christ in the Revelation of the Will of God unto us, as unto
the duty that he required at our hands, has taught and instructed us to pray
for the forgiveness of sin. It is one of the Petitions which he has left on
record for our use and imitation in that summary of all prayer which he has
given us, Matthew. 6. 12. Forgive us our debts, our trespasses, our sins: Some
contend that this is a form of prayer to be used in the prescript limited words
of it. All grant that it is a Rule for prayer, comprizing the heads of all
necessary things, that we are to pray for, and obliging us to make
supplications for them. So then upon the Authority of God revealed unto us by
Jesus Christ, we are bound in duty to pray for pardon of sins, or forgiveness.

2. On this supposition, it is the highest Blasphemy and reproach of God
imaginable, to conceive that there is not forgiveness with him for us. Indeed
if we should go upon our own heads without his Warranty and Authority, to ask
any thing at his hand, we might well expect to meet with disappointment. For
what should encourage us unto any such boldness? But now when God himself shall
command us to come, and ask any thing from him, so making it thereby our Duty,
and that the neglect thereof should be our great sin and Rebellion against him;
to suppose he has not the thing in his Power to bestow on us, or that his Will
is wholly averse from so doing, is to reproach him with want of Truth,
Faithfulness and Holiness, and not to be God. For what sincerity can be in such
proceedings? Is it consistent with any Divine Excellency? Could it have any
other end, but to deceive poor creatures? either to delude them if they do pray
according to his command, or to involve them in further guilt, if they do not?
God forbid any such thoughts should enter into our hearts. But,

3. To put this whole matter out of question, God has promised to hear our
prayers, and in particular those which we make unto him for the forgiveness of
sin. So our Savior has assured us, that what we ask in his name, it shall be
done for us. And he has, as we have showed, taught us to ask this very thing
of God as our Heavenly Father; that is in his name. For in and through him
alone is he a Father unto us. I need not insist on particular Promises to this
purpose, they are as you know multiplied in the Scriptures.

What has been spoken may suffice to establish our present Argument, namely,
that Gods prescription of Religious Worship unto sinners, does undeniably prove
that with him there is forgiveness; especially considering that the principal
parts of the Worship so prescribed and appointed by him, are peculiarly
designed to confirm us in the faith thereof.

And this is the design of the words that we do insist upon; There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. The fear of God, as we have
showed in the Old Testament, does frequently express not that gracious
Affection of our minds, which is distinctly so called; but that whole Worship
of God wherein that and all other Gracious Affections toward God are to be
exercised. Now the Psalmist tells us, that the foundation of this fear or
Worship, and the only motive and encouragement for sinners to engage in it, and
give up themselves unto it is this, that there is forgiveness with God. Without
this no sinner could fear, serve, or worship him. This therefore is undeniably
proved by the Institution of this Worship, which was proposed unto confirmation.

The end of all these things, as we shall afterward at large declare, is to
encourage poor sinners to believe, and to evidence how inexcusable they will be
left, who notwithstanding all this, do through the power of their lusts and
unbelief, refuse to come to God in Christ that they may be pardoned. Yea, the
laying open of the certainty and fullness of the evidence given unto this truth,
makes it plain and conspicuous, whence it is that men perish in and for their
sins. Is it for want of Mercy, Goodness, Grace or Patience in God? Is it
through any defect in the Mediation of the Lord Christ? Is it for want of the
mightiest encouragements and most infallible Assurances that with God there is
Forgiveness? Not at all, but merely on the account of their own obstinacy,
stubbornness and perverseness. They will not come unto this Light, yea they hate
it, because their deeds are evil. They will not come to Christ, that they may
have life. It is merely darkness, blindness, and love of sin, that brings men
to destruction. And this is laid open, and all pretenses and excuses are
removed, and the shame of men's lusts made naked by the full confirmation of
this Truth, which God has furnished us withal.

Take heed you that hear or read these things; if they are not mixed with
faith, they will add greatly to your misery. Every Argument will be your
Torment. But these considerations must be insisted on afterward,

Moreover if you will take into your minds what has been delivered in
particular, concerning the nature and end of the Worship of God which you
attend unto, you may be instructed in the use and due observation of it. When
you address your selves unto it, remember that this is that which God requires
of you who are sinners. That this he would not have done, but with thoughts and
intention of mercy for sinners. Bless him with all your souls, that this is
laid as the Foundation of all that you have to do with him. You are not utterly
cast off, because you are sinners. Let this support and warm your hearts, when
you go to hear, to pray, or any duty of Worship. Consider what is your
principal work in the whole. You are going to deal with God about Forgiveness,
in the Being, Causes, Consequents, and Effects of it. Hearken what he speaks,
declares, or reveals about it; mix his Revelation and Promises with faith.
Enquire diligently into all the Obedience and Thankfulness, all those duties of
Holiness, and Righteousness, which he justly expects from them who are made
partakers of it; so shall you observe the Worship of God unto his Glory, and
your own Advantage.

The giving and establishing of the New Covenant another Evidence of
Forgiveness with God. The Oath of God engaged in the confirmation thereof.

Forgiveness manifested in the New Covenant.
VIII. Another Evidence hereof may be taken from the making, establishing and
ratifying of the New Covenant. That God would make a new Covenant with his
people is often promised, often declared. See among other places, Jer. 31. 31,
32. and that he has done so accordingly, the Apostle at large does manifest,
Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Now herein sundry things unto our present purpose may
be considered. For,

1. It is supposed that God had before made another Covenant with mankind. With
reference hereunto is this said to be a new one. It is opposed unto another
that was before it, and in comparison whereof that is called old, and this said
to be new, as the Apostle speaks expressly in the place before mentioned. Now a
Covenant between God and man is a thing Great and Mavelous; whether we
consider the nature of it, or the Ends of it; In its own nature it is a
Convention, Compact and Agreement, for some certain ends and purposes between
the Holy Creator and his poor creatures. How infinite, how unspeakable must
needs the Grace and Condescension of God in this matter be? For what is poor
miserable man, that God should set his heart upon him, that he should as it
were give bounds to his Sovereignty over him, and enter into terms of Agreement
with him? For whereas before, he was a mere object of his Absolute Dominion,
made at his Will, and for his Pleasure, and on the same reasons to be crushed
at any time into nothing; Now he has a bottom, and ground given him to stand
upon, whereon to expect good things from God, upon the account of his
Faithfulness and Righteousness. God, in a Covenant, gives those holy properties
of his Nature unto his Creatures: as his hand or arm for him to lay hold upon,
and by them to plead and argue with him. And without this a man could have no
foundation for any intercourse or Communion with God, or of any expectation
from him; nor any direction how to deal with him in any of his concernments.
Great and signal then was the condescension in God, to take his poor Creature
into Covenant with himself. And especially will this be manifest, if we
consider the Ends of it, and why it is that God thus deals with man. Now these
are no other than that man might serve him aright, be blessed by him, and be
brought unto the everlasting enjoyment of him, all unto his Glory. These are
the Ends of every Covenant that God takes us into with himself. And these are
the whole of man. No more is required of us in a way of duty; no more can be
required by us to make us blessed and happy, but what is contained in them.
That we might live to God, be accepted with him, and come to the eternal
fruition of him, is the whole of man; All that we were made for, or are capable
of; and these are the Ends of every Covenant that God makes with men; being all
comprised in that solemn word, that he will be their God, and they shall be his
people.

Secondly, This being the Nature, this the End of a Covenant, there must be
some great and important cause, to change, alter, and abrogate a Covenant once
made and established, to lay aside one Covenant, and to enter into another. And
yet this the Apostle says expressly that God had done, Heb. 8. 13. and proves
it, because himself calls that which he promised, a New Covenant, which
undeniably confirms two things. First, That the other was become old; and
Secondly, That being become so, it was changed, altered and removed. I know the
Apostle speaks immediately of the old Administration of the Covenant under the
Old Testament or Mosaical Institutions: but he does so with reference unto that
revival which in it was given to the first Covenant made with Adam. For in the
giving of the Law, and the Curse wherewith it was accompanied which were
immixed with that Administration of the Covenant, there was a solemn revival
and Representation of the first Covenant, and its Sanction, whereby it had life
and power given it to keep the people in bondage all their days. And the end
of the Abolition or taking way of the Legal Administration of the Covenant, was
merely to take out of Gods dealing with his people, all use and Remembrance of
the first Covenant. As was said therefore, to take away, disannul, and change a
Covenant so made, ratified, and established betwixt God and man, is a matter
that must be resolved into some cogent, important, and indispensable cause. And
this will the more evidently appear, if we consider,

Nature, Use and End of the first Covenant.
First, In general; that the first Covenant was Good, Holy, Righteous and Equal.
It was such as became God to make, and was every way the happiness of the
Creature to accept of. We need no other Argument to prove it holy and good,
than this, that God made it. It was the Effect of infinite Holiness, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Goodness and Grace. And therefore in it self was it every way
perfect; for so are all the works of God. Besides it was such, as man, when
through his own sault he cannot obtain any good by it, and must perish
everlastingly by virtue of the Curse of it; yet cannot but subscribe unto its
Righteousness and Holiness. The Law was the Rule of it, therein is the tenor of
it contained. Now, says the Apostle, whatever becomes of the sin, and the
sinner, the Law is holy, and the commandment is holy and just, and good, Romans
7. 12. Holy in it self, and its own Nature, as being the Order and Constitution
of the most holy God. Just and equal with reference unto us; such as we have no
reason to complain of, or repine against the Authority of it, and the terms of
it are most righteous. And not only so, but it is good also, that which
notwithstanding the appearance of Rigor and severity which it is accompanied
withal, had in it an exceeding mixture of Goodness and Grace, both in the
Obedience constituted in it, and the Reward annexed unto it; as might be more
fully manifested, were that our present work.

Secondly, In particular it was Good, Holy and Righteous in all the Commands of
it, in the Obedience which it required. And two things there were that rendered
it exceeding Righteous, in reference unto its Precepts or Commands. First, That
they were all suited unto the Principles of the nature of man created by God,
and in the regular acting whereof consisted his perfection. God in the first
Covenant required nothing of man, prescribed nothing unto him, but what there
was a Principle for the doing and accomplishing of it ingrafted, and implanted
on his nature; which rendered all those commands equal, holy and good. For what
need any man complain of that which requires nothing of him, but what he is
from his own frame and Principles inclined unto? Secondly, all the Commands of
it were proportionate unto the strength and ability of them to whom they were
given. God in that Covenant required nothing of any man, but what he had before
enabled him to perform: nothing above his strength, or beyond his power: and
thence was it also righteous. Secondly, It was exceeding Good Holy and
Righteous upon the account of its Promises and rewards. Do this, says the
Covenant; this which thou art able to do, which the Principles of thy nature
are fitted for, and inclined unto. Well, what shall be the issue thereof? Why
do this and live; Life is promised unto Obedience, and that such a Life, as
both for the present and future condition of the creature, was accompanied with
every thing that was needful to make it blessed and happy. Yea, this Life
having in it the eternal enjoyment of God, God himself as a Reward, was
exceedingly above whatever the Obedience of man could require as due, or have
any Reason, on any other account, but merely of the Goodness of God to expect.

Thirdly, There was provision in that Covenant for the Preservation and
manifestation of the Glory of God, whatever was the Event on the part of man.
This was provided for in the Wisdom and Righteousness of God. Did man continue
in his Obedience, and fulfill the terms of the Covenant; all things were laid
in subserviency to the Eternal Glory of God in his Reward. Herein would he for
ever have manifested and exalted the Glory of his Holiness, Power,
Faithfulness, Righteousness and Goodness. As an Almighty Creator, and
Preserver, as a faithful God, and Righteous Rewarder would he have been
glorified. On supposition, on the other side, that man by sin and Rebellion
should trangress the terms and tenor of this Covenant, yet God had made
provision that no detriment unto his Glory should ensue thereon. For by the
constitution of a punishment proportionable in his Justice unto that sin and
demerit, he had provided that the glory of his Holiness Righteousness and
Veracity in his Threatenings should be exalted, and that to all Eternity. God
would have lost no more glory and honor by the sin of man, than by the sin of
Angels, which in his infinite Wisdom and Righteousness is become a great
Theater of his Eternal Glory. For he is no less Excellent in his Greatness and
Severity, than in his Goodness and Power.

Reason of Alteration of the first Covenant.
Wherefore we may now return unto our former enquiry. All things being thus
excellently and admirably disposed in infinite Wisdom and Holiness in this
Covenant, the whole Duty and Blessedness of man being fully provided for, and
the Glory of God absolutely secured upon all Events, what was the Reason that
God left not all things to stand or fall according to the terms of it?
Wherefore does he reject and lay aside this Covenant and Promise to make
another, and do so accordingly? Certain it is, that he might have continued it
with a blessed security to his own Glory; and he makes all things for himself,
even the wicked for the day of evil.

God himself shows what was the only and sole Reason of this dispensation, Heb.
8. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The sum of it is this. Notwithstanding the blessed
Constitution of the first Covenant; yet there was no provision for the pardon
of sin, no room or place for forgiveness in it; but on supposition that man
sinned, he was in that Covenant left remediless. God had not in it revealed
that there was any such thing as forgiveness with him; nor had any sinner the
least hope or grounds of expectation from thence of any such thing in him. Dye
he must and perish, and that without remedy or recovery. Now, says God, this
must not be. Mercy, Goodness, Grace, require another state of things. This
Covenant will not manifest them; their effects will not be communicated to poor
sinners by it. Hence says he it is faulty; that is defective, I will not lose
the glory of them, nor shall sinners be unrelieved by them. And therefore
although I may strictly tie up all mankind unto the terms of this; yet, I will
make another Covenant with them, wherein they shall know and find, that there
is forgiveness with me, that they may fear me.

Now next to the Blood of Christ, whereby this Covenant was ratified and
confirmed, this is the greatest Evidence that can possible be given, that there
is forgiveness with God. To what end else does God make this great alteration
in the effects of his Will, in his way of dealing with mankind. As forgiveness
of sin is expressly contained in the tenor and words of the Covenant, so set it
aside, and it will be of no more use or advantage than the former. For as this
Covenant is made directly with sinners, nor was there any one in the world,
when God made it that was not a sinner, nor is it of use unto any but sinners,
so is forgiveness of sins the very life of it.

Hence we may see two things. First, The greatness of forgiveness, that we may
learn to value it: and Secondly, The certainty of it, that we may learn to
believe it.

First, The greatness of it. God would not do so great a thing as that
mentioned, but for a great, the greatest end. Had it not been a matter of the
greatest importance unto the glory of God, and the good of the souls of men,
God would not for the sake of it, have laid aside one Covenant, and made
another. We may evidently see how the heart of God was set upon it, how his
Nature and Will were engaged in it. All this was done that we might be
pardoned. The old glorious fabric of Obedience and Rewards shall be taken down
to the ground, that a new one may be erected for the honor and glory of
forgiveness. God forbid that we should have slight thoughts of that which was
so strangely and wonderfully brought forth, wherein God had as it were embarked
his great Glory. Shall all this be done for our sakes, and shall we undervalue
it, or disesteem it? God forbid. God could, if I may so say, more easily have
made a new world of Innocent Creatures, and have governed them by the Old
Covenant, than have established this new one for the salvation of poor sinners;
but then where had been the glory of forgiveness? It could never have been
known, that there was forgiveness with him. The Old Covenant could not have
been preserved, and sinners pardoned. Wherefore God chose rather to leave the
Covenant, than sinners unrelieved, than Grace unexalted, and Pardon
unexercised. Prize it, as you prize your souls, and give glory unto God for it,
as all those that believe will do unto Eternity.

Secondly, For the security of it, that we may believe it. What greater can be
given? God deceives no man, no more than he is deceived. And what could God
that cannot lie, do more, to give us satisfaction herein than he has done?
Would you be made partakers of this forgiveness? Go unto God, spread before him
this whole matter; plead with him that he himself has so far laid aside the
first Covenant, of his own Gracious Will as to make a new one; and that merely
because it had no forgiveness in it. This he has made on purpose that it might
be known, that there is forgiveness in him. And shall not we now be made
partakers of it? Will he now deny that unto us, which he has given such
Assurance of, and raised such expectations concerning it? Nothing can here
wrong us, nothing can ruin us but unbelief. Lay hold on this Covenant, and we
shall have pardon. This God expresses, Isa. 27. 4, 5. Will we continue on the
old bottom of the first Covenant? All that we can do thereon, is but to set
thorns and briars in the way of God, to secure our selves from his coming
against us and upon us with his indignation and fury. Our sins are so, and our
Righteousness is no better. And what will be the issue? both they and we shall
be trodden down consumed and burnt up. What way then, what remedy is left unto
us? only this of laying hold on the arm and strength of God in that Covenant,
wherein forgiveness of sin is provided. Therein alone he says, fury is not in
me; and the end will be that we shall have peace with him both here and for
ever.

Forgiveness confirmed by the Oath of God.
IX. The Oath of God engaged and interposed in this matter is another Evidence
of the truth insisted on. Now because this is annexed unto the Covenant before
mentioned, and is its establishment, I shall pass it over the more briefly. And
in it we may consider;

1. The Nature of the Oath of God; The Apostle tells us that he swear by
himself: And he gives this Reason of it, because he had no greater to swear by,
Heb. 6. 13. An Oath for the confirmation of any thing, is an Invocation of a
Supreme Power that can judge of the truth that is spoken, and vindicate the
breach of the engagement. This God has none other but himself, Because he
could swear by no greater, he swear by himself. Now this God does, (1.) By
express Affirmation that he has so sworn by himself, which was the form of the
first solemn Oath of God, Genesis 22. 16. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord.
The meaning whereof is, I have taken it upon my self as I am God, or let me not
be so, if I perform not this thing. And this is expressed by his soul, Jer. 51.
14. The Lord of Hosts has sworn by his soul, that is, by himself, as we render
the words. Secondly, God does it by the especial Interposition of some such
Property of his nature, as is suited to give credit and confirmation to the
Word spoken; as of his Holiness, Psalm. 89. 35. I have sworn by my Holiness: So
also Amos 4. 2. Sometime by his life; As I live, says the Lord. (...) I live
says God, it shall be so. And sometimes by his Name, Jer. 44. 26. God as it
were engages the Honor and Glory of the Properties of his Nature for the
certain accomplishment of the things mentioned. And this is evident from the
manner of the Expression, as in that place of Psalm. 89. 35. Once have I sworn
by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David; so we; in the Original the
words are eliptical: If I lie unto David, that is, Let me not be so, nor be
esteemed to be so, if I lie unto David.

Secondly, For the End of his Oath; God does not give it to make his Word or
Promise sure and steadfast, but to give Assurance and Security unto us of their
accomplishment. Every Word of God is sure and certain, truth it self, because
it is his; and he might justly require of us, the belief of it without any
further Attestation. But yet knowing what great Objections Satan and our own
unbelieving hearts will raise against his Promises, at least as to our own
concernment in them, to confirm our minds, and to take away all pretenses of
unbelief, he interposeth his Oath in this matter. What can remain of distrust
in such a case? If there be a matter in doubt between men, and an Oath be
interposed in the confirmation of that which is called in question, it is an
End, as the Apostle tells us, unto them of all strife, Heb. 6. 16. How much
more ought it to be so on the part of God, when his Oath is engaged. And the
Apostle declares this End of his Oath, it is to show the immutability of his
counsel, Heb. 6. 17. His counsel was declared before in the Promise; but now
some doubt or strife may arise, whether on one occasion or other, God may not
change his counsel; or whether he has not changed it with such conditions as
to render it useless unto us? In what case soever it be, to remove all doubts
and suspicions of this nature, God adds his Oath, manifesting the
unquestionable immutability of his counsel and Promises. What therefore is thus
confirmed is ascertained unto the height of what any thing is capable of. And
nor to believe it, is the height of Impiety.

Thirdly, In this Interposition of God by an Oath, there is unspeakable
condescension of Grace, which is both an exceeding great motive unto faith, and
a great Aggravation of Unbelief. For what are we, that the holy and blessed God
should thus condescend unto us, as for our satisfaction and surety, to engage
himself by an Oath! One said well of old; Foelices nos quorum causa Deus jurat;
O infoelices, si nec juranti Deo credimus. It is an inestimable advantage that
God should for our sakes engage himself by his Oath. So it will be our misery,
if we believe him not when he swears unto us. What can we now object against
what is thus confirmed? What pretense, color, or excuse can we have for our
unbelief? How just, how righteous, how holy must their destruction be, who upon
this strange, wonderful and unexpected Warranty, refuse to set their seal, that
God is true.

These things being premised, we may consider how variously God has engaged
his Oath, that there is forgiveness with him. First, He swears that he has
no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent and live, Ezekiel.
33. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner:
Now without forgiveness in him, every sinner must dye, and that without remedy.
Confirming therefore with his Oath, that it is his will the sinner should
return, repent and live, he does in the first place swear by himself, that
there is forgiveness with him for these sinners that shall so repent and turn
unto him.

Again, Whereas the great means he has appointed for the forgiveness of sins,
is by the Mediation of the Lord Christ, as we shall afterward show, he has on
several occasions confirmed his purpose in him, and the counsel of his Will by
his Oath. By this Oath he promised him unto Abraham, and David of old, which
proved the foundation of the Churches stability in all generations; and also of
their Security and Assurance of Acceptance with him; see Luke 1. 73, 74, 75.
And in his taking upon him that Office whereby in an especial manner the
forgiveness of sins was to be procured, namely of his being a Priest to offer
Sacrifice, to make an Atonement for sinners, he confirmed it unto him, and him
in it by his Oath, Heb. 7. 20. He was not made a Priest without an Oath. And to
what end? Namely, that he might be a surety of a better Testament, v. 22. And
what was that better Testament? Why, that which brought along with it the
forgiveness of sin, Chap. 8. 12, 13. So that it was forgiveness which was so
confirmed by the Oath of God. Further, the Apostle shows, that the great
Original Promise made unto Abraham, being confirmed by the Oath of God, all his
other Promises were in like manner confirmed. Whence he draws that blessed
conclusion which we have, Heb. 6 17, 18. As to every one, says he, that flies
for refuge to the hope that is set before him, that is, who seeks to escape the
guilt of sin, the curse and the sentence of the Law, by an Application of
himself unto God in Christ for pardon, he has the Oath of God to secure him
that he shall not fail thereof. And thus are all the concernments of the
forgiveness of sin testified unto by the Oath of God; which we have manifested
to be the highest security in this matter, that God can give, or that we are
capable of.

The Name of God confirming the Truth and Reality of Forgiveness with him. As
also the same is done by the Properties of his Nature.

Forgiveness confirmed by the Name of God.
X. Another foundation of this Truth, and infallible Evidence of it may be taken
from that especial Name and Title which God takes unto himself in this matter.
For he owns the name of the God of Pardons; or the God of forgiveness. So is he
called, Nehem. 9. 17. (...) we have rendered the words, Thou art a God ready to
forgive; but they are as was said, And thou art the God of Pardons,
Forgiveness, or Propitiations. That is his Name, which he owneth, which he
accepts of the Ascription of unto himself. The Name whereby he will be known.
And to clear this Evidence we must take in some considerations of the Name of
God, and the Use thereof. As,

1. The Name of God is that whereby he reveals himself unto us, whereby he
would have us know him, and own him. It is something expressive of his Nature
or Properties which he has appropriated unto himself. Whatever therefore any
name of God expresses him to be, that he is, that we may expect to find him;
for he will not deceive us by giving himself a wrong, or a false Name. And on
this account he requires us to trust in his name, because he will assuredly be
found unto us, what his Name imports. Resting on his name, flying unto his
name, calling upon his name, praising his name, things so often mentioned in
the Scripture, confirm the same unto us. These things could not be our duty, if
we might be deceived in so doing. God is then, and will be to us what his Name
declares.

2. On this Ground and Reason, God is said then first to be known by any name,
when those to whom he reveals himself, do in an especial manner rest on that
name by faith, and have that accomplished toward them which that name imports
signifies or declares. And therefore God did not under the Old Testament reveal
himself to any by the name of the Father of Jesus Christ, or the Son incarnate,
because the Grace of it unto them was not to be accomplished, God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us, should not be made
perfect; they were not entrusted with the full Revelation of God, by all his
blessed names. Neither does God call us to trust in any name of his however
declared, or revealed, unless he gives it us in an especial manner, by way of
Covenant to rest upon. So he speaks, Exodus 6. 3. I appeared unto Abraham, unto
Isaac, and to Jacob ((...)) in the name of God Almighty, but by my name Jehovah
was I not known unto them. It is certain that both these names of God Elshaddai
and Jehovah, were known among his people before. In the first mention we have
of Abraham's addressing himself unto the Worship of God, he makes use of the
name Jehovah, Genesis 12. 7. He built an Altar unto Jehovah; and so afterward not
only does Moses make use of that Name in the Repetition of the Story, but it
was also of frequent use amongst them. Whence then is it said, that God
appeared unto them by the name of Elshaddai, but not by the name of Jehovah?
The Reason is because that was the name which God gave himself in the solemn
confirmation of the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. (...) I am Elshaddai,
God Almighty, God Alsufficient. And when Isaac would pray for the blessing of
the Covenant on Jacob, he makes use of that name, Genesis 28. 3. God Almighty
bless thee. He invocates that name of God which was engaged in the Conant made
with his Father Abraham, and himself. That therefore we may withfull Assurance
rest on the name of God, it is not only necessary that God reveal that name to
be his, but also that he give it out unto us for that end and purpose, that we
might know him thereby, and place our trust and confidence in him according
unto what that name of his imports. And this was the case where ever he
revealed himself unto any in a peculiar manner, by an especial Name. So he did
unto Jacob, Genesis 28. 13. I am the God of Abraham and Isaac; assuring him, that
as he dealt faithfully in his Covenant with his Fathers Abraham and Isaac, so
also he would deal with him. And Genesis 31. 13. I am the God of Bethel; he who
appeared unto thee there, and blessed thee, and will continue so to do. But
when the same Jacob comes to ask after another name of God, he answers him not,
as it were commanding him to live by faith, on what he was pleased to reveal.
Now then God had not made himself known to Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob by his
name Jehovah, because he had not peculiarly called himself unto them by that
name; nor had engaged it in his Covenant with them, although it were otherwise
known unto them. They lived and rested on the name of God Almighty, as suited
to their supportment and consolation in their wandering helpless condition,
before the Promise was to be accomplished.

But now when God came to fulfill his Promises, and to bring the people by
virtue of his Covenant into the Land of Canaan, he reveals himself unto them
by, and renews his Covenant with them in the name of Jehovah. And hereby did
God declare, that he came to give stability and Accomplishment unto his
Promises. To which end they were now to live upon this name of Jehovah in an
expectation of the fulfilling of the Promises; as their Fathers did on that of
God Almighty in an expectation of protection from him in their wandering state
and condition. Hence this name became the foundation of the Judaical Church,
and ground of the faith of them who did sincerely believe in God therein. And
it is strangely fallen out in the Providence of God, that since the Jews have
rejected the Covenant of their Fathers, and are cast out of the Covenant for
their unbelief, they have utterly forgot that Name of God. No Jew in the world
knows what it is, nor how to pronounce it, or make mention of it. I know
themselves, and others pretend strange Mysteries in the Letters and Vowels of
that name which make it ineffable. But the truth is, being cast out of that
Covenant which was built and established on that name, in the just Judgment of
God, through their own blindness and superstition, they are no more able to
make mention of it, or to take it into their mouths. It is required then that
the name of God be given unto us as engaged in Covenant, to secure our
expectation that he will be unto us according to his name.

3. All the whole Gracious Name of God, every Title that he has given himself,
every Ascription of Honor unto himself that he has owned, is confirmed unto
us, (unto as many as believe,) in Jesus Christ. For as he has declared unto us
the whole name of God, John 17. 6. So not this, or that Promise of God, but all
the Promises of God are in him, Yea and Amen. So that as of old, every
particular Promise that God made unto the people, served especially for the
particular occasion on which it was given, and each Name of God was to be
rested on, as to that dispensation whereunto it was suited to give relief, and
confidence; as the name of Elshaddai to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the name
Jehovah to Moses and the people; so now by Jesus Christ and in him, every
particular Promise belongs unto all believers in all their occasions; and every
Name of God whatever, is theirs also, at all times, to rest upon and put their
trust in. Thus the particular Promise made unto Joshuah at his entrance into
Canaan, to encourage and strengthen him in that great enterprise of conquering
the Land, is by the Apostle applied unto all Believers in all their occasions
whatever. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. So like wise
does every name of God belong now unto us, as if it had in particular manner
been engaged in Covenant unto us. And that because the whole Covenant is
ratified and confirmed unto us by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 6. 18. Chap. 7. 1. This
then absolutely secures unto us an interest in the Name of God insisted on, the
God of forgiveness, as if it had been given unto every one of us to assure us
thereof.

4. God takes this name, the God of forgiveness to be his in a peculiar manner,
as that whereby he will be distinguished and known. He appropriates it to
himself as expressing that, which the Power and Goodness of no other can extend
unto. There are Lords many, and Gods many, says the Apostle; (...), some that
are called so; such as some account so to be. How is the true God distinguished
from these Gods by Reputation? He is so by this name, He is the God of Pardons,
Micah 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity? This is his
Prerogative; herein none is equal to him, like him, or a sharer with him. Who
is a God like unto thee, that may be called a God of Pardons. The Vanities of
the Nations cannot give them this rain; they have no refreshing showers of
mercy and Pardon in their power. Neither Angels, nor Saints, nor Images, nor
Popes, can Pardon Sin. By this name does he distinguish himself from them all.

5. To be known by this name is the Great Glory of God in this world. When
Moses desired to see the Glory of God, the Lord tells him that he could not see
his face, Exodus 33. 18, 20. The face of God or the glorious Majesty of his
Being, his Essential Glory, is not to be seen of any in this life; We cannot
see him as he is. But the glorious manifestation of himself we may behold and
contemplate. This we may see as the back parts of God; That shadow of his
excellencies which he casts forth in his passing by us in his works and
dispensations. This Moses shall see. And wherein did it consist? Why in the
Revelation and Declaration of this name of God, Chap. 34. 6, 7. The Lord passed
by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God, Merciful and Gracious,
long-suffering, and Abundant in Goodness and in Truth, keeping Mercy for
thousands, Forgiving Iniquity, Transgressions, and Sin. To be known by this
Name, to be honored, feared, believed as that declares him, is the great glory
of God. And shall this fail us? Can we be deceived trusting in it, or expecting
that we shall find him to be what his name declares? God forbid.

Let us lay together these Considerations, and we shall find that they will
give us another stable foundation of the Truth insisted on; and a great
encouragement to poor sinful souls to draw nigh to God in Christ for Pardon.
God has no Name but what he gives unto himself. Nor is it lawful to know him,
or call him otherwise; as he calls himself, so is he. What his Name imports, so
is his Nature. Every name also of God is engaged in Jesus Christ in the
Covenant, and is proposed unto us to place our Trust and Confidence in. Now
this is his name and his memorial, even the God of Forgiveness. By this he
distinguishes himself from all others, and expresses it as the principal
Title of his Honor, or his peculiar Glory. According to this name therefore
all that believe shall assuredly find, There is forgiveness with him.

(...), of Gods Nature, manifesting Forgiveness.
XI. The consideration of the Essential Properties of the Nature of God, and
what is required to the manifestation of them, will afford us further Assurance
hereof. Let us to this end take in the ensuing Observations.

God being absolutely perfect, and absolutely self-sufficient, was eternally
glorious, and satisfied with, and in his own holy Excellencies and Perfections,
before, and without the creation of all or any thing, by the putting forth or
the exercise of his Almighty Power. The making therefore of all things depends
on a mere Sovereign Act of the Will and Pleasure of God. So the whole Creation
makes its acknowledgement, Rev. 4. 11. Chap. 5. 12. Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive Glory, Honor and Power, for thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are and were created. God could have omitted all this great work,
without the least impeachment of his Glory. Not one Holy Property of his Nature
would have been diminished, or abated in its Eternal Glory by that omission.
This then depended on a pure Act of his Will and Choice.

2. On supposition that God would work ad extra, by his Power produce any thing
without himself, it was absolutely necessary that himself should be the End of
his so doing. For as before the production of all things, there was nothing
that could be the end why any of them should be brought forth out of nothing,
or toward which they should be disposed: So God being an infinite Agent in
Wisdom and Understanding and Power, he could have no End in his Actings, but
that also which is infinite. It is therefore natural and necessary unto God to
do all things for himself. It is impossible he should have any other end; and
he has done so accordingly, Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for
himself. He aimed at himself in all that he did; there being no other infinite
Good for him to make his Object, and his End, but himself alone.

3. This doing things, all things for himself, cannot intend an Addition or
Acrewment thereby of any new real good unto himself. His absolute Eternal
Perfection and Al-sufficiency render this impossible. God does not become more
Powerful, Great, Wise, Just, Holy, Good or Gracious by any of his works, by any
thing that he does. He can add nothing to himself. It must therefore be the
Manifestation and Declaration of the Holy Properties of his Nature that he does
intend and design in his works. And there are two things required hereunto.

1. That he make them known; that by ways suited to his Infinite Wisdom, he
both declare that such Properties do belong unto him; as also what is the
nature of them according as the creature is able to apprehend.

What it is to give Glory to God.
So he does things to make his power known, to show his power, and to declare
his name through the earth, Romans 9. 17, 22. So it was said, that by the works
of creation, (...), that which may be known of God is made manifest, Romans 1.
19, 20. And what is that? even the natural essential Properties of his Being;
his Eternal Power and Godhead. To this Head are referred all those Promises of
God that he would glorify himself, and the prayers of his Saints that he would
do so. And the Attestations given unto it in the Scripture that he has done
so. He has made known his Wisdom, Holiness, Power, Goodness, Self-sufficiency,
and the like perfections of his nature.

2. That he attain an Ascription, an Attribution of Praise, and Glory to
himself upon their account. His design is to be admired in all them that
believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. That is, that upon an Apprehension of his
Excellencies, which he has revealed, and as he has revealed them, they should
admire adore, applaud, glorify and praise him, worship, believe in and trust
him in all things, and endeavor the enjoyment of him as an eternal reward. And
this is also threefold.

1. Interpretative; so the inanimate and brute creatures ascribe unto God the
glory of his Properties, even by what they they are, and do. By what they are
in their Beings, and their observation of the Law and inclination of their
nature, they give unto God the glory of that Wisdom and Power whereby they are
made; and of that Sovereignty whereon they depend. Hence nothing more frequent
in the praises of God of old, than the calling of the inanimate creatures,
Heaven and Earth, Winds, Storms, Thunder, and the Beasts of the field, to give
Praise and Glory to God. That is, by what they are, they do so, in as much as
from the impression of Gods glorious Excellencies in their Effects upon them,
they are made known and manifest.

2. Involuntary in some rational creatures. Sinning Men and Angels have no
design, no will, no desire to give glory to God. They do their utmost endeavor
to the contrary, to hate him reproach and blaspheme him. But they cannot yet
cast off the yoke of God. In their Minds and Consciences they are forced and
shall be for ever to acknowledge that God is infinitely Holy, infinitely Wise,
Powerful and Righteous. And he has the glory of all these Properties from
them, in their very desires that he were otherwise. When they would that God
were not Just to punish them, Powerful to torment them, Wise to find them out,
Holy to be displeased with their lusts and sins, they do at the same time, in
the same thing, own acknowledge and give unto God the glory of his Being,
Justice, Wisdom, Power and Holiness. When therefore God has made known his
Properties, the Ascription of glory unto him on their account, is to rational
creatures, natural and unavoidable.

3. It is voluntary in the reasonable service, Worship, Fear, Trust, Obedience,
of Angels and Men. God having revealed unto them the Properties of his Nature,
they acknowledge, adore them, and place their confidence in them, and thereby
glorify him as God. And this glorifying of God consists in three things.

1. In making the Excellencies of God revealed unto us, the Principle and Chief
Object of all the moral actings of our souls, and of all the actings of our
Affections. To fear the Lord and his Goodness, and to fear him for his
Goodness; to trust in his Power and Faithfulness, to obey his Authority, to
delight in his Will and Grace, to love him above all, because of his
Excellencies and Beauty, this is to glorify him.

2. To pray for, and to rejoice in all the ways and means whereby he will, or
has promised further to manifest or declare these Properties of his Nature and
his Glory in them. What is the reason why we pray for, long for the
accomplishment of the Promises of God toward his Saints, of his Threatenings
toward his Enemies, of the fulfilling of the glorious Works of his Power and
Grace that yet remain to be done, of the coming of the Kingdom of Christ, of
the approach of glory? Is it not chiefly and principally; that the glorious
Excellencies of Gods Nature may be made more manifest, be more known, more
exalted; that God may appear more as he is, and as he has declared himself to
be? This is to give glory to God. So likewise our Joy, Rejoicing and
Satisfaction in any of the ways and works of God, it is solely on this account,
that in them, God in his Properties, that is, his Power, Wisdom, Holiness, and
the like, is revealed, declared and made known.

3. In their joint actual Celebration of his praises; which as it is a Duty of
the greatest importance, and which we are indeed of all others most frequently
exhorted unto, and most earnestly called upon for: so in the nature of it, it
consists in our believing rejoicing expression of what God is, and what he
does; that is, our admiring, adoring and blessing him because of his Holiness,
Goodness, and the rest of his Properties, and his works of Grace and Power,
suitable unto them. This it is to praise God, Rev. 5.

4. Observe that none of these Properties of God can be thus manifested and
known, nor himself be glorified for them, but by his declaration of them, and
by their effects. We know no more of God than he is pleased to reveal unto us.
I mean not mere Revelation by his Word, but any ways or means, whether by his
Word, or by his Works, or by Impressions from the Law of Nature upon our hearts
and minds. And what ever God thus declares of himself; He does it by
exercising, putting forth, and manifesting the effects of it. So we know his
Power, Wisdom, Goodness and Grace; namely, by the effects of them, or the works
of God that proceed from them, and are suited unto them. And what ever is in
God that is not thus made known, we cannot apprehend nor glorify God on the
account of it. God therefore doing all things, as has been showed, for the
glory of these his Properties, he does so reveal them, and make them known.

5. Upon this design of God, it is necessary that he should reveal, and make
known all the Attributes and Properties of his Nature, in works and effects
peculiarly proceeding from them and answering unto them, that he might be
glorified in them, and which as the Event manifests, he has done accordingly.
For what Reason can be imagined, why God will be glorified in one Essential
Excellency of his Nature, and not in another? Especially must this be affirmed
of those Properties of the Nature of God, which the Event manifests his
principal glory to consist in, and arise from, and the knowledge whereof is of
the greatest use behoof and benefit unto the Children of men in reference unto
his design toward them.

Glory arising to God by Forgiveness.
6. These things being so, let us consider how it stands in reference unto that
which is under consideration. God in the Creation of all things, glorified or
manifested his Greatness, Power, Wisdom and Goodness, with many other
properties of the like kind. But his Sovereignty, Righteousness and Holiness,
how are they declared hereby? either not at all, or not in so evident a manner
as is necessary, that he might be fully glorified in them, or for them. What
then does he do? leave them in darkness, veiled, undiscovered, satisfying
himself in the glory of those Properties which his work of Creation had made
known? Was there any Reason, why he should do so, designing to do all things
for himself and for his own glory? Wherefore he gives his holy Law as a Rule of
Obedience unto men and Angels. This plainly reveals his Sovereignty or
Authority over them, his Holiness and Righteousness in the Equity and Purity of
things he required of them: so that in and by these Properties also he may be
glorified. As he made all things for himself, that is, the manifestation of his
Greatness, Power, Wisdom and Goodness, so he gave the Law for himself, that is,
the manifestation of his Authority, Holiness and Righteousness. But is this
all? Is there not Remunerative Justice in God, in a way of Bounty? Is there not
Vindictive Justice in him, in a way of severity? There is so, and in the
pursuit of the design mentioned, they also are to be manifested, or God will
not be glorified in them. This therefore he did also in the Rewards and
Punishments that he annexed unto the Law of Obedience that he had prescribed.
To manifest his Remunerative Justice he promised a Reward in a way of Bounty,
which the Angels that sinned not were made partakers of; and in the penalty
threatened, which sinning Angels and Men incurred, he revealed his Vindictive
Justice in a way of severity. So are all these Properties of God made known by
their Effects, and so is God glorified in them, or on their account.

But after all this, are there no other Properties of his Nature, Divine
Excellencies that cannot be separated from his Being, which by none of these
means, are so much as once intimated to be in him? It is evident that there
are; such are Mercy, Grace, Patience, Long-suffering, Compassion and the like:
concerning which observe,

1. That where there are no Objects of them, they cannot be declared, or
manifested, or exercised. As Gods Power or Wisdom could not be manifest, if
there were no Objects of them, no more can his Grace or Mercy. If never any
stand in need of them, they can never be exercised, and consequently never be
known. Therefore were they not revealed, neither by the Creation of all things,
nor by the Law or its Sanction, nor by the Law written in our hearts. For all
these suppose no objects of Grace and Mercy. For it is sinners only, and such
as have made themselves miserable by sin, that they can be exercised about.

2. There are no Excellencies of Gods nature, that are more expressive of
Divine Goodness, Loveliness and Beauty, than these are, of Mercy, Grace,
Long-suffering and Patience: and therefore there is nothing that God so
requires our likeness unto him in, our conformity unto his Image as in these;
namely, Mercy, Grace and readiness to forgive. And the contrary frame in any he
does of all things most abhor. They shall have judgment without mercy, who
showed no mercy. And therefore it is certain that God will be glorified in the
manifestation of these Properties of his Nature.

3. These Properties can be no otherwise exercised, and consequently no other
ways known, but only in and by the pardon of sin; which puts it beyond all
question, that there is Forgiveness with God. God will not lose the glory of
these his Excellencies; he will be revealed in them, he will be known by them,
he will be glorified for them; which he could not be, if there were not
forgiveness with him: So that here comes in not only the Truth, but the
necessity of forgiveness also.

Forgiveness manifested in the sending of the Son of God to dye for sin. And
from the Obligation that is on us to forgive one another.

Forgiveness manifested in the Death of Christ.
XII. In the next place, we shall proceed unto that Evidence which is the Center
wherein all the lines of those foregoing do meet and rest: The fountain of all
those streams of Refreshment that are in them, that which animates and gives
life and efficacy unto them. This lies in Gods sending of his Son. The
consideration hereof will leave no pretense or excuse unto unbelief in this
matter.

To make this Evidence more clear and legible, as to what is intended in it, we
must consider,

1. What was the Rise of this sending, we speak of. 2. Who it was that was
sent. 3. How or in what manner he was sent. 4. Unto what end and purpose.
First, the Rise and spring of it is to be considered. It came forth from the
Eternal mutual consent and counsel of the Father and the Son, Zech. 6. 13. The
Counsel of Peace shall be between them both. It is of Christ the Branch, of
whom he speaks. He shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
glory. And shall sit and rule upon his Throne; and shall be a Priest upon his
Throne, and the Counsel of Peace shall be between them both. That is, between
God the Father, who sends him, and himself; There lay the Counsel of Peace
making between God and Man in due time accomplished by him who is our Peace,
Ephesians. 2. 16. So he speaks, Prove. 8. 30, 31. Then I was by him as one brought up
with him, and I was daily his delight; rejoicing always before him. Rejoicing
in the habitable parts of the Earth, and my delights were with the Sons of men.
They are the words of the Wisdom, that is, of the Son of God. When was this
done? Then I was with him. Why before the Mountains were settled, whilst as yet
he had not made the Earth nor the Fields; That is, before the creation of the
world, or from eternity, v. 25, 26. But how then could he rejoice in the
habitable parts of the Earth? And how could his delight be with the Sons of
men? seeing as yet they were not? I answer, It was the Counsel of Peace toward
them before mentioned, in the pursuit whereof he was to be sent to converse
amongst them on the earth. He rejoiced in the fore-thoughts of his being sent
to them, and the work he had to do for them. Then, with his own consent and
delight was he foreordained unto his work, even before the foundation of the
world, 1 Pet. 1. 20. and received of the Father the Promise of eternal life,
even before the world began, Tit. 1. 2. That is to be given unto sinners, by
way of Forgiveness through his blood. So is this whole Counsel expressed, Psalm
40. 7, 8. Whence it is made use of by the Apostle, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. Then said
I, lo I come, in the volume of thy Book it is written of me, I delight to do
thy will O God. Thy Law is in the midst of my heart. There is the Will of the
Father in this matter, and the Law of its performance. And there is the Will of
the Son, in answer thereunto; and his delight in fulfilling that Law which was
prescribed unto him.

Let us now consider, to what purpose was this Eternal Counsel of Peace, This
Agreement of the Father and Son from Eternity about the State and Condition of
Mankind? If God would have left them all to perish under the guilt of their
sins, there had been no need at all of any such thoughts, design or Counsel.
God had given unto them a Law, Righteous and Holy, which if they transgressed,
he had threatened them with eternal destruction. Under the Rule disposal and
power of this Law; he might have righteously left them to stand or fall
according to the verdict and sentence thereof. But now he assures us, he
reveals unto us that he had other thoughts in this matter; that there were
other Counsels between the Father and the Son concerning us. And these such as
the Son was delighted in the prospect of his Accomplishment of them. What can
these thoughts and counsels be, but about a way for their deliverance, which
could no otherwise be, but by the forgiveness of sins? For whatever else be
done, yet if God mark iniquities there is none can stand. Hearken therefore
poor sinner, and have hope. God is consulting about thy deliverance and
freedom. And what cannot the Wisdom and Grace of the Father and Son effect and
accomplish? And to this end was the Son sent into the world, which is the
second thing proposed to Consideration.

2. Whom did God send about this business? The Scripture lays great weight and
Emphasis on this consideration, faith must do so also: John 3. 16. God so loved
the world that he gave his only begotten Son: So 1 John 4. 9. In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him. And again, v. 10. Herein is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us: and sent his Son to be the
propitiations of our sins. And who is this that is thus sent and called the
only begotten Son of God? Take a double description of him, one out of the Old
Testament, and another from the new. The first from Isa. 9. 6. To us a Child is
born, to us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and
his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace: The other from Heb. 1. 2, 3. God has spoken unto
us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all, by whom also he made the
worlds, who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person, upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. This is he
who was sent; in Nature he was glorious; even over all God blessed for ever. In
Answerableness unto the Father; the brightness of his Glory, and the express
Image of his person: possessed of all the same essential Properties with him.
So that what we find in him, we may be assured of in the Father also; for he
that has seen him, has seen the Father, who is in him. In Power, Omnipotent,
for he made all things, and upholding all things with an unspeakable facility,
by the Word of his power. In Office, exalted over all, sitting at the right
hand of the Majesty on high. In Name, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father;
so that whatever he came about, he will assuredly accomplish and fulfill; for
what should hinder or let this Mighty One from perfecting his design?

Now this consideration raises our Evidence to that height, as to give us an
unquestionable Assurance in this matter. Here is a near and a particular Object
for faith to be exercised about, and to rest in. Wherefore did this glorious
Son of God come and Tabernacle amongst poor sinners? We beheld the glory of the
Eternal Word, the glory of the only begotten of the Father, and he was made
flesh, (...), and pitched his Tabernacle amongst us, John 1. 14. To what end?
It was no other but to work out, and accomplish the Eternal Counsel of Peace
toward sinners before mentioned, to procure for them, and to declare unto them
the forgiveness of sin. And what greater evidence, what greater Assurance can
we have, that there is forgiveness with God for us? he himself has given it as
a Rule, that what is done by giving an only begotten, or an only beloved Son,
gives assured Testimony of reality and sincerity in the thing that is confirmed
by it. So he says unto Abraham, Genesis 22. 12. Now I know that thou fear God,
seeing that thou have not withheld thy Son, thy only Son from me. This way it
may be known, or no way. And they are blessed Conclusions that faith may make
from this consideration; now I know that there is forgiveness with God, seeing
he has not withheld his Son, his only Son, that he might accomplish it. To
this purpose the Apostle teaches us to reason, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all things?

What further can any soul desire? What ground remains for unbelief to stand
upon in this matter? Is there any thing more to be done herein? It was to
manifest that there is forgiveness with him, and to make way for the exercise
of it, that God sent his Son; that the Son of God came into the world, as will
afterward more fully appear.

3. To this sending of the Son of God to this purpose, there is evidence and
security added from the Manner wherein he was sent. How was this? Not in Glory,
not in Power, not in an open discovery of his Eternal Power and Godhead. Had it
been so, we might have thought, that he had come merely to manifest and
glorify himself in the world. And this he might have done without thoughts of
mercy or Pardon toward us. But he came quite in another manner: He was seen in
the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8 3. In the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 10.
Being made of a woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. What he endured,
suffered, underwent in that state and condition, is in some measure known unto
us all. All this could not be merely, and firstly for himself. All that he
expected at the close of it, was to be glorified with that glory which he had
with the Father before the world was, John 17. 5. It must then be for our
sakes; and for what? to save and deliver us from that condition of wrath at
present, and future expectation of Vengeance, which we had cast our selves into
by sin; that is, to procure for us the forgiveness of sin. Had not God designed
Pardon for sin, he would never have sent his Son in this manner, to testify
it: And he did it, because it could no other way be brought about, as has been
declared. Do we doubt whether there be forgiveness with God or no? or whether
we shall obtain it, if we address our selves unto him for to be made partakers
of it? Consider the Condition of his Son in the world; review his Afflictions,
Poverty, Temptation, Sorrows, Sufferings; Then ask our souls, To what end was
all this? And if we can find any other design in it, any other Reason, Cause,
or Necessity of it, but only and merely to testify and declare, that there is
forgiveness with God, and to purchase and procure the Communication of it unto
us, let us abide in, and perish under our fears. But if this be so, we have
sufficient warranty to assure our souls in the expectation of it.

4. Besides all this, there ensues upon what went before, that great and
wonderful Issue, in the death of the Son of God. This thing was great and
mavelous, and we may a little enquire into what it was, that was designed
therein. And hereof the Scripture gives us a full account. As,

1. That he dyed to make Atonement for Sin, or Reconciliation for Iniquity,
Dan. 9. 24. He gave his life a ransom for the sins of many, Matthew. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. He was in it made sin, that others might become the righteousness of
God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Romans 8. 3. Therein he bare our sins in his body on
the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. This was the state of this matter. Notwithstanding all
the Love, Grace and condescension before mentioned, yet our sins were of that
nature, and so directly opposite unto the Justice and Holiness of God, that
unless Atonement were made, and a Price of Redemption paid, there could be no
Pardon, no forgiveness obtained. This therefore he undertook to do, and that by
the Sacrifice of himself; answering all that was prefigured by, and represented
in the Sacrifices of old; as the Apostle largely declares, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8
9. And herein is the forgiveness that is in God, copied out and exemplified so
clearly and evidently, that he that cannot read it, will be cursed unto
Eternity. Yea, and let him be accursed; for what can be more required to
justify God in his eternal destruction? He that will not believe his Grace as
testified and exemplified in the Blood of his Son, let him perish without
remedy. Yea but,

2. The Curse and Sentence of the Law lies on record against sinners. It puts
in its Demands against our acquittance, and lays an obligation upon us unto
punishment. And God will not reject, nor destroy his Law, unless it be answered
there is no acceptance for sinners. This therefore in the next place his death
was designed unto. As he satisfied and made Atonement by it unto Justice,
(that was the fountain, spring and cause of the Law) so he fulfilled and
answered the demands of the Law as it was an Effect of the Justice of God: So
Romans 8. 13. He suffered in the likeness of sinful flesh, that the Righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled, and answered. He answered the Curse of the Law
when he was made a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And so became as to the Obedience
of the Law, the end of the Law for Righteousness unto them that do believe,
Romans 10. 3, 4. And as to the penalty that it threatened, he bore it, removed it,
and took it out of the way. So has he made way for forgiveness through the
very heart of the Law; it has not one word to speak against the pardon of them
that do believe. But,

3. Sinners are under the power of Satan; he lays a claim unto them, and by
what means shall they be rescued from his interest and dominion? This also his
death was designed to accomplish. For as he was manifest to destroy the works
of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. So by death he destroyed him that had the power of
death, Heb. 2. 14. That is, to despoil him of his Power, to destroy his
Dominion, to take away his plea unto sinners that believe; as we have at large
elsewhere declared.

And by all these things, with many other concernments of his death that might
be instanced in, we are abundantly secured of the forgiveness that is with God:
And of his willingness that we should be made partakers thereof.

5. Is this all? Did his Work cease in his death? Did he no more for the
securing of the forgiveness of sins unto us, but only that he dyed for them?
Yes, he lives also after death for the same end and purpose. This Son of God in
that nature which he assumed to expiate sin by death, lives again after death
to secure unto us, and to complete the forgiveness of sins. And this he does
two ways.

1. Being raised from that death which he underwent, to make Atonement for sin
by the Power and Good Will of God, he evidenceth and testifies unto us, that
he has fully performed the work he undertook; and that in our behalf, and for
us, he has received a discharge. Had he not answered the guilt of sin by his
death* he had never been raised from it.

2. He lives after death, a Mediatory Life to make intercession for us, that we
may receive the forgiveness of sin, as also himself to give it out unto us:
which things are frequently made use of, to encourage the souls of men to
believe, and therefore shall not at present be further insisted on.

Thus then stands this matter, that Mercy might have a way to exercise it self
in forgiveness, with a consistency unto the Honor of the Righteousness and Law
of God, was the Son of God so sent for the ends and purposes mentioned. Now
herein consists the greatest Work that God did ever perform, or ever will. It
was the most eminent product of Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Grace and Power. And
herein do all the Excellencies of God shine forth more gloriously than in all
the works of his hands. Let us then wisely ponder and consider this matter; let
us bring our own souls with their Objections unto this Evidence, and see what
exception we have to lay against it. I know nothing will satisfy unbelief: the
design of it is to make the soul find that to be Iso hereafter, which it would
persuade it of here; namely; that there is no forgiveness in God. And Satan,
who makes use of this Engine, knows full well, that there is none for them who
believe there is none; or rather will not believe that there is any. For it
will at the last day be unto men according unto their faith or unbelief. He
that believes aright; and he that believes not, that forgiveness is with God,
as to their own particulars shall neither of them be deceived. But what is it
that can be reasonably excepted against this evidence, this foundation of our
faith in this matter? God has not sent his Son in vain, which yet he must have
done, as we have showed, had he not designed to manifest and exercise
forgiveness toward sinners. Wherefore to confirm our faith from hence, let us
make a little search into these things, in some particular enquiries.

1. Seeing the Son of God dyed in that way and manner that he did according to
the determinate Counsel and Will of God, wherefore did he do so, and what aimed
he at therein?

Answ. It is plain that he dyed for our sins, Romans 4. 25. that is, to make
reconciliation for the sins of his people, Heb. 2. 17, 18. This Moses and the
Prophets, this the whole Scripture testifies unto; and without a supposal of
it, not one word of it can be aright believed. Nor can we yield any due
Obedience unto God without it.

2. What then did God do unto him? What was in transaction between God as the
Judge of all, and him that was the Mediator of the Church?

Answ. God indeed laid on him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53. 6. all the
sins of all the Elect; yea, he made him a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And making
him a sin offering, or an offering for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, Romans
8* 3. 2 Cor. 5. 21. So that, all that which the Justice or Law of God had to
require about the punishment due unto sin, was all laid and executed on him.

3. What then did Christ do in his death? What did he aim at and design? What
was his intention in submitting unto, and undergoing the Will of God in these
things?

Answ. He bare our sins in his own body upon the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. He took
our sins upon him, undertook to answer for them, to pay our debts, to make an
end of the difference about them between God and sinners, Dan. 9. 24. His aim
undoubtedly was by all that he underwent and suffered, so to make Atonement
for sin, as that no more could on that account be expected.

4. Had God any more to require of sinners on the account of sin, that his
Justice might be satisfied, his Holiness vindicated, his Glory exalted, his
Honor be repaired, than what he charged on Christ? Did he lay somewhat of the
penalty due to sin on him, execute some part of the curse of the Law against
him, and yet reserve some wrath for sinners themselves?

Answ. No doubtless: He came to do the whole Will of God, Heb. 10. 7, 8. And
God spared him not any thing that in his holy will he had appointed to be done
unto sin, Romans 8. 32. He would never have so dealt with his Son, to have made
an half work of it; nor is the work of making satisfaction for sin such, as
that any, the least part of it should ever be undertaken by another. Nothing is
more injurious, or blasphemous against God and Christ, than the foolish
imagination among the Papists of works satisfactory for the punishment due to
sin, or any part of it: As also is their Purgatory pains to expiate any
remaining guilt after this life. This work of making satisfaction for sin is
such, as no creature in Heaven or Earth can put forth an hand unto. It was
wholly committed to the Son of God, who alone was able to undertake it, and who
has perfectly accomplished it. So that God now says, fury is not in me, he
that will lay hold on my strength that he may have peace, he shall have peace,
Isa. 21. 4.

5. What then became of the Lord Christ in his undertaking? Did he go through
with it? or did he faint under it? Did he only testify his Love, and show his
good will for our deliverance? or did also effectually pursue it, and not
faint, until he had made a way for the exercise of forgiveness?

Answ. It was not possible that he should be detained by the pains of death,
Acts 2. 24. He knew before hand, that he should be carried through his work,
that he should not be forsaken in it, nor saint under it, Isa. 50. 6, 7, 8. And
God has given this unquestionable evidence of his discharge of the debt of sin
to the utmost, in that he was acquitted from the whole account, when he was
raised from the dead. For he that is given up to prison upon the sentence of
the Law for the debt of sin, shall not be freed, until he have paid the utmost
farthing. This therefore he manifested himself to have done, by his
Resurrection from the dead.

6. What then is now become of him? Where is he, and what does he? Has he so
done his work and laid it aside, or does he still continue to carry it on until
it be brought unto its perfection?

Answ. It is true, he was dead, but he is alive, and lives for ever; and has
told us, that because he lives we shall live also; And that, because this is
the end of his mediatory life in Heaven: he lives for ever to make Intercession
for us, Heb. 7. 26, 27. And to this end, that the forgiveness of sin which he
has procured for us, may be communicated unto us, that we might be made
partakers of it, and live for ever.

What ground is left of questioning the Truth in hand? What link of this Chain
can unbelief break in, or upon? If men resolve, notwithstanding all this
Evidence and Assurance that is tendered unto them thereof, that they will not
yet believe that there is forgiveness with God, or will not be encouraged to
attempt the securing of it unto themselves, or else despise it as a thing not
worth the looking after; It is enough for them that declare it, that preach
these things, that they are a sweet savor unto God in them that perish, as
well as in them that are saved. And I bless God that I have had this
Opportunity to bear Testimony to the Grace of God in Christ, which if it be not
received, it is because the God of this world has blinded the eyes of men,
that the light of the Gospel of the Glory of God should not shine into their
minds. But Christ will be glorified in them that believe on these principles
and foundations.

Our Obligation unto mutual forgiveness, proves forgiveness in God.
XIII. Another Evidence of the same Truth may be taken from hence, that God
requires forgiveness in us; that we should forgive one another; and therefore
doubtless, there is forgiveness with him for us. The sense of this
Consideration unto our present purpose will be manifest in the ensuing
Observations.

First, It is certain, that God has required this of us: The Testimonies
hereof are many, and known, so that they need not particularly to be repeated
or insisted on. See Luke 17. 3, 4. Ephesians. 4. 32. Matthew. 18 24. unto the end.
Only there are some things that put a singular Emphasis upon this Command,
manifesting the great importance of this duty in us, which may be marked. As,

1. That our Savior requires us to carry a sense of our Integrity and
Sincerity in the discharge of this duty, along with us, in our Addresses unto
God in prayer. Hence he teaches and enjoins us to pray, or plead for the
forgiveness of our debts to God, (that is, our sins or trespasses against him,
which make us debtors to his Law and Justice,) even as we forgive them that so
trespass or offend against us, as to stand in need of our forgiveness, Matthew.
6. 12. Many are ready to devour such as are not satisfied, that the Words of
that Rule of Prayer, which he has prescribed unto us, are to be precisely read
or repeated every day; I wish they would as heedfully mind that prescription
which is given us herein, for that frame of heart and spirit which ought to be
in all our supplications. It might possibly abate of their wrath in that and
other things. But here is a Rule for all prayer, as all acknowledge, as also of
the things that are requisite to make it acceptable. This in particular is
required, that before the searcher of all hearts, and in our addresses unto
him, in our greatest concernments, we profess our sincerity in the discharge of
this duty, and do put our obtaining of what we desire upon that issue. This a
great Crown that is put upon the head of this duty, that which makes it very
eminent, and evidenceth the great concern of the Glory of God, and our own
souls therein.

2. We may observe, that no other duty whatever is expressly placed in the same
series, order, or rank with it; which makes it evident, that it is singled out
to be professed as a token and pledge of our sincerity in all other parts of
our Obedience unto God. It is by Christ himself made the instance, for the
trial of our sincerity in our Universal Obedience, which gives no small honor
unto it. The Apostle puts great weight on the Fifth Commandment, Honor thy
Father and Mother, because it is the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.
2. All the Commandments indeed had a promise, Do this and live; life was
promised to the observance of them all: But this is the first that had a
peculiar promise annexed unto it, and accompanying of it. And it was such a
Promise, as had a peculiar foundation through Gods Ordinance in the thing it
self. It is, that the Parents should prolong the lives of their Children that
were obedient. (...) Exodus 20. 11. They shall prolong thy days; that is, by
praying for their prosperity, blessing them in the name of God, and directing
them in those ways of Obedience, whereby they might live and possess the Land.
And this Promise is now translated from the Covenant of Canaan, into the
Covenant of Grace. The blessing of Parents going far toward the interesting
their Children in the Promise thereof, and so prolonging their days unto
eternity, though their days in this world should be of little continuance. So
it is said of our Savior, that he should see his seed, and prolong his days,
Isa. 53. 10. Which has carried over that Word, and that which is signified by
it, unto eternal things. But this by the way. As the singular Promise made to
that Command, renders it singular, so does this especial instancing in this
duty in our prayer, render it also. For though as all the Commandments had a
Promise, so we are to carry a Testimony with us of our sincerity in Universal
Obedience in our addresses unto God: yet the singling out of this instance
renders it exceeding remarkable; and shows what a value God puts upon it, and
how well he is pleased with it.

3. That God requires this forgiveness in us, upon the account of the
forgiveness we receive from him; which is to put the greatest obligation upon
us unto it, that we are capable of: and to give the strongest and most powerful
motive possible unto its performance: See Ephesians. 4. 32.

4. That this duty is more directly and expressly required in the New Testament
than in the Old. Required then it was, but not so openly, so plainly, so
expressly as now. Hence we find a different frame of Spirit between them under
that dispensation, and those under that of the New Testament. There are found
amongst them some such Reflections upon their enemies, their Oppressors,
Persecutors, and the like, as although they were warranted by some actings of
the Spirit of God in them, yet being suited unto the Dispensation they were
under, do no way become us now, who by Jesus Christ receive grace for grace. So
Zechariah when he dyed, cried, the Lord look on, and require; but Stephen dying
in the same cause and manner said, Lord lay not this sin to their charge.
Elijah called for fire from Heaven: But our Savior reproves the least
inclination in his Disciples, to imitate him therein. And the reason of this
difference is, because forgiveness in God is under the New Testament far more
clearly, especially in the nature and cause of it, discovered in the Gospel,
which has brought life and immortality to light, than it was under the Law.
For all our Obedience both in matter and manner, is to be suited unto the
discoveries and Revelation of God unto us.

5. This Forgiveness of others, is made an express Condition of our obtaining
Pardon and Forgiveness from God. Mat 6. 14, 15. And the nature hereof is
expressly declared, Chap. 18. 24. Such Evangelical Conditions we have not many.
I confess, they have no causal influence into the accomplishment of the
Promise; but the nonperformance of them, is a sufficient bar against our
pretending to the Promise, a sufficient evidence that we have no pleadable
interest in it. Our forgiving of others will not procure forgiveness for our
selves: But our not forgiving of others proves, that we our selves are not
forgiven. And all these things do show what weight God himself lays on this
duty.

Secondly, Observe, that this Duty is such, as that there is nothing more
comely, useful, or honorable unto, or praise worthy in any, than a due
performance of it. To be morose, implacable, inexorable, revengeful, is one of
the greatest degeneracies of humane nature. And no men are commonly, even in
this world, more branded with real infamy and dishonor amongst Wise and Good
men, than those who are of such a frame, and do act accordingly. To remember
Injuries, to retain a sense of Wrongs, to watch for Opportunities of Revenge,
to hate and be maliciously perverse, is to represent the Image of the Devil
unto the world in its proper colors; He is the great Enemy and self avenger:
On the other side, no Grace, no Virtue, no Duty, no Ornament of the mind, or
Conversation of man, is in it self so lovely, so comely, so praise worthy, or
so useful unto mankind, as are Meekness, Readiness to forgive and pardon. This
is that principally which renders a man a good man, for whom one would even
dare to dye: And I am sorry to add that this Grace or duty is recommended by
its raritie. It is little found amongst the Children of men. The consideration
of the defect of men herein, as in those other fundamental duties of the
Gospel, in self-denial, readiness for the Cross, and forsaking the world, is an
Evidence, if not how little sincerity there is in the World; Yet at least it
is, of how little growing, and thriving there is amongst Professors.

3. That there is no Grace, Virtue, or Perfection in any man, but what is as an
Emanation from the Divine Goodness and Bounty, so expressive of some Divine
Excellencies or perfection; somewhat that is in God, in a way and manner
Infinitely more Excellent. We were created in the Image of God. Whatever was
good or comely in us, was a part of that Image: Especially the Ornaments of our
Minds, the perfections of our souls. These things had in them a resemblance of,
and a correspondency unto some excellencies in God, whereunto by the way of
Analogy they may be reduced. This being for the most part lost by sin, a
shadow of it only remaining in the faculties of our souls; and that Dominion
over the Creatures, which is permitted unto men in the patience of God. The
recovery that we have by Grace, is nothing but an initial Renovation of the
Image of God in us, Ephesians. 4. 22. It is the implanting upon our natures those
Graces, which may render us again like unto him. And nothing is Grace or
Virtue, but what so answers to somewhat in God. So then whatever is in us of
this kind, is in God absolutely, perfectly, in a way and manner infinitely more
excellent.

Let us now therefore put these things together. God requires of us, that there
should be forgiveness in us for those that do offend us; forgiveness without
limitation and bounds; The Grace hereof he bestows on his Saints; sets an
high price upon it, and manifests many ways, that he accounts it among the
most excellent of our endowments; one of the most lovely and praise worthy
qualifications of any person. What then shall we now say? Is there forgiveness
with him or no? He that made the Eye, shall he not see? He that planted the
Ear, shall he not hear? He that thus prescribes forgiveness to us, that bestows
the Grace of it upon us, is there not forgiveness with him? It is all one as to
say, though we are good, yet God is not; though we are Benign and Bountiful,
yet he is not. He that finds this Grace wrought in him in any measure, and yet
fears that he shall not find it in God for himself, does therein, and so far
prefer himself above God; which is the natural Effect of cursed unbelief.

But the Truth is, were there not forgiveness with God, forgiveness in man
would be no virtue, with all those qualities that incline thereto; such are
meekness, pity, patience, compassion and the like. Which what were it, but to
set loose Humane Nature to rage and madness. For as every Truth consists in its
answerableness to the Prime and Eternal Verity; So virtue consists not
absolutely nor primarily in a conformity to a rule of Command, but in a
Correspondency unto the first absolute perfect Being and its perfections.

Properties of Forgiveness. The Greatness and Freedom of it.

Properties of Divine forgiveness.
The Arguments and Demonstrations foregoing have, we hope, undeniably evinced
the great Truth we have insisted on, which is the life and soul of all our
Hope, Profession, Religion and Worship. The end of all this Discourse is, to
lay a firm foundation for faith to rest upon, in its addresses unto God for the
forgiveness of sins; as also to give encouragements unto all sorts of persons
so to do. This End remains now to be explained and pressed; which work yet
before we directly close withal, two things are further to be premised. And
the first is, to propose some of those Adjuncts of, and Considerations about
this forgiveness, as may both encourage and necessitate us to seek out after
it, and to mix the Testimonies given unto it, and the Promises of it with faith
unto our Benefit and Advantage. The other is to show, how needful all this
endeavor is, upon the, account of that great Unbelief which is in the most in
this matter. As to the first of these then we may consider,

First, That this forgiveness that is with God, is such as becomes him, such as
is suitable to his Greatness, Goodness, and all other Excellencies of his
Nature, such as that therein he will be known to be God. What he says
concerning some of the works of his Providence, be still and know that I am
God; may be much more said concerning this great Effect of his Grace: Still
your souls, and know that he is God. It is not like that narrow, difficult,
halving and manacled forgiveness that is found amongst men, when any such thing
is found amongst them. But it is full, free, boundless, bottomless, absolute,
such as becomes his Nature and Excellencies. It is in a word, forgiveness that
is with God, and by the exercise whereofhe will be known so to be. And hence,

1. God himself does really separate and distinguish his forgiveness, from any
thing that our thoughts and imaginations can reach unto, and that because it is
his, and like himself. It is an object for faith alone; which can rest in that,
which it cannot comprehend. It is never safer, than when it is as it were
overwhelmed with infiniteness. But set mere rational thoughts, or the
imaginations of our minds at work about such things, and they fall
unconceivably short of them. They can neither conceive of them aright, nor use
them unto their proper end and purpose. Were not forgiveness in God somewhat
beyond what men could imagine, no flesh could be saved. This himself
expresses, Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon. For my
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways says the Lord;
for as the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your
ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. They are, as is plain in the
context, thoughts of forgiveness, and ways of Pardon whereof he speaks. These
our Apprehensions come short of; we know little or nothing of the infinite
largeness of his heart in this matter. He that he speaks of, is (...) an
impiously wicked man, and (...) a man of deceit, and perverse wickedness. He
whose design and course is nothing but a lie, sin, and iniquity. Such an one as
we would have little or no hopes of; that we would scarce think it worth our
while to deal withal about a hopeless Conversion; or can scarce find in our
hearts to pray for him, but are ready to give him up, as one profligate and
desperate. But let him turn to the Lord and he shall obtain forgiveness. But
how can this be? Is it possible there should be mercy for such an one? Yes! For
the Lord (...) will multiply to pardon. He has forgiveness with him to outdo
all the multiplied sins of any that turn unto him, and seek for it. But this is
very hard, very difficult for us to apprehend. This is not the way and manner
of men: We deal not thus with profligate Offenders against us. True, says God;
But your ways are not my ways. I do not act in this matter like unto you, nor
as you are accustomed to do. How then shall we apprehend it; how shall we
conceive of it? You can never do it by your Reason or Imaginations; For as the
Heavens is above the Earth, so are my thoughts in this matter above your
thoughts. This is an expression to set out the largest and most unconceivable
distance that may be. The creation will afford no more significant expression
or representation of it. The Heavens are inconceivably distant from the Earth,
and inconceivably glorious above it. So are the Thoughts of God; they are not
only distant from ours, but have a Glory in them also that we cannot rise up
unto. For the most part when we come to deal with God about forgiveness, we
hang in every bryar of disputing quarelsom unbelief. This or that Circumstance
or Aggravation, this or that unparalleld particular, bereaves us of our
Confidence. Want of a due Consideration of him with whom we have to do,
measuring him by that line of our own imaginations, bringing him down unto our
Thoughts and our Ways, is the cause of all our disquietments. Because we find
it hard to forgive our pence, we think he cannot forgive Talents. But he has
provided to obviate such thoughts in us, Hos. 11. 9. I will not execute the
fierceness of my wrath, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, for I AM GOD AND
NOT MAN. Our satisfaction in this matter, is to be taken from his Nature; where
he a man, or as the Sons of men, it were impossible that upon such and so many
provocations, he should turn away from the fierceness of his Anger. But he is
God. This gives an Infiniteness, and an inconceivable boundlesness to the
forgiveness that is with him; and exalts it above all our thoughts and ways.
This is to be lamented; Presumption which turns God into an Idol, ascribes unto
that Idol, a greater largeness in forgiveness, than faith is able to rise up
unto, when it deals with him as a God of infinite Excellencies and Perfections.
The reasons of it I confess are obvious. But this is certain, no presumption
can falsely imagine that forgiveness to it self from the Idol of its heart, as
faith may in the way of God, find in him, and obtain from him. For,

Secondly, God engages his infinite Excellencies to demonstrate the Greatness
and Boundlesness of his forgiveness. He proposes them unto our Considerations
to convince us, that we shall find pardon with him suitable and answerable unto
them See Isa. 40. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak O
Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over from my
God? Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the Everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary;
there is no searching of his understanding; He gives power to the faint, and
to them that have no might he increases strength: even the youths shall faint
and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fail; but they that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they
shall run and not be weary; and they shall walk and not be faint. The matter in
question is whether Acceptance with God, which is only by forgiveness is to be
obtained or no; This sinful Jacob either despairs of, or at least desponds
about. But says God, My thoughts are not as your thoughts in this matter. And
what course does he take to convince them of their mistake therein? What
Argument does he make use of to free them from their unbelief, and to rebuke
their fears? Plainly, he calls them to the consideration of himself, both Who
and What he is, with whom they had to do. That they might expect acceptance and
forgiveness, such as did become him. Minding them of his power, his Immensity,
his Infinite Wisdom, his Unchangableness, all the Excellencies and Properties
of his nature, he demands of them, whether they have not just ground to expect
Forgiveness and Grace, above all their thoughts and apprehensions, because
answering the infinite largeness of his heart from whence it does proceed?

And Moses manageth this plea for the forgiveness of that people under an high
provocation, and a most severe threatening of their destruction thereon, Numb.
14. 17, 18. He pleads for pardon in such a way and manner, as may answer the
great and glorious Properties of the Nature of God, and which would manifest an
infiniteness of Power and Al-sufficiency to be in him.

This I say is an encouragement in general unto Believers. We have, as I hope,
upon unquestionable grounds evinced that there is forgiveness with God, which
is the hinge on which turns the issue of our eternal condition. Now this is
like himself, such as becomes him; that answers the infinite perfections of his
nature; that is exercised and given forth by him as God. We are apt to narrow
and streighten it by our unbelief, and to render it unbecoming of him. He less
dishonours God (or as little) who being wholly under the power of the Law,
believes that there is no forgiveness with him, none to be obtained from him,
or does not believe it, that so it is, or is so to be obtained, for which he
has the voice and sentence of the Law to countenance him; then those who being
convinced of the principles and grounds of it before mentioned, and of the
Truth of the Testimony given unto it, do yet by streigthning and narrowing of
it, render it unworthy of him, whose Excellencies are all infinite, and whose
ways on that account are incomprehensible. If then we resolve to rreat with
God about this matter, which is the business now in hand, let us do it, as it
becomes his Greatness, that is, indeed, as the wants of our souls do require.
Let us not entangle our own Spirits by limiting his Grace. The Father of the
Child possessed with a Devil being in a great Agony when he came to our
Savior, cries out, If thou can do any thing, have compassion on us, and help
us, Mark 9. 22. He would fain be delivered, but the matter was so great, that
he questioned whether the Lord Christ had either Compassion or Power enough for
his relief. And what did he obtain hereby? nothing but the retarding of the
Cure of his Child for a season. For our Savior holds him off until he had
instructed him in this matter; says he, v. 23. If thou can believe, all
things are possible unto him that believes. Mistake not, if thy Child be not
cured, it is not for want of power or pity in me, but of faith in thee. My
power is such as renders all things possible, so that they be believed. So it
is with many, who would desirously be made partakers of forgiveness. If it be
possible they would be pardoned, but they do not see it possible. Why where is
the defect? God has no pardon for them, or such as they are, and so it may be
they come finally short of pardon. What, because God cannot pardon them, it is
not possible with him? Not at all! but because they cannot, they will not
believe, that the forgiveness that is with him is such, as that it would answer
all the wants of their souls, because it answers the infinite largeness of his
heart. And if this does not wholly deprive them of Pardon, yet it greatly
retards their Peace and Comfort. God does not take it well to be limited by us
in any thing, least of all in his Grace. This he calls a Tempting of him, a
provoking Temptation, Psalm. 78. 41. They turned back and tempted God, they
limited the Holy One of Israel. This he could not hear with. If there be any
pardon with God, it is such as becomes him to give. When he pardons, he will
abundantly pardon. Go with your half forgiveness limited, conditional Pardons
with reserves and limitations unto the Sons of men; it may be, it may become
them, it is like themselves. That of God is absolute and perfect, before which
our sins are as a Cloud before the East Wind, and the rising Sun. Hence he is
said to do this work, with his whole heart, and his whole soul; (...), freely,
bountifully, largely to indulge and forgive unto us our sins. And to cast them
into the bottom of the Sea, Mic. 7. 19. into a bottomless Ocean, an Emblem of
infinite mercy. Remember this, poor souls, when you are to deal with God in
this matter, all things are possible unto them that do believe.

Secondly, This forgiveness is in or with God, not only so, as that we may
apply our selves unto it, if we will, for which he will not be offended with
us, but so also, as that he has placed his great Glory in the Declaration and
communication of it; nor can we honor him more than by coming to him to be
made partakers of it, and so to receive it from him. For the most part, we are
as it were ready rather to steal forgiveness from God, than to receive from him
as one that gives it freely and largely. We take it up, and lay it down, as
though we would be glad to have it, so God did not, as it were, see us take it;
for we are afraid he is not willing we should have it indeed. We would steal
this fire from Heaven, and have a share in Gods Treasures and Riches almost
without his consent. At least we think that we have it from him aegre, with
much difficulty, that it is rarely given and scarcely obtained. That he gives
it out, (...), with a kind of unwilling willingness; as we sometimes give Alms
without Cheerfulness. And that he loses so much by us, as he gives out in
Pardon. We are apt to think that we are very willing to have forgiveness, but
that God is unwilling to bestow it, and that because he seems to be a loser by
it, and to forego the glory of inflicting punishment for our sins, which of all
things we suppose he is most loath to part withal. And this is the very nature
of unbelief. But indeed things are quite otherwise. He has in this matter
through the Lord Christ ordered all things in his dealings with sinners to the
praise of the glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. His design in the whole mystery
of the Gospel, is to make his Grace glorious, or to exalt pardoning mercy. The
great fruit and product of his Grace is forgiveness. The forgiveness of
sinners. This God will render himself Glorious in and by. All the Praise, Glory
and Worship, that he designs from any in this world, is to redound unto him by
the way of this Grace, as we have proved at large before. For this cause spared
he the world, when sin first entered into it: for this cause did he provide a
New Covenant, when the old was become unprofitable. For this cause did he send
his Son into the world. This has he testified by all the Evidences insisted
on. Would he have lost the praise of his Grace, nothing hereof would have been
done or brought about. We can then no way so eminently bring or ascribe glory
unto God, as by our receiving forgiveness from him, he being willing thereunto
upon the account of its tendency unto his own Glory, in that way, which he has
peculiarly fixed on for its manifestation. Hence the Apostle exhorts us to come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. That is, with the Confidence of
faith, as he expounds boldness, Chap. 10. 19, 20. We come about a business
wherewith he is well pleased; such as he delights in the doing of, as he
expresses himself, Zeph. 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee, is
mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy. He will rest in his
love, he will joy over thee with singing. This is the way of Gods Pardoning; he
does it in a rejoicing triumphant manner, satisfying abundantly his own holy
soul therein, and resting in his love. We have then abundant encouragement to
draw nigh to the Throne of Grace, to be made partakers of what God is so
willing to give out unto us. And to this end serves also the Oath of God before
insisted on, namely, to root out all the secret reserves of unbelief,
concerning Gods Unwillingness to give Mercy, Grace and Pardon unto sinners. See
Heb. 6. 17, 18. where it is expressed. Therefore the tendency of our former
Arguments, is not merely to prove that there is forgiveness with God, which we
may believe and not be mistaken; but which we ought to believe. It is our duty
so to do. We think it our duty to pray, to hear the Word, to give alms, to love
the Brethren, and to abstain from sin; and if we fail in any of these, we find
the guilt of them reflected upon our Conscience unto our disquietment. But we
scarce think it our duty to believe the forgiveness of our sins. It is well it
may be, we think, with them that can do it, but we think it not their fault who
do not. Such persons may be pityed, but as we suppose not justly blamed, no not
by God himself. Whose Conscience almost is burdened with this as a sin, that he
does not as he ought, believe the forgiveness of his sins? And this is merely
because men judge it not their duty so to do. For a nonperformance of a duty
apprehended to be such, will reflect on the Conscience a sense of the guilt of
sin. But now what can be required to make any thing a duty unto us, that is
wanting in this matter? For,

1. There is forgiveness with God, and this manifested, revealed, declared.
This manifestation of it is that which makes it the Object of our faith. We
believe things to be in God, and with him, not merely and formally because they
are so, but because he has manifested and revealed them so to be, 1 John 1. 2.
What he so declares, it is our duty to believe, or we frustrate the end of his
Revelation.

2. We are expressly commanded to believe, and that upon the highest Promises,
and under the greatest penalties. This Command is that which makes believing
formally a duty. Faith is a Grace as it is freely wrought in us by the Holy
Ghost, the root of all Obedience and duties, as it is radically fixed in the
heart. But as it is commanded it is a duty; and these Commands, you know, are
several ways expressed, by Invitations, Exhortations, Propositions, which all
have in them the nature of Commands, which take up a great part of the Books of
the New Testament.

3. It is a duty, as we have showed, of the greatest concernment unto the Glory
of God.

4. Of the greatest importance unto our souls, here and hereafter. And these
things were necessary to be added, to bottom our ensuing Exhortations upon.

Evidences that most men do not believe Forgiveness.

Forgiveness believed by Few.
That which should now ensue, is the peculiar improvement of this Truth all
along aimed at; namely, to give Exhortations, and encouragements unto
believing. But I can take few steps in this work, wherein methinks I do hear
some saying, Surely all this is needless; Who is there that does not believe
all that you go about to prove? And so these pains are spent to little or no
purpose. I shall therefore before I persuade any unto it, endeavor to show
that they do it not already. Many I say, the most of men who live under the
dispensation of the Gospel, do woefully deceive their own souls in this matter.
They do not believe what they profess themselves to believe, and what they
think they believe. Men talk of fundamental Errors; this is to me the most
fundamental error that any can fall into, and the most pernicious. It is made
up of these two parts. (1.) They do not indeed believe forgiveness. (2.) They
suppose they do believe it, which keeps them from seeking after their only
remedy. Both these mistakes are in the foundation, and do ruin the souls of
them that live and die in them. I shall then by a brief enquiry put this matter
to a trial. By some plain Rules and Principles may this important Question,
whether we do indeed believe forgiveness or no, be answered and decided. But to
the Resolution intended, I shall premise two Observations.

1. Men in this case, are very apt to deceive themselves. Selflove, vain Hopes,
liking of Lust, common false Principles, sloth, unwillingness unto
self-examination, Reputation with the World, and it may be in the Church, all
vigorously concur unto men's self-deceivings in this matter. It is no easy
thing for a soul to break through all these, and all self-reasonings that rise
from them, to come unto a clear judgment of its own acting in dealing with God
about forgiveness. Men also find a Common Presumption of this Truth, and its
being an easy relief against gripings of Conscience, and disturbing thoughts
about sin; which they daily meet withal Aiming therefore only at the removal
of trouble, and finding their present Imagination of it, sufficient thereunto,
they never bring their persuasion to the trial.

2. As men are apt to do thus, so they actually do so, they do deceive
themselves, and know not that they do so. The last day will make this evident,
if men will no sooner be convinced of their folly. When our Savior told his
Disciples, that one of them twelve should betray him; though it were but one of
twelve that was in danger, yet every one of the twelve made a particular
enquiry about himself. I will not say, that one in each twelve is here
mistaken: But I am sure the Truth tells us, That many are called, and but few
are chosen; they are but few, who do really believe forgiveness. Is it not then
incumbent on every one to be enquiring in what number he is likely to be found
at the last day? Whilst men put this enquiry off from themselves, and think or
say, it may be the Concernment of others, it is not mine, they perish, and that
without remedy. Remember what poor Jacob said, when he had lost one Child, and
was afraid of the loss of another, Genesis 43. 14. If I be bereaved of my
Children, I am bereaved. As if he should have said, if I lose my Children, I
have no more to lose, they are my all. Nothing worse can befall me in this
world. Comfort, Joy, yea, Life and all go with them. How much more may men say
in this Case, If we are deceived here, we are deceived; all is lost, hope, and
life, and soul, all must perish, and that for ever. There is no help or relief
for them who deceive themselves in this matter. They have found out a way to go
quietly down into the pit.

Now these things are premised, only that they may be incentives unto
self-examination in this matter; and so render the ensuing Considerations
useful. Let us then address our selves unto them.

1. In General; This is a Gospel Truth; yea, the great fundamental, and most
important Truth of the Gospel. It is the turning point of the two Covenants, as
God himself declares, Heb. 7. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Now a very easy
Consideration of the ways and walkings of men will satisfy us as to this
Enquiry, whether they do indeed believe the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace, and
the fundamental Principles of it. Certainly their Ignorance, Darkness,
Blindness, their Corrupt Affections, and Worldly Conversations, their
Earthly-mindedness and open disavowing of the Spirit, Ways and Yoke of Christ,
speak no such language. Shall we think that proud, heady, worldly,
self-seckers, haters of the people of God, and his ways, despisers of the
Spirit of Grace, and his work, Sacrificers to their own lusts, and such like,
do believe the Covenant of Grace, or Remission of sins? God forbid we should
entertain any one thought of so great dishonor to the Gospel. Where ever that
is received or believed, it produces other effects, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Isa. 11 6,
7, 8, 9. It teaches men to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. It changes
their hearts, natures and ways; It is not such a barren, impotent and
fruitless thing, as such an Apprehension would represent it.

2. They that really believe forgiveness in God, do thereby obtain forgiveness.
Believing gives an interest in it; it brings it home to the soul concerned.
This is the inviolable Law of the Gospel. Believing and forgiveness are
inseparably conjoined. Among the Evidences that we may have of any one being
interested in forgiveness, I shall only name one, They prize and value it above
all the world. Let us enquire what Esteem and valuation many of those have of
forgiveness, who put it out of all question that they do believe it. Do they
look upon it as their Treasure, their Jewel, their Pearl of price? Are they
solicitous about it? Do they often look and examine whether it continues safe
in their possession or no? Suppose a man have a precious Jewel laid up in some
place in his house; Suppose it be unto him as the poor Widows two mites, all
her substance or living; will he not carefully ponder on it? Will he not
frequently satisfy himself that it is safe? We may know that such an house,
such fields or lands do not belong unto a man when he passes by them daily,
and takes little or no notice of them. Now how do most men look upon
forgiveness? What is their common deportment in reference unto it? Are their
hearts continually filled with thoughts about it? Are they solicitous
concerning their interest in it? Do they reckon, that whilst that is safe, all
is safe with them? When it is, as it were, laid out of the way by sin and
unbelief, do they give themselves no rest, until it be afresh discovered unto
them? Is this the frame of the most of men? The Lord knows it is not. They talk
of forgiveness, but esteem it not, prize it not, make no particular enquiries
after it. They put it to an ungrounded venture, whether ever they be partakers
of it or no; for a relief against some pangs of Conscience it is called upon,
or else scarce thought of at all.

Let not any so minded flatter themselves that they have any acquaintance with
the mystery of Gospel forgiveness.

3 Let it be enquired of them who pretend unto this persuasion, how they came
by it; that we may know whether it be of him who calls us, or no; that we may
try whether they have broken through the difficulties in the Entertaining of
it, which we have manifested abundantly to lie in the way of it.

When Peter confessed our Savior to be the Christ the Son of the living God;
He told him that flesh and blood did not reveal that unto him, but his Father
who is in Heaven. Matthew. 16. 17. It is so with them who indeed believe
forgiveness in God: Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto them. It has not
been furthered by any thing within them or without them, but all lies in
opposition unto it. This is the work of God that we believe, John 6. 29. A
great work, the greatest work that God requires of us. It is not only a great
thing in it self (the Grace of believing is a great thing,) but it is great in
respect of its Object, or what we have to believe, or forgiveness it self. The
great honor of Abraham's faith lay in this, that deaths and difficulties lay in
the way of it. Romans 4. 18, 19, 20. But what is a dead body, and a dead womb, to
an accusing Conscience, a killing Law, and apprehensions of a God terrible as a
consuming fire? all which, as was showed, oppose themselves unto a soul called
to believe forgiveness.

What now have the most of men, who are confident in the profession of this
faith, to say unto this thing? Let them speak clearly, and they must say, that
indeed they never found the least difficulty in this matter; they never doubted
of it; they never questioned it, nor do know any reason why they should do so.
It is a thing which they have so taken for granted, as that it never cost them
an hours labor prayer or meditation about it. Have they had secret reasonings
and contendings in their hearts about it? No; Have they considered how the
Objections that lie against it may be removed? Not at all; But is it so indeed
that this persuasion is thus bred in you, you know not how? Are the corrupted
Natures of men, and the Gospel so suited, so complying? Is the New Covenant
grown so connatural to flesh and blood? Is the greatest secret that ever was
revealed from the bosom of the Father, become so familiar and easy to the
wisdom of the flesh? Is that which was folly to the wise Greeks, and a
stumbling block to the Wondergazing Jews, become on a sudden Wisdom, and a
plain path to the same principles that were in them? But the truth of this
matter is, that such men have a general, useless, barren notion of Pardon,
which Satan, Presumption, Tradition, Common Reports, and the Customary hearing
of the Word have furnished them withal; But for that Gospel discovery of
forgiveness whereof we have been speaking, they are utterly ignorant of it, and
unacquainted with it. To convince such poor creatures of the folly of their
presumption, I would but desire them to go to some real Believers, that are or
may be known unto them; Let them be asked whether they came so easily by their
Faith, and Apprehensions of forgiveness, or no? Alas, says One, these twenty
years have I been following after God, and yet I have not arrived unto an
abiding Chearing persuasion of it. I know what it cost me, what trials,
difficulties, temptations I wrestled with, and went through withal before I
obtained it, says another. What I have attained unto, has been of unspeakable
mercy. And it is my daily prayer, that I may be preserved in it; by the
exceeding greatness of the Power of God; for I continually wrestle with storms
that are ready to drive me from my Anchor. A little of this discourse may be
sufficient to convince poor, dark, carnal creatures of the folly and vanity of
their confidence.

4. There are certain Means whereby the Revelation and discovery of this
Mystery is made unto the souls of men. By these they do obtain it, or they
obtain it not. The mystery it self was a secret, hidden in the Counsel of God
from Eternity; nor was there any way whereby it might be revealed, but by the
Son of God. And that is done in the Word of the Gospel. If then you say you
know it; Let us enquire how you came so to do? And by what means it has been
declared unto you? Has this been done by a Word of Truth? by the Promise of
the Gospel? Was it by preaching of the Word unto you, or by reading of it, or
meditating upon it? Or did you receive it from and by some seasonable word, of,
or from the Scriptures spoken unto you? Or has it insensibly gotten ground
upon your hearts and minds, upon the strivings and conflicts of your souls
about sin, from the truth wherein you had been instructed in General? Or by
what other ways or means have you come to that acquaintance with it, whereof
you boast? You can tell how you came by your wealth, your Gold, and Silver; you
know how you became learned, or obtained the knowledge of the mystery of your
trade, who taught you in it, and how you came by it. There is not any thing
wherein you are concerned, but you can answer these Enquiries in reference unto
it. Think it then no great matter, if you are put to answer this Question also;
by what way or means came you to the knowledge of forgiveness which you boast
of; Was it by any of those before mentioned, or some other? if you cannot
answer distinctly to these things, only you say, you have heard it, and
believed it ever since you can remember, so those said that went before you, so
they say with whom you do converse; you never met with any one that called it
into question, nor heard of any, unless it were one or two despairing wretches;
it will be justly questioned, whether you have any portion in this matter or
no. If uncertain rumors, reports, general notions, lie at the bottom of your
persuasion, do not suppose that you have any Communion with Christ therein.

5. Of them who profess to believe forgiveness, how few are there who indeed
know what it is. They believe they say, but as the Samaritans Worshipped, they
know not what. With some, a bold presumption, and crying peace peace, goes for
the belief of forgiveness.

A General Apprehension of impunity from God, and that though they are sinners,
yet they shall not be punished, passes with others at the same rate.

Some think they shall prevail with God by their prayers and desires to let
them alone, and not cast them into Hell. One way or other to escape the
Vengeance of Hell, not to be punished in another world, is that which men fix
their minds upon.

But is this that forgiveness which is revealed in the Gospel? that which we
have been treating about? The Rise and Spring of our forgiveness is in the
heart and Gracious Nature of God, declared by his Name; Have you enquired
seriously into this? Have you stood at the shore of that infinite Ocean of
Goodness and Love? Have your souls found supportment and relief from that
Consideration? And have your hearts leaped within you with the thoughts of it?
Or if you have never been affected in an especial manner herewithal, have you
bowed down your souls under the Considerations of that Sovereign Act of the
Will of God, that is the next spring of forgiveness; that glorious acting of
free Grace, that when all might justly have perished, all having sinned and
come short of his Glory, God would yet have mercy on some? Have you given up
your selves to this Grace? Is this any thing of that you do believe? Suppose
you are strangers to this also: What communion with God have you had about it
in the blood of Christ? We have showed how forgiveness relates thereunto; how
way is made thereby for the exercise of mercy, in a consistency with the Glory
and Honor of the Justice of God, and of his Law; how Pardon is procured and
purchased thereby; with the mysterious Reconciliation of Love and Law; and the
new disposal of Conscience in its work and duty by it. What have you to say to
these things? Have you seen pardon flowing from the heart of the Father through
the blood of the Son? Have you looked upon it as the price of his life, and the
purchase of his blood? Or have you general thoughts that Christ dyed for
finners? and that on one account or other forgiveness relates unto him, but are
strangers to the mystery of this great work. Suppose this also; Let us go a
little further and enquire whether you know any thing that yet remains of the
like importance in this matter? Forgiveness as we have showed, is manifested,
tendered, exhibited in the Covenant of Grace and Promises of the Gospel. The
Rule of the Efficacy of these is, that they he mixed with faith, Heb. 4. 2. It
is well if you are grown up hereunto; but you that are strangers to the things
before mentioned, are no less to this also. Upon the matter you know not then
what forgiveness is, nor wherein it consists, nor whence it comes, nor how it
is procured, nor by what means given out unto sinners. It is to no purpose for
such persons to pretend that they believe that whereunto either notionally, or
practically, or both, they are such utter strangers.

6. Another Enquiry into this matter regards the State and Condition wherein
souls must be, before it be possible for them to believe forgiveness. If there
be such an Estate and it can be evinced that very many of the Pretenders
concerning whom we deal, were never brought into it, it is then evident that
they neither do nor can believe forgiveness, however they do and may delude
their own souls.

It has been showed that the first discovery that was made of pardoning Grace
was unto Adam, presently after the fall. What was then his State and Condition?
How was he prepared for the reception of this great mystery in its first
discovery? that seems to be a considerable Rule of proceeding in the same
matter. That which is first in any kind, is a Rule to all that follows. Now
what was Adams condition when the Revelation of forgiveness was first made to
him? it is known from the Story; convinced of sin, afraid of punishment, he lay
trembling at the foot of God. Then was forgiveness revealed unto him; So the
Psalmist states it, Psalm 130. v. 3. If thou Lord should mark iniquity, O
Lord who shall stand? Full of thoughts he is of the desert of sin, and of
inevitable and eternal ruin, in case God should deal with him according to the
Exigence of the Law. In that state is the great support of Forgiveness with
God, suggested unto him by the Holy Ghost. We know what work our Savior had
with the Pharisees on this account. Are we, say they, blind also? No, says he,
you say, you see, therefore your sin remains, John 9. 40, 41. It is to no
purpose to talk of forgiveness to such persons as you are, you must of
necessity abide in your sins. I came not to call such righteous persons as you
are, but sinners to Repentance; who not only are so, as you are also, and that
to the purpose, but are sensible of their being so, and of their undone
condition thereby. The whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick.
Whilst you are seeming Righteous and whole, it is to no End to tell you of
forgiveness, you cannot understand it, nor receive it. It is impossible then
that any one should in a due manner believe forgiveness in God, unless in a due
manner he be convinced of sin in himself. If the fallow ground be not broken
up, it is to no purpose to sow the seed of the Gospel. There is neither Life,
Power, nor sweetness in this Truth, unless a door be opened for its Entrance by
Conviction of sin.

Let us then on this ground also, continue our Enquiry upon the ordinary
boasters of their skill in this mystery. You believe there is forgiveness with
God; Yes, but have you been convinced of sin? Yes; you know that you are
sinners well enough. Answer then but once more as to the nature of this
conviction of sin, which you say you have; Is it not made up of these two
ingredients. (1.) A general notion that you are sinners as all men also are.
(2.) Particular troublesome reflections upon your selves, when on any eruption
of sin, Conscience accuses, rebukes, condemns? You will say, yes, what would
you require more. This is not the Conviction we are enquiring after; That is a
work of the Spirit by the Word; this you speak of, a mere Natural work, which
you can no more be without than you can cease to be men. This will give no
Assistance unto the receiving of forgiveness. But it may be, you will say, you
have proceeded farther than so; and these things have had an improvement in
you. Let us then a little try whether your process have been according to the
mind of God. And so whether this invincible bar in your way be removed or no.
For although every convinced person do not believe forgiveness: yet no one who
is not convinced does so. Have you then been made sensible of your condition by
Nature; what it is to be alienated from the life of God, and to be obnoxious to
his wrath? Have you been convinced of the Universal Enmity that is in your
hearts to the mind of God; and what it is to be at Enmity against God? Has the
unspeakable multitude of the sins of your lives been set in order by the Law
before you? And have you considered what it is for sinners, such sinners as you
are, to have to deal with a Righteous and a holy God? Has the Holy Ghost
wrought a serious Recognition in your hearts of all these things, and caused
them to abide with you and upon you? If you will answer truly, you must say,
many of you, that indeed you have not been so exercised. You have heard of
these things many times, but to say that you have gone through with this work,
and have had Experience of them, that you cannot do. Then I say you are
strangers to forgiveness, because you are strangers unto sin: But and if you
shall say that you have had thoughts to this purpose; and are persuaded that
you have been thoroughly convinced of sin; I shall yet ask you one Question
more; what Effects has your Conviction produced in your hearts and lives? Have
you been filled with perplexities and consternation of Spirit thereupon? Have
you had fears dreads or terrors to wrestle withal? It may be you will say, No;
Nor will I insist upon that enquiry; but this I deal with you in. Has it
filled you with self-loathing and Abhorrency, with self-condemnation, and
abasement? If it will do any thing this it will do. If you come short here, it
is justly to be feared that all your other pretenses are of no value; Now where
there is no work of conviction, there is no faith of forgiveness, whatever is
pretended. And how many vain boasters this sword will cut off is evident.

7. We have yet a greater evidence than all these. Men live in sin, and
therefore they do not believe forgiveness of sin. Faith in general purifies the
heart, Acts 15. 19. Our souls are purified in obeying the Truth, 1 Pet. 1. 22.
and the life is made fruitful by it, James 2. 22. Faith works by works, and
makes it self perfect by them. And the Doctrine concerning forgiveness has a
special influence into all Holiness, Tit. 2. 11, 12. The Grace of God which
brings salvation, teaches us to deny all unrighteousness and worldly lusts,
to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. And that is the
Grace whereof we speak. No man can then believe forgiveness of sin, without a
detestation and relinquishment of it. The ground of this might be farther
manifested, and the way of the Efficacy of faith of forgiveness unto a
forsaking of sin, if need were. But all that own the Gospel must acknowledge
this principle. The real belief of the Pardon of sin, is prevalent with men not
to live longer in sin.

But now what are the greatest number of those who pretend to receive this
Truth? Are their hearts purified by it? Are their consciences purged? Are their
lives changed? Do they deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts? Does forgiveness
teach them so to do? Have they found it effectual to these purposes? Whence is
it then that there is such a bleating and bellowing to the contrary amongst
them?

Some of you are Drunkards, some of you Swearers, some of you unclean persons,
some of you liars, some of you worldly, some of you haters of all the ways of
Christ, and all his concernments upon the Earth; proud, covetous, boasters,
selfseekers, envious, wrathful, backbiters, malicious praters, slanderers, and
the like. And shall we think that such as these believe forgiveness of sin? God
forbid. Again, Some of you are dark, ignorant, blind, utterly unacquainted with
the mystery of the Gospel, nor do at all make it your business to enquire into
it. Either you hear it not at all, or negligently, slothfully, customarily, to
no purpose. Let not such persons deceive their own souls: to live in sin and
yet to believe the forgiveness of sin, is utterly impossible. Christ will not
be a Minister of sin, nor give his Gospel to be a Doctrine of licentiousness
for your sakes. Nor shall you be forgiven that you may be delivered to do more
Abominations. God forbid.

If any shall say, that they thank God, they are no such Publicans as those
mentioned; they are no drunkards, no swearers, no unclean persons, nor the
like, so that they are not concerned in this consideration. Their lives and
their duties give another account of them: then yet consider further,

That the Pharisees were all that you say of your selves; and yet the greatest
despisers of forgiveness that ever were in the world, and that because they
hated the light, on this account, that their deeds were evil. And for your
duties you mention, what I pray is the root and spring of them? are they
influenced from this Faith of forgiveness you boast of or no? May it not be
feared that it is utterly otherwise? you do not perform them because you love
the Gospel, but because you fear the Law. If the truth were known, I doubt it
would appear, that you get nothing by your believing of pardon, but an
encouragement unto sin. Your Goodness such as it is, springs from another root.
It may be also that you ward your selves by it against the strokes of
Conscience, or the guilt of particular sins, this is as bad as the other. It is
as good be encouraged unto sin, to commit it, as be encouraged under sin, so as
to be kept from humiliation for it. None under Heaven are more remote from the
belief of Grace and Pardon, than such persons are: All their Righteousness is
from the Law, and their Sin in a great measure from the Gospel.

8. They that believe forgiveness in a due manner, believe it for the Ends and
Purposes for which it is revealed of God. This will further improve and carry
on the former consideration. If God reveals any thing for one end and purpose,
and men use it quite unto another; they do not receive the Word of God, nor
believe the thing revealed, but steal the Word and delude their own souls.

Let us then weigh to what Ends and purposes this forgiveness was first
revealed by God; for which also its manifestation is still continued in the
Gospel. We have showed before who it was to whom this Revelation was first
made, and what condition he was in when it was so made unto him. A lost,
wretched Creature, without hope or help he was; how he should come to obtain
Acceptance with God, he knew not. God reveals forgiveness unto him by Christ to
be his all. The intention of God in it was, that a Sinners All should be of
Grace, Romans 11. 6. If any thing be added unto it for the same End and purpose,
then Grace is no more Grace. Again, God intended it as a new foundation of
Obedience, of Love and Thankfulness. That men should Love because Forgiven, and
be Holy because Pardoned; as I have showed before, that it might be the
Righteousness of a Sinner, and a spring of new obedience in him, all to the
praise of Grace, were Gods Ends in its Revelation.

Our Enquiry then is, whether men do receive this Revelation as unto these
Ends, and use it for these purposes, and these only. I might evince the
contrary, by passing through the General abuses of the Doctrine of Grace, which
are mentioned in the Scripture, and common in the world; but it will not be
needful. Instead of Believing, the most of men seem to put a studied despite
on the Gospel. They either proclaim it to be an unholy and polluted way, by
turning its Grace into Lasciviousness, or a weak and insufficient way, by
striving to twist it in with their own Righteousness, both which are an
Abomination unto the Lord.

From these and such other Considerations of the like importance as might be
added, it is evident that our Word is not in vain; nor the Exhortation which is
to be built upon it. It appears, that notwithstanding the great noise and
pretenses to this purpose that are in the World, they are but few who seriously
receive this fundamental truth of the Gospel; Namely, that there is forgiveness
with God. Poor Creatures sport themselves with their own deceivings, and perish
by their own delusions.

Exhortation unto the Belief of the Forgiveness that is with God. Reasons for
it, and the Necessity of it.

Exhortations unto Believing.
We shall now proceed unto the direct uses of this great Truth. For having laid
our foundation in the Word that will not fail, and having given as we hope,
sufficient Evidence unto the truth of it, our last work is to make that
improvement of it unto the Good of the Souls of men, which all along was aimed
at. The persons concerned in this Truth are all Sinners whatever. No sort of
sinners are unconcerned in it, none are excluded from it. And we may cast them
all under Two heads.

First, Such as never yet sincerely closed with the promise of Grace; Nor have
ever yet received forgiveness from God, in a way of believing. These we have
already endeavored to undeceive; and to discover those false presumptions
whereby they are apt to ruin and destroy their own souls. These we would guide
now into safe and pleasant paths, wherein they may find assured Rest and Peace.

Secondly, Others there are, who have received it, but being again entangled by
sin, or clouded by darkness and temptations, or weakened by unbelief, know not
how to improve it to their Peace and Comfort. This is the condition of the soul
represented in this Psalm: And which we shall therefore apply our selves unto
in an especial manner, in its proper place.

Our Exhortation then is unto both; to the first, that they would receive it,
that they may have life, to the latter, that they would improve it, that they
may have peace. To the former that they would not overlook, disregard, or
neglect so great salvation as is tendered unto them; to the latter, that they
would stir up the Grace of God that is in them, to mix with the Grace of God
that is declared unto them.

I shall begin with the first sort, those who are yet utter strangers from the
Covenant of Grace; who never yet upon saving grounds believed this forgiveness;
who never yet once tasted of Gospel Pardon. Poor sinners! this word is unto you.

Be it, that you have heard or read the same word before, or others like unto
it, to the same purpose: It may be often, it may be an hundred times. It is
your concernment to hear it again. God would have it so; The Testimony of Jesus
Christ is thus to be accomplished. This Counsel of God we must declare that we
may be free from the blood of all men, Acts 20. 26, 27. And that not once or
twice, but in preaching the Word, we must be instant in season, out of season,
reproving, rebuking, exhorting, with all long-suffering and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.
2. And for you, woe unto you, when God leaves thus speaking unto you; when he
refuses to Exhort you any more, woe unto you. This is Gods departure from any
person or people, when he will deal with them no more about forgiveness; and
faith he, Woe unto them when I depart from them, Hos. 9. 12. O that God
therefore would give unto such persons, seeing Eyes, and hearing Ears, that the
word of Grace may never more be spoken unto them in vain. Now in our
Exhortation to such persons, we shall proceed gradually, according as the
matter will bear, and the nature of it does require. Consider therefore,

1. That notwithstanding all your sins, all the evil that your own hearts know
you to be guilty of, and that hidden Mass or evil treasure of sin which is in
you, which you are not able to look into; notwithstanding that charge that lies
upon you from your own Consciences, and that dreadful sentence and curse of the
Law which you are obnoxious unto; notwithstanding all the just grounds that you
have to apprehend that God is your Enemy, and will be so unto eternity; yet
there are Terms of Peace and Reconciliation, provided and proposed between him
and your souls. This in the first place is spoken out by the Word we have
insisted on. Whatever else it informs us of, this it positively asserts;
namely, that there is a way whereby sinners may come to be accepted with God:
For there is forgiveness with him that he may be feared. And we hope that we
have not confirmed it by so many Testimonies, by so many Evidences in vain. Now
that you may see how great a privilege this is, and how much your concernment
lies in it; Consider,

1. That this belongs unto you in an especial manner, it is your peculiar
advantage.

It is not so with the Angels that sinned. There were never any terms of Peace
or Reconciliation proposed unto them, nor ever shall be unto Eternity. There is
no way of escape provided for them. Having once sinned, as you have done a
thousand times, God spared them not, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered
them unto Chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 4.

It is not so with them that are dead in their sins, if but one moment past. Ah
how would many souls who are departed it may be not an hour since out of this
world, rejoice for an interest in this privilege, the hearing of Terms of
Peace once more between God and them. But their time is past, their house is
left unto them desolate. As the tree falls, so it must lie: It is appointed
unto all men once to dye, and after that is the Judgment, Heb 9. 27. After
death there are no terms of Peace, nothing but Judgment. The Living, the
living, he alone is capable of this Advantage.

It is not so with them to whom the Gospel is not preached. God suffers them to
walk in their own ways, and calls them not thus to repentance. The Terms of
Reconciliation which some fancy to be offered in the shining of the Sun, and
falling of the rain, never brought souls to peace with God. Life and
Immortality are brought to light only by the Gospel. This is your privilege
who yet live, and yet have the Word sounding in your Ears.

It is not thus with them who have sinned against the Holy Ghost, though yet
alive, and living where the word of forgiveness is preached. God proposes unto
them no terms of Reconciliation. Blasphemy against him, says Christ, shall not
be forgiven, Matthew. 12. 31. There is no forgiveness for such sinners. And we,
if we knew them, ought not to pray for them, 1 John 5. 16. Their sin is unto
death. And what numbers may be in this Condition God knows.

This Word then is unto you; These terms of peace are proposed unto you. This
is that which in an especial manner you are to apply your selves unto. And woe
unto you, if you should be found to have neglected it at the last day.
Wherefore consider,

2. By whom these terms are proposed unto you, and by whom they were procured
for you. By whom are they proposed? Who shall undertake to umpire the business,
the controversy between God and Sinners? No creature doubtless is either meet
or worthy to interpose in this matter. I mean originally on his own account.
For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor?
Wherefore it is God himself who proposes these terms; and not only proposes
them, but invites, exhorts, and persuades you to accept of them. This the whole
Scriptures testify unto. It is fully expressed, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. He has
provided them, he has proposed them, and makes use only of men, of Ministers,
to act in his Name. And excuse us if we are a little earnest with you in this
matter. Alas, our utmost that we can by zeal for his glory, or compassion unto
your souls, raise our thoughts, minds, spirits, words unto, comes infinitely
short of his own pressing earnestness herein. See Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3, 4. Oh
infinite condescension! O blessed Grace! Who is this that thus bespeaks you?
He, against whom you have sinned, of whom you are justly afraid. He whose Laws
you have broken, and whose name you have dishonored; He who needs not you, nor
your Love, nor your Friendship, nor your Salvation. It is He who proposes unto
you these terms of Reconciliation and Peace. Consider the Exhortation of the
Apostle upon this consideration, Heb. 12. 25. See that you refuse not him that
speaks from Heaven. It is God that speaks unto you in this matter: And he
speaks unto you from Heaven. And he does therein forego all the Advantage that
he has against you for your destruction. Woe would be unto your souls, and that
for ever, if you should refuse him.

3. By whom were these Terms procured for you? and by what means? Do not think
that this matter was brought about by chance, or by an ordinary undertaking.
Remember that the proposal made unto you this day cost no less than the price
of the blood of the Son of God. It is the fruit of the travail of his soul. For
this he prayed, he wept, he suffered, he dyed. And shall it now be neglected or
despised by you? Will you yet account the blood of the Covenant to be a common
thing? Will you exclude your selves from all benefit of the purchase of these
terms, and only leave your souls to answer for the Contempt of the price
whereby they were purchased?

4. Consider, that you are sinners, great sinners, cursed sinners; Some of you
it may be, worse than innumerable of your fellow sinners were, who are now in
Hell. God might long since have cast you off everlastingly, from all
expectation of mercy, and have caused all your hopes to perish. Or he might
have lest you alive, and yet have refused to deal with you any more. He could
have caused your Son to go down at noon day, and have given you darkness
instead of vision. He could respite your lives for a season, and yet swear in
his wrath, that you should never enter into his rest. It is now otherwise. How
long it may be so, nor you, nor I know any thing at all. God only knows what
will be your time, what your continuance. We are to speak whilst it is called
to day. And this is that for the present which I have to offer unto you. God
declares that there is forgiveness with him; that your condition is not
desperate nor helpless. There are yet terms of Peace proposed unto you.
Methinks it cannot but seem strange, that poor sinners should not at the least
stir up themselves to enquire after them. When a poor man had sold himself of
old, and his Children to be servants, and parted with the land of his
inheritance unto another because of his poverty; with what heart do you think
did he hear the sound of the Trumpet, when it began to proclaim the year of
Jubilee, wherein he and all his were to go out at liberty, and to return unto
his possession and Inheritance? And shall not poor servants of sin, slaves unto
Satan, that have forfeited all their Inheritance in this world, and that which
is to come, attend unto any Proclamation of the year of Rest, of the acceptable
year of the Lord? And this is done in the tender of terms of Peace with God in
this matter. Do not put it off; this thing belongs unto you; The great
concernment of your souls lies in it. And it is a great matter; for consider,

5. That when the Angels came to bring the news of the Birth of our Lord Jesus,
they say, we bring tidings of great joy to the whole people, Luke 2. 10. What
are these joyful tidings? What was the matter of this report? Why, this day is
born a Savior, Christ the Lord, v. 11. It is only this; a Savior is born; a
way of escape is provided, and further they do not proceed. Yet this they say
is a matter of great joy, as it was indeed. It is so to every burdned convinced
sinner, a matter of unspeakable joy and rejoicing. Oh blessed words! a Savior
is born. This gives life to a sinner, and opens a door of hope in the valley of
Achor. The first rescue of a sin distressed soul. Upon the matter, it was all
that the Saints for many Ages had to live upon; and that not in the enjoyment,
but only the expectation. They lived on that Word, the seed of the Woman shall
break the Serpents head; that is, a way of deliverance is provided for sinners.
This with all diligence they enquired into, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. and improved
it to their eternal advantage. As of old, Jacob when he saw the Wagons that
his Son Joseph had sent to bring him unto him, it is said his Spirit revived:
So did they upon their obscure discovery of a way of forgiveness. They looked
upon the Promise of it as that which God had sent to bring them unto him; and
they saw the day of the coming of Christ in it, and rejoiced. How much more
have Sinners now Reason so to do, when the substance of the Promise is
exhibited, and the news of his Comeing proclaimed unto them. This then is a
great matter; namely, that terms of Peace and Reconciliation are proposed; in
that it is made known, that there is forgiveness with God. Upon these
Considerations then we pursue that Exhortation which we have in hand.

If any of you were justly condemned to a cruel and shameful death, and lay
trembling in the expectation of the execution of it, and a man designed for
that purpose should come unto him, and tell him that there were terms
propounded on which his life might be spared, only he came away like Ahimaaz
before he heard the particulars; would it not be a reviving unto him? would he
not cry out, Pray enquire what they are, for there is not any thing so
difficult which I will not undergo to free my self from this miserable
condition? Would it not change the whole frame of the spirit of such a man, and
as it were put new life into him? But now if instead hereof, he should be
froward, stubborn and obstinate, take no notice of the Messenger, or say, Let
the Judge keep his terms to himself, without inquiring what they are; that he
would have nothing to do with them; would not such a person be deemed to perish
deservedly? does he not bring a double destruction upon himself; first of
deserving death by his crimes, and then by refusing the honest and good way of
delivery tendered unto him? I confess it often times falls out, that men may
come to enquire after these terms of Peace, which when they are revealed, they
like them not, but with the young man in the Gospel they go away sorrowful.
The cursed wickedness and misery of which condition, which befalls many
convinced persons, shall be spoken unto afterward. At present I speak unto
them who never yet attended in sincerity unto these terms, nor seriously
enquired after them. Think you what you please of your Condition, and of your
selves; or choose whether you will think of it or no, pass your time in a full
regardlesness, of your present and future Estate. Yet indeed thus it is with
you, as to your eternal concerns; you lie under the sentence of a bitter,
shameful, and everlasting death; you have done so in the midst of all your
jollity, ever since you came into this world: And you are in the hand of him,
who can in the twinkling of an eye destroy both body and soul in Hell fire. In
this state and condition, men are sent on purpose, to let you know that there
are terms of Peace, there is yet a way of escape for you: And that you may not
avoid the issue aimed at, they tell you, that God that cannot lie, has
commanded them to tell you so; if you question the truth of what they say, they
are ready to produce their warrant under Gods own hand and seal; here then is
no room for tergiversation or excuses. Certainly, if you have any care of your
eternal estate, if you have any drop of tender blood running in your veins
toward your own souls, if you have any rational considerations dwelling in
your minds, if all be not defaced and obliterated through the power of lust,
and love of sin, you cannot but take your selves to be unspeakably concerned in
this proposal; But now if instead hereof, you give up your selves unto the
power of unbelief, the will of Satan, the love of your lusts, and this present
world, so as to take no notice of this errand or message from God, nor once
seriously to enquire after the nature and importance of the terms proposed, Can
you escape? shall you be delivered? will your latter end be peace? The Lord
knows it will be otherwise with you, and that unto Eternity.

So the Apostle assures us: 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of
them that believe not, lest the light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is
the Image of God, should shine into them. If you receive not this word, if it
be bid from you, it is from the power and efficacy of Satan upon your minds.
And what will be the end? Perish you must, and shall, and that for ever.

Remember the Parable of our Savior, Luke 14. 31, 32. What King, going to make
war, against another King, sits not down first, and consulteth whether he
be able with Ten Thousand to meet him that comes against him with Twenty
Thousand; or else while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an
Embassage and desires conditions of Peace. That which he teaches in this
Parable is, the necessity that lies on us, of making peace with God, whom we
have provoked, and justly made to be our Enemy; as also our utter impotency to
resist and withstand him, when he shall come forth in a way of Judgment and
Vengeance against us. But here lies a difference in this matter, such as is
allowed in all similitudes; Amongst men at variance, it is not his part who is
the stronger, and secure of success, to send to the weaker, whom he has in his
Power, to accept of terms of Peace. Here it is otherwise, God who is infinitely
powerful, justly provoked, and able to destroy poor sinners in a moment; when
now he is not very far off, but at the very door, sends himself an Embassage
with Conditions of Peace. And shall he be refused by you? will you yet neglect
his offers? How great then will be your destruction?

Hear then once more poor sin-hardened senseless souls, ye stouthearted, that
are far from Righteousness. Is it nothing unto you, that the great and holy God
whom ye have provoked all your days, and whom you yet continue to provoke, who
has not the least need of you or your salvation, who can when he pleases
eternally glorify himself in your destruction, should of his own accord send
unto you, to let you know that he is willing to be at peace with you, on the
terms he had prepared? The Enmity began on your part, the danger is on your
part only; and he might justly expect that the message for peace should begin
on your part also; But he begins with you; and shall he be rejected? The
Prophet well expresses this, Isa. 30. 15. Thus says the Lord God, the holy
One of Israel, in returning and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and
confidence shall be your strength, and you would not. The Love and
Condescension that is in these words, on the one hand, on the part of God, and
the folly and ingratitude mentioned in them on the other hand is inexpressible.
They are fearful words; But you would not. Remember this against another day.
As our Savior says in the like manner to the Jews; You will not come unto
me, that ye may have life. Whatever is pretended, it is will and stubbornness
that lie at the bottom of this refusal.

Wherefore, that either You may obtain Advantage by it, or that the way of the
Lord may be prepared for the Glorifying of himself upon you, I shall leave this
word before all them that hear, or read it, as the Testimony which God requires
to be given unto his Grace. There are terms of peace with God provided for you
and tendered unto you; It is yet called to day, harden not your hearts, like
them of old, who could not enter into the Rest of God, by reason of unbelief,
Heb. 3. 19. Some of you, it may be, are old in sins, and unacquainted with God;
some of you, it may be, have been great sinners, scandalous sinners; and some
of you, it may be, have reason to apprehend your selves near the grave, and so
also to hell; some of you it may be, have your Consciences disquieted and
galled; and it may be some of you are under some outward Troubles, and
Perplexities, that cause you a little to look about you; and some of you it may
be are in the madness of your natural strength and lusts; your breasts are full
of milk, and your bones of marrow, and your hearts of sin, pride and contempt
of the ways of God; All is one; This word is unto you all; And I shall only
mind you, That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
You hear the voice, or read the words of a poor worm, but the Message is the
Message, and the Word is the Word of him who shakes Heaven and Earth. Consider
then well what you have to do; and what answer you will return unto him who
will not be mocked.

But you will say; Why, what great matter is there that you have in hand? why
is it urged with so much earnestness? We have heard the same words an hundred
times over. The last Lords day, such a one, or such a one preached to the same
purpose; And what need it be insisted on now again, with so much importunity?

But is it so indeed; that you have thus frequently been dealt withal, and do
yet continue in an Estate of irreconciliation; my heart is pained for you, to
think of your woeful and almost remediless condition. If he that being often
reproved, and yet stiffeneth his neck, shall perish suddenly, and that without
remedy, Prove. 29. 1. how much more will he do so, who being often invited unto
Peace with God, yet hardens his heart, and refuses to treat with him?
Methinks I hear his voice concerning you; Those mine enemies, they shall not
taste of the Supper that I have prepared. Be it then that the word in hand is a
common word unto you, you set no value upon it; then take your way and course
in sin; stumble, fall, and perish; It is not so slight a matter to poor
convinced sinners, that tremble at the Word of God. These will prize it, and
improve it. We shall follow then that counsel, Prove. 31. 6. Give strong drink
unto him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of an heavy heart.
We shall tender this New Wine of the Gospel to poor sad hearted, conscience
distressed sinners; sinners that are ready to perish; to them it will be
pleasant, they will drink of it, and forget their poverty, and remember their
misery no more. It shall take away all their sorrow and sadness; when you shall
be drunk with the fruit of your lusts, and spue, and lie down, and not rise
again.

But now if any of you shall begin to say in your hearts, that you would
willingly treat with God; oh that the day were come wherein we might approach
unto him! let him speak what he pleases, and propose what terms he pleases,
we are ready to hear. Then consider,

Secondly, That the Terms provided for you, and proposed unto you, are equal,
holy, righteous, yea pleasant, and easy. This being another General Head of
our work in hand, before I proceed to the further explication and confirmation
of it, I shall educe one or two Observations from what has been delivered on
the first. As,

1. See here on what foundation we preach the Gospel. Many disputes there are,
whether Christ died for all individuals of Mankind or no; if we say No, but
only for the Elect who are some of all sorts; some then tell us, we cannot
invite all men promiscuously to believe. But why so; we invite not men, as all
men; no man, as one of all men, but all men as Sinners: And we know that Christ
died for Sinners. But is this the first thing, that we are in the dispensation
of the Gospel to propose to the Soul of a sinner, under the Law; That Christ
dyed for him in particular. Is that the beginning of our Message unto him? were
not this a ready way to induce him to conclude, Let me then continue in sin
that Grace may abound; No; but this is in order of Nature our first work; even
that which we have had in hand. This is the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. This is the voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way
of the Lord. There is a way of Reconciliation provided. God is in Christ
reconciling the World to himself. There is a way of acceptance; there is
Forgiveness with him to be obtained. At this Threshold of the Lords house, does
the greatest part of men to whom the Gospel is preached fall and perish, never
looking in to see the Treasures that are in the house it self; never coming
into any such state and condition, wherein they have any ground or bottom to
enquire, whether Christ dyed for them in particular or no. They believe not
this report, nor take any serious notice of it. This was the Ministry of the
Baptist, and they who received it not, rejected the counsel of God concerning
their salvation, Luke 7. 10. And so perished in their sins. This is the sum
of the blessed invitation given by Wisdom, Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And here men
stumble, fall, and perish, Prove. 1. 29, 30.

2. You that have found grace and favor to accept of these terms, and thereby
to obtain peace with God; Learn to live in an holy Admiration of his
condescension and love therein. That he would provide such terms; That he would
reveal them unto you; that he would enable you to receive them. Unspeakable
Love and Grace lies in it all. Many have not these terms revealed unto them;
few find favor to accept of them; and of whom is it that you have obtained
this peculiar mercy?

Do you aright consider the nature of this matter? The Scripture proposes it
as an object of eternal admiration, So God loved the World; herein is love, not
that we loved God, but he loved us first. Live in this Admiration, and do your
utmost in your several capacities to prevail with your Friends, Relations,
Acquaintance, to hearken after this great treaty of peace with God, whose terms
we shall nextly consider, as before in general they were expressed.

Terms of Peace with God, Equal and Holy.
2. The terms provided for you, and proposed unto you, are equal, holy,
righteous, yea pleasant and easy, Hes. 2. 18, 19. They are not such, as a
cursed guilty sinner might justly expect, but such as are meet for an
infinitely Good and Gracious God to propose; not suited to the Wisdom of man,
but full of the wisdom of God, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7. The poor convinced wretch,
thinking of dealing with God, Micah 6. 6, 7. rolls in his mind what terms he is
like to meet withal; and fixes on the most dreadful, difficult, and
impossible that can be imagined. If says he any thing be done with this Great
and most high God, it must be by Rivers, Thousands, and Ten Thousands,
Children, first born; whatever is dreadful and terrible to Nature, whatever is
impossible for me to perform, that is it which he looks for. But the matter is
quite otherwise. The terms are wholly of another nature; it is a way of mere
mercy, a way of free forgiveness. The Apostle lays it down, Romans 3. 23, 24, 25.
it is a way of propitiation, of pardon, of forgiveness in the blood of Christ;
the Terms are the Acceptance of the forgiveness that we have described. Who
would not think now that the whole world would run in to be made partakers of
these terms, willingly accepting of them. But it proves for the most part quite
otherwise. Men like not this way of all others. It had been something, says
Naaman, if the Prophet had come and done so and so; but this, Go, wash and be
clean, I do not like it, I am but deluded. Men think within themselves, that
had it been some great thing that was required of them that they might be
saved, they would with all speed address themselves thereunto; but to come to
God by Christ, to be freely forgiven without more ado, they like it not. Some
rigid austere penances, some compensatory obedience, some satisfactory
mortification, or Purgatory, had been a more likely way. This of mere pardon in
and by the Cross, it is but folly, 1 Cor. 1. 18. 20. I had rather, says the
Jew, have it as it were by the works of the Law, Romans 9. 32. and Chap. 10. 3.
This way of Grace and Forgiveness, I like not. So say others also. So practice
others every day; either this way is wholly rejected, or it is mended by some
additions; which with God, is all one with the rejection of it.

Here multitudes of Souls deceive themselves and perish. I know not whether be
more difficult, to persuade an unconvinced person to think of any terms, or a
convinced Person to accept of these. Let men say what they will, and pretend
what they please; yet practically they like not this way of Forgiveness. I
shall therefore offer some subservient Considerations, tending to the
furtherance of your Souls, in the Acceptance of the Terms proposed.

1. This is the way, these are Terms of Gods own choosing; He found out this
way, he established it himself. He did it when all was lost, and undone. He did
it not upon our desire, request, or proposal, but merely of his own Accord, and
why should we contend with him about it? If God will have us saved in a way of
mere mercy and forgiveness; If his Wisdom and Sovereignty be in it, shall we
oppose him, and say we like it not? Yet this is the language of unbelief, Romans
10. 3, 4. Many poor Creatures have disputed it with God, until at length being
overpowered as it were by the Spirit, have said, If it must be so, and God
will save us by Mercy and Grace, let it be so, we yield our selves to his will;
and yet throughout their disputes dreamed of nothing but that their own
unworthiness only kept them from closing with the Promise of the Gospel.

Of this nature was that way of Satan whereby he deceived our first Parents of
their Interest in the Covenant of works; the terms of it, says he, as
apprehended by you, are unequal. Yea, has God said, ye shall eat of every Tree
of the Garden, but of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, ye shall not eat,
lest ye die; come, you shall not dye, for God does know in the day you eat
thereof your eyes shall be opened. There is no proportion between the
disobedience and the threatening. The Issue cannot be such as is feared. And by
these means he ruined them. Thus also he proceeds to deprive Souls of their
Interest in the Covenant of Grace, whereunto they are invited. The Terms of it
are unequal, how can any man believe them? There is no proportion between the
Obedience and the Promise. To have pardon, forgiveness, life, and blessed
Eternity on believing, who can rest in it? And here lies a conspiracy between
Satan and unbelief, against the Wisdom, Goodness, Love, Grace and Sovereignty
of God. The poison of this deceit lies in this; that neither the Righteousness,
nor the Mercy of God is of that infiniteness, as indeed they are. The Apostle
to remove this fond imagination, calls us to the pleasure of God, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, that is by the Gospel preached,
which they esteemed foolishness, to save Believers. He suffered men indeed to
make trial of other ways; and when their insufficiency for the Ends men
proposed to themselves was sufficiently manifested, it pleased him to reveal
his way. And what are we, that we should contend about it with him? This
Rejection of the way of personal Righteousness, and choosing the way of Grace
and Forgiveness, God asserts, Jerem. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel
and the house of Judah. Not according to the Covenant which I made with their
Fathers: (in which Administration of the Covenant as far as it had respect unto
Typical mercies, much depended on their personal obedience) But this shall be
the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after these days,
says the Lord, -- I will put my Laws, etc. and I will forgive their
iniquities, and remember their sins no more. Let then this way stand, and the
way of man's Wisdom and self Righteousness perish for ever.

2. This is the way that above all others atends directly and immediately to
the Glory of God. God has managed and ordered all things in this way of
forgiveness, so as no flesh should glory in his presence, but that he that
glories should glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 29. 31. Where then is Boasting? it
is excluded; by what Law? by the Law of Works; nay, but by the Law of Faith,
Romans 3. 27. It might be easily manifested, that God has so laid the design of
saving Sinners by Forgiveness according to the Law of Faith, that it is utterly
impossible that any Soul should on any account whatever have the least Ground
of Glorying, or boasting in its self, either absolutely, or in comparison with
them that perish. If Abraham, says the same Apostle, were justified by works,
he had whereof to glory, but not before God, Chap. 4. 2. The Obedience of works
would have been so infinitely disproportionate to the Reward, which was God
himself, that there had been no glorying before God; but therein his Goodness
and Grace must be acknowledged; yet in comparison with others who yielded not
the Obedience required, he would have had wherein to glory; But now this also
is cast off by the way of forgiveness, and no pretense is left for any to claim
the least share in the Glory of it but God alone; and herein lies the
excellency of Faith, that it gives glory unto God, Romans 4. 20. the denial
whereof under various pretenses is the issue of proud unbelief. And this is
that which God will bring all unto, or they shall perish; Namely, that shame be
ours, and the whole Glory of our salvation be his alone. So he expresses his
design, Isa. 45. 22, 23, 24, 25. v. 22. he proposes himself as the only relief
for Sinners; Look unto me, (says he) and be saved, all ye ends of the Earth;
But what if men take some other course, and look well to themselves, and so
decline this way of mere Mercy and Grace, wh^ says he, v. 23. I have sworn by
my self, the Word is gone out of my mouth in Righteousness, and shall not
return, that unto me, every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear. Look
you unto that; but I have sworn that you shall either do so, or answer your
disobedience at the day of Judgment; whereunto Paul applies those words, Romans
14. 11. what do the Saints hereupon? v. 24, 25. Surely shall one say, in the
Lord have I Righteousness and strength. In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory. They bring their hearts to accept of all
Righteousness from him, and to give all Glory unto him.

God at first placed Man in a blessed state and condition, in such a dependence
on himself, as that he might have wrought out his Eternal happiness with a
great Reputation of Glory unto himself. Man being in this honor, says the
Psalmist, abode not. God now fixes on another way, as I said, wherein all the
Glory shall be his own, as the Apostle at large sets it forth, Romans 3. 23, 24,
25, 26. Now neither the way from which Adam fell, nor that wherein some of the
Angels continued, which for the substance were the same, is to be compared with
this of Forgiveness, as to the bringing Glory unto God. I hate curiosities and
conjectures in the things of God: Yet upon the account of the interposition of
the blood of Christ, I think I may boldly say, there comes more glory to God,
by saving one sinner in this way of Forgiveness, than in giving the reward of
blessedness to all the Angels in Heaven; So seems it to appear, from that
solemn Representation, we have of the Ascription of Glory to God by the whole
Creation, Revel. 5. 9. 10, 11, 12, 13. All centers in the bringing forth
Forgiveness by the blood of the Lamb.

I insist the more on this, because it lies so directly against that cursed
Principle of Unbelief, which reigns in the hearts of the most, and often
disquiets the best. That a poor ungodly sinner, going to God with the guilt of
all his sins upon him, to receive Forgiveness at his hand, does bring more
Glory unto him, than the obedience of an Angel, men are not over-ready to
think, nor can be prepared for it, but by it self. And the formal nature of
that unbelief which works in Convinced Sinners, lies in a refusal to give
unto God the whole glory of Salvation. There are many hurtful Controversies in
Religion that are managed in the World with great noise and clamor; but this
is the greatest and most pernicious of them all, and it is for the most part
silently transacted in the souls of men; although under various forms and
pretenses. It has also broken forth in writings and disputations, that is,
Whether God or man shall have the Glory of Salvation; or whether it shall
wholly be ascribed unto God, or that man also on one account or other, may come
in for a share. Now if this be the state and condition with any of you, that
you will rather perish, than God should have his Glory, what shall we say, but
Go ye cursed souls, perish for ever, without the least compassion from God, or
any that love him, Angels or Men.

If you shall say, for your parts you are contented with this course, let God
have the glory, so you may be forgiven and saved; There is yet just cause to
suspect, lest this be a selfish contempt of God. It is a great thing to give
Glory unto God by believing, in a due manner. Such slight returns seem not to
have the least relation unto it. Take heed that instead of believing, you be
not found mockers, and so your bands be made strong.

But a poor Convinced Sinner may here find encouragement, Thou would
willingly come to Acceptance with God, and so attain Salvation; Oh my soul
longs for it; would thou willingly take that course for the obtaining those
ends which will bring most Glory unto God? Surely it is meet and most equal
that I should do so; What now if one should come and tell thee from the Lord of
a way, whereby thou poor, sinful, self condemned creature, might bring as
much Glory unto God, as any Angel in Heaven is able to do? Oh, if I might
bring the least glory unto God, I should rejoice in it. Behold then the way
which himself has fixed on for the exaltation of his Glory: Even, that thou
should come to him merely upon the account of Grace in the blood of Christ,
for pardon and forgiveness, and the Lord strengthen thee to give up thy self
thereunto.

3. Consider, That if this way of salvation be refused, there is no other way
for you. We do not propose this way of forgiveness as the best and most
pleasant, but as the only way. There is no other Name given but that of Christ;
no other way but this of Forgiveness. Here lies your choice; take this path, or
perish for ever. It is a shame indeed unto our cursed nature that there should
be any need to use this Argument, that we will neither submit to Gods
Sovereignty, nor delight in his Glory. But seeing it must be used, let it be
so. I intend neither to flatter men, nor to frighten them; but to tell them the
truth as it is. If you continue in your present state, and condition, if you
rest on what you do, or what you hope to do, if you support your selves with
general hopes of mercy, mixed with your own endeavors and obedience, if you
come not up to a through Gospel-closure with this way of God, if you make it
not your All, giving Glory to God therein; perish you will, and must, and that
to Eternity. There remains no more sacrifice for your sins, nor way of escape
for your Souls. You have not then only the excellency of this way to invite
you, but the absolute indispensable necessity of this way to enforce you. And
now let me add, that I am glad this Word is spoken, is written unto you. You
and I must one day be accountable for this discourse. That word that has
already been spoken, if neglected, will prove a sore Testimony against you. It
will not fare with you, as with other men who have not heard the Joyful sound.
All these words that shall be found consonant to the Gospel, if they are not
turned to Grace in your hearts here, will turn into Torment unto your Souls
hereafter. Choose not any other way, it will be in vain for you; it will not
profit you; and take heed lest you suppose you Embrace this way, when indeed
you do not, about which I have given Caution before.

4. This way is free and open for and unto sinners. He that fled to the City of
Refuge, might well have many perplexed thoughts, whether he should find the
Gates of it opened unto him or no, and whether the Avenger of blood might not
overtake and slay him, whilst he was calling for entrance. Or if the Gates
were always open, yet some crimes excluded men thence. Numb. 35. 24. It is not
so here. Acts 13. 38, 39.

This is the voice of God even the Father; come says he to the Marriage, for
all things are prepared, no fear of want of entertainment, Matthew. 22. 4. whence
the Preachers of the Gospel are said in his stead to beseech men to be
reconciled, 2 Cor. 5. 18. And

It is the voice of the Son; whosoever, says he, comes to God by me, I will
in no wise cast out, John 6. 37. Who ere he be that comes shall assuredly find
entertainment; the same is his call and invitation in other places, as Matthew.
11. 28. John 7. 37. and

This is the voice of the Spirit, and of the Church, and of all Believers,
Revel. 22. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that hears say
Come; and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take of the
water of life freely; All center in this, that sinners may come freely to the
Grace of the Gospel. And

It is the known voice of the Gospel it self, as Isa. 55. 1, 2, 3. Prove. 9. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. And it is the voice of all the Saints in Heaven and Earth, who have
been made partakers of Forgiveness, they all testify, that they received it
freely.

Some indeed endeavor to abuse this concurrent Testimony of God and Man. What
is spoken of the freedom of the Grace of God, they would wrest to the power of
the Will of man: But the riches and freedom of Gods mercy do not in the least
enterfere with the efficacy of his Grace. Though he proclaim pardon in the
blood of Christ indefinitely, according to the fullness and excellency of it,
yet he gives out his quickening Grace to enable men to receive it, as he
pleases, for he has mercy on whom he will have mercy. But this lies in the
thing it self, the way is open and prepared, and it is not because men cannot
enter, but because they will not, that they do not enter. As our Savior Christ
tells the Pharisees, Ye therefore hear not Gods Word, because ye are not of
God. Joh. 8. 47. and Joh. 6. 44. So he does, Ye will not come unto me that you
may have life, Joh. 5. 40. In the neglect, and inadvertency of the most
excusable, there is a positive Act of their Will put forth in the refusing of
Christ and Grace by him. And this is done by men under the preaching of the
Gospel every day. There is nothing that at the last day will tend more
immediately to the advancement of the Glory of God, in the inexcusableness of
them who obey not the Gospel, than this, that Terms of Peace in the blessed way
of Forgiveness were freely tendered unto them. Some that hear or read this Word,
may perhaps have lived long under the dispensation of the Word of Grace, and
yet it may be have never once seriously pondered on this way of comeing to God
by Forgiveness through the blood of Christ; but think, that going to Heaven is
a thing of course, that men need not much trouble themselves about; do they
know what they have done? hitherto all their days they have positively refused
the salvation, that has been freely tendered unto them in Jesus Christ. Not
they, they will say, they never had such a thought, nor would for all this World.
But be it known unto you, in as much as you have not effectually received him,
you have refused him, and whether your day and season be past or no, the Lord
only knows.

5. This Way is safe. No soul ever miscarried in it. There is none in Heaven
but will say it is a safe way; There is none in Hell can say otherwise. It is
safe to all that venture on it, so as to enter into it. In the old way we were
to preserve our selves and the way. This preserves it self and us; This will be
made evident by the ensuing considerations.

1. This is the Way which in the Wisdom, Care, and Love of God in Christ, was
provided in the room of another, removed and taken out of the way for this
cause and reason, because it was not safe, nor could bring us unto God, Heb. 8.
7, 8. For if the First Covenant had been faultless, then should no place have
been sought for the Second; but finding fault with them, he says. And,

1. He tells us, that the first Covenant was not faultless, for if it had,
there would have been no need of a Second. The Commandment indeed, which was
the matter of that Covenant, the same Apostle informs us to be holy, just, and
good, Romans 7. 12. But it was faulty as to all ends of a Covenant, considering
our state and condition as sinners; it could not bring us unto God. So he
acquaints us Romans 8. 3. It was made weak through the flesh; that is, by the
entrance of sin, and so became unusefull as to the saving of souls. Be it so
then; through our sin and default this good and holy Law, this Covenant was
made unprofitable unto us; But what was that unto God? was he bound to desert
his own Institution and Appointment, because through our own default it ceased
to be profitable unto us? Not at all; He might righteously have tied us all
unto the terms of that Covenant, to stand or fall by them unto Eternity. But he
would not do so. But

Secondly, In his Love and Grace, he finds fault with it, v. 8. not in its
self, and absolutely, but only so far as that he would provide another way,
which should supply all its defects and wants in reference to the end aimed at.
What way that is, the Apostle declares in the following Verses to the end of
that Chapter. The sum is, v. 12. I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their Iniquities will I remember no more.
It is the way of pardon and forgiveness: This is substituted in the room of
that insufficient way that was removed.

Let us consider then, whether the infinitely Wise and Holy God, pursuing his
purpose of bringing souls unto himself, laying aside one way of his own
appointment as useless, and infirm, because of the coming in of sin, against
which there was no relief found in it, and substituting another way in the room
of it; would not provide such an one, as should be absolutely free from the
faults and inconveniences, which he charged upon that, which he did remove.
That which alone rendered the former way faulty was sin; it could do any thing
but save a sinner; this then was to be, and is principally provided against in
this way of Forgiveness. And we see here, how clearly God has severed, yea and
in this matter opposed these two things, (1.) Namely, the way of personal
Righteousness, and the way of forgiveness. He finds fault with the first; what
then does he do? what course does he take? does he mend it, take from it what
seems to be redundant, mitigate its severity, and supply it where it was
wanting, by Forgiveness, and so set it up anew? This indeed is the way that
many proceed in in their notions, and the most in their practice. But this is
not the way of God. He takes the one utterly away, and establishes the other in
its place. And men's endeavors to mix them will be found of little use to them
at the last. I can have no great expectation from that which God pronounced
faulty.

(2.) The unchangeable Principles and Foundations that this Way is built upon,
render it secure and safe for sinners, for,

1. It is founded on the Purpose of God, Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify the Heathen through Faith. God would do so, he had
purposed and determined to proceed this way; and all the purposes of God are
attended with immutability; and

2. His Promise also is engaged in it, and that given out in the way of a
Covenant, as has been already declared; and

3. This Promise is confirmed by an Oath; and it may be observed, that God does
not in any thing interpose with an Oath, but what relates to this way of coming
to himself by Forgiveness. For the Oath of God wherever it is used, respects
either Christ Typically, or personally, or the Covenant established in him; for,

4. This Way is confirmed and ratified in his Blood; from whence the Apostle at
large evinceth its absolute security and safety, Heb. 9. Whatever soul then on
the invitation under consideration, shall give up himself to come to God, by
the way proposed; he shall assuredly find absolute peace, and security in it.
Neither our own weakness, or folly from within, nor the opposition of any of
all our Enemies from without, shall be able to turn us out of this Way. See
Isa. 35. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

3. In the other way, every individual person stands upon his own bottom, and
must do so, to the last, and utmost of his continuance in this World. You are
desirous to go unto God, to obtain his favor, and come to an enjoyment of him.
What will you do? What course will you fix upon, for the obtaining of these
Ends? if you were so holy, so perfect, so righteous, so free from sin as you
could desire, you should have some boldness in going unto God; why if this be
the way you fix upon, take this along with you: You stand upon your own
personal Account all your days. And if you fail in the least you are gone for
ever. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he
is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10. And what peace can you possibly obtain, were you
as holy as ever you aimed or desired to be, whilst this is your Condition? But
in this way of Forgiveness, we all stand upon the Account of one common
Mediator in whom we are complete. Col. 3. 10. And a want of a due improvement
of this Truth, is a great principle of disconsolation to many Souls. Suppose a
man look upon himself as loosed from the Covenant of Works, wherein exact and
perfect Righteousness is rigidly required; and to be called unto Gospel
Evangelical Obedience to be performed in the room thereof, in sincerity and
integrity; yet if he be not cleared in this also, that he stands not in this
way purely on his own account, he will never be able to make his Comforts hold
out to the end of his Journey. There will be found in the best of men so many
particular failings, as will seem in difficult seasons to impeach their
integrity; And so many questionings will after arise, through the darkness of
their minds, and Power of their Temptations, as will give but little rest unto
their Souls. Here lies the great security of this way; We abide in it on the
account of the faithfulness and Ability of our Common Mediator Jesus Christ.

And this is another Consideration, strengthening our invitation to a closure
with the way of coming unto God, under proposal. There is nothing wanting that
is needful to give infallible Security to any Soul, that shall venture himself
into it and upon it. There are Terms of peace proposed, as you have heard.
These terms are excellent, and holy, and chosen of God, tending to the interest
of his Glory; free, safe, and secure unto sinners. What has any soul in the
World to object against them? or wherein do men repose their Trust and
Confidence in the neglect of this so great Salvation? Is it in their Lusts, and
sins, that they will yield them as much satisfaction and contentment as they
shall need to desire? Alas, they will ruin them, and bring forth nothing but
death. Is it in the World? it will deceive them; the figure of it passes away.
Is it in their Duties, and Righteousness? they will not relieve them; for did
they follow the Law of Righteousness, they could not obtain the Righteousness
of the Law. Is it in the continuance of their lives? Alas, it is but a shadow,
a vapor that appears for a little while. Is it in a future Amendment and
Repentance? Hell is full of souls perishing under such Resolutions. Only this
way of pardon remains, and yet of all others is most despised. But yet I have
one consideration more to add before I further enforce the Exhortation.

6. Consider, that this is the only Way and means to enable you unto obedience,
and to render what you do therein acceptable unto God. It may be that some of
you are under the power of Convictions, and have made Engagements unto God, to
live unto him, to keep your selves from fin, and to follow after holiness. It
may be you have done so in Afflictions, dangers, sicknesses, or upon the
receipt of mercies; but yet you find that you cannot come unto stability or
constancy in your course; you break with God and your own Souls, which fills
you with new disquietments, or else hardens you, and makes you secure and
negligent; so that you return unto your purposes no oftener, than your
Convictions or Afflictions befall you anew. This condition is ruinous and
pernicious, which nothing can deliver you from, but this closing with
forgiveness. For,

1. All that you do without this, however it may please your minds or ease your
Consciences, is not at all accepted with God. Unless this foundation be laid,
all that you do is lost. All your Prayers, all your Duties, all your amendments
are an abomination unto the Lord. Until peace is made with him, they are but
the Acts of Enemies, which he despises and abhors. You run it may be
earnestly, but you run out of the way; you strive, but not lawfully, and shall
never receive the Crown. True Gospel-obedience is the fruit of the Faith of
Forgiveness. Whatever you do without it, is but a building without a
foundation, a Castle in the air. You may see the order of Gospel Obedience,
Ephesians. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. The foundation must be laid in Grace; Riches of Grace by
Christ, in the free pardon, and forgiveness of sin. From hence must the works
of obedience proceed, if you would have them to be of Gods appointment, or
find acceptance with him. Without this God will say of all your Services,
Worship, Obedience, as he did to the Israelites of old; Amos 5. 21, 22, 23, 24,
25. I despise all, reject it all; it is not to him, nor to his Glory. Now if
you are under convictions of any sort, there is nothing you more value, nothing
you more place your confidence in, than your Duties; your Repentance, your
Amendment, what you do, and what in good time you will be. Is it nothing unto
you to lose all your hopes, and all your Expectations which you have from
hence? To have no other Reception with God, than if all this while you had been
wallowing in your sins and lusts? Yet thus it is with you, if you have not
begun with God on his own Terms, if you have not received the Atonement in the
Blood of his Son; if you are not made partakers of Forgiveness, if your persons
are not pardoned, all your Duties are accursed.

2. This alone will give you such Motives and Encouragements unto Obedience, as
will give you Life, Alacrity, and Delight in it. You perform Duties, abstain
from sins, but with heaviness, fear, and in bondage. Could you do as well
without them, as with them, would Conscience be quiet, and hope of Eternity
hold out, you would omit them for ever. This makes all your Obedience
burdensome, and you cry out in your thoughts with him in the Prophet, behold
what a weariness it is! the service of God is the only drudgery of your lives,
which you dare not omit, and delight not to perform. From this wretched and
cursed frame, there is nothing can deliver you, but this closing with
forgiveness. This will give you such motives, such encouragements, as will
greatly influence your hearts and souls. It will give you freedom, liberty,
delight, and cheerfulness in all duties of Gospel Obedience. You will find a
constraining power in the love of Christ therein; a freedom from bondage, when
the Son truly has made you free. Faith and love will work genuinely and
naturally in your spirits; and that which was your greatest burden, will become
your chiefest joy: 2 Cor. 7. 1. Thoughts of the Love of God, of the Blood of
Christ, or the Covenant of Grace, and sense of pardon in them, will enlarge
your hearts, and sweeten all your duties. You will find a new life, a new
pleasure, a new satisfaction, in all that you do. Have you yet ever understood
that of the Wiseman, Prove. 3. 17. The ways of Wisdom are pleasantness, and her
paths are peace? Have the ways of Holiness, of Obedience, of Duties been so
unto you? Whatever you pretend, they are not, they cannot be so, whilst you are
strangers unto that which alone can render them so unto you. I speak unto them
that are under the Law; Would you be free from that bondage, that galling yoke
in duties of Obedience? Would you have all that you do toward God, a delight
and pleasantness unto you? this, and this alone will effect it for you.

3. This will place all your Obedience upon a sure foot of account in your own
Souls and Consciences; even the same that is fixed on in the Gospel. For the
present all that you do, is indeed but to compound with God for your sin; you
hope by what you do for him, and to him, to buy off what you have done against
him; that you may not fall into the hands of his Wrath and Vengeance. This
makes all you do to be irksom. As a man that labors all his days, to pay an
old debt, and brings in nothing to lay up for himself, how tedious and
wearisome is his work and labor to him. It is odds but that at one time or
other, he will give over, and run away from his Creditor. So it is in this
case, men who have secret reserves of recompensing God by their Obedience,
every day find their debt growing upon them; and have every day less hopes of
making a satisfactory payment. This makes them weary, and for the most part
they faint under their discouragements, and at length they fly wholly from God.
This way alone will state things otherwise in your Consciences; It will give
you to see, that all your debts are paid by Christ, and freely forgiven unto
you by God. So that what you do is of Gratitude or thankfulness, has an
influence into Eternity, leads to the Glory of God, the honor of Christ in the
Gospel, and your own comfortable account at the last day. This encourages the
soul to labor, to Trade, to endeavor; all things now looking forward, and
unto his advantage.

4. Find you not in your selves an impotency, a disability unto the duties of
Obedience, as to their performance unto God in an acceptable manner? It may be
you are not so sensible hereof as you ought to be. For respecting only or
principally the outward part and performance of duties, you have not Experience
of your own Weakness. How to enliven and fill up Duties with Faith, Love, and
Delight, you know not; and are therefore unacquainted with your own
insufficiency in this matter; yet if you have any Light, any Convictions, (and
to such I speak at present) you cannot but perceive and understand, that you
are not able in your Obedience to answer what you aim at; you have not strength
or power for it. Now it is this faith of Forgiveness alone that will furnish
you with the Ability, whereof you stand in need. Pardon comes not to the Soul
alone; or rather Christ comes not to the Soul with pardon only. It is that
which he opens the door, and enters by; but he comes with a Spirit of life and
Power. And as without him we can do nothing, so through his enabling us we may
do all things. Receiving of Gospel Forgiveness engages all the grace of the
Gospel unto our assistance.

This is the sum of what has been spoken, the: obedience that you perform
under your convictions is burdensome and unpleasant unto you; it is altogether
unacceptable to God. You lose all you do, and all that you hope to do
hereafter, if the foundation be not laid in the receiving of pardon in the
blood of Christ. It is high time to cast down all that vain and Imaginary
fabric which you have been erecting, and to go about the laying of a new
Foundation, which you may safely and cheerfully build upon; a building that
will abide for ever.

Certainty of the final Ruin of them who believe not.
Again, It is such a way, so excellent, so precious, so near the heart of God,
so relating to the blood of Christ, that the neglect of it will assuredly be
sorely revenged of the Lord. Let not men think that they shall despise the
Wisdom, and Love of the Father, the blood of the Son, and the Promises of the
Gospel, at an easy rate. Let us in a very few words take a view of what the
Holy Ghost speaks to this purpose. There are Three ways whereby the Vengeance
due to the neglect of closing with forgiveness or Gospel Grace is expressed.

1. That is done Positively, He that believes not shall be DAMNED, Mark. 16.
16. That Is a hard word; many men cannot endure to hear of it. They would not
have it named by their good wills, and are ready to fly in the face of him from
whose mouth it proceeds. But let not men deceive themselves, this is the
softest word, that Mercy, and Love it self, that Christ, that the Gospel speaks
to despisers of forgiveness. It is Christ who is this legal terrifying
Preacher; it is he that cries out, if you believe not, you shall be Damned; and
will come himself in flaming fire to take vengeance of them that obey not the
Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. This is the end of the disobedient; if God, if Christ,
if the Gospel may be believed.

2. Comparatively in reference unto the Vengeance due to the breach of the Law,
2 Cor. 2. 16. We are in the preaching of forgiveness by Christ, unto them that
perish, a savor of death unto death, a deep death, a sore Condemnation, so
Heb. 10. 29. Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye he shall be thought
worthy: Sorer than ever was threatened by the Law, or inflicted for the breach
of it; not as to the Kind of punishment, but as to the degrees of it; Hence
arises the addition of many stripes.

3. By the way of Admiration at the unexpressibleness, and unavoidableness of
the punishment due unto such sinners. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation? Surely there is no way for men to escape, they
shall unavoidably perish who neglect so great salvation. So the Holy Ghost
says, 1 Pet. 4. 11. What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel?
What understanding can reach to an apprehension of their miserable and woeful
condition? None can, says the Holy Ghost; nor can it be spoken to their
capacity; ah what shall their end be? There remains nothing, but a certain
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation that shall consume the
Adversaries, Heb. 10. 27. A certain fearful expectation of astonishable things
that cannot be comprehended.

Exhortation to Believing enforced.
And these are the Enforcements of the Exhortation in hand, which I shall insist
upon. On these foundations, on the consideration of these Principles, let us
now a little confer together, with the words of Truth and Sobriety. I speak
to such poor souls, as having deceived themselves, or neglected utterly their
Eternal Condition, are not as yet really, and in Truth made partakers of this
forgiveness. Your present state is sad, and deplorable. There is nothing but
the woeful uncertainty of a dying life between you and Eternal ruin. That
persuasion you have of forgiveness, is Good for nothing but to harden you, and
destroy you. It is not the Forgiveness that is with God. Nor have you taken it
up on Gospel grounds or Evidences. You have stolen painted beads, and take
your selves to be lawful possessors of Pearls and Jewels. As you are then any
way concerned in your own Eternal Condition, which you are entering into, (and
how soon you shall be engaged in it you know not) prevail with your selves to
attend a little unto the Exhortation that lies before you; it is your own
business that you are entreated to have regard unto.

1. Consider seriously what it is you bottom your hopes and expectation upon as
to Eternity. Great men, and in other things wise, are here very apt to deceive
themselves. They suppose they think and believe much otherwise, than indeed
they think and believe, as their cry at the last day will manifest. Put your
souls a little unto it. Do you at all seriously think of these things? Or are
you so under the power of your Lusts, Ignorance, and Darkness, that you neglect
and despise them? Or do you rise up and lie down, and perform some duties, or
neglect them, with a great Coldness, Remisness, and Indifferency of Spirit,
like Gallio not much caring for these things? Or do you relieve your selves
with hopes of future amendment, purposing, that if you live, you will be other
persons than you are, when such and such things are brought about and
accomplished? Or do you not hope well in General upon the account of what you
have done, and will do? If any of these express your condition, it is
unspeakably miserable. You lie down, and rise up under the wrath of the Great
God, who will prevail at last upon you, and there shall be none to deliver. If
you shall say, Nay, This is not our state; we rely on Mercy and Forgiveness;
then let me in the fear of the Great God entreat a few things, yet further of
you.

1. That you would seriously consider, whether the forgiveness you rest on, and
hope in, be that Gospel Forgiveness which we have before described? or is it
only a General Apprehension of Impunity, though you are Sinners? That God is
merciful, and you hope in him, that you shall escape the Vengeance of
Hellfire. If it be thus with you, forgiveness it self will not relieve you.
This is that of the presumptuous man, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Gospel-pardon is a thing of
another nature; It has its spring in the Gracious heart of the Father, is made
out by a Sovereign Act of his Will; rendered consistent with the Glory of his
Justice and Holiness by the blood of Christ, by which it is purchased in a
Covenant of Grace, as has been showed; If you shall say, yea, this is the
forgiveness we rely upon, it is that which you have described. Then I desire
further that you would

1. Examine your own hearts, how you came to have an interest in this
Forgiveness, to close with it, and to have a right unto it. A man may deceive
himself as effectually by supposing that True Riches are his, when they are
not, as by supposing his false and counterfeit ware to be good and current; how
then come you to be interested in this. Gospel-forgiveness? If it has befallen
you you know not how, if a lifeless, barren, inoperative persuasion of it has
crept upon your minds; be not mistaken, God will come and require his
forgiveness at your hands, and it shall appear, that you have had no part, nor
portion in it. If you shall say, Nay, but we were convinced of sin, and rendered
exceeding unquiet in our Consciences, and on that account looked out after
Forgiveness, which has given us Rest. Then I desire,

2. That you would diligently consider, to what ends and purposes you have
received, and do make use of this Gospel-forgiveness. Has it been to make up
what was wanting, and to piece up a peace in your own Consciences? that whereas
you could not answer your Convictions with your duties, you would seek for
relief from Forgiveness. This, and innumerable other ways there are, whereby
men may lose their souls when they think all is well with them, even on the
account of Pardon and Mercy. Whence is that caution of the Apostle, Looking
diligently lest any one should seem to fail, or come short of the Grace of God,
Heb. 12. 15. men miss it and come short of it, when they pretend themselves to
be in the pursuit of it; yea to have overtaken and possessed it. Now if any of
these should prove to be your Condition, I desire

3. That you would consider seriously, whether it be not high time for you to
look out for a way of deliverance, and escape, that you may save your selves
from this evil World, and fly from the wrath to come. The Judge stands at the
door. Before he deal with you as a Judge, he knocks with a tender of mercy. Who
knows, but that this may be the last time of his dealing thus with you. Be you
old or young, you have but your season, but your day; it may perhaps be night
with you, when it is day with the rest of the World. Your Sun may go down at
Noon; And God may swear that you shall not enter into his Rest. If you are then
resolved to continue in your present condition, I have no more to say unto you.
I am pure from your blood, in that I have declared unto you the counsel of God
in this thing, and so I must leave you to a naked Trial between the Great God
and your Souls at the last day; poor Creatures, I even tremble to think, how he
will tear you in pieces, when there shall be none to deliver. Me thinks I see
your poor destitute forlorn souls, forsaken of lusts, sins, world, friends,
Angels, Men, Trembling before the Throne of God, full of horror, and fearful
expectation of the dreadful sentence. Oh that I could mourn over you, whilst
you are joined to all the living; whilst there is yet hope, oh that in this
your day, you knew the things of your peace.

But now of you shall say, Nay, but we will seek the Lord whilst he may be
found, we will draw nigh unto him before he cause darkness; then consider, I
pray,

4. What Joshua told the children of Israel, when they put themselves upon such
a Resolution, and cried out, We will serve the Lord our God, chap. 24. v. 19.
Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, a jealous God, he will not
forgive your transgressions, nor your sins. Go to him upon your own Account,
and in your own strength, with your own best endeavors and duties, you will
find him too great, and too holy for you to deal withal. You will obtain
neither Acceptance of your persons, nor Pardon of your sins. But you will say,
this is heavy tidings. If you sit still you perish, and if you rise to be
doing, it will not be better; is there no hope left for our Souls? must we pine
away under our sins and the wrath of God for ever? God forbid. There are yet
other directions remaining to guide you out of these entanglements. Wherefore,

5. Ponder seriously on what has been spoken of this way of approaching unto
God. Consider it in its own nature, as to all the ends and purposes for which
it is proposed of God: Consider, whether you Approve of it or no; do you judge
it a way suited and fitted to bring glory unto God? does it answer all the
wants and distresses of your souls? Do you think it excellent, safe, and
Glorious unto them who are entered unto it? or have you any thing to object
against it? Return your Answer to him in whose Name, and by whose Appointment
these words are spoken unto you. If you shall say, we are convinced that this
way of forgiveness is the only way for the relief and deliverance of our Souls;
Then,

6. Abhor your selves for all your blindness and obstinacy whereby you have
hither to despised the love of God, the blood of Christ, and the Tenders of
Pardon in the Gospel. Be abased and humbled to the dust, in a sense of your
vileness, Pollutions, and Abominations; which things are every day spoken unto,
and need not here be repeated. And,

7. Labor to exercise your hearts greatly with thoughts of that abundant Grace
that is manifested in this way of sinners comeing unto God; as also of the
Excellency of the Gospel wherein it is unfolded. Consider the Eternal Love of
the Father, which is the Fountain and Spring of this whole dispensation; the
inexpressible Love of the Son, in establishing and confirming it, in removing
all hindrances and obstructions by his own blood, bringing forth unto beauty
and Glory this Redemption or Forgiveness of sin, as the price of it. And let
the Glory of the Gospel which alone makes this discovery of Forgiveness in God,
dwell in your hearts. Let your minds be exercised about these things. You will
find effects from them, above all that has as yet been brought forth in your
souls. What for the most part have you hitherto been conversant about? when you
have risen above the turmoyling of lusts and corruptions in your hearts, the
entanglements of your Callings, business, and affairs, what have you been able
to raise your hearts unto? perplexing fears about your Condition, General hopes
without savor or relish, yielding you no refreshment, Legal Commands,
Bondage-duties, distracted Consciences, broken Purposes and Promises which you
have been tossed up and down withal, without any certain rest. And what
Effects have these thoughts produced? have they made you more holy, and more
humble? have they given you delight in God, and strength unto new obedience?
Not at all. Where you were, there you still are without the least progress. But
now bring your Souls unto these Springs; and try the Lord if from that day you
be not blessed with spiritual stores.

8. If the Lord be pleased to carry on your Souls thus far, then stir up your
selves, to choose and close with the way of forgiveness that has been
revealed. Choose it only, choose it in comparison with, and opposition unto all
others. Say you will be for Christ, and not for another, and be so accordingly.
Here venture, here repose, here rest your Souls. It is a way of peace, safety,
Holiness, beauty, strength, power, liberty, and glory; you have the Nature, the
Name, the Love, the Purposes the Promises, the Covenant, the Oath of God; the
Love, Life, Death, or Blood, the Mediation, or Oblation and Intercession of
Jesus Christ; The Power and Efficacy of the Spirit, and Gospel Grace by him
administered, to give you Assurance of the excellency, the oneness, the safety
of the Way, whereunto you are engaging.

If now the Lord shall be pleased to persuade your hearts, and souls, to enter
upon the path marked out before you, and shall carry you on through the various
exercises of it, unto this closure of Faith, God will have the Glory, the
Gospel will be Exalted, and your own Souls shall reap the Eternal benefit of
this Exhortation.

But now if not withstanding all that has been spoken, all the Invitations you
have had, and Encouragements that have been held out unto you, you shall
continue to despise this so great salvation, you will live and dye in the state
and condition wherein you are; why then as the Prophet said to the Wife of
Jeroboam, Come near, for I am sent unto you with heavy Tidings. I say then,

9. If you resolve to continue in the neglect of this Salvation, and shall do
so accordingly, Then Cursed be you of the Lord, with all the Curses that are
written in the Law, and all the Curses that are denounced against Despisers of
the Gospel. Yea, be you Anathema Maranatha; Cursed in this World always,
until the comeing of the Lord, and when the Lord comes, be ye cursed from his
presence into Everlasting destruction. Yea, Curse them all ye holy Angels of
God, as the obstinate Enemies of your King and Head the Lord Jesus Christ.
Curse them all ye Churches of Christ, as despisers of that Love and Mercy which
is your portion, your Life, your Inheritance; Let all the Saints of God, all
that love the Lord, curse them, and rejoice to see the Lord comeing forth
mightily, and prevailing against them to their everlasting ruin. Why should
any one have a thought of compassion toward them, who despise the compassion
of God? or of mercy toward them who trample on the blood of Christ? Whilst
there is yet hope, we desire to have continual sorrow for you; and to travail
in soul for your conversion to God; but if you be hardened in your way, shall
we join with you against him? shall we prefer you above his Glory? shall we
desire your salvation with the despoyling God of his honor? Nay, God forbid,
We hope to rejoice in seeing all that vengeance and indignation, that is in the
right hand of God, poured out unto Eternity upon your Souls: Prove. 1. 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

Rules to be observed by them who would come to stability in Obedience. The
first Rule. Christ the only infallible Judge of our spiritual condition. How he
judges, by his Word and Spirit.

That which remains to be further carried on, upon the Principles laid down,
is to persuade with Souls more or less entangled in the depths of sin, to close
with this Forgiveness by Believing, unto their Peace and Consolation. And
because such persons are full of pleas and objections against themselves, I
shall chiefly in what I have to say, endeavor to obviate these Objections, so
to encourage them unto believing, and bring them unto settlement. And herein
whatever I have to offer, flows naturally from the Doctrine at large laid down
and asserted. Yet I shall not in all particulars apply my self thereunto, but
in General fix on those things that may tend to the Establishment and
Consolation of both distressed and doubting Souls. And I shall do what I
purpose these two ways.

First, I shall lay down such General Rules as are necessary to be observed by
all those who intend to come to Gospel peace and Comfort. And then, Secondly,
shall consider some such Objections as seem to be most comprehensive of those
special reasonings where with distressed persons do usually entangle themselves.

I shall begin with General Rules, which through the Grace of Christ, and
Supplies of his Spirit, may be of use unto Believers in the condition under
consideration.

RULE I.
Christ the only Judge of our spiritual condition.
Be not Judges of your own Condition, but let Christ judge. You are invited to
take the comfort of this Gospel Truth, That there is Forgiveness with God. You
say not for you; so said Jacob; My way is hid from the Lord, Isa. 40. 27. and
Sion said so too, chap. 49. 14. The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has
forgotten me. But did they make a right Judgment of themselves? We find in
those places that God was otherwise minded. This false Judgment made by Souls
in their intanglements, of their own Condition, is oft-times a most
unconquerable hinderance unto the bettering of it. They fill themselves with
thoughts of their own about it, and on them they dwell, instead of looking out
after a Remedy. Misgiving thoughts of their distempers, are commonly a great
part of some men's sickness. Many diseases are apt to cloud the thoughts, and to
cause misapprehensions concerning their own nature, and danger. And these
delusions are a real part of the persons sickness. Nature is no less impaired
and weakened by them, the Efficacy of Remedies no less obstructed, than by any
other real distemper. In such cases we persuade men to acquiesce in the
Judgment of their skillful Physician, not always to be wasting themselves in
and by their own tainted imaginations, and so despond upon their own mistakes;
but to rest in what is informed them by him, who is acquainted with the causes
and tendency of their indisposition better than themselves. It is oft-times one
part of the Souls depths, to have false apprehensions of its Condition. Sin is
a madness; Eccles. 9. 3. so far as any one is under the power of it, he is
under the power of madness. Madness does not sooner, nor more effectually
discover it self in any way or thing, than in possessing them in whom it is,
with strange conceits and apprehensions of themselves. So does this madness of
sin, according unto its degrees, and prevalency. Hence some cry Peace, peace,
when sudden destruction is at hand, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. It is that madness, under
whose power they are, which gives them such groundless Imaginations of
themselves and their own Condition. And some say they are lost for ever, when
God is with them.

Do you then your duty, and let Christ judge of your state. Your Concernment is
too great, to make it a reasonable demand, to commit the Judgment of your
condition to any other. When Eternal welfare or woe are at the stake, for a man
to renounce his own thoughts, to give up himself implicitly, to the Judgment
of men fallible and liars like himself, is stupidity; But there is no danger of
being deceived by the sentence of Christ. The truth is, whether we will or no,
he will Judge; and according as he determines so shall things be found at the
last day, Joh. 5. 22. The Father judges no man, (that is, immediately and in
his own Person) but has committed all judgment unto the Son. All Judgment
that respects Eternity, whether it be to be passed in this World or in that to
come, is committed unto him. Accordingly in that place (...) judges both of
Things and Persons. Things he determines upon, v. 24. He that hears my Word,
and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come
into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life. Let men say what they
please, This sentence shall stand; Faith and eternal life are inseparably
conjoined. And so of Persons, v. 38. You have not, (says he to the Pharisees,
who were much otherwise minded) the Word of God abiding in you.

Take not then the Office and Prerogative of Christ out of his hand, by making
a Judgment upon your own Reasonings, and Conclusions, and Deductions of your
state and Condition. You will find that he oftentimes both on the one hand,
and on the other, determines quite contrary to what men judge of themselves; As
also to what others judge of them. Some he judges to be in an evil condition,
who are very confident that it is well with them, and who please themselves in
the thoughts of many to the same purpose. And he judges the state of some to
be Good, who are diffident in themselves, and it may be despised by others. We
may single out an Example or two in each kind.

1. Laodicea's Judgment of her self, and her spiritual state we have, Revel.
3. 17. I am rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing. A fair
state it seems, a blessed Condition. She wants nothing that may contribute to
her rest, peace and reputation; she is Orthodox, and Numerous, and Flourishing;
makes a fair profession, and all is well within. So she belives, so she reports
of her self; wherein there is a secret reflection also upon others whom she
despises. Let them shift as they list, I am thus as I say. But was it so with
her indeed? was that her true Condition whereof she was so persuaded, as to
profess it unto all? Let Jesus Christ be heard to speak in this cause, let him
come and judge? I will do so, says he, v. 14. Thus says the Amen, the
faithful and true Witness. Coming to give sentence in a case of this
importance, he gives himself this Title that we may know his Word is to be
acquiesced in. Every man, says he, is a Liar; Their Testimony is of no value,
let them pronounce what they will of themselves, or of one another; I am the
Amen, and I will see whose Word shall stand, mine or theirs. What then says he
of Laodicea? Thou art wretched, and miserable and poor, and blind, and naked. O
woeful and sad disappointment! O dreadful surprizall! Ah how many Laodicean
Churches have we in the World? How many Professors are members of these
Chruches? Not to mention the generality of men that live under the means of
Grace, all which have Good hopes of their Eternal Condition whilst they are
despised and abhorred by the only Judge. Among Professors themselves, it is
dreadful to think how many will be found light when they come to be weighed in
this balance.

2. Again, he Judges some to be in a good condition, be they themselves never
so diffident; Revel. 2. 9. says he to the Church of Smyrna; I know thy
poverty; Smyrna was complaining that she was a poor contemptible Congregation,
not fit for him to take any notice of. Well, says he, fear not; I know thy
poverty whereof thou complainest; but thou art Rich; That is my Judgment,
Testimony, and Sentence concerning thee and thy condition. Such will be his
Judgment at the last day, when both those, on the one hand, and the other,
shall be suprized with his sentence, the one with Joy, at the riches of his
Grace; The other with terror at the severity of his Justice, Math. 25 37, 38,
39. and 44, 45. This case is directly stated in both the places mentioned in
the entrance of this discourse; as in that for instance, Isa. 49. 14. Zion
said, the Lord has forsaken me. That is Zions judgment of her self, and her
state and condition; a sad report and conclusion. But does Christ agree with
Zion in this sentence? The next verse gives us his Resolution of this matter;
Can, says he, a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have
compassion on the Son of her womb; Yea they may forget, yet will not I forget
thee. The state of things in Truth, is as much otherwise as can possibly be
thought or imagined.

To what purpose is it for men to be passing a Judgment upon themselves, when
there is no manner of certainty in their determinations; and when their
proceeding thereon will probably lead them to further entanglements, if not to
eternal ruin. The Judging of Souls as to their spiritual state and condition
is the work of Jesus Christ; especially as to the End now under Enquiry. Men
may, men do take many ways to make a Judgment of themselves. Some do it on
slight and trivial conjectures; some on bold and wicked presumptions; some on
desperate Atheistical notions; as Deuteronomy. 29. 17. some with more sobriety and
sense of Eternity, lay down principles, it may be good and true in themselves;
from them they draw conclusions, arguing from one thing unto another; and in
the end oft-times either deceive themselves, or sit down no less in the dark,
than they were at the entrance of their self-debate and Examination. A man's
judgment upon his own reasonings is seldom true, more seldom permanent. I
speak not of self-examination, with a due discussion of Graces and Actions, but
of the final sentence as to state and condition, wherein the soul is to
acquiesce. This belongs unto Christ.

Now there are Two ways whereby the Lord Jesus Christ gives forth his
decretory sentence in this matter.

1. By his Word. He determines in the Word of the Gospel of the state and
condition of all men indefinitely. Each Individual coming to that Word,
receives his own sentence and doom. He told the Jews that Moses accused them,
John 5. 45. His Law accused and condemned the transgressors of it. And so does
the acquit every one that is discharged, by the Word of the Gospel. And our
self-judging, is but our receiving by faith his Sentence in the Word. His
process herein we have recorded, Joh 33. 22, 23. His soul (that is of the
sinner) draws near to the grave, and his life to the destroyers; This seems
to be his state; it is so indeed; he is at the very brink of the grave and
hell. What then; why if there be with him, or stand over him, (...) the Angel
interpreting, or the Angel of the Covenant, who alone is (...) the one of a
thousand; what shall he do? He shall show unto him his uprightness. He shall
give in unto him a right determination of his interest in God, and of the state
and frame of his heart toward God; whereupon God shall speak peace unto his
Soul, and deliver him from his entanglements, v. 24. Jesus Christ has in the
Word of the Gospel stated the condition of every man. He tells us, that
sinners, of what sort soever they are, that believe, are accepted with him; and
shall receive forgiveness from God; that none shall be refused or cast off that
come unto God by him. The Soul of whom we are treating is now upon the work of
coming unto God for forgiveness by Jesus Christ. Many and weighty Objections it
has in and against its self, why it should not come, why it shall not be
accepted. Our Lord Jesus the Wisdom of God foresaw all these Objections; he
foreknew what could be said in the case, and yet he has determined the matter,
as has been declared. In General, men's arguings against themselves arise from
Sin and the Law. Christ knows what is in them both. He tried them to the
uttermost, as to their penalties; and yet he has so determined as we have
showed. Their particular Objections, are from particular considerations of sin;
their Greatness, their Number, their Aggravations. Christ knows all these also;
And yet stands to his firmer determination. Upon the whole matter then, it is
meet his Word should stand. I know when a Soul brings it self to be judged by
the Word of the Gospel, it does not always in a like manner receive and rest
in the sentence given. But when Christ is pleased to speak the word with power
to men, they shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and be concluded by it.
Let the Soul then that is rising out of depths, and pressing toward a sense of
forgiveness, lay it self down before the Word of Christ in the Gospel. Let him
attend to what he speaks; and if for a while it has not power upon him to
quiet his heart, let him wait a season, and light shall arise unto him out of
darkness. Christ will give in his sentence into his Conscience with that power
and efficacy, as he shall find rest and peace in it.

2. Christ also judges by his Spirit; not only in making this sentence of the
Gospel to be received effectually in the Soul, but in and by peculiar Actings
of his upon the heart and soul of a Believer: 1. Cor. 2. 11. We have received
the Spirit of God, that we may know the things that are freely given us of God.
The Spirit of Christ acquaints the Soul, that this and that Grace is from him,
that this or that duty was performed in his strength. He brings to mind, what
at such and such times was wrought in men by himself, to give them supportment
and relief in the times of depths and darkness. And when it has been clearly
discovered unto the Soul at any time by the Holy Ghost, that any thing wrought
in it, or done by it has been truly saving; The Comfort of it will abide in
the midst of many shakings and Temptations.

2. He also by his Spirit bears witness with our Spirits, as to our state and
condition. Of this I have spoken largely elsewhere, and therefore shall now
pass it by.

This then is our first General Rule and Direction. Selfdeterminations
concerning men's spiritual state and condition, because their minds are usually
influenced by their distempers, are seldom right and according to Rule.
Mistakes in such determinations are exceedingly prejudicial to a Soul seeking
out after relief, and sense of Forgiveness; let Christ then be the Judge in
this Case by his Word and Spirit, as has been directed.

RULE II.
Self-condemnation and abhorrency for sin consistent with Gospel Justification
and Peace. The nature of Gospel-Assurance; what is consistent with it. What are
the Effects of it.

Self-condemnation consistent with Gospel Justification and Peace.
Self-Condemnation and Abhorrency do very well consist with
Gospel-Justification and Peace. Some men have no peace, because they have that,
without which it is impossible they should have peace. Because they cannot but
condemn themselves, they cannot entertain a sense, that God does acquit them.
But this is the mystery of the Gospel, which unbelief is a stranger unto;
Nothing but faith can give a real subsistence unto these things, in the same
Soul, at the same time. It is easy to learn the notion of it, but it is not
easy to experience the power of it. For a man to have a sight of that within
him, which would condemn him for which he is troubled, and at the same time to
have a discovery of that without him, which will justify him, and to rejoice
therein, is that which he is not lead unto, but by Faith in the mystery of the
Gospel. We are now under a Law for Justification, which excludes all boasting,
Romans 3. 27. So that though we have joy enough in another, yet we may have, we
always have sufficient cause of humiliation in our selves. The Gospel will
teach a man to feel sin, and believe Righteousness at the same time. Faith will
carry Heaven in one hand, and Hell in the other; showing the one deserved, the
other purchased. A man may see enough of his own sin and folly to bring
Gehennam e Coelo, a Hell of wrath out of Heaven; and yet see Christ bring
Coelum ex inferno, a Heaven of blessedness out of an Hell of punishment. And
these must needs produce very diverse, yea contrary effects and operations in
the Soul. And he who knows not how to assign them their proper duties, and
seasons, must needs be perplexed. The work of selfcondemnation then, which men
in these depths cannot but abound with, is in the disposition of the Covenant
of Grace, no way inconsistent with, nor unsuited unto Justification, and the
enjoyment of Peace in the sense of it. There may be a deep sense of sin on
other considerations besides Hell. David was never more humbled for sin, than
when Nathan told him it was forgiven. And there may be a view of Hell as
deserved, which yet the Soul may know it self freed from, as to the issue.

To evidence our intendment in this discourse, I shall briefly consider what we
intend by Gospel Assurance of Forgiveness, that the Soul may not be solicitous
and perplexed, about the utter want of that, which perhaps it is already in
some enjoyment of.

Gospel Assurance, wherein it consists.
Some men seem to place Gospel Assurance in an high unassaulted Confidence of
Acceptance with God. They think it is in none but such, as if a man should go
to them, and ask them, are you certain you shall be saved, have boldness, and
confidence, and ostentation to answer presently, yea they are certain they
shall be saved. But as the blessed Truth of Assurance has been reproached in
the World under such a notion of it, so such expressions become not them who
know what it is to have to do with the Holy God who is a consuming fire. Hence
some conclude, that there are very few Believers who have any Assurance,
because they have not this confidence, or are more free to mention the
oppasition they meet with, than the supportment they enjoy. And thus is it
rendered a matter not greatly to be desired, because it is so rarely to be
obtained; most of the Saints serving God, and going to Heaven well enough
without it; But the matter is otherwise. The importance of it, not only as it
is our life of comfort and joy, but also as it is the principal means of the
flourishing of our Life of Holiness, has been declared before; and might be
further manifested, were that our present business; Yea and in times of trial,
which are the proper seasons for the Effectual working and manifestation of
Assurance, it will and does appear, that many, yea that most of the Saints of
God, are made partakers of this Grace and Privilege.

I shall then in the pursuit of the Rule laid down, do these two things. (1.)
Show what things they are which are not only consistent with Assurance, but are
even necessary concomitants of it, which yet if not duly weighed and
considered, may seem so far to impeach a man's comfortable persuasion of his
condition before God, as to leave him beneath the Assurance sought after. And,

2. I shall speak somewhat of its nature: Especially as manifesting its self by
its Effects.

Sense of sin consistent with Assurance.
1. A deep sense of the evil of sin, of the guilt of man's own sin, is no way
inconsistent with Gospel assurance of Acceptance with God through Christ, and
of Forgiveness in him. By a sense of the guilt of sin; I understand two things.
(1.) A clear conviction of sin by the Holy Ghost, saying unto the Soul, Thou
art the man; and (2.) A sense of the displeasure of God, or the wrath due to
sin, according to the sentence of the Law. Both these David expresses in that
complaint, Psalm. 31. 10. My life is spent with grief, and my years with
sighing, my strength fails because of mine Iniquity, and my bones are
consumed. His Iniquity was before him, and a sense of it pressed him sore. But
yet notwithstanding all this, he had a comfortable persuasion that God was his
God in Covenant, v. 14. I trusted in thee O Lord, I said, thou art my God. And
the tenor of the Covenant, wherein alone God is the God of any person is, that
he will be merciful unto their sin and iniquity. To whom he is a God, he is so
according to the Tenor of that Covenant; so that here these two are conjoined.
Says he, Lord, I am pressed with the sense of the guilt of mine Iniquities,
and thou act my God who forgivest them. And the ground hereof is, that God by
the Gospel has divided the work of the Law, and taken part of it out of its
hand. Its whole work and duty is to condemn the sin and the sinner. The sinner
is freed by the Gospel, but its right lies against the sin still, that it
condemns, and that justly. Now though the sinner himself be freed, yet finding
his sin laid hold of and condemned, it fills him with a deep sense of its
guilt, and of the displeasure of God against it; which yet hinders not, but
that at the same time, he may have such an insight as faith gives into his
personal interest in a Gospel acquitment. A man then may have a deep sense of
sin all his days, walk under the sense of it continually, abhor himself for
his ingratitude, unbelief, and rebellion against God, without any impeachment
of his Assurance.

Sorrow for sin consistent with Assurance.
2. Deep sorrow for sin is consistent with Assurance of forgiveness Yea it is a
great means of preservation of it. Godly sorrow, mourning, humiliation,
contriteness of Spirit, are no less Gospel Graces, and fruits of the Holy
Ghost, than Faith it self; and so are consistent with the highest flourishings
of faith whatever. It is the work of Heaven it self, and not of the Assurance
of it, to wipe all tears from our eyes. Yea these Graces have the most eminent
Promises annexed to them, as Isa. 57. 15. chap. 66. 2. with blessedness it
self, Math. 5. 4. yea they are themselves the matter of many Gracious Gospel
Promises, Zech. 12. 10. so that they are assuredly consistent with any other
Grace or Privilege that we may be made partakers of; or are promised unto us.
Some finding the weight and burden of their sins, and being called to mourning
and bumiliation on that account, are so taken up with it, as to lose the sense
of Forgiveness, which rightly improved, would promote their sorrow, as their
sorrow seems directly to sweeten their sense of forgiveness. Sorrow absolutely
exclusive of the faith of forgiveness, is legal, and tends unto death.
Assurance absolutely exclusive of Godly sorrow is presumption, and not a
persuasion from him that calls us. But Gospel Sorrow, and Gospel Assurance
may well dwell in the same breast at the same time. Indeed as in all worldly
Joys there is a secret wound; So in all Godly sorrow and mourning considered
in its self, there is a secret Joy and refreshment; Hence it does not wither
and dry up, but rather enlarge, open, and sweeten the heart. I am persuaded
that generally they mourn most, who have most Assurance. And all True Gospel
mourners, will be found to have the root of Assurance so grafted in them, that
in its proper season (a time of trouble) it will undoubtedly flourish.

Sense of the power of sin consistent with Assurance.
3. A deep sense of the indwelling power of sin, is consistent with Gospel
Assurance. Sense of indwelling sin will cause manifold perplexities in the
Soul. Trouble, disquietments, sorrow, and anguish of heart, expressing
themselves in sighs, mourning, groaning for deliverance always attend it. To
what purpose do you speak to a Soul highly sensible of the restless power of
indwelling sin concerning Assurance. Alas, says he, I am ready to perish every
moment, my lusts are strong, active, restless, yea outrageous; they give me no
rest, no liberty, and but little success do I obtain. Assurance is for
Conquerours; for them that live at rest and peace. I lie grovelling on the
ground all my days, and must needs be uncertain what will be the issue. But
when such an one has done all he can, he will not be able to make more woeful
complaints of this matter than Paul has done before him. Romans 7. and yet he
closes the discourse of it with as high an expression of assurance as any
person needs to seek after, v. last, and chap. 8. 1. It is not Assurance, but
Enjoyment that excludes this sense and trouble. But if men will think they can
have no Assurance, because they have that, without which it is impossible they
should have any, it is hard to give them relief. A little Cruse of Salt of the
Gospel cast into these bitter waters will make them sweet and wholesome. Sense of
the guilt of sin may consist with faith of its pardon and forgiveness in the
blood of Christ. Godly sorrow may dwell in the same heart at the same time,
with Joy in the Holy Ghost; and groaning after deliverance from the power of
sin, with a Gracious persuasion that sin shall not have dominion over us,
because we are not under the Law but Grace.

Fears and Temptations consistent with Assurance.
4. Doubtings, Fears, Temptations, if not ordinarily prevailing are consistent
with Gospel Assurance. Though the Devils power he limited in reference unto the
Saints, yet his hands are not tied. Though he cannot prevail against them, yet
he can assault them. And although there be not an evil heart of unbelief in
Believers, yet there will still be unbelief in their hearts. Such an evidence,
conviction, and persuasion of Acceptance with God as are exclusive of all
contrary reasonings, that suffer the Soul to hear nothing of Objections, that
free and quiet it from all assaults are neither mentioned in the Scripture, nor
consistent with that state wherein we walk before God, nor possible on the
account of Satan's will and ability to tempt, or of our own remaining unbelief.
Assurance encourages us in our Combat, it delivers us not from it. We may
have peace: with God, when we have none from the assaults of Satan.

Now unless a man do duly consider the tenor of the Covenant wherein we walk
with God, and the nature of that Gospel Obedience which he requires at our
hands, with the state and Condition which is our Lot and portion whilst we
live in this World, the daily sense of these things, with the trouble that must
be undergone on their account, may keep him in the dark unto himself, and
hinder him from that establishment in believing which otherwise he might attain
unto. On this account some as holy persons as any in this World, being wholly
taken up with the consideration of these home bred perplexities, and not
clearly acquainted with the way and tenor of assuring their Souls before God
according to the Rule of the Covenant of Grace, have passed away their days in
a bondage frame of spirit, and unacquaintance with that strong consolation
which God is abundantly willing that all the Heirs of promise should receive.

The Nature and Effects of Gospel Assurance.
5. Evangelical Assurance is not a thing that consists in any point, and so
incapable of variation. It may be higher or lower, greater or less, obscure or
attended with more Evidence. It is not quite lost; when it is not quite at its
highest. God sometimes marvellously raises the Souls of his Saints with some
close and near approaches unto them; gives them a sense of his Eternal Love; a
taste of the embraces of his Son, and the inhabitation of the Spirit, without
the least intervening disturbance, then this is their Assurance. But this life
is not a season to be always taking wages in; our work is not yet done, we are
not always to abide in this Mount; we must down again into the battle, fight
again, cry again, complain again; Shall the Soul be thought now to have lost
its assurance? Not at all, it had before assurance with Joy, Triumph, and
Exultation; it has it now, or may have, with wrestling, cries, tears, and
supplications. And a man's Assurance may be as Good, as true, when he lies on
the earth with a sense of sin, as when he is carried up to the third Heaven
with a sense of Love, and foretaste of Glory. In brief, this Assurance of
Salvation is such a Gracious Evangelical persuasion of Acceptance with God in
Christ, and of an interest in the promises of preservation unto the End,
wrought in Believers by the Holy Ghost, in and through the exercise of Faith,
as for the most part produces these effects following.

Effects of Gospel Assurance in Believers.
1. It gives delight in obedience, and draws out Love in the duties that unto
God we do perform. So much Assurance of a Comfortable Issue of their Obedience,
of a blessed End of their labors and duties, of their purifying their hearts,
and pressing after universal Renovation of mind and life, as may make them
Cheerful in them, as may give Love and Delight in the pursuit of what they are
engaged in, is needful for the Saints, and they they do not often go without
it; and where this is, there is Gospel Assurance. To run as men uncertain, to
fight as those that beat the Air, to travel as not any way persuaded of a
comfortable entertainment or refreshment at the Journeys End, is a state and
condition that God does not frequently leave his people unto. And when he does,
it is a season wherein he receives very little of Glory from them, and they
very little increase of grace in themselves. Many things, as has been showed,
do interpose, many doubts arise and intangling perplexities, but still there is
a Comfortable persuasion kept alive, that there is a Rest provided, which makes
them willing unto, and cheerful in their most difficult duties. This
prevails in them, that their labor in the Lord, their watchings, praying,
suffering, alms, mortification, fighting against temptation, crucifying the
flesh with the lusts thereof, shall not be in vain. This gives them such a
delight in their most difficult duties, as men have in a hard Journey toward a
desirable home, or a place of Rest.

2. It casts out fear, tormenting fear, such as fills the soul with perplexing
uncertainties, hard thoughts of God, and dreadful apprehensions of wrath to
come: There are three things spoken concerning that fear which is inconsistent
with the Assurance of forgiveness. First, With respect unto its principle, it
is from a spirit of bondage, Romans 18. 15. We have not again received the spirit
of bondage unto fear: It is not such a fear as makes an occasional incursion
upon the mind or soul; such as ise xcited and occasioned by incident darkness
and Temptation, such as the best, and persons of the highest assurance are
liable and obnoxious unto; but it is such as has a complete abiding principle
in the soul, even a spirit of bondage, a prevailing frame constantly inclining
it to fear, or dreadful apprehensions of God and its own condition. Secondly,
That it tends to bondage, it brings the soul into bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. He
dyed to deliver them who by fear of death were in bondage all their days. Fear
of death as penal, as it lies in the curse, which is that fear that proceeds
from a spirit of bondage, brings the persons in whom it is into bondage; that
is, it adds weariness, trouble, and anxiety of mind unto fear, and puts them
upon all ways and means imaginable, unduly and disorderly to seek for a remedy
or relief. Thirdly, It has torment; fear has torment, 1 John 4. 18. It gives
no rest, no quietness unto the mind; now this is so cast out by Gospel
Assurance of forgiveness, that though it may assault the soul, it shall not
possess it; though it make incursions upon it, it shall not dwell abide and
prevail in it.

3. It gives the soul an hope and expectation of the Glory that shall be
revealed, and secretly stirs it up, and enlivens it unto a supportment in
sufferings, trials and Temptations. This is the hope which makes not ashamed,
Romans 5. 5. and that, because it will never expose the soul unto disappointment.
Where ever there is the root of Assurance, there will be this fruit of hope.
The proper object of it, is things absent, invisible, eternal; the promised
reward in all the notions, respects and concernments of it. This hope goes out
unto, in distresses, temptations, failings; and under a sense of the guilt and
power of sin. Hence arises a spring of secret relief in the soul, something
that calms the heart, and quiets the spirit in the midst of many a storm. Now,
as where ever Assurance is, there will be this hope; so, where ever this secret
relieving hope is, it grows on no other root, but a living persuasion of a
personal interest in the things hoped for.

4. As it will do many other things; so that I may give one comprehensive
instance, it will carry them out in whom it is, to dye for Christ. Death unto
men who saw not one step beyond it, was esteemed of all things most terrible.
The way and means of its approach add unto its terror. But this is nothing in
comparison of what it is unto them who look through it as a passage into
ensuing Eternity. For a man then to choose death rather than life, in the most
terrible manner of its approach, expecting an Eternity to ensue, it argues a
comfortable persuasion of a Good State and Condition after death. Now I am
persuaded that there are hundreds, who upon Gospel saving accounts would
embrace a stake for the Testimony of Jesus, who yet know not at all that they
have the Assurance we speak of, and yet nothing else would enable them
thereunto. But these things being besides the main of my Intendment, I shall
pursue them no further, only the Rule is of use. Let the soul be sure to be
well acquainted with the nature of that which it seeks after, and confesses a
sense of the want of.

RULE III.
Continuance in waiting necessary unto Peace and Consolation. The fourth Rule.
Remove the Hindrances of Believing by a searching out of sin. Rules and
Directions for that Duty.

Waiting necessary to obtain Peace.
Whatever your Condition be, and your Apprehension of it; yet continue waiting
for a better issue, and give not over through weariness or impatience. This
Rule contains the sum of the Great Example given us in this Psalm. Forgiveness
in God being discovered, though no sense of a particular interest therein as
yet obtained; that which the soul applies it self unto, is diligent, careful,
constant, persevering waiting; which is variously expressed in the 5, and 6,
verses. The Holy Ghost tells us, that light is sown for the righteous, and
gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97. 11. Light and Gladness are the
things now enquired after. Deliverance from darkness, misapprehensions of God,
hard and misgiving thoughts of his own condition, is that which a soul in its
depths reaches toward. Now, says the Holy Ghost, These things are sown for
the Righteous. Does the Husbandman after he casts his seed into the Earth,
immediately the next day, the next week, expect that it will be harvest? does
he think to reap so soon as he has sown? or does he immediately say, I have
labored in vain, here is no return, I will pull up the hedge of this field and
lay it waste? or I see a little grass in the blade, but no corn, I will give it
to the beasts to devour it? No, his God, as the Prophet speaks, instructs him
unto discretion and teaches him; namely, what he must do, and how he must look
for things in their season. And shall not we be instructed by him? behold the
Husbandman, says James, waits for the precious fruit of the Earth, and has
long patience for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain, Jam. 5.
7. And is Light sown for them that are in darkness, and shall they stifle the
seed under the clods, or spoil the tender blade, that is springing up, or
refuse to wait for the watering and dews of the Spirit, that may bring it forth
to perfection? Waiting is the only way to Establishment and Assurance; we
cannot speed by our haste; yea nothing puts the end so far away, as making too
much haste and speed in our Journey. The ground hereof is, that a sense of a
special interest in forgiveness and acceptance, is given into the soul by a
mere act of Sovereignty. It is not, it will not be obtained by or upon any
rational conclusions or deductions that we can make: All that we can do is but
to apply our selves to the removal of hindrances. For the Peace and Rest
sought for, come from mere prerogative. When he gives quietness, who can give
trouble? and when he hides his face, who can behold him? Job 34. 29. Now what
is the way to receive that which comes from mere Sovereignty and prerogative?
does not the nature of the thing require humble waiting? If then either
Impatience cast the soul into frowardness, or weariness make it slothful,
which are the two ways whereby waiting is ruined; Let not such an one expect
any comfortable Islue of his contending for deliverance out of his depths. And
let not any think to make out their difficulties any other way: their own
Reasonings will not bring them to any establishing conclusions; for they may
lay down propositions, and have no considerable objections to lie against
either of them, and yet be far enough from that sweet consolation, joy and
assurance which is the product of the conclusion, when God is not pleased to
give it in; yea a man may sometimes gather up consolation to himself upon such
terms, but it will not abide. So did David, Psalm. 30 6, 7. He thus argues with
himself, He whose mountain is made strong, to whom God is a defense, he shall
never be moved nor be shaken; but I am thus settled of God, therefore I shall
not be moved; and therein he rejoices. It is an expression of exultation that
he uses; but what is the Issue of it? In the midst of these pleasing thoughts
of his, God hides his face, and he is troubled; he cannot any longer draw out
the sweetness of the conclusion mentioned. It was in him before from the shines
of Gods Countenance, and not from any arguings of his own.

No disappointment then, no tediousness or weariness should make the soul leave
waiting on God, if it intend to attain Consolation and Establishment. So
deals the Church, Lam. 3. 21. This I recall to mind, therefore have I hope:
What is it that she calls to mind, this, that it is of the Lords mercy that we
are not consumed, because his compassions fail not, verse. 22. I will yet hope,
I will yet continue in my Expectation upon the account of never
failing-compassion; of endless mercies in him, whatever my present condition
be. And thence she makes a blessed conclusion, verse. 26. It is good that a man
should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. And this is
our third Rule. It is good to hope and wait, whatever our present condition be,
and not to give over, if we would not be sure to fail: whereunto I speak no
more, because the close of this Psalm insists wholly on this duty, which must
be further spoken unto.

RULE IV.
Search of Sin necessary to consolation.
Seeing in the course of our believing and obedience, that which is chiefly
incumbent on us, for our coming up to establishment and consolation, is
spiritual diligence in the removal of the hindrances thereof: Let the soul
that would attain thereunto, make through work in the search of sin, even to
the sins of youth; that all scores on that account may clearly be wiped out. If
there be much rubbish left in the foundation of the building, no wonder if it
always shake and totter. Men's leaving of any sin unsearched to the bottom,
will poison all their consolation. David knew this, when in dealing with God in
his distresses, he prays that he would not remember the sins and
transgressions of his youth, Psalm. 5. 7. Youth is oftentimes a time of great
vanity and unmindfulness of God; many stains and spots are therein usually
brought upon the consciences of men. Childhood and youth are vanity, Eccles.
11. 10. Not because they soon pass away, but because they are usually spent in
vanity, as the following advice (of chap. 12. 1.) to remember God in those
days, does manifest. The way of many is to wear such things out of mind, and
not to walk in a sense of their folly and madness, never to make through work
with God about them. I speak of the Saints themselves; for with others that
live under the Means of Grace, whom God intends any way to make useful and
industrious in their Generation, this is the usual course; by convictions,
restraining Grace, Afflictions, Love of Employment and Repute, God gives them
another heart than they had for a season. Another heart, but not a new heart.
Hence another course of life, another profession, other actions than formerly
do flow; with this change they do content themselves; they look on what is
past perhaps with delight, or as things fit enough for those days, but not for
those they have attained unto; here they rest, and therefore never come to rest.

But I speak of the Saints themselves, who make not such through, full, close
work in this kind as they ought. An afterreckoning may come in on this hand to
their own disturbance, and an inconquerable hinderance of their peace and
settlement be brought in, on this account. So was it with Job, chap. 13. 26, He
makes me possess the sins of my youth. God filled his heart, his thoughts, his
mind with these sins; made them abide with him, so that he possessed them; they
were always present with him. He made the sins of his youth the sufferings of
his age. And it is a sad thing, as one speaks, when young sins and old bones
meet together; as Zophar, chap. 20. 11. His bones are filled with the sins of
his youth. The joyous frame of some men's Youth, makes way for sad work in their
Age. Take heed young ones, you are doing that which will abide with you to Age,
if not to Eternity. This possessing of the sins of youth, Job calls, the
writing of bitter things against him. As indeed it is impossible but that sin
should be bitter one time or other. God calls it a root that bears Gall and
Wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. A root of bitterness springing up into defilement, Heb.
12. 15. This then is to be searched out to the bottom. Israel will not have
success nor peace whilst there is an Achan in the Camp. Neither success in
Temptation, nor consolation in believing is to be expected, whilst any Achan,
any sin unreckoned for, lies in the conscience.

Now for them who would seriously accomplish a diligent search in this matter,
which is of such importance unto them, let them take these two Directions.

1. Let them go over the consideration of those sins, and others of the like
nature, which may be reduced unto the same General heads with them, which we
laid down before, as the sins which generally cast men into depths and
intanglements. And if they find they have contracted the guilt of any of them,
let them not think strange that they are yet bewildred in their condition, and
do come short of a refreshing sense of peace with God, or an interest in
forgiveness. Rather let them admire the riches of Patience, Grace and
forbearance, that they are not cast utterly out of all hopes of a recovery.
This will speed an end unto their trouble, according to the direction given.

2. Let them cast the course of their times under such heads and seasons, as
may give them the more clear and distinct view and apprehension of the passages
in them between God and their souls, which may have been provoking unto him. As,

First, For the state of their inward man, let them consider,

First, The unregenerate part of their lives, that which was confessedly so,
before they had any real work of God upon their hearts; and therein enquire
after two things.

1. If there were then any great and signal eruptions of sins against God; for
of such God requires that a deep sense be kept on our souls all our days. How
often do we find Paul calling over the sins of his life and ways before his
conversion. I was, says he, injuricus, and a blasphemer. Such reflections ought
persons to have on any great provoking occasions of sin, that may keep them
humble, and necessitate them constantly to look for a fresh sense of pardon
through the blood of Christ. If such sins lie neglected, and not considered
according to their importance, they will weaken the soul in its comforts whilst
it lives in this world.

2. If there were any signal intimations made of the Good Will and Love of God
to the soul, which it broke off from through the power of its corruption and
temptation, they require a due humbling consideration all our days; but this
has been before spoken unto.

Secondly, In that part of our lives, which upon the call of God we have given
up unto him. There are two sorts of sins that do effectually impeach our future
peace and comfort, which ought therefore to be frequently renewed and issued in
the blood of Christ. First, Such as by reason of any aggravating circumstances
have been accompanied with some especial unkindness toward God. Such are sins
after warnings, communications of a sense of Love, after particular engagements
against them, relapses, omissions of great opportunities and advantages for the
furtherance of the Glory of God in the world. These kinds of sins have much
unkindness attending them, and will be searched out if we cover them. 2. Sins
attended with scandal toward fewer, or more, or any one single person who is
or may be concerned in us: The aggravations of these kind of sins are commonly
known.

Thirdly, The various outward states and conditions which we have passed
through, as of Prosperity and Afflictions, should in like manner fall under
this search and consideration. It is but seldom that we fill up our duty, or
answer the mind of God in any dispensation of providence. And if our neglect
herein be not managed aright, they will undoubtedly hinder and interrupt our
peace.

RULE V.
The fifth Rule. Distinction between Unbelief and Jealousy. The sixth Rule.
Distinction between Faith and Spiritual Sense.

Unbelief and Jealousy distinguished.
Learn to distinguish between Unbelief and Jealousy. There is a twofold
Unbelief. (1.) That which is universal and privative, such as is in all
unregenerate persons; they have no Faith at all, that is, they are dead men and
have no principles of spiritual life. This I speak not of, it is easily
distinguished from any Grace, being the utter enemy and privation as it were of
them all. (2.) There is an Unbelief partial and negative, consisting in a
staggering at, or Questioning of the promises. This is displeasing to God, a
sin which is attended with unknown Aggravations, though men usually indulge it
in themselves. It is well expressed, Psalm. 78. 19, 20. God had promised his
presence to the people in the wilderness to feed, sustain, and preserve them.
How did they entertain these promises of God? Can he, say they, give bread? can
he give flesh unto his people? verse. 20. What great sin, crime, or offense is
in this enquiry? Why verse. 19. This is called speaking against God; they spoke
against God; they said, Can he furnish a Table in the wilderness? Unbelief in
questioning of the promises is a speaking against God, a limiting of the holy
One of Israel, as it is called, verse. 41. An assigning of bounds to his
Goodness, Power, Kindness and Grace, according to what we find in our selves,
which he abhors. By this Unbelief we make God like our selves; that is our
limiting of him, expecting no more from him, than either we can do, or see how
it may be done. This you will say was a great sin in the Israelites, because
they had no reason to doubt or Question the promises of God. It is well we
think so now; But when they were so many thousand families, that had not one
bit of bread, nor drop of water aforehand for themselves and their little ones,
there is no doubt but they thought themselves to have as good reason to
question the promises, as any one of you can think that you have. We are ready
to suppose that we have all the reasons in the world; every one supposes he
has those that are more cogent than any other has, to question the promises
of Grace, Pardon, and forgiveness; and therefore the questioning of them is not
their sin, but their duty. But pretend what we will, this is speaking against
God, limiting of him, and that which is our keeping off from stedfastness and
Comfort.

But now there may be a Jealousy in a Gracious heart concerning the love of
Christ, which is acceptable unto him, at least which he is tender toward, that
may be mistaken for this questioning of the promises by Unbelief, and so help
to keep the soul in darkness and disconsolation, this the spouse expresses in
her self, Cant. 8. 6. Love is strong as death, jealousy is hard as the Grave,
the Coals thereof are Coals of fire which has a most vehement flame. Love is
the foundation. The root; but yet it bears that fruit which is bitter although
it be wholesome; that which fills the soul with great perplexities, and makes it
cry out for a nearer and more secure admission into the presence of Christ. Set
me, says the Spouse, as a Seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine Arms, for
Jealousy is cruel as the Grave. I cannot bear this distance from thee, these
fears of my being disregarded by thee. Set me as a seal on thy heart.

Now this spiritual jealousy is the solicitousness of the mind of a believer
who has a sincere love for Christ, about the heart, affection, and good will
of Christ toward it, arising from a consciousness of its own unworthiness to
be beloved by him, or accepted with him. All causeless jealousy arises from a
secret sense and conviction of unworthiness in the person in whom it is, and a
high esteem of him that is the object of it; or concerning whose love and
affection any one is Jealous. So it is with this spiritual Jealousy; the root
of it is Love, sincere love, that cannot be quenched by waters, nor drowned by
floods, v. 7. which nothing can utterly prevail against, or overcome. This
gives the soul high thoughts of the glorious Excellencies of Christ, fills it
with admiration of him; these are mixed with a due sense of its own baseness,
vileness and unworthiness to be owned by him, or accepted with him. Now if
these thoughts on the one hand, and on the other be not directed, guided, and
managed aright by faith, which alone can show the soul, how the Glory of Christ
consists principally in this, that he being so excellent and glorious, is
pleased to love us with love unexpressible who are vile and sinful,
Questionings about the love of Christ, and those attended with much anxiety and
trouble of mind, will arise. Now this frame may sometimes be taken for a
questioning of the promises of God, and that to be a defect in faith which is
an excess of love; or at most such an irregular acting of it, as the Lord
Christ will be very tender toward, and which is consistent with peace and a
due sense of the forgiveness of sins. Mistake not then these one for another,
lest much causeless unquietness ensue in the Judgment which you are to make of
your selves.

But you will say how shall we distinguish between these two, so as not
causelessly to be disquieted and perplexed? I answer briefly,

Different Effects of Unbelief and Jealousy.
1. Unbelief working in and by the questioning of the promises of God, is a
weakening, disheartning, dispiriting thing It takes off the edge of the soul
from spiritual duties and weakens it both as unto delight and strength. The
more any one questions the promises of God, the less life, power, joy and
delight in obedience he has. For faith is the spring and root of all other
Graces; and according as that thriveth or goes backwards so do they all. Men
think sometimes, that their uncertainty of the love of God and of acceptance
with him by the forgiveness of sin, does put them upon the performance of many
duties, and they can have no rest or peace in the omission of them. It may be
it is so; Yea this is the state and Condition with many. But what are these
duties? and how are they performed? And what is their acceptance with God? The
duties themselves are legal, which denomination arises not from the Nature,
Substance or Matter of them, for they may be the same that are required and
enjoined in the Gospel, but from the principle from whence they proceed, and
the End to which they are used. Now these in this case are both legal, their
principle is legal fear, and their end is legal Righteousness; the whole
attendance unto them a seeking of righteousness as it were by the works of the
Law: and how are they performed? Plainly, with a bondage frame of Spirit,
without Love, Joy, Liberty, or Delight; To quiet conscience, to pacify God,
are the things in them aimed at; all in opposition to the Blood and
Righteousness of Christ. And are they accepted with God? Let them be multiplied
never so much, he every where testifies that they are abhorred by him. This
then Unbelief mixed with convictions will do. It is the proper way of venting
and exercising it self where the soul is brought under the power of conviction.
But as unto Gospel Obedience in all the duties of it, to be carried on in
communion with God by Christ, and delight in him, all questioning of the
promises weakens and discourageth the soul, and makes them all wearisome and
burdensome unto it.

But the Jealousy that is exercised about the Person and Love of Christ unto
the soul, is quite of another nature, and produces other effects. It cheers,
enlivens, and enlarges the soul, stirs up to activity, earnestness, and
industry in its enquiries and desires after Christ. Jealousy, says the
Spouse, is hard as the grave, therefore set me as a Seal upon thy heart, as a
Seal upon thy arm. It makes the soul restlesly pant after nearer more sensible
and more assured Communion with Christ; It stirs up vigorous and active Spirits
in all duties. Every doubt and fear that it ingenerates concerning the Love of
Christ, stirs up the soul unto more earnestness after him, delight in him, and
sedulous watching against every thing that may keep it at a distance from him,
or occasion him to hide, withdraw, or absent himself from it.

2. Unbelief that works by questioning of the promises, is universally selfish;
it begins and ends in self. Self-love, in desires after freedom from guilt,
danger and punishment, are the life and soul of it. May this end be attained,
it has no delight in God. Nor does it care what way it be attained so it may
be attained. May such persons have any persuasions that they shall be freed
from death and hell, be it by the works of the Law, or by the observance of any
inventions of their own, whether any Glory arises unto God from his Grace and
faithfulness or no, they are not solicitous.

The Jealousy we speak of has the Person of Christ and his Excellency for its
constant object. These it fills the mind with in many and various thoughts,
still representing him more and more amiable and more desirable unto the soul.
So does the Spouse upon the like occasion, as you may see at large, Cant. 5. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Being at some loss for his presence, for he had
withdrawn himself, not finding her wonted communion and intercourse with him,
fearing that upon her provocation she might forfeit her Interest in his Love,
she falls upon the Consideration of all his Excellencies, and thereby the more
enflames her self unto desires after his company and enjoyment. And these
diverse things may be thus distinguished and discerned.

RULE VI.
Differences between faith and spiritual sense.
Learn to distinguish between faith and spiritual sense. This Rule the Apostle
gives us, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith and not by sight. It is the sight of
Glory that is especially here intended. But faith and sense in any kind are
clearly distinguished. That may be believed, which is not felt. Yea, It is the
Will and Command of God, that faith should stand and do its work, where all
sense fails, Esa. 50. 10. And it is with spiritual sense in this matter, as it
is with natural. Thomas would not believe, unless he saw the object of his
faith with his Eyes, or felt it with his hand: but, says our Savior, blessed
are they who believe, and have not seen; who believe upon the testimony of God,
without the help of their own sense or reason. And, if we will believe no more
of God, of his Love, of Grace, of our acceptance with him, than we have a
spiritual affecting sense of, we shall be many times at a loss. Sensible
impressions from Gods Love, are great springs of Joy, but they are not
absolutely necessary unto peace; nor unto an evidence that we do believe.

We will deal thus with the vilest person living. We will believe him whilst
we have the certainty of our sense to secure us. And if we deal so with God
what is there in our so doing, praise worthy? the Prophet tells us, what it is
to believe, in respect of providence, Hab. 3. 17. When there is nothing left
outward and visible to support us, then to rest quietly on God, that is to
believe. So Psalm. 73. 26. And the Apostle in the Example of Abraham, shows us
what it is to believe with respect unto a special promise, Romans 4. 18. Against
hope, he believed in hope. When he saw not any outward ordinary means for the
accomplishment of the promise, when innumerable objections arose against any
such hope as might have respect unto such means, yet he resolved all his
thoughts into the faithfulness of God in the promise, and therein raised a new
hope in its accomplishment; so in hope believing against hope.

To clear this matter you must observe what I intend by this spiritual sense,
which you must learn to distinguish faith from; and to know that true faith
interesting the soul in forgiveness may be without it, that so you may not
conclude unto a real want of pardon, from the want of the refreshing sense of
it.

Grace in general may be referred unto two heads. (1.) Our Acceptance with God
through Christ; the same upon the matter with the forgiveness of sin that we
are treating of. And (2.) Grace of Sanctification from God in Christ: Of each
of these there is a spiritual sense, or Experience to be obtained; in both
distinguished from faith that gives us a real Interest in forgiveness.

Spiritual sense wherein it consists.
Of the first, or the spiritual sense that we have of Acceptance with God, there
are sundry parts or degrees; As first, hereunto belongs peace with God, Romans 5.
1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. This peace is the Rest and
composure of the soul emerging out of troubles, upon the account of the
Reconciliation and friendship made for it by the blood of Christ. And it has,
as all peace has, two parts; First, a freedom from war, trouble, and distress;
and Secondly, Rest, Satisfaction and Contentment in the condition attained. And
this, at least the second part of it, belongs unto the spiritual sense that we
enquire after. Again, there is in it Joy in the holy Ghost, called joy
unspeakeable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. as also glorying in the Lord,
upon the account of his Grace, Esa. 45. 26. with many the like Effects,
preceding from a shedding abroad of the Love of God in our hearts, Romans 5. 5.

Yea, you say these are the things you aim at; these are the things you would
attain, and be filled withal. It is this Peace, this Joy, this glorying in the
Lord that you would always be in the possession of; I say you do well to
desire them, to seek and labor after them: They are purchased by Christ for
Believers; but you will do well to consider under what notion you do desire
them. If you look on these things as belonging to the Essence of Faith, without
which you can have no real interest in forgiveness or acceptance with God, you
greatly deceive your own souls, and put your selves out of the way of obtaining
of them. These these things are not believing, nor adequate effects of it; so
as immediately to be produced where ever faith is: But they are such
consequents of it, as may, or may not ensue upon it, according to the Will of
God. Faith is a seed that contains them virtually; and out of which they may be
in due time educed by the working of the Word and Spirit. And the way for any
soul to be made partaker of them, is to wait on the Sovereignty of God's Grace,
who creates peace in the exercise of faith upon the promises. He then that
would place believing in these things, and will not be persuaded that he does
believe, until he is possessed of them; he does both lose the benefit,
advantage and comfort of what he has, and neglecting the due acting of faith,
puts himself out of the way of attaining what he aims at.

These things therefore are not needful to give you a real, saving interest in
forgiveness, as it is tendered in the promise of the Gospel by the blood of
Christ. And it may be it is not the Will of God, that ever you should be
entrusted with them. It may be, it would not be for your good and advantage so
to be. Some servants that are ill husbands, must have their wages kept for them
to the years end, or it will do them no good. It may be some would be such
spendthrifts of satisfying peace and joy, and be so diverted by them from
attending unto some necessary duties, as of humiliation, mortification, and
self-abasament, without which their souls cannot live, that it would not be
much to their advantage to be entrusted with them. It is from the same Care and
Love, that Peace and Joy are detained from some Believers, and granted unto
others.

You are therefore to receive forgiveness by a pure Act of believing, in the
way and manner before at large described. And do not think that it is not in
you, unless you have constantly a spiritual sense of it in your hearts. See in
the mean time that your Faith brings forth Obedience, and God in due time
will cause it to bring forth Peace.

The like may be said concerning the other head of Grace; though it be not so
direct unto our purpose, yet tending also to the relief of the soul in its
depths. This is the Grace that we have from God in Christ for our
sanctification: When the soul cannot find this in himself, when he has not a
spiritual sense and experience of its in being and power, when it cannot
evidently distinguish it from that which is not right or genuine, It is filled
with fears and perplexities, and thinks it is yet in its sin. He is so indeed
who has no Grace in him; but not he always who can find none in him: But
these are different things. A man may have Grace, and yet not have it at some
times much acting; he may have Grace for life, when he has it not for
fruitfulness and comfort, though it be his duty so to have it Rev. 3. 2. 2 Timothy
1. 6. And a man may have Grace acting in him, and yet not know, not be sensible
that he has acting Grace. We see persons frequently under great temptations of
apprehension that they have no Grace at all, and yet at the same time to the
clearest conviction of all who are able to discern spiritual things, sweetly
and genuinely to act Faith, Love, Submission unto God, and that in an high and
eminent manner, Psa. 88. Heman complains that he was free among the dead; a man
of no strength, verse. 4, 5. as one that had no spiritual life, no Grace. This
afflicted his mind, and almost distracted him, verse. 15. and yet there can be
no greater expressions of Faith and Love to God, than are mixed with his
complaints.

These things I say then, are not to be judged of by spiritual sense, but we
are to live by faith about them. And no soul ought to conclude, that because it
has not the one, it has not the other; that because it has not Joy and
Peace, it has no interest in pardon and forgiveness.

RULE VII.
The seventh Rule. Mix not foundation and building work together. The eighth
spend no time in heartless complaints, etc.

Mix not too much foundation and building work together. Our foundation in
dealing with God is Christ alone, mere Grace and Pardon in him.

Foundation and Spiritual Building distinguished.
Our Building is in and by Holiness and Obedience, as the fruits of that faith
by which we have received the Attonemont. And great mistakes there are in this
matter which bring great intanglements on the souls of men. Some are all their
days laying of the foundation, and are never able to build upon it unto any
comfort to themselves, or usefulness unto others. And the Reason is, because
they will be mixing with the foundation; stones that are fit only for the
following building. They will be bringing their Obedience, duties,
mortification of sin, and the like, unto the foundation. These are precious
stones to build with; but unmeet to be first laid to bear upon them the whole
weight of the building. The foundation is to be laid, as was said, in mere
Grace, Mercy, Pardon in the blood of Christ. This the soul is to accept of, and
to rest in merely as it is Grace, without the consideration of any thing in its
self, but that it is sinful and obnoxious unto ruin: This it finds a
difficulty in, and would gladly have something of its own to mix with it: It
cannot tell how to fix these foundation stones without some cement of its own
endeavors and duty. And because these things will not mix, they spend a
fruitless labor about it all their days. But if the foundation be of Grace,
it is not at all of works; for otherwise grace is no more grace. If any thing
of our own be mixed with Grace in this matter, it utterly destroys the nature
of Grace; which if it be not alone, it is not at all. But does not this tend to
licenciousness? does not this render Obedience, Holiness, Duties, Mortification
of sin, and good works, needless? God forbid; yea this is the only way to order
them aright unto the glory of God. Have we nothing to do but to lay the
foundation? yes, all our days we are to build upon it, when it is surely and
firmly laid. And these are the means and ways of our Edification. This then is
the soul to do who would come to peace and settlement. Let it let go all former
endeavors if it have been engaged unto any of that kind. And let it alone
receive, admit of, and adhere to mere Grace, mercy and pardon, with a full
sense that in its self it has nothing for which it should have an interest in
them, but that all is of mere Grace through Jesus Christ. Other foundation can
no man lay. Depart not hence until this work be well over. Surcease not an
earnest endeavor with your own hearts to acquiesce in this Righteousness of
God, and to bring your souls unto a comfortable persuasion that God for Christ
his sake has freely forgiven you all your sins. Stir not hence until this be
effected. If you have been engaged in another way, that is, to seek for an
interest in the pardon of sin by some endeavors of your own, it is not
unlikely but that you are filled with the fruit of your own doings; that is,
that you go on with all kind of uncertainties, and without any kind of constant
peace. Return then again hither; bring this foundation work to a blessed issue
in the blood of Christ, and when that is done, up and be doing.

You know how fatal and ruinous it is for souls to abuse the Grace of God, and
the Apprehension of the pardon of sins in the course of their obedience, to
countenance themselves in sin, or the negligence of any duty; this is to turn
the Grace of God into wantonness, as we have else where at large declared. And
it is no less pernicious to bring the duties of our obedience, any reserves for
them, any hopes about them, into the matter of pardon and forgiveness, as we
are to receive them from God. But these things, as they are distinct in
themselves; so they must be distinctly managed in the soul; and the confounding
of them, is that which disturbs the Peace, and weakens the Obedience of many.
In a confused manner they labor to keep up a life of Grace and Duty, which
will be in their places conjoined, but not mixed or compounded.

First, To take up Mercy, Pardon and Forgiveness absolutely on the account of
Christ, and then to yield all obedience in the strength of Christ, and for the
Love of Christ, is the life of a Believer, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.

RULE VIII.
Complaints fruitless and heartless to be avoided.
Take heed of spending time in complaints, when vigorous actings of Grace are
your Duty. Fruitless and heartless complaints, bemoanings of themselves and
their condition is the substance of the profession that some make. If they can
object against themselves, and form Complaints out of their conditions, they
suppose they have done their duty. I have known some who have spent a good part
of their time in going up and down from one to another with their objections
and complaints. These things are contrary to the life of Faith. It is good
indeed in our spiritual distresses to apply our selves unto them who are
furnished with the tongue of the learned, to know how to speak a word in season
unto him that is weary. But for persons to fill their minds and imaginations
with their own Objections and Complaints, not endeavoring to mix the words
that are spoken for their relief and direction, with faith, but going on still
in their own way, this is of no use or advantage. And yet some, I fear, may
please themselves in such a course, as if it had somewhat of Eminency in
Religion in it.

Others, it may be, drive the same trade in their Thoughts, although they make
not outwardly such Complaints. They are conversant for the most part with
heartless despondings. And in some they are multiplied by their natural
Constitutions or Distempers. Examples of this kind occur unto us every day. Now
what is the Advantage of these things? what did Sion get when she cried, The
Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me? or Jacob, when he said, My
way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over from my God?
Doubtless they did but prejudice themselves. How does David rouse up himself
when he found his mind inclinable unto such a frame? For having said, Why do
thou cast me off O God? why go I mourning because of the oppression of mine
enemy? He quickly rebukes and recollects himself, saying, Why art thou cast
down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, Psalm. 4. 2,
5.

We must say then unto such heartless Complainers, as God did to Joshuah, Get
you up, why lie you thus upon your faces? Do you think to mend your condition
by wishing it better, or complaining it is so bad? are your complaints of want
of an Interest in forgiveness, a sanctified means to obtain it? not at all! you
will not deal so with your selves in things natural or civil. In such things
you will take an industrious course for a remedy, or for relief. In things of
the smallest importance in this world, and unto this life, you will not content
your selves with wishing and complaining. As though industry in the use of
natural means for the attaining of natural Ends, were the Ordinance of God, and
diligence in the use of spiritual means for the obtaining of spiritual Ends
were not.

Do not consult your own hearts only. What is it that the Scripture calls for
in your condition? Is it not Industry and Activity of spirit? And what does the
nature of the thing require: distress that is yet hoped to be conquered,
evidently calls for Industry and diligence in the use of means for deliverance.
If you are past hope, it avails not to complain. If you are not, why do you
give up your selves to despondencies? Our Savior tells us, that the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, Mat. 11. 12. It is
not of the outward violence of its Enemies seeking to destroy it, that our
Savior speaks, but of that spiritual servency and ardency of mind, that is in
those who intend to be partakers of it: For (...), is taken by force, Luke 16.
16. is no more but (...) is preached, the Kingdom of God is preached, and every
man presses into it; pressing into it, and taking it by force, are the same
thing. There is then a violence, a restless activity and vigor of spirit to be
used and exercised for an interest in this Kingdom. Apply this to your
condition. Are you in depths and doubts, staggering and uncertain, not knowing
what is your condition, nor whether you have any interest in the forgiveness
that is with God? Are you tossed up and down between hopes and fears, want
peace, consolation and establishment? why lie you upon your faces? get up,
watch, pray, fast, meditate, offer violence to your lusts and corruptions; fear
not, startle not at their crying or importunities to be spared; press unto the
Throne of Grace by Prayers, Supplications, Importunities, restless Requests:
This is the way to take the Kingdom of Heaven. These things are not Peace, they
are not Assurance, but they are part of the means that God has appointed for
the attainment of them.

What then is the peculiar Instruction that is proper for souls in this
condition? that plainly of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to
make your Calling and Election sure. Alas! says the soul, I am at no
certainty, but rather am afflicted and tossed, and not comforted; my heart will
come to no stability; I have no Assurance, know not whether I am chosen or
called; yea fear that my latter end will be darkness and sorrow. There is I
confess forgiveness with God, but justly fear that I shall never be made
partaker of it. What is the usual course that is taken in such complaints by
them to whom they are made? Mostly they have a good opinion of them that come
with these complaints: They judge them to be godly and holy, though much in the
dark; if they knew them not before, yet upon these complaints they begin to be
well persuaded of them. Hereupon they are moved with pity and compassion, and
troubled to see them in their perplexities; and set themselves to tender relief
unto them: They mind them of the gracious promises of the Gospel; it may be fix
upon some one or more of them in particular, which they explain unto them:
Thence they mind them of the abundant Grace and tender Love of the Father, of
the merciful care of our High Priest, his readiness and ability to save, his
communications of such savours unto them as they perceive not. By such ways
and means, by such Applications do they seek to relieve them in the state and
condition wherein they are. But what is the issue? Does not this Relief prove
for the most part like the morning cloud, and as the early dew; a little
refreshment it may be it yields for a season, but it is quickly again dried up,
and the soul left in its heartless withering condition.

You will say then, do you condemn this manner of proceeding with the souls of
men in their doubts, fears and distresses? or would you have them pine away
under the sense of their condition, or abide in this uncertainty all their
days? I answer, no; I condemn not the way, I would not have any left
comfortless in their depths. But yet I would give these two Cautions;

1. That Spiritual Wisdom and prudence is greatly required in this matter, in
the Administration of consolation to distressed souls. If in any thing, the
tongue of the spiritually learned is required herein; namely in speaking a word
in season to them that are weary. A promiscuous drawing out of Gospel
consolations, without a previous right Judgment concerning the true state and
condition of the souls applied unto, is seldom useful, often times pernicious.
And let men take care, how they commit their souls and consciences unto such
who have good words in readiness, for all comers.

2. If Counsel and Consolation of this kind be given; special and distinct from
the Advice we are upon of Watchfulness, Diligence, Spiritual Violence in a way
of duty; it is exceeding dangerous, and will assuredly prove useless. For let
us see what counsel the holy Ghost gives in this condition unto them who would
make their Calling and Election sure, who would be freed from their present
fears and uncertainties, who complain of their darkness and dangers; why says
he, giving all diligence add to your faith virtue; and so on, v. 5. for says
he, If you do these things, an entrance shall be Administered unto you
abundantly into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
v. 11. You who are now in the Skyrts of it, who know not whether you belong
unto it or no, you shall have an Entrance into the Kingdom of Christ, and all
the Joy, comforts, consolations and Glory of it, shall be richly administered
unto you. This is the advice that the Holy Ghost gives in this case; And this
is the blessed promise annexed unto the following of this advice. And this the
former compassionate course of Administering consolation, is not to be separated
from.

But you will it may be here say, we are so dead and dull, so chained under the
power of corruptions, and temptations, that we are not able thus to put forth
the fruit of a spiritual life in adding one Grace unto another. But do you use
diligence, Study, Endeavors, all diligence, diligence at all times, in all
ways by God appointed, all manner of diligence within and without, in private
and public to this end and purpose? do you study, meditate, pray, watch, fast,
neglect no opportunity, keep your hearts, search, try, examine your selves, fly
Temptations, and occasions of cooling, deadning, and stifling Grace? Do these
things abound in you? Alas you cannot do thus, you are so weak, so indisposed;
but alas you will not, you will not part with your ease, you will not Crucify
your lusts, you will not ufe all diligence; but must come to it, or be
contented to spend all your days in darkness, and to lie down in sorrow.

Thus do men frequently miscarry; Is it any news for persons to bewail the
folly of their nature and ways in the Morning and Evening, and yet scarce
stand upon their watch any part of the day, or in any occasion of the day? Is
this giving all diligence? Is this working out our Salvation with fear and
trembling? And may we not see Professors, even indulging to themselves in ways
of Vanity, folly, wrath, envy, sloth and the like, and yet complain at what a
loss they are, how unquiet, how uncertain. God forbid it should be otherwise
with you; or that we should endeavor to speak peace unto you in any such a
frame. To hear of a person, that he walks slothfully, carelessly, or indulgeth
his corruptions, and to find him complaining that he is at loss whether he have
any interest in Pardon or not, to give or tender Comfort to such mourners
without a due Admonition of their duty to use diligence in the use of means,
for to help on their delivery out of the condition wherein they are, is to
tender poison unto them.

To this then the soul must come that is in depths, if it intend to be
delivered. Heartless complaints, with excuses to keep it from vigorous
spiritual diligence must be laid aside; if not, ordinarily, Peace, Rest, and
stability will not be obtained. A great Example hereof we have in the Spouse,
Cant. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. She is drousie and indisposed unto communion with
Christ, whereunto she is invited, v. 2. this puts her upon making excuses from
the unfitness of the time, and her present indisposition and unpreparedness as
to the duty whereunto she was called, v. 3. Hereupon Christ withdraws his
presence from her, and leaves her at a loss as to her former comforts, v. 6.
what course does she now take; does she now lie down again in her former
Slumber? does she make use of her former excuses and pretenses, why she could
not engage into the duties she was called unto? no such thing! but now with all
Earnestness, Diligence, Sedulity and Importunity, She engages in all manner of
duties, whereby she may recover her former Comforts, as you may see in the
Text. And this must be the course of others, who would obtain the same success.
Spiritual peace and sloth will never dwell together in the same soul and
Conscience.

RULE IX.
The ninth Rule. Take heed of undue expressions concerning God and his ways in
distress.

Hasty Expressions concerning God to be avoided.
Take heed in doubts, distresses, and perplexities of hard thoughts of God;
hasty unweighed expressions concerning him or his ways, with or of secret
resolves, that it were as good give over waiting as continue in the state
wherein you are, seeing your Condition is remediless.

On three occasions are such thoughts and resolves apt to befall the minds of
men, which sometimes break forth into unwarrantable Expressions concerning God
himself and his ways. 1. In deep perplexities of mind, by reason of some
pressing terror from the Lord. 2. On the long wearisome continuance of some
tempting distress, and hereof we have many examples, some whereof shall be
mentioned. 3. In spiritual disappointments through the strength of Lust or
Temptation.


When a person has it may be recovered himself through Grace, from a
perplexing sense of the guilt of some sin, or it may be from a course shorter
or longer, lesser or greater of back sliding and negligent walking with God,
and therein goes on cheerfully for a season in the course of his Obedience, if
this person through the power of Temptation Subtilty of Lusts, neglect of
watchfulness, by one means or other, is surprised in the sins, or ways that he
had relinquished, or is turned aside from the vigor of that course wherein he
was engaged, he may be exposed not only to great despondencies, but also be
overtaken with secret resolves to give over contending, seeing it is to no more
purpose, nay to no purpose, and that God regards him not at all.

Take an Instance or two in each kind.

The first we have in Job in the Extremity of his trials and terrors from the
Lord. See among other places, chap. 10. v. 3. Is it says he, to God, Good for
thee that should oppress, that thou should despise the work of thy hands?
Ah poor worms, with whom have we to do? who shall say unto a King thou art
wicked, and to Princes ye are ungodly; and will ye speak so to him, who
respects not the persons of Princes, nor regards them more than the poorest
in the Earth? And see what conclusions from such thoughts as these he does
infer. Chap. 14. 15, 16, 17. Thou numbrest my steps, do thou not watch over
my sin? my transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up my Iniquity.
He charge God to be his Enemy, one that watched for all opportunities and
advantages against him, that seemed to be glad at his halting, and take care
that none of his sins should be missing when he intended to deal with him. Had
this indeed been the Case with him, he had perished unto Eternity, as elsewhere
he acknowledged.

Of the other, we have an Instance in the Church, Lament. 3. 18. I said my
strength aad my hope is perished from the Lord. Present Grace in spiritual
strength, and future expectation of mercy are all gone. And what is got by
this? secret hard thoughts of God himself are hereby ingenerated; as v. 8. When
I cry and shout, he shuts out my Prayers, v. 44. thou have covered thy self
with a Cloud that our Prayers should not pass through. These things are
grievous unto God to bear, and no way useful to the soul in its Condition. Yea
they more and more unfit^^ for every duty that may lie in a tendency to its
relief and deliverance.

So was it with Jonah Chap. 2. 4. I said I am cast out of thy sight; all is
lost and gone with me, as good give over as Contend, I do but labor in vain;
perish I must as one cast out of the sight of God. The like complaints fell
also from Heman in his distress, Psalm. 88.

The General who heard one of his Soldiers cry out upon a fresh onset of the
Enemy, Now we are undone, Now we are ruined, called him Traitor and told him it
was not so, whilst he could weild his Sword. It is not for every private
Soldier on every danger, to make a Judgment of the battle. That is the work
of the General. Jesus Christ is the Captain of our Salvation, he has
undertaken the leading and conduct of our souls through all our difficulties.
Our Duty is to fight and contend; his Work is to take care of the Event; and to
him it is to be committed.

That then you make a due use of this Rule, keep always in your minds these
two Considerations.

Judgment of men's states in the hand of Christ alone.
1. That it is not for you to take the Judgment of Christ out of his hand, and
to be passing sentence upon your own souls. Judgment as to the state and
condition of men is committed unto Christ, and to him it is to be left. This we
were directed unto into our first Rule, and it is of special use in the case
under consideration. Self-judging in reference unto sin, and the demerit of it,
is our duty. The judging of our state and condition in Relation unto the Remedy
provided, is the Office and Work of Jesus Christ, with whom it is to be left.

2. Consider, that hard thoughts of what God will do with you, and harsh
desponding sentences pronounced against your selves, will unsensibly alienate
your hearts from God. It may be when men's perplexities are at the height, and
the most sad Expressions are as it were wrested from them, they yet think they
must Justify God, and that they do so accordingly. But yet such thoughts as
those mentioned, are very apt to infect the mind with other inclinations. For
after a while they will prevail with the soul to look on God as an Enemy, as
one that has no delight in it; and what will be the consequent thereof is
easily discernable. None will continue to love long, where they expect no
returns. Suffer not then your minds to be tainted with such thoughts; and let
not God be dishonored by any such expressions as reflect on that infinite
Grace and compassion which he is exercising toward you.

RULE X.
The Tenth Rule. Duly improve the least Appearances of God in a way of Grace or
Pardon.

The least Appearances of Grace to be improved.
If you would come to stability, and a comforting persuasion of an Interest in
forgiveness by the Blood of Christ, improve the least Appearances of him unto
your souls, and the least Intimations of his Love in Pardon, that are made unto
you in the way of God. The Spouse takes notice of her Husband, and rejoices in
him, when he stands behind the wall, when he does but look forth at the window,
and show himself at the lattice, when she could have no clear sight of him,
Cant. 2. 9. She lays hold on the least Appearance of him to support her heart
withal, and to stir up her Affections toward him. Men in dangers do not sit
still to wait until something presents it self unto them that will give assured
deliverance; but they close with that which first presents it self unto them,
that is of the same kind and nature with what they look after. And thus God
does in many places express such supportments as give the soul little more than
a possibility of attaining the End aimed at. As Zeph. 2. 3. It may be ye shall
be hid in the day of the Lords Anger. And Joel 2. 14. Who knows but he will
return and leave a blessing. It may be we shall be hid; it may be we shall have
a blessing. And this was the best ground that Jonathan had for the great
undertaking against the Enemies of God, 1 Samuel 14. 6. It may be God will go
along with us. And to what end does God at any time make these seemingly
dubious intimations of Grace and Mercy? is it that we should by the difficulty
included in them, be discouraged and kept from him? not at all; he speaks
nothing to deter sinners, especially distressed sinners, from trusting in him.
But his End is that we should close with, and lay hold upon, and improve the
least Appearances of Grace, which this kind of expressions do give unto us.
When men are in a voyage at Sea, and meet with a Storm or a Tempest which
abides upon them, and they fear will at last prevail against them; if they make
so far a discovery of Land, as that they can say, it may be there is Land; it
may it is such a place where there is a safe harbor, none can positively say,
it is not; there lies no demonstration against it; in this condition especially
if there be no other way of escape delivery or safety proposed to them, this is
enough to make them to follow on that discovery, and with all diligence to
steer their course that way, until they have made a trial of it unto the
utmost. The soul of which we speak is afflicted and tossed, and not comforted.
There is in the Intimation of Grace and Pardon intended, a remote discovery
made of some relief. This may be Christ, it may be forgiveness. This it is
convinced of; it cannot deny but at such or such a time under such Ordinances,
or in such Duties, it was persuaded that yet there might be Mercy and Pardon
for it. This is enough to carry it to steer its course constantly that way; to
press forward unto that harbor which will give it rest. How little was it that
David had to bring his soul unto a composure in his great distress, 2 Samuel 15.
25, 26. If, says he, I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will
bring me again, and show me the Ark, and the place of his habitation; but if he
thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let him do unto me as
seems good unto him. He has nothing but Sovereign Grace to rest upon, and
that he gives himself up unto.

Faith is indeed the souls Venture for Eternity. Something it is to venture on,
as to its eternal condition. It must either adhere unto its self, or its own
vain hopes of a Righteousness of its own; or it must give over all expectation
and lie down in darkness; or it must shut out all dreadful Apprehensions of
Eternity, by the power and activity of its lusts and carnal Affections; or it
must, whatever its discouragements be, cast it self upon Pardon in the blood of
Jesus Christ. Now if all the former ways be detestable and pernicious, if the
best of them be a direct opposition unto the Gospel, what has the soul that
enquires after these things to do, but to adhere unto the last, and to improve
every encouragement, even the least to that purpose.

As a close unto these General Rules, I shall only add this last direction:
Consider in particular where the stress and hinderance lies, that keeps you off
from Peace through an established persuasion of an interest in Evangelical
Pardon. Do not always fluctuate up and down in generals and uncertainties; but
drive things unto a particular issue, that it may be tried whether it be of
sufficient efficacy to keep you in your present entanglements and
despondencies. Search out your wound, that it may be tried whether it be
curable or no.

Now in this case we cannot expect that persons should suggest their own
particular concerns, that so they might be considered and be brought unto the
Rule; but we must our selves reduce such distresses, as may, or do in this
matter befall the minds of men, unto some General heads, and give a Judgment
concerning them according to the Word of Truth. Indeed particular cases as
varied by circumstances are endness; nor can they be spoken unto in this way of
Instruction and Direction, but they must be left unto occasional considerations
of them, as they are represented unto them who are entrusted to dispense the
mysteries of God. Besides, many have labored already in this matter, and their
endeavors are in, and of general use. Although it must be said, as was before
observed, that special cases are so varied by their Circumstances, that it is
very rare that any Resolutions of them are every way adequate, and suited unto
the Apprehensions of them that are exercised with them. I shall therefore call
things unto some general heads whereunto most of the Objections that distressed
sinners make against their own peace, may be reduced; and leave the Light of
them to be applied in particular unto the relief of the souls of men, as God
shall be pleased to make them effectual.

Second General Head of the Application of the Truth insisted on. Grounds of
Spiritual Disquietments considered. The first; Afflictions. Ways and means of
the Aggravation of Afflictions. Rules about them.

That which now lies before us, is the second part of the second General Use
educed from the Truth insisted on. Our aim is to lead on souls toward peace
with God, through a gracious persuasion of their Interest in that forgiveness
which is with him. And it consists, as was declared, in a Consideration of some
of those disquietments which befall the minds of men, and keep them off from
Establishment in this matter.

Afflictions a cause of spiritual disquictments.
And first, such disquietments and objections against the peace of the soul, and
its acceptance with God, will arise from Afflictions; they have done so of old,
they do so in many at this day. Afflictions, I say, greatned unto the mind from
their Nature, or by their Concomitants do oft-times variously affect it, and
sometimes prevail to darken it so far as to ingenerate thoughts, that they are
all messengers of wrath, all tokens of displeasure, and so consequently
evidences that we are not par doned or accepted with God.

Now this is a time of great Afflictions unto many, and those some of them such
as have innumerable aggravating circumstances accompanying of them. Some have
come with a dreadful surprizal in things not looked for; such as falls not out
in the providence of God in many Generations. Such is the condition of them who
are reduced to the utmost extremity by the late consuming fire; some have had
their whole families, all their posterity taken from them; in a few days they
have been suddenly bereaved, as in the Plague. Some in their own persons, or in
their Relations, have had sore, long and grievous trials from Oppressions and
Persecutions; and these things have various effects on the minds of men. Some
we find crying with that wicked King, This evil is of the Lord, why should we
wait any longer for him? and give up themselves to seek relief from their own
lusts. Some bear up under their troubles with a natural stoutness of spirit;
some have received a sanctified use and improvement of their trials, with joy
in the Lord. But many we find to go heavily under their burdens, having their
minds darkened with many misapprehensions of the Love of God, and of their own
personal interest in his Grace. It is not therefore unseasonable to speak a
little to this Head of trouble in our entrance. Outward troubles, I say, are
oftentimes occasions, if not the causes of great inward distresses. You know
how the Saints of old expressed their sense of them, and conflicts with them.
The complaints of David are familiar to all who attend unto any communion with
God in these things; so are those of Job, Heman, Jonah, Jeremiah, and others;
neither do they complain only of their troubles, but of the sense which they
had of Gods displeasure in and under them, and of his hiding of his face from
them whilst they were so exercised.

It is not otherwise at present, as is known unto such as converse with many,
who are either surprised with unexpected troubles, or worn out with trials and
disappointments of an expected end. They consider themselves both absolutely,
and with respect unto others, and on both accounts are filled with dark
thoughts and despondencies. Says one, I am rolled from one trial unto another;
the clouds with me return still after the rain. All the billows and
water-spouts of God go over me. In my person, it may be, pressed with sickness,
pains, troubles; in my Relations, with their sins, miscarriages, or death; in
my outward state, in wants, losses, dis-reputation, I am even as a withered
branch. Surely if God had any especial regard unto my soul, it would not be
thus with me; or some timely end would have been put unto these dispensations.
On the other hand, they take a view of some other Professors; they see that
their Tables are spread day by day; that the Candle of the Lord shines
continually on their tabernacle, and that in all things they have their hearts
desire. Setting aside the common attendencies of humane nature, and nothing
befalls them grievous in the world. Thus it is with them. And surely had I an
interest in his Grace, in Pardon, the God of Israel would not thus pursue a
Flea in the Mountains, nor set himself in battle array against a leaf driven to
and fro with the wind; he would spare me a little, and let me alone for a
moment; but as things are with me, I fear my way is hidden from the Lord, and
my Judgment is passed over from my God. These kind of thoughts do perplex the
minds of men, and keep them off from partaking of that strong consolation which
God is abundantly wiling they should receive, by a comfortable persuasion of a
blessed Interest in that forgiveness that is with him.

And this was the very case of David; or at least these outward Troubles were a
special part of those depths, out of which he cried for relief, by a sense of
Pardon, Grace and Redemption with God.

I answer to these Complaints; First, That there are so many excellent things
spoken concerning Afflictions; their Necessity, their Usefulness, and the like;
such blessed ends are assigned unto them, and in many have been compassed and
fulfilled by them, that a man unacquainted with the exercise wherewith they are
attended, would think it impossible that any one should be shaken in mind, as
to the Love and favor of God on their account. But as the Apostle tells us,
that no Afflictions are joyous at present but grievous; So he who made in the
close of his Trials that solemn profession, That it was good for him that he
had been affected, yet we know, as has been declared, how he was distressed
under them. There are therefore sundry Accidental things which accompany great
Afflictions that seem to exempt them from the common Rule, and the promise of
Love and Grace: As,

Means of the Aggravation of Affliction.
1. The Remembrance of past and buried misearriages and sins, lies in the bosom
of many Afflictions: It was so with Job; Thou make me, says he, to possess
the sins of my youth. See his plea to that purpose, chap. 13. 23, 24, 25, 26,
27. In the midst of his troubles and distresses, God revived upon his spirit a
sense of former sins, even the sins of his youth, and made him to possess them;
he filled his soul and mind with thoughts of them, and anxiety about them. This
made him fear lest God was his enemy, and would continue to deal with him in
all feverity. So was it with Joseph's Brethren in their distresses, Genesis 42. 21.
They said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that
we saw the anguish of his soul, when he sought us, and we would not hear,
therefore is this distress come upon us. And verse. 22. Behold his blood is
required. Their distress revives a deep perplexing sense of the guilt of sin
many years past before, and that under all its aggravating circumstances which
spoiled them of all their reliefs and comforts, filling them with Confusion and
Trouble, though absolutely innocent as to what was come on them. And the like
appeared in the Widow of Zareptha, with whom Elijah sojourned during the
famine. Upon the death of her Son, which it seems was some what extraordinary,
she cried out unto the Prophet, What have I to do with thee thou Man of God?
Art thou come to call my sins to remembrance and to slay my Son? 1 King. 17,
18. It seems some great sin she had formerly contracted the guilt of, and now
upon her sore Affliction in the death of her only child, the Remembrance of it
was recalled and revived upon her soul. Thus deep calls unto deep at the
noise of Gods water spouts, and then all his waves and billows go over a
person, Psalm. 42. 7. The deep of Afflictions calls up the deep of the guilt
of sin, and both in conjunction become as billows and waves passing over the
soul. We see only the outside of men's afflictions, they usually complain only
of what does appear. And an easy thing it is supposed to be, to apply relief
and comfort unto those that are distressed. The Rule in this matter is so
clear, so often repeated and inculcated, the promises annexed unto this
condition so many and precious, that every one has in readiness what to apply
unto them who are so exercised. But oftentimes we know nothing of the Gall and
Wormwood that is in men's Affliction; they keep that to themselves, and their
souls feed upon them in secret, Lam. 3. 12. God has stirred up the Remembrance
of some great sin, or sins, and they look upon their Afflictions as that
wherein he is come, or beginning to enter into Judgment with them. And is it
any wonder if they be in darkness and filled with disconsolation.

2. There is in many Afflictions something that seems New, and peculiar,
wherewith the soul is surprised, and cannot readily reduce its condition unto
what is taught about Afflictions in General. This perplexeth and intangleth it.
It is not Affliction it is troubled withal, but some one thing or other in it
that appears with an Especial dread unto the soul, so that he questioneth
whether ever it were so with any other or no, and is thereby deprived of the
supportment which from former Examples it might receive. And indeed when God
intends that which shall be a deep Affliction, he will put an Edge upon it in
matter, or manner, or circumstances, that shall make the soul feel its
sharpness. He will not take up with our bounds and measures, and with which we
think we could be contented. But he will put the impress of his own greatness
and terror upon it, that he may be acknowledged and submitted unto. Such was
the State with Naomi; When from a full and plentiful condition, she went into a
strange Country with an Husband and two Sons, where they all dyed, leaving her
destitute and poor; Hence in her account of Gods dealing with her, she says,
call me not Naomi (that is pleasant) but call me mara (that is bitter) for the
Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me. I went out Full and the Lord brought
me again Empty; why then call ye me Naomi since the Lord has testified against
me; and the Almighty has afflicted me, Ruth 1. 20, 21. So was it with Job,
with the Widow of Zareptha; and with her at Naim who was burying her only
Child. And still in many Afflictions God is pleased to put in an entangling
specialty, which perplexeth the soul and darkens it in all its Reasonings about
the Love of God toward it, and its interest in Pardon and Grace.

3. In some; Affections are very strong and Importunate as fixed on lawful
things; whereby their Nature is made sensible and tender, and apt to receive
very deep impressions from urgent Afflictions; Now although this in its self be
a good natural frame, and helps to preserve the soul from that stout hardness
which God abhors, yet if it be not watched over, it is apt to perplex the soul
with many intangling Temptations. The Apostle intimates a double evil that we
are obnoxious unto under trials and Afflictions, Heb. 12. 5. My Son, despise
not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him.
Men may either through a natural stoutness despise and contemn their
sufferings, and be obstinate under them, or faint and despond, and so come
short of the end which God aims at for them, to be attained in a way of duty.
Now though the frame spoken of, be not obnoxious unto the first extreme, yet it
is greatly to the latter, which if not watched against, is no less pernicious
than the former. Affections in such persons being greatly moved they cloud and
darken the mind, and fill it with strange Apprehensions concerning God and
themselves. Every thing is presented unto them through a Glass composed of
Fear, Dread, Terror, Sorrow, and all sorts of disconsolations. This makes them
faint and despond, unto very sad apprehensions of themselves and their
Conditions.

4. Afflictions find some entangled with very strong corruptions, as Love of
the World, or the pleasure of it, of Name or Reputation, of great contrivances
for posterity, and the like; or it may be in things carnal or sensual. Now when
these unexpectedly meet together, great Afflictions and strong Corruptions, it
is not conconceivable what a combustion they will make in the soul. As a strong
medicine or potion meeting with a strong or tough distemper in the body; there
is a violent contention in nature between them and about them, so that
oftentimes the very life of the patient is endangered. So it is where a great
trial, a smart stroke of the hand of God, falls upon a person in the midst of
his pursuit of the Effects of some corruptions; the soul is amazed even to
distraction, and can scarce have any thought, but that God is come to cut the
person off in the midst of his sin. Every unmortified corruption fills the very
fear and expectation of Affliction, with horror. And there is good Reason that
so it should do; for although God should be merciful unto men's Iniquities, yet
if he should come to take Vengeance of their Inventions, their condition would
be dark and sorrowful.

5. Satan is never wanting in such Occasions to attempt the compassing of his
Ends, upon persons that are exercised under the hand of God. In the time of
suffering it was, that he fell upon the Head of the Church, turning it into the
very hour of the power of darkness. And he will not omit any appearing
opportunities of Advantage against his Members. And this is that which he
principally in such seasons attacks them withal; namely, that God regards them
not, that they are fallen under his Judgment and Severity, as those who have
no share in Mercy, Pardon or Forgiveness.

From these and the like Reasons, I say, it is, that whereas Afflictions in
general are so testified unto, to be such pledges and tokens of Gods Love and
Care to be designed unto blessed ends; as conformity unto Christ, and a
participation of the Holiness of God; yet by reason of these Circumstances,
they often prove means of casting the soul into depths, and of hindering it
from a refreshing interest in the forgiveness that is with God. That this may
prove no real or abiding ground of inward spiritual trouble unto the soul, the
following Rules and Directions may be observed.

Rules to be observed concerning Afflictions.
1. Not only Afflctions in general, but great and manifold Afflictions, and
those attended with all sorts of aggravating circumstances, are always
consistent with the pardon of sin, after signal tokens and pledges of it, and
of the Love of God therein, Job 7. 17, 18. What is man that thou should
magnify him, and that thou should set thine heart upon him, and that thou
should visit him every morning, and try him every moment! What were the
considerations that cast him into this admiration of the Care and Love of God,
is expressed, v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. There are no words of a more dismal import
in the whole book than those here expressed; yet when he recollected himself
from his overwhelming distress, he acknowledges that all this proceeded from
the Love and Care of God; yea his fixing his heart upon a man to magnify him,
to set him up, and do him good; For this end does he chasten a man every
morning, and try him every moment; and that with such afflictions as are for
the present so far from being joyous, as that they give no Rest, but even weary
the soul of life, as he expresses their Effects on himself, v. 15, 16. And
hence it is observed of this Job, that when none in the Earth was like to him
in trouble, God gave him three Testimonies from Heaven, that there was none in
the Earth like unto him in Grace. And although it may not be laid down as a
General Rule, yet for the most part in the providence of God, from the
foundation of the world, those who have had most of Afflictions, have had most
of Grace, and the most eminent Testimonies of Acceptance with God. Christ Jesus
the Son of God, the Head of the Church, had all Afflictions gathered into an
head in him; and yet the Father always loved him, and was always well pleased
with him.

When God solemnly renewed his Covenant with Abraham, and he had prepared the
Sacrifice whereby it was to be ratified and confirmed, God made a smoking
Furnace to pass between the pieces of the Sacrifice, Genesis 15. 17. It was to let
him know that there was a furnace of Affliction attending the Covenant of Grace
and Peace. And so he tells Sion that he chose her in the furnace of Affliction,
Isa. 48. 10. that is, in Egyptian Affliction, burning, flaming afflictions,
fiery trials, as Peter calls them, 1 Pet. 4. 12. There can then no Argument be
drawn from Affliction, from any kind of it, from any aggravating circumstance
wherewith it may be attended, that should any way discourage the soul in its
comforting supporting persuasion of an interest in the Love of God and
forgiveness thereby.

2. No length or continuance of Afflictions ought to be any impeachment of our
spiritual consolation. Take for the confirmation hereof, the great Example of
the Son of God. How long did his Afflictions continue? what end or issue was
put to them? No longer did they abide than until he cried with a loud voice and
gave up the Ghost. To the moment of his death; from his Manger to his Cross,
his Afflictions still increased, and he ended his days in the midst of them.
Now he was the Head of the Church, and the great Representative of it; unto a
conformity with whom we are predestined. And if God will have it so with us,
even in this particular, so as that we shall have no rest, no peace from our
trials, until we lie down in the Grave, that whatever condition we pass
through, they shall be shut out of none, but only from Immortality and Glory,
what have we herein to complain of?

3. Where the Remembrance and perplexing sense of past sins is revived by
present afflictions; separate them in your minds, and deal distinctly about
them. So long as you carry on the consideration of them jointly, you will be
rolled from one to another, and never obtain rest unto your souls. They will
mutually aggravate each other. The sharpness of Affliction will add to the
bitterness of the sense of sin; and the sense of sin will give an edge to
Affliction, and cause it to pierce deeply into the soul, as we showed in the
former instances. Deal therefore distinctly about them, and in their proper
order. So does the Psalmist here. He had at present both upon him, and together
they brought him into these depths concerning which he so cries out for
deliverance from them; see Psalm. 32. 3, 4, 5. And what course does he take? he
applies himself in the first place to his sin, and the guilt of it, and that
distinctly and separately. And when he has got a discharge of sin, which he
waited so earnestly for, his faith quickly arose above his outward trials, as
appears in his blessed close of all; He shall redeem Israel out of all his
trouble; the whole Israel of God, and my self amongst them. This do then,
single out the sin or sins that are revived in the sense of their guilt upon
the conscience. Use all diligence to come to an issue about them in the blood
of Christ. This God by your Affliction calls you unto. This is the disease
whereof your trouble is but the symptom. This therefore in the Cure you seek
after, is first and principally to be attended unto; when that is once removed,
the other as to any prejudice unto your souls will depart of its self. The root
being once dug up, you shall not long feed on the bitter fruit that it has
brought forth; or if you do, the Wormwood shall be taken out of it, and it
shall be very pleasant unto you, as well as wholesome. How this is to be done
by an Application unto God for forgiveness, has been at large declared. But if
men will deal with confused thoughts about their sins and their troubles, their
wound will be incurable, and their sorrow endless.

4. Remember that a time of Affliction is a time of Temptation. Satan, as we
have showed, will not be wanting unto any appearing Opportunity or Advantage of
setting upon the soul. When Pharaoh heard that the people were entangled in the
wilderness, he pursued them. And when Satan sees a soul entangled with it is
distresses and troubles, he thinks it his time and hour to assault it. He seeks
to winnow, and comes when the Corn is under the flail. Reckon therefore that
when trouble comes, the Prince of the world comes also, that you may be
provided for him. Now is the time to take the shield of faith, that we may be
able to quench his fiery darts. If they be neglected, they will inflame the
soul. Watch therefore and pray that you enter not into Temptation; that Satan
do not represent God falsely unto you. He that durst represent Job falsely to the
All-seeing God, will with much boldness represent God falsely unto us, who see
and know so little. Be not then ignorant of his devices; but every way set your
selves against his interposing between God and your souls, in a matter which he
has nothing to do withal. Let not this makebate by any means inflame the
difference.

5. Learn to distinguish the Effect of natural distempers from spiritual
distresses. Some have sad, dark and tenacious thoughts fixed on their minds
from their natural distempers. These will not be cured by Reasonings, nor
utterly quelled by faith. Our design must be to abate their Efficacy and
Consequents, by considering their Occasions. And if men cannot do this in
themselves, it is highly incumbent on those who make Application of relief unto
them, to be careful to discern what is from such principles, whereof they are
not to expect a speedy Cure. And,

6. Take heed in times of peace and ease, that you lay not up, by your
negligence or careless walking, sad provision for a day of darkness, a time of
Afflictions. It is sin that imbitters troubles; the sins of peace are revived
in the time of distress. Fear of future Affliction, of impendent troubles,
should make us careful not to bring that into them which will make them bitter
and sorrowful.

7. Labor to grow better under all your Afflictions, lest your Afflictions
grow worse; lest God mingle them with more darkness, bitterness and terror. As
Joab said unto David, if he ceased not his scandalous Lamentation on the death
of Absalom, all the people would leave him, and he then should find himself in
a far worse condition than that which he bemoaned, or any thing that befell him
from his youth. The same may be said unto persons under their Afflictions. If
they are not managed and improved in a due manner, that which is worse may,
nay, in all probability will befall them. Wherever God takes this way, and
engages in afflicting, he does commonly pursue his work until he has
prevailed, and his design toward the afflicted party be accomplished. He will
not cease to thresh and break the bread-corn until it be meet for his use. Lay
down then the weapons of thy warfare against him; give up your selves to his
Will; let go every thing about which he contends with you; follow after that
which he calls you unto, and you will find light arising unto you in the midst
of darkness. Has he a cup of Affliction in one hand, lift up your eyes and you
will see a cup of Consolation in another. And if all Stars withdraw their
light, whilst you are in the way of God, assure your selves that the Sun is
ready to rise.

8. According to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, a man may be sensible of
the respect of Affliction unto sin; yea unto this or that sin in particular,
and yet have a comfortable persuasion of the forgiveness of sin. Thus it was in
general in Gods dealing with his people, He forgave them, but he took vengeance
on their inventions, Psalm. 99. 8. Whatever they suffered under the vengeance
that fell upon their Inventions, (and that is as hard a word as is applied any
where unto Gods dealing with his people) yet at the same time he assured them
of the pardon of their sin. So you know was the case of David. His greatest
Trial and Affliction, and that which befell him on the account of a particular
sin, and wherein God took vengeance on his invention, was ushered in with a
Word of Grace, that God had done away, or pardoned his sins, and that he should
not dye. This is expressed in the Tenor of the Covenant with the seed of
Christ, Psalm. 89. 31, 32, 33, 34.

Objections against Believing from things internal. The person knows not
whether he be Regenerate or no. State of Regeneration asserted. Difference of
Saving and Common Grace. This difference discernable. Men may know themselves
to be Regenerate. The Objection answered.

Another head of Objections and Despondencies arises from things internal,
things that are required in the soul, that it may have an Interest in the
forgiveness that is with God. Some whereof we shall speak unto; and these
respect, first the state of the soul; and secondly, some actings in the soul.

Objections against Believing, from the State of the Soul.
First, As to the State, say some, unless a man be Regenerate, and born again,
he is not, he cannot be made partaker of Mercy and Pardon. Now all things here
are in the dark unto us. For first, we know not well what this Regeneration is,
and it is variously disputed amongst men. Some would place it only in the
outward signs of our Initiation unto Christ, and some otherwise express it.
Again, it is uncertain, whether thou that are Regenerate do or may know that
they are so; or whether this may be in any measure known unto others with whom
they may treat about it. And if it may not be known we must be uncertain in
this also. And then it may be for their parts, they neither know the time when,
nor the manner how any such work was wrought in them; and yet without this,
seeing it is wrought by means, and springs from certain causes, they can have
no establishment in a not-failing persuasion of their Acceptance with God, by
the pardon of their sins in the blood of Christ. This is the Head and sum of
most of the Objections which perplexed souls do manage against themselves as to
their state and condition. Hence indeed they draw forth reasonings with great
variety according as they are suggested by their particular occasions and
temptations. And many proofs taken from their sins, miscarriages and fears, do
they enforce their Objections withal. My purpose is to lay down some General
Rules and Principles, which may be applied unto particular occasions and
emergencies. And this shall be done in answer to the several parts of the
General Objection mentioned before. I say then,

Two different estates whereunto all men belong.
First, It is most certain that there are two Estates and Conditions that divide
all mankind; and every one that lives in the world, does completely and
absolutely belong unto one of them. These are the state of Nature, and the
state of Grace, of Sin, and of Righteousness by Christ; every man in the world
belongs unto one of these states or condition. This the Scripture so abounds
in, that it seems to be the first principal thing that we are taught in it. It
is as clear that there are two different states in this world, as that there
are so in that to come. Yea, all our Faith and our Obedience depend on this
Truth. And not only so, but the Covenant of God, the Mediation of Christ, and
all the Promises and Threats of the Law and Gospel are built on this
supposition. And this lays naked unto a spiritual eye that abounding Atheism
that is in the world. Men are not only like Nicodemus, ignorant of these
things, and wonder how they can be, but they scorn them, despise them, scoff at
them. To make mention of being regenerate is exposed to reproach in the world.
But whether men will or no, unto one of these conditions they must belong.

2. As these two estates differ morally in themselves, and Physically in the
causes constitutive of that difference; so there is a specifical difference
between the things that place men in the one condition and in the other.
Whatever there is of Goodness, Virtue, Duty, Grace in an Unregenerate person,
there is in him that is Regenerate somewhat of another kind that is not in the
other at all. For the difference of these states themselves it is plain in
Scripture. The one is a state of Death, the other of Life; the one of Darkness,
the other of Light; the one of Enmity against God, the other of Reconciliation
with him. And that the one state is constituted by that of Grace which is of a
peculiar kind, and which is not in the other. I shall briefly declare.

Saving Grace specifically distinct from common Grace.
1. The Grace of Regeneration proceeds from an especial spring and fountain,
which emptieth much of its living waters into it, no one drop whereof falls on
them that are not Regenerate. This is Electing Love; it is given out in the
pursuit of the Decree of Election; God has chosen us that we should be holy,
Ephesians. 1. 4. Our Holiness, whose only spring is our Regeneration, is an effect
of our Election; That which God works in our souls, in the pursuit of his
eternal purpose of Love and good will toward us. So again, says the Apostle,
2 These. 2. 13. God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through the
sanctification of the Spirit. God having designed us unto salvation as the End,
has also appointed the sanctification of the Spirit to be the Means to bring
us orderly unto the attainment of that End. But the best of common Grace or
Gifts that may be in men Unregenerate, are but products of the Providence of
God, ordering all things in general unto his own Glory, and the good of them
that shall be heirs of salvation. They are not fruits of Electing Eternal Love,
nor designed means for the insiallible attaining of Eternal Salvation.

Secondly, The Graces of those that are Regenerate have a manifold Respect or
Relation to the Lord Christ that the common Graces of others have not. I shall
name one or two of these Respects: First, They have an especial moral Relation
to the Mediatory Acts of Christ in his Oblation and Intercession. Especial
Grace is an especial part of the purchase of Christ by his death and
bloodshedding. He made a double purchase of his Elect; of their persons to be
his; of especial Grace to be theirs. He gave himself for his Church, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that he
might present it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle,
or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.
26, 27. The design of Christ in giving himself for his Church, was to procure
for it that Especial Grace, whereby through the use of Means, it might be
regenerate, sanctified and purified. So Titus 2. 14. He gave himself that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works. Real purification in Grace and Holiness has this
Especial Relation unto the Death of Christ, that he designed therein to procure
it for them for whom he dyed. And in the pursuit of his Purchase or Acquisition
of it, his purpose was really to bestow it upon them, or effectually to work it
in them. Moreover, it has an Especial Relation unto his Intercession; and that
in a distinguishing manner from any other Gifts or common Graces that other men
may receive. Giving us the Rule and Pattern of his intercession, Joh. 17. He
tells us, that he so prays not for the world, but for his Elect; those which
the Father had given him, because they were his, v. 9. And what is it that he
prays for them, in distinction from all other men whatever? Amongst others,
this is one principal thing that he insists on, v. 17. Sanctify them through
thy Truth. Their Sanctification and Holiness is granted upon that Prayer and
Intercession of Christ, which is peculiar unto them with an exclusion of all
others, I pray for them, I pray not for the world. Now the common Grace of
unregenerate persons, whereby they are distinguished from other men, whatever
it be, it has not this Especial Relation to the Oblation and Intercession of
Christ. Common Grace is not the procurement of Especial Intercession.

Secondly, They have a Real Relation unto Christ as he is the living
Quickning-Head of the Church; for he is so, even the living spiritual fountain
of the spiritual life of it, and of all vital Acts whatever. Christ is our
life, and our life is hid with him in God, Col. 3. 2, 3. That Eternal Life
which consists in the Knowledge of the Father and the Son, Joh. 17. 3. is in
him as the cause, head, spring and fountain of it. In him it is in its fullness,
and from thence it is derived unto all that believe, who receive from his
fullness Grace for Grace, Joh. 1. 16. All ^^ue saving sanctifying Grace, all
spiritual life, and every thing that belongs thereunto is derived directly from
Christ as the living Head of his Church, and fountain of all spiritual life
unto them. This the Apostle expresses, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Speaking the truth in
love, grow up into him in all things, which is the Head even Christ; from whom
the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. To the same
purpose he again expresses the same matter, Col. 2. 19. All Grace in the whole
body comes from the Head Christ Jesus; and there is no growth or furtherance of
it, but by his Effectual working in every part to bring it unto the measure
designed unto it. Nothing then, no not the least of this Grace can be obtained
but by virtue of our Union unto Christ as our head, because it consists in a
vital effectual influence from him, and his fullness. And this kind of Relation
unto Christ, all Grace that is, or may be in unregenerate men, is incapable of.

Thirdly, The Grace of Regeneration, and the fruits of it are administered in
and by the Covenant. This is the promise of the Covenant, That God will write
his Law in our hearts, and put his fear in our inward parts, that we shall not
depart from him, Jer. 32. This is that Grace whereof we speak, whatever it be,
or of what kind soever. It is bestowed on none but those who are taken into
Covenant with God; for unto them alone it is promised, and by virtue thereof is
it wrought in and upon their souls. Now all Unregenerate men are strangers from
the Covenant, and are not made partakers of that Grace which is peculiarly and
only promised thereby, and exhibited therein.

Fourthly, the least spark of saving Regenerating Grace is wrought in the soul
by the Holy Ghost, as given unto men to dwell in them, and to abide with them.
He is the water given by Jesus Christ unto Believers, which is in them a well
of water springing up to everlasting life, John 4. 14. First they receive the
water, the spring it self that is the Holy Spirit; and from thence living
waters do arise up in them; they are wrought, effected, produced by the Spirit,
which is given unto them. Now although the common Gifts and Graces of men
Unregenerate are effects of the power of the Holy Ghost wrought in them, and
bestowed on them, as are all other works of Gods Providence; yet it does not
work in them, as received by them, to dwell in them, and abide with them as a
Never-failing spring of spiritual life. For so our Savior says expressly, that
the World, or Unbelievers do not know the Spirit, nor can receive him, or have
him abiding in them. All which, in a contradistinction unto all Unregenerate
persons, are affirmed of all them that do believe.

Fifthly, The least of saving Grace, such as is peculiar unto them that are
Regenerate, is Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit.
Whatever it is that is so born, it is Spirit, it has a spiritual being, and it
is not educible by any means out of the principles of Nature. So it is said to
be a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Be it never so little or so great, however it
may differ in degrees in one and in another, yet the nature of it is the same
in all; It is a new Creature. As the least Worm of the Earth in the order of
the old Creation, is no less a creature than the Sun; yea or the most glorious
Angel in Heaven: So in the order of the new Creation, the least spark or dram
of true grace that is from the sanctifying Spirit, is a new Creature, no less
than the highest Faith or Love that ever were in the chiefest of the Apostles.
Now that which is Spirit, and that which is not Spirit; that which has a new
spiritual being, and that which has none, whatever appearance of agreement
there may be among them, do yet differ specifically from one another. And thus
it is with the saving Grace that is in a Regenerate, and those common Graces
that are in others which are not so. So that as these are diverse States, so
they are eminently different and distinct the one from the other; and this
answers the second thing laid down in the Objections, taken from the
Uncertainty of these States, and of Regeneration it self, and the real
difference of it from the contrary State, which is exclusive of an interest in
forgiveness.

Difference between the State of Grace and Nature discernable.
Thirdly, This is laid down in the Enquiry, whether this State may be known
unto him, who is really partaker of it, or translated into it, or unto others
that may be concerned therein; to which I say, the difference that is between
these two States, and the constitutive causes of them, as it is real, so it is
discernable; It may be known by themselves who are in those states, and others.
It may be known who are born of God, and who are yet Children of the Devil; who
are quickened by Christ, and who are yet dead in Trespasses and Sin: But here
also Observe,

1. That, I do not say, This is always known to the persons themselves
concerned in this distribution. Many cry peace, peace when sudden destruction
is at hand. These either think themselves regenerate when they are not, or else
wilfully despise the consideration of what is required in them, that they may
have peace, and so delude their own souls unto their ruin. And many that are
truly born of God, yet know it not. They may for a season walk in darkness and
have no light; Nor

2. That this is always known to others. It is not known unto Unregenerate men
in respect of them that are so. For they know not really and substantially what
it is to be so. Natural men perceive not the things of God; that is,
spiritually, in their own light and nature, 2 Cor. 2. And as they cannot aright
discern the things which put men into that condition, (for they are foolishness
unto them,) so they cannot Judge aright of their persons in whom they are. And
if they do at any time Judge aright nationally concerning any things or
Persons, Yet they do not Judge so upon right grounds, nor with any Evidence in
or unto themselves of what they do Judge. Wherefore Generally they Judge amiss
of such persons; And because they make profession of somewhat which they find
not in themselves, they Judge them Hypocrites, and false pretenders unto what
is not. For those things which evince their Union with Christ, and which
evidence their being born of God, they savor them not, nor can receive them.
Nor is this always known unto, or discerned by them that are Regenerate. They
may sometime with Peter think a Simon Magus to be a true believer; or with Eli
an Hannah to be a daughter of Belial. Many Hypocrites are so set forth with
gifts, common Graces, Light and profession that they pass amongst all believers
for such as are born of God. And many poor Saints may be so disguised under
Darkness, Temptation, Sin, as to be looked on as strangers from that family
whereunto indeed they do belong. The Judgment of man may fail, but the
Judgment of God is according unto Righteousness; wherefore,

3. This is that we say; it may be known in the Sedulous use of means appointed
for that end, to a man's self and others, which of the Conditions mentioned he
does belong unto; that is, whether he be regenerate or no, so far as his or
their concernment lies therein. This I say may be known and that infallibly and
assuredly with reference unto any duty wherein from hence we are concerned. The
discharge of some duties in our selves and toward others, depends on this
knowledge, and therefore we may attain it, so far as it is necessary for the
discharge of such duties unto the Glory of God. Now because it is not directly
in our way, yet having been mentioned I shall briefly in our passage touch upon
the latter, or what duties do depend upon our Judging of others to be
regenerate, and the way or Principles whereby such a Judgment may be made.

1. There are many duties incumbent on us to be performed with and toward
Professors; which without admitting a Judgment to be made of their State and
Condition cannot be performed in faith. And in reference unto these duties
alone it is that we are called to Judge the State of others. For we are not
giving Countenance unto a rash uncharitable censuring of men's spiritual
conditions, nor unto any Judging of any men, any other than what our own duty
toward them, does indispensably require. Thus if we are to lay down our lives
for the Brethren, it is very meet we should so far know them, so to be, as that
we may hazard our lives in faith when we are called thereunto. We are also to
Join with them in those Ordinances wherein we make a Solemn profession that we
are members of the same body with them, that we have the same head, the same
Spirit, faith and love: We must love them because they are begotten of God,
Children of our heavenly Father; and therefore must on some good ground believe
them so to be. In a word, the due performance of all principal mutual Gospel
Duties, to the Glory of God and our own Edification, depends on this
supposition, that we may have such a satisfying persuasion concerning the
spiritual condition of others as that from thence we may take our aim, in what
we do.

2. For the grounds hereof, I shall mention one only; which all others do lean
upon. This is pressed, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. As the body is one, and has many
members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so is
Christ. For by one Spirit we are all Baptized into one body, whether we be Jews
or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into
one Spirit. They are all united unto, and hold of one head. For as are the
members of the body natural under one head, So is Christ mystical, that is, all
believers under Christ their head. And this Union they have by the inhabitation
of the same quickening Spirit, which is in Christ their head, and by him they
are brought all into the same spiritual state and frame; they are made to drink
into one and the same Spirit; for this same Spirit produces the same Effects
in them all, the same in kind though differing in degrees, as the Apostle fully
declares, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. And this Spirit is in them, and not in the
world, John 16. And as this gives them a naturalness in their duties one
toward another; or in mutual caring for, rejoicing and sorrowing with one
another, as members one of another, 1 Cor. 12. 25, 26. So it reveals and
discovers them to each other, so far as is necessary for the performance of the
Duties mentioned, in such a manner as becomes members of the same body. There
is on this account a spiritually natural Answering of one to another, as face
answers face in the Water. They can see and discern that in others whereof
they have Experience in themselves; they can taste and relish that in others,
which they feed upon in themselves, and wherein the lives of their souls do
consist? the same spirit of life being in them, they have the same spiritual
taste and Savor. And unless their pallats are distempered by Temptations or
false opinions, or prejudices, they can in their Communion, taste of that Spirit
in each other, which they are all made to drink into. This gives them the same
likeness and Image in the Inward man, the same heavenly light in their minds,
the same affections; and being thus prepared and enabled to Judge and discern
of the State of each other, in reference unto their mutual duties, they have
moreover the true Rule of the Word to Judge of all Spirits and Spiritual
effects by. And this is the ground of all that love without dissimulation and
real Communion that is among the Saints of God in this World. But here two
Cautions must be allowed,

1. That we would not Judge the State and Condition of any men in the world, no
further than we are called thereunto in a way of Duty; and we are so called
only with reference unto the Duties that we are to perform toward them. What
have we to do to Judge them that are without, that is any one that we have not
a call to consider in reference unto our own Duty. Herein that great Rule takes
place; Judge not, that ye be not Judged. Let us leave all men, the worst of
men, unless where evident duty requires other actings, to the Judgment seat of
God. They are the Servants of another, and they stand or fall unto their own
Master. There have been great miscarriages amongst us in this matter, some have
been ready to condemn all that go not along with them in every principle, yea
opinion or practice. And every day slight occasions and provocations, are made
the grounds and reasons of severe censures. But nothing is more contrary to the
conduct of the meek and holy Spirit of Christ. This is our Rule; are we called
to Act toward any as Saints, as living Members of the body of Christ, and that
in such Duties as we cannot perform in faith, unless we are persuaded that so
they are, then are we on the grounds, and by the ways before mentioned, to
satisfy our selves in one another.

2. Do we endeavor mutually to discern the condition of one another, in
reference unto such Ends; Let us be sure to look unto, and pursue those ends
when we have attained our Satisfaction. What these ends are has been showed.
It is that we may love them without dissimulation, as members of the same
mystical body with us; that we may naturally take care of them, and for them;
that we may delight sincerely in them; that we may minister unto their wants,
Temporal and Spiritual; that we may watch over them with pity and compassion.
These and the like are the only ends for which we are at any time called to the
consideration of the spiritual condition of one another, if these be neglected
the other is useless. And here lies a great aggravation of that neglect, in
that such a way is made for the avoidance of it. Here lies the life or death of
all Church Society. All Church Society and Relation is built on this
supposition, that the members of it are all Regenerate; some lay this
foundation in Baptism only, professing that all that are baptized are
Regenerate. Others require a farther Satisfaction in the real work it self. But
all build on the same foundation; that all Church members are to be Regenerate.
And to what end is this? Namely that they may all mutually perform those duties
one toward another, which are incumbent mutually on Regenerate persons. If
these are omitted, there is an End of all profitable use of Church Society.
Churches without this are but mere husks and shells of Churches, Carcasses
without souls. For as there is no real Union unto Christ without faith, so
there is no real Union among the members of any Church without Love, and that
acting its self in all the Duties mentioned. Let not this Ordinance be in vain.

But we must return from this digression, to that which lies before us, which
is concerning what a man may discern concerning his own being Regenerate or
born again. I say then,

Believers may know themselves to be born of God.
Secondly, Men may come to an assured Satisfactory persuasion that themselves
are regenerate, and that such, as is so far insallible, as that it will not
deceive them, when it is brought unto the trial. For there are many Duties
whose performance in faith unto the glory of God, and the Edification of our
own souls, does depend on this persuasion and Conviction. As,

1. A due sense of our Relation unto God, and an answerable comportment of our
spirits and hearts toward him. He that is born again, is born of God. He is
begotten of God by the immortal seed of the Word. Without a persuasion hereof
how can a man on grounds of faith carry himself toward God as his Father? and
how great a part of our Obedience toward him and communion with him depends
hereon, we all know. If men fluctuate all their days in this matter, if they
come to no settlement in it, no comfortable persuasion of it, they scarce ever
act any genuine childlike acts of Love or Delight toward God, which
exceedingly impeacheth their whole Obedience.

2. Thankfulness for Grace received is one of the principal duties that is
incumbent on Believers in this World. Now how can a man in faith bless God for
that which he is utterly uncertain whether he have received it from him or no.
I know some men run on in a Road in this matter. They will bless God in a
formal way, for their Regeneration, Sanctification, Justification, and the
like: But if you ask them whether themselves are regenerate or no, they will be
ready to scoff at it, or at least to profess that they know no such thing. What
is this but to mock God, and in a presumptuous manner to take his name in vain:
But if we will praise God, as we ought for his Grace, as we are guided and
directed in the Scripture, as the nature of the matter requires, with such a
frame of heart as may influence our whole Obedience, surely it cannot but be
our duty to know the Grace that we have received.

3. Again the main of our Spiritual watch, and diligence, consists in the
cherishing, improving, and increasing of the Grace that we have received; the
strengthening of the new Creature that is wrought in us; Herein consists
principally the Life of faith, and the exercise of that Spiritual Wisdom which
faith furnishes the soul withal. Now how can any man apply himself hereunto,
whilst he is altogether uncertain whether he has received any principle of
Living, Saving Grace, or no? whereas therefore God requires our utmost
Diligence, Watchfulness, and Care in this matter, It is certain that he
requires also of us, and grants unto us, that which is the foundation of all
these duties which lies in an Acquaintance with that state and condition
whereunto we do belong. In brief there is nothing, we have to do in reference
unto Eternity, but one way or other, it has a respect unto our light and
convictions, as to our State and Condition in this World. And those who are
negligent in the trial and Examination thereof, do leave all things between God
and their souls at absolute uncertainties, and dubious hazards; which is not to
lead the Life of Faith.

We shall now upon these premises return unto that part of the Objection which
is under consideration. Say some; We know not whether we are regenerate or no,
and are therefore altogether uncertain whether we have an interest in that
forgiveness that is with God; nor dare we on that account admit of the
consolation that is tendered on the Truth insisted on.

Supposing what has been spoken in general, I shall lay down the grounds of
resolving this perplexing doubt in the ensuing Rules.

RULE I.
Rules whereby men may judge of their Condition in respect of Inherent Grace.
See that the persuasion and Assurance hereof which you look after and desire
be regular, and not such as is suited merely unto your own Imaginations. Our
second and third General Rules about the nature of all spiritual Assurance, and
what is consistent therewithal, are here to be taken into consideration. If
you look to have such an Evidence, Light into, and absolute conviction of this
matter, as shall admit of no doubts, fears, questionings, just occasions and
causes of new trials, teachings, and self-examinations, you will be greatly
deceived. Regeneration induces a new principle into the soul, but it does not
utterly expel the old; some would have security, not Assurance. The principle
of sin and unbelief will still abide in us, and still work in us. Their abiding
and their acting must needs put the soul upon a severe enquiry whether they are
not prevalent in it beyond what the condition of Regeneration will admit. The
constant conflicts we must have with sin, will not suffer us to have always so
clear an Evidence of our condition as we would desire. Such a persuasion as is
prevalent against strong objections to the contrary, keeping up the heart to a
due performance of those duties in faith which belong unto the state of
Regeneration, is the substance of what in this kind you are to look after.

RULE II.
If you are doubtful concerning your state and condition, do not expect an
extraordinary determination of it by an Immediate Testimony of the Spirit of
God. I do grant that God does sometimes by this means bring in peace and
satisfaction unto the soul; he gives his own Spirit immediately to bear witness
with ours, that we are the children of God, both upon the account of
Regeneration and Adoption. He does so, but as far as we can observe in a way of
Sovereignty, when and to whom he pleases. Besides, that men may content and
satisfy themselves with his ordinary Teachings, Consolations and
Communications of his Grace, he has left the nature of that peculiar Testimony
of the Spirit very dark and difficult to be found out, few agreeing wherein it
does consist, or what is the nature of it: No one man's Experience is a Rule
unto others. And an undue Apprehension of it, is a matter of great danger. Yet
it is certain that humble souls in extraordinary cases may have recourse unto
it with benefit and relief thereby. This then you may desire, you may pray for,
but not with such a frame of spirit as to refuse that other satisfaction which
in the ways of Truth and Peace you may find. This is the putting of the hand
into the side of Christ, but blessed are they who believe, and yet have not
seen.

RULE III.
If you have at any time formerly received any especial or Immediate pledge or
testimony of God given unto your souls as unto their Sincerity, and
consequently their Regeneration, labor to recover it, and to revive a sense of
it upon your Spirits now in your darkness and trouble. I am persuaded there are
but few Believers, but that God does at one time or other, in one duty or
other, entering into, or coming out of one Temptation or another, give some
singular Testimony unto their own souls and consciences concerning their
Sincerity, and his Acceptance of them. Sometimes he does this in a duty wherein
he has enabled the soul to make so near an approach unto him, as that it has
been warmed, enlivened, sweetened, satisfied with the presence, the gracious
presence of God, and which God has made unto him as a token of his
uprightness. Sometimes, when a man is entering into any great Temptation, Trial,
difficult or dangerous duty, that death it self is feared in it, God comes in
by one means or other, by a secret intimation of his Love, which he gives him
to take along with him for his furniture and provision in his way, and thereby
testifies to him his Sincerity. And this serves like the food of Elijah for
forty days in a wilderness condition. Sometimes he is pleased to shine
immediately into the soul in the midst of its darkness and sorrow wherewith it
is surprised, as not looking for any such expression of kindness, and is
thereby relieved against its own pressing self-condemnation. And sometimes the
Lord is pleased to give these tokens of Love unto the soul as its refreshment,
when it is coming off from the storm of Temptations wherewith it has been
tossed. And many other times and seasons there are wherein God is pleased to
give unto Believers some Especial Testimony in their consciences unto their own
Integrity. But now these are all wrought by a transient operation of the Spirit
exciting and enabling the heart unto a spiritual sensible apprehension and
receiving of Gods expressing kindness toward it. These things abide not in
their sense, and in their power which they have upon our Affections, but
immediately pass away. They are therefore to be treasured up in the mind and
judgment, to be improved and made use of by Faith, as occasion shall require;
but we are apt to lose them. Most know no other use of them, but whilst they
feel them; yea, through ignorance in our duty to improve them, they prove like
a sudden light brought into a dark place, and again removed, which seems to
increase, and really aggravates our sense of the darkness. The true Use of them
is to lay them up, and ponder them in our hearts, that they may be Supportments
and Testimonies unto us in a time of need. Have you then, who are now in the
dark as to your state or condition, whether you are Regenerate or no, ever
received any such refreshing and chearing Testimony from God given unto your
Integrity, and your Acceptance with him thereupon; call it over again, and make
use of it against those discouragements which arise from your present darkness
in this matter, and which keeps you off from sharing in the consolation tendered
unto you in this Word of Grace.

RULE IV.
A due spiritual Consideration of the Causes and Effects of Regeneration, is
the ordinary way and means whereby the souls of Believers come to be satisfied
concerning that work of God in them and upon them. The principle or causes of
this work, are the Spirit and the Word. He that is born again, is born of the
Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. and of the Word; Of his own Will begat he us by the word of
his Truth, Jam. 1. 18. We are born again by the Word of God that abides for
ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Where ever then a man is regenerate, there has been an
effectual work of the Spirit, and of the Word upon his soul. This is to be
inquired into, and after. Ordinarily it will discover it self. Such impressions
will be made in it upon the soul, such a change will be wrought and produced in
it, as will not escape a spiritual diligent search and enquiry. And this is
much of the duty of such as are in the dark, and uncertain concerning the
accomplishment of this work in themselves. Let them call to mind what have been
the actings of the Spirit by the Word upon their souls. What Light thereby has
been communicated unto their minds; what discoveries of the Lord Christ and way
of Salvation have been made to them; what sense and detestation of sin have
been wrought in them; what satisfaction has been given unto the soul, to
choose, accept, and acquiesce in the Righteousness of Christ; what Resignation
of the heart unto God according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, it has
been wrought unto; Call to mind what Transactions there have been between God
and your souls about these things; how far they have been carried on; whether
you have broken off the Treaty with God, and refused his Terms; or if not,
where the stay is between you; and what is the Reason since God has graciously
begun to deal thus with you, that you are not yet come to a through close with
him in the work and design of his Grace; the defect must of necessity lie on
your parts. God does nothing in vain: Had he not been willing to receive you,
he would not have dealt with you so far as he has done. There is nothing then
remains to firm your condition but a resolved Act of your own Wills in
answering the mind and will of God. And by this search may the soul come to
satisfaction in this matter; or at least find out and discover where the stick
is whence their uncertainty does arise, and what is wanting to complete their
desires.

Again, this work may be discovered by its Effects. There is something that is
produced by it in the soul, which may also be considered either with respect
unto its Being and Existence, or unto its Actings and Operations; in the first
regard it is Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. That which is born of the Spirit, which is
produced by the effectual operation of the Spirit of God, it is Spirit; A new
Creature, 2 Cor. 15. 17. He that is in Christ Jesus, who is born again, is a
new Creature, a new life, a spiritual life, Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 2. 1. In brief,
it is an habitual furnishment of all the faculties of the soul, with new
spiritual vital principles, enabling a person in all instances of Obedience, to
lead a spiritual life unto God. This principle is by this work produced in the
soul; and in respect of its Actings, it consists in all the gracious operations
of the Mind, Will, Heart or Affections in the duties of Obedience which God
has required of us. This is that which gives life unto our duties (without
which the best of our works are but dead works) and renders them acceptable
unto the Living God. It is not my business at large to pursue and declare these
things; I only mention them, that persons who are kept back from a
participation of the Consolation tendered from the forgiveness that is with God,
because they cannot comfortably conclude that they are born again, as knowing
that it is unto such persons alone unto whom these Consolations do truly and
really belong, may know how to make a right judgment of themselves. Let such
persons then not fluctuate up and down in Generals and Uncertainties, with
heartless complaints, which is the ruin of the peace of their souls; but let
them really put things to the trial, by the examination of the Causes and
Effects of the work they enquire after. It is by the use of such means whereby
God will be pleased to give them all the Assurance and Establishment concerning
their State and Condition which is needful for them, and which may give them
encouragement in their course of obedience. But supposing all that has been
spoken; what if a man by the utmost search and enquiry that he is able to make,
cannot attain any satisfactory persuasion that indeed this great work of Gods
Grace has passed upon his soul; is this a sufficient ground to keep him off
from accepting of supportment and consolation from this Truth, that there is
forgiveness with God, which is the design of the Objection laid down before? I
say therefore further, that

1. Regeneration does not in Order of time precede the souls interest in the
forgiveness that is with God, or its being made partaker of the pardon of sin;
I say no more but that it does not precede it in order of time, not determining
which has precedence in order of nature. That, I confess, which the method of
the Gospel leads unto, is that Absolution, Acquitment, or the pardon of sin, is
the foundation of the communication of all saving Grace unto the soul, and so
precedeth all Grace in the sinner whatever. But because this Absolution or
pardon of sin is to be received by faith, whereby the soul is really made
partaker of it, and all the benefits belonging thereunto; and that faith also
is the radical grace which we receive in our Regeneration; for it is by faith
that our hearts are purified, as an Instrument in the hand of the great
purifier, the Spirit of God; I place these two together, and shall not dispute
as to their priority in nature; but in time the one does not precede the other.

2. It is hence evident, that an Assurance of being Regenerate, is no way
previously necessary unto the believing of an interest in forgiveness; so that
although a man have not the former, it is, or may be his duty to endeavor the
latter. When convinced persons cried out, What shall we do to be saved! the
answer was, believe and you shall be so; Believe in Christ, and in the
remission of sin by his blood, is the first thing that convinced sinners are
called unto. They are not directed first to secure their souls that they are
born again, and then afterward to believe. But they are first to believe that
the Remission of sin is tendered unto them in the blood of Christ, and that by
him they may be justified from all things from which they could not be
justified by the Law. Nor upon this proposition is it the duty of men to
question whether they have faith or no, but actually to believe. And faith in
its operation will evidence it self. See Acts 13. 38, 39. Suppose then that you
do not know that you are Regenerate, that you are born of God; that you have no
prevailing, refreshing constant evidence or persuasion thereof; should this
hinder you? should this discourage you from believing forgiveness, from closing
with the promises, and thereby obtaining in your selves an interest in that
forgiveness that is with God? Not at all; Nay, this ought exceedingly to excite
and stir you up unto your duty herein. For,

1. Suppose that it is otherwise; that indeed you are yet in the state of sin,
and are only brought under the power of Light and Conviction; this is the way
for a translation into an estate of spiritual life and Grace: If you will
forbear the acting of faith upon; and for forgiveness, until you are
Regenerate, you may, and probably you will come short both of Forgiveness and
Regeneration also. Here lay your foundation, and then your building will go on.
This will open the door unto you, and give you an entrance into the Kingdom of
God, Christ is the door; do not think to climb up over the wall; enter by him,
or you will be kept out.

2. Suppose that you are born again, but yet know it not, as is the condition
of many. This is a way whereby you may receive an evidence thereof. It is good
embracing of all signs, tokens and pledges of our spiritual condition; and it
is so to improve them. But the best course is to follow the genuine natural
actings of faith, which will lead us into the most settled apprehensions
concerning our Relation unto God, and acceptance with him. Believe first the
forgiveness of sin as the effect of mere grace and mercy in Christ. Let the
faith hereof be nourished and strengthened in your souls. This will insensibly
influence your hearts into a comforting Gospel persuasion of your state and
condition toward God, which will be accompanied with assured rest and peace.

To wind up this discourse; remember, that that which has been spoken with
reference unto the state of Regeneration in General, may be applied unto every
particular objection or cause of fear or discouragement that may be reduced to
that head. Such are all Objections that arise from particular sins, from
Aggravations of sin by their greatness or circumstances, or relapses into them.
The way that the consideration of these things prevail upon the mind unto
fears, is by begetting an apprehension in men that they are not Regenerate; for
if they were, they suppose they could not be so overtaken or entangled. The
Rules therefore laid down are suited to the streights of the souls of sinners
in all such particular cases.

Lastly, There was somewhat in particular added in the close of the Objection,
which although it be not directly in our way, nor of any great importance in it
self, yet having been mentioned it is not unmeet to remove it out of the way,
that it may not leave intanglement upon the minds of any. Now this is, that
some know not, nor can give an account of the Time of their conversion unto
God, and therefore cannot be satisfied that the saving work of his grace has
passed upon them. This is usually and ordinarily spoken unto, And I shall
therefore briefly give an account concerning it.

1. It has been showed that in this matter, there are many things whereon we
may regularly found a Judgment concerning our selves; and it is great folly to
wave them all, and put the issue of the matter upon one circumstance. If a man
have a trial at law wherein he has many evidences speaking for him, only one
circumstance is dubious and in question; He will not cast the weight of his
Cause on that disputed circumstance, but will plead those Evidences that are
more clear, and testify more fully in his behalf. I will not deny but that
this matter of the time of conversion is oftimes an important circumstance; In
the affirmative when it is known it is of great use tending to stability and
consolation; but yet it is still but a circumstance, such as that the being of
the thing it self does not depend upon. He that is alive may know that he was
born, though he know neither the place where, nor the time when he was so. And
so may he that is spiritually alive, and has ground of evidence that he is so,
that he was born again, though he knew neither when, nor where, nor how. And
this Case is usual in persons of quiet natural Tempers, who have had the
advantage of education under means of light and Grace. God ofttimes in such
persons begins and carries on the work of his Grace insensibly, so that they
come to good growth and maturity before they know that they are alive. Such
persons come at length to be satisfied in saying with the blind man in the
Gospel, How our eyes were opened we know not, only one thing we know, whereas
we were blind by nature, now we see.

2. Even in this matter also, we must, it may be, be content to live by faith,
and to believe as well what God has done in us, if it be the matter and
subject of his promises, as what he has done for us, the ground whereof also
is the promise and nothing else.

Objections from the present state and Condition of the Soul: Weakness and
imperfection of Duty. Opposition from Indwelling Sin.

Objections from weakness in Duty, and the power of Sin.
3. There is another Head of Objections against the souls receiving Consolation
from an interest in forgiveness arising from the consideration of its present
state and condition, as to actual Holiness, Duties and sins. Souls complain
when in Darkness, and under Temptations that they cannot find that Holiness,
nor those fruits of it in themselves, which they suppose an interest in
pardoning mercy will produce. Their hearts they find are weak, and all their
Duties worthless. If they were weighed in the balance they would be all found
too light. In the best of them there is such a mixture of Self, Hypocrisy,
Unbelief, vain Glory, that they are even ashamed and confounded with the
Remembrance of them. These things fill them with discouragements, so that they
refuse to be comforted, or to entertain any refreshing persuasion from the
Truth insisted on; but rather conclude that they are utter strangers from that
forgiveness that is with God, and so continue helpless in their depths.

According unto the method proposed, and hitherto pursued I shall only lay down
some such general Rules, as may support a soul under the despondencies, that
are apt in such a condition to befall it, that none of these things may weaken
it in its endeavor to lay hold of forgiveness. And,

First, This is the proper place to put in execution our seventh Rule, to take
heed of heartless complaints, when vigorous actings of Grace are expected at
our hands. If it be thus indeed, why lie you on your faces, why do you not
rise, and put out your selves to the utmost, giving all diligence to add one
Grace to another, until you find your selves in a better frame. Supposing then
the putting of that Rule into practice, I add, that

1. Known Holiness, is apt to degenerate into self righteousness. What God
gives us on the account of Sanctification, we are ready enough to reckon on the
score of Justification. It is a hard thing to feel Grace, and to believe as if
there were none. We have so much of the Pharisee in us by nature, that it is
sometimes well that our Good is hid from us. We are ready to take our Corn and
Wine and bestow them on other Lovers. Were there not in our hearts a
spiritually sensible principle of corruption; and in our duties a discernable
mixture of self, it would be impossible we should walk so humbly, as is
required of them who hold communion with God in a Covenant of Grace and
pardoning mercy. It is a good life, which is attended with a faith of
Rightcousness, and a sense of corruption. Whilst I know Christ's.
Righteousness, I shall the less care to know my own Holiness. To be holy is
necessary, to know it sometimes a Temptation.

2. Even Duties of Gods Appointment when turned into selfrighteousness are Gods
great abhorrency, Isa. 66. 2, 3. What has a good Original may be vitiated by a
bad End.

3. Oftentimes Holiness in the heart is more known by the Opposition that is
made there to it, than by its own prevalent working; The Spirits Operation is
known by the flesh's opposition. We find a man's strength by the burdens he
carries, and not the pace that he goes. Oh, wretched man that I am who shall
deliver me from the body of this death, is a better evidence of Grace and
Holiness, than God I thank thee I am not as other men; a heart pressed,
grieved, burdened, not by the guilt of sin only, which reflects with trouble on
an awakened conscience, but by the close adhering power of Indwelling sin,
tempting, seducing, soliciting, hindering, captivating, conceiving, restlesly
disquieting may, from thence have as clear an evidence of holiness, as from a
delightful fruit-bearing. What is it that is troubled and grieved in thee; What
is it, that seems to be almost killed, and destroyed; that cries out, complains,
longs for deliverance? is it not, the new Creature? is it not the principle of
spiritual life, whereof thou art partaker? I speak not of trouble and
disquietments for sin committed, nor of fears and perturbations of mind, left
sin should break forth to loss, shame, ruin, dishonor; nor of the contending
of a convinced Conscience lest Damnation should ensue; but of the striving of
the spirit against sin, out of a hatred and a loathing of it, upon all the mixed
Considerations of Love, Grace, Mercy, Fear, the beauty of Holiness, Excellency
of communion with God, that are proposed in the Gospel. If thou seem to thy
self to be only passive in these things, to do nothing, but to endure the
Assaults of sin; Yet if thou art sensible, and stand under the stroke of it,
as under the stroke of an Enemy, there is the root of the matter. And as it is
thus, as to the substance and Being of Holiness, so it is also as to the
degrees of it. Degrees of Holiness are to be measured more by Opposition, than
self operation. He may have more Grace, than another; who brings not forth so
much fruit as the other; because he has more opposition, more Temptation, Isa.
41. 17. And sense of the want of all, is a great sign of somewhat in the soul.

2. As to what was alleged to the nothingness, the selfishness of Duty; I say,

It is certain whilst we are in the flesh, our duties will taste of the vessel
whence they proceed. Weakness, defilements, treachery, hypocrisy will attend
them. To this purpose whatever some pretend to the contrary, is the Complaint
of the Church, Isa. 64. 6. The Chafe oftentimes is so mixed with the Wheat
that Corn can scarce be discerned. And this know, that the more spiritual any
man is, the more be sees of his unspiritualness in his spiritual Duties. An
outside performance will satisfy an outside Christian. Job abhorred himself
most, when he knew himself best. The clearer discoveries we have had of God,
the viler will every thing of self appear. Nay further, duties and performances
are oftentimes very ill measured by us; and those seem to be first, which
indeed are last, and those to be last, which indeed are first. I do not doubt
but a man when he has had distractions to wrestle withal, no outward
advantage to further him, no extraordinary provocations of hope, fear or sorrow
on a natural account in his duty, may rise from his knees with thoughts that he
has done nothing in his duty but provoked God; when there has been more
workings of Grace in contending with the deadness cast on the soul by the
condition that it is in, than when by a concurrence of moved natural
affections, and outward provocations, a frame has been raised, that has to
the party himself seemed to reach to Heaven; so that it may be this perplexity
about duties, is nothing but what is common to the people of God, and which
ought to be no obstruction to peace and settlement.

2. As to the pretense of Hypocrisy, you know what is usually answered; it is
one thing to do a thing in hypocrisy, another not to do it without a mixture
of hypocrisy. Hypocrisy in its long extent is every thing that for matter or
manner comes short of sincerity. Now our sincerity is no more perfect than our
other graces; so that in its measure it abides with us, and adheres to all we
do: In like manner, it is one thing to do a thing for vain glory, and to be
seen of men, another not to be able wholly to keep off the subtle insinuations
of self and vain glory. He that does a thing in hypocrisy, and for vain glory,
is satisfied with some corrupt end obtained, though he be sensible that he
sought such an end. He that does a thing with a mixture of hypocrisy, that is
with some breaches upon the degrees of his sincerity, with some insensible
advancements in performance on outward considerations, is not satisfied with a
self end attained, and is dissatisfied with the defect of his sincerity. In a
word, would thou yet be sincere, and do endeavor so to be in private
duties, and in public performances; in praying, hearing, giving alms, zealous
actings for Gods glory, and the Love of the Saints, though these duties are
not, it may be, sometimes, done without sensible hypocrisy, I mean as traced
to its most subtle insinuations of self and vain glory, yet are they not done
in hypocrisy, nor do not denominate the persons by whom they are performed
hypocrites; Yet I say of this, as of all that is spoken before; it is of use to
relieve us under a troubled condition, of none to support us or encourage us
unto an abode in it.

3. Know that God despises not small things; he takes notice of the least
breathings of our hearts after him, when we our selves can see nor perceive no
such thing. He knows the mind of the spirit in those workings, which are never
formed to that height, that we can reflect upon them with our observation.
Every thing that is of him, is noted in his Book, though not in ours. He took
notice that when Sarah was acting unbelief toward him, yet that she showed
respect and regard to her Husband, calling him Lord, Genesis 18. 12. 1 Pet. 3. 6.
And even whilst his people are sinning, he can find something in their hearts,
words or ways that pleases him, much more in their duties. He is a skillful
refiner that can find much Gold in that Ore where we see nothing but Lead or
Clay. He remembers the duties which we forget, and forgets the sins which we
remember. He justifies our persons though ungodly, and will also our duties,
though not perfectly godly.

4. To give a little further support in reference unto our wretched miserable
duties, and to them that are in perplexities on that account, know that Jesus
Christ takes out whatever is evil and unsavory out of them, and makes them
acceptable. When an unskilful servant gathers many herbs, flowers and weeds in
a Garden, you gather them out that are useful, and cast the rest out of sight.
Christ deals so with our performances. All the ingredients of self that are in
them on any account, he takes away, and adds Incense to what remains, and
presents it to God, Exodus 28. 36. This is the cause that the Saints at the last
day when they meet their own duties and performances, they know them not, they
are so changed from what they were when they went of their hand. Lord, when saw
we thee naked or hungry, so that God accepts a little, and Christ makes our
little a great deal.

5. Is this an Argument to keep thee from believing? The Reason why thou art no
more Holy, is because thou have no more faith. If thou have no holiness, it is
because thou have no says; Holiness is the purifying of the heart by faith; or
our Obedience unto the Truth. And the reason why thou art no more in duty, is
because thou art no more in believing; the reason why thy duties are weak and
imperfect, is because thy faith is weak and imperfect. Have thou no holiness,
believe that thou may have; have thou but a little, or that which is
imperceptible, be steadfast in believing that thou may abound in Obedience. Do
not resolve not to eat thy meat until thou art strong, when thou have no means
of being strong, but by eating thy bread, which strengthens the heart of man.

Object. 4. The powerful tumulating of indwelling sin or corruption, is
another cause of the same kind of trouble and despondency. They that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the lusts thereof. But we find, say some,
several corruptions working effectually in our hearts, carrying us captive to
the Law of sin. They disquiet with their power, as well as with their guilt.
Had we been made partakers of the Law of the Spirit of Life, we had ere this
been more set free from the Law of sin and death. Had sin been pardoned fully,
it would have been subdued more effectually.

There are three Considerations which make the actings of indwelling sin to be
so perplexing to the soul.

1. Because they are unexpected. The soul looks not for them upon the first
great conquest made of sin, and universal engagement of the heart unto God.
When it first says, I have sworn, and amstedfastly purposed to keep thy
righteous Judgments; commonly there is peace at least for a season from the
disturbing vigorous actings of sin. There are many Reasons why so it should be.
Old things are then passed away, all things are become new; and the soul under
the power of that universal change, is utterly turned away from those things
that should foment, stir up, provoke or cherish any lust or temptation. Now
when some of these Advantages are past, and sin begins to stir and act again,
the soul is surprised, and thinks the work that he has passed through was not
true and effectual, but temporary only. Yea he thinks perhaps that sin has
more strength than it had before, because he is more sensible than he was
before. As one that has a dead arm or limb whilst it is mortified, endures
deep cuts and launcings, and feels them not: when spirits and sense are brought
into the place again, he feels the least cut, and may think the instruments
sharper than they were before, when all the difference is, that he has got a
quickness of sense, which before he had not. It may be so with a person in this
case; he may think lust more powerful than it was before, because he is more
sensible than he was before. Yea sin in the heart, is like a Snake or Serpent;
you may pull out the sting of it, and cut it into many pieces; though it can
sting mortally no more, nor move his whole body at once, yet it will move in
all its parts, and make an appearance of a greater motion than formerly. So it
is with lust, when it has received its deaths wound, and is cut in pieces, yet
it moves in so many parts as it were in the soul, that it amazes him that has
to do with it; and thus coming unexpectedly, fills the spirit oftentimes with
disconsolation.

2. It has also in its actings an Universality. This also surprizeth; there is
an universality in the actings of sin, even in Believers. There is no evil that
it will not move to; there is no good that it will not attempt to hinder; no
duty that it will not defile. And the reason of this is, because we are
sanctified but in part; not in any part wholly, though savingly and truly in
every part. There is sin remaining in every faculty, in all the Affections, and
so may be acting in and toward any sin that the nature of man is liable unto.
Degrees of sin there are that all Regenerate persons are exempted from; but
unto solicitations to all kinds of sin they are exposed, and this helps on the
Temptation.

3. It is endless and restless; never quiet conquering nor conquered; it gives
not over, but rebels being overcome, or assaults afresh having prevailed.
Oft-times after a victory obtained, and an opposition subdued, the soul is in
expectation of Rest and Peace from its enemies. But this holds not. It works
and rebels again and again, and will do so whilst we live in this world; so
that no issue will be put to our conflict but by death. This is at large
handled elsewhere, in a Treatise lately published on this peculiar subject.

These and the like Considerations attending the actings of indwelling sin, do
oftentimes entangle the soul in making a Judgment of it self, and leave it in
the dark as to its state and condition.

A few things shall be offered unto this Objection also.

1. The sensible powerful actings of indwelling sin, are not inconsistent with
a state of Grace, Gal. 5. 17. There are in the same person contrary principles,
the flesh and the spirit; these are contrary; And there are contrary actings
from these principles; The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh; and these actings are described to be great vigorous in
other places. Lust wars against our souls, Jam. 4. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 1 l. Now to war
is not to make faint or gentle Opposition to be flighted and contemned; but it
is to go out with great strength, to use craft, subtlety and force, so as to
put the whole issue to a hazard. So these lusts war; such are their actings in
and against the soul. And therefore says the Apostle, You cannot do the things
that you would; see Romans 7. 14, 15, 16, 17. In this conflict indeed the
understanding is left unconquered; it condemns and disapproves of the evil led
unto; and the will is not subdued; it would not do the evil that is pressed
upon it, and there is an hatred or aversation remaining in the Affections unto
sin; but yet notwithstanding sin rebels, fights, tumultuates, and leads
captive. This Objection then may receive this speedy Answer. Powerful actings
and workings, universal endless struglings of ind welling sin, seducing to all
that is evil, putting it self forth to the disturbance and dissettlement of all
that is good, is no sufficient ground to conclude a state of Alienation from
God; see for this the other Treatise before mentioned at large.

2. Your state is not at all to be measured by the opposition that sin makes to
you, but by the opposition you make to it; be that never so great, if this be
good, be that never so restless and powerful, if this be sincere, you may be
disquieted, you can have no reason to despond.

I have mentioned these things only to give a specimen of the Objections which
men usually raise up against an actual closing with the Truth insisted on to
their consolation. And we have also given in upon them some Rules of Truth for
their relief, not intending in them absolute satisfaction as to the whole of
the cases mentioned, but only to remove the darkness raised by them so out of
the way, as that it might not hinder any from mixing the Word with Faith that
has been dispensed from this blessed testimony, that there is forgiveness with
God that he may be feared,

Verse 5, 6.
V. 5, 6.
PRoceed we now to the second part of this Psalm, which contains the deportment
of a sin-perplexed soul; when by Faith it has discovered where its Rest does
lie, and from whom its relief is to be expected; even from the forgiveness
which is with God, whereof we have spoken.

There are two things in general, as was before mentioned, that the soul in
that condition applies it self unto; whereof the first respects its self, and
the other the whole Israel of God.

That which respects its self, is the description of that frame of heart and
spirit that he was brought into, upon faiths discovery of forgiveness in God;
with the duties that he applied himself unto, the grounds of it, and the manner
of its performance, v. 5, 6. V. 5, and 6. opened.
I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his Word do I hope.
My soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning: I say
more than they that watch for the morning.


Herein I say he describes both his frame of spirit, and the Duty he applied
himself to, both as to matter and manner.

I shall, as in the method hitherto observed, first consider the reading of the
Words, then their sense and importance, with the suitableness of the things
mentioned in them, to the condition of the soul under Consideration; all which
will yield us a foundation of the Observations that are to be drawn from them.

The Words rendered strictly or word for word lie thus, I have earnestly
expected Jehovah; my Soul has expected, and in his Word have I tarryed, or
waited.

My Soul to the Lord, more then, (or before) the watchmen in the morning; the
watchmen in the morning; or unto the morning.



I have waited or expected; (...) from (...) to expect, to hope, to wait.
Verbum hoc est, magno animi desiderio, in aliquem intentum esse, and respicere
ad eum, ex eo pendere. The word denotes to be intent on any one with great
desire; to behold or regard him, and to depend upon him; and it also expresses
the earnest inclination and intention of the Will and Mind.

Paul seems to have expressed this word to the full, Romans 8. 19. by (...); an
intent or earnest expectation, expressing it self by putting forth the head,
and looking round about with earnestness and diligence. And this is also
signified expressly by this word; Psalm. 69. 20. (...) and I looked for some to
take pity; huc illuc anxie circumspexi, siqui forte me commiseraturus esset. I
looked round about this way and that way diligently and solicitously, to see if
any would pity me or lament with me.

Thus, I have waited, is as much, as I have diligently with intention of soul,
mind, will, and affections looked unto God, in earnest expectation of that from
him, that I stand in need of, and which must come forth from the forgiveness
that is with him.

2. I have, says he, waited for, or expected Jehovah; he uses the same Name of
God in his Expectation, that he first fixed on in his Application to him.

And it is not this or that means, not this or that Assistance, but it is
Jehovah himself that he expects and waits for. It is Jehovah himself that must
satisfy the Soul: his favor and loving kindness; and what flows from them; If
he come not himself, if he gives not himself, nothing else will relieve.

3. My soul does wait or expect; it is no outward duty that I am at, no
lip-labor, no bodily work, no formal cold careless performance of a duty; no,
my soul does wait: it is soul work, heart work I am at; I wait, I wait with my
whole soul.

4. In his word do I hope: or wait. There is not anything of difficulty in
these words; the word used (...) is from (...) sunt qui quod affiue sit verbo
(...) velint anxietatem and nisum includere, ut significet anxie, seu enixe
expectare, sustinere, and sperare; It signifies to hope, expect, endure, and
sustain, with care, solicitousness, and endeavors. Hence the 70 have rendered
the word by (...) and the Vul. Lat. Sustinui. I have sustained and waited with
patience.

And this on the Word; or he sustained his soul with the Word of promise that
it should not utterly faint. Seeing he had made a discovery of Grace and
forgiveness, though yet at a great distance; he had a sight of Land, though he
was yet in a storm at Sea; and therefore incourageth himself, or his soul, that
it do not despond.

But yet all this that we have spoken reaches not the intensness of the soul of
the Psalmist in this his Expectation of Jehovah. The earnest engagement of his
soul in this duty rises up above what he can express. Therefore he proceeds,
ver. 6. My Soul, says he, for the Lord, (that is, expects him, looks for him,
waits for his coming to me in Love and with forgiveness) more than the watchers
for the morning, the watchers for the morning.

These latter words are variously rendered, and variously expounded. The LXX.
and vulgar Latin render them; from the Morning watch, until night. Others,
from those that keep the Morning watch unto those that keep the Evening watch.
More than the watchers in the morning, more than the Watchers in the Morning.

The Words also are variously expounded. Austin would have it to signify, the
placing of our hopes on the Morning of Christ's Resurrection, and continuing in
them until the night of our own death.

Hierome who renders the Words, from the morning watch to the morning watch,
expounds them of continuing our hopes and expectations from the morning that we
are called into the Lords Vineyard, to the morning when we shall receive our
reward; as much to the sense of the place as the former: and so Chrysostom
interprets it of our whole life.

It cannot be denied but that they were lead into these mistakes by the
Translation of the 70. and that of the Vulgar Latin, who both of them have
divided these Words, quite contrary to their proper dependence; and read them
thus, My soul expected the Lord. From the Morning watch to the Night watch, Let
Israel trust in the Lord; so making the words to belong to the following
Exhortation unto others, which are plainly a part of the expression of his own
duty.

The words then are a Comparison, and an Allusion unto Watchmen, and may be
taken in one of these two senses.

1. In things Civil; As those who keep the Watch of the Night, do look, and
long for, and expect the morning, when being dismissed from their Guard they
may take that Sleep that they need and desire, which expresses a very earnest
expectation, inquiry and desire, Or,

2. In things Sacred; With the Chaldee Paraphrast, which renders the words,
more than they that look for the morning watch, which they carefully observe,
that they may offer the Morning Sacrifice. In this sense, as faith he, the
Warders and Watchers in the Temple, do look diligently after the Appearance of
the Morning that they may with Joy offer the Morning Sacrifice in the appointed
season; So, and with more diligence does my Soul wait for Jehovah.

You see the reading of the words; and how far the sense of them opens it self
unto us by that consideration.

Let us then nextly see briefly the several parts of them, as they stand in
Relation one to another. We have then, 1. The Expression of the Duty wherein he
was exercised, and that is earnest waiting for Jehovah. 2. The bottom and
foundation of that his waiting and expectation; that is the Word of God; the
word of promise, he diligently boped in the Word. 3. The Frame of his Spirit
in, and the manner of his performance of this Duty; Expressed.


1. In the words themselves that he uses, according as we opened them before.

2. In the Emphatical reduplication, yea triplication of his expression of it;
I wait for God, my soul waits for God, my soul for the Lord.

3. In the Comparison instituted between his discharge of his duty, and others
performances of a corporal watch, with the greatest care and diligence; more
than they that watch for the morning; So that we have,

1. The duty he performed; earnest Waiting and Expectation. 2. The Object of
his waiting; Jehovah himself. 3. His Supportment in that duty, the Word of
promise. 4. The Manner of his performance of it. 1. With Earnestness and
diligence. 2. With Perseverance.

Let us then now Consider the Words, as they contain the frame and working of a
sin entangled soul.

Having been raised out of his depths by the discovery of forgiveness in God,
as was before declared, yet not being immediately made partaker of that
forgiveness, as to a comforting sense of it, he gathers up his soul from
wandering from God, and supports it from sinking under his present condition.

It is, says he, Jehovah alone with whom is forgiveness that can relieve and
do me good; his favor, his loving kindness, his communication of mercy and
Grace from thence, is that which I stand in need of; on him therefore do I with
all heedfulness attend; on him do I wait, my soul is filled with expectation
from him; surely he will come to me, he will come and refresh me; though he
seem as yet to be afar of, and to leave me in these depths, yet I have his word
of promise to support and stay my soul, on which I will lean until I obtain
the enjoyment of him, and his kindness which is better than life.

And this is the frame of a sin entangled Soul, who has really by faith
discovered forgiveness in God, but is not yet made partaker of a comforting
refreshing sense of it. And we may represent it in the ensuing Observations.
Obs. 1. The first proper fruit of faiths discovery of forgiveness in God unto a
sin distressed soul, is waiting in patience and Expectation. Obs. 2. The proper
Object of a sin distressed souls waiting and expecting, is God himself as
reconciled in Christ; I have waited for Jehovah. Obs. 3. The Word of promise is
the souls great supportment in waiting for God; in thy Word do I hope. Obs. 4.
Sin distressed Souls wait for God with earnest intention of mind, diligence,
and expectation; from the redoubling of the Expression. Obs. 5. Continuance in
waiting until God appears to the soul, is necessary and prevailing; Necessary
as that without which we cannot attain assistance; and prevailing as that
wherein we shall never fail. Obs. 6. Establishment in waiting where there is no
present sense of forgiveness, yet gives the soul much secret Rest and Comfort;
This Observation arises from the influence that these Verses have unto those
that follow. The Psalmist having attained thus far, can now look about him, and
begin to deal with others, and exhort them to an Expectation of Grace and mercy.


And thus though the soul be not absolutely in the haven of Consolation where
it would be, yet it has cast out an Anchor that gives it Establishment, and
Security. Though it be yet tossed, yet it is secured from Shipwreck, and is
rather sick than in danger: A waiting Condition is a condition of Safety.

Hence it is that he now turns himself to others and upon the Experience of the
discovery that he had made of forgiveness in God, and the Establishment and
consolation he found in waiting on him, he calls upon, and incourageth others
to the same duty, v. 7, 8.

The Propositions laid down, I shall briefly pass through; still with respect
unto the State and Condition of the Soul, represented in the Psalm. Many things
that might justly be insisted on in the improvement of these Truths, have been
anticipated in our former General Rules. To them we must therefore sometimes
have recourse; because they must not be again repeated. On this account I say,
we shall pass through them with all briefness possible; yet so as not wholly to
omit any directions that are here tendered unto us, as to the guidance of the
soul, whose condition and the working of whose faith is here described. This
therefore in the first place is proposed.

The first proper fruit of faiths discovery of forgiveness in God unto a
sin-distressed soul, is waiting in patience and expectation.

Waiting the first fruit of Faith in a way of Duty.
This the Psalmist openly and directly applies himself unto, and expresses to
have been as his duty, so his practice. And he does it so emphatically, as was
manifested in the opening of the words, that I know not that any duty is any
where in the Scripture so recommended and lively represented unto us.

You must therefore for the right understanding of it, call to mind what has
been spoken concerning the state of the soul inquired into; its depths,
intanglements, and sense of sin, with its Application unto God about those
things; As also remember what has been delivered about the nature of
forgiveness, with the Revelation that is made of it unto the faith of
Believers, And that this may be done, where the soul has no refreshing sense
of its own interest therein. It knows not that its own sins are forgiven,
although it believes that there is forgiveness with God. Now the principal duty
that is incumbent on such a soul, is that laid down in the proposition, namely,
patient waiting and expectation.

Two things must be done in reference hereunto: First, The nature of the duty
it self is to be declared: And secondly, The necessity and usefulness of its
practice is to be evinced and demonstrated.

For the Nature of it, something has been intimated giving light into it, in
the opening of the words here used by the Psalmist to express it by. But we may
observe that these duties as required of us, do not consist in any particular
acting of the soul, but in the whole spiritual frame and deportment of it in
reference unto the End aimed at in and by them. And this waiting, as here and
elsewhere commended unto us, and which is comprehensive of the especial duties
of the soul in the case insisted on, and described, comprehends these three
things. (1.) Quietness, in Opposition to haste, and tumultuating of spirit.
(2.) Diligence in Opposition to spiritual sloth, despondency and neglect of
means. (3.) Expectation in Opposition to despair, distrust, and other proper
immediate actings of unbelief.

Waiting on God wherein it consists.
1. Quietness. Hence this waiting it self is sometimes expressed by silence. To
wait, is to be silent, Lam. 3. 6. It is good both to hope, (...) and to be
silent for the salvation of the Lord; that is, to wait quietly, as we have
rendered the word. And the same word we render sometimes to rest. as Psalm. 37.
7. Rest on the Lord, (...) be silent unto him; where it is joined with hoping
or waiting, as that which belongs unto the nature of it; and so in sundry other
places. And this God in an especial manner calls souls unto in straights and
distresses. In quietness and confidence, says he, shall be your strength, Isa.
30. 15. And the effect of the Righteousness of God by Christ, is said to be
Quietness and Assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17. First Quietness, and then
Assurance. Now this silence and quietness which accompanies waiting, yea which
is an essential part of it, is opposed first to Haste; and Haste is the souls
undue lifting up its self, proceeding from a weariness of its condition, to
press after an end of its troubles, not according to the conduct of the Spirit
of God. Thus when God calls his people to waiting, he expresses the contrary
acting unto this duty, by the lifting up of the soul, Hab. 2. 3, 4. Though the
vision tarry, wait for it; behold his soul which is lifted up is not upright in
him, but the Just shall live by faith. God has given unto the soul a vision of
Peace, through the discovery of that forgiveness which is with him; but he will
have us wait for an actual participation of it unto rest and comfort. He that
will not do so, but lifts up his soul, that is, in making haste beyond the Rule
and Method of the Spirit of God in this matter, his heart is not upright in
him, nor will he know what it is to live by faith. This ruins and disappoints
many a soul in its attempts for forgiveness. The Prophet speaking of this
matter, tells us, that He that believes shall not, nor will not make haste,
Isa. 28. 16. Which words the Apostle twice making use of, Romans 9. 33, chap. 10,
11. in both places renders them, Whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed, or confounded. And that because this Haste turns men off from
believing, and so disappoints their hopes, and leaves them unto shame and
confusion. Men with a sense of the guilt of sin, having some discovery made to
them of the Rest Ease and Peace which they may obtain to their souls by
forgiveness, are ready to catch greedily at it, and to make false, unsound,
undue applications of it unto themselves. They cannot bear the yoke that the
Lord has put upon them, but grow impatient under it, and cry with Rachel, Give
me children or I dye. Any way they would obtain it. Now as the first duty of
such a soul is to apply its self unto waiting; so the first entrance into
waiting consists in this Silence and Quietness of heart and spirit. This is the
souls endeavor to keep its self humble, satisfied with the sovereign pleasure
of God in its condition, and refusing all ways and means of Rest and Peace,
but what it is guided and directed unto by the Word and Spirit.

2. As it is opposed unto Haste, so it is unto tumultuating thoughts, and
vexatious disquietments; the soul is silent, Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened
not my mouth, because thou did it. He redoubles the expression, whereby he
sets out his endeavor to quiet and still his soul in the Will of God. In the
condition discoursed of, the soul is apt to have many tumultuating thoughts, or
a multitude of perplexing thoughts of no use or advantage unto it. How they are
to be watched against and rejected, was before declared in our General Rules.
This Quietness in waiting will prevent them. And this is the first thing in the
duty prescribed.

Secondly, Diligence, in Opposition unto spiritual sloth, is included in it
also. Diligence is the activity of the mind in the regular use of means, for
the pursuit of any end proposed. The End aimed at by the soul, is a comforting
refreshing interest in that forgiveness that is with God. For the attaining
hereof, there are sundry means instituted and blessed of God. A neglect of them
through regardlesness or sloth, will certainly disappoint the soul from
attaining that end. It is confessedly so in things natural. He that sows not,
must not think to reap; he that cloatheth not himself will not be warm; nor he
enjoy health, who neglects the means of it. Men understand this as to their
outward concerns. And although they have a due respect unto the blessing of
God, yet they expect not to be rich without industry in their ways. It is so
also in things spiritual. God has appointed one thing to be the means of
obtaining another; in the use of them does he bless us, and from the use of
them does his Glory arise, because they are his own appointments. And this
diligence wholly respects practice, or the regular use of means. A man is
said to be diligent in business, to have a diligent hand; though it be an
Affection of the mind, yet it simply respects Practice and Operation. This
diligence in his waiting David expresses, Psalm. 40. 1. (...). We render it, I
have waited patiently, that is, waiting I have waited, that is diligently,
earnestly in the use of means. So he describes this duty by an elegant
similitude, Psalm. 123. 2. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of
their Masters; and as the eyes of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress; so our
eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy on us. Servants that wait
on their Masters, and look to their hands, it is to expect an intimation of
their minds, as to what they would have them do, that they may address
themselves unto it. So, says he, do we wait for mercy; not in a slothful
neglect of duties, but in a constant readiness to observe the Will of God in
all his commands. An instance hereof we have in the Spouse, when she was in the
condition here described, Cant. 3. 1, 2. She wanted the presence of her
Beloved, which amounts to the same state which we have under consideration. For
where the presence of Christ is not, there can be no sense of forgiveness. At
first she seeks him upon her bed; by night upon my bed, I sought him whom my
soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not. She seems herein to have gone
no further than desires; for she was in her bed, where she could do no more;
and the issue is, she found him not; but does she so satisfy her self, and lie
still, waiting until he should come there unto her? no, she says, she will
rise now and go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways, I will
seek him whom my soul loves. She resolves to put her self into the use of all
means, whereby one may be sought that is wanting. In the City, Streets, and
Fields, she would enquire after him. And the blessed success she had herein is
reported, verse. 4. She found him, she held him, she would not let him go. This
then belongs unto the waiting of the soul. Diligence in the use of means,
whereby God is pleased ordinarily to communicate a sense of pardon and
forgiveness is a principal part of it. What these means are, is known. Prayer,
Meditation, Reading, Hearing of the Word, Dispensation of the Sacraments, they
are all appointed to this purpose; they are all means of communicating Love and
Grace to the soul. Be not then heartless or slothful; up and be doing; attend
with diligence to the Word of Grace; be fervent in prayer, assiduous in the use
of all Ordinances of the Church, in one or other of thern, at one time or other
thou will meet with him whom thy soul loves; and God through him will speak
peace unto thee.

Thirdly, There is Expectation in it, which lies in a direct opposition to all
the actings of unbelief in this matter, and is the very life and soul of the
duty under consideration. So the Psalmist declares it, Psalm. 62. 5. My soul,
wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is only from him. The soul will
not, cannot in a due manner wait on God, unless it has Expectations from him;
unless, as James speaks, he looks to receive somewhat from him, chap. 1. 7. The
soul in this condition regards forgiveness, not only as by its self it is
desired, but principally as it is by God promised. Thence they expect it. This
is expressed in the fourth Proposition before laid down, namely, that
sin-distressed souls wait for God with earnestness, intention of mind, and
expectation. As this arises from the redoubling of the Expression; so
principally from the nature of the Comparison that he makes of himself in his
waiting with them that watch for the morning. Those that watch for the morning
do not only desire it, and prepare for it, but they expect it, and know
assuredly that it will come. Though darkness may for a time be troublesome, and
continue longer than they would desire, yet they know that the morning has its
appointed time of return, beyond which it will not tarry; and therefore they
look out for its Appearance on all occasions: so it is with the soul in this
matter. So, says David, Psalm. 5. 3. I will direct my prayer unto thee (...)
and look up. So we; the words before are defective (...) in the morning, or
rather every morning, I will order unto thee. We restrain this unto prayer. I
will direct my peayer unto thee. But this was expressed directly in the words
foregoing; In the morning thou shall hear my voice, that is, the voice of my
prayer and supplications, as it is often supplied. And although the Psalmist
does sometime repeat the same thing in different Expressions, yet here he
seems not so to do, but rather proceeds to declare the general frame of his
spirit in walking with God. I will, says he, order all things toward God, so
as that I may wait upon him in the ways of his appoinment; (...) and will look
up. It seems in our Translation to express his posture in his prayer. But the
Word is of another importance. It is diligently to look out after that which is
coming toward us, a looking out after the Accomplishment of our Expectation.
This is a part of our waiting for God; yea, as was said, the life of it, that
which is principally intended in it. The Prophet calls it his standing upon his
watch tower, and watching to see what God would speak unto him, Hab. 2. 3.
namely, in answer unto that prayer which he put up in his trouble. He is now
waiting in Expectation of an answer from God. And this is that which poor,
weak, trembling sinners are so encouraged unto, Isa. 53. 3, 4. Strengthen the
weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees; say unto them that are of a fearful
heart, be strong, fear not, behold your God will come. Weakness and
discouragements are the effects of Unbelief. These he would have removed with
an Expectation of the coming of God unto the soul according to the Promise. And
this I say belongs unto the waiting of the soul in the condition described.
Such a one does expect and hope that God will in his season manifest himself
and his Love unto him, and give him an experimental sense of a blessed interest
in forgiveness. And the accomplishment of this purpose and promise of God, it
looks out after continually. It will not despond and be heartless, but stir up
and strengthen it self unto a full expectation to have the desires of his soul
satisfied in due time: as we find David doing in places almost innumerable.

This is the duty that in the first place is recommended unto the soul, who is
persuaded that there is forgiveness with God, but sees not its own interest
therein. Wait on, or for the Lord. And it has two properties when it is
performed in a due manner; namely, patience and perseverance. By the one men
are kept to the length of Gods time; by the other they are preserved in a due
length of their own duty.

And this is that which was laid down in the first Proposition drawn from the
words; namely, that continuance in watching, until God appears unto the soul is
necessary, as that without which we cannot attain what we look after, and
prevailing, as that wherein we shall never fail.

God is not to be limited, nor his times prescribed unto him. We know our way,
and the end of our Journey; but our stations of especial rest, we must wait for
at his mouth, as the people did in the wilderness. When David comes to deal
with God in his great distress, he says unto him, O Lord, thou art my God, my
times are in thine hand, Psalm. 31. 14, 15. His times of trouble, and of peace,
of darkness and of light, he acknowledged to be in the hand, and at the
disposal of God; so that it was his duty to wait his time and season for his
share and portion in them.

During this state the soul meets with many Oppositions, difficulties and
perplexities, especially if its darkness be of long continuance, as with some
it abides many years, with some all the days of their lives. Their hope being
hereby deferred, makes their hearts sick, and their spirit oftentimes to faint;
and this fainting is a defect in waiting, for want of perseverance and
continuance which frustrates the End of it. So David, Psalm. 27. 13. I had
fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord. Had I not
received supportment by faith, I had fainted. And wherein does that consist?
what was the fainting which he had been overtaken withal without the
supportment mentioned? it was a relinquishment of waiting on God, as he
manifests by the Exhortation which he gives to himself and others, v. 14. Wait
on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy heart; wait I say
on the Lord. Wait with courage and resolution that thou faint not. And the
Apostle puts the blessed Event of Faith and Obedience upon the avoidance of
this evil, Gal. 6. 9. We shall reap if we faint not. Hence we have both
encouragements given against it, and promises that in the way of God we shall
not be overtaken with it. Consider the Lord Christ, says the Apostle, the
Captain of your salvation, lest you be wearied and faint in your minds, Heb.
12. 3. Nothing else can cause you to come short of the mark aimed at. And they,
says the Prophet, who wait on the Lord, that is in the use of the means by him
appointed, shall not faint, Isa. 40. 11.

This continuance then in waiting is to accompany this duty upon the account of
both the things mentioned in the Proposition; that it is indispensibly
necessary on our own account, and it is assuredly prevailing in the end; it
will not fail.

1. It is necessary. They that watch for the morning, to whose frame and
actings, the waiting of the soul for God is compared, give not over until the
Light does appear, or if they do, if they are wearied and faint, and so cease
watching, all their former pains will be lost, and they will lie down in
disappointments. So will it be with the soul that deserts its watch, and faints
in its waiting. If upon the eruption of new lusts or corruptions; if upon the
return of old temptations, or the Assaults of new ones; if upon a revived
perplexing sense of guilt, or on the tediousness of working and laboring so
much and so long in the dark, the soul begins to say in it self, I have looked
for light, and behold darkness; for peace, and yet trouble comes; the Summer
is past, the Harvest is ended, and I am not relieved; such and such blessed
means have been enjoyed, and yet I have not attained rest, and so gives over
its waiting in the way and course before prescribed, it will at length utterly
fail and come short of the Grace aimed at. Thou have labored, and have not
fainted, brings in the reward, Rev. 2. 3.

2. Perseverance in waiting is assuredly prevalent; and this renders it a
necessary part of the duty it self. If we continue to wait for the vision of
peace, it will come, it will not tarry but answer our expectation of it. Never
soul miscarried that abode in this duty unto the end. The Joys of Heaven may
sometimes prevent consolations in this life; God sometimes gives in the full
Harvest without sending of the first fruits aforehand; But Spiritual or Eternal
peace and Rest is the infallible End of permanent waiting for God.

This is the Duty that the Psalmist declares himself to be engaged in, upon the
encouraging discovery which was made unto him of forgiveness in God. There is
forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared, I wait for the Lord, my soul
does wait, and in his word do I hope: And this is that which in the like
condition is required of us. This is the great direction which was given us in
the Example and practice of the Psalmist, as to our Duty and deportment in the
condition described. This was the Way whereby he rose out of his depths and
escaped out of his entanglements? Is this then the state of any of us; let such
take directions from hence.

1. Encourage your souls unto waiting on God. Do new fears arise, do old
disconsolations continue, say unto your souls, yet wait on God; why are you
cast down O our souls, and why are you disquieted within us, hope in God; for
we shall yet praise him, who is the health of our countenance, and our God, as
the Psalmist does in the like case, Psalm. 43. 5. so he speaks elsewhere, wait
on God; and be of good courage, shake of sloth, rouse up your selves from under
despondencies, let not fears prevail. This is the only way for success, and it
will assuredly be prevalent; Oppose this Resolution to every discouragement,
and it will give new life to faith and hope; say, my flesh fails, and my
heart fails, but God is the rock of my heart, and my portion for ever, as
Psalm. 73. 26. Though thy perplexed thoughts have even wearied and worn out the
outward man, as in many they do, so that flesh fails; and though thou have no
refreshing evidence from within, from thy self, or thy own Experience, so that
thy heart fails; yet resolve to look unto God; there is strength in him, and
satisfaction in him, for the whole man; he is a Rock, and a portion; this will
strengthen things which otherwise will be ready to dye. This will keep life in
thy course, and stir thee up to plead it with God in an acceptable season when
he will be found. Job carried up his condition unto a supposition that God
might slay him; that is add one stroke, one rebuke unto another until he was
consumed; and so take him out of the world in darkness and in sorrow. Yet he
resolved to trust, to hope, to wait on him, as knowing that he should not
utterly miscarry so doing; this frame the Church expresses so admirably that
nothing can be added thereunto, Lament. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26. Thou have removed my soul far off from peace, I forgot prosperity, and my
hope is perished from the Lord; remembering mine Affliction and my misery; my
Wormwood and my Gall; My soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in
me. This I recall to my mind therefore have I hope. It is of the Lords mercy
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. They are new every
Morning, great is thy faithfulness. The Lord is my portion, says my soul,
therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to
the soul that seeks him. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly
wait for the salvation of God. We have here both the Condition, and the Duty
insisted on, with the method of the souls actings in reference unto the one and
the other fully expressed. The Condition is sad and bitter, the soul is in
depths far from peace and rest, v. 14. in this state it is ready utterly to
faint and to give all for lost and gone, both strength for the present, and
hopes for the future, v. 18. This makes its condition full of sorrow and
bitterness, and its own thoughts become unto it like Wormwood and Gall, v. 19,
20. But does he lie down under the burden of all this trouble? does he despond,
and give over? no says he, I call to mind, that there is forgiveness with God;
Grace, Mercy, Goodness, for the relief of distressed souls; such as are in my
condition, v. 21, 22, 23. Thence the conclusion is, that as all help is to be
looked for, all relief expected from him alone; so it is good that a man should
quietly wait, and hope for the salvation of God. This he stirs up himself unto,
as the best, as the most blessed course for his deliverance.

2. Remember, that diligent use of the means for the end aimed at, is a
necessary concomitant of, and ingredient unto waiting on God. Take in the
consideration of this direction also. Do not think to be freed from your
entanglements, by restless, heartless desiring that it were otherwise with you:
Means are to be used that relief may be obtained. What those means are, is
known unto all. Mortification of sin, prayer, meditation, due attendance upon
all Gospel Ordinances; conferring in General about spiritual things, advising
in particular about our own state and condition, with such who having received
the tongue of the learned are able to speak a word in season, to them that are
weary, are required to this purpose. And in all these are diligence and
perseverance to be exercised; or in vain shall men desire a delivery from their
entanglements.

God the proper Object of the souls waiting in its distresses and depths.

God himself the Object of our Waiting.
We have seen what the duty is intended in the proposition; we are nextly to
consider the Reason also of it, why this is the great, first, and principal
duty of souls; who in their depths have it discovered unto them that there is
forgiveness with God; And the reason hereof is; that which is expressed in our
second Observation before mentioned, namely.

That the proper object of a sin distressed souls waiting and expectation, is
God himself as revealed in Christ. I have says the Psalmist waited for
Jehovah; It is not this or that mercy, or Grace, this or that help or relief;
but it is Jehovah himself that I wait for.

Here then we must do two things, first, show in what sense, God himself is the
object of the waiting of the soul. (2.) How it appears from hence that waiting
is so necessary a Duty.

1. It is the Lord himself, Jehovah himself, that the soul waits for. It is
not Grace, mercy, or relief absolutely considered, but the God of all Grace and
help, that is the full adaequate object of the souls waiting and Expectation;
only herein he is not considered absolutely in his own Nature; but as there is
forgiveness with him, What is required hereunto, has been at large before
declared. It is as he is revealed in and by Jesus Christ; as in him he has
found a Ransom, and accepted the Atonement for sinners in his blood; as he is
a God in Covenant; so he is himself the Object of our waiting. And that,

First, Because all troubles, depths, entanglements, arise from, (1.) The
Absence of God from the soul; and (2.) From his displeasure.

The Absence of God from the soul, by his departure, withdrawing, or hiding
himself from it, is that which principally casts the soul into its depths. Woe
unto them, says the Lord, when I depart from them, Hos. 9. 12. And this woe,
this sorrow does not attend only an universal, a total departure of God from
any; but that also which is gradual, or partial, in some things, in some
seasons. When God withdraws his enlightening, his refreshing, his comforting
presence, as to any ways or means whereby he has formerly communicated
himself unto the souls of any; then woe unto them, sorrows will befall them,
and they will fall into depths and entanglements. Now this condition calls for
waiting. If God be withdrawn, if he hides himself, what has the soul to do but
to wait for his return. So says the Prophet, Isa. 8. 17. I will wait upon the
Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. If
God hide himself, this is the natural and proper duty of the soul to wait and
to look for him. Other course of relief it cannot apply it self unto. What that
waiting is, and wherein it does consist has been declared. Patient seeking of
God in the ways of his Appointment is comprised in it; this the Prophet
expresses in that word, I will look for him; indeed the same in the Original
with that in the Psalm, (...); and I will earnestly look out after him with
expectation of his return unto me.

Secondly, A sense of Gods displeasure is another cause of these depths and
troubles, and of the continuance of the soul in them, notwithstanding it has
made a blessed discovery by faith that there is with him forgiveness; this has
been so fully manifested through the whole preceding discourse, that it need
not again be insisted on. All has respect unto sin, and the reason of the
trouble that arises from sin, is because of the displeasure of God against it.
What then is the natural posture and frame of the soul toward God as
displeased? shall he contend with him? shall he harden himself against him?
shall he despise his wrath and anger, and contemn his threatenings? or shall he
hide himself from him, and so avoid the effects of his wrath? who knows not how
ruinous and pernicious to the soul such courses would be? and how many are
ruined by them every day? patient waiting is the souls only reserve on this
account also. And

Waiting on God whence so necessary.
Secondly, This duty in the occasion mentioned is necessary upon the account of
the Greatness and sovereignty of him with whom we have to do. My soul waits
for Jehovah. Indeed waiting is a duty that depends on the distance that is
between the persons concerned in it, namely, he that waits, and he that is
waited on; so the Psalmist informs us, Psalm. 123. 2. It is an action like that
of Servants and Handmaids toward their Masters or Rulers. And the greater this
distance is, the more cogent are the reasons of this duty on all occasions. And
because we are practically averse from the due performance of this duty, or at
least quickly grow weary of it, notwithstanding our full conviction of its
necessity, I shall a little insist on some such considerations of God and our
selves, as may not only evince the necessity of this duty, but also satisfy us
of its reasonableness; that by the first we may be engaged into it, and by the
latter preserved in it.

Two things we may to this purpose consider in God, in Jehovah whom we are to
wait for. First, His Being, and the absolute and essential properties of his
nature. Secondly, Those Attributes of his nature which respect his dealing with
us; both which are suited to beget in us affections, and a frame of spirit
compliant with the duty proposed.

Considerations of God rendering our Waiting on him Reasonable and Necessary.
His glorious Being.

Considerations of Gods Being and Attributes rendering Waiting necessary.
1. Let us consider the infinite glorious Being of Jehovah, with his absolute
incommunicable essential Excellencies; and then try whether it does not become
us in every condition to wait for him, and especially in that under
consideration. This course God himself took with Job to recover him from his
discontents and complaints, to reduce him to quietness and waiting, He sets
before him his own Glorious Greatness, as manifested in the works of his power,
that thereby being convinced of his own ignorance, weakness and infinite
distance in all things from him, he might humble his soul into the most
submissive dependence on him, and waiting for him. And this he does
accordingly, chap. 42. 6. I abhor, says he, my self, and repent in dust and
ashes. His soul now comes to be willing to be at Gods disposal, and therein he
found present rest, and a speedy healing of his condition. It is the high and
losty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy, Isa. 57. 15. with whom
we have now to do: He that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the
inhabitants of it are as Grasshoppers before him; yea, the Nations are as the
drop of the bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance; he takes
up the Isles as a very little thing; all Nations before him are as nothing,
they are counted unto him less than nothing and vanity, Isa. 40. 15, 17, 22. To
what end does the Lord set forth and declare his glorious Greatness and Power?
It is that all might be brought to trust in him, and to wait for him, as at
large is declared in the close of the chapter. For shall Grasshoppers, a drop of
the bucket, dust of the balance, things less than nothing, repine against, or
wax weary of the Will of the immense, glorious and lofty One? He that takes up
all Isles as a very little thing, may surely, if he please, destroy, cast and
forsake one Isle, one City in an Isle, one Person in a City; and we are before
him but single persons. Serious thoughts of this Infinite All-Glorious Being,
will either quiet our souls, or overwhelm them. All our weariness of his
dispensations toward us, arises from secret imaginations, that he is such a
one as our selves; one that is to do nothing but what seems good in our eyes.
But if we cannot comprehend his Being, we cannot make Rules to judge of his
ways and proceedings. And how small a portion is it that we know of God? The
nearest approaches of our reasons and imaginations, leave us still at an
infinite distance from him. And indeed what we speak of his Greatness, we know
not well what it signifies, we only declare our respect unto that which we
believe, admire and adore, but are not able to comprehend. All our thoughts
come as short of his Excellent Greatness, as our natures do of his; that is
infinitely. Behold the Universe, the glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth; how
little is it that we know of its beauty, order and disposal; yet was it all the
product of the Word of his mouth; and with the same facility can he when he
pleases reduce it to its primitive nothing. And what are we poor worms of the
Earth, an inconsiderable unknown part of the lower series and order of the
works of his hands; few in number, fading in condition, unregarded unto the
residue of our fellow creatures, that we should subduct our selves from under
any kind of his dealings with us, or be weary of waiting for his pleasure. This
he presses on us, Psalm. 46. 10. Be still and know that I am God. Let there be
no more repinings, no more disputings, continue waiting in silence and
patience; consider who I am; Be still, and know that I am God.

Further, to help us in this Consideration, let us a little also fix our minds
toward some of the Glorious, Essential, Incommunicable properties of his
Nature, distinctly; As,

1. His Eternity. This Moses proposes to bring the souls of Believers to
submission, trust and waiting, Psalm. 90. 1. From Everlasting to Everlasting
thou art God. One that has his Being and subsistence not in a duration of
time, but in Eternity it self: So does Habakkuk also, chap. 1. 12. My Lord, my
God, my Holy One, art thou not from Everlasting: And hence he draws his
conclusion against making have in any condition, and for tarrying and waiting
for God. The like Consideration is managed by David also, Psalm. 102. 27. How
unconceivable is this glorious divine Property unto the thoughts and minds of
men? How weak are the ways and terms whereby they go about to express it? One
says it is a nunc stans; another that it is a perpetual Duration. He that
says most, only signifies what he knows of what it is not. We are of
Yesterday, change every moment, and are leaving our station to morrow. God is
still the same, was so before the world was, from Eternity. And now I cannot
think what I have said, but only have intimated what I adore. The whole
Duration of the world from the beginning unto the end, takes up no space in
this Eternity of God. Fow how long soever it has continued, or may yet
continue, it will all amount but to so many thousand years, so long a time; and
time has no place in Eternity. And for us who have in this matter to do with
God, what is our continuance unto that of the world? a moment as it were in
comparison of the whole. When men's lives were of old prolonged beyond the date
and continuance of Empires or Kingdoms now, yet this was the winding up of all;
such a one lived so many years, and then he dyed, Genesis 5. And what are we poor
worms, whose lives are measured by inches in comparison of their span? what are
we before the Eternal God? God always immutably subsisting in his own Infinite
Being? A real Consideration hereof will subdue the soul into a condition of
dependence on him, and of waiting for him.

2. The Immensity of his Essence, and his Omnipresence is of the same
consideration. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 24. The
Heavens, even the Heavens of Heavens, the supreme and most comprehensive
created Being cannot contain him, says Solomon. In his infinitely Glorious
Being he is present with, and indistant from all places, things, times, all the
works of his hands, and is no less gloriously subsisting where they are not.
God is where Heaven and Earth are not, no less than where they are; and where
they are not is himself; where there is no place, no space, real or imaginary,
God is; for place and imagination have nothing to do with Immensity; and he is
present every where in the Creation, where I am writing, where you are reading;
he is present with you, indistant from you. The thoughts of men's hearts for the
most part are, that God as to his Essence is in Heaven only; and it is well if
some think he is there, seeing they live and act as if there were neither God
nor Devil but themselves. But on these apprehensions such thoughts are ready
secretly to arise, and effectually to prevail, as are expressed, Joh 22. 13,
14. How does God know? Can he judge through the dark; thick clouds are as a
covering unto him that he sees not; and he walks in the circuit of the
Heavens. Apprehensions of Gods distance from men, harden them in their ways.
But it is utterly otherwise; God is every where, and a man may on all occasions
say with Jacob, God is in this place, and I knew it not. Let the soul then who
is thus called to wait on God, exercise it self with thoughts about this
Immensity of his Nature and Being. Comprehend it, fully understand it, we can
never: But the consideration of it will give that awe of his Greatness upon our
hearts, as that we shall learn to tremble before him, and to be willing to wait
for him in all things.

3. Thoughts of the Holiness of God, or infinite self-purity of this Eternal
Immense Being, are singularly useful to the same purpose. This is that which
Eliphaz affirms that he received by vision, to reply to the complaint and
impatience of Job, chap. 14. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 17, 18, 19. After he has
declared his vision, with the manner of it, this he affirms to be the
Revelation that by voice was made unto him: Shall mortal man be more just than
God? shall a man be more pure than his Maker? Behold be puts no trust in his
Servants, and his Angels he charge with folly. How much less on them that
dwell in houses of Clay; whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed
before the moth? If the Saints and Angels in Heaven do not answer this infinite
Holiness of God in their most perfect condition, is it meet for Worms of the
Earth to suppose that any thing which proceeds from him is not absolutely Holy
and perfect, and so best for them? This is the fiery property of the nature of
God, whence he is called a Consuming fire, and Everlasting burnings: And the
Law whereon he had impressed some representation of it, is called a fiery Law,
as that which will consume and burn up whatever is perverse and evil. Hence the
Prophet who had a representation of the Glory of God in a vision, and heard the
Seraphims proclaiming his Holiness, cried out, Woe is me, for I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips, Isa. 6. 5. He thought it impossible that he
should bear that near approach of the Holiness of God. And with the remembrance
hereof does Joshuah still the people with the terror of the Lord, chap. 14.
19. Let such souls then as are under troubles and perplexities on any account,
endeavor to exercise their thoughts about this infinite Purity and fiery
Holiness of God. They will quickly find it their wisdom to become as weaned
children before him, and content themselves with what he shall guide unto them,
which is to wait for him. This fiery Holiness streams from his Throne, Dan. 7.
10. and would quickly consume the whole Creation, as now under the curse, and
sin, were it not for the interposing of Jesus Christ.

4. His Glorious Majesty as the Ruler of all the world. Majesty relates unto
Government, and it calls us to such an awe of him as does render our waiting
for him comely and necessary. Gods Throne is said to be in Heaven, and there
principally do the glorious beams of his terrible Majesty shine forth. But he
has also made some Representation of it on the Earth, that we might learn to
fear before him. Such was the appearance that he gave of his glory in the
giving of the Law, whereby he will judge the world, and condemn the
transgressors of it, who obtain not an acquitment in the blood of Jesus Christ.
See the description of it in Exodus 19. 16, 18. So terrible was the sight
hereof, that Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12. 21. And
what effect it had upon all the people is declared, Exodus 20. 18, 19. They were
not able to bear it, although they had good assurance that it was for their
benefit and advantage, that he so drew nigh and manifested his Glory unto them.
Are we not satisfied with our condition? cannot we wait under his present
dispensations? let us think how we may approach unto his presence, or stand
before his Glorious Majesty. Will not the dread of his Excellency fall upon us?
will not his terror make us afraid? shall we not think his way best, and his
time best, and that our duty is to be silent before him? And the like
manifestation has he made of his Glory, as the great Judge of all upon the
Throne unto sundry of the Prophets, as unto Isaiah, chap. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. to
Ezekiel. chap. 1. to Daniel, chap. 7. 9, 10. to John, Rev. 1. Read the places
attentively, and learn to tremble before him. These are not things that are
foreign unto us. This God is our God. The same Throne of his Greatness and
Majesty is still established in the Heaven. Let us then in all our Hastes and
heats that our spirits in any condition are prone unto, present our selves
before this Throne of God, and then consider what will be best for us to say or
do; what frame of heart and spirit will become us, and he safest for us. All
this Glory does encompass us every moment, although we perceive it not. And it
will be but a few days before all the vails and shades that are about us,
shall be taken away and depart. And then shall all this glory appear unto us,
unto endless bliss, or everlasting woe. Let us therefore know that nothing in
our dealings with him does better become us than silently for to wait for him,
and what he will speak unto us in our depths and streights.

5. It is good to consider the instances that God has given of this his
Infinite Greatness, Power, Majesty and Glory. Such was his mighty work of
creating all things out of nothing. We dwell on little Mole-hills in the Earth,
and yet we know the least part of the excellency of that spot of ground which
is given us for our habitation here below. But what is it unto the whole
habitable world, and the fullness thereof? And what an amazing thing is its
Greatness, with the wide and large Sea, with all sorts of creatures therein.
The least of these has a beauty, a glory, an excellency, that the utmost of
our enquiries end in admiration of. And all this is but the Earth, the lower
depressed part of the world. What shall we say concerning the Heavens over us,
and all these creatures of Light that have their habitations in them? who can
conceive the beauty, order, use and course of them? The consideration hereof
caused the Psalmist to cry out, Lord our Lord, how excellent and glorious art
thou! Psalm. 8. 1. And what is the rise, spring, and cause of these things? Are
they not all the effect of the Word of the Power of this glorious God? And does
he not in them, and by them speak us into a Reverence of his Greatness? the
like also may be said concerning his mighty and strange works of Providence in
the Rule of the World. Is not this he who brought the Flood of old upon the
world of ungodly men? Is it not he who consumed Sodom and Gomorrah with fire
from Heaven, setting them forth as Examples unto them that should afterward
live ungodly, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire? Is it not he who
destroyed Egypt with his Plagues, and drowned Pharaoh with his Host in the red
Sea? Is it not he, one of whose servants flew an hundred and fourscore and five
thousand in Senacheribs Army in one night? that opened the Earth to swallow up
Dathan and Abiram? and sent out fire from the Altar to devour Nadab and Abibu?
and have not all ages been filled with such instances of his Greatness and
Power?

The end why I have insisted on these things, is to show the Reasonableness of
the Duty which we are pressing unto; namely to wait on God quietly and
patiently in every condition of distress. For what else becomes us when we have
to do with this great, and Holy one? And a due consideration of these things
will exceedingly influence our minds thereunto.

Secondly, This waiting for God respects the whole of the Condition expressed
in the Psalm, and this contains not only spiritual depths about sin, which we
have at large insisted on, but also providential depths, depths of trouble or
affliction; that we may be exercised withal in the holy wise providence of
God. In reference also unto these, Waiting in patience and silence is our duty.
And there are two considerations that will assist us in this duty with respect
unto such depths, that is of Trouble or Affliction. And the first of these is
the consideration of those properties of God, which he exercises in an
especial manner in all his dealings with us, and which in all our troubles we
are principally to regard. The second is the Consideration of our selves, what
we are, and what we have deserved.

Let us begin with the former; and there are four things in Gods dispensations
toward us, and dealing with us, that in this matter we should consider, all
suited to work in us the end aimed at. The first is his Sovereignty: this he
declares, this we are to acknowledge, and submit unto, in all the great and
dreadful dispensations of his Providence in all his dealings with our souls.
May he not do what he will with his own? who shall say unto him, what do
thou? or if they do so, what shall give them countenance, in their so doing? He
made all this world of nothing, and could have made another, more, or all
things quite otherwise than they are, It would not subsist one moment without
his Omnipotent supportment. Nothing would be continued in its place, course,
use, without his effectual influence and countenance. If any thing can be,
live, or act a moment without him, we may take free leave, to dispute its
disposal with him, and to haste unto the accomplishment of our desires? but
from the Angels in Heaven, to the worms of the earth, and the grass of the
field, all depend on him and his power continually. Why was this part of the
Creation, an Angel, that a Worm, this a Man, that a Brute Beast; is it from
their own Choice, designing or contrivance, or brought about by their own
wisdom; or is it merely from the Sovereign pleasure and will of God? And what a
madness is it, to repine against what he does, seeing all things are, as he
makes them, and disposes them; nor can be otherwise; Even the repiner himself
has his Being and subsistence upon his mere pleasure. This Sovereignty of God,
Elibu pleads in his dealings with Job, Chap. 33. 8, 9, 10, 11. He apprehended
that Job had reasoned against Gods sev re dispensations toward him, and that
he did not humble himself under his mighty hand wherewith he was exercised, nor
wait for him in a due manner; and therefore what does he propose unto him to
bring him unto this duty; what does he reply unto his reasonings and
Complaints; behold says he v. 12. in this thou art not Just, I will answer
thee, God is greater than man, v. 13. why do thou strive against him, for he
gives not account of any of his matters. Be it that in other things thou art
Just and Innocent, that thou art free from the things wherewith thy friends
have charged thee; yet in this matter thou art not Just; it is neither just nor
equal, that any man should complain of, or repine against any of Gods
dispensations; yea, but I suppose that these dealings of God are very griev us,
very dreadful, such as he has, it may be, scarce exercised toward any from
the foundation of the world; to be utterly destroyed and consumed in a day, in
all Relations, and Enjoyments, and that at a time and season, when no such
thing was looked for, or provided against; to have a sense of sin revived on
the Conscience after pardon obtained, as it is with me; all is one, says he,
if thou complainest, thou art not Just; And what reason does he give thereof?
why God is greater than man; infinitely so, in power, and Sovereign glory; he
is so absolutely therein, that he gives no account of any of his matters; and
what folly; what injustice is it to complain of his proceedings. Consider his
absolute dominion over the works of his hands, over thy self, and all that thou
have; his infinite distance, from thee, and Greatness above thee, and then see
whether it be just or no to repine against what he does. And he pursues the
same Consideration Chap. 34. 18, 19. If when Kings and Princes rule in
Righteousness it is a contempt of their Authority to say unto them they are
wicked and ungodly, then will thou speak against him, contend with him, that
accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the
poor; for they are all the works of his hands; and v. 29. when he gives
quietness who can make trouble, and when he hides his face; who can behold
him? whether it be done against a Nation, or against a man only. All is one,
what ever God does, and toward whomsoever, be they many or few, an whole
Nation or City, or one single person, be they high or low, rich or poor, good
or bad, all are the works of his hands, and he may deal with them, as seems
Good unto him. And this man alone, as God afterward declares, made use of the
right and proper mediums to take of Job from Complaining, and to compose his
spirit to rest and peace, and to bring him to wait patiently for God. For
whereas his other friends injuriously charged him with Hypocrisy, and that he
had in an especial manner above other men deserved those Judgments of God
which he was exercised withal; he who was conscious unto his own Integrity,
was only provoked and exasperated by their arguings, and stirred up to plead
his own Innocence and uprightness. But this man allowing him the plea of his
Integrity, calls him to the consideration of the Greatness and Sovereignty of
God against which there is no rising up. And this God himself afterward calls
him unto.

Deep and serious thoughts of Gods Sovereignty, and absolute Dominion or
Authority over all the works of his hands, are an effectual means to work the
soul unto this duty. Yea, this is that which we are to bring our souls to. Let
us consider with whom we have to do; are not we and all our concernments in his
hands, as the Clay in the hand of the Potter? and may he not do what he will
with his own? Shall we call him unto an account? Is not what he does, good and
holy because he does it? do any repining thoughts against the works of God
arise in our hearts? are any Complaints ready to break out of our mouths? let
us lay our hands on our hearts, and our mouths in the dust, with thoughts of
his Greatness and absolute Sovereignty and it will work our whole souls into a
better frame.

And this extends it self unto the manners, Times, and seasons of all things
whatever. As in earthly things; If God will bring a dreadful Judgment of fire
upon a people, a Nation; ah, why must it be London; If on London, why so
terrible, raging, and unconquerable? Why the City, not the Suburbs? Why my
house, not my neighbors? Why had such one help and I none? all these things
are wholly to be referred to Gods Sovereign pleasure. There alone can the soul
of Man find rest and peace. It is so in spiritual dispensations also.

Thus Aaron upon the sudden death of his two eldest Sons, being minded by
Moses of Gods Soverainty and Holiness, immediately held his peace, or quietly
humbled himself under his mighty hand, Levit. 10. 3, 4. And David when things
were brought into extreme confusion by the Rebellion of Absalom followed by the
Ungodly multitude of the whole Nation, relinquisheth all other Arguments and
Pleas, and lets go complaints in a resignation of himself and all his
Concernments unto the absolute pleasure of God, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. And this in
all our extremities must we bring our souls unto, before we can attain any rest
or peace, or the least comfortable persuasion that we may not yet fall under
greater severities in the just Indignation of God against us.

2. The Wisdom of God is also to be Considered and submitted unto. Job 9. 4. He
is wise in heart who has hardened himself against him and prospered. This the
Prophet joins with his Greatness and Sovereignty, Isa. 40. 12, 13, 14. There is
no searching of his understanding, v. 28. And the Apostle winds up all his
Considerations of the works of God in an holy Admiration of his Knowledge and
Wisdom, whence his Judgment becomes unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out, Romans 11. 33, 34. He sees and knows all things, in all their Causes,
Effects, consequences and circumstances, in their utmost reach and tendency in
their correspondencies one unto another, and suitableness unto his own Glory,
and so alone judges aright of all things. The wisest of men as David speaks
walk in a shade. We see little, we know little, and that but of a very few
things, and in an imperfect manner; and that of their present appearances,
abstracted from their Issues, Successes, Ends, and Relations unto other things.
And if we would be further wise in the works of God, we shall be found to be
like the wild Asses Colt. What is good for us or the Church of God; what is
evil to it or us, we know not at all; but all things are open and naked unto
God. The day will come indeed wherein we shall have such a prospect of the
works of God, see one thing so set against another, as to find Goodness,
Beauty, and Order in them all; that they were all done in number, weight and
measure; that nothing could have been otherwise without an abridgement of his
glory and disadvantage of them that believe in him. But for the present all our
wisdom consists in referring all unto him. He who does these things is
infinitely wise, he knows what he does, and why, and what will be the end of
all. We are apt, it may be, to think, that at such seasons all things will go
to wrack with our selves, with the Church, or with the whole world; how can
this breach be repaired, this loss made up, this ruin recovered? peace is
gone, trade is gone, our substance is gone, the Church is gone, all is gone,
confusion and utter desolation lie at the door. But if a man who is unskilled
and unexperienced should be at Sea, it may be every time the vessel wherein he
is, seems to decline on either side, he would be apt to conceive, they should
be all cast away; but yet if he be not childishly timorous when the Master
shall tell him that there is no danger, bid him trust to his skill and it shall
be well with him, it will yield quietness and satisfaction. We are indeed in a
storm, the whole earth seems to reel and stagger like a drunken man; but yet
our souls may rest in the infinite skill and wisdom of the great Pilot of the
whole Creation, who stears all things according to the Counsel of his Will. His
works are manifold; in Wisdom has he made all these things, Psalm. 104. 24. And
in the same wisdom does he dispose of them. All these things come forth from
the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderfully in counsel, and excellent in working,
Isa. 28. 29. What is good, meet, useful for us, for ours, for the Churches,
for the City, for the Land of our Nativity he knows, and of Creatures not one.
This infinite Wisdom of God also are we therefore to resign and submit our
selves unto. His hand in all his works is guided by Infinite Wisdom. In
thoughts thereof, in humbling our selves thereunto, shall we find rest and
peace, and this in all our pressures will work us to a waiting for him.

3. The Righteousness of God is also to be considered in this matter. That name
in the Scripture is used to denote many Excellencies of God, all which are
reducible unto the infinite Rectitude of his Nature. I intend that at present
which is called Justitia Regiminis, his Righteousness in Rule or Government.
This is remembered by Abraham, Genesis 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the earth
do right? And by the Apostle; Is God unjust who takes vengeance? God forbid.
This our souls are to own in all the works of God. They are all righteous; all
his who will do no iniquity, whose Throne is established in Judgment. However
they may be dreadful, grievous, and seem severe, yet they are all righteous:
It is true, he will sometimes rise up and do strange acts, strange works, Isa.
28. 21. Such as he will not do often nor ordinarily; such as shall fill the
world with dread and amazement: He will answer his people in terrible things?
But yet all shall be in Righteousness. And to complain of that which is
righteous, to repine against it, is the highest unrighteousness that may be.
Faith then fixing the soul on the Righteousness of God, is an effectual means
to humble it under his mighty hand: And to help us herein we may consider,

Considerations of Gods Righteousness in his Judgments.
1. That God judges not as man judges. We judge by the seeing of the Eye, and
hearing of the Ear, according to outward appearances and evidences. But God
searches the heart. We judge upon what is between man and man, God principally
upon what is between himself and man. And what do we know or understand of
these things? or what there is in the heart of man; what purposes, what
contrivances, what designs, what corrupt affections, what sins, what
transactions have been between God and them; what warnings he has given them,
what reproofs, what engagements they have made, what convictions they have had,
what use they were putting their lives, their substance, their families unto?
Alas; we know nothing of these things, and so are able to make no judgment of
the proceedings of God upon them; but this we know, that he is Righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works; yea the most terrible of them: And when
the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed, ah how glorious will be his
drowning of the old world, firing of Sodom, swallowing up of Dathan and Abiram
in the earth, the utter rejection of the Jews, with all other acts of his
Providence seeming to be accompanied with severity? And so will our own Trials
inward or outward appear to be.

2. God is Judge of all the world, of all ages, times, places, persons, and
disposes of all so as they may tend unto the good of the whole, and his own
Glory in the universe. Our thoughts are bounded, much more our Observations and
Abilities to measure things, within a very small compass. Every thing stands
alone unto us, whereby we see little of its beauty or order; nor do know how it
ought justly to be disposed of. That particular may seem deformed unto us,
which when it is under his eye, who sees all at once, past, present and to
come, with all those joints and bands of Wisdom and Order, whereby things are
related unto one another, is beautiful and glorious; for as nothing is of its
self, nor by its self, nor to its self, so nothing stands alone; but there is a
line of mutual respect that runs through the Creation, and every particular of
it, and that in all its changes and alterations from the beginning to the end,
which gives it its Loveliness, Life and Order. He that can at once see but one
part of a goodly statua or Colossus, might think it a very deformed piece; when
he that views it altogether, is assured of its due proportion symmetry and
loveliness. Now all things, ages and persons, all thus at once are objected
unto the sight of God, and he disposes them with respect unto the whole, that
every one may fill up its own place, and sustain its part and share in the
common tendency of all to the same end.

And hence it is that in public Judgments and Calamities God oftentimes
suffers the Godly to be involved with the wicked, and that not on the account
of their own persons, but as they are parts of that body which he will destroy.
This Job expresses somewhat harshly, but there is truth in his Assertion,
chap. 9. 22, 23. This is one thing, therefore I said it, he destroys the
righteous with the wicked. If the scourge slay suddenly he will laugh at the
trial of the Innocent. God in public desolations oftentimes takes good and bad
together; a sudden scourge involves them all; and this God does for sundry
Reasons: As,

1. That he may manifest his own Holiness; which is such that he can without
the least Injustice or Oppression, even upon the account of their own
provocations, take away the houses, possessions, estates, liberties, and lives
of the best of his own Saints. For how should a man, any man, the best of men,
be just with God if he would contend with him? No man can answer to him one of
a thousand, Job 9. 31. This they will also own and acknowledge; upon the
account of Righteousness, none can open his mouth about his Judgments, without
the highest impiety and wickedness.

2. He does so, that his own people may learn to know his terror, and to
rejoice always before him with trembling. Therefore Job affirms that in the
time of his prosperity he was not secure, but still trembled in himself with
thoughts of the Judgments of God. Doubtless much wretched carnal security
would be ready to invade and possess the hearts of Believers, if God should
always and constantly pass them by in the dispensations of his public
Judgments.

3. That it may be a stone of offense, and a stumbling block unto wicked men,
who are to be hardened in their sins, and prepared for ruin. When they see
that all things fall alike unto all, and that those who have made the strictest
profession of the name and fear of God, fare no better than themselves, they
are encouraged to despise the warnings of God, and the strokes of his hand; and
so to rush on unto the destruction whereunto they are prepared.

4. God does it to proclaim unto all the world, that what he does here is no
final Judgment, and ultimate determination concerning things and persons. For
who can see the wise man dying as the fool, the Righteous and Holy perishing in
their outward concernments, as the ungodly and wicked, but must conclude, that
the Righteous God the Judge of all, has appointed another day, wherein all
things must be called over again, and every one then receive his final Reward,
according as his works shall appear to have been. And thus are we to humble our
selves unto the Righteousness wherewith the hand of God is always accompanied.

5. His Goodness and Grace is also to be considered in all the works of his
mighty hands. As there is no unrighteousness in him, so also all that is good
and gracious. And whatever there is in any trouble of allay from the utmost
wrath, is of mere goodness and grace. Thy houses are burned, but perhaps thy
goods are saved; is there no grace, no goodness therein? or perhaps thy
substance also is consumed, but yet thy person is alive; and should a living
man complain? but say what thou will, this stroke is not Hell which thou have
deserved long ago; yea it may be a means of preventing thy going thither; so
that it is accompanied with infinite goodness, patience and mercy also. And if
the considerations hereof will not quiet thy heart, take heed lest a worse
thing befall thee.

And these things amongst others are we to consider in God to lead our hearts
into an acquiescing in his Will, a submission under his mighty hand, and a
patient waiting for the issue.

Considerations of our own Condition tending to Humble us.
2. Consider our mean and abject condition, and that infinite distance wherein
we stand from him with whom we have to do. When Abraham, the Father of the
faithful, and friend of God, came to treat with him about his Judgments, he
does it with this acknowledgement of his condition, that he was mere dust and
ashes, Genesis 18. 27. A poor abject Creature that God at his pleasure had formed
out of the dust of the earth, and which in a few days was to be reduced again
into the ashes of it. We can forget nothing more perniciously than what we are.
Man is a worm, says Bildad, and the Son of man is but a worm, Job 25. 6. And
therefore says Job himself, I have said to corruption, thou art my father, and
to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister, chap. 17. 14. His Affinity, his
Relation unto them is the nearest imaginable, and he is no otherwise to be
accounted of; and there is nothing that God abhors more than an Elation of mind
in the forgetfulness of our mean frail condition. Thou say, said he to the
proud Prince of Tyrus, that thou art a God, but says he, will thou say thou
art a God in the hands of him that slayes thee, Ezekiel. 28. 9. That severe
conviction did God provide for his pride. Thou shall be a man, and no God in
the hand of him that slayes thee. And when Herod prided himself in the
acclamations of the vain multitude, ( the voice of God and not of a man.) The
Angel of the Lord filled that God immediately with worms which slew him and
devoured him, Acts 12. 23. There is indeed nothing more effectual to abase the
pride of the thoughts of men, than a due remembrance that they are so. Hence
the Psalmist prays, Psalm. 9. 20. Put them in fear O Lord, that the Nations may
know themselves to be but men, so and no more. (...) poor, miserable, frail,
mortal man, as the word signifies; what is man? what is his life? what is his
strength? said one, the dream of a shadow; a mere nothing; or as David much
better, Every man living in his best condition is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.
5. and James, our life, which is our best, our all, is but a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, chap. 4. 14. But enough
has been spoken by many on this subject. And we that have seen so many
thousands each week in one City carried away to the grave, have been taught the
truth of our frailty, even as with Thorns and Briers. But I know not how it
comes to pass, there is not any thing we are more apt to forget, than what we
our selves are. And this puts men on innumerable miscarriages toward God and
one another. Thou therefore that art exercised under the hand of God in any
severe dispensation, and art ready on all occasions to fill thy mouth with
complaints, sit down a little and take a right measure of thy self, and see
whether this frame and posture becomes thee. It is the great God against whom
thou repinest, and thou art a man, and that is a name of a worm, a poor, frail,
dying worm; and it may be whilst thou art speaking, thou art no more. And will thou think it meet for such a one as thou art, to magnify thy self against the
great possessor of Heaven and Earth? Poor clay, poor dust and ashes, poor dying
worm, know thy state and condition, and fall down quietly under the mighty hand
of God. Though thou wranglest with men about thy concernments, let God alone.
The po^sheards may contend with the potsheards of the earth; but woe unto him
that striveth with his Maker.

2. Consider that in this frail condition, we have all greatly sinned against
God. So did Job. chap. 7. 20. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? If this consideration will not satisfy thy mind, yet it will
assuredly stop the mouths of all the Sons of men. Though all the Curses of the
Law should be executed upon us, yet every mouth must be stopped, because all
the world is become guilty before God, Romans 3. 19. And why should a living man
complain, says the Prophet, Lament. 3. 39. Why, it may be, it is because that
his trouble is great and inexpressible, and such as seldom or never befell any
before him; but what then, says he, shall a man complain against the
punishment of his sins? If this living man be a sinful man, as there is none
that lives and sins not, whatever his state and condition be, he has no
ground of murmuring or complaint. For a sinful man to complain, especially
whilst he is yet a living man, is most unreasonable. For,

1. Whatever has befallen us, It is just on the account that we are sinners
before God; and to repine against the judgments of God that are rendered
evidently righteous upon the account of sin, is to anticipate the Condition of
the damned in hell, a great part of whose misery it is, that they always
repine against that sentence and punishment which they know to be most
righteous and holy. If this were now a place, if that were now my design to
treat of the sins of all professors, how easy were it to stop the mouths of
all men about their troubles. But that is not my present business, I speak unto
particular persons, and that not with an especial design to convince them of
their sins, but to humble their souls. Another season may be taken to press
that Consideration, directly and prosessedly also. At present, let us only,
when our souls are ready to be entangled with the thoughts of any severe
dispensation of God, and our own particular pressures, troubles, miseries
occasioned thereby, turn into our selves and take a view every one of his own
personal provocations. And when we have done so, see what we have to say to
God, what we have to Complain of: let the man hold his tongue and let the
sinner speak. Is not God holy, righteous, wise in what he has done? and if he
be, why do we not subscribe unto his ways, and submit quietly unto his Will?

2. But this is not all, We are not only such sinners, as to render these
dispensations of God evidently holy, these Judgments of his righteous, but
also to manifest, that they are accompanied with unspeakable patience, mercy
and Grace. To instance in one particular. Is it the burning of our houses, the
spoiling of our Goods, the ruin of our estates alone that our sins have
deserved? if God had made the temporary fire on earth, to have been unto us a
way of entrance into the Eternal fire of hell, we had not had whereof
righteously to complain. May we not then see a mixture of unspeakable patience,
grace and mercy in every dispensation? and shall we then repine against it? Is
it not better advice, go and sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee; for a
sinner out of hell not to rest in the will of God, not to humble himself under
his mighty hand, is to make himself guilty of the especial sin of hell. Other
sins deserve it, but repining against God is principally, yea only committed in
it. The Church comes to a blessed quieting resolution in this case, Micah. 7.
9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him;
bear it quietly, patiently, and submit under his hand therein.

3. Consider that of our selves we are not able to make a right judgment of
what is good for us; what evil unto us, or what tends most directly unto our
chiefest end, Psalm 39. 6. surely man walks in ajvain show; (...) in an Image
full of false representations of things; in the midst of vain appearances that
he knows not what to choose, or do aright, and therefore spends the most of his
time and strength about things that are of no use or purpose unto him; Surely
they are disquieted in vain. And hereof he gives one especial Instance, he
heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather; which is but one Example
of the manifold frustrations that men meet withal in the whole course of their
lives, as not knowing what is good for them. We all profess to aim at one chief
and principal end, namely the enjoyment of God in Christ, as our eternal
reward; and in order thereunto to be carried on in the use of the means of
faith and obedience, tending to that end. Now if this be so, the suitableness,
or unsuitableness of all other things being good or evil unto us, is to be
measured by their tendency unto this end. And what know we hereof? As unto the
things of this life, do we know, whether it will be best for us to be rich or
poor, to have houses or to be harbourless, to abound or to want, to leave
wealth and inheritances unto our Children, or to leave them naked unto the
providence of God? do we know what state, what condition will most further our
Obedience, best obviate our temptations, or call most on us to mortify our
Corruptions? and if we know nothing at all of these things, as indeed we do
not, were it not best for us to leave them quietly unto Gods disposal? I doubt
not but it will appear at the last day, that a world of evil in the hearts of
men was stifled by the destruction of their outward concernments, more by their
inward troubles. That many were delivered from temptations by it, who otherwise
would have been overtaken to their ruin and scandal of the Gospel; that many a
secret Imposthume has been lanced and cured by a stroke, for God does not send
Judgments on his own, for Judgments sake, for punishment sake; but always to
accomplish some blessed design of Grace toward them. And there is no one soul
in particular which shall rightly search it self and Consider its state and
Condition, but will be able to see wisdom, grace and care toward it self in
all dispensations of God. And if I would here enter upon the benefits that
through the sanctifying hand of God, do redound unto believers by Afflictions,
Calamities, troubles, distresses, temptations and the like Effects of Gods
visitations, it would be of use unto the souls of men in this Case. But this
subject has been so often, and so well spoken unto, that I shall not insist
upon it. I desire only that we would seriously consider how utterly Ignorant we
are of what is good for us, or useful unto us in these outward things, and so
leave them quietly unto Gods disposal.

4. We may Consider that all these things about which we are troubled, fall
directly within the compass of that good word of Gods grace, that he will make
all things work together for the good of them that love him, Romans 8. 28. All
things that we enjoy, all things that we are deprived of, all that we do, all
that we suffer; our losses, troubles, miseries, distresses in which the Apostle
instanceth in the following verses, they shall all work together for good;
together with one another, and all with, and in subordination unto the power,
grace, and wisdom of God. It may be, we see not how, or by what means it may be
Effected: but he is infinitely wise and powerful, who has undertaken it, and
we know little or nothing of his ways. There is nothing that we have, or enjoy,
or desire, but it has turned unto some unto their hurt. Riches have been kept
for men unto their hurt. Wisdom and high places have been the ruin of many.
Liberty and plenty are to most a snare. Prosperity slayes the foolish. And we
are not of our selves, in any measure able to secure our selves from the hurt
and poison that is in any of these things, but that they may be our ruin also,
as they have already been, and every day are unto multitudes of the Children of
men. It is enough to fill the soul of any man with horror and amazement, to
consider the ways and ends of most of them that are entrusted with this worlds
goods. Is it not evident that all their lives they seem industriously to take
care that they may perish eternally? Luxury, riot, oppression, Intemperance
(and of late especially) blasphemy and Atheism, they usually give up themselves
unto. And this is the fruit of their abundance and security. What now if God
should deprive us of all these things? Can any one certainly say, that he is
worsted thereby? might they not have turned unto his everlasting perdition, as
well as they do so of thousands as good by nature, and who have had advantages
to be as wise as we? and shall we complain of Gods dispensations about them?
And what shall we say, when he himself has undertaken to make all things that
he guides unto us to work together for our good? Anxieties of mind, and
perplexities of heart about our losses is not that which we are called unto in
our troubles; but this is that which is our duty; let us Consider whether we
Love God or no, whether we are called according to his purpose, if so, all
things are well in his hand who can order them for our good and advantage. I
hope many a poor foul will from hence under all their trouble be able to say
with him that was banished from his Country, and found better entertainment
elsewhere; My Friends, I had perished, if I had not perished; had I not been
undone by Fire, it may be I had been ruined in Eternal Fire, God has made all
to work for my good.

The end of all these discourses is to evince the reasonableness of the duty of
waiting on God, which we are pressing from the Psalmist. Ignorance of God and
our selves, is the great principle and cause of all our disquietments. And this
arises mostly, not from want of light and instruction, but for want of
Consideration and Application. The notions insisted on concerning God are
obvious and known unto all; so are these concerning our selves; but by whom
almost are they employed and improved as they ought? the frame of our spirits
is as though we stood upon equal terms with God, and did think with Jonah, that
we might do well to be angry with what he does; did we rightly consider him,
did we stand in awe of him as we ought, It had certainly been otherwise with us.

Influence of the Promises into the souls waiting in time of trouble. The
nature of them.

Having therefore laid down these Considerations from the second Observation
taken from the Words; namely, That Jehovah himself is the proper object of the
souls waiting in the condition described; I shall only add one direction, how
we may be enabled to perform and discharge this duty aright, which we have
manifested to have been so necessary, so reasonable, so prevalent for the
obtaining of relief, and this arises from another of the Propositions laid
down for the opening of these verses not as yet spoken unto. Namely that

Supportment in trouble from the Word of Promise.
The Word of promise is the souls great supportment in waiting for God. So
says the Psalmist; In his word do I hope, that is, the Word of promise. As the
Word in general is the adequate rule of all our Obedience unto God, and
Communion with him; so there are especial parts of it that are suited unto
these especial actings of our souls toward him. Thus the Word of Promise, or
the Promise in the Word, is that which our faith especially regards, in our
hope, trust and waiting on God; and it is suited to answer unto the immediate
actings of our souls therein. From this Word of Promise therefore, that is from
these promises does the soul in its distresses take encouragement to continue
waiting on God, and that on these two accounts.

1. Because they are declarative of God, his Mind and his Will: And secondly,
because they are communicative of grace and strength to the soul; of which
latter we shall not here treat.

1. The End and Use of the Promise is to declare, reveal and make known God
unto Believers, and that in an especial manner in him, and concerning him,
which may give them encouragement to wait for him.

1. The promises are a declaration of the Nature of God, especially of his
Goodness, Grace and Love. God has put an impression of all the glorious
Excellencies of his nature on his Word, especially as he is in Christ, on the
Word of the Gospel. There as in a Glass do we behold his Glory in the face of
Jesus Christ. As his Commands express unto us his Holiness, his Threatenings,
his Righteousness and Severity; so do his Promises, his Goodness, Grace, Love
and Bounty. And in these things do we learn all that we truly and solidly know
of God; that is, we know him in and by his Word. The soul therefore that in
this condition is waiting on, or for God, considers the Representation which he
makes of himself, and of his own nature in and by the promises, and receives
supportment and encouragement in its duty. For if God teach us by the promises
what he is, and what he will be unto us, we have firm ground to expect from him
all fruits of Benignity, Kindness and Love. Let the soul frame in it self that
Idea of God, which is exhibited in the Promises, and it will powerfully prevail
with it to continue in an Expectation of his gracious returns; they all
expressing Goodness, Love, Patience, Forbearance, Longsuffering, Pardoning
Mercy, Grace, Bounty, with a full satisfactory reward. This is the beauty of
the Lord mentioned with admiration by the Prophet; How great is his goodness!
how great is his beauty! Zeph. 9. 17. Which is the great attractive of the soul
to adhere constantly unto him. Whatever difficulties arise, whatever
temptations interpose, or wearisomeness grows upon us in our streights,
troubles, trials and desertions, let us not entertain such thoughts of God as
our own perplexed imaginations may be apt to suggest unto us. This would
quickly cast us into a thousand impatiencies, misgivings and miscarriages; but
the remembrance of, and meditation on God in his promises as revealed by them,
as expressed in them, is suited quite unto other ends and purposes. There
appears, yea gloriously shines forth, that Love, that Wisdom, that Goodness,
Tenderness and Grace, as cannot but encourage a believing soul to abide in
waiting for him.

2. The Word of Promise does not only express Gods nature as that wherein he
proposes himself unto the contemplation of faith, but it also declares his
Will and Purpose of acting toward the soul suitable unto his own Goodness and
Grace. For Promises are the declarations of Gods purpose and will to act
toward Believers in Christ Jesus, according to the infinite Goodness of his
own nature, and this is done in great variety according to the various
conditions and wants of them that do believe. They all proceed from the same
spring of Infinite Grace, but are branched into innumerable particular streams
according as our necessities do require. To these do waiting souls repair for
stay and encouragement. Their perplexities principally arise from their
misapprehensions of what God is in himself, and of what he will be unto them;
and whither should they repair to be undeceived, but unto that faithful
Representation that he has made of himself and his Will in the Word of his
Grace. For no man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son who is in
the bosom of the Father, he has revealed him, John 1. 17. Now the Gospel is
nothing but the Word of Promise explained in all the Springs, Causes and
Effects of it; thither must we repair to be instructed in this matter. The
imaginations and reasonings of men's hearts will but deceive them in these
things. The informations or instructions of other men may do so; nor have they
any truth in them further than they may be resolved into the Word of Promise.
Here alone they may find rest and refreshment. The soul of whom we speak, is
under troubles, perplexities and distresses as to its outward condition;
pressed with many streights it may be on every hand; and as to its spiritual
estate under various apprehensions of the mind and will of God toward it, as
has before at large been explained; in this condition it is brought in some
measure unto an holy submission unto God, and a patient waiting for the issue
of its trials. In this estate it has many temptations to, and much working of
unbelief. The whole of its opposition amounts to this, that it is neglected of
God, that its way is hid, and his judgment is passed over from him, that it
shall not be at present delivered, nor hereafter saved. What course can any one
advise such a one unto for his relief, and to preserve his soul from fainting
or deserting the duty of waiting on God wherein he is engaged, but only this,
to search and enquire what Revelation God has made of himself and his Will
concerning him in his Word: And this the promise declares. Here he shall find
hope, patience, faith, expectation to be all increased, comforted, encouraged.
Herein lies the duty and safety of any in this condition. Men may bear the
first impression of any trouble with the strength, courage and resolution of
their natural spirits; under some continuance of them they may support
themselves with former experiences, and other usual springs and means of
consolation: But if their wounds prove difficult to be cured, if they despise
ordinary remedies, if their diseases are of long continuance, this is that
which they must be take themselves unto. They must search into the Word of
promise, and learn to measure things not according to the present state and
apprehensions of their mind, but according unto what God has declared
concerning them. And there are sundry Excellencies in the promises when hoped
in, or trusted in, that tend unto the establishment of the soul in this great
duty of waiting. As,

1. That Grace in them, that is, the Good Will of God in Christ, for help,
relief, satisfaction, pardon and salvation, is suited unto all particular
conditions and wants of the soul. As Light arises from the Sun, and is
diffused in the beams thereof to the especial use of all creatures, enabled by
a visive faculty to make use of it; so comes Grace forth from the Eternal Good
Will of God in Christ, and is diffused by the promises, with a blessed
contemporation unto the conditions and wants of all Believers. There can
nothing fall out between God and any soul, but there is grace suited unto it in
one promise or another, as clearly and evidently, as if it were given unto him
particularly and immediately. And this they find by experience who at any time
are enabled to mix effectually a promise with faith.

2. The Word of promise has a wonderful mysterious especial impression of God
upon it. He does by it secretly and ineffably communicate himself unto
Believers. When God appeared in a dream unto Jacob, he awaked and said, God is
in this place and I knew it not. He knew God was every where, but an intimation
of his especial presence surprised him. So is a soul surprised when God opens
himself and his Grace in a promise unto him. It cries out, God is here and I
knew it not. Such a near approach of God in his Grace it finds, as is
accompanied with a refreshing surprizal.

3. There is an especial Engagement of the Veracity and Truth of God in every
promise. Grace and Truth are the two ingredients of an Evangelical promise; the
matter and form whereof they do consist. I cannot now stay to show where in
this especial engagement of Truth in the promise does consist. Besides, it is a
thing known and confessed. But it has an especial influence to support the
soul when hoped in, in its duty of waiting. For that hope can never make
ashamed or leave the soul unto disappointments, which stays its self on Divine
Veracity under a special engagement.

And this is that duty which the Psalmist engages himself in, and unto the
performance of, as the only way to obtain a comfortable interest in that
forgiveness which is with God, and all the gracious effects thereof. And in the
handling hereof, as we have declared its nature and necessity; so we have the
Psalmists directions for its practice unto persons in the like condition with
him, for the attaining of the end by him aimed at; so that it needs no further
Application. That which remains of the Psalm is the Address which he makes unto
others, with the encouragement which he gives them to steer the same course
with himself; and this he does in the two last verses, which to complete the
Exposition of the whole Psalm, I shall briefly explain and pass through, as
having already dispatched what I principally aimed at.

Psalm. 130. v. 7, 8.
Verse 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and
with him is plenteous Redemption.

8. And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.


Exposition of verse. 7, and 8.
I shall proceed in the opening of these words, according unto the method
already insisted on. First, the meaning of the principal words shall be
declared; then the sense and importance of the whole. Thirdly, the Relation
that they have unto the condition of the soul expressed in the Psalm must be
manifested; from all which Observations will arise for our Instruction and
Directions in the like cases, wherein we are or may be concerned.

Let Israel hope in the Lord; (...) Hope Israel in Jehovah. Trust, or expect;
the same word with that, verse. 5. In his word do I hope; properly, to expect,
to look for, which includes hope, and adds some further degree of the souls
acting toward God; it is an earnest looking after the thing hoped for; expecta
ad Dominum; hope in him, and look up to him; For with the Lord, quia or
quoniam, because, seeing that with the Lord; (...) mercy; the verb substantive,
as usual, is omitted, which we supply, there is Mercy, Grace, Bounty, Goodness,
Good Will. This word is often joined with another, discovering its importance,
and that is (...) Truth. (...) Goodness, or Mercy and Truth. These are, as it
were, constituent parts of Gods Promises. It is of Goodness, Grace, Bounty, to
promise any undue mercy. And it is of Truth or Faithfulness to make good what
is so promised. The LXX. commonly render this word by (...), that is, pardoning
mercy, as it is every where used in the New Testament.

And with him is plenteous Redemption; (...) with him; as before speaking unto
God, v. 4. (...) with thee there is; the meaning of which expression has been
opened at large. Redemption (...) from (...) to redeem; the same with (...),
Redemption: This word is often used for a proper Redemption, such as is made by
the intervention of a price, and not a mere Assertion unto liberty by power,
which is sometimes also called Redemption. Thus it is said of the money that
the first born of the children of Israel, which were above the number of the
Levites were redeemed with; that Moses took (...) the Redemption, that is, the
Redemption money, the price of their Redemption, Numb. 3. 49. And Psalm. 49. 8.
The Redemption of men's souls is precious; it cost a great price. The Redemption
then that is with God, relates unto a Price; Goodness or mercy with respect
unto a price, becomes Redemption, that is actively, the cause or means of it.
What that price is, see Matthew. 20. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 18.

Plenteous Redemption, (...) multa, copi sa, much, abundant, plenteous. It is
used both for Quantity and Quality; much in quantity, or plenteous, abundant,
and in Quality, that is, precious, excellent. And it is applied in a good and
bad sense; so it is said of our sins, Ezekiel. 9. 6. our sins (...) are increased
or multiplied, or are great; many in number, and heinous in their nature or
quality. And in the other sense, it is applied unto the mercy of God, whereby
they are removed; it is great or plenteous, it is excellent or precious.

V. 8. And he, that is, the Lord Jehovah; he with whom is plenteous Redemption
(...) shall redeem; or make them partakers of that Redemption that is with him.
He shall redeem Israel, that is, those who hope and trust in him.

From all his iniquities (...); his iniquities, that is, of the Elect Israel,
and every individual amongst them. But the word signifies trouble as well as
sin, especially that trouble or punishment that is for sin. So Cain expresses
himself upon the denunciation of his sentence; (...) my sin, that is, the
punishment thou have denounced against my sin, is too great or heavy for me to
bear, Genesis 4. 13. There is a near affinity between sin and trouble; noxam poena
sequitur, punishment is inseparable from iniquity. (...) then the word here
used signifies either sin with reference unto trouble due to it, or trouble
with respect unto sin whence it proceeds. And both may here be well intended.
God shall redeem Israel from all his sins and troubles that have ensued
thereon. And this is the signification of the words, which indeed are plain and
obvious.

And these words close up the Psalm. He who began with depths, his own depths
of sin and trouble; out of which, and about which he cried out unto God, is so
encouraged by that prospect of grace and forgiveness with God, which by faith
he had obtained, as to preach unto others, and to support them in expectation
of deliverance from all their sin and trouble also.

And such for the most part are all the exercises and trials of the children of
God. Their Entrance may be a strom, but their close is a calm. Their beginning
is oftentimes trouble, but their latter end is peace; peace to themselves, and
advantage to the Church of God. For men in all ages coming out of great trials
of their own, have been the most instrumental for the good of others. For God
does not greatly exercise any of his, but with some especial end for his own
glory.

Secondly, The sense and intendment of the Psalmist in these words is to be
considered, and that resolves it self into three general parts. 1. An
Exhortation or Admonition. Israel hope in the Lord, or expect Jehovah. 2. A
ground of Encouragement unto the performance of the Duty exhorted unto; Because
with the Lord there is much, plenteous, abundant, precious Redemption. 3. A
gracious Promise of a blessed issue which shall be given unto the performance
of this duty. He shall redeem Israel from all his sins, and out of all his
troubles.


In the Exhortation there occurs,

1. The persons exhorted; that is, Israel; not Israel according to the flesh;
for they are not all Israel which are of Israel, Romans 9. 6. But it is the
Israel mentioned, Psalm. 73. 1. The whole Israel of God to whom he is good, such
as are of a clean heart; that is, all those who are interested in the Covenant,
and do inherit the promise of their forefathers who was first called by that
name? All Believers; and the Psalmist treats them all in general in this matter.

1. Because there is none of them but have their trials and intanglements about
sin, more or less. As there is none that lives and sins not; so there is
none sins, and is not entangled and troubled. Perhaps then they are not all
of them in the same condition with him, in the depths that he was plunged into.
Yet more or less, all and every one of them is so far concerned in sin, as to
need his direction. All the Saints of God either have been, or are, or may be
in these depths. It is a good saying of Austin on this place, Valde sunt in
profundo qui non clamant de profundo. None so in the deep, as they who do not
cry and call out of the deep. They are in a deep of security, who are never
sensible of a deep of sin.

2. There is none of them, whatever their present condition he, but they may
fall into the like depths with those of the Psalmist. There is nothing
absolutely in the Covenant, nor in any Promise, to secure them from it. And
what befalls any one Believer, may befall them all. If any one Believer may
fall totally away, all may do so, and not leave one in the world, and so an end
be put to the Kingdom of Christ, which is no small evidence that they cannot so
fall. But they may fall into depths of sin; that some of them have done so, we
have testimonies and instances beyond exception. It is good then that all of
them should be prepared for that duty which they may all stand in need of, and
a right discharge of it. Besides the duty mentioned, is not absolutely
restrained to the condition before described: But it is proper and accommodate
unto other seasons also. Therefore are all the Israel of God exhorted unto it.

2. The duty it self, is hoping in Jehovah, with such an hope or trust, as has
an expectation of relief joined with it. And there are two things included in
this duty, 1. The Renuntiation of any hopes in expectation of deliverance
either from sin or trouble, any other way; hope in Jehovah; this is frequently
expressed, where the performance of this duty is mentioned; see Hos. 14. 3.
Jer. 3. 22, 23. And we have declared the nature of it in the exposition of the
1, and 2. verses. 2. Expectation from him; and this also has been insisted on
in the Observations from the verses immediately preceding, wherein also the
whole nature of this duty was explained, and directions were given for the due
performance of it.


Secondly, The encouragement tendered unto this duty, is the next thing in the
words; for with the Lord is plenteous Redemption; wherein we may observe,

1. What it is that he professes as the great encouragement unto the duty
mentioned, and that is Redemption; the Redemption that is with God; upon the
matter the same with the forgiveness before mentioned; Mercy, Pardon,
Benignity, Bounty. He does not bid them hope in the Lord, because they were the
seed of Abraham, the peculiar people of God made partakers of privileges above
all the people in the world; much less because of their worthiness, or that
good that was in themselves, but merely upon the account of mercy in God; of
his Grace, Goodness and Bounty. The Mercy of God, and the Redemption that is
with him, is the only ground unto sinners for hope and confidence in him.

2. There are two great Concernments of this Grace, the one expressed, the
other implied in the words. The first is, that it is much, plenteous, abundant.
That which principally discourageth distressed souls from a comfortable waiting
on God, is, their fears lest they should not obtain mercy from him, and that
because their sins are so great, and so many; or attended with such
circumstances and aggravations, as that it is impossible they should find
acceptance with God. This ground of despondency and unbelief, the Psalmist
obviates, by representing the fullness, the plenty, the boundless plenty of the
mercy that is with God. It is such as will suit the condition of the greatest
sinners in their greatest depths; the stores of its treasures are
inexhaustible. And the force of the exhortation does not lie so much in this,
that there is Redemption with God, as that this Redemption is plenteous or
abundant.

Secondly, Here is an intimation in the Word it self of that Relation which the
Goodness and Grace of God proposed has to the blood of Christ; whence it is
called Redemption. This, as was showed in the opening of the words, has
respect unto a price, the price whereby we are bought, that is the blood of
Christ. This is that whereby way is made for the exercise of mercy toward
sinners; Redemption, which properly denotes actual deliverance, is said to be
with God, or in him, as the effect in the cause. The causes of it are his own
Grace, and the blood of Christ. There are these prepared for the redeeming of
Believers from sin and trouble, unto his own glory. And herein lies the
encouragement that the Psalmist proposes unto the performance of the duty
exhorted unto; namely, to wait on God. It is taken from God himself, as all
encouragements unto sinners to draw nigh unto him, and to wait for him, must
be. Nothing but himself can give us confidence to go unto him. And it is suited
unto the state and condition of the soul under consideration. Redemption and
Mercy are suited to give relief from sin and misery.

Thirdly, The last verse contains a promise of the issue of the performance of
this duty; He shall redeem his people from all their iniquities. Two things are
observable in the words.

1. The Certainty of the Issue or event of the duty mentioned, (...) and he
shall; or, he will redeem; he will assuredly do so. Now, although this in the
Psalmist is given out by Revelation, and is a new promise of God, yet as it
relates to the condition of the soul here expressed, and the discovery made by
says of forgiveness and Redemption with God, the Certainty intended in this
Assertion is built upon the principles before laid down. Whence therefore does
it appear, whence may we infallibly conclude, that God will redeem his Israel
from all their iniquities? I answer,

1. The Conclusion is drawn from the Nature of God. There is forgiveness and
Redemption with him and he will act toward his people suitably to his own
nature. There is Redemption with him, and therefore he will redeem; forgiveness
with him, and therefore he will forgive. As the Conclusion is certain and
infallible; that wicked men, ungodly men, shall be destroyed, because God is
Righteous and holy; his Righteousness and Holiness indispensibly requiring
their destruction; so is the Redemption and Salvation of all that believe,
certain on this account; namely, because there is forgiveness with him; he is
good and gracious, and ready to forgive; his Goodness and Grace requires their
Salvation.

2. The Conclusion is certain upon the account of Gods Faithfulness in his
Promises. He has promised; that those who wait on him shall not be ashamed;
that their expectation shall not be disappointed; whence the Conclusion is
certain, that in his time and way they shall be redeemed.

2. There is the Extent of this deliverance or Redemption; shall redeem Israel
from all their Iniquities. It was showed in the opening of the verse, that this
word denotes either sin procuring trouble, or trouble procured by sin; and
there is a respect unto both, sin and its punishment. From both, from all of
both kind, God will redeem his Israel. Not this or that evil; this or that sin,
but from all evil, all sin. He will take all sins from their souls, and wipe
all tears from their Eyes. Now God is said to do this on many accounts.

1. On the account of the Great Cause of all actual deliverance and Redemption,
the blood of Christ. He has laid an assured foundation of the whole work; the
price of Redemption is paid, and they shall in due time enjoy the Effects and
fruits of it.

2. Of the Actual Communication of the Effects of that Redemption unto them.
This is sure to all the Elect of God, to his whole Israel. They shall all be
made partakers of them. And this is the end of all the promises of God, and of
the grace and mercy promised in them, namely that they should be means to
exhibit and give out to Believers that Redemption which is purchased and
prepared for them; and this is done two ways,

1. Partially, initially and gradually in this life. Here God gives in unto
them the pardon of their sins; being justified freely by his grace; and in his
Sanctification of them through his spirit, gives them delivery from the power
and dominion of sin. Many troubles also he delivers them from, and from all as
far as they are Poenal, or have any mixture of the Curse in them. 2.
Completely; Namely, when he shall have freed them from sin and trouble, and
from all the effects and consequents of them, by bringing them unto the
enjoyment of himself in Glory.
3. The Words being thus opened, we may briefly in the next place consider what
they express, concerning the State, Condition, or Actings of the soul, which
are represented in this Psalm.

Having himself attained unto the State before described, and being engaged
resolvedly into the performance of that duty which would assuredly bring him
into an haven of full rest and peace; the Psalmist applies himself unto the
residue of the Israel of God to give them encouragement unto this duty with
himself, from the Experience that he had of a blessed success therein. As if he
had said unto them; Ye are now in Affictions, and under troubles, and that upon
the account of your sins and provocations. A condition I Confess sad and
deplorable; but yet there is hope in Israel concerning these things. For
consider how it has been with me, and how the Lord has dealt with me. I was
in depths inexpressible, and saw for a while no way or means of delivery. But
God has been pleased graciously to reveal himself unto me, as God pardoning
Iniquity, transgression, and sin; and in the Consolation, and supportment which
I have received thereby; I am waiting for a full participation of the fruits of
his Love. Let me therefore prevail with you who are in the like condition to
steer the same course with me. Only let your expectations be fixed in mercy and
Sovereign Grace, without any regard unto any privilege or worth in your
selves. Rest in the plenteous redemption, those stores of Grace which are with
Jehovah, and according to his faithfulness in his promises, he will deliver you
out of all perplexing troubles.

Having thus opened the Words, I shall now only name the doctrinal Observations
that are tendered from them, and so put a close to these Discourses. As, Obs. 1.
The Lord Jehovah is the only hope for sin-distressed souls; Hope in the Lord:
This has been sufficiently discovered and confirmed on sundry passages in the
Psalm. Obs. 2. The Ground of all hope and Expectation of relief in sinners, is
mere Grace, Mercy, and Redemption. Hope in the Lord, for with him there is
Redemption. All other grounds of hope are false and deceiving. Obs. 3.
Inexhaustible stores of Mercy, and Redemption are needful for the encouragement
of sinners to rest and wait on God. With him is plentiful Redemption. Such is
your misery, so pressing are your fears and disconsolations, that nothing less
than boundless Grace, can relieve or support you; there are therefore such
Treasures and stores in God as are suited hereunto. With him is Plenteous
Redemption. Obs. 4. The Ground of all the dispensation of Mercy, Goodness,
Grace, and forgiveness which is in God to Sinners, is laid in the blood of
Christ. Hence it is here called Redemption. Unto this also we have spoken at
large before. Obs. 5. All that wait on God on the account of Mercy and Grace
shall have an undoubted Issue of peace. He shall redeem Israel; let him says
God lay hold of my Arm, that he may have peace, and he shall have peace, Isa.
27. 3. Obs. 6. Mercy given to them that wait on God shall in the close and
issue, be every way full and satisfying. He shall redeem his people from all
their Iniquities.


And these Propositions do arise from the words, as absolutely considered, and
in themselves. If we mind their Relation unto the peculiar Condition of the
soul represented in this Psalm, they will yet afford us the ensuing
Observations. Obs. 1. They who out of depths, have by faith and waiting
obtained mercy, or are supported in waiting for a sense of believed mercy and
forgiveness, are fitted, and only they are fitted to Preach and declare Grace,
and mercy unto others.

This was the Case with the Psalmist. Upon his emerging out of his own depths
and streights, he declares the mercy and redemption whereby he was delivered,
unto the whole Israel of God.

Obs. 2. A saving participation of Grace and forgiveness leaves a deep
Impression of its fullness and excellency on the soul of a sinner; So was it
here with the Psalmist. Having himself obtained Forgiveness, he knows no bounds
or measure as it were in the extolling of it. There is with God Mercy,
Redemption, Plenteous Redemption, redeeming from all Iniquity; I have found it
so, and so will every one do that shall believe it.


Now these Observations might all of them, especially the two last, receive an
useful improvement. But whereas what I principally intended from this Psalm,
has been at large insisted on, upon the first verses of it, I shall not here
further draw forth any Meditations upon them, but content my self with the
Exposition that has been given of the design of the Psalmist, and sense of his
words in these last verses.

FINIS.

