AN ENQUIRY Into the Original, Nature, Institution, Power, Order and Communion
of Evangelical CHURCHES.

The First Part.

With AN ANSWER To the Discourse of the Unreasonableness of SEPARATION Written
by Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, Dean of Paul's; And in Defense of the Vindication
of Non-conformists from the Guilt of SCHISM.

By JOHN OWEN, D. D.

Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the Good
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls.

JER. 6.16. LONDON, Printed by J. Richardson, for Nath. Ponder, at the Peacock
in the Poultrey; And Sam. Lee at the Feathers in Lumbardstreet, 1681.

TO THE READER.
(...) omitted the Consi^^ration (...) of Dr. Stilling^^^^^ (...) the (...) the
(...) of (...) by Non(...) passed it by (...) the (...) I supposed (...) assign
it (...) the provocation which he (...) received from those who answered his
Sermon, or (...), and so have ^^ssed it by, among such other excursions, as
Di^^^es are incident unto, in their Controversal Writings. For that no
Countenance was given unto it, either from Truth or any useful End as unto the
present state of (...) the (...) the Times, or rather (...) rest of some, then
any just rational projections. For what other success, this Book has had, I
know not, nor am solicitous, Certain it is that many, of the same mind and
persuasion with himself, have been encouraged and emboldened by it, Confidently
to report* t^^^ ^^e Non-Conformists are great promoters (...) Papal ^^terest^
ye^ (...) to facilitate its Introdu^t^^^ (...) evident in the (...) Topi^^^
(...) import^^^ (...) need (...) were (...) from amongst (...) it came in, as
(...) not^^^^ will (...) influenced ^y (...) ^^vantages, to de^^^^ (...)
^^cessary that such an (...) true Reason^ and Means of the advance of Popery in
this Na^^on, as shall give them occasion to consider themselves and their own
ways; For we are to look for the Causes of such Effects, in things and means,
that are suited and fitted to be productive of them, so as that they cannot but
follow on their being and operation; and not in Cold Stories, Surmizes, and far
fetched, or feigned Inferences. And if we do reckon that the real advancement
of Religion depends only on the secular advancement of some that do profess
it, we may be mistaken in our measures as others have been before us.

But at present, the Insinuations of that Preface; do seem to prevail much with
those of the same Party with its Author; who want nothing at any time but the
Countenance of such a Pen and Story, to vent their ill will against
Non-Conformists. Report say they and we will Report it. But also as he said,
Mendacium mendacio tegendum ne perpluat. First evil Inventions, always tend
unto, and stand in need of new Additions, to render them useful unto their End,
without which they quickly evaporate; Wherefore least the Insinuations of this
worthy Person, should not be sufficiently subservient unto the Uniting of all
Protestants in one common Interest against Popery, which was the original
Design of the Drs. Sermon, some have added unto it, that which is Homogeneal as
unto Truth, and so easily mixing with the other Discourse; that the
Non-Conformists some of them at least, do receive or have received Money from
the Papists, to act their Affairs and promote their Interest. And although this
be such a putid Calumny, such a malicious falsehood, such a frontless Lie, as
Impudence it self would blush at being made an instrument to vent it, and
withal extremely ridiculous; Yet because it seems useful unto the Good End of
Uniting Protestants, and Opposing Popery, it has not only been reported by
sundry of the Clergy, but embraced and divulged also by some of their weak and
credulous Followers, who seem to believe that other men's Advantage is their
Religion. But when the utmost bounds of Modesty are passed, nothing but an
outrage in* Lying and Calumny, out of hopes that something will stick at last,
can give Countenance to men in such false Accusations. And those by whom they
are first whispered, probably understand better than the Non-formists what
Influence Money, or the things which they know how to turn into it; has into
their Profession, and actings in Religion. It seems to me that some such men
are afraid, lest the present opposition unto Popery, should issue in such an
establishment of the Protestant Religion, as that hereafter it should not be in
the disposal of any, nor in their power to make a bargain of it, either for
their Advantage or in their Necessity. For unless we should suppose such a
defect in common Prudence, as is not chargeable on men of Understanding in
other affairs, it is hard to judge that these things can proceed from any other
ground, but a design to increase distrusts and Jealousies amongst Protestants,
to heighten their Differences, to exasperate and provoke them to Animosities,
to weaken the hands of each Party by a disbelief of the Sincerity of each other
in the same common Cause; whence, whether it be designed or no, it will follow
that we shall be all made a prey unto our restless Adversaries. For what else
but a strong inclination thereto, can give the least Credit or Reputation to
such vile insinuations, false Surmizes and Fables (I do not say in the Preface
but in the Reports that have been occasioned thereby) wherein Folly and Malice
Rival one another, against that plain, open, uncontrollable evidence, which the
Non-conformists always gave, and yet continue to give, of their faithful
cordial adherence unto the Protestant Religion, and interest in the Nation. And
what now if in way of Retaliation, a charge should be laid and managed against
those of the Episcopal way, that they should contribute their assistance,
whether knowingly, or being deluded, (it is all one) to the Introduction of
Popery; would not all things be cast into an admirable posture amongst us, for
an opposition thereunto? But let none mistake nor deceive themselves, neither
the past Sufferings of the Non-conformists, nor their present hopes of Liberty,
nor the reproaches cast upon them, shall shake them in their Resolutions for a
Conjunction with all sincere Protestants, in the preservation of their
Religion, and opposition unto all Popish Designs whatever. And (to speak with
Modesty enough) as they have hitherto in all Instances of Zeal and Duty for the
preservation of the Protestant Religion, been as ready and forward as any other
sort of men, so whatever may befall them, however they may be traduced, or
falsely accused, they do and will continue in giving the highest security, that
Conscience, Profession, Principles, Interest, and Actions can give, of their
stability in the same Cause. Only they desire to be excused, if they make not
use of this notable Engine for opposing of Popery, namely, the stirring up (at
this present time) of Jealousies, Fears and Animosities amongst Protestants,
which others judge serviceable unto that End. But that which animates all these
insinuations, charges and Reports, is our Thankful acceptance of the Indulgence
granted by his Majesty by a publ^que Declaration some years ago; whereby it
should seem the Papists thought to make some advantage, though they were
deceived in their Expectation. I must needs say that whatever be the true Case
in reference thereto in point of Law, that in my Judgment it scarcely answers
that Loyalty and regard unto his Majesty's honor, which some men Profess, when
all his Actions are suited to their Interests, to continue such outcries about
that which was his own sole Act by the advice of his Counsel. We did indeed
Thankfully accept and make use of this Royal Favor; and after that for so many
years we had been exposed to all manner of sufferings and Penalties, whereby
multitudes were ruined in their Estates, and some lost their Lives, and that
without hopes of any Remission of severity from the Parliament that then sat,
by their mistake of the true Interest of the Kingdom, wherein alone they did
not miss it, we were glad to take a little breathing space from our troubles,
under his Majesty's Royal Protection, designed only as an Expedient (as was
usual in former times) for the Peace and Prosperity of the Kingdom, until the
whole matter might be settled in Parliament. And if this were a crime habetis
confitentem reum as to my part. But because I know my self herein peculiarly
reflected on, I do avow, that never any one Person in Authority, Dignity or
Power in the Nation, nor any one that had any Relation unto public Affairs,
nor any from them, Papist or Protestant, did once speak one word to me, or
advise with me, about any Indulgence or Toleration to be granted unto Papists;
I Challenge all the World who are otherwise Minded, to intermit their service
for a season unto the great false Accuser, and prove the Contrary if they can;
The Persons are sufficiently known, of whom they may make their Enquiry.

But I can cast this also, into the same heap or bundle of other false Surmizes
and Reports, concerning me almost without number; which it would be a wonder
that some men should pretend to believe and divulge as they have done, if we
were bound to judge that their Charity and Prudence were proportionable unto
their Dignities and Promotions. These things must be, whilst Interest, with
Hopes and Fears, vain Love, and Hatred thence arising, do steer the Minds of
Men.

But what if we have not designed the prevalence or Introduction of Popery, yet
being a company of silly Fellows, we have suffered our selves to be wheadled by
the Jesuits, to be active for the cutting of our own throats; for we are full
well satisfied, that we should be the very first who should drink of the Cup of
their fury, could they ruin the Protestant Interest in England. And into such
an unhappy posture of Affairs are we fallen, that whereas it is Evident we do
nothing for the promotion of Popery, but only, pray against it, preach against
it, write against it, instruct the people in principles of Truth whereon to
avoid it; and Cordially join with all true Protestants in the opposition of it,
wherein we are charged with an excess that is like to spoil all; yet these
Crafty Blades know how to turn it all unto their advantage. As it should seem
therefore there remains nothing for Non-conformists to do in this matter; but
to bind themselves hand and foot, and give themselves up unto the power of the
Papists; for all they do against them, does but promote their Interest. But
this I am persuaded they will be greatly unwilling unto, unless they are well
assured, that their Episcopal Friends will be more ready to expose themselves
to hazard for their preservation and deliverance, then yet they have reason to
expect that they will. But for my part I was a long time since taught an
Expedient by an eminent personage for the freeing my self from any inclination
to a Compliance with Popery, and that in the Instance of himself. For being in
Ireland when there was in former days, a great noise about Reconciliation; a
Person of his own Order and Degree in the Court of England, wrote unto him to
inform him, of a Report, that he was inclined to a Reconciliation with Popery,
or a Compliance on Good Terms with the Church of Rome; and withal desired him,
that if it were so, he would Communicate unto him the Reason of his Judgment.
But that great and wise Personage, understanding full well whereunto these
things tended, returned no answer but this only; That he knew no reason for
any such Report; For he was sure, that he believed the Pope to be Antichrist,
which put an absolute Period unto the Intercourse. And I can insist on the same
defensative, against forty such Arguments as are used to prove us compliant
with the Papal Interest; and so I believe can all the Non-conformists. And if
this be not enough I can for my part subscribe unto the Conclusion which that
most eminent Champion of the Ptotestant Religion in England, namely Whitaker,
gives unto his learned Disputation about Antichrist; Igitur (says he) sequamur
praeeuntem Spiritum Sanctum, and libere dicamus, defendamus, clamemus, and per
eum qui vivit in aeternum juremus, pontificem Romanum esse Antichristum.

If this will not suffice, we know better how to spend our remaining hours of
Life and Peace, then in Contending about impertinent stories and surmizes,
exhaled by Wit and Invention out of the bogge of secular Interest. And shall
therefore only assure those by whom we are Charged, in the Pulpit, or
Coffee-houses; or from the Press, to Countenance the promotion of the Papal
Interest in the Nation, that as they deal unjustly with us herein, and weaken
the Protestant Interest what lies in them; so let them and others do and say
what they please, nothing shall ever shake us in our Resolution by the help of
God, to abide in a firm Conjunction with all sincere Protestants for the
preservation of our Religion, and in opposition to the Papists; yea that we
would do so with our lives at the Stake, if there were none left to abide in
the same Testimony but our selves; But if they think that there is no way for
us to be serviceable against Popery, but by debauching our Consciences with
that Conformity which they prescribe unto us, we beg their pardon, we are (...)
Mind.

The Preface.
An Examination of the General Principles of Dr. Stillingfleet's Book of the
Unreasonableness of SEPARATION.

THE Differences and Contests among professed Christians about the Nature,
Power, Order, Rule and Residence of the Gospel Church State, with the Interest
of each Dissenting Party therein, have not only been great, and of long
continuance, but have also so despised all ways and means of allaying or
abatement, that they seem to be more and more enflamed every day; and to
threaten more pernicious consequents, then any they have already produced;
which yet have been of the worst of Evils that the World for some Ages has
groaned under. For the Communion, so much talked of, amongst Churches, is
almost come only, unto an Agreement and Oneness in design for the mutual and
forcible Extermination of one another; at least this is the professed Principle
of them who lay the loudest claim to the Name and Title, with all the Rights
and Privileges of the Church; Nor are others far remote from the same Design,
who adjudge all who dissent from themselves, into such a condition, as wherein
they are much inclined to think it meet they should be destroyed. That which
animates this contest, which gives it Life and Fierceness, is a supposed
enclosure of certain Privileges and Advantages Spiritual and Temporal, real or
pretended, unto the Church State contended about. Hence most men seem to think
that the principal, if not their only concernment in Religion, is, of what
Church they are; so as that a dissent from them, is so evil, as that there is
almost nothing else that has any very considerable evil in it. When this is
once well riveted in their Minds by them whose secular Advantages lie in the
Enclosure, they are in a Readiness to bear a share in all the evils that
unavoidably ensue on such Divisions. By this means among others, is the state
or condition of Christian Religion as unto its public Profession, become at
this day so deplorable as cannot well be expressed. What with the bloody and
desolating Wars of Princes and Potentates, and what with the Degeneracy of the
Community of the People from the Rule of the Gospel in Love, Meekness,
Self-denial, Holiness, Zeal, the Universal Mortification of Sin, and
Fruitfulness in Good Works, the Profession of Christianity is become but a sad
Representation of the Virtues of him who calls out of Darkness into his
Mavelous Light. Neither does there seem at present to be any design or
expectation in the Most for the ending of Controversies about the Church, but
Force and the Sword; which God forbid.

It is therefore high time that a sober Enquiry be made whether there be any
such Church state of Divine Institution as those contended about. For if it
should appear upon Trial, that indeed there is not, but that all the fierce
digladiations of the Parties at Variance, with the doleful effects that attend
them, have proceeded on a false supposition, in an adherence whereunto they are
confirmed by their Interests, some advances may be made toward their
Abatement. However if this may not be attained, yet Directions may be taken
from the Discovery of the Truth, for the use of them who are willing to be
delivered from all concernment in these fruitless endless contests, and to
reduce their whole Practice in Religion unto the Institutions, Rules, and
Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ. And where all hopes of a general Reformation
seem to fail, it savours somewhat of an unwarrantable Severity, to forbid them
to reform themselves who are willing so to do; provided they admit of no other
Rule in what they so do, but the Declaration of the Mind of Christ in the
Gospel, carrying it peaceably toward all Men, and firmly adhering unto the
Faith once delivered unto the Saints.

To make an Entrance into this Enquiry, the ensuing Discourse is designed. And
there can be no way of the Mannagement of it, but by a diligent impartial
search into the Nature, Order, Power and Rule of the Gospel Church state, as
instituted, determined and limited by our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles.
When we depart from this Rule, so as not to be regulated by it, in all
Instances of Fact, or pleas of Right that afterward fell out, we fall into the
confusion of various Presumptions, suited unto the Apprehensions and Interests
of men, imposed on them from the Circumstances of the Ages wherein they lived.
Yet is it not to be denied, but that much Light into the nature of Apostolical
Institutions, may be received from the declared Principles and Practices of the
first Churches for the space of 200 years, or thereabouts. But that after this
the Churches did insensibly depart in various degrees from the state, Rule, and
Order, of the Apostolical Churches, must I suppose be acknowledged by all those
who groan under the final Issue of that gradual Degeneracy in the Papal
Antichristian Tyranny. For Rome was not built in a day, nor was this change
introduced at once, or in one Age, nor were the lesser Alterations which began
this Declension, so prejudicial unto the Being, Order, and Purity of the
Churches, as they proved afterward, through a continual additional increase in
succeeding Ages.

Having affirmed something of this nature in my brief Vindication of the
Nonconformists from the Guilt of Schism, the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet in his
late Treatise entitled, The Unreasonableness of Separation, does not only deny
it, but reflects with some severity upon the Mention of it; Part 2. Sect. 3.
page 225, 226, etc. I shall therefore on this Occasion reassume the
consideration of it, although it will be spoken unto also, afterward.

The Words he opposes are these; It is possible that an impartial Account may
ere long be given of the state and ways of the first Churches, after the
decease of the Apostles, wherein it will be made to appear how they did
insensibly deviate in many things from the Rule of their first institution; so
as that though their Mistakes were of small moment, and not prejudicial unto
their Faith and Order, yet occasion was administered unto succeeding Ages to
increase those Deviations, until they issued in a fatal Apostasy; I yet suppose
these words inoffensive, and agreeable unto the Sentiments of the Generality of
Protestants. For,

1. Unto the first Churches after the Apostles, I ascribe nothing but such
small Mistakes as did no way prejudice their Faith or Order. And that they did
preserve the latter as well as the former, as unto all the substantial Parts of
it, shall be afterward declared. Nor do I reflect any more upon them, then did
Hegesippus in Eusebius, who confines the Virgin Purity of the Church unto the
days of the Apostles* lib. 3. cap. 29. The greater Deviations which I intend,
began not until after the end of the second Century. But,

2. To Evince the improbability of any Alteration in Church Rule and Order,
upon my own Principles, he intimates both here and afterward, that my Judgment
is that the Government of the Church was Democratical, and the Power of it in
the People in distinction from its Officers; which is a great Mistake; I never
thought, I never wrote any such thing. I do believe that the Authoritative
Rule, or Government of the Church, was, is, and ought to be in the Elders and
Rulers of it, being an Act of the Office-Power committed unto them by Christ
himself. Howbeit my Judgment is, that they ought not to Rule the Church, with
Force, Tyranny, and Corporal Penalties, or without their own consent, whereof
we shall treat afterward. There are also other Mistakes in the same Discourse
which I shall not insist upon.

3. This therefore is that which he opposes, namely, that there was a
Deviation in various degrees, and falling of from the Original Institution,
Order, and Rule of the Church, until it issued in a fatal Apostasy. This is
that which on the present Occasion must be further spoken unto; For if this be
not true, I confess there is an end of this contest, and we must all acquiesce
in the State, Rule, and Order, that was in the Church of Rome before the
Reformation. But we may observe something yet farther in the Vindication and
Confirmation of this Truth, which I acknowledge to be the Foundation of all
that we plead for in point of Church Reformation. As

1. That the Reasons and Arguings of the Doctor in this Matter, the Necessity
of his Cause compelling him thereunto, are the same with those of the Papists
about the Apostasy of their Church, in Faith, Order, and Worship, wherewith
they are charged; namely, when, where, how was this Alteration made, who made
opposition unto it; and the like. When these Enquiries are multiplied by the
Papists, as unto the whole Causes between them and us, he knows well enough how
to give satisfactory Answers unto them, and so might do in this particular unto
himself also; but I shall endeavor to ease him of that trouble at present.
Only I must say that it is fallen out somewhat unexpectedly, that the Ruins of
the principle Bulwark of the Papacy, which has been effectually demolished by
the Writings of Protestants of all sorts, should be endeavored to be repaired
by a Person, justly made eminent by his Defense of the Protestant Religion
against those of the Church of Rome.

2. But it may be pleaded, that although the Churches following the first Ages,
did insensibly degenerate from the Purity and simplicity of Gospel Faith and
Worship, yet they neither did nor could do so, from an Adherence unto, and
abiding in their Original constitution; or from the due Observation of Church
Order, Rule, and Discipline, least of all could this happen in the Case of
Diocesan Episcopacy. I Answer;

1. That as unto the Original of any thing that looks like Diocesan Episcopacy,
or the Pastoral Relation of one Person of a distinct order from Presbiters,
unto many particular complete Churches with Officers of their own, with Power
and Jurisdiction in them and over them, unto the Abridgement of the exercise of
that Right and Power unto their own Edification, which every true Church is
entrusted withal by Jesus Christ, it is very uncertain, and was introduced by
insensible Degrees, according unto the effectual working of the Mystery of
Iniquity. Some say, that there were two distinct Orders, namely, those of
Bishops and Presbyters, instituted at first, in all Churches planted by the
Apostles; But as the contrary may be evidently proved, so a supposition of it,
would no way promote the cause of Diocesan Episcopacy, until those who plead
for it have demonstrated the State of the Churches wherein they were placed, to
be of the same nature with those now called Diocesan; Wherefore this Hypothesis
begins generally to be deserted, as it seems to be by this Author. Others
suppose that immediately upon, or at, or after the Decease of the Apostles,
this new Order of Bishops was appointed to succeed the Apostles in the
Government of the Churches, that were then gathered or planted. But how, when,
or by whom, by what Authority, Apostolical and Divine, or Ecclesiastical only
and humane, none can declare; seeing there is not the least footstep of any
such thing either in the Scripture or in the Records that remain of the
primitive Churches. Others think this new Order of Officers, took its
occasional Rise, from the Practice of the Presbyters of the Church at
Alexandria, who chose out one among themselves constantly to preside in the
Rule of the Church, and in all matters of Order, unto whom they ascribed some
kind of Pre-eminence and Dignity, peculiarly appropriating unto him the nam^ of
Bishop. And if this be true as unto matter of Fact, I reckon it unto the
Beginnings of those less harmful Deviations from their Original Constitution;
which I assigned unto Primitive Churches; But many Additions must be made
hereunto, before it will help the Cause of Diocesan Episcopacy. What other
occasions hereof were given or taken, what Advantages were made use of to
promote this Alteration, shall be touched upon afterward.

2. Why may not the Churches be supposed to have departed from their original
Constitution, Order, and Rule, as well as from their first Faith and Worship,
which they did gradually in many successive Ages, until both were utterly
corrupted. The Causes, Occasions, and Temptations leading unto the former, are
to the full as pregnant as those leading unto the latter. For

1. There was no vicious corrupt disposition of Mind, that began more early to
work in Church Officers, nor did more grow and thrive in the Minds of many,
then Ambition, with desire of Pre-eminence, Dignity, and Rule. It is not to be
supposed that Diotrephes was alone in his Desire of ^reheminence, nor in the
irregular actings of his unduly ^ssumed Authority. However we have one signal
Instance in him, of the Deviation that was in the Church with him, from the
Rule of its Original Constitution. For he prevailed so far therein, as by his
own single Episcopal Power to reject the Authority of the Apostles, and to cast
them out of the Church, who complied not with his humor. How effectually the
same Ambition wrought afterward, in many others possessing the same Place in
their Churches with Diotrephes, is sufficiently evident in all Ecclesiastical
Histories. It is far from being the only Instance of the Corruption of Church
Order and Rule, by the Influence of this Ambition, yet it is one that is
pregnant, which is given us by Am^rose, for says he, Ecclesia ut Synagoga,
Seniores habu^^* quorum sine consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia; quod qua
negl^gentia obsoleverit nescio, nisi forte doctorum desidia, aut magis
superbia, dum soli volunt aliquid videri. In 1. ad Timoth. cap. 5. It seems
there was some alteration in Church Rule and Order in his Time, whose Beginning
and Progress he could not well discover and trace, but knew well enough, that
so it was then come to pass. And if he who lived so near the Times wherein such
Alterations were made, could not yet discover their first Insinuation, nor
their subtle Progress, it is unreasonable to exact a strict account of us in
things of the same nature, who live so many Ages after their first
Introduction. But this he judges, that it was the Pride or Ambition of the
Doctors of the Church, which introduced that Alteration in its Order. Whereas
therefore we see in the Event, that all Deviations from the Original
Constitution of Churches, all Alterations in their Rule and Order, did issue in
a compliance with the Ambition of Church Rulers, as it did in the Papal Church;
and this Ambition was signally noted as one of the first depraved Inclinations
of Mind that wrought in Ecclesiastical Rulers, and which in the fourth and
fifth Centuries openly proclaimed itself unto the scandal of Christian
Religion, there was a greater disposition in them unto a Deviation from the
Original Institution, Rule, and Order of the Church, no way suited unto the
satisfaction of that Ambition, then unto a Defection from the Purity of Faith
and Worship, which yet also followed.

2. As the Inclination of many lay toward such a Deviation, so their Interests
lead them unto it, and their Temptations cast them upon it. For to acknowledge
the Truth unto our Author and Others, the Rule and Conduct of the Church, the
Preservation of its Order and Discipline according unto its first Institution,
and the Directions given in the Scripture about it, are according unto our
Apprehension of these things, a Matter so weighty in itself, so dangerous as
unto its Issue, attended with so many Difficulties, Trials and Temptations,
laid under such severe Interdictions of Lordly Power, or seeking either of
Wealth or Dignity, that no wise men will ever undertake it, but merely out of a
sense of a Call from Christ unto it, and in compliance with that Duty which he
owes unto him. It is no pleasant thing unto Flesh and Blood, to be engaged in
the conduct and oversight of Christ's Volunteers, to bear with their manners, to
exercise all Patience toward them in their Infirmities and Temptations, to
watch continually over their walkings and conversation, and thereon personally
to exhort and admonish them all, to search diligently and scrupulously into the
Rule of the Scripture for their Warranty in every Act of their Power and Duty;
under all their Weaknesses and Miscarriag^s, continuing an high valuation of
them, as of the Flock of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood, with
sundry other things of the like kind, all under an abiding sense, of the near
approach of that great Account which they must give of the whole Trust and
Charge committed unto them, before the Judgment seat of Christ; for the most
part peculiarly exposed unto all manner of Dangers, Troubles, and Persecutions,
without the least encouragement from Wealth, Power, or Honor. It is no wonder
therefore if many in the Primitive times, were willing gradually to extricate
themselves out of this uneasy condition, and to embrace all occasions and
opportunities of introducing insensibly another Rule and Order into the
Churches, that might tend more unto the Exaltation of their own Power,
Authority, and Dignity, and free them in some measure, from the weight of that
important charge, and continual care with labor, which a diligent and strict
Adherence unto the first institution of Churches, and Rules given for their
Order and Government, in the Scripture, would have obliged them unto. And this
was done accordingly; until in the fourth and fifth Centuries and so onward,
the Bishops under various Titles, began by their Arbitrary Rules and Canons, to
dispose of the Flock of Christ, to part and divide them among themselves,
without their own knowledge or consent, as if they had conquered them by the
sword. This Bishop shall have such a share and number of them under his Power,
and that other so many; so far shall the Jurisdiction of one extend, and so far
that of another, was the subject of many of their Decrees and Laws, for the
Rule of the Church. But yet neither did they long keep within those Bounds and
Limits which their more modest Ambition had at first prescribed unto them; but
took occasion from these Beginnings to contend among themselves, about
Pre-eminence, Dignity and Power, in which contest, the Bishop of Rome at length
remained Master of the Field, thereby obtaining a second Conquest of the World.

3. That there was such a gradual Deviation from the Original Institution of
Churches, their Order and Rule, is manifest in the Event. For the change became
at length as great as the distance is between the Gospel and the Rule of Christ
over his Church, on the one hand, and the Canon Law with the Pope or Antichrist
set over the Church on the other. This change was not wrought at once, not in
one Age, but by an insensible Progress even from the Days of the Apostles unto
those dark and evil times wherein the Popes of Rome were exalted into an
absolute Tyranny over all Churches unto the satiety of their Ambition. For

4. This Mystery of Iniquity began to work in the days of the Apostles
themselves, in the suggestions of Satan and the Lusts of Men, though in a
manner latent and imperceptible unto the wisest and best of Men. For that this
Mystery of the Iniquity consisted in the effectual Workings of the Pride,
Ambition, and other Vices of the Minds of Men, excited, enticed, and guided, by
the craft of Satan, until it issued in the Idolatrous persecuting State of the
Church of Rome, wherein all Church Rule, Order, and Worship of Divine
Institution was utterly destroyed or corrupted, we shall believe, until we see
an Answer given unto the learned Writings of all sorts of Protestants whereby
it has been proved.

These things are sufficient to Vindicate the Truth of the Assertion which the
Doctor opposes, and to free it from his Exceptions. But because, as was
observed before, the supposition hereof, is the foundation of all our present
contests about Church Order and Rule, I shall yet proceed a little farther in
the Declaration of the Way and Manner whereby the Apostasy asserted was begun,
and carried on. And I shall not herein insist on particular Instances, nor make
a Transcription of Stories out of ancient Writers, giving Evidence unto the
Truth, because it has been abundantly done by others, especially those of
Magdeburg in the sixth and seventh Chapters of their Centuries, unto whose
Observations many other Learned men have made considerable Additions; but I
shall only treat in general of the Causes, Ways and Manner, of the Beginning
and Progress of the Apostasy or Declension of Churches from their first
Institution, which fell out in the successive Ages after the Apostles
especially after the End of the second Century, until when, Divine Institutions
as unto the substance of them, were preserved entire.

Decays in any kind even in things Natural and Political, are hardly
discernable but in and by their effects. When an Hectic Distemper befalls the
Body of any man, it is oftimes not to be discerned until it is impossible to be
cured. The Roman Historian gives this advice unto his Readers; after he has
considered the ways and means whereby the Empire came to its Greatness; labente
deinde disciplina velut dissidentes primo mores sequatur animo; deinde ut magis
magisque lapsi sint, tum ire caeperint praecipites, donec ad haec tempora,
anibus nec vitia nostra, nec remedia pati possumus, periculu^ est. Live.
Praefat. His words do not give us a more graphical Description of the Rise and
Decay, as unto Virtue and Vice, of the Roman Empire, then of the Roman Church,
as unto its Rise* by Holiness and Devotion, and its Ruin by Sensuality,
Ambition, the utter neglect of the Discipline of Christ, and Superstition. But
yet let any man peruse that Historian who wrote with this express Design, he
shall hardly fix upon many of those instances whereby the Empire came into that
deplorable condition, wherein it was not able to bear its Distempers nor its
Cure, such as was the State of the Church before the Reformation. But besides
the common difficulty of discovering the Beginnings and gradual Progression of
Decays, Declensions and Apostasy, those which we treat of were begun and
carried on in a mysterious manner, that is, by the effectual working of the
Mystery of Iniquity. As this almost hid totally the work of it, from the Ages
wherein it was wrought, so it renders the Discovery of it now accomplished, the
more difficult. Passengers in a Ship setting out to Sea, oftimes discern not
the progressive Motion of the Ship; yea, for a while the Land rather seems to
to move from them, then the Vessel wherein they are from it. But after a Season
the consideration of what Distance they are at from their Port, gives them
sufficient Assurance of the Progress that has been made. So is this Declension
of the Churches from their Primitive Order and Institution, is discoverable,
rather by measuring the Distance between what it left, and what it arrived
unto, then by express Instances of it. But yet is it not altogether like unto
that of a Ship at Sea, but rather unto the way of a Serpent on a Rock, which
leaves some slime in all its turnings and windings, whereby he may be traced.
Such Marks are left on Record, of the Serpentine Works of this Mystery of
Iniquity, as whereby it may be traced, with more or less Evidence from its
Original Interests unto its Accomplishment.

The principal promoting causes of this Defection on the part of men, were
those assigned by St. Ambrose in one Instance of it, namely, the Negligence of
the People, and the Ambition of the Clergy. I speak as unto the State, Rule,
Discipline and Order of the Church; for as unto the Doctrine and Worship of it,
there were many other causes and means of their Corruption, which belong not
unto our present purpose. But as unto the Alterations that were begun and
carried on in the State, Order, and Rule of the Church, they arose from those
springs of Negligence on the one hand, and Ambition on the other, with want of
skill and wisdom to manage outward occurrences and incidencies, or what
Alteration fell out in the outward state and condition of the Church in this
World. For hence it came to pass, that in the Accession of the Nations in
general unto the Profession of the Gospel, Church Order was suited and framed
unto their secular State, when they ought to have been brought into the
spiritual State and Order of the Church, leaving their Political State entire
unto themselves. Herein I say did the Guides of the Church certainly miss their
Rule and depart from it, in the days of Constantine the Emperor and
afterward under other Christian Emperors, when whole Towns, Cities, yea and
Nations offered at once to join themselves unto it. Evident it is, that they
were not wrought hereunto by the same Power, nor induced unto it, on the same
Motives, or lead by the same means with those who formerly under Persecution
were converted unto the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this quickly
manifested itself in the Lives and Conversations of many, yea of the most of
them. Hence those which were wise, quickly understood, that what the Church had
got in multitude and number, it had lost in the Beauty and Glory of its holy
Profession. Chrysostom in particular complains of it frequently, and in many
places cries out, What have I to do with this Multitude, a few serious
Believers are more worth than them all. However the Guides of the Church
thought meet to receive them, with all their Multitudes, into their communion,
at least so far as to place them under the Jurisdiction of such and such
Episcopal Sees. For hereby, their own Power, Authority, Dignity, Revenues, were
enlarged and mightily increased. On this Occasion, the ancient Primitive way of
admitting Members into the Church being relinquished, the consideration of
their Personal Qualifications, and real Conversion unto God, omitted, such
Multitudes being received as could not partake in all Acts and Duties of
Communion with those particular Churches, whereunto they were disposed, and
being the most of them unfit to be ruled by the Power and Influence of the
Commands of Christ on their Minds and Consciences, it was impossible but that a
great Alteration must ensue in the State, Order, and Rule of the Churches, and
a great Deviation from their original Institution. Men may say that this
Alteration was necessary, that it was Good, and Useful, that it was but the
Accommodation of general Rules unto especial Occasions and circumstances; but
that there was an Alteration hereon in all these things, none can with Modesty
deny. And this is enough unto my present Design, being only to prove, that such
Alterations and Deviations did of old fall out. Neither ought we to cover the
provoking Degeneracy of the Generality of Christians, in the 4 th. and 5 th.
Centuries, with those that followed. The consideration of it, is necessary unto
the Vindication of the Holy Providence of God, in the Government of the World,
and of the faithfulness of Christ in his dealing with his Church. For there
has been no Nation in the World which publicly received Christian Religion,
but it has been wasted and destroyed by the sword of Pagan Idolaters, or such
as are no better then they. At first all the Provinces of the Western Empire,
were one after another made desolate by the Pagan Nations of the Northern
Countries; who themselves did afterward so turn Christians, as to lay among
them the Foundation of Anti-Christianisme, Rev. 17.12, 13. The Eastern Empire
comprehending the Residue of the Provinces that had embraced the Christian
Religion, was first desolated in the chief Branches of it, by the Saracens, and
at length utterly destroyed by the Turks. And I pray God that the like Fate
does not at this day hang over the Reformed Nations, as from their Profession
they are called. Do we think that all this was without c^use? Did God give up
his Inheritance to the spoil of Barbarous Infidels, without such provocations,
as the passing by whereof, was inconsistent with the Holiness and Righteousness
of his Rule? It was not the Wisdom, nor the Courage, nor the Multitude of the^r
Enemies, but their own Sins, Wickedness, Superstition, and Apostasy from the
Rule of Gospel Order, Worship and Obedience, which ruined all Christian Nations.

But to give farther Evidence hereunto, I shall consider the causes
aforementioned distinctly and apart. And the first of them is the Negligence of
the people themselves. But in this Negligence I comprize both the Ignorance,
Sloth, Worldliness, Decay in Gifts and Graces, with Superstition in sundry
Instances, that in many of them were the causes of it. Dr. Still. pleads that it
is very unlikely that the People would forego their Interest in the Government
of the Churches, if ever they had any such thing, without great Noise and
Trouble. For, says he, Government is so nice and tender a thing, that every
one is so much concerned for his share in it, that men are not easily induced
to part with it. Let us suppose the Judgment of the Church to have been
Democratical at first, as Dr. O. seems to do, is it probable that the People
would have been wheadled out of the sweetness of Government so soon, and made
no noise about it? page 226. His Mistake about my Judgment herein has been
marked before. No other Interest or share in the Government is ascribed by us
unto the People, but that they may be ruled by their own consent, and that they
may be allowed to yield Obedience in the Church, unto the commands of Christ
and his Apostles, given unto them for that End. This Interest they neither did
nor could forego, without their own Sin and Guilt, in neglecting the Exercise
of the Gifts and Graces which they ought to have had, and the Performance of
the Duties whereunto they were obliged. But for any engagement on their Minds
from the sweetness of Government, wherein their concern principally consists in
an understanding voluntary Obedience unto the commands of Christ, they had
nothing of it. Take also in general, Government to be, as the Government of the
Church is, merely a Duty, Labor, and Service, without those Advantages of
Power, Ease, Dignity, and Wealth, which have been annexed unto it; and it will
be hard to discover such a Nicety or Sweetness in it, as to oblige unto
Pertinacy in an adherence unto it. If the Government of the Church were
apprehended to consist, in men's giving themselves wholly to the Word and
Prayer, in watching continually over the Flock; in acurate carefulness to do
and act nothing in the Church but in the Name and Authority of Christ, by the
Warranty of his Commands, with a constant Exercise of all Gifts and Graces of
the Holy Spirit which they have received, in these and all other Duties of
their Office, and that without the least Appearance of Domination, or the
procuring of Dignity, Secular Honors, and Revenues thereby, it may be, a share
and Interest in it, would not be so earnestly coveted and sought after, as at
present it is. Nor is there any more pertinency in his ensuing supposal, of a
change in the Government of the Congregational Churches in London, in setting
up one Man to rule over them all and to appoint their several Teachers, etc. p.
227. which could not be done without noise. It is in vain to fear it, Non isto
vivimus illic quo tu vere, Modo. and impertinent in this case to suppose it.
For it speaks of a sudden total Alteration in the State, Order and Rule of
Churches to be made at once, whereas our Discourse is of that which was gradual
in many Ages by Degrees almost imperceptible. But yet I can give no security
that the Churches of our way, shall not in process of time, decline from their
Primitive Constitution and Order, either in their Power and Spirit, in Faith
and Love, or in the outward Practice of them, unless they continually watch
against all Beginnings and Occasions of such Declensions, and frequently renew
their Reformation; or if it be otherwise, they will have better success then
any Churches in the World ever yet had, even those that were of the planting of
the Apostles themselves, as is manifested in the Judgment that our Lord Jesus
Christ passed on them, Rev. 2. and 3. The Negligence of the People which issued
in their unfitness to be disposed of and ruled according to the Principles of
the first Constitution of Church Order, may be considered either as it gave
occasion unto those lesser Deviations from the Rule, which did not much
prejudice the Faith and Order of the Churches, or as it occasioned greater
Alterations in the ensuing Ages. And

(1.) The great, and perhaps in some things, excessive Veneration which they
had of their Bishops or Pastors, did probably occasion in them some neglect of
their own Duty. For they were easily induced hereon, not only implicitly to
leave the Mannagement of all Church Affairs unto them, but also Zealously to
comply with their Mistakes. The Church of Smyrna giving an Account of the
Martyrdom of holy Polycarpus, tells us, that when he ascended the Pile wherein
he was to be burned, that he pulled off his own cloths, and endeavored to pull
off his shoes, which he had not done before, because the Faithful strove among
themselves who should soonest touch his Body; Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. I think
there can be no Veneration due to a Man, which was not so unto that great and
holy Person. But those who did so express it, might easily be induced to place
too much of their Religion, in an implicit compliance with them unto whom they
are so devoted. Hence a Negligence in themselves as unto their particular
Duties did ensue. They were quickly far from esteeming it their Duty to say
unto their Pastor or Bishop, that he should take heed unto the Ministry which
he had received in the Lord to fulfill it, as the Apostle enjoins the
Colossians to say to Archippus their Pastor; chap. 4.17. but begun to think
that the Glory of obsequious Obedience, was all that was left unto them. And
hence did some of the Clergy begin to assume to themselves, and to ascribe unto
one another, great swelling Titles of Honor, and names of Dignity, (amongst
which the Blasphemous Title of His Holiness was at length appropriated unto the
Bishop of Rome) wherein they openly departed from Apostolical Simplicity and
Gravity. But these things fell out after the writing of the Epistle of Clemens,
of those of the Church of Vienna, and Smyrna, wherein no such Titles do appear.

(2.) Many of the Particular Churches of the first Plantations, increasing
greatly in the number of their Members, it was neither convenient nor safe that
the whole Multitude should on all occasions come together as they did at first,
to consult about their common concerns, and discharge the Duties of their
Communion. For by Reason of Danger from their numerous Conventions, they met in
several Parcels, as they had opportunity. Herewith they were contented, unless
it were upon the greater occasions of choosing their Officers and the like,
whereon the whole Church met together. This made them leave the ordinary
Administration of all things in the Church, unto the Elders of it, not
concerning themselves further therein, but still continuing Members of the same
particular Church. It is altogether improbable what Platina from Damasus
affirms in the Life of Evaristus about the End of the first Century, that he
distributed the Faithful at Rome into distinct Titles or Parishes, with
distinct Presbyters of their own. For it is apparent that in those days wherein
Persecution was at its height, the Meetings of Believers were occasional, with
respect unto their Security, oft-times by Night, sometimes in Caves under the
Earth, or in deserted Burial places, at best in private Houses. And they had
for what they did the Example of the Apostolical Churches; Acts 1.13, 14. Acts
2.46. chap. 4.24, 31. chap. 12.12. chap. 18.7. chap. 20.8. chap. 21.18.
Instances of such Meetings may be multiplied, especially in the Church of Rome.
And to manifest that they took this course upon Necessity, when Peace begun to
be restored at any time unto them, they designed Temples that might receive the
whole Multitude of the Church together. The Distribution mentioned into Titles
and Parishes, began a long time after, and in very few places within 300 years.
In this State, it is easy to conceive what Alterations might fall out in some
Churches from their Primitive Order, especially how the People might desert
their Diligence and Duty in attending unto all the concerns of the Church. And
if those things which the Apostles wrote unto them in their Epistles, the
Instructions, Directions and Commands, how in all things they should act and
deport themselves in the Church, be esteemed to be Obligatory in all Ages, I
cannot see how after the second Century they were much complied withal, unless
it were in the single Instance of choosing their own Officers or Rulers.

But Secondly; After these there ensued greater Occasions of greater Variations
from the Primitive Institution and Order of the Churches, on the Part of the
People. For

1. Such Numbers of them were received into a Relation unto particular
Churches, as was inconsistent with the Ends of their Institution, and the
Observance of the Communion required in them, as will afterward appear. And
the Reliefes that were invented for this Inconveniency in distinct Conventions,
supplied with the Administration of the Word and Sacrament from the first
Church, or by stated Titles, did alter the State of the Church.

Among those Multitudes which were added unto the Churches, especially in the
fourth Century, many, if not the most, did come short inexpressibly in
Knowledge, Gifts, Grace, Holiness, and uprightness of Conversation, of the
Primitive, Christians, as the Writers of that Age complain. And being hereby
incapable of walking according unto the Order, Rule, and Discipline of the
Apostolical Churches, there seemed to be a Necessity of another Rule, of other
ways and means, for their Government, without their own concurrence or consent,
then what was at first appointed, which were gradually introduced; Whence the
original of a Multitude of those Canons, which were arbitrarily invented
afterward for their Rule and Government is to be derived. And it may be made
to appear that the Accommodation of the Rule, yea and of the Worship of the
Church in the several Ages of it, unto the Ignorance, Manners, and Inclinations
of the People, who were then easily won unto the outward Profession of
Christian Religion, was one means of the Ruin of them both, until they issued
in downright Tyranny and Idolatry.

But much more of the cause of the Deviation of the Churches from their
Primitive Rule and Order, is to be ascribed unto the Ambition and Love of
Pre-eminence in many of the Clergy, or Rulers of the Churches; But this is no
Place nor Season to manifest this by Instances, besides it has been done by
others. I shall therefore enquire only into one or two things in particular,
which are of principal consideration in the Declension of the Churches from
their Primitive Institution, Order and Rule. And

1. It is evident, that there was an Alteration made in the state of the Church
as to its Officers. For it issued at last in Popes, Patriarchs, Cardinals,
Metropolitan, and Diocesan Bishops, who were utterly foreign unto the State
and Order of the Primitive Churches, and that for some Ages. Nor were these
Officers introduced into the Church at one, or in one Age, nor with the Powers
which they afterward claimed and assumed unto themselves. It was done
gradually in many succeeding Ages, working by a Design to accommodate the State
of the Church, unto the Political State of the Empire in the distribution of
its Government.

2. The Beginnings of this great Alteration were small, nor at all perceived in
the days wherein they were first acted. Nor is it agreed, nor as far as I see,
will it ever be agreed among Learned Men, when first a Disparity among the
ordinary Officers of the Church, in Order, Degree or Power did first begin, nor
by what means it was brought about. The Apostles were all equal among
themselves, no one had either Office or Office-Power above others. So were all
the ordinary Bishops and Presbyters mentioned in the Scripture, as shall be
proved afterward; No intimation is given of any Pre-eminence or Superiority
amongst them, of one over others. Yet afterward in the third and fourth
Centuries, much of that nature appears. It begins to be granted that the
Bishops and Elders mentioned in the Scripture were the same, and that there was
no difference in Name, Office, or Power, during the Apostles times, which was
the Judgment of Hierome, and our Author seems to me to be of the same Mind; p.
267. But they say, that after the Decease of the Apostles there were some
appointed to succeed them in that part of their Office, which concerned the
Rule of many Churches. And this they say was done for the prevention of
Schism, but with ill success; For as Clemens affirms that the Apostles foresaw
that there would be Strife and Contention about Episcopacy, even when it was
confined unto its Original Order, because of the Ambition of Diotrephes and
others like him; so it became much more the cause of all sorts of Disorders in
Schisms and Heresies, when it began to exalt it self in Dignity and
Reputation. The first express Attempt to corrupt and divide a Church, made from
within itself, was that in the Church of Jerusalem, made by Thebulis, because
Simon Cleopas was chosen Bishop, and he was refused; Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 21.
The same Rise had the Schisms of the Novatians and Donatists, the Heresies of
Arius and others. Neither is there any thing certain in this pretended
Succession of some Persons unto the Apostles in that part of their Office which
concerns the Rule of many Churches by one Overseer. No Intimation of any such
Appointment by the Apostles, or any of them, no record of the concurrence of
the Churches themselves, in and unto this Alteration, can be produced. Nor is
there any Analogy between the extraordinary Power of every Apostle over all
Churches, and care for them, and the ordinary Power of a Bishop over a small
Number, which Lot or Accident disposes unto him. Besides it cannot be proved,
no Instance can be given, or has been for the space of 200 years or until the
end of the second Century, of any one Person who had the care of more Churches
than one committed unto him, or did take the charge of them on himself. But
whereas this change did fall out and appears evidently so to have done in the
fourth Century, we may briefly enquire into the Causes and Occasions of it.

Churches were originally planted in Cities and Towns for the most part; not
absolutely, for the Word was preached and Churches gathered by the Apostles
(...), as Clemens testifies. In such Cities there was but one Church,
whereunto all Beleivers did belong. I mention this the rather because our
present Author who is pleased frequently to mistake my Words and Principles,
affirms that the thing which I should have proved, is, that there were more
Churches at first planted in one City, than one. I know not why I should be
obliged to do so, because I never said so. I do believe indeed that there may
be more particular Churches than one, in one City; and that sometimes it is
better that it should be so, then that all Beleivers in the same City, should
be kept up unto one Congregation to the Obstruction of their Edification. But
that there were originally or in the days of the Apostles more Churches than
one, in any one City or Town, I do wholly deny; though I grant at the same time
there were Churches in Villages also, as will appear afterward. But though
there was one Church only in one Town or City, yet all the Believers that
belonged unto that Church, did not live in that City, but sundry of them in the
Fields and Villages about. So Justin Martyr tells us, that on the first day of
the week when the Church had its solemn Assemblies, all the Members of it in
the City and out of the Country, the Fields and Villages about, met together in
the same place. In process of time these Believers in the Country, did greatly
increase, by the means of the Ministry of the City-Church, which diligently
attended unto the Conversion of all sorts of men, with some extraordinary helps
besides. But hereon the Example of the Apostles was overseen. For on this
account of the Conversion of many unto the Faith, in the Towns and Villages of
any Province, they erected and planted new Churches among them, not obliging
them all unto that first Church, from whence the Word went forth for their
Conversion. But those who succeeded them, being hindered by many Reasons which
may be easily recounted, from Thoughts of the Multiplication of Churches, chose
rather to give the Beleivers scattered up and down in the Country, occasional
Assistance by Presbyters of their own, than to dispose them into a Chrch State
and Order. But after a while their Number greatly increasing, they were
necessitated to supply them with a constant Minist^y in several Parcels or
Divisions. The Ministers or Elders thus disposed amongst them for their
Edification in the Administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel, did still
relate unto and depend upon that City first Church, from whence they came. But
the Numbers of Beleivers daily increasing and a Succession of Presbyters in
their distinct Assemblies being found necessary, they came to be called
Churches, though continuing in dependence both for a supply of Officers and for
Rule, on the first or City Church, whereunto they esteemed themselves to
belong. This was the way and manner of the Multiplication of Christian
Assemblies throughout the Roman Empire. And hereby all the Bishops of the first
Churches became by common consent to have a distinction from and Pre-eminence
above the Presbyters that were fixed in the Country, and a Rule over those
Assemblies or Churches themselves. And therefore when they met together in the
Council of Nice, among the first things they decreed, one was, to confirm unto
the Bishops of the great Cities, that Power over the Neighboring Churches
which they had enjoined from this occasional Rise and Constitution of them.
Hereby was a Difference and Distinction between Bishops and Presbiters, between
Mother and Dependant Churches, introduced, equally almost in all places,
without taking any notice of the departure which was therein from the Primitive
Pattern and Institution. But these things fell out long after the Days of the
Apostles, namely, in the third and fourth Centuries, there being no mention of
them before.

But Secondly; There was another Occasion of this Alteration which took place
before that insisted on. For in many of those City Churches, especially when
the number of Beleivers much increased, there were many Bishops or Elders who
had the Rule of them in common. This is plain in the Scripture, and in the
ensuing Records of Church Affairs. And they had all the same Office, the same
Power, and were of the same Order. But after a while to preserve Order and
Decency among themselves, and in all their proceedings, they chose one from
among them, who should preside in all Church Affairs for Orders sake, unto whom
after a season, the name of Bishop began to be appropriated. Whether the Rule
they proceeded by herein, was to choose them unto this Dignity who had been
first converted unto the Faith, or first called and ordained to be Presbyters,
or had respect unto the Gifts and Graces of those whom they chose, is not
certain. But this way began in those Churches, wherein some extraordinary
Officer, Apostle, or Evangelist had long resided. It cannot therefore be
doubted but they had some Design to represent hereby somewhat of the Dignity of
such an Officer, and a Resemblance of the continuance of his Presence among
them. And this I suppose fell out early in the Churches, though without Ground
or Warrant. And the Principal Pastors of other Churches, which had not any
great Number of Elders in them, yet quickly assumed unto themselves, the
Dignity which the others had attained.

Justin Martyr in the Account he gives of the Church, its Order, Rule, Worship,
and Discipline in his Days, mentions one singular Person in one Church, whom he
calls (...), who presided in all the Affairs of the Church, and himself
administered all the sacred Ordinances every Lords Day, unto the whole Body of
the Church gathered and met, out of the City and the Villages about. This was
the Bishop; and if any one desired this Office, he desired a good work, as the
Apostle speaks. Whatever Accessions were made unto the Church, these (...),
which were either the first converted to the Faith, or the first ordained
Presbyters, or obtained their Pre-eminence, non pretio, sed Testimonio, as
Tertullian speaks, upon the account of their Eminency in Gifts and Holiness,
were yet quickly sensible of their own Dignity and Praelation, and by all means
sought the enlargement of it, supposing that it belonged unto the Honor and
Order of the Church it self.

Under this State of things, the Churches increasing every day in Number and
Wealth, growing insensibly more and more ( indies magis magisque decrescente
disciplina) into a form, and state exceeding the bounds of their Original
Institution, and becoming unweildy as unto the Pursuit of their Ends unto
mutual Edification, it is not hard to conjecture how a stated Distinction
between Bishops and Presbyters did afterward ensue. For as the first Elder,
Bishop, or Pastor, had obtained this small Pre-eminence in the Church wherein
he did preside, and the Assemblies of the Villages about, so the Mannagement of
those Affairs of the Church, which they had in Communion with others, was
committed unto him, or assumed by him. This gave them the Advantage of meeting
in Synods and Councils afterward, wherein they did their own Business unto the
Purpose. Hereon in a short time the People were deprived of all their Interest
in the State of the Church, so as to be governed by their own Consent, which
indeed they also had rendered themselves unmeet to enjoy and exercise; other
Elders were deprived of that Power and Authority which is committed unto them
by Christ; and thrust down into an Order or Degree inferior unto that wherein
they were originally placed; New Officers in the Rule of the Church, utterly
unknown to the Scripture and Primitive Antiquity, were introduced; all
Charitable Donations unto the Church, for the maintenance of the Ministry, the
Poor, and the Redemption of Captives, were for the most part abused, to advance
the Revenues of the Bishops; such secular Advantages in Honor, Dignity and
Wealth were annexed unto Episcopal Sees, as that Ambitious Men shamefully
contested for the attaining of them, which in the Instance of the bloody
conflict between the Parties of Damasus and Vrsacius at Rome, Ammianus
Marcellinus an Heathen does greatly and wisely reflect upon. But yet all these
Evils were as nothing in comparison of that dead Sea of the Roman Tyranny and
Idolatry, whereinto at last these bitter Waters ran, and were therein totally
Corrupted.

I thought also to have proceeded with an Account of the Declension of the
Churches from their first Institution, in their Matter, Form and Rule. ^ut
because this would draw forth my Discourse beyond my present Intention, I shall
forbear, having sufficiently vindicated my Assertion in this one Instance.

It is no Part of my Design to give an Answer at large unto the great Volume
that Dr. Still. has written on this Occasion; much less to contend about
particular Sayings, Opinions, the Practices of this or that Man, which it is
filled withal. But whereas his Treatise, so far as the Merit of the Cause is
concerned in it, does consist of two Parts, the first whereof contains such
Stories, Things, and Sayings, as may load the Cause and Persons whom he
opposes with prejudices in the Minds of others, in which endeavor he exceeds
all Expectation; and what does more directly concern the Argument in hand; I
shall at the end of the ensuing Discourse speak distinctly unto all that is
Material of the second sort, especially so far as is needful, unto the Defense
of my former Vindication of the Non-conformists from the Guilt of Schism.

For the things of the first sort wherein the Doctor does so abound both in his
Preface, and in the first part of his Book, as to manifest himself (I fear) to
be a little too sensible of Provocation, (for the actings of Interest in wise
Men are usually more sedate) I shall only oppose some general considerations
unto them, without arguing or contending about Particulars, which would be
endless and useless. And whereas he has gathered up almost every thing that
has been done, written or spoken, to the Prejudice of the Cause and Persons
whom he opposes (though frequently charged before) adding the advantage of his
Style and Method unto their Reinforcement; I shall reduce the whole unto a few
Heads which seem to be of the greatest importance.

I shall leave him without disturbance unto the satisfaction he has in his own
Love, Moderation, and Condescension, expressed in his Preface. Others may
possibly call some things in it unto a farther Account. But the first Part of
his Book is cast under two Heads;

1. A Commendation of the first Reformers and their Reformation, with some
Reflections upon all that acquiesce not therein, as though they esteemed
themselves wiser and better than they. From this Topic proceed many severe
Reflections and some Reproaches. The other consists in a story of the Rise and
Progress of Separation from the Church of England, with great Miscarriages
among them who first attempted it, and the Opposition made unto them by those
who were themselves Non-conformists. The whole is closed with the Difference
and Debate, between the Divines of the Assembly of the Presbyterian way, and
the dissenting Brethren, as they were then called. Concerning these things the
Discourse is so prolix, and so swelled with long Quotations, that I scarce
believe any man would have the Patience to read over a particular Examination
of it; especially considering how little the Cause in hand is concerned in the
whole Story, whether it be told right or wrong, heartily or with a Design to
make an Advantage unto the Prejudice of others. I shall therefore only mark
something with respect unto both these heads of the first Part of the Book,
which if I mistake not will lay it aside from being of any Use in our present
Cause.

1. As unto the first Reformers and Reformation in the Days of King Edward, the
Plea from them and it, which we have been long accustomed unto, is that they
were Persons, Great, Wise, Learned, Holy; that some of them dyed Martyrs; that
the work of the Reformation was greatly owned and blessed of God; and therefore
our Non-acquiescency therein, but desiring a farther Reformation of the Church,
then what they saw and judged necessary, is unreasonable, and that what we
endeavor therein, though never so peaceably, is Schismatical. But,

1. None do more bless God for the first Reformers, and the work they did, than
we do; none have an higher Esteem of their Persons, Abilities, Graces, and
Sufferings than we have; None cleave more firmly to their Doctrine, which was
the Life and Soul of the Reformation then we; nor desire more to follow them in
their Godly Design. They are not of us, who have declared that the Death of
King Edward was an happiness or no unhappiness to the Church of England, nor
who have reflected on the Reformation as needless, and given Assurance that if
it had not been undertaken, Salvation might have been obtained safely enough in
the Church of Rome; nor were they of us who have questioned the Zeal and
Prudence of the Martyrs of those Days in Suffering. We have other thoughts
concerning them, another kind of Remembrance of them.

2. The Titles assigned unto them, of Wise, Learned, Holy, Zealous, are fully
answered by that Reformation of the Church, in its Doctrine and Worship, which
God wrought by their Ministry, so that none without the highest ingratitude can
derogate any thing from them in these things. But it is no disparagement unto
any of the Sons of Men, any Officers of the Church since the days of the
Apostles, first Reformers, or those that followed them, to judge that they were
not infallible, that their work was not absolutely perfect, like the work of
God whereunto nothing can be added, nor ought taken away. Wherefore,

3. We are not obliged to make, what they did, and what they attained unto, and
what they judged meet as unto the Government and Worship of the Church, to be
our absolute Rule, from which it should be our Sin to dissent or depart. They
never desired nor designed that it should be so; for to do so, would have been
to have cast out one Papacy, and to have brought in another. And the Arguments
of the Papists for their absolute Adherence unto the Men of their Veneration,
those who have been formerly of great Reputation in their Church, for Learning,
Holiness, and Devotion, are as forcible unto them, as any can be unto us for an
Adherence unto the first Reformers in all things; but yet are they not excused
in their Errors thereby. Had we received a Command from Heaven to hear them in
all things, it had altered the case, but this we have received only with
respect unto Jesus Christ, and shall therefore in these things ultimately
attend only unto what he speaks. And we have sundry considerations which
confirm us in the use and exercise of that Liberty wherewith Christ has made
us free, to enquire our selves into our Duty in these things, and to regulate
our Duty in them by his Word, notwithstanding what was done by our first
Reformers. For,

1. They did not think themselves obliged, they did not think meet to abide
within the bounds and limits of that Reformation of the Church, which had been
attempted before them, by Men Wise, Learned and Holy, even in this Nation. Such
was that which was endeavored by Wickliffe and his Followers, in giving
Testimony whereunto many suffered Martyrdom, and prepared the way unto those
that were to come after. They approved of what was then done or attempted to be
done for the Substance of it; yet esteemed themselves at Liberty to make a
further Progress in the same Work, which they did accordingly. Surely such
Persons never designed their own Judgment and Practice to give Boundaries unto
all Reformation for Evermore; or pretended that they had made so perfect a
Discovery of the Mind of Christ in all things belonging unto the Rule and
Worship of the Church; as that it should not only be vain, but sinful to make
any farther Enquiries about it. Some thought they were come unto the utmost
limits of Navigation, and discovery of the Parts of the World, before the
West Indies were found out. And some men when in any kind they know as much as
they can, are apt to think there is no more to be known. It was not so with our
Reformers.

2. They did not at once make what they had done themselves to be a fixed Rule
in these things. For themselves made many Alterations in the Service Book which
they first composed; And if they judged not their first Endeavor to be
satisfactory to themselves, they had no Reason to expect their second should be
a standing Rule unto all future Ages. Nor did they so, but frequently
acknowledged the Imperfection of what they had done.

3. The first Reformers, both Bishops and others, both those who underwent
Martyrdom at home, and those who lived in Exile abroad, differed among
themselves in their Judgments and Apprehensions about those things, which are
now under concest; Whereas they perfectly agreed in all Doctrines of Faith and
Gospel Obedience. The Public Records of these Differences, do so remain as
that they cannot modestly be denied, nor handsomely covered. And this must needs
weaken the Influence of their Authority in the Settlement of the Church, which
was an Act only of the prevalent Party among them.

4. They differed in these things from all other Reformed Churches, with whom
they did absolutely agree in Doctrine, and had the strictest Communion in Faith
and Love. For it is known that their Doctrine which they owned and established,
was the same with that of the Churches abroad called particularly Reformed in
distinction from the Lutherans. But as unto the State, Rule, and Order of the
Church they differed from them all. I press not this consideration unto the
disadvantage of what they attained unto and established in the way of
Reformation, or in a way of preferring other Churches above them; but only to
Evidence that we have reason enough not to esteem our selves absolutely obliged
unto what they did and determined, as unto all Endeavors after any farther
Reformation.

5. In their Reformation they avowedly proposed a Rule and Measure unto
themselves, which was both uncertain, and in many things apparently various
from the original Rule of these things given by Christ and his Apostles, with
the Practice of the first Churches. And this was the state and Example of the
Church under the first Christian Emperors; as our Author confesses. This Rule
is uncertain; For no man living is able to give a just and full account of what
was the State and Rule of all the Churches in the World in the Reign of any one
Emperor, much less during the Succession of many of them, continual
Alterations in the State or Order of the Church following one upon another. And
that in those days there was a prevalent Deviation from the Original Rule of
Church Order, has been before declared. We dare not therefore make them and
what they did, to be our Rule absolutely, who missed it so much in the choice
of their own.

6. We may add hereunto the Consideration of the horrid Darkness which they
newly were delivered from, the close Adherence of some Traditional Prejudices
unto the best of Men in such a Condition, the Difficulties and Oppositions they
met withal as unto their whole Work; their Prudence, as they judged it, in an
endeavor to accommodate all things unto the Inclinations, and desires of the
Body of the People, (extremely immersed in their Old Traditions,) which might
not be destructive unto their Salvation, in Heresy or Idolatry; all which
could not but leave some Marks of Imperfection on their whole Work of
Reformation.

Upon these and the like Considerations it is, that we are enforced to assert
the use of our own Liberty, Light and Understanding, in the Enquiring after and
Compliance with the true Original State and Order of Evangelical Churches, with
our Duty in reference thereunto, and not to be absolutely confined unto what
was judged meet and practiced in these things by the first Reformers. And the
Truth is, if present Interest and Advantage, did not prevail with men to fix
the bounds of all Church Reformation in what was by them attained and
established, they would think it themselves a Papal Bondage to be bound up
absolutely unto their Apprehensions, from a confinement whereunto in sundry
other things, they declare themselves to be at an absolute Liberty. Wherefore
neither we nor our Cause are at all concerned in the Rhetorical Discourse of
Dr. Still. concerning the first Reformers and their Reformation; neither do we
at all delight in reflecting on any of the Defects of it, desiring only the
Liberty avowed on Protestant Principles, in the Discharge of our own Duty.

Nor Secondly; Are we any more concerned in the long story that ensues about
the Rise and Progress of Separation from the Church of England, with the
Mistakes of some in Principles, and Miscarriages in Practice, who judged it
their Duty to be Separate. For as in our refraining from total Communion with
the Parochial Assemblies of the Church of England, we proceed not on the same
Principles, so we hope that we are free from the same Miscarriages with them,
or any of an alike Nature. But it is also certain, that after the great
Confusion that was b^ought on the whole State and Order of the Church, under
the Roman Apostasy, many of those who attempted a Reformation; fell into
different Opinions and Practices in sundry things, which the Papists have made
many a long story about. We undertake the Defense only of our own Principles
and Practices according unto them. Nor do we esteem our selves obliged to
justify or reflect on others.

And it were no difficult Task, to compose a Story of the proceedings of some
in the Church of England with reference unto these Differences, that would have
as ill an Aspect as that which is here reported. Should an Account be given of
their unaccountable Rigor and Severity, in that, through so many years, yea
Ages, they would never think of the least Abatement of their Impositions, in
any one Instance, though acknowledged by themselves indifferent, and esteemed
by others unlawful; although they saw what woeful Detriment arose to the
Churches thereby; Yea, how instead thereof they did to the last of their Power,
make a Progress in the same course, by attempting new Canons to inflame the
Difference, and increased in Severities toward all Dissenters; should an
Account be given of the Silencings, Deprivings, Imprisonings, by the High
Commission Court, and in most of the Diocesses of the Kingdom, of so great
Numbers of Godly, Learned, Faithful, Painful Ministers, to the unspeakable
disadvantage of the Church and Nation, with the Ruin of the most of them and
their Families; the Representation of their Names, Qualifications, evident
usefulness in the Ministry, with the Causes of their Sufferings, wherein the
Observance of some Ceremonies was openly preferred before the Edification of
the Church, and a great Means of the Conversion of Souls; would give as ill a
Demonstration of Christian Wisdom, Love, Moderation, Condescension, Zeal for
the Propagation of the Gospel, as any thing does, on the other hand, in the
History before us. It would not be omitted on such an Occasion to declare what
Multitudes of pious, peaceable Protestants, were driven by their Severities to
leave their Native Country, to seek a Refuge for their Lives and Liberties,
with freedom for the Worship of God in a Wilderness in the Ends of the Earth;
and if it be said that what some did herein, they did in discharge of the
Duties of their Office; I must say, I shall hardly acknowledge that Office to
be of the Institution of Christ, whereunto it belongs in a way of Duty, to
ruin and destroy so many of his Disciples, for no other cause but a desire and
endeavor to serve and worship him, according unto what they apprehend to be
his Mind revealed in the Gospel. Should there be added hereunto, an Account of
the Administration of Ecclesiastical Discipline in the Courts of Chancellors,
Commissaries, Officials, and the like, as unto the Authority, and Causes with
the way and manner of their proceedings, in the exercise of their Jurisdiction,
with the woeful Scandals that have been given thereby, with an Addition of
sundry other things which I will not so much as mention; I suppose it would as
much conduce unto Peace and Reconciliation among Protestants, as the Story here
given us by our Author.

But setting aside the Aggravations of things gathered out of Controversial
Writings, (wherein few men do observe the due Rules of Moderation, but indulge
unto themselves the Liberty of severe Censures and sharp Reflections on them
they do oppose) the Sum and Truth of the Story concerning these things may be
reduced into a narrow Compass. For

1. It is certain that from the first dawning of the Reformation in this
Nation, there were different Apprehensions among them that jointly forsook the
Papacy as unto its Doctrine and Worship, about the State, Rule, Order, and
Discipline of the Church, with sundry things belonging unto its Worship also; I
suppose this will not be denied.

2. There does not remain any Record, of a due Attempt and Endeavor for the
composing these Differences before one certain way was established by those in
Power. And whereas the State and condition wherein they were at that time, from
the confusions about Religion that were then abroad, and the pertinaciousness
of the Generality of the People in an Adherence unto their old ways and
Observances in Religion, with a great Scarcity in able Ministers, the greatest
part of the Bishops and Clergy disliking the whole Reformation, they found
themselves as they judged necessitated to make as little Alteration in the
present state of things as was possible, so as to keep up an Appearance of the
same things in the Church, which had been in former use. On these Grounds the
State and Rule of the Church was continued in the same form and posture that it
was before under the Papacy, the Authority of the Pope only being excluded, and
the Power of disposal of Ecclesiastical Affairs usurped by him, declared to be
in the King. So also in imitation of that Book of Worship and Service which the
People had been accustomed unto, another was established, with the Ceremonies
most obvious unto popular Observation.

3. This Order was unsatisfactory unto great Numbers of Ministers and others,
who yet considering what the necessity of the Times did call for, did outwardly
acquiesce in it, in several Degrees, in hopes of a farther Reformation in a
more convenient season. Nor did they cease to plead and press for it by all
quiet and peaceable means; abstaining in the mean time, from the use of the
Ceremonies, and full compliance with Episcopal Jurisdiction.

4. Hereon those who were for the Establishment, having secured their Interests
therein, and obtained Power, began after a while to Oppress, Excommunicate,
Silence, Deprive, and Imprison those who dissented from them, and could not
come up unto a full practical compliance with their Institutions and Rules. Yet
the Generality of those so silenced and deprived, abode in Privacy under their
Sufferings, hoping for a Reformation at one time or another, without betaking
themselves unto any other Course for the Edification of themselves or their
People.

5. After sundry years, some men, partly silenced and deprived, as unto their
Ministry, and partly pursued with other Censures and Penalties began to give
place unto severe Thoughts of the Church of England and its Communion, and
withdrawing themselves into foreign Parts openly avowed a Separation from it.
And if the extremities which many had been put unto for their mere Dissent and
Nonconformity unto the Established Rule, which with a good Conscience they
could not comply with, were represented, it might, if not excuse, yet alleviate
the Evil of that Severity in Separation which they fell into.

6. But hereon a double Inconvenience, yea, Evil did ensue, whence all the
Advantages made use of in this Story, to load the present Cause of the
Nonconformists, did arise.

For (1.) Many of those who refused to conform unto the Church in all its
Constitutions, yet thought it their Duty to wait quietly for a National
Reformation, thinking no other possible, began to oppose and write against
them, who utterly Separated from the Church, condemning its Assemblies as
Unlawful. And herein, as the manner of men is on such Occasions, they fell into
sharp Invectives against them, with severe Censures and Sentences concerning
them and their Practice.

And (2.) Those who did so separate, being not agreed among themselves, as unto
all Principles of Church Order, nor as unto the Measures of their Separation
from the Church of England, there fell out differences and disorders among
them, accompanied with personal Imprudencies and Miscarriages, in not a few.
Neither was it ever scarcely otherwise among them who first attempted any
Reformation, unless like the Apostles they were infallibly guided. These mutual
Contests which they had among themselves, and with the Nonconformists who abode
in their private Stations in England, with their Miscarriages also, were
published unto the World, in their own Writings and those of their Enemies.

Hinc omnis pendet Lucilius. These were the things that gave advantage unto,
and are the Substance of the History of our Author concerning Separation;
wherein all I can find unto our present Instruction is, that Iliacos intra
muros peccatur and extra; There are and ever were Sins, Faults, Follies, and
Miscarriages among all sorts of Men; which might be farther evidenced by
recounting on the other hand, what were the Ways, Acts and Deeds at the same
time of those by whom the others were cast out and rejected. And whereas it was
the Design of the Reverend Author, to load the Cause and Persons of the present
Nonconformists with Prejudice and contempt, it is well fallen out, in the
Merciful disposal of things toward and amongst us, by the Providence and Grace
of God, that he is forced to derive the principal Matter of his Charge, from
what was done by a few private Persons, three or fourscore years ago and more,
in whose Principles and Practices we are not concerned. And as for the
Difference that fell out more lately among the Divines in the Assembly at
Westminster, about the Ways, Means, and Measures of Reformation and mutual
Forbearance, which he gives us a large account of in a long Transcription out
of their Writings, I must have more Health, and Strength and Leisure than now I
have, (which I look not for in this World) before I esteem my self concerned to
engage in that contest, or to Apologize for the one side or other. The things
in Agitation between them, had no Relation unto or present Dissent from the
Church of England, being here insisted on merely to fill up the story, with
Reference unto the General End designed.

Neither to my Knowledge did I ever read a Book, wherein there was a greater
Appearance of Diligence in the Collection of Things, Words, Sayings,
Expressions, Discourses unto other Ends, which might only cast Odium on the
Cause opposed, or give advantage for Arguings unto a seeming Success, very
little or no way at all belonging unto the Cause in hand, than there is in this
of our Reverend Author, though much in the same way and kind has been before
attempted.

But Separation it is and Schism which we are all charged withal, and the Evil
thereof is aggravated in the Words of the Author himself, and in large
Transcriptions out of the Writings of others. Schism indeed we acknowledge to
be an Evil, a great Evil; but are sorry that with some, a pretended, unproved
Schism is become almost all that is Evil in the Churches or their Members; so
that let men be what they will, drenched, yea, overwhelmed in Ignorance, Vice
and Sin, so they do not separate (which to be sure, in that state they will not
do, for why should he who has Plague Sores upon him, depart from the Society
of them that are infected) they seem to be esteemed as unto all the concerns of
the Church, very unblameable.

The Truth is, considering the present State and Condition of the Inhabitants
of this Nation; who are generally Members of the Church of England, how the
Land is filled with sin against the Holy One of Israel, God giving us every day
renewed Tokens and Indications of his Displeasure, no compliance with his
Calls, no public Reformation being yet attempted; it seems a more necessary
Duty and of more importance unto them, upon whom the care of such things is
incumbent, to endeavor in themselves, and to engage a Faithful Ministry
throughout the Nation, both to give a due Example in their Conversations, and
to Preach the Word with all diligence, for the turning of the People from the
Evil of their ways; then to spend their time and strength in the Mannagment of
such Charges against those who would willingly comply with them, as unto all
the great Ends of Religion amongst men.

But this must be farther spoken unto. I say therefore 1. In General, that
whereas the whole Design of this Book, is to charge all sorts of Nonconformists
with Schism, and to denounce them Schismatics; yet the Author of it does not
once endeavor to state the true notion and nature of Schism, wherein the
Consciences of Men may be concerned. He satisfies himself in the Invectives of
some of the Ancients against Schism, applicable unto those which were in their
days, wherein we are not concerned. Only he seems to proceed on the general
Notion of it, that it is a Causeless Separation from a true Church, which
departs from that of the Romanists, who will allow no Separation from the
Church but what is Causeless. To make Application hereof unto us; it is supposed

(1.) That the Church of England is a true Church in its National Constitution,
and so are all the Parochial Churches in it; which can be no way justified but
by a large extensive Interpretation of the Word True. For there is but one sort
of Churches instituted by Christ and his Apostles; but National and Parochial
Churches differ in their whole kind, and therefore cannot both of them be of a
Divine Original.

(2.) That we are Members of this Church by our own Consent. How we should come
to be so otherways, I know not; If we are so by being born and baptized in
England, then those who are born beyond Sea and baptized there, are made
Members of this Church by an Act of Parliament for their Naturalization and no
otherwise.

(3.) That we separate from this Church, in things wherein we are obliged by
the Authority of Christ to hold communion with it; which neither is nor will
ever be proved, nor is it endeavored so to be, by any Instances in this
Treatise.

(4.) That to withold Communion from Parochial Assemblies in the Worship of
God, as unto things confessedly not of Divine Institution, is Schism, that
kind of Schism which is condemned by the Ancient Writers of the Church. Upon
these and the like suppositions, it is no uneasy thing to make vehement
Declamations against us, and severe Reflections on us; all is Schism and
Schismatics, and all of the same kind, with what was written against by
Cyprian and Austin, and others a great many.

But the true state of the Controversy between him and us, is this and no
other; namely, Whether a Dissent in and Forbearance from the Communion of
Churches, in their state and kind not of Divine Institution, or so far as they
are not of Divine Institution, and from Things in other Churches that have no
such Divine Institution, nor any Scriptural Authority to oblige us unto their
Observance, be to be esteemed Schism in them who maintain and professedly avow
Communion in Faith and Love with all the true Churches of Christ in the World.
This is the whole of what we are concerned in, which where it is spoken unto,
it shall be considered. But because there were in the Primitive Churches,
certain Persons who on Arbitrary Principles of their own, consisting for the
most part in gross and palpable Errors, which they would have imposed on all
others, did separate from the Catholic Church, that is all other Christians in
the World, and all the Churches of Christ, condemning them as no Churches,
allowing not the Administration of Sacraments unto them, nor Salvation unto
their Members, whom the Ancient Church condemned with great severity and that
justly as guilty of Schism, their Judgment, their Words and Expressions are
applied unto us, who are no way concerned in what they speak of or unto. We are
not therefore in the least terrified with what is alleged out of the Ancients
about Schism, no more then he is, when the same Instances, the same
Authorities, the same Quotations, are made use of by the Papists against the
Church of England, as they are continually. For, as was said, we know that we
are no way concerned in them. And suppose that all that the Dr. alleges
against us be true, and that we are in the wrong in all that is Charged on us,
yet I dare refer it to the Dr. himself to determine, whether it be of the same
nature with what was Charged on them who made Schisms in the Church of old. I
suppose I guess well enough what he will say, to secure his Charge, and it
shall be considered where it is spoken.

But, as was said, the great and only Design of the Author of this Book, is to
prove all Non-conformists to be Schismatics, or guilty of the Sin of Schism.
How he has succeeded in this Attempt, shall be afterward considered. And
something I have spoken in the ensuing Discourse, concerning the Nature of
Schism, which will manifest how little we are concerned in this Charge. But
yet it may not be amiss in this place, to mind both him and others, of some of
those Principles whereon we ground our Justification in this Matter, that it
may be known what they must further overthrow, and what they must establish who
shall persist in the Mannagement of this Charge; that is indeed through want of
Love, in a design to heighten and perpetuate our Divisions. And,

The first of these Principles is; That there is a Rule prescribed by our Lord
Jesus Christ, unto all Churches and Believers, in a due Attendance whereunto,
all the Unity and Peace, which he requires amongst his Disciples, do consist.

We acknowledge this to be our Fundamental Principle. Nor can the Rhetoric or
Arguments of any man, affect our Consciences, with a sense of the Guilt of
Schism, until one of these things be proved, namely, Either,

First, That the Lord Christ has given no such Rule, as in the Observance
whereof, Peace and Unity may be preserved in his Church; Or,

Secondly, That we refuse a compliance with that Rule, in some one Instance or
other, of what therein, he has himself appointed. Unless one or the other be
proved, and that strictly and directly, not pretended so to be, by perpetual
Diversions from the things in Question, no vehement Assertions of any of us to
be Schismatics, nor Aggravations of the Guilt of Schism, will signify any
thing in this Cause.

But that our Principle herein, is according unto Truth, we are fully
persuaded. There is a Rule of Christ's giving, which whosoever walk according
unto, Peace shall be on them and Mercy, as on the whole Israel of God. Gal.
6.16. And we desire no more, no more is needful unto the Peace and Unity of the
Church; And this Rule whatever it be, is of his giving and Appointment. No Rule
of Men's Invention or Imposition, can by its Observance secure us of an Interest
in that Peace and Mercy, which is peculiar unto the Israel of God. God forbid
we should entertain any such Imagination. We know well enough men may be
through Conformists, to such Rules, unto whom as unto their present state and
condition, neither Peace nor Mercy do belong; For there is no Peace to the
Wicked. He who has directed and commanded the end of Church Unity and Peace,
has also appointed the Means and Measures of them. Nothing is more
disagreeable unto, Nothing more inconsistent with the Wisdom, Care, and Love of
Christ unto his Church, than an Imagination, that whereas he strictly enjoynes
Peace and Unity in his Church, he has not himself appointed the Rules, Bounds,
and Measures of them, but left it unto the Will and Discretion of Men. As if
his Command unto his Disciples had been, Keep Peace and Unity in the Church, by
doing and observing whatever some men under a Pretense of being the Guides of
the Church shall make necessary unto that End; Whereas it is plainly otherwise,
namely, that we should so keep the Peace and Unity of the Church, by doing and
observing all whatever that he commands us. And besides we strictly require,
that some one Instance be given us, of a Defect in the Rule given by Christ
himself, which must be supplied by humane Additions, to render it complete for
the End of Church Peace and Unity. In vain have we desired, in vain may we for
ever expect, any Instance of that kind.

This Principle we shall not be easily dispossessed of. And whilst we are under
the Protection of it, we have a safe Retreat and shelter, from the most
vehement Accusations of Schism for a Noncompliance with a Rule, none of his,
different from his, and in some things contrary unto his, for the Preservation
of Church Peace and Unity. All the Dispute is whether we keep unto this Rule of
Christ or no; wherein we are ready at any time to put our selves upon the
Trial, being willing to Teach, or Learn, as God shall help us.

Secondly; We say that this Rule in general is the Rule of Faith, Love, and
Obedience, contained and revealed in the Scripture, and in particular the
Commands that the Lord Christ has given for the Order and Worship that he
requires in his Churches. It may seem strange to some, that we should suppose
the due Observance of the Rule of Faith, Love and Obedience, that is, of Faith
real and unfeigned, Love fervent and without Dissimulation, and of Universal
gracious Evangelical Obedience, to be necessary unto the Preservation of Church
Peace and Unity. But we do affirm with some confidence, that the only real
Foundation of them does lie herein, nor do we value that Ecclesiastical Peace,
which may be without it, or is neglective of it. Let all the Christian World,
or those therein who concern themselves in us Know, that this is our Principle
and our Judgment, that no Church Peace or Unity is valued by or accepted with
Jesus Christ, that is not founded in, that does not arise from, and is the
effect of, a diligent Attendance unto, and Observance of the entire Gospel
Rule, of Faith and Obedience. In the Neglect hereof, Peace is is but Carnal
Security; and Unity is nothing but a Conspiracy against the Rule of Christ. Add
hereunto in particular, the due Observation of what the Lord Christ has
appointed to be done and observed in his Churches, as unto their Order, Rule,
and Worship; and they who walk according unto this Rule, need not fear the
Charge of Schism from the fiercest of their Adversaries. Wherefore we say,

Thirdly; Those who recede from this Rule, in any material Branch of it, are
guilty of the Breach of Church Unity, according to the Measure of their
Exorbitancy. As suppose that any Preach, Teach, or Profess Doctrines, that are
contrary to the form of wholesome Words, especially with reference unto the
Person, Offices, and Grace of Christ, which are the Subject of Doctrines purely
Evangelical, they break the Peace of the Church, and we are bound to separate
or withdraw Communion from them, which is a Means of preserving the true Peace
and Unity of the Church. Speciosum quidem est Nomen Pacis, and pulchra Opinio
Vnitatis, sed quis ambigat eam solam, unicam, Ecclesiae Pacem esse, quae
Christi est; says Hilary. Suppose that men retain a Form of Godliness in the
Profession of the Truth; but deny the Power of it, acting their habitual Lusts
and Corruptions, in a vicious Conversation; they overthrow the Foundation of
the Churches Unity, and we are obliged from such to turn away. The like may be
said of those who live in a constant neglect of any of the Commands of Christ,
with respect unto the Order, Rule and Worship of the Church, with a contempt of
the Means appointed by him for their Edification. All these according unto the
Measures of their Deviations from the Rule of Christ, do disturb the Foundation
of all Church Peace and Unity. And therefore we say;

Fourthly; That Conscience is immediately and directly concerned in no other
Church Unity as such, but what is an effect of the Rule of Christ given unto
that End. We know what is spoken concerning Obedience unto the Guides and
Rulers of the Church, which is a part of the Rule of Christ. But we know
withal, that this Obedience is required of us, only as they teach us to observe
and do all that he has commanded, for other Commission from him they have
none. When this Rule is forsaken, and another substituted in the room of it, as
it quickly diverts the Minds of Men from a Conscientious Attendance unto that
Rule of Christ as the only means of Church Unity, so that other, does either
proceed from men's secular Interests, or may easily be accommodated thereunto.
And whereas the Lines of it must be drawn in the Feilds of pretended
Indifferencies, and real Arbitrariness, it will be the cause of endless
Contentions; whilst whatever some think themselves to have Power to appoint,
others will judge themselves to have Liberty to refuse.

Fifthly; It is Unity of Christ's Appointment, that Schism respects as a Sin
against it, and not Uniformity in things of Men's Appointment. And,

Lastly, Those who charge Schism on others for a dissent from themselves, or
the refraining of Total Communion with them; must,

1. Discharge themselves of the Charge of it, in a consistence with their
charge on them. For we find as yet no Arrows shot against us, but such as are
gathered up in the Feilds, shot at them that use them, out of the Roman Quiver.
Neither will it avail them to say, that they have other manner of Reason for
their Separation from the Church of Rome, than any we have for our withdrawing
Communion from them. For the Question is not what Reasons they have for what
they do; but what Right and Power they have to do it, namely, to separate from
the Church whereof they were, constituting a new Church state of their own,
without the consent of that Church, and against the Order and Authority of the
same.

2. Require no Communion but by virtue of the Rule before declared. In no other
are we concerned, with respect unto the Peace and Unity of the Church.

3. Give a farther Confirmation, than what we have yet seen unto the Principles
or Presumptions they proceed upon in the Mannagement of the Charge of Schism;
As that (1.) Diocesan Bishops with their Metropolitans are of Divine
Institution. (2.) That the Power of Rule in and over all Churches is committed
unto them alone. (3.) That the Church has Power to ordain Religious Rites and
Ceremonies, no where prescribed in the Scripture, and impose the Observation of
them on all Members of the Church. (4.) That this Church they are. (5.) That no
Man's Voluntary Consent is required to constitute him a Member of any Church,
but that every one is surprised into that state whether he will or no. (6) That
there is nothing of force in the Arguments pleaded for Noncompliance with
Arbitrary unnecessary Impositions. (7.) That the Church stands in no need of
Reformation, neither in Doctrine, Discipline, nor Conversation; with sundry
other things of an alike Nature, that they need unto their Justification.

But yet when all is done, it will appear, that mutual Forbearance, first
removing Animosities, then administering Occasion of inoffensive Converse, unto
the revival of decayed Affections, leading unto sedate Conferences and
Considerations of a more entire conjunction in the things whereunto we have
attained, will more conduce unto Universal Peace and Gospel Unity, than the
most fierce contentions about things in difference, or the most vehement
Charges of Schism against Dissenters.

But I must return to the Argument, and shall add something giving Light into
the Nature of Schism, from an Instance in the Primitive Churches.

That which is first in any kind, gives the Measure of what follows in the same
kind, and Light into the Nature of them. Whereas therefore the Schism that was
among the Churches about the Observation of Easter, was the first that fell out
unto the Disturbance of their Communion, I shall give a brief account of it, as
far as the Question in hand is concerned in it.

It is evident that the Apostles did with care and diligence teach the Doctrine
of Christian Liberty, warning the Disciples to stand fast in it, and not submit
their Necks unto any Yoke of Bondage, in the things of the Worship of God;
especially the Apostle Paul had frequent Occasions to treat of this subject.
And what they taught in Doctrine, they established and confirmed in their
Practice. For they enjoined nothing to be observed in the Church but what was
necessary, and what they had the Command of Christ for; leaving the Observation
of things indifferent, unto their Original Indifferency. But whereas they had
decreed by the Direction of the Holy Ghost some necessary Condescensions in the
Gentile Believers, toward the Jews, in case of Offense or Scandal; they did
themselves make use of their Liberty to comply with the same Jews, in some of
their Observances, not yet unlawful. Hereon there ensued in several Churches
different Observations of some Rites and Customs, which they apprehended were
countenanced by the Practice of the Apostles, at least as it had been reported
unto them. For immediately after the Decease of the Apostles, very many
Mistakes and Untruths were reported concerning what they said, did, and
practiced, which some diligently collected from Old Men, (it may be almost
delirant) as Eusebius gives an Instance in Papias, lib. 3. cap. 36. And even
the great Irenaeus himself, was imposed upon, in a Matter directly contrary to
the Scripture, under a Pretense of Apostolical Tradition. Among those Reports
was that of the Observation of Easter. And for a while the Churches continued
in these different Observances, without the least disturbance of their
Communion, each one following that which it thought the most probable
Tradition, for Rule of Scripture they pretended not unto. But after a while
they began to fall into a Contest about these things, which began at Laodicea,
which Church was as likely to strive about such things as any other. For
Eusebius tells us, that Melito the Bishop of Sardis, wrote two Books about
Easter, beginning the first with an Account that he wrote them, when Servilius
Paulus was Proconsul, there being then a great stir about it, at Laodicea.
Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 25. But as it falls out on such Occasions, much talk and
disputing ensuing thereon, the differences were increased, until one side or
Party at Variance, would make their Opinion and Practice the Rule and Terms of
Communion unto all other Churches. But this was quickly condemned by those who
were Wise and Sober. For as Zozoman affirms, they accounted it a frivolous or
foolish thing to differ about a Custom, whereas they agreed in all the
principal Heads of Religion. And thereon he gives a large Account of different
Rites and Observances in many Churches, without any breach of Communion among
them; adding, that besides those enumerated by him, there were many others in
Cities and Villages which they did in a different manner adhere unto. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 19.

At length this Matter fell into the handling of Victor, Bishop of Rome. And
his Judgment was that the Observation of Easter on the Lords Day, and not on
the fourteenth day of the first Month precisely, according to the Computation
of the Jews, in the Observation of the Passover, was to be imposed on all the
Churches of Christ every where. It had all along until his time been judged a
thing indifferent, wherein the Churches and all Believers were left unto the
use of their own Liberty. He had no pretense of any Divine Institution making
it necessary, the Writers of those days constantly affirming that the Apostles
made no Canons, Rules, or Laws about such things. He had Persons of as great
Worth as any in the World, as Melito, Polycrates, Polycarpus, that opposed him,
not only as unto the Imposition of his Practice on others, but as unto his
Error as they judged in the Matter of Fact and Right. Yet all this could not
hinder but that he would needs have the Reputation of the Father of Schisms
among the Churches of Christ by his Impositions, and cut off all the Asian
Churches from Communion, declaring them and their Members Excommunicate. Eusebius.
lib. 5. cap. 23.

The Noise hereof coming abroad unto other Churches, great Offense was taken at
it by many of them, and Victor was roundly dealt withal by sundry of them who
agreed with him in Practice, but abhorred his Imposition of it, and making it a
Condition of Church Communion.

Among those who so opposed and rebuked him, Irenaeus was the most Eminent. And
I shall observe some few things out of the Fragment of his Epistle, as it is
recorded by Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.

And (1.) He tells us, that he wrote unto Victor in the name of those Brethren
in France whom he did preside amongst. The Custom of considering things of this
Nature with all the Brethren of the Church, and writing their Determination, in
their Name, was not yet grown out of use, though the Practice of it now would
be esteemed Novel and Schismatical.

(2.) He tells Victor, that there were great varieties in this thing, as also
in the Times and Seasons of Fasting, which did not, says he, begin or arise in
our days, but long before was introduced by such, who being in Places of Rule,
rejected and changed the common and simple Customs which the Church had before.
The Dr. therefore need not think it so strange, that an Alteration in Church
Order and Rule should fall out in after Ages, when long before Irenaeus's time
such Changes were begun.

(3.) He gives hereon that excellent Rule, (...); the Difference of Fastings,
(and consequently things of an alike Nature) commends the Concord or Agreement
of Faith.

This was the first Effect of a Departure from the only Rule of Unity and
Communion among the Churches, which was given by Christ himself and his
Apostles. As hereby great Confusion and Disorder was brought upon the Churches,
so it was the first public inroad that was made on the Doctrine of the
Scripture, concerning Christian Liberty. And as it was also the first Instance
of rejecting Men otherwise found in the Faith from Communion, for
Nonconformity, or the Non-Observance of Humane Institutions or Traditions,
which had therein an unhappy Consecration unto the use of future Ages; so it
was the first notorious Entrance into that Usurpation of Power, in the Roman
Bishops, which they carried on by degrees unto an absolute Tyranny. Neither was
there ever a more pernicious Maxim broached in the Primitive Times, nor which
had a more effectual Influence into the Ruin of the first Institution and
Liberty of the Churches of Christ. For although the Fact of Victor, was
condemned by many, yet the Principle he proceeded on, was afterward espoused
and put in Practice.

Our Reverend Author will hardly find an Instance before this of Schism among
any Churches that retained the Substance of the Doctrine of Faith, unless it be
in those Divisions which fell out in some particular Churches, among the
Members of them. And this we affirm to be in general the Case of the
Non-conformists at this day. For admitting such Variations as Time and other
Circumstances must necessarily infer, and they are rejected from Communion on
the same grounds, that Victor proceeded on in the Excommunication of the
Churches of Asia. Neither will there be any End of Differences whilst the same
Principle is retained. Before this, Schism was only esteemed a defect in Love
and breach of the Rule of Christ's Appointment, for the Communion and walking
together of Believers in the same Church.

But this Notion of Schism is in the Judgment of Dr. Still. Pref. p. 46. so
mean, so jejune, so narrow a Notion of it, that I cannot, says he, but wonder
that men of Understanding should be satisfied with it. But in my Judgment, the
Author of it, was a Man of Good Understanding; indeed I have heard him spoken
of, as one of abstruse Speculations, that did not advantage Christian Religion.
And one has published in Print, that he is one of the Obscurest Writers that
ever he read, but never heard him before charged with mean and jejune Notions.
Now this was St Paul, who expressly charge Schism on the Church of Corinth,
because of the Divisions that were among them, namely, the Members of the same
particular Church; so as they could not come together in one place, in a due
manner. Nor in all his Writings, does he any where give us any other Notion of
Schism. But, says he, this is short of that care of the Churches Peace, which
Christ has made so great a Duty of his followers. But if th^re be no other
Rule, no other Duty for the Preservation of the Churches Peace, but only, that
no separation be made from it, which is called Schism, we might have been all
quiet in the Church of Rome. Let no Man think to persuade us, but that for the
Preservation of the Churches Peace, it is required of us, that we do and
observe all things that Christ requires of us, and that we enjoin not the
Observation of what he has not Commanded, on Victors Penalty of being excluded
from Communion; that Faith and Love and Holiness, be Kept and promoted in the
Church, by all the ways of his Appointment; And when these things are attended
unto, St. Paul's mean and jejune Notion of Schism, will be of good use also.

Nor was there the least Appearance of any other kind of Schism among the
Churches of Christ until that which was occasioned by Victor, of which we have
spoken. The Schisms that followed afterward, were six to one, from the
Contentions of Bishops, or those who had an Ambition so to be, which the
Apostle foresaw as Clemens witnesses, and made provision against it, but that
no banks are strong enough to confine the overflowing Ambition of some sort of
Persons. But, says the Dr. Pref. p. 47. The Obligation to preserve the Peace
of the Church, extends to all lawful constitutions, in order ^o it. Therefore
to break the Peace of the Church we live in, for the sake of any Lawful Orders
and Constitutions, made to preserve it, is directly the sin of Schism.

Now Schism he tells us, is as great and dangerous a sin as Murder, p. 45. and
we know that no Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3.1^. So that
all men here seem to be adjudged unto Hell, who comply not with, who submit not
unto, our Ecclesiastical Con^titutions or Canons. God forbid that ever such
Doctrine should be looked on, as to have the least affinity unto the Gospel, or
such Censures to have any savor of the Spirit of Christ in them. The Lord
Jesus Christ has not cast the Eternal Condition of those whom he purchased
with his own most precious blood, into the Arbitrary disposal of any, that
shall take upon them to make Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Orders, for
Conformity in Rites and Ceremonies, etc. Shall we think that he who upon the
best use of Means for his Instruction which he is capable of, with fervent
Prayers to God for Light and Direction, cannot comply with, and submit unto
some Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Orders, however pretended to be made for
the preservation of Peace and Unity of the Church, on this Ground principally,
because they are not of the Appointment, nor have the Approbation of Jesus
Christ, though he should mistake herein and miss of his Duty, is guilty of no
less sin than that of Murder; suppose of Cain in Killing his Brother? For all
Murder is from Hatred and Malice. This is that which enflames the Differences
amongst us. For it is a Scandal of the highest nature, when men do see that
Persons who in any thing dissent from our Ecclesiastical Constitutions, though
otherwise, sober, honest, pious and peaceable, are looked on as bad, if not
worse than Theives and Murderers, and are dealt withal accordingly. Nor can any
thing be more effectual to harden others in their Immoralities, than to find
themselves approved by the Guides of the Church in comparison with such
Dissenters.

But (2.) Who is it that shall make these Orders and Constitutions that must be
observed for the Preservation of the Unity and Peace of the Church? It can be
none but those who have power so to do by being uppermost in any Place, or
Time. Who shall judge them to be Lawful? no doubt they that make them. And what
shall these Constitutions be about, what shall they extend unto? any thing in
the World, so there be no mention of it in the Scripture, one way or other.
What if any one should now dissent from these Constitutions and not submit unto
them? why then he is guilty of Schism, as great and dangerous a sin as that of
Murder. But when all is done; what if these Constitutions and Orders should be
no ways needful or useful unto the Preservation of the Peace of the Church?
What if a supposition that they are so, reflects dishonor on the Wisdom and
Love of Christ? What if they are unlawful and unwarrantable, the Lord Christ
not having given Power and Authority unto any sort of men to make any such
Constitutions? What if they are the great ways and means of breaking the Unity
and Peace of the Church? These and other Enquiries of the like nature must be
clearly resolved, not by the Dictates of men's own Minds and Spirits, but from
the Word of Truth, before this Intimation can be complied withal.

But that which is fallen out most beyond Expectation in this whole Discourse,
is that the Reverend Author seeking by all ways and means, countenanced with
the least semblance or appearance of Truth, to load the Non-Conformists and
their Cause with the Imputation of things invidious and burdensome, should fix
upon, their Prayers, by virtue of the Grace and Gift of Prayer which they have
received, ascribing the Original of its Use unto the Artifice and Insinuation
of the Jesuits, as he does, Pref. page 14, 15. But because I look on this as a
thing of the greatest importance of all the Differences between them and us, as
that wherein the Life of Religion, the Exercise of Faith, and the Labor of
Divine Love do much consist, the Nature and Necessity of that kind of Prayer,
which is here reflected on and opposed, shall (God willing) be declared and
vindicated in a peculiar Discourse unto that Purpose. For the Differences that
are between us cannot possibly have any more pernicious consequence, then if we
should be influenced by them to oppose or condemn any Principles or Exercise of
the Duties of Practical Holiness, as thinking them to yield matter of advantage
to one Party or another.

The great pains he has taken in his Preface, to prove the Non-conformists to
have been the means of furthering and promoting Popery in this Nation, might,
as I suppose, have been omitted without a^^ disadvantage unto himself or his
Cause. For the thing it self is not true, as it is utterly impossible to affect
the Minds or Consciences of the Non-conformists with a sense of it, because
they have a thousand witnesses in themselves, against the Truth of the Charge;
so it is impossible it should be believed by any who are in the least
acquainted with their Principles, or have their Eyes open to see any thing that
is doing at this day in Religion. But as there are many palpable Mistakes in
the account he gives of things among our selves to this Purpose, so if on the
other hand, any should out of Reports, Surmizes, Jesuits Letters and
Politics, particularly those of Contzen, Books written to that purpose against
them, Agreement of Principles, notorious compliance of some Bishops and others
of the same way, with the Papists, some dying avowedly such, Stories of what
has been said at Rome and elsewhere, which are not few, nor unproveable,
concerning the Inclinations of many unto a fair composition of things with the
Church of Rome, the deportment of some before and since the Discovery of the
Plot, with such other Topics as the Discourse of our Author with respect unto
the Non-conformists will furnish them withal; as also from the woeful Neglect
there has been of instructing the People in the Principles of Religion, so as
to implant a sense of the Life and Power of it on their Souls, with all things
that may be spoken on that Head, with reference unto the Clergy under their
various distributions, with the casting out of so great number of Ministers who
they knew in their own Conscience, to be firmly fixed against Popery and its
Interest in this Nation, and could not deny, but they might be useful to
instruct the People in the Knowledge of the Truth, and encourage them by their
Example unto the Practice of it; if any, I say, should on these and the like
grounds, not in a way of Recrimination, nor as a Requital of the Drs. Story,
but merely as a necessary Part of the Defense of their own Innocence, charge
the same guilt of giving occasion unto the growth, increase and danger of
Popery in this Nation, on the Episcopal Party, I know not now, how they could
be well blamed for it, nor what will be done of that kind. For they who will
take Liberty to speak what they please, must be content sometimes to hear what
will displease. For my part I had rather if it were possible, that these things
at present might be omitted, and that all those who are really united in
opposition unto Popery, as I am assured in particular that this Reverend Author
and I am, would rather consider how we might come out of the danger of it
wherein we are, then at present to contest how we came unto it. This I speak
seriously, and that under the consideration of this Discourse, which upon the
Account of sundry Mistakes in Matter of Fact, of great Defects in point of
Charity, with a design to expose others unto reproach for their great Crimes,
of being willing to be a little freed from being beaten, fined, punished and
imprisoned, by their means, and on their Accounts, is as apt to excite new
Exasperations, and to provoke the Spirits of them concerned, as any I have read
of late. However the Defense of our own Innocence must not be forsaken. But
Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda Trophaeis.

It is not Praiseworthy to abide in these contests beyond Necessity.

This Discourse indeed of the Reverend Author is increased into so large a
Volume, as might justly discourage any from undertaking the Examination of it,
who has any other necessary Duties to attend unto. But if there be separated
from it, the consideration of Stories of Things and Persons long since past,
wherein we are not concerned, with the undue Application of what was written by
some of the Ancients against the Schisms in their days, unto our present
Differences; as also the Repetition of a Charge that we do not refrain
Communion from the Parochial Churches on the Grounds and Reasons, which we know
to the contrary that we do; with the Report and Quotations of the Words and
Sayings of Men, by whose Judgment we are not determined; with frequent
Diversions from the Question, by attempting Advantages from this or that
passage or Expression in one or another; and the Rhetorical Aggrevations of
things that might be plainly expressed, and quickly issued; and the
controversy may be reduced into a narrower Compass.

It is acknowledged that the Differences which are amongst Protestants in this
Nation, are to be bewailed, because of the Advantages which the Common Enemy of
the Protestant Interest does endeavor to make thereby. Howbeit the Evil
Consequences of them do not arise from the Nature of the things themselves, but
from the Interests, Prejudices and biased Affections of them amongst whom they
are. Nor shall any man ever be able to prove, but that on the Doctrinal
Agreement which we all profess, (provided it be real) we may, notwithstanding
the Differences that remain, enjoy all that Peace and Union, which are
prescribed unto the Churches and Disciples of Christ; provided that we live in
the exercise of that Love which he enjoyneth us; which whilst it continues, in
the Profession of the same Faith, it is impossible there should be any Schism
among us. Wherefore, whereas some are very desirous to state the Controversy
on this supposition, that there is a Schism among us, and issue it in an
Enquiry, on which side the blame of it is to be laid, wherein they suppose they
need no farther Justification, but the Possession of that Church State which is
Established by Law; I shall willingly forego the Charging of them with the
whole Occasion of the Schism pretended, until they can prove there is such a
Schism, which I utterly deny. For the refraining of Communion with Parochial
Assemblies, on the Grounds whereon we do refrain, has nothing of the Nature of
Schism in it, neither as it is stated in the Scripture, nor as it was esteemed
of in the Primitive Churches, amongst whom there were Differences of as great
importance, without any mutual Charges of Schism. Wherefore although we cannot
forego utterly the Defense of our own Innocence against such Charges as import
no less then an heinous Guilt of Sin against God, and eminent danger of Ruin
from Men; Yet we shall constantly unite our selves with and unto all who
sincerely endeavor the Promotion of the great Ends of Christian Religion, and
the Preservation of the Interest of Protestant Religion, in this Nation.

Something I Judge necessary to add concerning My Engagement, or rather
Surprisal into this Controversy, against my Inclination and Resolution.

The Dr. tells us, Pref. p. 51. That when his Sermon came first out, it went
down quietly enough; and many of the People began to read and consider it,
being pleased to find so weighty and necessary a Point debated with so much
calmness and freedom from passion; which being discovered by the Leaders and
Managers of the Party, it was soon resolved that the Sermon must be cried down,
and the People dissuaded from reading of it. If any of them were talked withal
about it, they shrunk up their shoulders and looked sternly; and shook their
heads, and hardly forbore some bitter words, both of the Author and the Sermon:
(which it seems he knows, though they did forbear to do so;) and much more to
the same Purpose. And page 58. As if they had been the Papists Instruments to
execute the fury of their wrath and displeasure against me, they summon in the
Power of their Party, and resolve with their force and might to fall upon me;
with more to the same Purpose. And page 59. After a while they thought fit to
draw their strength into the Open Field; and the first who appeared was; etc.

I Confess I was somewhat surprised, that coming into this Coast, all things
should appear so new and strange unto me, as that I could fix on no one Mark to
discover, that I had ever been there before. For I am as utter a Stranger unto
all these things, as unto the Counsels of the Pope or Turk. The Dr. seems to
apprehend, that at the coming forth of his Sermon, at least after its worth and
weight were observed, there was a Consternation and Disorder among the
Non-Conformists, as if Hannibal had been at the Gates. For hereby he supposes
they were cast into those ugly Postures of shrinking and stareing and shaking,
and swelling with what they could hardly forbear to utter. But these things
with those that follow, seem to Me to be Romantic, and somewhat tragically
expressed, sufficiently evidencing, that other Stories told by the same Author
in this Case stand in need of some grains of Allowance, to reduce them to the
Royal Standard. For whereas I am the first Person Instanced in, that should
have an hand in the Management of these Contrivances, I know nothing at all of
them, nor upon the utmost enquiry I have made, can I hear of any such things
among the Parties, or the Managers of them, as they are called. It is true the
Preaching and Publishing of the Drs. Sermon at that time, was by many judged
unseasonable, and they were somewhat troubled at it, more upon the Account that
it was done by him, then that it was done. But otherwise as to the Charge of
Schism managed therein against them, they were neither surprised with it nor
discomposed at it. And so far as I know, it was the season alone, and the
present Posture of Affairs in the Nation, calling for an Agreement among all
Protestants, that occasioned any Answer unto it.

It is therefore no small mistake, that we dissuaded any from reading his
Sermon, which has been commonly objected by some other Writers of the same
way. But if we were Enemies unto these Worthy Persons, we could not desire they
should have more false Intelligence from our Tents, then they seem to have.
This is not our way. Those who are joined with us, are so upon their own free
Choice and Judgment; nor do we dissuade them from reading the Discourses of any
on the Subject of our Differences. The Rule holds herein, to try all things and
hold fast that which is Good.

Nor do I know any thing in the least of Advices or Agreements to cry down and
oppose, Confute or Answer the Drs. Sermon. Nor do I believe that there were
ever any such among those who are Charged with them. And what shall be said
unto those Military Expressions, of summoning in the Power of the Party,
resolved to fall on, think fit to draw their strength into the Field, etc. I
say, what shall we say to these things? I am not a little troubled that I am
forced to have any concernment in the Debate of these Differences, wherein men's
sense of their Interest, or of Provocations they have received, cast them on
such irregular ways of Defense and Retaliation. For all these things are but
fruits of Imagination, that have nothing of Truth or Substance to give
countenance unto them.

The Way whereby I became to be at all engaged in this Contest, and the Reasons
whereon I undertook an harmless Defense of our Innocence, as to the Charge of
Schism at this time, I shall give a brief account of.

Some days after the Drs. Sermon was printed and published, One of those whom
he supposes we persuaded not to read it, brought it unto me, and gave it me,
with such a Character of it, as I shall not repeat. Upon the perusal of it,
(which I did on his Desire, being uncertain to this day, whither without that
occasion, I had ever read it at all) I confess I was both surprised and
troubled, and quickly found that many others were so also. For as there was
then a great Hope and Expectation, that all Protestants would cement and Unite
in one common Cause and Interest for the Defense and Preservation of Religion
against the Endeavors of the Papists for its Subversion; so it was thought by
wise men of all sorts, that the only Medium and Expedient for this End, was the
deposing of the consideration of the lesser Differences among ourselves, and
burying all Animosities that had arisen from them. And I yet suppose my self at
least excusable, that I judged the Tendency of that Discourse, to lie utterly
another way. Nor is it in my Power to believe, that a Peremptory Charge of
Schism upon any Dissenters, considering what is the Apprehension and Judgment
of those who make that Charge concerning it, with respect unto God and Men, is
a means to unite us in one common Religious Interest. And on this Account, not
knowing in the least that any other Person had undertaken, or would undertake
the Consideration of the Drs. Sermon, I thought that My endeavor for the
removal of the Obstacle cast in the way unto a sincere Coalition in the Unity
of Faith among all sorts of Protestants, might not be unacceptable. Neither did
I see any other way whereby this might be done, but only by a Vindication of
the Dissenters from the Guilt of that state, which if it be truly charged on
them must render our Divisions irreconcilable. And continuing still of the
same Mind, I have once more renewed the same Defensative, with no other Design
but to maintain hopes, that Peace and Love may yet be preserved among us,
during the continuation of these Differences. And whereas it is a work of
Almighty Power, to reduce Christian Religion unto its first Purity and
Simplicity, which will not be effected but by various providential
Dispensations in the World, and renewed Effusions of the Holy Spirit, from
above; which are to be waited for; and seeing that all endeavors for National
Reformation are attended with insuperable Difficulties, few Churches being
either able or willing to extricate themselves, from the Dust of Traditions and
Time, with the Rust of Secular Interests; I would hope that they shall not be
always the Object of public Severities, who keeping the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Truth and Peace, with all sincere Disciples of Christ every where,
do design nothing but a Reformation of themselves and their ways, by an
universal compliance with the Will and Word of Christ alone, whom God has
commanded them in all things to hear and obey.

The Reduction, I say, of the Profession of Christianity in general, unto its
Primitive Purity, Simplicity, Separation from the World, and all Implication
with Secular Interests, so as that it should comprize nothing but the Guidance
of the Souls of Men in the Life of God, toward the Enjoyment of him, is a Work
more to be prayed for to come in its proper season, then to be expected in this
Age. Nor do any yet appear fitted in the least Measure for the undertaking or
attempting such a Work, any farther then by their own Personal Profession and
Example. And whilst things continue amongst Protestant Churches, in the State
wherein they are, under the Influence of divided secular Interests, and
advantageous Mixtures with them, with the Relics of the Old General
Apostasy, by differences in points of Doctrine, in Rules of Discipline, in
Orders of Divine Worship, it is in vain to look for any Union or Communion
among them, in a compliance with any certain Rule of Uniformity, either in the
Profession of Faith, or in the Practice of Worship and Discipline. Nor would
such an Agreement among them, could it be attained, be of any great Advantage
unto the important ends of Religion, unless a Revival of the Power of it in the
Souls of Men, do accompany it. In the mean time, the Glory of our Christian
Profession in Righteousness, Holiness, and a visible Dedication of its
Professors unto God is much lost in the World, innumerable Souls perishing
through the want of effectual means for their Conversion and Edification. To
attempt public National Reformation, whilst things Ecclesiastic and Civil are
so involved as they are, the one being riveted into the legal constitution of
the other, is neither the Duty, nor Work of Private men; Nor will, as I
suppose, Wise Men be over forward in attempting any such thing, unless they had
better Evidence of means to make it effectual, then any that do as yet appear.
For the Religion of a Nation in every form will answer the Ministry of it. What
is the present Duty in this State of things, of those private Christians or
Ministers, who cannot satisfy their Consciences, as unto their Duty toward
God, without endeavoring a Conformity unto the Will of Christ, in the
Observance of all his Institutions and Commands, confining all their Concerns
in Religion unto things Spiritual and Heavenly, is the Enquiry before us.

CHAP. I. Of the Original of Churches.
WHEN any thing which is pleaded to belong unto Religion, or the Worship of
God, is proposed unto us: Our first Consideration of it ought to be in that
Enquiry, which our Lord Jesus Christ made of the Pharisees, concerning the
Baptism of John; Whence is it? from Heaven or of Men? He distributes all things
which come under that Plea or Pretense, into two heads, as unto their Original
and Efficient cause; namely, Heaven and Men. And these are not only different
and distinct, but so contradictory one unto another, that as unto any thing
wherein Religion or the Worship of God is concerned, they cannot concur as
partial causes of the same effect. What is of Men is not from Heaven? and what
is from Heaven is not of Men. And hence is his determination concerning both
sorts of these things; Every plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted up. Mat. 15.13.

Designing therefore to treat of Churches, their Original, Nature, Use and End,
my first Enquiry must be, whether they are from Heaven or of Men: that is,
whether they are of a Divine Original, having a Divine Institution; or whether
they are an Ordinance or Creation of Men: For their Pedigree must be derived
from one of these singly; they never concurred in the Constitution of any part
of Divine Worship, or any thing that belongs thereunto.

This would seem a case and enquiry of an exceeding easy determination: For
the Scripture every where makes mention of the Church or Churches as the
Ordinances and Institutions of God. But such things have falln out in the World
in latter Ages, as may make men justly question, whether we understand the mind
of God aright or no in what is spoken of them. At least if they should allow,
that the Churches so mentioned in the Scripture, were of Divine Appointment;
yet it might be highly questionable, whether those which have since been in the
World, be not a mere product of the invention and power of men.

1. For many Ages, such things alone were proposed unto the world, and imposed
on it, for the only Church, as were from Hell rather than from Heaven, at least
from Men, and those none of the best: For all men in these Western parts of the
world, were obliged to believe and profess on the penalties of Eternal and
Temporal Destruction, that the Pope of Rome and those depending on him, were
the only Church in the World. If this should be granted, as it was almost
universally in some Ages, and in this is earnestly contended for, there would
be a thousand evidences to prove that the institution of Churches is not from
Heaven, but from Men. Whether the inventions of men in the mystery of iniquity
be to be received again or no, men of secular Wisdom and Interest may do well
to consider; but he must be blind and mad and accursed in his mind and
understanding, who can think of receiving it as from Heaven, as a Divine
Institution. But I have treated of this subject in other Discourses.

2. The Name, Pretense and presumed power of the Church or Churches, have been
made and used as the greatest Engine for the promoting and satisfying the
Avarice, Sensuality, Ambition, and cruelty of men, that ever was in the world.
Never any thing was found out by men or Satan himself, so fitted, suited, and
framed to fill and satisfy the lusts of multitudes of men, as this of the
Church has been, and yet continues to be: For it is so ordered, is of that
make, constitution and use, that corrupt men need desire no more for the
attainment of Wealth, Honor, Grandeur, Pleasure, all the ends of their Lusts
spiritual or carnal, but a share in the Government and power of the Church; nor
has an interest therein been generally used unto any other ends. All the Pride
and Ambition, all the flagitious lives in Luxury, Sensuality, Uncleanness,
Incests, etc. of Popes, Cardinals, Prelates, and their Companions, with their
hatred unto, and oppression of Good men, arose from the advantage of their
being reputed the Church. To this very day, the Church here and there as it is
esteemed, is the greatest means of keeping Christian Religion in its power and
purity out of the world; and a temptation to multitudes of men, to prefer the
Church before Religion, and to be obstinate in their oppositions unto it. These
things being plain and evident unto wise men, who had no share in the
conspiracy, nor the benefit of it, how could they think that this Church State
was from Heaven and not of Men.

3. By the Church (so esteemed) and in pursuit of its Interests, by its
Authority and Power, innumerable multitudes of Christians have been slain or
murdered, and the earth soked with their Blood. Two Emperors of Germany alone,
fought above eighty battles for, and against the pretended power and authority
of the Church. It has laid whole Countries desolate with fire and sword,
turning Cities into ashes and Villages into a wilderness, by the destruction of
their Inhabitants. It was the Church which killed, murdered and burnt
innumerable holy Persons, for no other reason in the world, but because they
would not submit their Souls, Consciences and Practices unto her commands, and
be subject unto her in all things: Nor was there any other Church conspicuously
visible in all these parts of the world; nor was it esteemed lawful once to
think, that this was not the true Church, or that there was or could be any
other: For men to believe that this Church State was from Heaven, is for them
to believe that cruelty, bloodshed, murder, the destruction of mankind
especially of the best, the wisest and the most holy among them, is the only
way to Heaven.

4. The secular worldly interest of multitudes lying in this presumptive Church
and the state of it, they preferred and exalted it above all that is called
God, and made the greatest Idol of it, that ever was in the world: For it was
the faith and profession of it, that its authority over the Souls and
Consciences of men, is above the Authority of the Scripture so that they have
no Authority toward us, unless it be given unto them by this Church, and that
we neither can nor need believe them to be the Word of God, unless they inform
us and command us so to do. This usurpation of Divine Honor in putting itself
and its Authority above that of the Scripture or Word of God, discovers full
well whence it was. In like manner those who assumed it unto themselves to be
the Church, without any other Right, Title or Pretense unto it, have exalted
one amongst them and with him themselves in their several capacities, above all
Emperors, Kings and Princes, Nations and People, trampling on them at their
pleasure. Is this Church State from Heaven? Is it of Divine Institution? Is it
the heart and center of Christian Religion? Is it that which all men must be
subject to on pain of eternal damnation? who that knows any thing of Christ or
the Gospel, can entertain such a thought without detestation and abhorrency.

5. This Pretense of the Church is at this day, one of the greatest causes of
the Atheism, that the world is filled withal. Men find themselves, they know
not how, to belong unto this or that Church; they suppose that all the Religion
that is required of them, is no more but what this Church suggests unto them;
and abhorring through innumerable prejudices, to enquire whether there be any
other ministerial Church State or no; understanding at length the Church to be
a political combination for the Wealth, Power and Dignity of some persons, they
cast away all regard of Religion, and become professed Atheists.

6. Unto this very day the woeful Divisions, Distractions and end less
Controversies that are among Christians, with the dangerous Consequences and
effects of them, do all spring and arise from the Churches that are in the
World. Some are for the Church of Rome, some for the Church of England, some
for the Greek Church, and so of the rest; which upon an acknowledgment of such
a state of them, as is usually allowed, cannot but produce Wars and Tumults
among Nations, with the oppression of particular persons in all sorts of
calamities. In one place men are killed for not owning of one Church, and in
another for approving of it. Amongst our selves prisons are filled, and men's
goods spoiled, divisions multiplied, and the whole Nation endangered, in a
severe attempt to cause all Christians to acknowledge that Church State which
is set up among us. In brief, these Churches, in the great Instance of that of
Rome, have been and are the Scandal of Christian Religion, and the greatest
cause of most of the evils and villainies which the world has been replenished
withal. And is it any wonder if men question whether they are from Heaven or of
Men?

For my part, I look upon it, as one of the greatest mercies that God has
bestowed on any professed Christians in these latter Ages, that he has by the
Light and knowledge of his Word, disentangled the Souls and Consciences of any
that do believe, from all Respect and Trust unto such Churches, discovering the
vanity of their pretenses, and wickedness of their practices, whereby they
openly proclaim themselves to be of Men, and not from Heaven. Not that he has
led them off from a Church State thereby, but by the same word revealed that to
them which is pure, simple, humble, holy, and so far from giving occasion unto
any of the evils mentioned, as that the admittance of it will put an immediate
end unto them all: Such shall we find the true and Gospel Church State to be in
the following Description of it. He that comes out of the Confusion and
Disorder of these humane (and as unto some of them, hellish) Churches; who is
delivered from this mystery of iniquity, in darkness and confusion, policies
and secular contrivances coming thereon, to obtain a view of the true, native
Beauty, glory, and use of Evangelical Churches, will be thankful for the
Greatness of his Deliverance.

Whereas therefore for many Ages, the Church of Rome, with those claiming under
it, and depending on it, was esteemed to be the only true Church in the World;
and nothing was esteemed so highly criminal, not murder, Treason nor Incest,
as to think of, or to assert any other Church State, it was impossible that any
wise man not utterly infatuated, could apprehend a Church, any Church whatever
to be of Divine Institution or Appointment: For all the evils mentioned, and
others innumerable, were not only occasioned by it, but they were effects of
it, and inseparable from its State and Being. And if any other Churches also,
which, although the people whereof they consist, are of another faith than
those of the Roman Church, are like unto it in their make and constitution,
exercising the Right, power and authority which they claim unto themselves by
such ways and means, as are plainly of this World and of their own invention,
they do leave it highly questionable from whence they are as such: For it may
be made to appear that such Churches so far as they are such, are obstructive
of the sole end of all Churches, which is the Edification of them that do
believe; however any that are of them, or belong unto them, may promote that
end by their personal endeavors.

But notwithstanding all these things, it is most certain, that Churches are of
a Divine Original; that they are the ordinance and institution of Christ. I am
not yet arrived in the order of this Discourse, to a convenient season of
declaring what is the especial nature, use and end of such Churches as are so
the Institution of God; and so to give a definition of them, which shall be
done afterward; but treat only as unto the general notion of a Church, and
what is signified thereby. These are of God. And in those Churches before
described under a corrupt, degenerate estate, three things may be considered,
(1) What is of man without the least pretense unto the appointment or command
of God. Such is the very Form, Fabric and Constitution of the Church of Rome,
and those that depend thereon or are conformed thereunto. That which it is,
that whereby it is what it is, in its Kind, Government, Rule and End, is all of
man, without the least countenance given unto it from any thing of God's
Institution. This is that which through a long effectual working of men and
Satan, in a mystery of iniquity, it arrived unto. Herewith the Saints of God
ought to have no compliance, but bear witness against it with their lives, if
called thereunto. This in due time the Lord Christ will utterly destroy. (2)
Such things as pretend unto a countenance to be given them by divine
Institution but horribly corrupted. Such are the Name of a Church and its
Power, a Worship pretended to be Religious and Divine; an Order as to Officers
and Rulers different from the people, with sundry things of the like nature;
these things are good in themselves, but as engrossed into a false
Church State, and Worship corrupt in themselves, they are of Men, and to be
abhorred of all that seek after the true Church of Christ. (3) There is that
which is the Essence of a true Church, namely, that it be a society of men
united for the Celebration of Divine Worship; This so far as it may be found
among them, is to be approved,

But Churches, as was said, are of a Divine Original, and have the warrant of
Divine Authority. The whole Scripture is an account of God's Institution of
Churches, and of his dealing with them.

God laid the foundation of Church Societies and the necessity of them in the
Law of Nature, by the creation and constitution of it. I speak of Churches in
general, as they are Societies of Humane Race, one way or other joined and
united together for the Worship of God. Now the sole End of the Creation of the
Nature of man, was the Glory of God, in that Worship and Obedience which it was
fitted and enabled to perform: For that end, and no other, was our nature
created in all its Capacities, Abilities and Perfections: Neither was man so
made merely that every individual should singly and by himself perform this
Worship, though that also every individual person is obliged unto. Every man
alone and by himself, will not only find himself indigent, and wanting supplies
of sundry kinds; but also that he is utterly disabled to act sundry faculties
and powers of his Soul, which by nature he is endued withal. Hence the Lord God
said, It is not good that man should be alone, Genesis 2.18.

These things therefore are evident in themselves, (1) That God created our
nature, or made man for his own Worship and Service, and fitted the powers and
faculties of his soul thereunto. (2) That this nature is so fitted for Society,
so framed for it as its next end, that without it, it cannot act itself,
according unto what it is empowered unto. And this is the foundation of all
Order and Government in the world among Mankind. (3) That by the Light of
nature this acting in Society is principally designed unto the Worship of God.
The Power I say and Necessity of acting in Society, is given unto our nature
for this end principally, that we may thus glorify God, in and by the Worship
which he requires of us. (4) That without the Worship of God in Societies,
there would be an absolute failure of one principal end of the Creation of man;
nor would any glory arise unto God from the Constitution of his nature so
fitted for Society, as that it cannot act its own powers without it. (5) All
Societies are to be regulated in the light of Nature by such circumstances, as
whereby they are suited unto their end; for which they may be either too large
or too much restrained.

Hence have we the Original of Churches in the Light of Nature; men associating
themselves together, or uniting in such Societies for the Worship of God which
he requires of them, as may enable them unto an orderly Performance of it, are
a Church. And hereunto it is required, (1) That the persons so uniting are
sensible of their Duty, and have not lost the knowledge of the end of their
Creation and Being. (2) That they are acquainted with that Divine, Religious
Worship, which God requires of them: The former Light and Persuasion being
lost, issues in Atheism; And by the loss of this, instead of Churches, the
generality of Mankind have coalesced into idolatrous combinations. (3) That
they do retain such innate Principles of the Light of Nature as will guide them
in the discharge of their Duties in these Societies. As (1) That the Societies
themselves be such as are meet for their end, fit to exercise and express the
Worship of God in them, not such as whose Constitution makes them unfit for any
such end. And this gives the Natural bounds of Churches in all ages, which it
is in vain for any man to endeavor an alteration of, as we shall see
afterward. (2) That all things be done decently and in order in, and by these
Societies. This is a prime dictate of the Law of Nature, arising from the
knowledge of God and our selves, which has been wrested into I know not what
Religious Ceremonies of men's invention. (3) That they be ready to receive all
Divine Revelations with Faith and Obedience, which shall either appoint the
ways of God's Worship, and prescribe the Duties of it, or guide and direct them
in its performance, and to regulate their Obedience therein. This also is a
clear unquestionable dictate of the Light and Law of Nature; nor can be denied
but on the principles of downright Atheism.

Further we need not seek for the Divine Original of Churches, or Societies of
men fearing God, for the discharge of his public Worship unto his Glory, and
their own eternal Benefit, according unto the Light and Knowledge of his Mind
and Will, which he is pleased to communicate unto them.

What concerns the framing and fashioning of Churches by Arbitrary and
Artificial Combinations, in Provinces, Nations, and the like, we shall
afterward enquire into. This is the assured foundation and general warranty of
particular Societies and Churches, whilst men are continued on the earth; the
especial regulation of them by Divine Revelation, will in the next place be
considered. And he who is not united with others in some such Society, lives in
open contradiction unto the Law of Nature and its Light, in the principal
instances of it.

1. Whereas the directions given by the light of Nature in and unto things
concerning the outward worship of God, are general only, so as that by them
alone, it would be very difficult to erect a Church State in good and holy
Order; God did always from the beginning, by especial Revelations and
Institution, ordain such things as might perfect the Conduct of that Light unto
such a complete Order, as was accepted with himself. So (1) He appointed a
Church State for man in Innocence, and completed its Order by the Sacramental
Addition of the two Trees, the one of Life, the other of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil.

2. That before the coming of Christ, who was to perfect and complete all
Divine Revelations, and state all things belonging unto the House and Worship
of God, so as never to admit of the least change or alteration; This
Church State, as unto outward Order, Rites of Worship, ways and manner of the
Administration of things sacred, with its bounds and limits, was changeable,
and variously changed. The most eminent Change it received, was in the giving
of the Law, which fixed its State unalterably unto the Coming of Christ. Mal.
4.4, 5, 6.

3. That it was God himself alone, who made all these Alterations and Changes;
nor would he, nor did he ever allow, that the Wills, Wisdom, or Authority of
men, should prescribe Rules or Measures unto his Worship in any thing. Heb.
3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

4. That the Foundation of every Church State, that is accepted with God, is in
an express Covenant with him, that they receive and enter into, who are to be
admitted into that State. A Church not founded in a Covenant with God, is not
from Heaven, but of Men. Hereof we shall treat more at large, as I suppose,
afterward; See it exemplified, Exodus 24.

5. There is no Good in, there is no Benefit to be obtained by any Church State
whatever, unless we enter into it, and observe it by an Act of Obedience, with
immediate respect unto the Authority of Christ, by whom it is appointed, and
the observation of it prescribed unto us. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Hence,

6. Unless men by their voluntary choice and consent, out of a sense of their
Duty unto the Authority of Christ in his Institutions, do enter into a
Church State, they cannot by any other ways or means be so framed into it, as
to find acceptance with God therein. 2. Cor. 8.5. And the Interpositions that
are made, by Custom, Tradition, the Institutions and Ordinances of men, between
the Consciences of them who belong, or would belong unto such a State, and the
immediate Authority of God, is highly obstructive of this Divine Order, See
Discourse of Evangelical Love, page 58.
and all the Benefits of it: For hence it is come to pass, that most men, know
neither how, nor whereby, they come to be members of this or that Church, but
only on this Ground, that they were born where it did prevail and was accepted.

CHAP. II. The Especial Original of the Evangelical Church State.
OUR principal Concernment at present, is in the Evangelical Church State; or
the State of Churches under the New Testament: For this is that about which
there are many great and fierce Contests amongst Christians, and those attended
with pernicious Consequents and Effects. What is the Original, what is the
Nature, what is the Use and Power, what is the End of the Churches, or any
Church, what is the Duty of men, in it and toward it, is the subject of
various contests, and the principal occasion of all the Distractions that are
at this day in the Christian World: For the greatest part of those who judge
themselves obliged to take Care and Order about these things, having interwoven
their own secular Interests and Advantages, into such a Church State, as is
meet and suited to preserve and promote them; supposing (...), or that Religion
may be made a Trade for outward Advantage; they do openly seek the Destruction
of all those, who will not comply with that Church, Form and Order, that they
have framed unto themselves. Moreover from men's various conceptions and suitable
practices, about this Church State, is Advantage and Occasion taken to charge
each other with Schism, and all sorts of Evils which are supposed to ensue
thereon. Wherefore although I design all possible brevity, and only to declare
those Principles of Truth, wherein we may safely repose our Faith and practice,
avoiding as much as much as possibly I can, and the subject will allow, the
handling of those things in a way of Controversy with others; yet somewhat more
than ordinary diligence, is required unto the true stating of this important
Concernment of our Religion. And that which we shall first enquire into, is the
Special Original and Authoritative Constitution of this Church State: Wherefore,

1. The Church State of the New Testament, does not less relate unto, and
receive force from the Light or Law of Nature, then any other State of the
Church whatever. Herein as unto its general Nature, its foundation is laid.
What that directs unto may receive new Enforcements by Revelation, but changed,
or altered, or abolished, it cannot be. Wherefore there is no need of any new
express Institution, of what is required, by that Light and Law in all Churches
and Societies for the Worship of God, but only an Application of it unto
present Occasions, and the present State of the Church, which has been
various. And it is merely from a spirit of Contention, that some call on us or
others, to produce express Testimony or Institution; for every Circumstance in
the Practice of Religious Duties in the Church; and on a supposed failure
herein, to conclude, that they have Power themselves to Institute and Ordain
such Ceremonies as they think meet, under a Pretense of their being
Circumstances of Worship: For as the Directive Light of Nature, is sufficient
to guide us in these things, so the obligation of the Church unto it, makes all
stated Additions to be useless, as on other accounts they are noxious. Such
things as these are the Times and Seasons of Church Assemblies, the Order and
Decency wherein all things are to be transacted in them, the bounding of them
as unto the number of their Members, and places of Habitation, so as to answer
the ends of their Institution; the multiplication of Churches when the number
of Believers, exceeds the Proportion capable of Edification in such Societies;
what especial Advantages are to be made use of, in the Order and Worship of the
Church; such as are Methods in Preaching, Translations and Tunes of Psalms in
singing, Continuance in public Duties, and the like, the things themselves
being divinely instituted are capable of such general Directions in, and by the
Light of Nature, as may with ordinary Christian Prudence, be on all occasions
applied unto the Use and Practice of the Church. To forsake these Directions,
and instead of them, to invent ways, modes, forms and ceremonies of our own,
which the things whereunto they are applied, and made use of in, do no way call
for, require or own; (as it is with all humanely invented, Stated Ceremonies;)
and thereon by Laws and Canons to determine their precise observation at all
times and seasons to be one and the same, which is contrary to the very nature
of the Circumstances of such Acts and Duties, as they are applied unto: their
use, in the mean time, unto the general end of edification, being as
indemonstrable, as their necessity unto the Duties whereunto they are annexed
is also; It is that which has no warranty, either from Divine Authority, or
Christian Prudence.

This respect of the Gospel Church State unto the Light of Nature, the Apostle
demonstrates in his frequent Appeals unto it, in things that belong unto
Church Order. 1 Cor. 7.29, 33.7. chap. 9.7. chap. 11.14, 15, 16. chap. 14.8, 9,
10, 11. ver. 32, 33. ver. 40. And the like is done in sundry other places. And
the Reasons of it are evident.

2. But such is the especial Nature and condition of the
Evangelical-Church-State, such the Relation of it unto the Person and Mediation
of Jesus Christ, with all things thereon depending, such the Nature of that
especial Honor and Glory, which God designs unto himself therein, (things that
the Light of Nature can give no Guidance unto, nor direction about;) And
moreover so different and distant from all that was before ordained in any
other Church State, are the Ways, Means and Duties of Divine Worship prescribed
in it, that it must have a peculiar, Divine Institution of its own, to evidence
that it is from Heaven, and not from Men. The present State of the Church,
under the New Testament, the Apostle calls (...), Heb. 7.11. Its Perfection,
its Consummation, that perfect State which God designed unto it in this World.
And he denies that it could be brought into that State by the Law, or any of
the Divine Institutions that belonged thereunto. Heb. 7.19. chap. 9.9. chap.
10.1. And we need go no farther, we need no other Argument to prove, that the
Gospel-Church-State, as unto its especial nature, is founded in a peculiar
Divine Institution. For it has a (...), a perfect consummate State which the
Law could not bring it unto, though itself, its Ordinances of Worship, its Rule
and Policy, were all of Divine Institution. And herein does its Excellency and
Preference above the legal Church State consist, as the Apostle proves at
large. To suppose that this should be given unto it, any other way but by
Divine Authority in its Institution, is to advance the Wisdom and Authority of
men above those of God, and to render the Gospel-Church-State a Machine to be
moved up and down at pleasure, to be new molded or shaped according unto
Occasions, or to be turned unto any Interest like the Wings of a Mill unto the
Wind.

All the Dignity, Honor, and Perfection of the State of the Church under the
Old Testament, depended solely hereon, that it was in the whole and all the
particulars of it, of Divine Institution. Hence it was Glorious, that is, very
excellent, as the Apostle declares, 2. Cor. 3. And if the Church State of the
New Testament, have not the same Original, it must be esteemed to have a
greater Glory given unto it by the hand of men, than the other had, in that it
was instituted by God himself; for a greater Glory it has, as the Apostle
testifies. Neither can any man, nor dares any man alive, to give any Instance
in particular, wherein there is the least defect, in the Being, Constitution,
Rule and Government of the Gospel-Church-State, for want of Divine Institution;
so as that it should be necessary to make a supply thereof, by the Wisdom and
Authority of men. But these things will be more fully spoken unto, after we
have declared Who it is, who has divinely instituted this Church State.

3. The Name of the Church under the New Testament, is capable of a threefold
Application, or it is taken in a threefold Notion. As (1) For the Catholic
invisible Church, or Society of Elect Believers, in the whole World, really
related by Faith in him, unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as their mystical Head.
(2) For the whole number of visible Professors in the whole World, who by
Baptism and the outward Profession of the Gospel and Obedience unto Christ, are
distinguished from the rest of the World. And (3) for such a state, as wherein
the Worship of God is to be celebrated in the Way and Manner by him appointed,
and which is to be ruled by the Power which he gives it, and according to the
Discipline which he has ordained. Of the Nature of the Church under these
distinct Notions, with our Relation unto either, or all of them, and the Duties
required of us thereon, I have treated fully in my Discourse of Evangelical
Love and Church Peace or Unity, and thither I must remit the Reader. It is the
Church in the latter sense alone, whose Original we now enquire after. And I
say,

4. The Original of this Church State, is directly, immediately and solely from
Jesus Christ, He alone is the Author, Contriver and Institutor of it. When I
say it is immediately and solely from him, I do not intend, that in, and by his
own Person, or in his Personal Ministry here in the Earth, he did absolutely
and completely finish this State, exclusively unto the Ministry of any others,
that he was pleased to make use of therein: For as he took it on himself as his
own work to build his Church, and that upon himself, as its foundation; so he
employed his Apostles to act under him and from him, in the carrying on that
work unto perfection. But what was done by them, is esteemed to be done all by
himself.

For (1) It was immediately from him, that they received Revelations, of what
did belong unto this Church State, and what was to be prescribed therein. They
never did, neither jointly nor severally, once endeavor in their own Wisdom,
or from their own Invention, or by their own Authority, to add or put into this
Church State, as of perpetual Use, and belonging unto it as such, either less
or more, any one thing greater or less whatever. It is true, they gave their
Advice in sundry cases of present Emergencies, in, and about Church Affairs;
They gave direction for the due and orderly Practice of what was revealed unto
them, and exercised Authority both as unto the Ordination of Officers, and the
Rejection of obstinate sinners, from the Society of all the Churches; but to
Invent, Contrive, Institute or Appoint any thing in the Church, and its State,
which they had not by immediate Revelation from Christ, they never attempted
it, nor went about it. And unto this Rule of proceeding, they were precisely
obliged by the express words of their Commission. Mat, 28.19, 20. This I say is
so plainly included in the Tenor of their Commission, and so evident from all
that is divinely recorded of their Practice, that it will admit of no sober
Contradiction. In what others think it meet to do in this kind, we are not
concerned.

(2) The Authority whereby they acted in the Institution of the Church in its
Order, whereon, the Consciences of all Believers were obliged to submit
thereunto, and to comply with it in a way of Obedience, was the Authority of
Christ himself, acted in them and by them. 2 Cor. 1.24. chap. 4.5.
They every where disclaim any such Power and Authority in themselves. They
pleaded that they were only Stewards and Ministers, not Lords of the Faith or
Obedience of the Church, but helpers of its Joy; yea the Servants of all the
Churches for Christ's sake. And hereon it follows, that what is recorded of
their Practice, in their Institution, ordering or disposing of any thing in the
Church, that was to be of an abiding continuance, has in it, the obliging
Power of the Authority of Christ himself. Wherefore if the distinction that
some make concerning the Apostles, namely, that they are to be considered as
Apostles, or as Church Governors, should be allowed, as it is liable to just
exceptions; yet would no Advantage accrue thereby unto what is pretended from
it: For as what they did, appointed, and ordered in the Church for its constant
observation, as Apostles, they did it by immediate Revelation from Christ, and
in his Name and Authority; so what in distinction from hence, as Church
Governors, they did or ordered, they did it only by a due Application unto
present occasions, of what they had received by Revelation. But as they were
Apostles, Christ sent them, as his Father sent him, and he was so sent of the
Father, as that he did stand and feed in the Strength of the Lord, in the
Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God; Micah 5.4. So did they feed the Sheep
of Christ in his Strength and in the Authority or Majesty of his Name.

5. Christ therefore alone is the Author of the Gospel-Church-State. And
because this is the only Foundation of our Faith and Obedience, as unto all
that we are to believe, do and practice, by virtue of that Church State, or in
Order thereunto, the Scripture does not only plainly affirm it, but also
declares the Grounds of it, why it must be so, and whence it is so, as also,
wherein his doing of it does consist.

1. Three things amongst others, are eminently necessary in, and unto him, who
is to constitute this Church State with all that belongs thereunto. And as the
Scripture does eminently and expressly ascribe them all unto Christ, so no man,
nor all the men of the World, can have any such Interest in them, as to render
them meet for this work, or any part of it.

The first of these is Right and Title. He who institutes this Church State,
must have Right and Title to dispose of all men, in all their Spiritual and
Eternal Concernments, as seems Good unto him: For unto this Church State,
namely, as it is purely Evangelical, no man is obliged by the Law of Nature,
nor has any Creature power to dispose of him, into a condition whereon all his
Concernments, Spiritual and Eternal, shall depend. This Right and Title to the
Sovereign Disposal of Mankind, or of his Church* Christ has alone; and that
upon a treble account. (1) Of Donation from the Father. He appointed him the
Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2, 3. He gave him Power over all Flesh. Joh. 17.2.
Especially he has given unto him, and put into his absolute disposal all those
who are to be his Church; ver. 6. (2) By virtue of Purchase; he has by the
price of his most precious Blood, purchased them unto his own Power and
Disposal. He purchased his Church with his own Blood; Act. 20.28, which the
Apostle makes the Ground of that care which ought to be had of it. And this is
pleaded as a sufficient Reason, why we should be wholly at his Disposal only,
and be free from any Imposition of men in things Spiritual. 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are
bought with a Price, be ye not the Servants of men. The Purchase of this Right
and Title was one great end of the principal Mediatory Acts of Christ. Romans
14.9, 10. For to this end, etc. (3) Of Conquest: For all those who were thus to
be disposed by him, were both under the Power of his Enemies, and were
themselves Enemies unto him in their Minds. He could not therefore have a
Sovereign Right unto their Disposal, but by a double Conquest; namely, first of
their Enemies, by his Power: and then of themselves by his Word, his Spirit and
his Grace. And this twofold Conquest of his, is fully described in the
Scripture.

Whereas therefore there is a Disposal of the Persons, that are to belong unto
this Church State, as unto their Souls, Consciences, and all the eternal
Concernments of them, by an indispensible Moral Obligation to a compliance
therewithal; until men can manifest that they have such a Right and Title over
others, and that either by the especial Grant and Donation of God the Father,
or a Purchase that they have made of them unto themselves, or Conquest; they
are not to be esteemed to have either Right or Title to institute any thing
that belongs unto this Church State. And it is in vain pretended (as we shall
see more afterward) that Christ indeed has appointed this Church State in
general; but that he has appointed no particular Form of Churches, or their
Rule, but left that unto the Discretion and Authority of men, as they think
meet, when they have outward Power for their Warranty. But if by these
particular Appointments and Framings of Churches with their Order, men are
disposed of, as unto their spiritual concernments, beyond the Obligation of the
Light of Nature, or the moral ^aw. We must yet enquire, who gave them this
Right and Title to make this disposal of them.

2. Authority; As Right and Title respect the Persons of men to be reduced into
a new form of Government, so Authority respects the Rules, ^aws, Orders, and
Statutes to be made, prescribed and established, whereby the Privileges of
this new Society are conveyed, and the Duties of it enjoined unto all that are
taken unto it. Earthly Potentates who will dispose of men into a State and
Government absolutely new unto them, as unto all their temporal Concernments of
Life, Liberty, Inheritances, and Possessions, so as that they shall hold all of
them in dependence on, and according unto the Rules and Laws of their New
Government and Kingdom, must have these two things, namely, Right and Title
unto the Persons of men, which they have by Conquest, or an absolute
Resignation of all their Interests and Concerns into their disposal, and
Authority, thereon to constitute what Order, what kind of State, Rule and
Government they please; without these they will quickly find their Endeavors
and Undertakings frustrate. The Gospel Church State in the Nature of it, and in
all the Laws and Constitution of it, is absolutely new, whereunto all the World
are naturally Foreigners and Strangers. As they have no Right unto it, as it
contains Privileges, so they have no obligation unto it, as it prescribes
Duties. Wherefore there is need of both those, Right, as unto the Persons of
men; and Authority, as unto the Laws and Constitution of the Church, unto the
framing of it. And until men can pretend unto these things both unto this Right
and Authority with respect unto all the Spiritual and Eternal Concernments of
the Souls of others, they may do well to consider how dangerous it is to invade
the Right and Inheritance of Christ; and leave hunting after an Interest of
Power in the the framing or forming Evangelical Churches, or making of Laws for
their Rule and Government.

This Authority is not only ascribed unto Jesus Christ in the Scripture, but it
is en^^^sed unto him, so as that no other can have any Interest in it. See Mat.
28.18. Rev. 3.7. Isa. 9.6, 7 By virtue hereof he is the only Lawgiver of the
Church; Jam. 4.12. Isa. 22.22. There is indeed a Derivation of Power and
Authority from him unto others; but it extends itself no farther, save only
that they shall direct, teach and command those whom he sends them unto, to do
and observe what he has commanded, Matthew. 28.20 He builds his own House, and
he is over his own House, Heb. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. He both constitutes its State, and
gives Laws for its Rule.

The Disorder, the Confusion, the turning of the Kingdom of Christ upside down,
which have en^ued upon the Usurpation of men, taking upon them a Legislative
Power, in, and over the Church, cannot easily be declared: For upon a slight
Pretense, no way suited or serviceable unto their ends, of the Advice given,
and Determination made by the Apostles, with the Elders and Brethren of the
Church of Jerusalem, in a temporary Constitution about the use of Christian
Liberty, the Bishops of the 4 th and 5 th Centuries, took upon themselves Power
to make Laws, Canons, and Constitutions for the ordering of the Government, and
the Rule of the Church, bringing in many new Institutions, on a Pretense of the
same Authority. Neither did others who followed them cease to build on their
sandy Foundation, until the whole frame of the Church State was altered, a new
Law made for its Government, and a new Christ or Antichrist assumed in the head
of its Rule by that Law: For all this pretended Authority of making Laws and
Constitutions for the Government of the Church, issued in that Sink of
Abominations, which they call the Canon Law. Let any man, but of a tolerable
understanding, and freed from infatuating prejudices, but read the
Representation that is made of the Gospel Church State, its Order, Rule, and
Government in the Scripture on the one hand, and what Representation is made on
the other, of a Church State, its Order, Rule and Government, in the Canon Law,
the only effect of men's assuming to themselves a Legislative Power with respect
unto the Church of Christ, if he does not pronounce them to be contrary, as
Light and Darkness, and that by the latter the former is utterly destroyed, and
taken away, I shall never trust to the use of men's Reason, or their Honesty
any more.

This Authority was first usurped by Synods, or Counsels of Bishops; Of what
use they were at any time, to declare and give Testimony unto any Article of
the Faith, which in their days was opposed by Heretics; I shall not now
enquire. But as unto the exercise of the Authority claimed by them to make Laws
and Canons, for the Rule and Government of the Church; It is to be bewailed
there should be such a Monument left of their Weakness, Ambition,
Self-Interest, and Folly, as there is, in what remains of their
Constitutions. Their whole endeavor in this kind, was at best but the building
of Wood, Hay, and Stubble on the Foundation, in whose Consumption they shall
suffer loss, although they be saved themselves. But in making of Laws, to bind
the whole Church, in, and about things useless and trivial, no way belonging to
the Religion taught us by Jesus Christ, in, and for the Establishment or
Increase of their own Power, Jurisdiction, Authority, and Rule, with the extent
and bounds of their several Dominions; in, and for the Constitution of new
Frames and States of Churches, and new ways of the Government of them; in the
Appointment of new Modes, Rites, and Ceremonies of Divine Worship, with the
Confusions that ensued thereon, in mutual Animosities, Fightings, Divisions,
Schisms, and Anathematisms, to the horrible Scandal of Christian Religion, they
ceased not until they had utterly destroyed, all the Order, Rule, and
Government of the Church of Christ, yea, the very nature of it* and introduced
into its room, a carnal; worldly Church State and Rule suited unto the
Interests of Covetous, Ambitious, and Tyrannical Prelates. The most of them
indeed knew not for whom they wrought, in providing Materials for that Babel
which by an hidden skill in a Mystery of Iniquity, was raised out of their
Provisions: For after they were hewed, and carved, shaped, formed, and gilded,
the Pope appeared in the Head of it, as it were with those words of his mouth,
Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the House of the Kingdom, by
the might of my Power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? This was the fatal
Event of men's invading the Right of Christ, and claiming an Interest in
Authority to give Laws to the Church. This therefore is absolutely denied by
us, namely, that any men under what pretense or name soever, have any Right or
Authority to constitute any new Frame, or Order of the Church, to make any Laws
of their own, for its Rule or Government, that should oblige the Disciples of
Christ in point of Conscience unto their observation. That there is nothing in
this Assertion, that should in the least impeach the Power of Mastrates, with
Reference unto the Outward, Civil, and Political Concerns of the Church, or the
public Profession of Religion within their Territories; nothing that should
take off from the just Authority of the lawful Guides of the Church, in
ordering, appointing and commanding the Observation of all things in them,
according to the mind of Christ, shall be afterward declared. In these things,
the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Statute-maker, the Lord is our King, he
will save us.

It is then but weakly pleaded, that seeing the Magistrate can appoint or
command nothing in Religion, that God has forbidden; nor is there any need,
that he should Appoint or Command, what God has already Appointed and
Commanded; if so be he may not by Law command such things in the Church, as
before were neither Commanded nor Forbidden, but Indifferent, which are the
proper field of his Ecclesiastical, Legislative Power, then has he no Power
nor Authority about Religion at all. That is, if he has not the same and a
Coordinate Power with God or Christ, he has none at all. One of the best
Arguments that can be used for the Power of the Magistrate, in things
Ecclesiastical, is taken from the approved Example of the Good Kings under the
Old Testament. But they thought it honor enough unto them, and their Duty, to
see and take care, that the things which God had appointed and ordained, should
be diligently observed, by all those concerned therein, both Priests and
People, and to destroy what God had forbidden. To appoint any thing of
themselves, to make that necessary in the Church, and the Worship thereof,
which God had not made so, they never esteemed it to be in their Power, or to
belong unto their Duty. When they did any thing of that Nature, and thereby
made any Additions unto the outward Worship of God, not before commanded, they
did it by immediate Revelation from God, and so by Divine Authority; 1 Chronicles.
28.19. And it is left as a brand on those that were wicked, not only that they
commanded and made Statutes for the Observation of what God had forbidden; Mic.
6.16. but also that they commanded and appointed what God had not appointed, 1
Kings 12.32, 33. And it will be found at last to be Honor enough to the
greatest Potentate under Heaven, to take care, that what Christ has appointed
in his Church and Worship, be observed, without claiming a Power like unto that
of the most high, to give Laws unto the Church, for the Observation of things
found out and invented by themselves or other men.

Of the same nature is the other part of their Plea, against this Denial of a
Legislative Power in men, with respect unto the Constitution of the Evangelical
Church State, or the ordaining of any thing to be observed in it, that Christ
has not appointed. For it is said, that if this be allowed, as all the
Dignity, Power, and Honor of the Governors of the Church, will be rejected or
despised; so all manner of Confusion, and Disorder, will be brought into the
Church itself. For how can it otherwise be, when all Power of Law-making, in
the preservation of the Dignity of the Rulers, and Order of the Church is taken
away. And therefore we see, it was the Wisdom of the Church in former Ages, tha
all the principal Laws and Canons, that they made in their Councils, or
otherwise, were designed unto the Exaltation and Preservation of the Dignity of
Church Rulers; Wherefore take this Power away, and you will bring in all
Confusion into the Church.

Ans. 1. They do not in my Judgment, sufficiently think of whom, and of what
they speak, who plead after this manner. For the substance of the Plea is; That
if the Church have its whole Frame, Constitution, Order, Rule, and Government
from Christ alone, though men should faithfully discharge their Duty, in Doing
and Observing all what he has commanded, there would be nothing in it but
Disorder and Confusion: Whether this becomes that Reverence which we ought to
have of him, or be suited unto that Faithfulness and Wisdom, which is
particularly ascribed unto him, in the Constitution and Ordering of his Church,
is not hard to determine, and the Untruth of it shall be afterward
demonstrated.

2. As unto the Dignity and Honor of the Rulers of the Church, the subject of
so many Ecclesiastical Laws, they are in the first place, to be desired
themselves, to remember the Example of Christ himself in his Personal Ministry
here on Earth. Matthew. 20.28. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many. With the Rule
prescribed by him thereon; ver. 25, 26, 27. But Jesus called them unto him, and
said, ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and
they that are great, exercise Authority upon them. But it shall not be so among
you; but whosoever shall be great among you, let him be your Minister; And
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant. With the Occasion
of the Instruction given therein unto his Apostles, ver. 24. And when the Ten
heard it, they were moved with Indignation against the two Brethren. As also
the Injunction given them by the Apostle Peter, on whom, for their own
Advantage, some would fasten a Monarchy over the whole Church; 1 Epist. 5.2, 3.
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind; Neither
as being Lords over God's Heritage; but being Ensamples to the Flock. And the
blessed expressions of the Apostolical State by Paul; 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so
account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of
God. 2 Cor. 1.24. Not for that we have Dominion over your Faith, but are
helpers of your Joy. 2 Cor. 4, 5. For we preach not our selves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus sake; It may prepare
their Minds for the right Mannagement of that Honor which is their due. For
(2) There is in, and by the Constitution of Christ, and his express Laws, an
Honor and Respect due unto those Church Guides, which he has appointed,
abiding in the Duties which he requires. If men had not been weary of
Apostolical Simplicity and Humility, if they could have contented themselves
with the Honor and Dignity annexed unto their Office, and Work by Christ
himself; they had never entertained pleasing Dreams, of Thrones,
Preheminencies, Chief Sees, secular Grandeur and Power, nor framed so many Laws
and Canons about these things, turning the whole Rule of the Church into a
Worldly Empire. For such it was, that as of all the Popes which ever dwelt at
Rome, there was never any pretended or acted a greater Zeal for the Rule and
Government of the Church, by the Laws and Canons, that it had made for that
End, than Gregory the 7 th; so if ever there were any Antichrist in the World,
(as there are many Antichrists) he was one. His Luciferian Pride, his
Trampling on all Christian Kings and Potentates, his horrible Tyranny over the
Consciences of all Christians, his abominable Dictates asserting of his own
God-like Sovereignty, his Requiring all men, on the pain of Damnation, to be
sinful Subjects to God and Peter, that is, himself, which his own Acts and
Epistles are filled withal, do manifest both who, and what he was. Unto that
Issue did this Power of Law, or Canon making for the Honor and Dignity of
Church Rulers, at length arrive.

3. Let the Constitution of the Church by Jesus Christ abide and remain, let
the Laws for its Rule, Government, and Worship, which he has recorded in the
Scripture be diligenty observed by them, whose Duty it is to take Care about
them, both to observe them themselves, and to teach others so to do, and we
know full well, there will be no occasion given or left unto the least
Confusion or Disorder in the Church. But if men will be froward, and because
they may not make Laws themselves, or keep the Statutes made by others, will
neglect the due Observation and Execution of what Christ has ordained; or will
deny, that we may, and ought, in, and for the due Observation of his Laws, to
make use of the inbred Light of Nature, and Rules of common Prudence (the Use
and Exercise of both which, are included and enjoined in the Commands of
Christ, in that he requires a Compliance with them in the way of Obedience,
which we cannot perform without them) I know of no Relief, against the
Perpetuity of our Differences about these things. But after so much Scorn, and
Contempt has been cast upon that Principle, that it is not lawful to observe
any thing in the Rule of the Church, or Divine Worship, in a constant Way by
virtue of any humane Canons or Laws, that is not prescribed in the Scripture,
if we could prevail with men, to give us one single Instance, which they would
abide by, wherein the Rules and Institutions of Christ are so defective, as
that without their Canonical Additions, Order cannot be observed in the Church,
nor the Worship of God be duly performed; and it shall be diligently attended
unto. Allow the General Rules given us in the Scripture, for Church Order and
Worship, to be applied unto all proper Occasions and Circumstances, with
Particular, Positive, Divine Precepts: Allow also that the Apostles, in what
they did and acted, in the Constitution and Ordering of the Churches and their
Worship, did, and acted it in the Name, and by the Authority of Christ, as also
that there needs no other means of affecting and obliging our Consciences in
these things, but only that the Mind and Will of Christ be intimated and made
known unto us, though not in the form of a Law given and promulgated, which, I
suppose, no men of sober Minds or Principles, can disallow; and then give an
Instance of such a Deficiency, as that mentioned in the Institutions of Christ,
and the whole Difference in this matter, will be rightly stated, and not else.
But to return from this Digression.

2dly, The Scripture does not only ascribe this Authority unto Christ alone,
but it gives Instances of his Use and Exercise thereof, which comprize all
that is necessary unto the Constitution and Ordering of his Churches and the
Worship of them. (1) He builds his own House. Heb. 3.3. (2) He appoints
Offices for Rule in his Churches, and Officers; 1 Cor. 12 5. Rom* 12.6, 7, 8.
(3) He gives Gifts for the Administrations of the Church* Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
1 Cor. 11, 12. (4) He gives Power and Authority unto them that are to Minister
and Rule in the Church, etc. which things must be afterward spoken unto.

3dly, As unto this Constitution of the Gospel-Church-State, the Scripture
assigns in an especial manner, Faithfulness unto the Lord Christ; Heb. 3.3,
4, 5. This Power is originally in God himself. It belongs unto him alone, as
the great Sovereign of all his Creatures. Unto Christ as Mediator, it was given
by the Father, and the whole of it entrusted with him. Hence it follows, that
in the Execution of it, he has respect unto the Mind and Will of God, as unto
what he would have done and ordered, with respect whereunto this Power was
committed unto him. And here his Faithfulness takes place, exerted in the
Revelation of the whole Mind of God in this matter, instituting, appointing,
and commanding all that God would have so ordained, and nothing else. And what
can any man do, that comes after the King.

Hereunto there is added on the same Account, the Consideration of his Wisdom,
his Love, and Care, for the good of his Church, which in him were ineffable and
inimitable. By all these things was he fitted for his Office, and the work that
was reserved for him, so as that he might in all things have the Preheminency.
And this was to make the last and only full, perfect, complete Revelation of
the Mind and Will of God, as unto the State, Order, Faith, Obedience, and
Worship of the Church. There was no Perfection in any of these things, until he
took this work in hand. Wherefore it may justly be supposed, that he has so
perfectly stated, and established all things concerning his Churches and
Worship therein, being the last Divine Hand, that was to be put to this Work;
and this his Hand; Heb. 1.2, 3. that whatever is capable of a Law or a
Constitution for the use of the Church at all times, or is needful for his
Disciples to observe, is revealed, declared, and established by him. And in
this Persuasion I shall abide, until I see better Fruits and Effects of the
Interposition of the Wisdom and Authority of men, unto the same Ends which he
designed, than as yet I have been able, in any Age to observe.

The substance of the things pleaded, may for the greater Evidence of their
Truth, be reduced unto the ensuing Heads or Propositions.

1. Every Church State that has an especial Institution of its own, giving its
especial kind, supposes and has respect unto the Law and Light of Nature,
requiring and directing in general, those things which belong unto the Being,
Order, and Preservation of such Societies as that is. That there ought to be
Societies, wherein men voluntarily join together, for the solemn Performance of
Divine Worship, and joint walking in obedience before God; that these Societies
ought to use such means, for their own Peace, and Order, as the light of Nature
directs unto, that where many have a common Interest, they ought to consult in
common for the due management of it, with other things of the like Importance,
are evident Dictates of this Light and Law. Now whatever Church State may be
superinduced by Divine Institution, yet this Light and Law in all their evident
Dictates, continue their obliging Power in, and over the minds of men, and must
do so eternally. Wherefore things that belong hereunto need no new Institution
in any Church State whatever; But yet,

2. Whatever is required by the Light of Nature in such Societies as Churches,
as useful unto their Order, and conducing unto their end, is a Divine
Institution. The Lord Christ in the Institution of Gospel Churches, their
State, Order, Rule, and Worship, does not require of his Disciples, that in
their Observance of his Appointments, they should cease to be men, or forego
the Use and Exercise of their rational Abilities, according to the Rule of that
Exercise, which is the Light of Nature. Yea because the Rules and Directions
are in this case to be applied unto things Spiritual, and of mere Revelation,
he gives Wisdom, Prudence, and Understanding to make that Application in a due
manner, unto those to whom the Guidance and Rule of the Church is committed.
Wherefore as unto all the things which the Light of Nature directs us unto,
with respect unto the observation of the Duties prescribed by Christ in, and
unto the Church, we need no other Institution but that of the use of the
especial spiritual Wisdom and Prudence, which the Lord Christ gives unto his
Church, for that end.

4. There are in the Scripture general Rules directing us in the Application of
natural Light, unto such a Determination of all circumstances in the Acts of
Church Rule and Worship, as are sufficient for their performance decently and
in order. Wherefore, as was said before, it is utterly in vain and useless, to
demand express Institution of all the circumstances belonging unto the
Government, Order, Rule, and Worship of the Church; or for the due improvement
of things in themselves indifferent unto its Edification, as occasion shall
require. Nor are they capable to be any otherwise stated, but as they lie in
the light of Nature, and spiritual Prudence directed by general Rules of
Scripture.

These things being premised, our principal Assertion is; That Christ alone is
the Author, Institutor, and Appointer, in a way of Authority and Legislation,
of the Gospel Church State, its Order, Rule and Worship, with all things
constantly and perpetually belonging thereunto; or necessary to be observed
therein. What is not so, is of men, and not from Heaven; this is that which we
have proved in general, and shall farther particularly confirm in our Progress.
Hence

6. There is no spiritual use nor benefit of any Church State, nor of any thing
therein performed, but what on the part of men, consists in Acts of Obedience
unto the Authority of Christ. If in any thing we do of this nature, we cannot
answer that enquiry, which God directs in this case to be made, namely, why we
do this or that thing; Exodus 12.25, 26, 27. with this, that it is because
Christ has required it of us, we do not acknowledge him the Lord over his own
House, nor hear him as the Son. Nor is there any Act of Power to be put forth
in the Rule of the Church, but in them, by whom it is exerted, it is an Act of
Obedience unto Christ, or it is a mere Usurpation. All Church Power is nothing
but a Faculty or Ability, to obey the Commands of Christ in such a way and
manner as he has appointed. For it is his Constitution, that the
Administration of his solemn Worship in the Church, and the Rule of it, as unto
the observance of his commands, should be committed unto some Persons set apart
unto that end, according unto his appointment. This is all their Authority, all
that they have of Order or Jurisdiction, or by any other ways whereby they are
pleased to express it. And where there is any Gospel Administration, any Act of
Rule or Government in the Church, which those that perform it, do not give an
evidence that they do it in Obedience unto Christ, it is null as unto any
Obligation on the Consciences of his Disciples. The neglect hereof in the
World, wherein many in the Exercise of Church Discipline, or any Acts that
belong unto the Rule of it, think of nothing but their own Offices, whereunto
such Powers are annexed, by humane Laws and Canons, as enable them to Act in
their own names, without designing Obedience unto Christ in all that they do,
or to make a just representation of his Authority, Wisdom, and love thereby, is
ruinous unto Church Order and Rule.

7. There is no Legislative Power in, and over the Church, as unto its Form,
Order and Worship, left unto any of the Sons of men, under any qualification
whatever; For,

1. There are none of them, who have an Interest in those Rights,
Qualifications, and Endowments, which are necessary unto an Investiture into
such a Legislative Power. For what was given and granted unto Christ himself
unto this end, that he might be the Law giver of the Church, must be found also
in them, who pretend unto any Interest therein. Have they any of them a Right
and Title unto a disposal of the Persons of Believers in what way they please,
as unto their Spiritual and Eternal concernments? Have they Sovereign Authority
over all things to change their Moral Nature; to give them new uses and
significations, to make things necessary that in themselves are indifferent,
and to order all those things by Sovereign Authority in Laws obliging the
consciences of men? And the like may be said of his Personal Qualifications, of
Faithfulness, Wisdom, Love and Care, which are ascribed unto him in this work
of giving Laws unto his Churches, as he was the Lord over his own House.

2, The Event of the Assumption of this Legislative Power under the best
pretense that can be given unto it, namely, in Councils or great Assemblies of
Bishops and Prelates, sufficiently demonstrates how dangerous a thing it is for
any man to be engaged in. For it issued at length in such a constitution of
Churches, and such Laws for the Government of them, as exalted the Cannon Law
into the room of the Scripture, and utterly destroyed the true Nature of the
Church of Christ, and all the Discipline required therein.

3. Such an Assumption is derogatory unto the Glory of Christ, especially as
unto his Faithfulness in and over the House of God, wherein he is compared unto
and preferred above Moses. Heb. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. Now the Faithfulness of Moses
consisted in this, that he did, and appointed all things according to the
Pattern showed him in the Mount; That is all whatever it was the Will of God to
be revealed and appointed for the Constitution, Order, Rule, and Worship of his
Church, and nothing else. But it was the Will of God, that there should be all
those things in the Gospel Church State also, or else why do men contend about
them? And if this were the Will of God, if they were not all revealed,
appointed, prescribed, legalized by Christ, where is his Faithfulness in Answer
to that Moses? But no Instance can be given of any Defect in his Institutions,
that needs any supplement to be made by the best of men, as unto the end of
constituting a Church State, Order, and Rule, with rites of Worship in
particular.

4. How it is derogatory unto the Glory of the Scripture, as unto its
Perfection, shall be elsewhere declared.

8. There is no more required to give Authority obliging the Consciences of all
that do believe, unto any Institution, or Observation of Duty, or Acts of Rule
in the Church, but only that it is made evident in the Scripture to be the
Mind and Will of Christ. It is not necessary that every thing of this Nature
should be given out unto us in form of a Law or precise Command, in express
words. It is the Mind and Will of Christ that immediately affects the
Consciences of Believers unto Obedience, by what way or means soever, the
knowledge of it be communicated unto them in the Scripture, either by express
words, or by just consequence from what is so expressed. Wherefore;

9. The Example and Practice of the Apostles in the Erection of Churches, in
the Appointment of Officers and Rulers in them, in directions given for their
Walking, Order, Administration of Censures and all other holy things, are a
sufficient Indication of the Mind and Will of Christ about them. We do not say,
that in themselves they are Institutions and Appointments, but they infallibly
declare what is so, or the Mind of Christ concerning those things. Nor can this
be questioned without a denial of their Infallibility, Faithfulness, and Divine
Authority.

10 The Assertion of some, that the Apostles took their Pattern for the State
and Rule of the Churches, and as unto diverse Rites of Worship, from the
Synagogues of the Jews, their Institutions, Orders, and Rules, not those
appointed by Moses, but such as themselves had found out and ordained; is both
temerarious and untrue. In the pursuit of such bold Conjectures, one of late
has affirmed that Moses took most of his Laws and Ceremonies from the
Aegyptitians; whereas it is much more likely that many of them were given on
purpose to alienate the People by Prohibitions, from any compliance with the
Egyptians, or any other Nation, whereof Maimonides in his Mean Nebuchim gives
us sundry Instances. This Assertion I say is rash and false. For (1) As unto
the Instances given for its confirmation, who shall assure us that they were
then in use and practice in the Synagogues when the Apostles gave Rules unto
the Churches of the New Testament. We have no Record of theirs, not one word in
all the world, of what was their way and practice, but what is at least 250
years younger and later than the writings of the New Testament; and in the
first of their writings as in them that follow, we have innumerable things
asserted to have been the Traditions and Practices of their Forefathers, from
the days of Moses, which we know to be utterly false. At that time when they
undertook to compose a new Religion out of their pretended Traditions, partly
by the Revolt of many Apostates from Christianity unto them, especially of the
Eli^nites and Nazarenes, and partly by their own Study and Observation, coming
to the knowledge of sundry things in the Gospel Churches, their Order and
Worship, they took them in as their own; undeniable Instances may be given
hereof. (2) Wherein there is a real coincidence, between what was ordained by
the Apostles and what was practiced by the Jews, it is in things which the
light of Nature, and the general Rules of the Scripture do direct unto. And it
is dishonorable unto the Apostles and the Spirit of Christ in them, to think,
or say, that in such things, they took their Pattern from the Jews, or made
them their example. Surely the Apostles took not the Pattern and Example for
the Institution of Excommunication, from the Druids, among whom there was some
things that did greatly resemble it, so far as it has its Foundation in the
light of Nature.

CHAP. III. The Continuation of a Church State and of Churches unto the end of
the world; what are the Causes of it, and whereon it depends.
THAT there was a peculiar Church State Instituted and appointed by Christ, and
his Apostles, acting in his Name and Authority, with the infallible guidance of
his Spirit, has been declared. But it may be yet farther enquired, whether
this Church State be still continued by Divine Authority, or whether it ceased
not together with the Apostles by whom it was erected.

There was a Church State under the Old Testament solemnly erected by God
himself. And although it was not to be absolutely perpetual or everlasting, but
was to continue only unto the time of Reformation, yet unto that time its
continuation was secured, in the Causes and means of it.

The Causes of the continuation of this Church State unto its appointed period
were two.

1. The Promise of God unto Abraham, that he would keep and preserve his Seed
in Covenant with him, until he should be the Heir of the World, and the Father
of many Nations, in the coming of Christ, whereunto this Church State was
subservient. (2) The Law of God it self, and the Institutions thereof, which
God appointed to be observed in all their Generations, calling the Covenant,
the Statutes and Laws of it, perpetual and everlasting; that is never to cease,
to be abrogated or disannulled, until by his own Sovereign Authority he would
utterly change and take away that whole Church State, with all that belonged
unto its Constitution and Preservation.

2. The Means of its continuance were three. (1) Carnal Generation, and that on
a twofold account. For there were two Constituent Parts of that Church, the
Priests, and the People; the continuation of each of them depended on the
privilege of Carnal Generation. For the Priests were to be all of the Family
of Aaron, and the People of the Seed of Abraham by the other Heads of Tribes,
which gave them both their foundation in, and Right unto this Church State. And
hereunto were annexed all the Laws concerning the Integrity, Purity, and
Legitimacy of the Priests, with the certainty of their Pedigree. (2)
Circumcision; the want whereof was a bar against any advantage by the former
Privilege of Generation from those two Springs; and hereby others also might
be added unto the Church, though never with a Capacity of the Priesthood.

(3) The Separation of the People from the rest of the World, by innumerable
Divine Ordinances, making their Coalition with them, impossible.

From these Causes and by these Means it was, that the Church State under the
Old Testament was preserved unto its appointed season. Neither the outward
Calamities that befell the Nation, nor the sins of the generality of the People,
could destroy this Church State, but it continued its Right and exercise, unto
the Time of Reformation. And if it be not so, if there be not Causes and Means
of the infallible continuance of the Gospel Church State unto the Consummation
of all things, the time expressly allotted unto their continuance; then was the
work of Moses more honorable, more powerful and effectual, in the Constitution
of the Church State under the Old Testament, than that of Christ in the
Constitution of the New. For that Work and those Institutions which had an
efficacy in them for their own infallible continuation, and of the Church
thereby throughout all Generations, must be more Noble and Honorable, than
those which cannot secure their own continuance, nor the Being and State of the
Church thereon depending. Nothing can be more derogatory unto the Glory of the
Wisdom and Power of Christ, nor of his Truth and Faithfulness, than such an
Imagination. We shall therefore enquire into the Causes and Means of the
continuation of this Church State, and therein show the certainty of it; as
also disprove that which by some is pretended, as the only means thereof, when
indeed it is the principal Argument against their perpetual continuation, that
can be made use of.

1. The Essence and Nature of the Church instituted by the Authority of Jesus
Christ, was always the same from the Beginning, that it continues still to be.
But as unto its outward Form and Order it had a double State; and it was
necessary that so it should have, from the Nature of the thing it self. For (1)
The Church may be considered in its Relation unto those extraordinary Officers
or Rulers, whose Office and Power was antecedent unto the Church, as that by
virtue whereof, it was to be called and erected. (2) With respect unto ordinary
Officers, unto whose Office and Power the Church essentially considered was
antecedent; for their whole Work and Duty as such, is conversant about the
Church; and the Object is antecedent unto all Acts about it.

The first State is ceased; nor can it be continued. For these Officers were
constituted: (1) By an immediate call from Christ, as was Paul; Gal. 1.1, 2.
which none now are, nor have been since the decease of them who were so called
at first. (2) By extraordinary Gifts and Power, which Christ does not continue
to communicate. (3) By Divine Inspiration, and infallible Guidance, both in
preaching the Word, and appointing things necessary in the Churches,; which
none now pretend unto. (4) By Extensive Commission giving them Power toward
all the World for their Conversion, and over all Churches for their
Edification. Of these Officers, in their distinction into Apostles and
Evangelists, with their Call, Gifts, Power, and Work, I have treated at large
in my Discourse of Spiritual Gifts. The State and Condition of the Church, with
respect unto them, is utterly ceased; and nothing can be more vain, than to
pretend, any Succession unto them, in the whole or any part of their Office,
unless men can justify their claim unto it, by any, or all of these things,
which concurred unto it in the Apostles, which they cannot do.

But it does not hence follow, that the Church State instituted by Christ, did
fail thereon, or does now so fail; because it is impossible, that these
Apostles should have any Successors in their Office, or the Discharge of it.
For by the Authority of the Lord Christ, the Church was to be continued under
O^dinary Officers, without the Call, Gifts, or Power of the others that were to
cease. Under these, the Church State was no less Divine, than under the former.
For there were two things in it; (1) That the Offices themselves were of the
Appointment of Christ And if they were not so, we confess the Divine Right of
the Church State would have ceased. The Office of the Apostles and Evangelists
was to cease, as has been declared; and it did cease actually, in that Christ
after them did call no more unto that Office, nor provided any Way or Means,
whereby any one should be made Partaker of it. And for any to pretend a
Succession in Office, or any part of their Office, without any of those things
which did constitute it, is extreme Presumption. It is therefore granted, that
if there were not other Offices appointed by the Authority of Christ* it had
not been in the Power of man, to make or appoint any unto that Purpose, and the
Church State itself must have ceased. But this he has done, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1
Cor. 12.28. (2) That Persons were to be interested in these Offices, according
unto the Way and Means by him prescribed; which were not such as depended on
his own immediate, extraordinary actings, as it was with the former sort, but
such as consisted in the Churches acting according to his Law, and in Obedience
unto his commands.

This Church State was appointed by the Authority of Christ. The Direction
which he gave in his own Person for Addresses unto the Church in case of
Scandal, which is an obliging Institution for all Ages. ( Mat. 18.17, 18, 19,
20.) proves that he had appointed a Church State, that should abide through
them all. And when there was a Church planted at Jerusalem, there were not only
Apostles in it, according to its first State, but Elders also, which respected
its second State, that was approaching; Act. 15.23. The Apostles being in
Office before that Church State, the Elders ordained in it. So chap. 11.30. And
the Apostles ordained Elders in every Church; Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy
5.17. whom they affirmed to be made so by the Holy Ghost. Act. 20.28. The
Churches to whom the Apostle Paul wrote his Epistles, were such all of them,
under the Rule of ordinary Officers. Phil 1.1. Rules and Laws are given for
their Ordination in all Ages; Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 3. And the Lord Christ treats
from Heaven with his Churches, in this State and Order; Rev. 1st. 2d. 3d. He
has promised his presence with them unto the Consummation of all things, Mat.
28.20. chap. 18.20. and assigned them their Duty until his Second Coming. 1
Cor. 11.26. with other Evidences of the same Truth innumerable.

Our Enquiry therefore is, Whereon the Continuation of this Church State, unto
the end of the World, does depend; what are the Causes? What are the Means of
it? whence it becomes infallible and necessary. I must only premise, that our
present Consideration is not so much de facto, as unto what has fallen out in
the World, unto our Knowledge and Observation, but de jure, or of a Right unto
this Continuation. And this is such as makes it not only lawful for such a
Church State to be, but requires also from all the Disciples of Christ in a way
of Duty, that it be always in actual Existence. Hereby there is a warrant given
unto all believers, at all times to gather themselves into such a Church State,
and a Duty imposed on them so to do.

The Reasons and Causes appointing and securing this Continuation, are of
various sorts, the principal whereof, are these that follow.

1. The supreme Cause hereof, is the Father's Grant of a perpetual Kingdom in
this World unto Jesus Christ, the Mediator and Head of the Church. Psalm. 72.5,
7, 15, 16, 17. Isa 9.7. Zech. 6.13. This Grant of the Father, our Lord Jesus
Christ pleaded as his Warranty for the Foundation and Continuation of the
Church. Mat. 28 17, 18, 19, 20. This Everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ, given
him by the irrevocable Grant of the Father, may be considered three ways. (1)
As unto the real Subjects of it, true Believers, which are the Object of the
Internal, Spiritual Power, and Rule of Christ. Of these it is necessary, by
virtue of this Grant and Divine Constitution of the Kingdom of Christ, that in
every Age there should be some in the World, and those perhaps no small
multitude, but such as the Internal Rule over them, may be Rightly and
Honorably termed a Kingdom. For as that which formally makes them such
Subjects of Christ's, gives them no outward Appearance or Visibility, so if in a
time of the universal prevalency of Idolatry, there were Seven thousand of
these in the small Kingdom of Israel, undiscerned and invisible unto the most
Eagle-eyed Prophet who lived in their days; what number may we justly suppose
to have been within the limits of Christ's Dominions, which is the whole World,
in the worst, darkest, most profligate and idolatrous times, that have passed
over the Earth, since the first Erection of this Kingdom. This therefore is a
fundamental Article of our Faith, that by virtue of this Grant of the Father,
Christ ever had, has, and will have in all Ages, some, yea a Multitude, that
are the True, Real, Spiritual Subjects of his Kingdom. Neither the Power of
Satan, nor the Rage or fury of the World, nor the Accursed Apostasy of many,
or of all visible Churches, from the purity and Holiness of his Laws can
hinder, but that the Church of Christ in this sense, must have a perpetual
continuation in this World. Mat. 16.18.

2. It may be considered with respect unto the outward visible Profession of
Subjection and Obedience unto him, and the Observation of his Laws. This also
belongs unto the Kingdom granted him of his Father. He was to have a Kingdom in
this World, though it be not of this World. He was to have it not only as unto
its Being, but as unto its glory. The World and the worst of men therein, were
to see and know, that he has still a Kingdom and a Multitude of Subjects
depending on his Rule. See the Constitution of it. Dan. 7.13, 14. Wherefore it
is from hence indispensibly and absolutely necessary, that there should at all
times, and in all Ages, be ever an innumerable Multitude of them who openly
profess Faith in Christ Jesus, and Subjection of Conscience unto his Laws and
Commands. So it has always been, so it is, and shall for ever be in this
World. And those who would on the one hand confine the Church of Christ in this
notion of it, unto any one Church falling under a particular Denomination, as
the Church of Rome, which may utterly fail: Or are ready on the other hand upon
the supposed or real Errors or Miscarriages of them, or any of them, who make
this Profession, to cast them out of their thoughts and affections, as those
who belong not unto the Kingdom or the Church of Christ, are not only
injurious unto them, but Enemies unto the Glory and Honor of Christ.

3. This grant of the Father may be considered with respect unto particular
Churches, or Congregations. And the end of these Churches is twofold. (1) That
Believers as they are Internal, Spiritual, real Subjects of Christ's Kingdom,
may together act that Faith, and those Graces, whereby they are so, unto his
Glory. I say it is, that true Believers may together and in Society, act all
those Graces of the Spirit of Christ, wherein both as unto Faculty and
Exercise, their internal Spiritual subjection unto Christ does consist. And as
this is that whereby the Glory of Christ in this World does most eminently
consist, namely, in the joint exercise of the Faith and Love of true Believers;
so it is a principal means of the increase and augmentation of those Graces in
themselves, or their Spiritual Edification. And from this especial end of these
Churches, it follows, that those who are Members of them, or b^long to them,
ought to be Saints by calling, or such as are endued with those Spiritual
Principles and Graces, in whose exercise Christ is to be Glorified. And where
they are not so, the principal end of their Constitution is lost. So are those
Churches to be made up Fundamentally and Materially of those who in their
single capacity are Members of the Church Catholic invisible. (2) Their second
end is, that those who belong unto the Church and Kingdom of Christ under the
second consideration, as visibly professing subjection unto the Rule of Christ
and Faith in him, may express that subjection in Acts and Duties of his
Worship, in the Observance of his Laws and Commands, according unto his Mind
and Will. For this alone can be done in particular Churches, be they of what
sort they will, whereof we shall speak afterward. Hence it follows that it
belongs unto the Foundation of these particular Churches, that those who join
in them, do it on a public Profession of Faith in Christ, and Obedience unto
him, without which this end of them also is lost. Those I say who make a
visible Profession of the Name of Christ and their subjection unto him, have no
way to express it regularly and according to his mind, but in these particular
Churches, wherein alone those Commandments of his, in whose Observance our
Profession consists, do take place; being such Societies, as wherein the
solemn Duties of his Worship are performed, and his Rule or Discipline is
exercised.

Wherefore this State of the Church also, without which both the other are
imperfect, belongs unto the grant of the Father, whereby a perpetual
Continuation of it is secured. Nor is it of any weight to object, that such
has been the Alterations of the State of all Churches in the World, such the
visible Apostasy of many of them unto false Worship and Idolatry, and of others
into a worldly carnal conversation, with vain Traditions innumerable, that it
cannot be apprehended where there were any true Churches of this kind preserved
and continued, but that there were an actual Intercision of them all. For I
answer. (1) No Individual man, nay, no company of men that come together, can
give a certain Account of what is done in all the World, and every place of it,
where the Name of Christ is professed; so as that what is affirmed of the State
of all Churches, universally, is mere conjecture and surmize. (2) There is so
great a readiness in most, to judge the Church State of others, because in some
things they agree not in Judgment or Practice, with what they conceive to
belong thereunto as, obstructs a right Judgment herein. And it has risen of
late unto such a degree of Phrensy that some deny peremptorily the
Church State, and consequently the Salvation of all that have not Diocesan
Bishops. Alas! that poor men, who are known to others whether they are unto
themselves or no, what is their Office, and what is their Discharge of it,
should once think that the Being and Salvation of all Churches should depend on
them, and such as they are. Yea some of the men of this persuasion, that
Christians cannot be saved unless they comply with Diocesan Bishops, do yet
grant that Heathens may be saved without the knowledge of Christ. (3) Whatever
Defect there has been de facto in the constitution of these Churches, and the
celebration of Divine Worship in them, in any Places or Ages whatever, it will
not prove that there was a total failure of them; much less a Discontinuation
of the Right of Believers to Reform and Erect them according unto the Mind of
Christ.

It is hence evident that the perpetual continuation of the Church State
instituted by Christ under the Gospel, depends originally on the Grant of the
Kingdom unto him by his Father, with his Faithfulness in that Grant, and his
Almighty Power to make it good. And they do but deceive themselves and trouble
others, who think of suspending this continuation, on mean and low conditions
of their own framing.

2. The Continuation of this Church State depends on the Promise of Christ
himself to preserve and continue it. He has assured us that he will so bui^d
his Church on the Rock, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it,
Matthew. 16.18. Under what consideration soever the Church is here firstly
intended, the whole State of it as before described, is included in the
Promise; If the Gates of Hell do prevail either against the Faith of sincere
Believers, or the Catholic Profession of that Faith, or the expression of that
Profession in the Duties and Ordinances to be observed in particular Churches,
the Promise fails and is of no effect.

3. It depends on the Word or Laws of Christ, which gives Right and Title unto
all Believers to congregate themselves in such a Church State, with Rules and
Commands for their so doing. Suppose (1) That there are a number of Believers,
of the Disciples of Christ in any such place, as wherein they can assemble and
unite themselves or join together in a Society for the Worship of God. (2) That
they are as yet in no Church State, nor do know or own any Power of men that
can put them into that State; I say the Institution of this Church State by the
Authority of Christ, his Commands unto his Disciples, to observe therein
whatever he has commanded, and the Rules he has given whereby such a
Church State is to be erected, what Officers are to pre^ide therein, and what
other Duties belong th^reunto, is Warranty sufficient for them to join
themselves in such a S^ate. Who shall make it unlawful for the Disciples of
Christ to obey the Commands of their Lord and Master? Who shall make it lawful
for them to neglect what he requires at any time? Wherever therefore men have
the Word of the Scripture to teach them their Duty, it is lawful for them to
comply with all the commands of Christ contained therein. And whereas there are
many Privileges and ^owers accompanying this Church State, and those who are
in^erested therein are as such, the especial Object of many Divine Promises,
this Word and Law of Christ does make a conveyance of them all unto those who
in Obedience unto his institutions and commands do enter into that State, by
the way and means that he has appointed. Whilst we hear ^im, according to the
reiterated Direction given us from Heaven, whilst we do and observe all that he
has commanded us, we need not fear that promised Presence of his with us,
which brings along with it all Church Power and Privileges also. Wherefore
this State can have no Intercision, but on a supposition that there are none in
the World who are willing to obey the commands of Christ, which utterly
overthrows the very Being of the Church Catholic.

4. It depends on the Communication of Spiritual Gifts, for the Work of the
Ministry, in this Church State, as is expressly declared; Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12, 13,
14, 15. The continuation of the Church as unto the Essence of it, depends on
the Communication of saving Grace. If Christ should no more give of his Grace
and Spirit unto men, there would be no more Church in the World, as unto its
internal Form and Essence. But the continuation of the Church as it is
Organical, that is, a Society Incorporated according unto the mind of Christ,
with Rulers and Officers, for the Authoritative Administration of all its
concerns, especially for the Preaching of the Word and Administration of the
Sacraments, depends on the Communication of Spiritual Gifts and Abilities. And
if the Lord Jesus Christ should withold the Communication of Spiritual Gifts,
this Church State must cease. An Image of it may be Erected, but the true
Church State will fail; for that will hold no longer, but whilst the whole
Body, fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth
according to the effectual working in the measure of every part makes increase
of the Body, and the edifying of it self in Love. Ephesians. 4.16. whilst it holds
the Head, etc. Col. 2.19. such dead lifeless Images are many Churches in the
World. But this Communication of Spiritual Gifts unto the use of his Disciples,
to the end of the World, the Lord Christ has taken the charge of on himself,
as he is Faithful in the Administration of his Kingly Power. Ephesians. 4.18.11,
12, 13, 14.

Whereas therefore the Lord Christ in the Exercise of his Right and Power on
the grant of the Father of a perpetual visible Kingdom in this World; and the
Discharge of his own promise; has (1) Appointed the ordinary Offices which he
will have continue in his Church by an unalterable Institution; (2) Ordained
that Persons shall be called and set apart unto those Offices, and for the
Discharge of that Work and those Duties, which he has declared to belong
thereunto; (3) Furnished them with Gifts and Abilities for this Work, and
declared what their spiritual Qualifications and moral Endowments ought to be;
(4) Made it the Duty of Believers, to observe all his Institutions and
Commands, whereof those which concern the Erection and Continuance of this
Church State are the principal; and (5) Has in their so doing, or their
Observance of all his Commands, promised his presence with them, by which as by
a Charter of Right he has conveyed unto them, an Interest in all the Power,
Privileges, and Promises that belongs unto this State; it is evident that its
perpetual continuation, depends hereon; and is secured hereby. He has not left
this great concernment of his Glory unto the Wills of men, or any Order they
shall think meet to appoint.

Lastly; As a means of it, it depends on three things in Believers themselves.
(1) A due sense of their Duty to be found in Obedience unto all the Commands of
Christ. Hereby they find themselves indispensibly obliged unto all those things
which are necessary unto the continuation of this State; and that all Believers
should absolutely at any time live in a total neglect of their Duty, though
they may greatly mistake in the manner of its performance, is not to be
supposed, (2) The Instinct of the new Creature and those in whom it is, so
associate themselves in holy Communion, for the joint and mutual exercise of
those Graces of the Spirit which are the same, as unto the Essence of them, in
them all. The Laws of Christ in, and unto his Church, as unto all outward
Obedience, are suited unto those inward Principles and Inclinations, which by
his Spirit and Grace, he has implanted in the Hearts of them that believe.
Hence his Yoke is easy, and his Commandments are not grievous. And therefore
none of his true Disciples since he had a Church upon the Earth did, or could
satisfy themselves in their own Faith and Obedience, singularly and personally;
but would venture their lives and all that was dear unto them, for Communion
with others, and the associating themselves with them of the same Spirit and
way, for the observance of the Commands of Christ. The Martyrs of the Primitive
Churches of old, lost more of their Blood and Lives for their Meetings and
Assemblies, than for personal Profession of the Faith, and so also have others
done under the Roman Apostasy. It is an usual Plea among them who engage in the
Persecution or Punishment of such as differ from them; that if they please they
may keep their Opinions, their Consciences and Faith unto themselves, without
Meetings for Communion or public Worship. And herein they suppose they deal
friendly and gently with them. And this is our present Case. It is true indeed
as Tertullian observed of old, that men in these things have no Power over us,
but what they have from our own Wills; we willingly choose to be, and to
continue, what they take advantage to give us trouble for. And it is naturally
in our Power, to free our selves from them and their Laws, every day. But we
like it not; we cannot purchase outward Peace and Quietness at any such rate.
But as was said, the inward Instinct of Believers, from the same Principles of
Faith, Love, and all the Graces of the Spirit, in them all, does efficaciously
lead and incline them unto their joint exercise in Societies, unto the Glory of
Christ, and their own Edification, or increase of the same Graces in them. When
this appears to be under the Guidance of the Commands of Christ, as unto the
ways of Communion lead unto, and to consist in a compliance therewithal; they
find themselves under an indispensible Obligation unto it Nor has the Lord
Christ left them liberty to make a Composition for their outward Peace, and to
purchase Quietness, with foregoing any part of their Duty herein.

This therefore I say, is a Means and Cause on the part of Believers themselves
of the continuation of this Church State. For this Instinct of Believers,
leading them unto Communion, which is an Article of our Faith, in conjunction
with the Law and Commands of Christ, giving direction how, and in what ways it
is to be attained, and exercised, binds and obliges them unto the continuation
of this State; and the decay of this inward Principle in them that profess
Christian Religion, has been the great and almost only ground of its neglect.

3. The open Evidence there is, that sundry Duties required of us in the
Gospel, can never be performed in a due manner, but where Believers are brought
into this State, which that they should enter into, is therefore in the first
place required of them; what these Duties are will afterward appear.

On these sure Grounds is founded the Continuation of the Gospel Church State,
under ordinary Officers after the Decease of the Apostles; and so far secured,
as that nothing needs be added unto them for that end. Do but suppose that the
Lord Christ yet lives in Heaven in the Discharge of his Mediatory Office; that
he has given his Word for a perpetual Law unto all his Disciples, and a
Charter to convey Spiritual Privileges unto them; that he abides to
Communicate Gifts for the Ministry unto men, and that there are any Believers
in the World, who know it to be their Duty to yield Obedience unto all the
Commands of Christ. and have any internal Principle enclining them to that
which they profess to believe as a fundamental Article of their Faith, namely,
the Communion of Saints, and no man is desired to prove the certainty and
necessity of the continuance of this State.

But there are some who maintain that the Continuation and Preservation of this
Church State, depends solely on a successive Ordination of Church Officers,
from the Apostles, and so down throughout all Ages unto the end of the World.
For this they say is the only means of conveying Church Power from one time to
another; so as that if it fail, all Church State, Order, and Power must fall,
never in this World to be recovered. There is they say a Flux of Power through
the hands of the Ordainers, unto the Ordained, by virtue of their outward
Ordination, whereon the Being of the Church does depend. Howbeit those who use
this Plea, are not at all agreed about those things which are essential in, and
unto this successive Ordination. Some think that the Lord Christ committed the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven unto Peter only, and he to the Bishop of Rome
alone, from whose Person therefore all their Ordination must be derived. Some
think, and those on various Grounds, that it is committed unto all and only
Diocesan Bishops, whose Being and Beginning are very uncertain. Others require
no more unto it, but that Presbyters be ordained by Presbyters; who were
rejected in their Plea, by both the former sorts; and other differences almost
innumerable among them who are thus minded might be reckoned up.

But whereas this whole Argument about Personal successive Ordination, has
been fully handled. and the Pretenses of it disproved by the chiefest
Prot^stant Writers against the Papists; and because I design not an Opposition
unto what others think and do, but the Declaration and Confirmation of the
Truth in what we have proposed to insist upon, I shall very briefly discover
the falseness of this Pretense, and pass on unto what is principally intended
in this Discourse.

1. The Church is before all its ordinary Officers; and therefore its
continuation cannot depend on their successive Ordination. It is so as
essentially considered, though its being Organical is Simultaneous with their
Ordination. Extraordinary Officers were before the Church, for their Work was
to call, gather, and erect it out of the World. But no ordinary Officers can
be, or ever were ordained but to a Church in Being. Some say they are ordained
unto the universal visible Church of Professors; some unto the particular
Church wherein their Work does lie; but all grant that the Church State
whereunto they are ordained, is antecedent unto their Ordination. The Lord
Christ could, and did ordain Apostles and Evangelists, when there was yet no
Gospel Church, for they were to be the Instruments of its Calling and Erection.
But the Apostles neither did, nor could ordain any ordinary Officers, until
there was a Church or Churches, with respect whereunto they should be ordained.
It is therefore highly absurd to ascribe the continuation of the Church unto
the successive Ordination of Officers, if any such thing there were; seeing
this successive Ordination of Officers depends solely on the continuation of
the Church. If that were not secured on other Foundations, this successive
Ordination would quickly tumble into dust. (Yea this successive Ordination,
were there any such thing appointed, must be an Act of the Church it self, and
so cannot be the means of communicating Church Power unto others. A successive
Ordination in some sense may be granted, namely, that when those who were
ordained Officers in any Church do dye that others be ordained in their steads,
but this is by an Act of Power in the Church it self, as we shall manifest
afterward.)

2. Not to treat of Papal succession; the limiting of this successive
Ordination, as the only way and means of Communicating Church Power, and so of
the Preservation of the Church State, unto Diocesan Prelates or Bishops, is
built on so many inevident Presumptions and false Principles, as will leave it
altogether uncertain whether there be any Church State in the World or no. As
(1) That such Bishops were ordained by the Apostles, which can never be proved.
(2) That they received Power from the Apostles to ordain others and Communicate
their whole Power unto them by an Authority, inherent in themselves alone; yet
still reserving their whole Power unto themselves also, giving all, and
retaining all at the same time; which has no more of Truth than the former,
and may be easily disproved. (3) That they never did, nor could any of them
forfeit this Power, by any crime or error, so as to render their Ordination
invalid, and interrupt the succession pretended. (4) That they all ordained
others in such manner and way, as to render their Ordination valid; whereas
multitudes were never agreed, what is required thereunto. (5) That whatever
Heresy, Idolatry, Flagitiousness of life, Persecution of the true Churches of
Christ, these Prelatical Ordainers might fall into, by whatever Arts,
Simoniacal Practices, or false Pretenses unto what was not, they came
themselves into their Offices, yet nothing could deprive them of their Right of
Communicating all Church Power unto others by Ordination. (6) That Persons so
ordained, whether they have any call from the Church or no; whether they have
any of the Qualifications required by the Law of Christ in the Scripture to
make them capable of any Office in the Church, or have received any Spiritual
Gifts from Christ for the Exercise of their Office and Discharge of their Duty;
whether they have any Design or no, to pursue the ends of that Office which
they take upon them; yet all is one, being any way Prelatically ordained
Bishops, they may ordain other and so the successive Ordination is preserved.
And what is, this but to take the Rule of the Church out of the hand of Christ;
to give Law unto him, to follow with his Approbation, the actings of men
besides, and contrary to his Law and Institution, and to make Application of
his Promises unto the vilest of men, whether he will or no. (7) That it is not
lawful for Believers or the Disciples of Christ to yield Obedience unto his
Commands, without this Episcopal Ordination, which many Churches cannot have,
and more will not, as judging it against the Mind and Will of Christ. (8) That
one Worldly, Ignorant, Proud, sensual Beast, such as some of the Heads of this
successive Ordination, as the Popes of Rome, have been, should have more Power
and Authority from Christ to preserve and continue a Church State by
Ordination, than any the most holy Church in the World, that is, or can be
gathered according to his mind; with other unwarrantable Presumptions
innumerable.

3. The pernicious consequences that may ensue on this Principle, do manifest
its Inconsistency with what our Lord Jesus Christ has ordained unto this end
of the continuation of his Church. I need not reckon them upon the surest
Probabilities. There is no room left for fears of what may follow hereon, by
what has already done so. If we consider whither this successive Ordination,
has already led a great part of the Church, we may easily judge what it is
meet for. It has I say, led men, for Instance in the Church of Rome, into a
Presumption of a good Church State in the loss of Holiness and Truth, in the
Practice of false Worship and Idolatry, in the Persecution and Slaughter of the
faithful Servants of Christ; unto a State plainly Antichristian. To think there
should be a Flux and Communication of Heavenly and Spiritual Power, from Jesus
Christ and his Apostles in, and by the hands and Actings of Persons ignorant,
Simoniacal, Adulterous, Incestuous, Proud, Ambitious, Sensual, presiding in a
Church State never appointed by him, immersed in false and Idolatrous Worship,
persecuting the true Church of Christ, wherein was the true succession of
Apostolical Doctrine and Holiness, is an Imagination for men who embrace the
shadows and appearances of things, never once seriously thinking of the true
nature of them. In brief, it is in vain to derive a Succession whereon the
Being of the Church should depend, through the presence of Christ with the
Bishops of Rome, who for an 100 years together, from the year 900 to a 1000,
were Monsters for Ignorance, Lust, Pride, and Luxury; as Baronius
acknowledges. A. D. 912.5.8. Or by the Church of Antioch, by Samosatenus,
Eudoxius, Gnapheus, Severus, and the like Heretics. Or in Constantinople, by
Macedonius, Eusebius, Demophilus, Anthorinus, and their Companions: Or at
Alexandria; by Lucius, Dioscurus, Aelurus, Sergius, and the rest of the same
sort.

4. The principal Argument whereby this conceit is fully discarded, must be
spoken unto afterward. And this is the due consideration of the proper subject
of all Church Power, unto whom, it is originally, formally and radically given
and granted by Jesus Christ. For none can communicate this Power unto others,
but those who have received it themselves from Christ, by virtue of his Law and
Institution. Now this is the whole Church, and not any Person in it, or Prelate
over it. Look whatever constitutes it a Church, that gives it all the Power and
Privilege of a Church; for a Church is nothing but a Society of professed
Believers, enjoying all Church Power and Privileges, by virtue of the Law of
Christ. Unto this Church which is his Spouse does the Lord Christ commit the
Keys of his House, by whom they are delivered into the hands of his Stewards so
far as their Office requires that Trust. Now this (which we shall afterward
more fully confirm) is utterly inconsistent with the committing of all Church
Power unto one Person by virtue of his Ordination by another.

Nothing that has been spoken does at all hinder or deny, but that where
Churches are rightly constituted, they ought in their Offices, Officers, and
Order to be preserved by a successive Ordination of Pastors and Rulers, wherein
those who actually preside in them, have a particular Interest in the orderly
communication of Church Power unto them.

CHAP. IV. The Especial Nature of the Gospel Church State appointed by Christ.
THE Principal Enquiry which we have thus far prepared the way unto, and
whereon all that ensues unto it does depend, is concerning the especial Nature
of that Church State, Rule, and Order, which the Lord Christ has Instituted
under the Gospel, of what sort and kind it is. And hereunto some things must be
premised.

1. I design not here to oppose, nor any way to consider such Additions as men
may have judged necessary to be added unto that Church State which Christ has
appointed, to render it, in their apprehension, more useful unto its ends, than
otherwise it would be. Of this sort there are many things in the World, and of
a long season have been so. But our present Business is to prove the Truth, and
not to disprove the conceits of other men. And so far as our Cause is concerned
herein, it shall be done by it self, so as not to interrupt us in the
declaration of the Truth.

2. Whereas there are great contests about Communion with Churches, or
Separation from them, and mutual charges of Impositions and Schisms thereon,
they must be all regulated by this Enquiry; namely, what is that Church State
which Christ has prescribed. Herein alone is Conscience concerned as unto all
Duties of Ecclesiastical Communion. Neither can a change of Schism be managed
against any, but on a supposition of Sin, with respect unto that Church State
and Order which Christ has appointed. A Dissent from any thing else, however
pretended to be useful, yea advantageous unto Church Ends, must come under
other prudential considerations. All which shall be fully proved, and
vindicated from the exceptions of Dr. St.

3. There have been, and are in the World, several sorts of Churches of great
Power and Reputation, of several Forms and Kinds, yet contributing Aid to each
other, in their respective stations; As (1) The Papal Church which pretends it
self to be Catholic or Universal, comprehensive of all true Believers or
Disciples of Christ, united in their Subjection unto the Bishop of Rome. (2)
There were of old, and the shadow of them is still remaining, Churches called
Patriarchal, first 3, then 4, then 5 of them, whereinto all other Churches and
professed Christians in the Roman World were distributed, as unto a Dependence
on the Authority, and Subjection to the Jurisdiction, and Order of the Bishops
of 5 principal Cities of the Empire, who were thereon called Patriarks. (3)
Various Divisions under them, of Archiepiscopal or Metropolitical Churches; and
under them of those that are now called Diocesan, whose bounds and limits were
fixed and altered according to the Variety of Occasions and Occurrences of
things in the Nations of the World. What has been the Original of all these
sorts of Churches, how from Parochial Assemblies, they grew up by the Degrees
of their Descent now mentioned, into the height and center of Papal
Omnipotency, has been declared elsewhere sufficiently.

4. Some there are, who plead for a National Church State, arising from an
Association of the Officers of particular Churches, in several Degrees, which
they call Classical and Provincial, until it extend it self unto the limits of
an whole Nation, that is one civil Body, depending as such on its own supreme
Ruler and Law. I shall neither examine nor oppose this Opinion; there has been
enough, if not too much already disputed about it. But

5. The visible Church State which Christ has instituted under the New
Testament, consists in an especial Society or Congregation of professed
Believers, joined together according unto his Mind, with their Officers,
Guides, or Rulers whom he has appointed, which do, or may meet together for
the celebration of all the Ordinances of Divine Worship, the professing and
authoritatively proposing the Doctrine of the Gospel, with the Exercise of the
Discipline prescribed by himself, unto their own mutual Edification, with the
Glory of Christ, in the Preservation and Propagation of his Kingdom in the
World.

The things observable in this Description, and for the farther Declaration of
it, are; (1) The Material cause of this Church, or the Matter whereof it is
composed; which are visible Believers. (2) The formal Cause of it, which is
their voluntary Coalescency into such a Society or Congregation, according to
the mind of Christ. (3) The End of it, is presential, local Communion, in all
the Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, in Obedience unto him, and their own
Edification. (4) In particular these ends are, (1) The Preaching of the Word,
unto the Edification of the Church it self, and the Conversion of others. (2)
Administration of the Sacraments, or all the Mystical Appointments of Christ in
the Church. (3) The Preservation and Exercise of Evangelical Discipline. (4)
Visibly to profess their Subjection unto Christ in the World, by the
observation of his commands. (5) The Bounds and Limits of this Church, are
taken from the number of the Members, which ought not to be so Small, as that
they cannot observe, and do all that Christ has commanded in due Order; nor
yet so Great as not to meet together for the Ends of Institution of the Church
before mentioned. (6) That this Church in its complete State, consists of
Pastors, or a Pastor and Elders, who are its Guides and Rulers, and the
Community of the Faithful under their Rule. (7) That unto such a Church, and
every one of them, belongs of Right all the Privileges, Promises and Power
that Christ does give and grant unto the Church in this World.

These and sundry other things of the like Nature shall be afterward spoken
unto in their Order, according unto the Method intended in the present
Discourse.

Two things I shall now proceed unto. (1) To prove that Christ has appointed
this Church State under the Gospel, namely, of a particular or single
Congregation. (2) That he has appointed no other Church State that is
inconsistent with this, much less that is destructive of it.

1. Christ appointed that Church State which is meet and accommodated unto all
the ends which he designed in his Institution of a Church. But such alone is
that Church Form and Order that we have proposed. In Christ's Institution of the
Church, it was none of his ends, that some men might be thereby advanced to
Rule, Honor, Riches, or secular Grandeur; but the direct contrary, Matthew.
20.25, 26, 27, 28. Nor did he do it, that his Disciples might be ruled and
governed by force or the Laws of men; or that they should be obstructed in the
exercise of any Graces, Gifts, or Privileges that he had purchased for them,
or would bestow on them. And to speak plainly, (let it be despised by them that
please) this cannot greatly value that Church State which is not suited, to
guide, excite and direct the exercise of all Evangelical Graces unto the Glory
of Christ in a due manner. For, to propose peculiar and proper objects for
them, to give peculiar motives unto them, to limit the seasons and
circumstances of their exercise, and regulate the manner of the Performance of
the Duties that arise from them, is one principal End of their Institution.

It would be too long to make a particular enquiry into all the ends for which
the Lord Christ appointed this Church State, which indeed are all the Duties of
the Gospel, either in themselves, or in the manner of their Performance. We may
reduce them unto these three general Heads.

1. The p^ofessed Subjection of the Souls and Consciences of Believers unto his
Authority, in their Observance of his Commandments. He requires that all who
are baptized into his Name, be taught to do, and observe all things whatever he
commanded. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. And God is to be Glorified not only in their
Subjection, but in their professed Subjection unto the Gospel of Christ. 2 Cor.
19.13. Having given an express charge unto his Disciples, to make public
Profession of his Name, and not to be deterred from it by shame or fear of any
thing that may befall them on the account thereof, and that on the Penalty of
his disowning them before his Heavenly Father, Matthew. 8.33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38,
Matthew. 10.33; He has appointed this Church State, as the way and means whereby
they may jointly, and visibly make profession of this their Subjection to him,
Dependence on him, and Freedom in the Observation of all his commands. He will
not have this done, singly, and personally only, but in Society and
conjunction. Now this cannot be done in any Church State imaginable, wherein
the Members of the Church cannot meet together for this end, which they can
only do in such a Church as is Congregational.

2. The joint celebration of all Gospel Ordinances and Worship, is the great
and principal End of the Evangelical Church State. How far this is directed
unto by the Law of Nature was before declared. Man was made for Society in
things natural and civil, but especially in things Spiritual, or such as
concern the Worship of God. Hereon depends the n^cess^^y of par^i^ular
Churches, or Societ^es for Divine Worship. And this is declared to be the End
of the Churches instituted by Christ. Act. 2 42. 1 Cor. 11.20 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. as also of the Institution of Officers in the Church, for the
Solemn Administration of the Ordinances of this Worship. And the Reasons of
this Appointment are intimated in the Scripture; as (1) That it might be a way
for the joint Exercise of the Graces and Gifts of the Spirit; as was in general
before mentioned. The Lord Christ g^ves both his Grace and his Gifts in great
variety of measures. Ephesians. 4.7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given
unto every man to profit withal; 1 Cor. 12.7, 8. He gives neither of them unto
any merely for themselves. Saving Grace is firstly given for the good of him
that receives it; but respect is had in it unto the good of others; and the
Lord Christ expects such an exercise of it, as may be to others advantage. And
the first End of Gifts is the Edification of others; and all that do receive
them are thereby, and so far, Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. 1 Pet.
4.10. Wherefore for the due exercise of these Gifts and Graces unto his Glory,
and their proper ends, he has appointed particular Congregations, in whose
Assemblies alone, they can be duly exercised, (2) Hereby all his Disciples are
mutually edified; that is, increased in Light, Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Fruitfulness in Obedience, and conformity unto himself. This the Apostle
affirms to be the especial End of all Churches, their Offices, Officers, Gifts,
and Order. Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And again; 2.19. No Church State that
is not immediately suited unto this End, is of his Institution. And though
others may in general pretend unto it, besides that of particular
Congregations, it were to be wished that they were not obstructive of it, or
were any way fitted or useful unto it. (3) That he might hereby express and
testify his promised Presence with his Disciples unto the end of the World;
Matthew. 28.20. Matthew. 18.20. Rev. 1.13. It is in their Church Assemblies, and in
the Performance of his Holy Worship that he is present with his Disciples
according unto his Promise. (4) In these Churches thus exercised in the holy
Worship of God, he gives us a Resemblance and Representation of the great
Assembly above, who Worship God continually before his Throne, which is too
large a Subject here to insist upon.

And to manifest that Assemblies of the whole Church, at once and in one place,
for the Celebration of Divine Worship, is of the Essence of a Church, without
which it has no real Being; when God had instituted such a Church Form, as
wherein all the Members of it could not ordinarily come together every week for
this end; yet he ordained that, for the Preservation of their Church State,
three times in the year the Males (which was the circumcised Church) should
appear together in one place, to celebrate the most Solemn Ordinances of his
Worship. Exodus 23.14. Chap. 34 23. Deuteronomy. 16.16. All those Difficulties which
arose from the extent of the Limits of that Church unto the whole Nation, being
removed, these Meetings of the whole Church for the Worship of Go^ become a
continual Duty; and when they cannot be observed in any Church, the State or
kind of it is not instituted by Christ.

3. The third End of the Institution of the Gospel Church State is the Exercise
and Preservation of the Discipline appointed by Christ to be observed by his
Disciples. The Ancients do commonly call the whole Religion of Christianity, by
the Name of the Discipline of Christ, that is, the Faith and Obedience which he
has prescribed unto them, in Contradistinction, and Opposition unto the Rules
and Prescriptions of all ^hilosophical Societies. And it is that, without which
the Glory of ^hristian Religion can in no due manner be preserved. The especial
Nature of it shall be afterward fully spoken unto For the use of the present
Argument I shall only speak unto the Ends of it, or what it is that the Lord
Christ designeth in the Institution of it; and these things may be referred
unto 4 Heads.

1. The Preservation of the Doctrine of the Gospel in its Purity, and Obedience
unto the Commands of Christ in its Integrity. For the First; the Scripture is
full of Predictions, all confirmed in the Event, that after the days of the
Apostles, there should be various Attempts to wrest, corrupt, and pervert the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and to bring in pernicious Errors and Heresies. To
prevent, or reprove, and remove them, is no small Part and Duty of the
Ministerial Office in the Dispensation of the Word* But whereas those who
taught such perverse things, did for the most part arise at first in the
Churches themselves; Act. 20.30. 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 John 2.19. as the Preaching of
the Word was appointed for the rebuke of the Doctrines themselves, so this
Discipline was ordained in the Church with respect unto the Persons of them by
whom they were taught, Rev. 2.2.14*20. 3 John 8.9. Gal. 5.12. And so also it
was with respect unto Schisms and Divisions that might fall out in the Church.
The way of suppressing things of this Nature by external force, by the Sword of
Magistrates, in Prisons, Fines, Banishments, and Death, was not then thought
of, nor directed unto by the Lord Jesus Christ; but is highly dishonorable
unto him, as though the ways of his own appointment, were not sufficient for
the Preservation of his own Truth, but that his Disciples must betake
themselves unto the secular Powers of this World who for the most part are
wicked, Profane, and ignorant of the Truth, for that end.

And hereunto belongs the Preservation of his Commands, in the Integrity of
Obedience. For he appointed that hereby care should be taken, of the Ways,
Walkings, and Conversation of his Disciples, that in all things it should be
such as became the Gospel. Hence the exercise of this Discipline he orda^ned to
consist in Exhortations, Admonitions, Reproofs, of any that should offend in
things Moral or of his especial Institut^on, with the total Rejection of them
were obstinate in their Offenses; as we shall see afterward.

2. The second End of it was to preserve Love entire among his Disciples. This
was that which he gave in especial charge unto all that should believe in his
Name, taking the Command of it to be his own in a peculiar manner, and
declaring our Observance of it, to be the principal Pledge and Evidence of our
being his Disciples. For although mutual Love be an old Commandment, belonging
both unto the Moral Law, and sundry Injunction under the Old Testament; yet the
Degrees and Measure of it, the Ways and Duties of its exercise, the Motives
unto it, and Reasons for it, were wholly his own, whereby it becomes a new
Commandment, also. For the preservation and continuance of this Love, which he
lays so great weight upon, was this Discipline appointed, which it is several
ways effectual toward. As (1) In the Prevention or Removal of Offenses that
might arise among Believers, to the impeachment of it; Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17,
(2) In that Watch over each other with mutual Exhortations and Admonitions,
without which this Love let men pretend what they please, will not be
preserved. That which keeps either Life or Soul in Christian Love, consists
in the exercise of those Graces mutually and the Discharge of those Duties,
whereby they may be Partakers of the fruits of Love in one another. And for the
most part, those who pretend highly unto the Preservation of Love, by their
coming to the same Church who dwell in the same Parish, have not so much as the
carcass, nay not a shadow of it. In the Discipline of the Lord Christ it is
appointed that this Love, so strictly by him enjoined unto us, so expressive of
his own Wisdom and Love, should be preserved, continued and increased, by the
due and constant Discharge of the Duties of mutual Exhortation, Admonition,
Prayer, and watchful care over one another. Romans 15.14. 1 These. 5 11, 12. 2
These. 3.15. Heb. 3.12, 13. Chapter 12.15, 16.

3. A third End of it, is, that it might be a due Representation of his own
Love, Care, Tenderness, Patience, Meekness, in the acting of his Authority in
the Church. Where this is not observed and designed in the exercise of Church
Discipline, I will not say it is Antichristian, but will say, it is highly
injurious and dishonorable unto him. For all Church Power is in him, and
derived from him; nor is there any thing of that nature which belongs unto it,
but it must be acted in his Name, and esteemed both for the manner and matter
of it, to be his Act and Deed. For men therefore to pretend unto the exercise
of this Discipline, in a worldly frame of Spirit, with Pride and Passion, by
tricks of Laws and Canons, in Courts Foreign to the Churches themselves which
are pretended to be under this Discipline, it is a woeful and scandalous
Representation of Christ his Wisdom, Care and Love toward his Church. But as
for his Discipline he has ordained, that it shall be exercised in, and with
Meekness, Patience, Gentleness, evidence of Zeal for the good and compassion of
the Souls of men, with Gravity and Authority, so as that therein, all the holy
Affections of his mind toward his Church, or any in it, in their mistakes,
failings, and miscarriages, may be duly represented, as well as his Authority
acted among them. Isa. 40.11* 2 Cor. 10.1* Gal. 5.22.23. 1 These. 2.7. 2 Timothy
2.24, 25, 26. Jam. 3.17. 1 Cor. 13.

4. It is in part appointed to be an Evidence and Pledge of the future
Judgment, wherein the whole Church shall be judged before the Throne of Christ
Jesus. For in the Exercise of this Discipline Christ is on his own Judgment
Seat in the Church; nor may any man pronounce any Sentence, but what he
believes that Christ himself would pronounce were he visibly present, and what
is according to his mind as declared in his Word. Hence Tertullian calls the
Sentence of Excommunication in the Church, futuri judicii praejudicium; A
Representation of the future Judgment.

4. In all that Degeneracy which the Christian professing Church, has fallen
into, in Faith, Worship, and Manners, there is no Instance can exceed the
corruption of this Divine Institution. For that which was the Honor of Christ
and the Gospel, and an effectual means to represent him in the Glory of his
Wisdom and Love, and for the Exercise of all Graces in the Church, unto the
blessed Ends now declared; was turned into a Domination, Earthly and Secular,
Exercised In a Profane, Litigious, Unintelligible Process, according unto the
Arts, Ways, and Terms of the worst of Law Courts, by Persons for the most part
remote from any just Pretense of the least Interest in Church Power, on causes
and for ends, foreign unto the Discipline of the Gospel, by a Tyranny over the
Consciences, and over the Persons of the Disciples of Christ, unto the
Intolerable scandal of the Gospel, and Rule of Christ in his Church, as is
evident in the State and Rule of the Church of Rome. As these are the general
Ends of the Institution of a Church State under the Gospel, and in Order unto
them, it is a great Divine Ordinance for the Glory of Christ, with the
Edification and Salvation of them that do believe. Wherefore that Church State
which is suited unto these Ends, is that which is appointed by Christ; and
whatever kind of Church or Churches is not so, primarily, and as such, are not
of his Appointment. But it is in Congregational Churches alone, that these
things can be done and observed. For unto all of them there are required
Assemblies of the whole Church; which wherever they are, that Church is
Congregational. No such Churches as those mentioned before, Papal,
Patriarchical, Metropolitical, Diocesan, or in any way National, are capable of
the Discharge of these Duties, or attaining of these Ends. If it be said, that
what they cannot do in themselves; as that they cannot together in one place
profess, and express their Subjection unto the Commands of Christ, they cannot
have personal Communinion in the Celebration of Gospel Ordinances of Worship,
nor exercise Discipline in one Body and Society; they can yet do the same
things otherwise; partly in single Congregations appointed by themselves, and
partly in such ways for the Administration of Discipline, as are suited unto
their State and Rule; that is, by Ecclesiastical Courts, with Jurisdiction over
all Persons or Congregations belonging unto them, it will not help their Cause.
For (1) Those Particular Congregations wherein these things are to be observed,
are Churches, or they are not. If they are Churches, they are of Christ's
Appointment, and we obtain what we aim at; nor is it in the Power of any man to
deprive them of any thing that belongs unto them as such; if they are not, but
Inventions and Appointments of their own, then that which they say is this;
that what is absolutely necessary unto the due Observation of the Worship of
God, and unto all the Ends of Churches, being not appointed by Christ, is by
them provided for, appointed and ordained; which is to exalt themselves in
Wisdom and Care above him, and to place themselves in a nearer Relation to the
Church than he. To grant that many of those things which are the Ends for which
any Church State under the Gospel is appointed, cannot be performed or attained
but in, and by particular Congregations, and yet to deny that those particular
Congregations are of Christ's Institution, is to speak contradictions, and at
the same time to affirm, that they are Churches, and are not Churches. (2) A
Church is such a Body or Society, as has Spiritual Power, Privileges and
Promises annexed unto it, and accompanying of it. That which has not so, as
such, is no Church. The particular Congregations mentioned have this Power,
with Privileges, and Promises, belonging to them, or they have not. If they
have not, they are no Churches, at least no complete Churches, and there are no
Churches in the Earth, wherein those things can be done, for which the Being of
Churches was Ordained, as namely, the joint Celebration of Divine Worship by
all the Members of them. If they have such Power, I desire to know from whence
or whom they have it; if from Christ then are they of his Institution; and who
can divest them of that Power, or any part of it? That they have it from men, I
suppose will not be pretended. (3) As unto that way of the Exercise of
Discipline suited unto any other Church State but that which is Congregational,
we shall consider it afterward. (4) What is done in particular Congregations,
is not the Act of any greater Church; as a Diocesan or the like. For whatever
acts any thing, acts according unto what it is; but this of joint Worship and
Discipline in Assemblies, is not the Act of such a Church, according unto what
it is; for so it is impossible for it to do any thing of that Nature. But thus
it is fallen out. Some men under the Power of a Tradition that particular
Congregations were originally of a Divine Institution, and finding the absolute
necessity of them, unto the joint Celebration of Divine Worship, yet finding
what an Inconsistency with their Interest, and some other Opinions which they
have imbibed, should they still be acknowledged to be of the Institution of
Christ, seeing thereon the whole ordinary Power given by Christ unto his Church
must reside in them, they would now have them to be only conveniences for some
Ends of Worship of their own finding out. Some thing they would have like
Christ's Institution, but his it shall not be, which is an Image.

2. The very Notation of the Word does determine the sense of it unto a
particular Congregation. Other things may in Churches, as we shall see
afterward, both in the Rule and Administration of the Duties of Holy Worship,
be ordered and disposed in great variety. But whilst a Church is such as that
ordinarily, the whole Body in its Rulers and those that are Ruled, do assemble
together in one place, for the Administration of Gospel Ordinances, and the
Exercise of Discipline, it is still one single Congregation, and can be neither
Diocesan, Provincial, nor National. So that although the Essence of the Church
does not consist in actual Assemblies; yet are they absolutely necessary unto
its constitution in exercise.

Hence is the Name of a Church. (...) the Verb in the Old Testament, is to
Congregate, to Assemble, to call and meet together, and nothing else. The LXX
render it mostly by (...), to congregate in a Church Assembly; and sometimes by
other Words of the same importance; as (...); so they do the Noun (...) by
(...); seldom by any other word, but where they do so, it is always of the same
Signification. Wherefore this Word signifies nothing but a Congregation which
Assembles for the Ends and Uses of it, and Acts its Duties and Powers; so does
(...) also, in the New Testament. It may be sometimes applied unto that whose
Essence is not denoted thereby, as the Church Catholic invisible, which is
only a Mystical Society or Congregation. But wherever it is used to denote an
outward visible Society, it does connote their Assemblies together, in one. It
is frequently used for an Actual Assembly. Act. 19.32, 39, 40. which was the
signification of it in all Greek Writers. 1 Cor. 14.3, 4. And sometimes it is
expressly affirmed, that it met together in the same place; 1 Cor. 14, 23.
Wherefore no Society that does not congregate; the whole Body whereof does not
meet together, to Act its Powers and Duties, is a Church, or may be so called,
whatever other sort of Body or Corporation it may be.

In this sense is the Word used, when the first intimation is is given of an
Evangelical Church State, with Order and Discipline. Matthew. 18.17. if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell the Church, etc. There have been so many contests
about the sense of these Words and the Interpretation of them, so many various
and opposite Opinions about them, and those debated in such long and Operous
Discourses, that some would take an Argument from thence, that nothing can be
directly proved from them, nor any certain account of the State and Duty of the
Church be thence collected. But nothing can be insinuated more false and
absurd, nor which more directly tends to the overthrow of the whole Authority
of the Scripture. For if when men are seduced by their Interests or otherwise,
to multiply false Expositions of any place of Scripture, and to contend
earnestly about them, that thereon as unto us, they lose their instructive
Power, and certain Determination of the Truth, we should quickly have no Bottom
or Foundation for our Faith, in the most important Articles of Religion; nor
could have so at this day. But all the various Pretenses of men, some whereof
would have the Pope, others a General Council, some the Civil Magistrate, some
the Jewish Synagogue, some a Company of Arbitrators, are nothing but so many
Instances of what Interest, Prejudice, corrupt Lusts, ambitious Designs with a
dislike of the Truth, will bring forth. To me it seems strange that any
impartial man reading this Context, can take the Church in this place in any
other sense, but for such a Society, as whereunto an offending and offended
Brother or Disciple of Christ, might and ought to belong, to the Body whereof
they might address themselves for Relief and Remedy, or the Removal of
Offenses, by virtue of the Authority and Appointment of Jesus Christ.

It were an endless Task and unsuited unto our present Design, to examine the
various pretensions unto the Church in this place; enough also if not too much
has been written already about them. I shall therefore observe only some few
things from the context, which will sufficiently evidence what sort of Church
it is, that is here intended.

1. The Rule and Direction given by our Savior in this place unto his
Disciples, does not concern civil Injuries as such; but such Sins as have
Scandal and Offense in them, either causing other men to Sin, or giving them
Grief and Offense for Sin, whereby the exercise of Love in mutual Communion may
be impeded. Private Injuries may be respected herein, but not as Injuries, but
so far as they are scandalous, and matter of Offense unto them unto whom they
are known. And this appears;

(1) From the proper Signification of the Phrase here used; (...). If thy
Brother Sin against thee, Doing of an injury is expressed by (...), and to be
injured by (...), 1 Cor. 6.8, 9. that is, to be wronged, to be dealt unjustly
withal, and to be defrauded or deprived of our Right. But (...) is not so used;
but only so to sin as to give scandal unto them against whom that Sin is said
to be, 1 Cor. 8.11, 12: To be guilty of Sin against Christ in the light of
their consciences, is to sin against them.

2. It is evident in the context. Our Savior is treating directly about all
sorts of scandals and offenses, or sins, as occasions of falling, stumbling and
sinning, and so of perishing unto others, giving Rules and Directions about
them, from 8th verse, unto these words wherein Direction is given about their
Cure and Removal. And two things he ascribes unto these scandals; (1.) That
weak Christians are despised in them, ver. 10. (2.) That they are in danger to
be destroyed or lost for ever by them, ver. 14. which gives us a true account
of the nature of scandalous Offenses. Wherefore (...), to sin is used here in
the same sense with (...) before, to give offense by a scandalous miscarriage.

3. Where the same Rule is again recorded, the words used enforce this
application of them, Luke 17.1, 2, 3. The Lord Christ foretells his Disciples
that scandals and offenses would arise, with the nature and danger of them, v.
1. And because that they obtain their pernicious effects mostly on them that
are weak, he gives caution against them, with especial respect unto such among
his Disciples; better any one were cast into the Sea, (...) then that he should
give scandal or offense unto one of these little ones, ver. 2. And what he
expresses by (...), ver. 2. he expresses by (...), ver. 3. sin against thee;
and this is plain from the direction which he gives hereon, (...); rebuke him.
The word is never used with respect unto private Injuries; but as they are sins
or faults; so is it joined with (...), 2 Timothy 4.2. and (...) is the only word
used for the Rebuke given, or to be given unto a scandalous Offender, 2 Cor.
2.6.

4 Another Rule is given in case of private Injuries, that are only such, and
that is, that we immediately forgive them.

5. It does not seem a Direction suited unto that intense Love, which the Lord
Christ requires in all his Disciples one toward another, nor the nature of
that Love in its Exercise, as it is described, 1 Cor. 13. that for a private
Injury done unto any man, without respect unto sin against God therein, which
is the scandal, he should follow his Brother so far as to have him cast ^ut of
the Communion of all Churches and Believers, which yet in case of Sin
unrepented of, is a necessary Duty.

2dly. The Rule here prescribed, and the Direction given, were so prescribed
and given for the use of all the Disciples of Christ in all Ages, and are not
to be confined unto any present case, or the present season. For (1.) There was
no such case at present, no mutual offense among any of his Disciples, that
should require this Determination of it, only respect is had unto what might
afterward fall out in the Church. (2.) There was no need of any such Direction
at that time, because Christ himself was then constantly present with them, in
whom all Church Power did reside both eminently and formally. Accordingly, when
any of them did offend unto scandal, he did himself rebuke them; Matthew. 16.22,
23. And when any thing of mutual Offense fell out among them, he instructed
them, and directed them into the way of Love, doing what any Church could do,
and much more also, Mat. 20 24, 25, 26, 27.28. (3) This was a case which our
Savior foreknew and foretold that it would fall out in the Church in futu^e
generations even unto the end of the world* It does so every day, and will do
so whilst men are in an imperfect state here below. Nor is there any thing
wherein the Church as unto its Order, ^urity and Edification, is more
concerned. Nor can any of them be preserved without a certain Rule for the cure
and healing of offenses; nor are so, in any Church, where such a Rule is not,
or is neglected. It is therefore fond to suppose, that our Savior should
prescribe this Rule for that season wherein there was no need of it; and not
for those times, wherein the Church could not subsist in order without it.

3ly. The Church here directed unto, is a Christian Church. For (1.) whereas it
has been proved, it concerned the times to come afterward; there was in those
times nothing that could pretend unto the name of the Church but a Christian
Church only. The Jewish Synagogues had an utter end put unto them, so as that
an Address unto any of them in this case was not only useless but unlawful. And
as unto Magistrates or Arbitrators, to have them called the Church, and that in
such a sense as that after the Interposition of their Authority or Advice, a
man should be freed from the discharge of all Christian Duties, such as are
mutually required among the Disciples of Christ toward his Brother, is a fond
Imagination: For (2) It is such a Church, as can exercise Authority in the Name
of Christ, over his Disciples, and such as in Conscience, they should be bound
to submit themselves unto. For the Reason given of the Contempt of the Voice,
Judgment and Sentence of the Church in case of offense, is their Power of
spiritual binding and loo^ing, which is committed by Christ thereunto, and so he
adds immediatley ver. 18. Whatever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in
Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose in heaven, shall be loosed on earth; is
the Privilege of a Christian Church only.

4thly. It is a visible particular Congregation alone that is intended. For
(1.) As unto the Church, in other acceptations of that name, either for the
Catholic^ invisible Church, or for the whole Body of professed Believers
thoroughout the world, it is utterly impossible that this D^ty should be
observed toward it, as is manifest unto all. (2.) We have proved that the
first and most proper signification of the word is of a single congregation,
assembling together for its Duties and Enjoyments. Where ever therefore the
Church in general is mentioned, without the Addition of any thing or
circumstance, that may lead unto another signification; it must be interpreted
of such a Particular Church or Congregation. (3.) The Persons intended,
offending, and offended must belong unto the same society unto whom the Address
is to be made; or else the one party may justly decline the Judicatory applied
unto, and so frustrate the Process. And it must be such a Church, as unto whom
they are known in their Circumstances, without which it is impossible, that a
right judgment in sundry cases, can be made in point of Offense. (4) It is a
Church of an easy Address; Go tell the Church; which supposes that free and
immediate a^cess, which all the Members of a Church have unto that whole Church
whereof they are members. Wherefore (5) It is said, (...)* tell the Church; not
a Church, but the Church; namely, whereunto thou and thy Brother do belong. (6)
One end of this Direction is, that the offending and the offended parties may
continue together in the Communion of the same Church, in Love without
Dissimulation; which thing belongs unto a particular Congregation. (7) The
meaning is not tell the Diocesan Bishop; for whatever Church he may have under
his Rule, yet is not he himself a Church. Nor is it (8) the Chancellours Court
that our Savior intended. Be it what it will, it is a disparagement unto all
Churches, to have that name applied thereunto. Nor, Lastly, Is it a Presbytery
or Association of the Elders of many particular Congregations, that is
intended. For the Power claimed in such associated Presbyteries, is with
respect unto what is already in, or before particular Congregations, which they
have not either Wisdom or Authority, as is supposed, finally to order and
determine. But this supposes, that the Address in the first place, be made
unto a particular Congregation; which therefore is firstly and properly here
intended.

All things are plain, familiar, and exposed to the common Understandings of
all Believers, whose minds are any way exercised about these things, as indeed
are all things that belong unto the Discipline of Christ. Arguments pretendedly
deep and learned, really obscure and perplexed, with logical Notions and
distinctions, applied unto things thus plain and evident in themselves, do
serve only to involve and darken the Truth. It is plain in the place; (1) That
there was a Church State for Christians, then designed by Christ, which
afterward he would institute and settle. (2) That all true Disciples were to
join and unite themselves in some such Church, as might be helpful unto their
Love, Order, Peace and Edification. (3) That among the members of these
Churches, Offenses would, or might arise, which in themselves tend unto
pernicious Events. (4) That if these Offenses could not be cured and taken
away, so as that Love without Dissimulation might be continued among all the
Members of the Churches, an Account of them at last was to be given unto that
Church or Society whereunto the Parties concerned do belong as Members of it.
(5) That this Church should hear, determine and give Judgment with advice in
the cases, so brought unto it, for the taking away and removal of all Offenses.
(6) That this Determination of the Church is to be rested in, on the Penalty of
a Deprivation of all the Privileges of the Church. (7) That these things are
the Institution and Appointment of Christ himself, whose Authority in them all,
is to be submitted unto, and which alone can cast one that is a Professed
Christian into the condition of an Heathen or a Publican.

These things in the Notion and Practice of them, are plain, easy, and exposed
to the Understanding of the meanest of the Disciples of Christ; as it is meet,
that all things should be, wherein their daily Practice is concerned. But it is
not easily to be expressed, into what horrible Perplexities and Confusions they
have been wrested in the Church of Rome, nor how those who depart from the
plain obvious sense of the words, and love not the Practice they direct unto,
do lead themselves and others into ways and paths that have neither use, nor
end. From the corrupt abuse of the holy Institution of our Lord Jesus Christ
here intended, so many Powers, Faculties, Courts, Jurisdictions, legal
Processes, with Litigious, Vexatious, oppressive Courses of Actions and Trials,
whose very names are uncouth, horrid, foreign unto Religion, and unintelligible
without Cunning in an art^ficial barbarous Science of the Canon Law, have
proceeded, as are enough to fill a sober rational man with astonishment, how it
could ever enter into the minds of men to suppose, that they can possibly have
any Relation unto this Divine Institution. Those who are not utterly blinded
with Interest and Prejudice, wholly ignorant of the Gospel, and the mind of
Christ therein, as also Strangers from the Practice of the Duties which it
requires, will hardly believe, that in this Context our Lord Jesus Christ
designed to set up, and erect an Earthly Domination in, and over his Churches,
to be administered by the Rules of the Canon Law, and the Rota at Rome. They
must be spiritually mad and ridiculous, who can give the least entertainment
unto such an Imagination.

Nor can the Discipline of any Diocesan Churches, administered in, and by Courts
and Officers, foreign to the Scripture, both name and thing* be brought within
the view of this Rule; nor can all the Art of the World, make any application
of it thereunto: For what some plead concerning Magistrates or Arbitrators,
they are things which men would never betake themselves unto, but only to evade
the force of that Truth which they love not. All this is fallen out by men's
departing from the Simplicity of the Gospel* and a contempt of that sense of
the words of the Lord Jesus, which is plain and obvious unto all who desire not
only to hear his words, but also to observe his Commands.

3 dly. Our third Argument is taken from the Nature of the Churches ^nstituted
by the Apostles and their Order, as it is expressed in the Scripture. For they
were all of them Congregational, and of no other sort. This the ensuing
Considerations will make evident.

1. There were many Churches planted by the Apostles in very small Provinces.
Not to insist on the Churches of Galatia; Gal. 1.1. concerning which it is no
where intimated, that they had any one Head or Mother Church, Metropolitical,
or Diocesan. Nor of those of Macedonia, distinct from that of Philippi, whereof
we have spoken before; upon the first coming of Paul after his Conversion, unto
Jerusalem; which was three years; Gal. 1.18. in the Fourth year after the
Ascension of Christ, there were Churches planted in all Judea, and Galilee, and
Samaria; Act. 9.31. Neither of the two latter Provinces was equal unto one
Ordinary Diocese. Yet were there Churches in both of them, and that in so short
a time after the first Preaching of the Gospel, as that it is impossible they
should be conceived to be any other but single Congregations. What is excepted
or opposed hereunto by the Reverend Dr. St. shall be examined and disproved
afterward by itself, that the Progress of our Discourse be not here
interrupted.

2. These Churches were such, as that the Apostles appointed in them Ordinary
Elders and Deacons, that might administer all Ordinances unto the whole Church,
and take care of all the poor. Act. 14.23. chap. 20.28. Now the Care,
Inspection and Labor of Ordinary Officers, can extend itself no further than
unto a particular Congregation. No man can administer all Ordinances unto a
Diocesan Church. And this ordaining Elders in every Church, is the same with
ordaining them in every City, Tit. 1.5. that is in every Town wherein there was
a Number converted unto the Faith; as is evident from Act. 14.23. And it was in
Towns and Cities ordinarily that the Gospel was first preached, and first
received. Such Believers being congregated and united in the Profession of the
same Faith and subjection unto the Authority of Christ, did constitute such a
Church State as it was the Will of Christ, they should have Bishops, or Elders
and Deacons ordained amongst them; and were therefore as unto their State, such
Churches as he owned,

3. It is said of most of these Churches expressly that they respectively met
together in one place, or had their Assemblies of the whole Church, for the
discharge of the Duties required of them, which is peculiar unto Congregational
Churches only; so did the Church at Jerusalem on all occasions; Act. 15.12, 22.
chapter ^1.22. see chapter 5.11. chapter 6.1. It is of no force which is objecte^ from the
Multitude of them that are said to believe, and so consequently were of that
Church; so as that they could not assemble together: For whereas the Scripture
says expressly, that the multitude of the Church did come together; it is scarce
fair for us to to say they were such a multitude as that they could not come
together. And it is evident that the great numbers of Believers that are said
to be at Jerusalem, were there only occasionally, and were not fixed in that
Church. For many years after, a small Village beyond Jordan could receive all
that were so fixed in it. The Church at Antioch, gathered together in one
Assembly; Act. 14.27. to hear Paul and Silas. This Church thus called together
is called the Multitude; chap. 15.30. that is the whole Brotherhood at least of
that Church. The whole Church of Corinth did assemble together in one place,
both for solemn Worship, and the exercise of Discipline, 1 Cor. 8.8. chap.
14.25, 26. chap. 11.17, 20.

It is no way necessary to plead any thing in the illustration, or for the
Confirmation of these Testimonies. They all of them speak positively in a
matter of fact, which will admit of no debate, unless we will put in exceptions
unto the Veracity of their Authors. And they are of themselves sufficient to
establish our Assertion. For whatever may be the state of any Church, as unto
its Officers or Rule, into what order soever it be disposed ordinarily or
occasionally for its Edification, so long as it is its Duty, to assemble in,
and with all its Members in one place, either for the exercise of its Power,
the Performance of its Duty, or Enjoyments of its Privileges, it is a single
Congregation and no more.

4. The Duties prescribed unto all Church Members in the writings of the
Apostles, to be diligently attended unto by them, are such, as either in their
Nature, or the manner of their performance, cannot be attended unto, and duly
accomplished but in a particular Congregation only. This I shall immediately
speak distinctly unto, and therefore only mention it in this place.

These things being so plainly, positively, and frequently asserted in the
Scripture, it cannot be questionable unto any impartial-mind, but that
particular Churches or Congregations, are of Divine Institution; and
consequently that unto them the whole Power and Privilege of the Church does
belong; for if they do not so, whatever they are, Churches they are not. If
therefore any other Church State be Supposed, we may well require that, its
Name, Nature, Use, Power, and Bounds, be some or all of them declared in the
Scripture. Reasonings drawn from the Superiority of the Apostles above the
Evangelists, of Bishop above Presbyters, or from Church Rule, in the hands of
the Officers of the Church only; from the power of the Christian Magistrate in
things Ecclesiastical from the Meetness of Union among all Churches, are of no
use in this case; For they are all consistent with the Sole Institution of
particular Congregations, nor do in the least intimate that there is, or needs
to be, any other Church State of Divine Appointment.

CHAP. V. The Sat of the First Churches after the Apostles to the end of the
Second Century.
IN Confirmation of the foregoing Argument, we urge the President and Example
of the Primitive Churches, that succeeded unto those which were planted by the
Apostles themselves, and so may well be judged to have walked in the same way
and Order with them. And that which we allege is, That in no approved Writers
for the space of 200 years after Christ there is any mention made of any other
Organical, visibly professing Church, but that only which is Parochial, or
Congregational.

A Church of any other Form, State, or Order, Papal or Ecumenical,
Patriarchal, Metropolitical, Diocesan or Classical, they know not Neither Name
nor thing, nor any of them appear in any of their Writings.

Before I proceed unto the Confirmation of this Assertion by particular
Testimonies, I shall premise some things which are needful unto the right
understanding of what it is that I intend to prove by them. As

1. All the Churches at first planted by the Apostles, whether in the greatest
Cities as Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Rome, etc. or those in the meanest
Villages of Judea, Galilee, or Samaria, were, as unto their Church State, in
Order, Power, Privilege, and Duty every way equal, not Superior or Inferior,
not ruling over, or subject unto, one another. No Institution of any Inequality
between them, no Instance of any Practice Supposing it, no Direction for any
compliance with it, no one word of intimation of it, can be produced from the
Scripture; nor is it consistent with the nature of the Gospel* Church State.

2. In and among all these Churches* there was one and the same spirit one Hope
of their Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, whence they were all,
obliged mutually to seek and endeavor the Good and Edification of each other;
To be helpful to one another in all things, according unto that which any of
them had received in the Lord. This they did by Prayer, by Advice and Counsel,
by Messengers sent with Salutations, Exhortations, Consolations, supplies for
the Poor, and on all the like occasions. By these means, and by the exercise of
that mutual Love and Care which they were obliged unto, they kept and preserved
Unity and Communion among themselves, gave a common Testimony against any thing
that in Doctrine or Practice deviated from the Rule and Discipline of Christ.
This Order with Peace and Love thereon, continued among them, until Pride,
Ambition, Desire of Rule and Pre-eminence, in Diotrephes, and a multitude of
the same spirit with him, began to open a door unto the entrance of the Mystery
of Iniquity, under pretense of a better Order, than this which was of the
appointment of Christ.

3. It must be acknowledged, that notwithstanding this Equality among all
Churches, as unto their State and Power, that there were great Differences
between them, some real and some in Reputation, which not being rightly
managed, proved an Occasion of evil in, and unto them all. For Instance;

1. Some were more eminent in spiritual Gifts than others. As this was a
Privilege that might have been greatly improved unto the Honor of Christ and
the Gospel, yet we know how it was abused in the Church of Corinth, and what
Disorders followed thereon: so weak and frail are the best of men, so liable
unto Temptation, that all Pre-eminence is dangerous for them* and often abused
by them; which I confess makes me not a little admire to see men so earnestly
pleading for it, so fearlesly assuming it unto themselves, so fiercely
contending that all Power and Rule in the Church belongs unto them alone. But

2. Reputation was given unto some, by the long abode of some of the Apostles
in them; Of this Advantage we find nothing in the Scripture: But certain it is
it was much pleaded and contended about, among the Primitive Churches, yea so
far until by Degrees Disputes arose about the Places where this or that Apostle
fixed his Seat; which was looked on as a Pre-eminence for the present, and a
security for the future. But yet we know how soon some of them degenerated from
the Church Order and Discipline, wherein they were instructed by the Apostles;
see Rev. chap. 2. and 3.

3. The Greatness, Power, Fame, or Civil Authority of the Place or City where
any Church was planted, gave it an Advantage and Privilege in Reputation above
others. And the Churches planted in such Cities were quickly more numerous in
their Members, than others were, unless men strictly kept themselves unto the
force of Primitive Institutions, it was very hard for them to think and Judge,
that a a Church, it may be in a small Village or Town in Galilee, should be
Equal with that at Jerusalem or at Antioch, or afterward at Rome itself. The
Generality of men easily suffered themselves to be persuaded that those
Churches were advanced in State and Order, far above the other obscure, poor
Congregations. That there should be a Church at Rome, the Head City of the
world, was a Matter of great Joy and Triumph unto many, and the Advancement of
it in Reputation, they thought belonged unto the Honor of our Religion,
Howbeit there is not in the Scripture, the least regard expressed unto any of
these things, of place, number, or possibility of outward splendour, either in
the Promises of the Presence of Christ in, and with his Churches, or in the
Communication of Power and Privileges unto them. Yet such an improvement did
this foolish Imagination find, that after those who presided in the Churches
called in the principal Cities, had tasted of the sweetness of the bait which
lay in the Ascription of a Pre-eminence unto them, they began openly to claim
it unto themselves, and to usurp Authority over other Churches, Confirming
their own Usurpation by Canons and Rules, until a few of them in the Council of
Nice began to divide the Christian world among themselves, as if it had been
been Conquered by them. Hence proceeded those shameful contests that were among
the greater Prelates about their Preheminency; and hence arose that Pretense of
the Bishops of Rome, unto no less a Right of Rule and Dominion over all
Christian Churches, than the City had over all the Nations and Cities of the
Empire, which being carried on by all sorts of evil Artifices, as by downright
Forgeries, shameless Intrusions of themselves, impudent laying hold of all
Advantages unto their own exaltation, prevailed at length unto the utter ruin
of all Church Order and worship. There is no sober History of the rise and
growth by several Degrees of any City, Commonwealth or Empire, that is filled
with so many Instances of ambitious seeking of Pre-eminence, as our Church
stories are.

By this Imagination were the generality of the Prelates in those days,
induced to introduce and settle a Government in, and among the Churches of
Christ, answering unto the Civil Government of the Roman Empire. As the Civil
Government was cast into National or Diocesan, or Provincial, in less or
greater Divisions, each of which had its Capital City, the place of the
Residence of the chief Civil Governor; so they designed to frame an Image of
it in the Church, ascribing an alike Dignity and Power unto the Prelates of
those Cities, and a Jurisdiction extending itself unto Nations, Diocesses, and
Provinces. Hereby the lesser Congregations, or Parochial Churches, being
weakened in process of time, in their Gifts, and Interest, were swallowed up in
the Power of the others, and became only inconsiderable Appendixes unto them,
to be ruled at their Pleasure. But these things fell out long after the times
which we enquire into; only their occasion began to present it self unto men of
corrupt minds from the Beginning, but we have before at large discoursed of
them.

4. Some Churches had a great Advantage in that the Gospel, as the Apostle
speaks, went forth from them, unto others. They in their Ministry were the
Means first of the Conversion of others unto the Faith, and then of their
gathering into a Church State, affording them Assistance in all things they
stood in need of. Hence there newly formed Churches, in lesser Towns and
Villages, had always a great Reverence for the Church by whose means they were
converted unto God, and Stated in Church Order. And it was meet that so they
should have. But in process of time, as these lesser Churches decreased in
spiritual Gifts, and fell under a scarcity of able Guides, this Reverence was
turned into Obedience and Dependence; and they thought it well enough to be
under the Rule of others, being unable well to rule themselves.

On these and* the like Accounts there was quickly introduced an Inequality
among Churches, which by virtue of their first Institution were equal as unto
State and Power.

4. Churches may admit of many Variations, as unto their outward Form and
Order, which yet change not their State, nor cause them to cease from being
Congregational. As,

1. Supposing that any of them might have many Elders or Presbyters in them, as
it is apparent that most of them had, yea all that are mentioned in the
Scripture had so; Act. 11.30. chap. 14.23. chap. 15.6, 22, 23. chap. 16.4.
chap. 20.17, 18. chap. 21.18. Phil. 1.1.1. Tim. 5.17. Tit. 1.5. they might, and
some of them did choose out some one endued With especial Gifts, that might in
some sort preside amongst them, and who had quickly the name of Bishop
appropriated unto him. This Practice is thought to have had its Original at
Alexandria, and began generally to be received in the 3 Century: But this
changed not the State of the Church; though it had no divine Warrant to
authorize it. For this Order may be agreed unto among the Elders of a
particular Congregation, and Sundry things may fall out, enclining unto the
reception of it. But from a distinct mention (if any such there be) in the
Writings of the second Century of Bishops and Presbyters to fancy
Metropolitical and Diocesan Churches, is but a pleasant Dream.

2. The Members of these Churches that were great and numerous, being under the
care and Inspection of their Elders in common, might for the ordinary Duty of
Divine Worship me^t in parts or several actual Assemblies, and they did so
especially in time of Persecution. Nothing occurs more frequently in
Ecclesiastical Story, than the Meetings of Christians, in secret Places, in
private houses, yea in caves and dens of the Earth, when in some places it was
impossible that the whole Body of the Church should so assemble together. How
this Disposition of the Members of the Church into several Parts, in each of
which some Elder or Elders of it did officiate, gave occasion unto the
distinction of greater Churches into particular Titles or Parishes, is not here
to be declared, it may be so Elsewhere: But neither yet did this alter the
State of the Churches, from their Original Institution. For,

3. Upon all extraordinary occasions, all such as concerned the whole Church,
as the Choice of Elders, or the Deposition of them, the admission or exclusion
of Members, and the like, the whole Church continued to meet together, which
practice was plainly continued in the days of Cyprian as we shall see
afterward, Neither does it appear but that during the first 200 years of the
Church, the whole Body o^ the Church did ordinarily meet together in one place,
for the solemn Administration of the Holy Ordinances of Worship, and the
Exercise of Discipline.

Wherefore notwithstanding these and other the like Variations, from the
Original Institution of Churches which came in partly by Inadvertency unto the
Rule, and partly were received from the Advantages and Accommodations which
they pretended unto, the State of the Churches continued Congregational only
for 200 years, so far as can be gathered from the remaining Monuments of those
times. Only we must yet add, that we are no way concerned in Testimonies or
sayings taken from the writings of those in following Ages as unto the State,
way and manner of the Churches in this season; but do appeal unto their own
writings only, This is the great Artifice whereby Baronius in his Annalls
would impose upon the Credulity of men, an apprehension of the Antiquity of any
of their Roman Inventions; he affixeth them unto some of the first Ages; and
giving some Countenance unto them, it may be from some spurious writings, lays
the weight of Confirmation on Testimonies and Sayings of Writers, many years,
yea for the most part, Ages afterward, for it was and is of the Latter Ages of
the Church, wherein Use and Custom have wrested Ecclesiastical words to other
significations than at first they were applied unto, to impose the present
State of things among them, on these who went before who knew nothing of them.

I shall therefore briefly enquire into, what Representation is made of the
State of the Churches by the Writers themselves, who had in the season enquired
after, or in the Age next unto it, which was acquainted with their practice.

That which first offers itself unto us, and which is an invaluable Testimony
of the state of the first Churches, immediately after the Decease of the
Apostles, is the Epistle of Clemens Romanus unto the Brethren of the Church of
Corinth. This Epistle according to the Title of it, Irenaeus ascribes unto the
whole Church at Rome, and calls it, potentissimas literas; sub hoc Clemente
dissensione non modica inter ^os qui Corinthi erant fratres facta* scripsit
quae est Romae Ecclesia, potentissimas literas; lib. 3. cap. 3. By Eusebius it
is termed (...), great and admirable; who also affirms that it was publicly
read in some Churches; Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 14. And again he calls
it, (...), a most powerful writing; lib. 5. cap. 7.

There is no doubt but some things in the writings of it did befall him
humanitus, that the work of such a companion of some of the Apostles as he was,
might not be received as of divine Institution; such was the credit which he
gives unto the vulgar fable of the Phoenix. But for the substance of it, it is
such as every way becomes a person of an Apostolical Spirit, consonant unto the
style and writings of the Apostles themselves; a precious Jewel, and just
Representation of the state and order of the Church in those days. And sundry
things we may observe from it.

1. There is nothing in it that gives the least intimation of any other
Church State, but that which was Congregational, although there were the
highest causes and Reasons for him so to do, had there been any such Churches
then in being. The case he had in hand was that of Ecclesiastical Sedition or
Schism in the Church of Corinth; the Church or Body of the Brethren having
unjustly deposed their Elders, as it should seem, all of them. Giving advice
herein unto the whole Church, using all sorts of Arguments to convince them of
their sin, directing all probable means for their Cure, he never once sends
them to the Bishop or Church of Rome, as the Head of Unity unto all Churches;
makes no mention of any Metropolitical or Diocesan Church and its Rule, or of
any single Bishop and his Authority. No one of any such Order does he either
commend, or condemn, or once address himself unto, with either Admonitions,
Exhortations, Encouragements, or Directions. He only handles the cause by the
Rule of the Scripture, as it was stated between the Church itself and its
Elders. I take it for granted, that if there were any Church at Corinth
consisting of many Congregations in the City and about it, or comprehensive as
some say of the whole Region of Achaia, that there was a single Officer or
Bishop over that whole Church. But none such is here mentioned. If there were
any such, he was either Deposed by the people, or he was not. If he were
Deposed, he was only one of the Presbyters; for they were only Presbyters that
were Deposed. If he were not, why is he not once called on to discharge his
duty in curing of that Schism, or blamed for his neglect? Certainly there was
never greater Prevarication used by any man, in any cause, than is by Clemens
in this, if the state of the Church, its Rule and Order were such as some now
pretend. For he neither lets the people know wherein their sin and Schism did
lie, namely in a Separation from their Bishop, nor does once mention the only
proper cure and remedy of all their Evils. But he knew their state and order
too well, to insist on things that were not then in rerum natura, and wherein
they were not concerned.

2. This Epistle is written, as unto the whole Church at Corinth, so in the
name of the whole Church of Rome. (...). The Church of God which dwells (or
sojourneth as a stranger) at Rome, in the City of Rome; to the Church of God
that dwells or sojourneth at Corinth. For although that Church was then in
disorder, under no certain Rule, having cast off all their Elders, etc. yet the
Church of Rome not only allows it to be a sister-Church, but salutes the
Brethren of it in the following words; (...): called and sanctified through the
will of God by our Lord Jesus Christ. The Churches of Christ were not so ready
in those days to condemn the persons, nor to judge the Church State and
condition of others, on every miscarriage real or supposed, as some have been
and are in these latter Ages.

2. This Address being from the body of the Church at Rome unto that at
Corinth, without the least mention of the Officers of them in particular; it is
evident that the Churches themselves, that is, the whole entire Community of
them, had Communion with one another, as they were sister-Churches; and that
they had themselves the transaction of all Affairs wherein they were concerned;
as they had in the days of the Apostles, Acts 15.1, 2, 3. It was the Brethren
of the Church at Antioch who determined that Paul and Barnabas and certain
others should go up to Jerusalem to consult the Apostles and Elders. See also
Chap. 21.22. This they did not, nor ought to do, without the Presence,
Guidance, Conduct and consent of their Elders or Rulers where they had any. But
this they were not excluded from. And that Church, the whole Body or fraternity
whereof does advise and consult in those things wherein they are concerned, on
the account of their Communion with other Churches, is a Congregational Church,
and no other. It was the Church who sent this Epistle unto the Corinthians;
Claudius Ephebus, Page 73.
Valerius, Bibo, Fortunatus, are named as their Messengers; (...): that are
sent by us, our Messengers, our Apostles in these matters. Such as the Churches
made use of on all such occasions in the Apostles days, 2 Cor. 8.23. And the
persons whom they sent were only Members of the Church, and not Officers; nor
do we any where hear of them under that Character. Now they could not be sent
in the name of the Church, but by its consent; nor could the Church consent,
without its Assembling together.

This was the state and order of the first Churches; in that Communion which
was amongst them, according to the mind of Christ, they had a singular concern
in the welfare and prosperity of each other, and were solicitous about them in
their trials. Hence those who were planted at a greater distance than would
allow frequent personal converse with their respective Members, did on all
occasions send Messengers unto one another; sometimes merely to visit them in
love, and sometimes to give or take Advice. But these things* as indeed almost
all others that b^long unto the Communion of Churches, either in themselves, or
with one another, are either utterly lost and buried, or kept above ground, in
a pretense of Episcopal Authority; Churches themselves being wholly excluded
from any concernment in them. But as the Advice of the Church of Rome was
desired in this case by the whole Church of Corinth; ((...)) so it was given by
the Body of the Church itself, Page 1.
and sent by Messengers of their own.

3. The description given of the state, ways and walking of the Church of
Corinth, P. 2, 3, 4.
that is, that whole Fraternity of the Church, which fell afterward into that
disorder which is reproved, before their fall, is such, as that it bespeaks
their walking together in one and the same society, and is sufficient to make
any good man desire, that he might see Churches yet in the world, unto whom, or
the generality of whose Members, that Description might be honestly and justly
accommodated. One Character which is given of them I shall mention only. (...).
There was a full (or plentiful) effusion of the Holy Ghost upon you all; so
that being full (or filled) with an holy will, (holiness of will) and a good
readiness of mind, with a pious devout confidence, you stretched out your hands
in Prayers to Almighty God, supplicating his clemency (or Mercy) for the pardon
of your involuntary sins; (sins fallen into by infirmity, or the surprizals of
Temptations not consented to, not delighted or continued in) your labor or
contention of spirit, ((...), as the Apostle speaks, (...), Col. 2.1.) was
night and day (in your Prayers) for the whole Brotherhood, (that is, especially
of their own Church itself) that the number of Gods Elect might be saved in
mercy, through a good Conscience toward him.

This was their state, this was their Liturgy, this their practice. (1.) There
was on all the Members of the Church a plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit in
his Gifts and Graces; wherein, it may be, respect is had unto what was affirmed
by the Apostle before of the same Church, 1 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. the same Grace
being yet continued unto them. (2.) By virtue of this Effusion of the Spirit on
all of them, their Wills and Affections being sanctified, their minds were
enabled to pour forth fervent prayers unto God. (3.) They were not such as
lived in any open sin, or any secret sin, known to be so, but were only subject
unto involuntary surprizals, whose pardon they continually prayed for. (4.)
Their love and sense of duty stirred them up to labor mightily in their
Prayers with fervency and constancy, for the Salvation of the whole Fraternity
of Elect Believers, whether throughout the world, or more especial^y those in
and of their own Church.

He that should ascribe these things unto any of those Churches, which now in
the world claim to be so only, would quickly find himself at a loss for the
proof of what he asserts. Did we all sedulously endeavor to reduce and restore
Churches unto their primitive state and frame, it would bring more glory to
God, than all our contentions about Rule and Domination.

4. It is certain, that the Church of Corinth was fallen into a sinful excess,
in the Deposition and Rejection of their Elders, Page 57, 58. Page 62.
whom the Church at Rome judged to have presided among them laudably and
unblameably, as unto their whole walk and work amongst them. And this they did
by the suggestion of two or three envious discontented persons; and as it is
probable from some digressions in the Epistle, tainted with those Errors, which
had formerly infested that Church, as the denial of the Resurrection of the
flesh, which is therefore here reflected on. But in the whole Epistle, the
Church is nowhere reproved for assuming an Authority unto themselves which did
not belong unto them. It seems what Cyprian afterward affirmed, was then
acknowledged; namely, that the right of choosing the worthy, and of rejecting
the unworthy, was in the Body of the People. But they are severely reproved for
the abuse of their Liberty and Power. For they had exercised them on ill
grounds, by ill means, for ill ends, and in a most unjust cause. He therefore
exhorts the Body of the Church to return unto their duty, in the Restoration
of their Elders; and then prescribes unto them who were the first occasion of
Schism, that every one would subject themselves unto the restored Presbyter;
and say, Page 69.
(...), I will do the things appointed or commanded by the Multitude, the
Church in the generality of its Members. The Plebs, the Multitude, the Body of
the fraternity in the Church, (...), as they were often called in the
Scripture* Act. 4.32. Chap. 6.2, 5. Chap. 15.12, 30. had then Right and Power
to appoint things that were to be done in the Church, for Order and Peace. I do
not say they had it without, or in distinction from their Officers, Rulers, and
Guides, but in a concurrence with them, and subordination to them; whence the
Acts concluded on, may be esteemed, and are the Acts of the whole Church. This
order can be observed, or this can fall out only in a Congregational Church,
all whose Members do meet together for the discharge of their Duties, and
Exercise of their Discipline. And if no more may be considered in it but the
miscarriage of the people, without any respect to their Right and Power, yet
such Churches as wherein it is impossible that that should fall out in them, as
did so fall out in that Church, are not of the same kind or order with it.

But for the sake of them, who may endeavor to reduce any Church State into
its Primitive Constitution, that they may be cautioned against that great Evil
which this Church, in the exercise of their supposed liberty f^ll into, I
cannot but transcribe a few of those excellent words which are used plentifully
with cogent Reasons in this Epistle against it. Page 62.
(...). It is shameful, beloved, exceeding shameful which is reported of you,
that the most firm and ancient Church of the Corinthians, should for the sake
of one or two persons, seditiously tumultuate against their Elders. And herein
he proceeds to declare the dreadful scandal that ensued thereon, both among
Believers and Infidels. The Instruction also which he adds hereunto, is worthy
the remembrance of all Church Members, (...). It is blessed Advice for all
Church Members that he gives; Let a man be faithful, let him be powerful in
knowledge or the Declaration of it; let him be wise to judge the Words or
Doctrines; let him be chaste or pure in his works; the greater he seems to be,
the more humble he ought to be: that so the Church may have no trouble by him
nor his Gifts. But to return.

5. Having occasion to mention the Officers of the Church, he names only the
two ranks of Bishops and Deacons, Page 54. and 55.
as the Apostle also does, Phil. 1.1. speaking of the Apostles, he says, (...).
Preaching the word through Regions and Cities, they appointed the first fruits
(as the House of Stephan as was the first fruits of Achaia, who therefore
addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.15.) or the first
Converts to the Faith, after a Spiritual Trial of them, (as unto their fitness
for their work) to be Bishops and Deacons of them that should afterward
believe. Where there were as yet but a few converted, the Apostle gathered them
into Church Order; and so soon as they found any fit among them, appointed and
ordained them to be Bishops and Deacons, so that provision might be made for
the guidance and conduct of them that should be converted and added unto them,
after they were left by the Apostles. These Bishops he affirms to be, and have
been the Presbyters or Elders of the Church, even the same with those deposed
by the Corinthians, Page 57, and 58.
in the same manner as the Apostle does, Act. 20.28. (...), etc. It is no small
sin in us to reject or cast off them, who have offered the Gifts, (or
discharged the Duties) of Episcopacy, holily and without blame. Blessed are the
Elders who went before; namely, as he expresses it, because they are freed
from that amotion from their Office, which those Elders now amongst them had
undergone, after they had duly discharged the Office of Episcopacy. Other
distinction and difference of ordinary Officers, besides that of Bishops or
Elders and Deacons, the Church at Rome in those days knew not. Such ought to be
in every particular Church. Of any one single person to preside over many
Churches, which is necessary unto the Constitution of a Church State distinct
from that which is Congregational, Clemens knew nothing in his days; but gives
us such a description of the Church and its order, as is inconsistent with such
a pretense.

6. I shall add no more from this excellent Epistle, but only the account given
in it, of the first constitution of Officers in the Churches. (...). Our
Apostles therefore, knowing by our Lord Jesus Christ, that there would
contention arise about the name of Episcopacy, (that is, Episcopacy itself;)
For this cause being endued with a perfect foresight of things, they appointed
those forementioned (their first Converts, unto the Office of the Ministry)
for the future describing or giving order about the course of the Ministry,
that other approved men might succeed them in their Ministry. These (Elders)
therefore who were so appointed by them, and afterward by other famous men,
with the consent of the whole Church, etc.

Sundry things we may observe in this Discourse. (1.) The Apostles foresaw
there would be strife and contention about the name of Episcopacy; that is, the
Office itself, and those who should possess it. This Episcopacy was that Office
which the deposed Elders had well discharged in the Church of Corinth. This
they might foresee from the nature of the thing itself, the inclination of men
unto pre-eminence, and the instance they had seen in their own days, in such as
Diotrephes, with the former Divisions that had been in this very Church about
their Teachers, 1 Cor. 1.12. But moreover, they were instructed in the
knowledge of it by our Lord Jesus Christ, through his Divine Spirit abiding
with them, and teaching them all things. This therefore they sought by all
means to prevent; and that two ways: (1.) In that for the first time themselves
appointed approved persons unto the Office of the Ministry; not that they did
it of themselves without the consent and choice of the Church whereunto any of
them were appointed, for this was directly contrary unto their practice, Act.
1.15, 22, 23, 26. Chap. 6.3. Chap. 14.23. But that the peace and edification of
the Churches might be provided for, they themselves spiritually tried and
approved of fit persons so to lead the Church in their choice. Wherefore that
which is added afterward of the consent of the whole Church, is to be referred
unto those who were ordained by the Apostles themselves. (2.) They gave Rules
and Orders, namely, in their Writings, concerning the Offices and Officers that
were to be in the Church, with the way whereby they should be substituted into
the place and room of them that were deceased; as we know they have done in
their Writings. (3.) After this was done by the Apostles, other excellent
persons, as the Evangelists, did the same. These assisted the Churches in the
Ordination and Choice of their Officers according unto the Rules prescribed by
the Apostles. And I know not but that the eminent Pastors of other Churches who
usually gave their assistance in the setting apart and Ordination of others
unto the Ministry, be intended.

I have insisted long on this Testimony, being led on by the Excellency of the
writing itself. Nothing remains written so near the times of the Apostles; nor
does any that is extant which was written afterward, give such an Evidence of
Apostolical Wisdom, Gravity, and Humility. Neither is there in all Antiquity,
after the writings of the Apostles, such a Representation of the State, Order,
and Rule of first Evangelical Churches. And it is no small prejudice unto the
pretensions of future Ages, that this Apostolical person handling a most
weighty Ecclesiastical cause, makes not the least mention of such Offices,
Power, and Proceedings, as wherein some would have all Church-rule and order to
consist.

The Epistle of Polycarpus and the Elders of the Church at Smyrna with him,
unto the Church of the Philippians, is the next on Roll of Antiquity. Nothing
appears in the whole to intimate any other Church State or Order than that
described by Clemens. The Epistle is directed unto the whole Church at
Philippi, not unto any particular Bishop. (...). This was the usual style of
those days, so was it used as we have seen by Clemens; (...); so it was used
presently after the death of Polycarpus, by the Church at Smyrna, in the
account they gave unto other Churches of his death and Martyrdom; (...). And
the same was the Inscription of the Epistle of the Churches at Vienna, and
Lions in France, unto the Churches in Asia and Phrygia, as we shall see
immediately. And these are plain Testimonies of that Communion among the
Churches in those days which was held in and by the Body of each Church, or the
Community of the Brotherhood, which is a clear demonstration of their State and
Order. And those whom the Apostle writing to the Philippians calls their
Bishops and Deacons, Polycarpus calls their Presbyters and Deacons. It behooves
you, says he unto the Church there, to abstain from these things, (...), being
subject unto the Elders and Deacons. Nor does he mention any other Bishop among
the Philippians. And it may be observed, that in all these Primitive Writings*
there is still a distinction made, after the Example of the Scripture, between
the Church and the Guides, Rulers, Bishops, or Elders of it. And the name of
the Church is constantly assigned unto the Body of the People, as distinct from
the Elders; nowhere to the Bishops or Elders, as distinct from the people:
though the Church in its complete state comprehends both sorts.

Unto this time, that is, about the year 107 or 108, do belong the Epistles
ascribed unto Ignatius, if so be they were written by him. For Polycarpus wrote
his Epistle unto the Philippians after Ignatius was carried to Rome, having
wrote his Epistle before in Asia. Many are the Contests of Learned Men about
those Epistles which remain, whether they are genuine, or the same that were
written by him: for, that he did write Epistles unto sundry Churches, is
acknowledged by all. And whereas there have in this Age been two Copies found
and published of these Epistles, wherein very many things that were obnoxious
unto just exception in those before published do not at all appear, yet men are
not agreed which of them ought to be preferred; and many yet deny that any of
them were those written by Ignatius. I shall not interpose in this contest;
only I must say, that if any of his genuine Writings do yet remain, yet the
Corruption and Interpolation of them, for many Ages, must needs much impair the
Authority of what is represented in them as his; nor am I delivered from these
thoughts, by the late either more sound, or more maimed Editions of them. And
the truth is, the corruption and fiction of Epistolical Writings in the first
Ages was so intolerable, as that very little in that kind is preserved sincere
and unquestionable. Hence Dionysius the Bishop of Corinth complained that in
his own time his own Epistles were so corrupted by additions and detractions,
so as that it seems he would have them no more esteemed as his. Eusebius.
Ecclesiast. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 22.

But yet because these Epistles are so earnestly contended for by many Learned
men, as the genuine Writings of Ignatius, I shall not pass by the consideration
of them, as unto the Argument in hand. I do therefore affirm that in these
Epistles, (in any Edition of them,) there is no mention made, or Desc^iption
given of any Church or Churches state, but only of that which is
Congregational, that is, such a Church as all the Members whereof did meet and
were obliged to meet for Divine Worship and Discipline in the same place. What
was the Distinction they observed among their Officers; of what fort they were,
and what number, belongs not unto our present enquiry; our concernment is only
this, that they did preside in the same particular Church, and were none of
them Bishops of more Churches than one, or of any Church that should consist of
a Collection or Association of such particular Churches as had no Bishops
properly so called of their own.

All these Epistle, that is, the seven most esteemed, were written, as that of
Clemens, unto the Bodies or whole fraternity of the Churches, unto whom they
are directed in distinction from their Bishops, Elders, and Deacons; excepting
only that unto Polycarpus, which is unto a single person. Under that
consideration, namely, of the entire fraternity in distinction from their
Officers, does he address unto them, and therein does he ascribe and assign
such Duties unto them, as could not be attended unto, nor performed but in the
Assembly of them all. Such is the direction he gives unto the Church of the
Philadelphians, how and in what manner they should receive penitents returning
unto the Church, that they might be encouraged into that Duty by their
Benignity and Patience. And many things of the like nature does he deal with
them about. And this Assembling together in the same place, namely, of the
whole Church, he does frequen^ly intimate and express. Some instances hereof we
may repeat.

(...), Meet all of you together in the same place; let there be one Prayer in
common of all. Epist. ad Magnes. This direction can be given unto no other but
a particular Church. And again to the Philadelphians; (...) Where your Pastor
is, there follow you as sheep. And how they may do so, is declared immediately
afterward; (...) (...) I write with confidence unto your Godly Love; and
persuade you to use one Faith (or the confession of it) one Preaching of the
Word, and one Eucharist, or Administration of the holy Sacrament. For the flesh
of Christ is one, and the Blood of Christ that was shed for us in one; one
Bread is broken to all, and one Cup distributed among all; there is one Altar
to the whole Church, and one Bishop, with the Presbytery, and the Deacons my
fellow servants. Nothing can be more evident than that it is a particular
Church in its Order and Assembly for Worship in one place, that he describes;
nor can these things be accommodated unto a Church of any other form. And
toward the end of the Epistle treating about the Churches sending their
Bishops or others on their occasions, he tells them in particular, (...). It
becomes you as a Church of God, to choose or appoint a Bishop, who may perform
the Embassy of God, that it may be granted unto them to glorify the name of
God, being gathered together in one place. It is somewhat difficult how the
Church of Philadelphia should choose or ordain a Bishop at this time. For they
had one of their own, whom Ignatius greatly extols in the beginning of the
Epistle. Nor was it in their power or duty to choose or ord^in a Bishop for the
Church of Antioch, which was their own right and duty alone; nor had the Church
of Antioch any the least dependence on that at Philadelphia. It may be he
intends only their Assistance therein, as immediately before he ascribes the
peace and tranquillity of the Antiochians unto the Prayers of the
Philadelphians. For my part, I judge he intends not the proper Bishop of either
place; but some Elder which they were to choose as a Messenger to send to
Antioch, to assist them in their present condition. For in those days there
were persons chosen by the Churches to be sent abroad to assist other Churches
on the like occasions: These were called (...), *2 Cor. 8.23. the especial
Apostles of the Churches; as verse. 19. it is said of Luke that he was (...),
chosen and appointed by the Churches for the service there mentioned. Such was
this Bishop, who was sent on Gods Errand, to assist the Church by his Advice
and Counsel, as unto the continuance of their Assemblies unto the glory of God,
though at present their Bishop was taken from them. In that Epistle unto the
Ephesians, he lets them know that he rejoiced at their (...), their numerous
Multitude, whom he persuades and urges unto a common concurrence in Prayer
with their Bishop. (...). And if the Prayers of one or two be so effectual,
that they bring Christ among them, how much more will the consenting Prayer of
the Bishop and the whole Church together? So he again explains his mind toward
the end of the Epistle; (...). Do your diligence to meet together frequently;
for when you frequently meet together in the same place, the powers of Satan
are destroyed. And many other expressions of the like nature occur in those
Epistles. We are no way at present concerned in the controversy about that
distinction of Bishops and Presbyters, which the Writer of those Epistles does
assert; this only I say, that he does in none of them, take the least notice,
or give the least intimation of any Church State, but such alone, wherein the
Members of the whole Church did constantly meet together in the same place, for
the worship of God and Communion among themselves. And not only so, but he
every where in all his Epistles to them, ascribes such Duties and Rights unto
the Churches, as cannot be observed and preserved but in particular Churches
only. Nor does he leave any room for any other Church State whatever. Although
therefore, there might have been, and probably there was some Alterations in
the Order of the Churches, from what was of Primitive Institution; yet was
there as yet no such change in their state, as to make way for those greater
alterations, which not long after ensued. For they were not introduced, until
through a defect in the multiplication of Churches in an equality of Power and
Order, which ought to have been done, they were increased into that multitude
for number of Members, and were so diffused as unto their habitations, as made
an appearance of a Necessity of another Constitution of Churches, and anoth^r
kind of Rule, than what was of original appointment.

Justin Martyr wrote his second Apology for the Christians unto the Roman
Emperors, about the year 150. It is mavelous to consider how ignorant not
only the common sort of the Pagans, but the Philosophers also, and Governors
of the Nations, were of the nature of Christian Churches, and of the worship
celebrated in them. But who are so blind as those who will not see? Even unto
this day, not a few are willingly, or rather wilfully ignorant of the nature of
such Assemblies, or what is performed in them, as were among the Primitive
Christians, that they may be at liberty to speak all manner of evil of them
falsely. Hence were all the Reports and stories among the Heathen, concerning
what was done in the Christian Conventicles, which they would have to be the
most abominable villainies, that were ever acted by Mankind. Even th^se who made
the most candid Enquiry into what they were and did, attained unto very little
knowledge or certainty concerning them and their Mysteries, as is evident in
the Epistles of Trajan and Pliny, with the Rescript of Adrian unto Minucius
Fundanus about them.

In this state of things, this our great and learned Phil^sopher, who
afterward suffered Martyrdom about the year 160, undertook to give an account
unto Antoninus Pius and Lucius, who then ruled the Roman Empire, of the Nature,
Order, and Worship of the Christian Churches; and that in such an excellent
manner, as that I know nothing material that can be added unto it, were an
account of the same thing to be given unto alike persons at this day. We may
touch a little upon some Heads of it.

1. He declares the conversion of men unto the Faith, as the foundation of all
their Church Order and Worship. (...). As many as are persuaded and do believe
the things to be true, which are taught and spoken by us, and take upon
themselves that they are able to live according to that Doctrine, they are
taught to seek of God by fasting and prayer, the pardon of their foregoing
sins; and we also do join together with them, in fasting and prayer for that
end. And he^ein (1.) The only means of Conversion which he insists upon, is the
Preaching of the Word, or Truth of the Gospel; wherein they especially insisted
on the Doctrine of the Person and Office^ of Christ, as appears throughout his
whole Apology. (2.) This preaching of the Word, or Declaration of the Truth of
the Gospel unto the Conversion of the Hearers be does not confine unto any
especial sort of persons, as ^e does afterward that Administration of the holy
things in the Church; but speaks of it in general, as the work of all
Christians that were able for it, as does the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. (3.)
Those who were converted did two things. (1.) They professed their Faith or
Assent unto the Truth of the Dotcrine of the Gospel. (2.) They took it on
themselves, to live according to the Rule of it, to do and observe the things
commanded by Jesus Christ, as he appointed they should, Math. 28.18, 19. (4.)
To lay a sure and comfortable foundation of their future profession, they were
taught to confess their former sins, and by earnest prayer with fastings to
seek of God the pardon and forgiveness of them. And (5.) Herein, (such was
their love and zeal) those who had been the means of their Conversion, joined
with them for their comfort and edification. It is well known how this whole
process is lost, and on what account it is discontinued. But whether it be done
so unto the Advantage of Christian Religion, and the good of the Souls of Men,
is well worth a strict enquiry.

2. In the next place he declares how those who were so converted, were
conducted unto Baptism, and how they were initiated into the Mysteries of the
Gospel thereby.

3. When any was so Baptized, they brought him unto the Church which he was to
be joined unto. (...). Him who is thus Bapti^ed, who believes, and is received
(by consent) among (...), or to be of our number, we bring him unto those
called the Brethren, when they are met, or gathered together, for joint prayers
and supplications for themselves, and for him who is now illuminated, and all
others, with intention of mind, etc. We have here another illustrious instance
of the care and diligence of the Primitive Church, about the enstating
professed Believers in the Communion of the Church. That hereon those who were
to be admitted made their public confession, we shall afterward declare. And
the Brethren here mentioned, are the whole fraternity of the Church, who were
concerned in these things. And Justin is not ashamed to declare by what name
they called one another among themselves, even to the Heathen, though it be now
a scorn and reproach among them that are called Christians.

4. He proceeds to declare the nature of their Church-meetings or Assemblies,
with the Duties and Worship of them. And he tells us first, that they had
frequent meetings among themselves: they that have any wealth, says he, do
help the poor; (...), and we are continually together, that is, in the lesser
occasional Assemblies of the Brethren; for so in the next place he adds
immediately, (...). On the day called Sunday, there is a meeting of all that
dwell in the Towns, and Fields, or Villages about. This was the State, the
Order, the proceeding of the Church in the days of Justin; whence it is
undeniably evident, that he knew no other Church State or Order, but that of a
particular Congregation, whose Members living in any Town or City, or Fields
adjacent, did constantly all of them meet together in one place, the first day
of the week, for the celebration of Divine Worship.

5. In this Church he mentions only two sorts of Officers, (...) and (...),
Presidents and Deacons. Of the first sort, in the Duty of one of their
Assemblies ^e mentions but one; (...), the President, the Ruler, the Bishop, to
whom belonged the Administration of all the holy Mysteries. And that we may not
think that he is called the (...), with respect unto any Pre-eminence over
other Ministers or Elders, like a Diocesan Bishop, he terms him, (...), he that
presided over the Brethren of that Church. Now certainly that Church wherein
one President, Elder, Presbyter, or Bishop, did administer the Holy Ordinances
in one place unto all the Members of it, was a particular Congregation.

6. The things that he ascribes unto this Leader, to be done at this general
meeting of the Church, every Lords day; were, (1.) That he prayed; (2.) That
after the reading of the Scripture he preached. (3.) That he consecrated the
Eucharist; the Elements of the Bread and Wine being distributed by the Deacons,
unto the Congregation. (4.) That he closed the whole Worship of the day in
prayer.

7. In the Consecration of the Sacramental Elements, he observes that the
President prayed at large, giving thanks to God; (...). So vain is the pretense
of some, that in the Primitive times they consecrated the Elements by the
Repetition of the Lords prayer only. After the participation of the Eucharist,
there was a Collection made for the poor, as he describes it at large; what
was so gathered being committed to the Pastor, who took care for the
distribution of it, unto all sorts of poor belonging unto the Church. Hereunto
was added, as Tertullian observes, the Exercise of Discipline in their
Assemblies, whereof we shall speak afterward. The close of the Administration
of the Sacrament, Justin gives us in these words, (...) (...). The Pastor
again, according to his ability or power pours forth or sends up prayers, the
people all joyfully crying, Amen, etc. (...), that is, as Origin expounds the
Phrase often used by himself, (...), lib. 8. ad Cells. according unto the
present Ability given unto him.

This was the state, the Order, and the Worship of the Church, with its Method,
in the days of Justin Martyr. This and no other is that which we plead for.

Unto these times belongs the most excellent Epistle of the Churches of Vienna
and Lions in France, unto the Brethren in Asia and Phrygia, recorded at large
by Eusebius, Hist. lib. 5. cap* 1. Their design in it is, to give an account of
the holy Martyrs who suffered in the persecution under Marcus Antoninus. I am
no way concerned in what state Irenaeus was in the Church at Lions, whereon
after the writing of this Epistle, he was sent to Eleutherius the Bishop of
Rome, which he gives an account of Chap. 4. He is indeed in that Epistle called
a Presbyter of the Church; although as some suppose it was sundry years after
the death of Pothinus, whom they call Bishop of Lions, into whose room he
immediately succeeded. And Eusebius himself, cap. 8. affirming that he would
give an account of the Writings of the ancient Ecclesiastical Presbyters, in
the first place produces those of Irenaeus. But these things belong not unto
our present contest. The Epistle we intend was written by the Brethren of those
Churches, and it was written to the Brethren of the Churches in Asia and
Phrygia; after the manner of the Scripture, wherein the fraternity or Body of
the Church was designed or intended in all such Epistles. From them was this
Epistle, and unto those of the same sort was it written, not from one Bishop
unto another. And as this manifests the concern of the Brotherhood in all
Ecclesiastical Affairs, so with all other circumstances, it evidenceth that
those Churches were particular or Congregational only. Nor is there any thing
in the whole Epistle that should give the least intimation of any other Church
state know^ unto them. This Epistle as recorded by Eusebius, gives us as noble
Representation of the Spirit and Communion that was then among the Churches of
Christ, being written with Apostolical simplicity and gravity, and remote from
those Titles of Honor, and affected swelling words, which the feigned writings
of that Age, and some that are genuine in those that followed, are stuffed
withal.

Tertull^an, who lived about the end of the second Century, gives us the same
account of the State, Order, and Worship of the Churches, as was given before
by Justin Martyr, Apol. ad Genesis cap. 39. The Description of a Church he first
lays down in these words; Corp^s sumus de conscientia Religionis, and
Disciplinae unitate, and spei foedere. We are a Body (united) in the Conscience
of Religion, (or a conscientious Observation of the Duties of Religion) by an
Agreement in Discipline, (whereby it was usual with the Ancients to express
Universal Obedience unto the Doctrine and commands of Christ) and in a Covenant
of Hope. For whereas such a Body or Religious Society could not be united but
by a Covenant, he calls it a Covenant of Hope; because the principal respect
was had therein unto the things hoped for. They covenanted together so to live
and walk in the Discipline of Christ, or Obedience unto his commands, as that
they might come together unto the enjoyment of Eternal Blessedness.

This Religious Body or Society thus united by Covenant, did meet together in
the same Assembly or Congregation. Corpus su^us, ^o^mus in coe^um and
Congregationem, ut ad Deum quasi manu facta precationibus ambiamus orantes. And
cogimur ad divinarum literarum commemorationem, etc. Designing to declare, as
he does in particular, Negotia Christianae factionis, as he calls them, or the
Duties of Christian Religion, which in their Churches they did attend unto, he
lays the foundation in their meetings in the sa^^ Assem^ly or Congregation.

In these Assemblies there presided the Elders, that upon a Testimony of their
meetness unto that Office, were chosen thereunto. President probati quique
seniores, honorem istum non preti^ sed Testimonio adepti. And in the Church
thus met together in the same place, Assembly, or Congregation, under the rule
and conduct of their Elders, among other things they exercised Discipline, that
is, in the presence and by the consent of the whole. Ibidem etiam,
exhortationes, castigationes; and censura divina. Nam and judicatur magno cum
pondere* ut apud certos de Dei conspectu; summumque futuri jud^cii praejudicium
est, s^ quis ita deliquerit, ut a communicatione Oratinis and conventus, and
omnis sancti commercii relegetur. The loss of this Discipline* and the manner
of its Administration, has been one of the principal means of the Apostasy of
Churches from their Primitive Institution.

To the same purpose does Origin give us an account of the way of the gathering
and establishing Churches under Elders of their own choosing, in the close of
his last Book against Celsus. And although in the days of Cyprian, in the third
Century, the distinction between the Bishop in any Church eminently so called,
and those who are only Presbyters; with their imparity, and not only the
precedence, but superiority of one over others began generally to be admitted;
yet it is sufficiently manifest from his Epistles, that the Church wherein he
did preside, was so far a particular Church, as that the whole Body or
Fraternity of it, was admitted unto all advice in things of common concernment
unto the whole Church, and allowed the exercise of their power and liberty in
choosing or refusing the Officers that were to be set over them.

Some few things we may observe from the Testimonies insisted on. As,

1. There is in them a true and full representation of the State, Order, Rule,
and Discipline of the Churches in the first Ages. It is a sufficient
demonstration that all those things wherein at the present the State and Order
of the Church are supposed to consist, are indeed later Inventions; not merely
because they are not mentioned by them, but because they are not so, when they
avowedly profess to give an account of that State and Order of the Church which
was then in use and practice. Had there been then among Christians Metropolitan
Archbishops, or Bishops Diocesan, Churches National or Provincial, an enclosure
of Church Power, or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in and for the whole rule of
the Church, unto Bishops and Officers utterly foreign unto any pretense of
Apostolical Institution or countenance; had many Churches, or many hundreds of
Churches, been without Rule in or among themselves, subject to the rule of any
one man, standing in no especial relation unto any of them, with other things
of the like nature, been then invented, known, and in use, how could they
possibly be excused in passing them over without the least taking notice of
them, or giving them the honor of being once mentioned by them? How easy had
it been for their Pagan Rulers, unto whom they presented their accounts (some
of them) of the state of their Churches, to have replied, that they knew well
enough there were other Dignities, Orders, and practices, than what they did
acknowledge, which they were either afraid or ashamed to own? But besides this
silence, on the other hand, they assert such things of the Officers appointed
in the Church, of the way of their appointment, of the Duty of Officers in the
Church, of the Power and Liberty of the people, of the nature and exercise of
Discipline, as are utterly inconsistent with that state of these things which
is by some pleaded for. Yea, as we have showed, whatever they write or speak
about Churches, or their Order, can have no Being or Exercise in any other form
of Churches, but of particular Congregations.

2. That account which they give, that Representation which they make of the
kind, state, and order of the Churches among them, does absolutely agree with,
and answer unto, what we are taught in the Divine Writings about the same
things. There were indeed before the end of the second Century, some practices
in and about some lesser things, (such as sending the Consecrated Elements from
the Assembly unto such as were sick) that they had no warrant for from any
thing written or done by the Apostles: But as unto the substance of what
concerns the State, Order, Rule, Discipline, and Worship of Evangelical
Churches, there is not any instance to be given, wherein they departed from the
Apostolical Traditions or Institution, either by adding any thing of their own
unto them, or omitting any thing that was by them ordained.

3. From this state, the Churches did by degrees and insensibly degenerate, so
as that another Form and Order of them did appear toward the end of the third
Century. For some in the first Churches, not applying their minds unto the
Apostolical Rule and practice, who ordained Elders in every Church, and that
not only in Cities or Towns, but as Clemens affirms, (...) in the
Country-Villages, Many disorders ensued, with respect unto such Collections of
Christians and Congregations, as were gathered at some distance from the first
or City-Church. Until the time of Origin, the Example of the Apostles in this
case was followed, and their Directions observed. For so he writes; (...). And
we knowing that there are other Congregations gathered in the Towns up and
down, by the Preaching of the Word of God; (or that there is another Heavenly
City in any Town built by the word of God) we persuade some that are sound in
Doctrine and of good Conversation, and meet for their Rule, to take on them the
conduct or Rule of those Churches; and these whilst they Rule within the
Churches those societies of Divine Institution by whom they are chosen, they
govern them according to the Prescriptions or Commands and Rules given by God
himself. Adver. Cells. lib. 8.

Those of whom he speaks, (...), were the Pastors or principal Members of the
Churches that were established. When they understood that in any place distant
from them, a number of Believers were called and gathered into Church order by
the Preaching of the Word, they presently, according unto their duty, took care
of them, enquired into their State and condition, assisting them in particular,
in finding out, trying, and recommending unto them, persons meet to be their
Officers and Rulers. These he acknowledges to be Churches and Cities of God,
upon their Collection by the Preaching of the Word, antecedently unto the
constitution of any Officers among them; as the Apostles also did, Act. 14.22,
23. Wherefore the Church* is essentially before its ordinary Officers, and
cannot as unto its continuance depend on any Succession of theirs, which they
have none, but what it gives unto them. These Officers, thus recommended, were
chosen, as he tells us, by the Churches, wherein they were to preside, and
thereon did govern them by the Rule of Gods Word alone.

Hereby was the Original Constitution and state of the first Churches for a
good season preserved. Nor was there the least abridgment of the power either
of these Churches or of their Officers, because it may be they were some of
them planted in poor Country-Villages. For as no man in the world can hinder,
but that every true Church has de jure all the Rights and Powers that any
other Church in the world has or ought to have, or that every true Officer,
Bishop, Elder, or Pastor, has not all the power, that Christ has annexed unto
that Office, (be they at Rome or E^gubium) so there was no abridgment of this
power in the meanest of them, as yet attempted.

But this course and duty in many places not long after became to be much
omitted; whether out of Ignorance or Negligence, or unwillingness of men to
undertake the Pastoral Charge in poor Country-Churches; I know not. But so it
was, that Believers in the Regions round about any City, (...), were looked on
as those which belonged unto the City- Churches, and were not settled in
particular Congregations for their edification, which they ought to have been.
And the Councels that afterward ensued, made Laws and Canons that they should
be under the Government of the Bishops of those City-Churches. But when the
number of such Believers was greatly increased, so as that it was needful to
have some always attending the Ministry among them, they came I know not how to
have Chorepiscopi among them and over them. The first mention of them is in the
Synod of An^yra in Galatia, about the year 314, Can. 13. and mention is again
made of them in a Synod of Antioch, An. 341. and somewhat before at the Council
of Neocaesarea, Can. 13. and frequently afterward, as any one may see in the
late Collections of the ancient Canons. I verily believe, nor can the contrary
be proved, but that these Chorepiscopi at first were as absolute and complete
in the Office of Episcopacy, as any of the Bishops of the greater Cities,
having their name or denomination from the places of their Residence; (...),
and not for an intimation of any inferiority in them unto other City-Bishops.
But so it came to pass, that through their poverty and want of Interest, their
Ministry being confined unto a small Country-Parish, and perhaps through a
comparative meanness of their Gifts or Abilities, the City-Bishop claimed a
Superiority over them, and made Canons about their Power, the bounding and
exercising of it, in Dependence on themselves. For a while they were esteemed a
degree above mere Presbyters, who accompanied or attended the Bishop of the
City-Church in his Administrations; and a degree beneath the Bishop himself, in
a posture never designed by Christ nor his Apostles. Wherefore in process of
time, the name and thing were utterly lost, and all the Country-Churches were
brought into an absolute subjection unto the City-Church; something being
allowed unto them for Worship, nothing for Rule and Discipline; whereby the
first state of Churches in their Original Institution, sacredly preserved in
the first Centuries, was utterly lost and demolished.

I shall add but one Argument more, to evinc^ the true state and nature of
Evangelical Churches herein, namely, that they were only particular
Congregations; and that is taken from the Duties and Powers ascribed in the
Scripture unto Churches, and the Members or entire Brotherhood of them. It was
observed before, that the Epistles of the Apostles were written all of them
unto the Body of the Churches, in contradistinction unto their Elders, Bishops,
or Pastors; unless it were those that were written unto particular persons by
name. And as this is plain in all the Epistles of Paul, wherein sometimes
distinct mention is made of the Officers of the Church, sometimes none at all;
so the Apostle John affirms that he wrote unto the Church, but that Diotrephes,
(who seems to have been their Bishop) received him not; at once rejecting the
Authority of the Apostle, and overthrowing the liberty of the Church: which
example was diligently followed in the succeeding Ages, Joh. Epist. 3. ver. 9.
And the Apostle Peter writing unto the Churches, on an especial occasion,
speaks distinctly of the Elders, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. See also Heb. 13.24. the body
of the Epistle being directed to the Body of Churches. Wherefore all the
Instructions, Directions and Injunctions given in those Epistles as unto the
exercise of power, or the performance of duty, they are given unto the Churches
themselves. Now these are such, many of them, as cannot be acted or performed
in any Church by the Body of the People, but that which is Congregational only.
It were too long here to insist on particulars; it shall be done elsewhere; and
it will thence appear, that this Argument alone, is sufficient to bear the
weight of this whole Cause. The Reader may if he please consider what
Representation hereof is made in these places compared together, Matthew. 18.15,
16, 17, 18. Act. 1.12, 23, Chap. 2.1, 42, 44, 46. Chap. 5.11, 12, 13. Chap.
11.21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30. Chap. 12.5, 12. Chap. 14.26, 27. Chap. 15.1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 12, 13, 22, 23, 27, 28, 30. Chap. 20.28. Romans 15.5, 6, 14, 25, 26.
Chap. 16.1, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 1.4, 5. Chap. 5. throughout. Chap. 12.4, 7, 8, 9,
11, 15, 18, 28, 29, 30, 31. Chap. 14. throughout. Chap. 16.10, 11. 2 Cor. 3.1,
2, 3. Chap. 7.14, 15. Chap. 8.22, 23, 24. Chap. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Chap.
8.5. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Chap. 5.11, 12. Gal. 6.1. Philip. 2.25. 26, 27,
28. Colos. 1.1, 2. Chap. 2.3. Chap. 3.16. Chap. 4.9, 12, 16, 17. 1 These. 5.11,
12, 13, 14. 2 These. 3.6, 7, 14, 15. Heb. 12.13. Chap. 10.24, 25. Chap. 12.15,
16. In these, I say, and other places innumerable, there are those things
affirmed of, and ascribed unto the Apostolical Churches, as unto their State,
Order, Assemblies, Duties, Powers and Privileges, as evinces them to have been
only particular Congregations.

CHAP. VI. Congregational Churches alone suited unto the ends of Christ in the
Institution of his Church.
HAving given an account of that State and Order of the Gospel-Churches which
are of Divine Institution, it is necessary that we declare also their
suitableness and sufficiency unto all the ends for which the Lord Christ
appointed such Churches. For if there be any true proper end of that nature,
which cannot be attained in or by any Church State in this or that form, it
must be granted that no such form is of Divine Appointment. Yea, it is
necessary not only that such a state as pretends unto a Divine Original, be not
only not contradictory unto, or inconsistent with such an end, but that it is
effectually conducing thereunto, and in its place necessary unto that purpose.
This therefore is that which we shall now inquire into; namely, whether this
State and Form of Gospel-Churches in single Congregations be suited unto all
those ends for which any such Churches were appointed; which they must be on
the account of the wisdom of Jesus Christ, the Author and Founder of them, or
be utterly discarded from their pretense. Nor is there any more forcible
Argument against any pretended Church State, Rule, or Order, than that it is
obstructive unto the Souls of men in attaining the proper ends of their whole
Institution. What these ends are, was in general before declared; I shall not
here repeat them, or go over them again, but only single out the consideration
of those which are usually pleaded, as not attainable by this way of Churches
in single Congregations only; or that at least they are not suited unto their
Attainment.

The first of these is Mutual Love among all Christians, all the Disciples of
Christ, By the Disciples of Christ I intend them, and them only, who profess
Faith in his Person and Doctrine, and to hear him, or to be guided by him
alone, in all things that appertain unto the Worship of God, and their living
unto him. If there are any called Christians who in these things choose other
guides, call other Ministers, hear them in their appointments, we must sever
them from our present consideration, though there are important Duties required
of us toward them also. But what is alleged is necessary unto the
constitution of a true Disciple of Christ. Unto all those, his great command is
Mutual Love among themselves. This he calls in an especial manner his
Commandment, and a new Commandment, as for other Reasons, so because he had
given the first absolute great Example of it in himself, as also discovered
Motives unto it, and Reasons for it, which Mankind before was in the dark unto.
And such weight does he lay on this command, that he declares, the
manifestation of the glory of God, his own Honor, and the Evidence to be given
unto the world that we are his Disciples, do depend on our Obedience thereunto.

To express and exercise this Love, in all the Acts and Duties of it among his
Disciples, was one end of his appointing them to walk in Church-relation one
unto another, wherein this Love is the bond of Perfectness. And the loss of
this Love, as unto its due exercise, is no less a pernicious part of the fatal
Apostasy of the Churches, than is the loss of Faith and Worship. For hereon is
Christendom, as it is usually called, become the greatest stage of Hatred,
Rage, Wrath, Bloodshed, and mutual Desolations, that is in the whole world; so
as that we have no way to answer the Objection of the Jews, arguing against us
from the divine Promises of Love and Peace in the Kingdom of the Messiah, but
by granting that all these things arise from a Rebellion against his Rule and
Kingdom. Now this Love in its exercise is eminently preserved in this order of
particular Churches: For,

1. The Principle of their collection into such Societies, next unto that of
Faith in Christ Jesus, is Love unto all the Saints. For their conjunction being
with some of them as such only, they must have a Love unto all that are so. And
none of them would join in such Societies, if their so doing did in any thing
impair their Love unto all the Disciples of Christ, or impede it in any of its
Operations. And the Communion of these Churches among themselves, is and ought
to be such, as that all of them do constitute as it were one Body and common
Church, as we shall see afterward. And it is one principal Duty of them, to
stir up themselves in all their Members, unto a continual exercise of Love
toward all the Saints of Christ, as occasion does require; and if they are
defective in this Catholic Love, it is their fault, contrary to the Rule and
End of their Institution.

2. Unto the constant expression and exercise of this Love, there are required,
(1.) Present suitable Objects unto all the Acts and Duties of it. (2.) A
Description and Prescription of those Acts and Duties. (3.) Rules for the right
performance and exercise of them. (4.) An End to be attained in their
Discharge. All these things has the Lord Christ provided for his Disciples, in
the Constitution and Rule of these Churches. And a due Attendance unto them
has he appointed, as the Instance, Trial and Experiment of their Love unto all
his Disciples. For whereas any might pretend such a Love, yet plead that they
know not how nor wherein to express and exercise it, especially as unto sundry
Duties mentioned in the Scripture as belonging thereunto, he has provided this
way, wherein they cannot be ignorant of the Duties of Love, required of them,
nor of suitable Objects, Rules and Ends for their practice. It were too long to
go over these things in particular; I shall only add (what is easily
defensible) that Gospel-Love will never be recovered and restored unto its
pristine Glory, until particular Churches or Congregations are reformed, and
reduced to that exercise of Love without Dissimulation, which is required in
all their Members among themselves: For whilst men live in Envy and Malice, be
hateful and hating one another, or whilst they live in an open neglect of all
those Duties, which the Lord Christ has appointed to be observed toward the
Members of that Society whereunto they do belong, as a Pledge and Evidence of
their Love unto all his Disciples, no such thing can be attained. And thus is
it in most Parochial Assemblies, who in the midst of their complaints of the
Breach of Love and Union, by some men's withholding Communion in some parts of
Divine Worship with them; yet besides the common Duties of Civility and
Neighborhood, neither know nor practice any thing of that Spiritual Love,
Delight and Communion that ought to be amongst them, as Members of the same
Church.

We boast not ourselves of any seize in this kind; we know how short we
come of that fervent Love that flourished in the first Churches: But this we
say, that there is no way to recover it, but by that state and order of
particular Churches, which we propose, and (...), do adhere unto.

But pretenses unto the contrary are vehemently urged, and the clamours unto
that end are loud and many. For this way, it is said, of setting up particular
Congregations, is that which has caused endless Divisions, lost all Love and
Christian Affection among us, being attended with other mischievous
consequents, such as the most Rhetorical Adversaries of it are scarce able to
declare; nor could Tertullus himself do it, if he were yet alive. For by this
means men not meeting as they used to do, at the Administration of the
Sacrament, and Common Prayer, all Love is lo^^ among them. I answer,

1. This Objection, so far as I am able to observe, is mostly managed* by them
who seem to know very little of the Nature and Duties of that Love which our
Lord Jesus Christ enjoins in the Gospel, nor do give any considerable evidence
of their Living, Walking and Acting in the Power of it. And as unto what they
fancy unto themselves under that name, whereas it is evident from common
Practice, that it extends no farther but to peaceableness in things civil and
indifferent, with some expressions of kindness in their Mirth and Feastings,
and other jovial Societies, we are not concerned in it.

2. This Objection lies not at all against the thing itself; namely, that all
Churches of Divine Institution are Congregational, which alone at present is
pleaded for; but against the gathering of such Societies, or Congregations, in
that state of things which now prevails amongst us. But whereas this depends on
Principles not yet declared and confirmed, the consideration of this part of
the Objection must be referred unto another place. I shall only say at present,
that it is the greatest and most powerful engine in the hand of Satan, and men
of corrupt Secular Interests, to keep all Church-Reformation out of the world.

But if the way itself be changed (which alone, as absolutely considered, we at
present defend) that change must be managed with respect unto some Principles
contrary unto Love and its due exercise, which it does assert and maintain, or
some practices that it puts men upon of the same nature and tendency. But this
hitherto has not been attempted, at least not effected

3. We do not find that a joint participation of the same Ordinances at the
same time, within the same walls, is in itself either an Effect, or Evidence,
or Duty of Gospel-Love, or any means for the preservation or promotion of it.
For it was diligently observed in the Papacy, when all true Evangelical Love,
Faith and Worship were lost. Yea, this kind of Communion and Conjunction,
added unto an implicit dependence on the Authority of the Church, was
substituted in their room, and multitudes were contented with them, as those
which did bestead them in their neglect of all other Graces and their exercise.
And I wish it were not so among others, who suppose they have all the Love that
is required of them, if they are freed from such scandalous variances with
their Neighbors, as should make them unfit for the Communion.

4. If this be the only means of Love, how do men maintain it toward any not
of their own Parish, seeing they never meet with them at the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper? And if they can live in love with those of other Parishes, why
can they not do so with those who having the same Faith and Sacraments with
them, do meet apart for the exercise of Divine Worship, in such Congregations
as we have described? Wherefore,

5. The Variance that is pretended to be caused by the setting up of these
particular Congregations, is a part of that variance which Christ came to send
into the world, Matthew. 10.34, 35, 36. Think not that I am come to send Peace on
Earth: I came not to send Peace, but a Sword. For I am come to set a man at
variance against his Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and the
Daughter-in-law against her Mother-in-Law. And a man's Foes shall be they of his
own Household. He was the Prince of Peace; he came to make peace between God and
men; between men themselves, Jews and Gentiles; he taught nothing, enjoined
nothing, that in its own nature should have the least inconsistency with Peace,
or give countenance unto variance. But he declares what would ensue and fall
out, through the sin, the darkness, unbelief and enmity unto the Truth, that
would continue on some under the Preaching of the Gospel, whilst others of
their nearest Relations should embrace the Truth and profession of it. What
occasion for this variance is taken from the gathering of these Congregations,
which the way itself does neither cause, nor give the least countenance unto,
we are not accountable for. Whereas therefore there is with those among whom
these variances and loss of Love thereby are pretended, one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one Hope of their Calling, the same Truth of the Gospel Preached,
the same Sacraments administered; and whereas both the Principles of the way,
and the persons of those who assemble in distinct Corporations for the
Celebration of Divine Worship, do lead unto Love and the practice of it in all
its known Duties; all the evils that ensue on this way must be charged on the
Enmity, Hatred, Pride and Secular Interest of men, which it is not in our power
to cure.

2. Another end of the Institution of this state is, that the Church might be
The Ground and Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. that is, that it might be the
principal outward means to support, preserve, publish, declare and propagate
the Doctrine or Truth of the Gospel, especially that concerning the Person and
Offices of Christ, which the Apostle subjoyns unto this Assertion in the next
words. That Church state which does not answer this End, is not of Divine
Institution. But this the Ministry of these Churches is eminently suited unto.
There are three things required in this Duty, or required unto this end, that
the Church be the Ground and a Pillar of Truth. (1.) That it preserve the Truth
in itself, and in the Profession of all its Members, against all Seducers,
false Teachers, and Errors: This the Apostle gives in special charge unto the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, adding the Reasons of it, Act. 20.28, 29, 30,
31. This is in an especial manner committed unto the Officers of the Church, 1 Timothy 5.20. 2 Timothy 1.13, 14. This the Ministry of these Churches is meet and
suited unto. The continual Inspection which they may and ought to have into all
the Members of the Church, added unto that circumspection about, and trial of
the Doctrines Preached by themselves, in the whole Body of the Church, fits
them for this work. This is the Fundamental means (on the matter the only
outward means) that the Lord Christ has appointed for the preservation of the
Truth of the Gospel in this world, whereby the Church is the Ground and Pillar
of Truth. How this can be done, where Churches are of that Make and
Constitution, that the Officers of them can have no immediate Inspection into
or cognizance of either the Knowledge, Opinions, and Practices of the Members
of their Church, nor the Body of the Church know on any evident ground, what it
is that their principal Officer believes and teaches, I know not. By this means
was the Truth preserved in the Churches of the two first Centuries, wherein
they had no Officers but what were placed in particular Churches, so as that no
considerable Error made any entrance among them. (2.) That each Church take
care that the same Truth be preserved entire, as unto the profession of it in
all other Churches. Their Communion among themselves (whereof afterward) is
built upon their common (...), or Profession of the same Faith. This therefore
it is their Duty, and was always their practice to look after, that it was
preserved entire. For a change in the Faith of any of them, they knew would be
the dissolution of their Communion. Wherefore when any thing of that nature
fell out, as it did in the Church of Antioch upon the Preaching of the
necessity of Circumcision, and keeping of the Law, whereby the Souls of many of
the Disciples were subverted, the Church at Jerusalem on the notice and
knowledge of it, helped them with their Advice and Counsel. And Eusebius tells
us, that upon the first promulgation of the Heresies and Phrensies of Montanus,
the Faithful, or Churches in Asia, met frequently in sundry places, to examine
his Pretenses, and condemn his Errors; whereby the Churches in Phrygia were
preserved, Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 14. So the same was done afterward in the
case of Samosatenus at Antioch, whereby that Church was delivered from the
infection of his pernicious Heresy, lib. 7. cap. 26, 28, 29. And this care is
still incumbent on every particular Church, if it would approve itself to be
the Ground and Pillar of Truth. And in like manner Epiphanius giving an account
of the Original of the Heresy of Noetus, a Patropassian, affi^ms, that the
Holy Presbyters of the Church called him, and enquired of his Opinion several
times; whereon being convicted before the Presbytery of enormous Errors, he
was cast out of the Church. (...) (when he began to disperse his Errors)
(...). Epiphanius, Haeres. cont. Noet. Haer. 38. Sec. 57.

Hence it was that the Doctrine of the Church, as unto the substance of it, was
preserved entire during the two first Centuries, and somewhat after. Indeed as
when the Israelites came out of Egypt, there came along with them a mixed
multitude of other People, Exodus 12.38. which fell to lusting for Meat when
they came into the Wilderness, Numb. 11.4. to the danger of the whole
Congregation: So when Christianity was first Preached and received in the
world, besides those who embraced it sincerely, and were added unto the Church,
there was a great mixture of stubborn Jews, as the Ebionites; of Philosophical
Greeks, as the Valentinians and the Marcionites; of plain Impostors, such as
Simon Magus and Menander, who all of them pretended to be Christians; but they
fell a lusting, and exceedingly troubled and perplexed the Churches, with an
endeavor to sedu^e them unto their Imaginations. Yet none of their
Abominations could force an entrance into the Churches themselves, which by the
means insisted on, were preserved. But when this Church State and Order was
changed, and another gradually introduced in the room of it, Errors and
Heresies got new advantages, and entered into the Churches themselves, which
before did only assault and perplex them. For,

1. When Prerogative and Pre-eminence of any single Person in the Church began
to be in esteem, not a few who failed in their attempts of attaining it, to
revenge themselves on the Church, made it their business to invent and
propagate pernicious Heresies. So did Thebulis at Jerusalem, Eusebius. lib. 4.
cap. 22. and Valentinus, Tertul. ad. Valentin. cap. 4. and Marcion at Rome,
Epiphan. Haeres. 42. Montanus fell into his dotage on the same account, so did
Novitianus at Rome, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 43. and Arius at Alexandria. Hence is
that censure of them by Lactantius, lib. 4. cap. 30. Ii quorum fides fuit
lubrica, cum Deum nosse se and colere simularent, augendis opibus and honori
students, affectabant Maximum Sacerdotium, and a potioribus victi, secedere
cum suffragatoribus maluerunt, quam eos far praepositos quibus concupierant
ips^ ante praeponi.

2. When any of their Bishops of the new Constitution, whether Patriarchal or
Diocesan, fell into Heresies, which they did frequently, and that numbers of
them, they had so many advantages to diffuse their poison into the whole Body
of their Churches, and such Political Interests for their Promotion, as that
the Churches themselves were thoroughly infected with them. It is true, the Body
of the People in many places did oppose them, withdraw and separate from them:
but it cannot be denied, but that this was the first way and means whereby the
Churches ceased to be the Ground and Pillar of Truth, many destructive Errors
being received into them, which did only outwardly assault them, whilst they
abode in their first Institution. And had not the Churches, in process of time,
utterly lost their Primitive State and Order, by coalescing into one Papal
pretended Universal Church; the Faith itself could never have been so utterly
corrupted, depraved, and lost among them, as in the issue it was.

3. To propagate the Gospel is in like manner required hereunto. This I
acknowledge does more immediately concern the Duty of Persons in any
Church Order, than the Order itself. For it must be the work of some particular
persons dedicating themselves unto their Ministry, as it was in the first
Churches, 3 John 5, 6, 7, 8.

The like may be said of any other public acknowledged end of the Institution
of Churches. If the Way pleaded for be not consistent with them all, and the
proper means of attaining them, if it be not suited unto their accomplishment,
let it be discarded. I shall insist on one more only.

3. Our Lord Jesus Christ has given that state unto his Churches, has
instated them in that Order, as that his Interest, Kingdom and Religion might
be carried on in the world, without prejudice or disadvantage unto any of the
lawful Interests of men, especially without any opposition unto, or enterfering
with the Civil Authority or Magistracy, which is the Ordinance of God; and no
Church Way that does so, is of his Institution. Wherefore I shall briefly
declare, what are the Principles of those of this Way in these things, which
are the Principles of the Way itself which they do profess.

1. Our first general Assertion unto this purpose is this; The Lord Jesus
Christ taught no Doctrine, appointed no Order in his Church, gave it no Power
that is opposite unto, or inconsistent with any righteous Government in this
world, of what sort soever it be, of those whereunto Government is distributed
in Reason and Practice. His Doctrine indeed is opposed unto all Unrighteousness
in and of all men, Magistrates and others; but not to the legal Rule of
Magistrates that are unrighteous men. And this Opposition is Doctrinal only,
confirmed with Promises and Threatenings of eternal things, refusing and
despising all outward aids of force and restraint. This Rule we allow for the
trial of all Churches, and their state, whether they be according unto the
mind of Christ.

But whereas the Lord Jesus Christ has taught, commanded, appointed nothing
that is contrary unto, or inconsistent with righteous Governments of any sort,
if Rulers or Magistrates shall forbid the observance of what he has commanded,
appointed and ordered, and then charge it on him or his Way, that his Disciples
cannot, dare not, will not comply with that Prohibition, and accuse them
thereon of Sedition and Opposition unto Government, they deal injuriously with
him, whereof they must give an account. For whereas all Power is given unto him
in Heaven and Earth, all Nations are his Inheritance, all People in his
absolute Disposal, and it is his pleasure to set up his Kingdom in the Earth,
without which the Earth itself would not be continued; He could not deal more
gently with the righteous Rulers of this world, (and he did it, because
righteous Rule is the Ordinance of God) than to order all things so, that
whether they receive his Law and Doctrine or no, nothing should be done in
opposition unto them, or their Rule. And if any of them are not contented with
this measure, but will forbid the observance of what he commands, wherein he
alone is concerned and not they; this is left to be determined between him and
them. In the mean time, when Rulers are not able to fancy, much less give a
real instance of any one Principle, Doctrine, or Practice in any of the
Churches of Christ, or any belonging unto them, that is contrary unto, or
inconsistent with the Rights or exercise of their Rule and Government, and yet
shall not only prohibit the doing of those things which he has commanded,
merely with respect unto the Spiritual and Eternal ends of his Kingdom, but
shall also punish and destroy those who will not disown his Authority, and
comply with their Prohibition; it does scarce answer their Interest and
Prudence. For to what purpose is it, for any to provoke him who is mightier
than they, when they have no appearance of necessity for their* so doing, nor
advantage thereby?

2. In particular, the Lord Christ has ordained no Power nor Order in his
Church, no Office or Duty that should stand in need of the Civil Authority,
Sanction or force to preserve it, or make it effectual unto its proper ends. It
is sufficient to discharge any thing of a pretense to be an appointment of
Christ in his Church, if it be not sufficient unto its own proper End, without
the help of the Civil Magistrate. That Church State which is either constituted
by humane Authority, or cannot consist without it, is not from him. That
Ordinance which is in its own Nature divine, or is pretended so to be, so far
as it is not effectual unto its end without the aid of Humane Authority, is not
of him, he needs it not; he will not borrow the assistance of Civil Authority,
to rule in and over the Consciences of men, with respect unto their living to
God, and coming unto the enjoyment of himself.

The way of requiring the Sanction of Civil Authority unto Ecclesiastical
Orders and Determinations, began with the use of General Councils in the days
of Constantine: And when once it was engaged in and approved, so far as that
what was determined in the Synods, either as to Doctrine, or as unto the Rule
of the Church, should be confirmed by the Imperial Authority, with penalties on
all that should gainsay such Determinations; It is deplorable to consider, what
mutual havoc was made among Christians upon the various Sentiments of Synods
and Emperors. Yet this way pleased the Rulers of the Church so well, and as
they thought eased them of so much trouble, that it was so far improved amongst
them, that at last they left no Power in or about Religion or Religious Persons
unto the Civil Magistrate, but what was to be exercised in the execution of the
Decrees and Determinations of the Church.

It is necessary from this Institution of particular Churches, that they have
their Subsistence, Continuation, Order, and the efficacy of all that they act
and do as Churches, from Christ himself: For whereas all that they are and do,
is Heavenly, Spiritual, and not of this world, that it reaches nothing of all
those things which are under the Power of the Magistrate, that is, the Lives
and Bodies of Men, and all Civil Interests appertaining to them; and affect
nothing but what no Power of all the Magistrates under Heaven can reach unto,
that is, the Souls and Consciences of men; no trouble can hence arise unto any
Rulers of the world, no Contests about what they ought, and what they ought not
to confirm, which have caused great Disorders among many.

3. In particular also, There neither is nor can be in this Church State the
least pretense of Power or Authority to be acted toward, or over the Persons
of Kings or Rulers, which should either impeach their Right, or impede the
exercise of their just Authority. For as Christ has granted no such Power unto
the Church, so it is impossible that any pretense of it should be seated in a
particular Congregation, especially being gathered on this Principle, that
there is no Church Power properly so called, but what is so seated; and that no
Concurrence, Agreement or Association of many Churches, can add a new,
greater, or other Power or Authority unto them, than what they had singly
before. And what Power can such Churches act toward Kings, Potentates, or
Rulers of Nations? Have they not the highest Security, that it is uttterly
impossible that ever their Authority, or their persons in the exercise of it,
should be impeached, hindered, or receive any detriment from any thing that
belongs to this Church State?

These Principles I say are sufficient to secure Christian Religion, and the
State, Order, and Power of Churches instituted therein, from all reflections of
Inconsistency with Civil Government, or of influencing men into Attempts of its
Change or Ruin. The sum is, Let the outward frame and order of righteous
Government be of what sort it will, nothing inconsistent with it, nothing
entrenching on it, nothing making opposition unto it, is appointed by Jesus
Christ, or does belong unto that Church State which he has ordained and
established.

Two things only must be added unto these Principles, that we may not seem so
to distinguish the Civil State and the Church, as to make them unconcerned in
each other: For,

1. It is the unquestionable Duty of the Rulers and Governors of the World,
upon the Preaching of the Gospel, to receive its Truth, and so yield Obedience
unto its Commands. And whereas all Power and Offices are to be discharged for
God, whose Ministers all Rulers be; they are bound in the discharge of their
Office to countenance, supply, and protect the Profession and Professors of
the Truth, that is, the Church, according unto the degrees and measures which
they shall judge necessary.

2. It is the Duty of the Church materially considered, that is, of all those
who are Members of it, in any Kingdom or Commonwealth, to be usefully
subservient, even as Christians, unto that Rule which is over them as Men, in
all those ways, and by all those means, which the Laws, Usages, and Customs of
the Countries whereof they are, do direct and prescribe. But these things are
frequently spoken unto.

There are sundry other Considerations, whereby it may be evinced, not only
that this Order and State of Gospel-Churches is not only consistent with every
righteous Government in the world, (I mean that is so in its Constitution,
though as all other Forms, it be capable of Maladministration) but the most
useful and subservient unto its righteous Administrations; being utterly
incapable of immixing itself, as such, in any of those occasions of the world,
or State Affairs, as may create the least difficulty or trouble unto Rulers.
With others it is not so. It is known, that the very Constitution of the Papal
Church, as it is stated in the Canons of it, is inconsistent with the just
Rights of Kings and Rulers; and oft-times in the exercise of its Power
destructive unto their Persons and Dominions. And herein concurred the
Prelatical Church State of England, whilst it continued in their Communion, and
held its dependence on the Roman Church. For although they had all their Power
originally from the Kings of this Realm, as the Records and Laws of it do
expressly affirm, That the Church of England was founded in Episcopacy by the
King and his Nobles; yet they claimed such an addition of Power and Authority,
by virtue of their Office, from the Papal Omnipotency, as that they were
Ringleaders in perplexing the Government of this Nation, under the pretense of
maintaining of what they called, the Rights of the Church. And hereunto they
were enabled by the very Constitution of their Church Order, which gave them
that Power, Grandeur, with Political Interest, that were needful to effectuate
their Design. And since they have been taken off from this foundation of
contesting Kings and Princes on their own Ecclesiastical Authority, and
deprived of their dependence on the Power and Interest of the Papal See, having
no bottom for, or supportment of their Church state and Order, but Regal Favor
and mutable Laws; there have on such Causes and Reasons, which I shall not
mention, ensued such Emulations of the Nobility and Gentry, and such contempts
of the Common^People, as leave it questionable, Whether their Adherence unto
the Government be not more burdensome and dangerous unto it, than were their
ancient Contests and Oppositions.

CHAP. VII. No other Church State of Divine Institution.
IT may be it will be generally granted, I am sure it cannot be modestly
denied, that particular Churches, or Congregations, are of a Divine original
Institution; as also that the Primitive Churches continued long in that Form or
Order. But it will be farther pleaded, that granting or supposing this Divine
Institution of particular Churches, yet there may be Churches of another Form
and Order also, as Diocesan or National, that we are obliged to submit unto.
For although the Apostles appointed that there should be Bishops or Elders*
ordained (...), that is, in every City and Town where Christian Religion was
received; and Clemens affirms, that they did themselves constitute Bishops
and Deacons (...), in the Regions, or Villages and Cities; yet there was
another Form afterward introduced. Theodoret Bishop of Cyprus affirms, that
there were eight hundred Churches committed to his care, Epist. 113. whereof
many were in Towns and Cities having no Bishop of their own. The whole Country
of Scythia, though there were in it many Cities, Villages and Fortresses, yet
had but one Bishop, whose Residence was at Tomis, all other Churches being
under him; as Zozomen declares, lib. 6. cap. 20. So it is at this day in diverse
Provinces belonging of old unto the Greek-Church; as in Moldavia and Walachia,
where they have one whom they call the (...), the Leader or Ruler that presides
over all the Churches in the Nation. And this O^der of things, that there
should not be a Bishop in smaller Churches, was first confirmed in the sixth
Canon of the Council of Sardis, in the Year 347.

In Answer hereunto I shall do these two things. First, I shall show that there
is no Church Order, State, or Church-Form of Divine Institution, that does any
way impede, take away, or overthrow the Liberty, Power and Order of particular
Congregations, such as we have described. Secondly, I shall enquire into the
causes of Churches of another State or Order, as the Power of Magistrates and
Rulers, or their own choice and consent.

1. There is no Form, Order, or Church state Divinely Instituted, that should
annul the Institution of particular Congregations, or abridge them of their
Liberties, or deprive them of the Power committed unto them.

It is such a Church State alone, that we are now concerned to enquire after.
Whatever of that kind either is or may be imagined that entrenches not on the
State, Liberty and Power of particular Congregations, is not of our present
Consideration. Men may frame and order what they please, and what advantage
they make thereby, shall not be envied unto them, whilst they injure not any of
the Institutions of Christ. But,

1. These Churches, as they are Churches, are meet and able to attain the Ends
of Churches. To say they are Churches, and yet have not in themselves Power to
attain the ends of Churches, is to speak contradictions, or to grant and deny
the same thing in the same breath. For a Church is nothing but such a Society
as has Power, Ability and Fitness to attain those ends for which Christ has
ordained Churches: That which has so, is a Church; and that which has not so,
is none. Men may if they please deny them to be Churches, but then I know not
where they will find any that are so. For instance, suppose men should deny
all the Parochial Churches in England to be such Churches as are entrusted with
Church Power and Administrations, what Church in the first Instance could they
require our Communion withal? Will they say, it is with the National, or
Diocesan Churches? neither of these do, or can, as such, administer Sacred
Ordinances. A man cannot Preach nor hear the Word, but in a particular
Assembly. The Lord's Supper cannot be Administered but in a particular
Congregation; nor any presential local Communion of Believers among themselves,
like that described by the Apostle, 1 Cor. chap. 12. and chap. 14. be otherwise
attained. No Communion is firstly and immediately required, or can be required
with Diocesan Churches as such. Wherefore it is Parochial particular Churches
that we are required to hold Communion with. We say therefore these Parochial
Churches are either really and truly so endued with Church Power and Liberty,
or they are not. If they are, or are acknowledged so to be, we have herein
obtained what we plead for; if they are not, then are we required to join in
Church Communion with those Societies that are not Churches; and if we refrain
so doing, we are charged with Schism; which is to turn Religion into Ridicule.
For,

2. It is utterly foreign to the Scripture, and a Monster unto Antiquity, (I
mean that which is pure and regardable in this Cause) that there should be
Churches with a part, half, more or less of Church Power, and not the whole,
neither in Right nor Exercise; or that there should be Church Officers, Elders,
Presbyters or Bishops, that should have a partiary Power, half or a third part,
or less, of that which entirely belongs unto the Office they hold. Let one
Testimony be given out of the Scripture, or that Antiquity which we appeal
unto, unto this purpose, and we shall cease our Plea. But this is that which
our Understandings are set on rack withal every day. There is a National Church
that is entrusted with Supreme Church Power in the Nation whereof it is: Here
at the entrance we fall into a double disquietment.

For (1.) we know not as yet what this National Church is, here (or in France,)
nor of what Persons it does consist. (2.) We know not whether this National
Church have all the Power that Christ has given unto the Church, or that there
is a Reserve for some Addition from beyond Sea, if things were well
accommodated. Then, that there are Diocesan Churches, whose Original, with the
Causes and Occasions of their Bounds, Limits, Power, and manner of
Administrations, I think God alone knows perfectly, we do but guess; for there
is not one word mentioned of any of their concernments in the Scripture. And we
know that these Churches cannot be said to have all the Power that Christ has
entrusted his Church withal, because there is another Church, unto which they
are in subjection, and on which they do depend; but it seems they have the next
degree of Power unto that which is uppermost. But whatever their Power be, it
is so administered by Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, in such ways, and
for such ends, that I shall believe a dissent from them and it to be Schism,
when I believe it is Midnight, whilst the Sun shines in his full strength and
Glory. And then we are told of Parochial Churches, who have this Power only,
that if we do not in them whatever is required of us, not by them, but those
that are put over them, they can inform against us, that we may be mulcted and
punished.

Thirdly. It will be said that these Churches, as such, are indeed originally
entrusted and invested with all Church-Rights, Power and Authority; but for
many weighty Reasons are abridged in sundry things of the exercise of them. For
who can think it meet, that every single Parish should be entrusted with the
exercise of all Church-Rule and Power among themselves?

Answ. (1.) Whose fault is it, that these Churches are not meet for the
exercise of that Power which Christ has granted unto such Churches? If it be
from themselves, their Negligence, or Ignorance, or Wickedness, it is high time
they were reformed, and brought into that state and condition, wherein they may
be fit and able to answer the ends of their Institution. (2.) They are indeed
sorry Churches, that are not as meet to exercise all Church Power according to
the mind of Christ, as the Chancellors Court. (3.) There is no Power pleaded
for in Congregational Churches, but what is granted unto them by the Word and
Constitution of Christ. And who is he that shall take this from them, or
deprive them of its exercise, or Right thereunto? (1.) It is not done, nor ever
was, by Jesus Christ himself. He does not pull down what himself has built;
nor does any one Institution of his, in the least interfere with any other. It
is true, the Lord Christ by his Law deprives all Churches of their Power, yea
of their state, who walk, act, and exercise a Power not derived from him; but
set up against him, and used unto such ends as are opposite unto, and
destructive of the ends of Church^Order by him appointed. But to imagine, that
whilst a Church claims no Power but what it receives from him, uses it only
for him, and in Obedience unto his Commands, that he has by any Act, Order or
Constitution, taken away that Power or any part of it from such a Church, is a
vain Supposition. (2.) Such Churches cannot by any Act of their own deprive
themselves of this Right and Power. For (1.) it is committed unto them in a way
of Trust, which they falsify, if by their own consent they part with it. (2.)
Without it they cannot discharge many Duties required of them. To part with
this Power, is to renounce their Duty, which is the only way whereby they may
lose it. And if it be neither taken from them by any Law, Rule, or Constitution
of Christ, nor can be renounced or forgone by themselves, what other Power
under Heaven can justly deprive them of it, or hinder them in its Execution?
The truth is, the principal means which has rendered the generality of
Parochial Churches unmeet for the exercise of any Church Power, is, that their
Interest in it, and right unto it, has been so long unjustly detained from
them, as that they know not at all what belongs thereunto; being hidden from
them by those who should instruct them in it. And might they be admitted, under
the conduct of pious and prudent Officers, unto any part of the practice of
this Duty, in their Assemblies, their understanding in it would quickly be
increased.

That Right, Power, or Authority, which we thus assign unto all particular
Churches gathered according unto the mind of Christ, is that, and that only,
which is necessary to their own preservation, in their state and purity, and
unto the discharge of all those Duties which Christ requires of the Church.

Now although they may not justly by any be deprived hereof, yet it may be
enquired, whether there may not an Addition of Ecclesiastical power be made
unto that which is of Original Institution, for the good of the whole number of
Churches that are of the same Communion. And this may be done, either by the
Power and Authority of the Supreme Magistrate, with respect unto all the
Churches in his Dominion; or it may be so, by the Churches themselves, erecting
a new power in a combination of some, many, or all of them, which they had not
in them singly and distinctly before.

For the power of the Magistrate in and about Religion, it has been much
debated and disputed in some latter Ages. For three hundred years there was no
mention of it in the Church, because no Supreme Powers did then own the
Christian Religion. For the next three hundred years there were great
Ascriptions unto Supreme Magistrates to the exaltation of their power, and much
use was made thereof among the Churches, by such as had the best interest in
them. The next three hundred years was, as unto this case, much taken up with
Disputes about this Power, between the Emperors and the Popes of Rome;
sometimes one side gaining the Advantage in some especial instances, sometimes
the other. But from that period of time, or thereabouts, the Contest came to
blows, and the Blood of some hundred thousands was shed in the Controversy,
namely, about the Power of Emperors and Kings on the one side, and the Popes of
Rome on the other. In the issue, the Popes abode Masters of the Field, and
continued in actual possession of all Ecclesiastical Power, though sometimes
mixed with the Rebellion of one stubborn Prince or other, as here frequently in
England, who controuled them in some of their new acquisitions. Upon the
public Reformation of Religion, many Princes threw off the yoke of the Papal
Rule, and according to the Doctrine of the Reformers, assumed unto themselves
the Power which, as they judged, the Godly Kings of Judah of old, and the first
Christian Emperors, did exercise about Ecclesiastical Affairs. From that time
there have been great and vehement Disputes about the Ecclesiastical Power of
Sovereign Princes and States. I shall not here undertake to treat concerning
it; although it i^ a matter of no great difficulty to demonstrate the extremes
that many have run into, some by granting too much, and some too little unto
them. And I shall grant for my part, that too much cannot well be assigned unto
them, whilst these two principles are preserved. (1.) That no Supreme
Magistrate has power to deprive or abridge the Churches of Christ, of any
Right, Authority, or Liberty, granted unto them by Jesus Christ. (2.) Nor has
any to coerce, punish, or kill any persons, (being civilly peaceable, and
morally honest,) because they are otherwise minded in things concerning
Gospel-Faith and Worship than he is.

It has not yet been disputed, whether the Supreme Magistrate has power to
ordain, institute, and appoint, any new Form or State of Churches, supposedly
suited unto the Civil Interest, which were never ordained or appointed by
Christ. It has not I say been disputed under these terms expressly, though
really the substance of the Controversy lies therein. To assert this expressly,
would be to exalt him above Jesus Christ; at least to give him power equal unto
his; though really unto the Institution of the Gospel Church state, and the
Communication of Graces, Offices, and Gifts to make it useful unto its end, no
less than all power in Heaven and Earth be required.

Some plead that there is no certain Form of Church Government appointed in the
Scripture; that there was none ordained by Christ, nor exemplifyed by the
Apostles, and therefore it is in the power of the Magistrate to appoint any
such form thereof, as is suited unto the public Interest. It would seem to
follow more evidently, that no Form at all should by any be appointed; for what
shall he do that comes after the King? what shall any one ordain in the
Church, which the Lord Christ thought not meet to ordain? And this is the
proper inference from this consideration: Such a Church Government as men
imagine, Christ has not appointed; therefore neither may men do so. But
suppose that the Lord Christ has appointed a Church State, or that there
should be Churches of his Disciples on the Earth; let them therein but yield
Obedience unto all that he has commanded; and in their so doing, make use of
the light of nature, and rules of common prudence, so as to do it unto their
own edification, (which to deny to be their duty, is to destroy their nature as
created of God) trusting in all things unto the conduct of the promised Divine
Assistance of the Holy Spirit: if any instance can be given of what is wanting
unto the complete state and Rule of the Church, we shall willingly allow that
it be added by the Civil Magistrate, or whosoever men can agree upon, as was
before declared. If it be said, there is yet something wanting to accommodate
these Churches and their Rule unto the state of the Public Interest, and
Political Government under which they are placed, whereon they may be framed
into Churches Diocesan and Metropolitical, with such a Rule as they are capable
of; I say (1.) That in their Original Constitution, they are more accommodated
unto the Interest of all righteous Secular Government, than any Arbitrary
moulding them unto a pretended meetness to comply therewithal, can attain unto.
This we have proved before, and shall farther enlarge upon it, if it be
required. And we find it by experience, that those Additions, Changes, and
Alterations in the State, Order and Rule of the Churches, pretended for the end
mentioned, have proved the cause of endless Contentions, which have no good
aspect on the public peace, and will assuredly continue for ever so to be.
(2.) It is granted that the Magistrate may dispose of many outward concerns of
these Churches; may impart of his favor to them, or any of them, as he sees
cause; may take care that nothing falls out among them that may occasion any
public disturbance, in and by itself; may prohibit the public exercise of
Worship Idolatrous or Superstitious; may remove and take away all Instruments
and Monuments of Idolatry; may coerce, restrain, and punish, as there is
occasion, persons who under pretense of Religion, do advance Principles of
Sedition, or promote any Foreign Interest, opposite and destructive to his
Government, the welfare of the Nation, and the Truth of Religion; with sundry
things of the like nature. And herein lies an ample field, wherein the
Magistrate may exercise his power, and discharge his duty.

It cannot well be denied, but that the present pretenses and pleas of some to
reduce all things in the practice of Religion into the power and disposal of
the Civil Magistrate, are full of offense and scandal. It seems to be only a
design and contrivance, to secure Men's secular Interests under every way of the
profession of Christian Religion, true or false, which may have the advantage
of the Magistrates Approbation. By this device, Conscience is set at liberty
from concerning itself in an humble diligent enquiry into the mind of God, as
unto what is its duty in his Worship. And when it is so with the Conscience of
any, it will not be much concerned in what it does attend unto or observe. What
is in Divine things done or practiced solely on the Authority of the
Magistrate, is immediately and directly Obedience unto him, and not unto God.

Whatever therefore the Supreme Power in any place may do, or will be pleased
to do, for the accommodation of the outward state of the Church, and the
exercise of its Rule, unto the Political Government of a People or Nation, yet
these two things are certain.

(1.) That he can form, erect, or institute no new Church State, which is not
ordained and appointed by Christ and his Apostles, by virtue of his Authority;
and what he does of that nature appoint, is called a Church only equivocally,
or by reason of some resemblance unto that which is properly so called.

(2.) To dissent from what is so appointed by the Supreme Power, in and about
the State, Form, Rule, and Worship of Churches, whatever other evil it may be
charged with, or supposed liable unto, can have nothing in it of that which the
Scripture condemns under the name of Schism, which has respect only unto what
is stated by Christ himself.

That which in this place we should next enquire into, is, what these
particular Churches themselves may do, by their own voluntary consent and act
in a way of Association or otherwise, for the accumulation and exercise of a
power, not formally inherent in them, as particular Churches; but I shall refer
it unto the Head of the Communion of Churches, which must be afterward spoken
unto.

CHAP. VIII. The Duty of Believers to join themselves in Church Order.
UNto some one, or other of those particular Congregations which we have
described, continuing to be the ground and pillar of Truth, it is the duty of
every Believer, of every Disciple of Christ, to join himself, for the due and
orderly observation and performance of the commands of Christ, unto the glory
of God, and their own edification, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.

This in general is granted by all sorts and Parties of men: the grant of it,
is the ground whereon they stand in the management of their mutual fewds in
Religion, pleading that men ought to be of, or join themselves unto this or
that Church, still supposing that it is their Duty to be of one or another.

Yea, it is granted also, that Persons ought to choose what Churches they will
join themselves unto, wherein they may have the best advantage unto their
Edification and Salvation. They are to choose to join themselves unto that
Church which is in all things most according to the mind of God.

This it is supposed is the Liberty and Duty of every Man; for if it be not so,
it is the foolishest thing in the world, for any to attempt to get others from
one Church unto another; which is almost the whole business of Religion, that
some think themselves concerned to attend unto.

But yet notwithstanding these Concessions, when things come to the trial in
particular, there is very little granted in compliance with the Assertion laid
down. For besides that it is not a Church of Divine Institution, that is
intended in these Concessions, when it comes unto the issue, where a Man is
born, and in what Church he is Baptized in his Infancy, there all choice is
prevented, and in the Communion of that Church he is to abide, on the penalties
of being esteemed and dealt withal as a Schismatic. In what National Church
any person is Baptized, in that National Church he is to continue, or answer
the contrary at his peril. And in the Precincts of what Parish his Habitation
falls to be, in that particular Parish Church is he bound to Communicate in all
Ordinances of Worship. I say, in the judgment of many, whatever is pretended of
men's joining themselves unto the truest and purest Churches, there is no
Liberty of Judgment or Practice in either of these things left unto any of the
Disciples of Christ.

Wherefore the Liberty and Duty proposed, being the Foundation of all orderly
Evangelical Profession, and that wherein the Consciences of Believers are
greatly concerned, I shall lay down one Proposition wherein it is asserted, in
the sense I intend, and then fully confirm it.

The Proposition itself is this:

It is the duty of every one who professes Faith in Christ Jesus, and takes
due care of his own Eternal Salvation, voluntarily and by his own choice to
join himself unto some particular Congregation of Christ's Institution, for his
own Spiritual Edification, and the right discharge of his Commands.

1. This Duty is prescribed (1.) unto them only* who profe^s Faith in Christ
Jesus; who own themselves to be his Disciples, that call Jesus Lord. For this
is the method of the Gospel, that first men by the Preaching of it be made
Disciples, or be brought unto Faith in Christ Jesus* and then be taught to do
and observe whatever he commands, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. first to believe, and
then to be added unto the Church, Act. 2.41, 42, 46, 47. Men must first join
themselves unto the Lord, or give up themselves unto him, before they can give
up themselves unto the Church, according to the mind of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.5. We
are not therefore concerned at present as unto them, who either not at all
profess Faith in Christ Jesus, or else through ignorance of the Fundamental
Principles of Religion, and wickedness of life, do destroy or utterly render
useless that Profession. We do not say it is the duty of such persons, that is,
their immediate duty, in the state wherein they are, to join themselves unto
any Church. Nay, it is the duty of every Church, to refuse them their
Communion, whilst they abide in that state. There are other duties to be in the
first place pressed on them, whereby they may be made meet for this. So in the
Primitive times, although in the extraordinary Conversions unto Christianity
that were made among the Jews, who before belonged unto Gods Covenant, they
were all immediately added unto the Church; yet afterward, in the ordinary way
of the Conversion of men, the Churches did not immediately admit them into
complete Communion, but kept them as Catechumeners, for the increase of their
knowledge, and trial of their profession, until they were judged meet to be
joined unto the Church. And they are not to blame who receive not such into
complete Communion with them, unto whom it is not a present duty to desire that
Communion. Yea, the admission of such persons into Church-Societies, much more
the compelling of them to be Members of this or that Church, almost whether
they will or no, is contrary to the rule of the Word, the example of the
Primitive Churches, and a great expedient to harden men in their sins.

We do therefore avow, that we cannot admit any into our Church Societies, as
to complete Membership, and actual Interest in the Privileges of the Church,
who do not, by a profession of Faith in, and obedience unto Jesus Christ, no
way contradicted by sins of life, manifest themselves to be such, as whose duty
it is, to join themselves unto any Church. Neither do we injure any Baptized
persons hereby, or oppose any of their Right unto, and Interest in the Church,
but only as they did universally in the Primitive Churches, after the death of
the Apostles, we direct them into that way and method, wherein they may be
received unto the glory of Christ, and their own edification. And we do
therefore affirm, that we will never deny that Communion, unto any person, high
or low, rich or poor, old or young, Male or Female, whose duty it is to desire
it.

2. It is added in the description of the Subject, That it is such an one who
takes due care of his own Salvation. Many there are who profess themselves to
be Christians, who it may be hear the Word willingly, and do many things
gladly, yet do not esteem themselves obliged unto a diligent enquiry into, and
a precise observation of all the commands of Christ. But it is such whom we
intend, who constantly fix their minds on the enjoyment of God, as their
chiefest good and utmost end; who thereon duly consider the means of attaining
it, and apply themselves thereunto. And it is to be feared, that the number of
such persons will not be found to be very great in the world; which is
sufficient to take off the reproach from some particular Congregations of the
smalness of their number. Such they ever were, and such is it foretold that
they should be. Number was never yet esteemed a note of the true Church, by any
but those, whose worldly interest it is that it should so be; yet at present
absolutely in these Nations, the number of such persons is not small.

3. Of these persons it is said, that it is their duty so to dispose of
themselves. It is not that which they may do, as a convenience, or an
advantage; not that which others may do for them, but which they must do for
themselves in a way of duty. It is an Obediential act unto the commands of
Christ; whereunto is required subjection of Conscience unto his Authority,
Faith in his promises, as also a respect unto an appearance before his
Judgment-Throne at the last day. The way of the Church of Rome to compel men
into their Communion, and keep them in it, by fire and f^got, or any other
means of external force, derives more from the Alcoran than the Gospel. Neither
does it answer the mind of Christ in the Institution, End, and Order of
Church-Societies, that men should become Members of them, partly by that which
is no way in their own power, and partly by what their wills are regulated in,
by the Laws of men. For it is, as was said, commonly esteemed, that men being
born and Baptized in such a Nation, are thereby made Members of the Church of
that Nation; and by living within such Parochial Precincts, as the Law of the
Land has Arbitrarily established, are Members of this or that particular
Congregation. At least they are accounted so far to belong unto these Churches,
as to render them liable unto all outward punishments, that shall be thought
meet to be inflicted on them, who comply not with them. So far as these
persuasions* and actings according unto them, do prevail, so far are they
destructive of the principal foundation of the external being and order of the
Church. But that men's joining themselves in, or unto any Church Society, is, or
ought to be, a voluntary act, or an act of free choice, in mere obedience unto
the Authority and commands of Christ, is so sacred a truth, so evident in the
Scripture, so necessary from its subject matter, so testified unto by the
practice of all the first Churches; as that it despises all opposition. And I
know not how any can reconcile the common practice of giving men the reputation
or reality of being Members of, or belonging unto this or that Church, as unto
total Communion, who desire or choose no such thing, unto this acknowledged
principle.

5. There is a double joining unto the Church; (1.) That which is, as unto
total Communion in all the duties and privileges of the Church, which is that
whereof we treat. (2.) An adherence unto the Church, as unto the means of
Instruction and Edification to be attained thereby. So persons may adhere unto
any Church, who yet are not meet, or free on some present consideration, to
confederate with it, as unto total Communion; see Act. 5.13, 14. And of this
sort in a peculiar manner, are the Baptized Children of the Members of the
Church. For although they are not capable of performing Church-Duties, or
enjoying Church^priviledges in their tender years; nor can have a right unto
total Communion, before the testification of their own voluntary consent
thereunto, and choice thereof; yet are they in a peculiar manner under the care
and inspection of the Church, so far as the outward administration of the
Covenant in all the means of it, is committed thereunto; and their duty it is,
according to their capacity, to attend unto the Ministry of that Church
whereunto they do belong.

6. The Proposition respects a visible professing Church. And I intend such a
Church in general, as avoweth Authority from Christ; (1.) For the Ministerial
Preaching of the Word; (2.) Administration of the Sacraments; (3.) For the
Exercise of Evangelical Discipline; and (4.) To give a public testimony
against the Devil and the world, not contradicting their profession with any
corrupt Principles or Practices inconsistent with it. What is required in
particular, that any of them may be meet to be joined unto such a Church, we
shall afterward enquire.

7. It is generally said, that out of the Church there is no Salvation; and the
truth hereof is testified unto in the Scriptures, Act. 2.47. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.
Matthew. 16.18. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Joh. 10.16.

8: This is true both positively and negatively of the Catholic Church
Invisible of the Elect: All that are of it shall be saved; and none shall be
saved but those that belong unto it, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Of the Catholic
visible professing Church negatively; that no Adult person can be saved, that
does not belong unto this Church, Romans 10.10.

9. This Position of Truth is abused by Interest and Pride; an enclosure of it
being made by them, who of all Christians in the world can lay the least and
weakest claim unto it; namely, the Church of Rome. For they are so far from
being that Catholic Church, out of which there is no Salvation, and wherein
none can perish, like the Ark of Noah, that it requires the highest charity to
reckon them unto that visible professing Church, whereof the greatest part may
perish; and do so undoubtedly.

10. Our enquiry is, what truth there is in this Assertion, with respect unto
these particular Churches or Societies for the celebration of Gospel Worship
and Discipline, whereof we treat. And I say,

1. No Church, of what denomination soever, can lay a claim unto this
Privilege, as belonging unto itself alone. This was the ancient Donatism; They
confined Salvation unto the Churches of their Way alone. And after many false
charges of it on others, it begins really to be renewed in our days. For some
dispute, that Salvation is confined unto that Church alone, wherein there is a
Succession of Diocesan Bishops; which is the height of Donatism. The Judgments
and Determinations made concerning the Eternal Salvation or Damnation of Men,
by the measures of some differences among Christians about Churches, their
State and Order, are absurd, foolish, and impious, and for the most part used
by them, who sufficiently proclaim, that they know neither what it is to be
saved, nor do use any diligence about the necessary means of it. Salvation
depends absolutely on no particular Church State in the world; he knows not the
Gospel, who can really think it does. Persons of Believers are not for the
Church, but the Church is for them: if the Ministry of Angels be for them who
are Heirs of Salvation, much more is the Ministry of the Church so. If a man be
an Adulterer, an Idolater, a Rayler, a hater and scoffer of Godliness; if he
choose to live in any known sin, without Repentance, or in the neglect of any
known duty; if he be ignorant and profane; in a word, if he be not born again
from above, be he of what Church he will, and whatsoever place he possess
therein, he cannot be saved. And on the other side, if a man believe in Christ
Jesus, that is, know him in his Person, Offices, Doctrine and Grace, trust unto
him for all the ends of the wisdom and love of God toward Mankind in him; if
he endeavor to yield sincere and universal obedience unto all his commands,
and to be conformed unto him, in all things following his example, having for
these ends received of his Spirit; though all the Churches in the world should
reject him, yet he shall undoubtedly be saved. If any shall hence infer, that
then it is all one of what Church any one is: I answer, (1.) That although the
being of this or that, or any particular Church in the world, will not secure
the Salvation of any men; yet the adherence unto some Churches, or such as are
so called, in their constitution and worship, may prejudice, yea, ruin the
Salvation of any that shall so do. (2.) The choice of what Church we will join
unto, belongs unto the choice and use of the means for our Edification. And he
that makes no Conscience hereof, but merely with respect unto the event of
being saved at last, will probably come short thereof.

2. On this Supposition, that there be no insuperable difficulties lying in the
way of the discharge of this duty, as that a person be cast by the providence
of God into such a place or season, as wherein there is no Church that he can
possibly join himself unto, or that he be unjustly refused Communion, by
unwarrantable conditions of it, as it was with many during the prevalency of
the Papacy in all the Western Empire; it is the indispensible duty of every
Disciple of Christ, in order unto his edification and Salvation, voluntarily,
and of his own choice, to join himself in and unto some particular
Congregation, for the Celebration of Divine Worship, and the due observation of
all the Institutions and commands of Christ; which we shall now farther confirm.

1. The foundation of this duty, as was before declared, does lie in the law
and light of Nature. Man cannot exercise the principal Powers and Faculties of
his Soul, with which he was created, and whereby he is enabled to glorify God,
which is the end of him and them, without a consent and conjunction in the
Worship of God in Communion and Society, as has been proved before.

2. The way whereby this is to be done, God has declared and revealed from the
beginning, by the Constitution of a Church State, through the addition of
Arbitrary Institutions of Worship, unto what was required by the Law of Nature.
For this gives the true state, and is the formal reason of a Church, namely, a
Divine Addition of Arbitrary Institutions of Worship, unto the necessary
Dictates of the Law of Nature, unto that end. And the especial nature of any
Church State, does depend on the especial nature of those Institutions, which
is constitutive of the difference between the Church State of the Old Testament
and that of the new.

3. Such a Church State was constituted and appointed under the Old Testament,
founded in and on an especial Covenant between God and the People, Exodus 24.
Unto this Church every one that would please God, and walk before him, was
bound to join himself, by the ways and means that he had appointed for that
end; namely, by Circumcision, and their laying hold on the Covenant of God,
Exodus 12.48. Isa. 56.4. And this joining unto the Church, is called joining
unto the Lord, Isa. 56.6. Jerem. 50.5. as being the means thereof; without
which it could not be done. Herein was the Tabernacle of God with men, and he
dwelt among them.

4. As a new Church State is Prophesyed of under the New Testament, Ezekiel.
34.25, 26, 27. Isa. 66.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. and other places innumerable; so it
was actually erected by Jesus Christ, as we have declared. And whereas it is
introduced and established in the place and room of the Church State under the
Old Testament, which was to be removed at the time of Reformation, as the
Apostle demonstrates at large in his Epistle to the Hebrews; all the commands,
promises, and th^eatnings given or annexed unto that Church State, concerning
the conjunction of men unto it, and walking in it, are transferred unto this of
the new erection of Christ. Wherefore although the State of the Church itself,
be reduced from that which was Nationally Congregational, unto that which is
simply and absolutely so; and all Ordinances of its instituted Worship are
changed, with new rules for the observation of what we are directed unto by the
light of Nature: yet the commands, promises, and threatenings, made and given
unto it as a Church, are all in full force with respect unto this new
Church State; and we need no new commands to render it our duty to join in
Evangelical Churches, for the ends of a Church in general.

5. The Lord Christ has disposed all the ways and means of edification, unto
these Churches; so that ordinarily, and under an expectation of his presence in
them, and concurrence unto their efficacy, they are not otherwise to be
enjoyed. Such are the ordinary dispensation of the Word, and Administration of
the Sacraments. For any Disciple of Christ to live in a neglect of these
things, and the enjoyment of them according to his mind, is to despise his care
and wisdom, in providing for his eternal welfare.

6. He has prescribed sundry duties unto us, both as necessary, and as
evidences of our being his Disciples, such as cannot be orderly performed, but
as we are Members of some particular Congregation: this also has been before
declared.

7. The Institution of these Churches, is the way which Christ has ordained to
render his Kingdom visible or conspicuous, in distinction from, and opposition
unto, the Kingdom of Satan and the world. And he does not in a due manner,
declare himself a subject in or unto the Kingdom of Christ, who does not
solemnly engage in this way. It is not enough to constitute a legal Subject of
the Kingdom of England, that he is born in the Nation, and lives in some
outward observance of the Laws of it, if he refuse solemnly to express his
Allegiance in the way appointed by the Law for that end. Nor will it constitute
a regular subject of the Kingdom of Christ, that he is born in a place where
the Gospel is professed, and so professes a general compliance therewith; if
he refuse to testify his subjection, by the way that Christ has appointed for
that end. It is true, the whole Nation in their civil relation and
subordination according to Law, is the Kingdom of England. But the
representation of the Kingly power and rule in it, is in the Courts of all
sorts, wherein the Kingly power is acted, openly and visibly. And he that lives
in the Nation, yet denies his homage unto these Courts, is not to be esteemed a
Subject. So does the whole visible professing Church, in one or more Nations,
or lesser precincts of people and places constitute the visible Kingdom of
Christ; yet is no particular person to be esteemed a legal true Subject of
Christ, that does not appear in these his Courts with a Solemn expression of
his Homage unto him.

8. The whole Administration of the Rule and Discipline appointed by Christ, is
confined unto these Churches; nor can they be approved by whom that rule is
despised. I shall not argue farther, in a case whose truth is of so
uncontrollable evidence. In all the writings of the New Testament, recording
things after the Ascension of Christ, there is no mention of any of his
Disciples with approbation, unless they were extraordinary Officers, but such
as were entire Members of these Assemblies.

CHAP. IX. The Continuation of a Church State, and of the Administration of
Evangelical Ordinances of Worship, briefly vindicated.
THe Controversy about the Continuation of a Church State, and the
Administration of Gospel Ordinances of Worship, is not new, in this Age, though
some pride themselves, as though the Invention of the Error whereby they are
denied, were their own: In former Ages, both in the Papacy, and among some of
them that forsook it, there were diverse who on a pretense of a peculiar
Spirituality, and imaginary Seize in Religion, wherein these things are
unnecessary, rejected their Observation. I suppose it necessary briefly to
confirm the Truth, and vindicate it from this exception, because though it be
sufficiently weak in itself, yet what it is, lies against the foundation of all
that we are pleading about. But to reduce things into the lesser compass; I
shall first confirm the Truth by those Arguments or Considerations, which will
defeat all the Pleas and Pretenses of them by whom it is opposed; and then
confirm it by positive Testimonies and Arguments, with all Brevity possible.

First therefore I shall argue from the removal of all causes, whereon such a
Cessation of Churches and Ordinances is pretended. For it is granted on all
hands, that they had a Divine Original and Institution, and were observed by
all the Disciples of Christ, as things by him commanded. If now therefore they
cease as unto their force, efficacy and use, it must be on some of these
Reasons.

1. Because a limited Time and Season was fixed unto them, which is now
expired. So was it with the Church State and Ordinances of old; they were
appointed unto the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10. They had a certain time
prefixed unto their Duration, according to the degrees of whose approach they
waxed old, and at length utterly disappeared, chap. 8.13. until that time they
were all punctually to be observed, Mal. 4.4. But there were many antecedent
Indications of the Will of God concerning their cessation and abolition,
whereof the Apostle disputes at large in his Epistle unto the Hebrews. And from
a pretended supposition, that such was the state of Evangelical Ordinances,
namely, that they had a time prefixed unto their Duration, did the first
opposition against them arise. For Montanus, with his Followers, imagined that
the appointments of Christ and his Apostles in the Gospel, were to continue in
force only unto the coming of the Paraclete, or the Comforter, promised by him.
And adding a new Frenzy hereunto, that that Paraclete was then first come in
Montanus, they rejected the Institutions of the Gospel, and made new Laws and
Rules for themselves. And this continues to be the principal pretense of them
by whom the use of Gospel Ordinances is at present rejected, as that which is
of no force or efficacy. Either they have received, or do speedily look for
such a Dispensation of the Spirit, or his Gifts, as wherein they are to cease
and disappear. But nothing can be more vain than this Pretense.

1. It is so as unto the limitation of any Time, as unto their Duration and
Continuance. For (1.) there is no intimation given of any such thing, either in
the divine Word, Promise, Declaration about them, or the nature of the
Institutions themselves. But whereas those of the Old Testament were in Time to
be removed, that the Church might not be offended thereby, seeing originally
they were all of immediate Divine Institution, God did by all manner of ways,
as by Promises, express Declarations, and by the nature of the Institutions
themselves, foresignifie their removal, as the Apostle proves at large in his
Epistle to the Hebrews. But nothing of this nature can be pretended concerning
the Gospel Church State or Worship. (2.) There is no Prediction or intimation
of any other way of Worship, or serving God in this World, that should be
introduced in the room of that established at first; so that upon a cessation
thereof, the Church must be left unto all uncertainties and utter ruin. (3.)
The principal Reason why a Church State was erected of old, and Ordinances of
Worship appointed therein, that were all to be removed and taken away, was,
that the Son, the Lord over his own house, might have the Pre-eminence in all
things. His Glory it was to put an end unto the Law, as given by the
Disposition of Angels, and the Ministry of Moses, by the Institution of a
Church State and Ordinances of his own appointment. And if his Revelation of
the Will of God therein be not complete, perfect, ultimate, unalterable, if it
be to expire, it must be, that Honor may be given above him, unto one greater
than he.

2. It is so, as unto their Decay, or the loss of their primitive Force and
Efficacy. For their Efficacy unto their proper Ends, depends on, (1.) The
Institution of Christ: This is the Foundation of all Spiritual Efficacy unto
edification in the Church, or whatever belongs thereunto. And therefore
whatever Church State may be framed, or Duties, ways or means of Worship
appointed by Men, that have not his Institution, how specious soever they may
appear to be, have no Spiritual Force or Efficacy, as unto the Edification of
the Church. But whilst this Institution of Christ continues irrevocable, and is
not Abrogated by a greater Power than what it was enacted by, whatever defect
there may be as unto Faith and Obedience in men, rendering them useless and
ineffectual unto themselves; however they may be corrupted by additions unto
them, or detractions from them, changing their nature and use; in themselves
they continue to be of the same use and efficacy as they were at the beginning.
(2.) On the Promise of Christ, that he will be present with his Disciples in
the observation of his Commands unto the consummation of all things, Matthew.
28.20. To deny the continued accomplishment of this Promise, and that on any
pretense whatever, is the Venom of Infidelity. If therefore they have an
irrevocable Divine Institution, if Christ be present in their Administrations,
as he was of old, Revel. 2.1. there can be no abatement of their Efficacy unto
their proper ends, in the nature of Instrumental Causes. (3.) On the Covenant
of God, which gives an infallible inseparable Conjunction between the Word, or
the Church and its Institution by the Word, and the Spirit, Isai. 59.21. God's
Covenant with his People is the Foundation of every Church State, of all
Offices, Powers, Privileges, and Duties thereunto belonging. They have no
other end, they are of no other use, but to communicate, express, declare, and
exemplify on the one hand, the Grace of God in his Covenant unto his People;
and on the other, the Duties of his People according unto the Tenor of the same
Covenant unto him. They are the Way, Means, and Instruments appointed of God
for this end, and other end they have none. And hereon it follows, that if it
be not in the power of men, to appoint any thing that shall be a means of
communication between God and his People, as unto the Grace of the Covenant, on
the one hand, or the Duties of Obedience which it requires, on the other; they
have no Power to erect any new Church state, or enact any thing in Divine
Worship, not of his Institution. This being the state of Churches and their
Ordinances, they cannot be altered, they cannot be liable unto any decay,
unless the Covenant whereunto they are annexed, be altered or decayed. And
therefore the Apostle to put finally and absolutely his Argument unto an issue,
to prove that the Mosaical Church State and Ordinances were changed, because
useless and ineffectual, does it on this ground, that the Covenant whereunto
they were annexed, was changed and become useless. This I suppose at present
will not be said concerning the New Covenant, whereunto all Ordinances of
Divine Worship are inseparably annexed.

Men might at a cheaper rate, as unto the eternal interest of their own Souls,
provide another Covering for their sloth, negligence, unbelief, and indulgence
unto proud foolish imaginations, whereby they render the Churches and
Ordinances of the Gospel useless and ineffectual unto themselves; thereby
charging them with a decay and uselesness, and so reflecting on the honor and
faithfulness of Christ himself.

2. They do not cease, because there is at present, or at least there is
shortly to be expected, such an effusion of the gifts and graces of the Spirit,
as to render all these external institutions needless, and consequently
useless. This also is falsely pretended. For (1.) The greatest and most
plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit in his Gifts and Graces, was in the days
of the Apostles, and of the first Churches planted by them; nor is any thing
beyond it, or indeed equal unto it, any more to be expected in this world. But
yet then was the Gospel Church State erected, and the use of all its Ordinances
of Worship enjoined. (2.) The Ministry of the Gospel which comprizeth all the
Ordinances of Church-worship, as its object and end, is the Ministration of the
Spirit, and therefore no supplies or communication of him can render it
useless. 3. One of the principal ends for which the communication of the Spirit
is promised unto the Church, is to make and render all the Institutions of
Christ effectual unto its edification. (4.) 1 John 2.20, 27. is usually pleaded
as giving countenance unto this fond pretense. But (1.) The Unction mentioned
by the Apostle, was then upon all Believers. Yet (2.) It is known that then
they all walked in Church Order, and the sacred observation of all the
Institutions of Christ. (3.) If it takes away any thing, it is the Preaching of
the Word, or all manner of Teaching and Instruction; which is to overthrow the
whole Scripture, and to reduce Religion into Barbarism. (4.) Nothing is
intended in these words, but the different way of Teaching, and degrees of
Success, between that under the Law, and that now established in the Gospel, by
the plentiful effusion of the Spirit, as has been evidenced at large
elsewhere. Nor 3. Do they cease, in their Administration, for want either of
Authority or Ability to dispense them; which is pleaded unto the same end. But
neither is this pretense of any force; it only begs the thing in Question. The
Authority of Office for the Administration of all other Ordinances, is an
Institution. And to say that all Institutions cease, because none have
Authority to administer them, is to say they must all cease, because they are
ceased. (2.) The Office of the Ministry for the continuation of the
Church State, and Administration of all Ordinances of Worship unto the end of
the world, is sufficiently secured, (1) By the Law, constitution, and
appointment of our Lord Jesus Christ, erecting that Office, and giving warranty
for its continuance to the consummation of all things, Matthew. 28.20 Ephesians.
4.13. (2.) By his continuance according unto his promise to communicate
Spiritual gifts unto men, for the Ministerial Edification of the Church. That
this he does so continue to do, that it is the principal external Evidence of
his abiding in the discharge of his Mediatory Office, and of what nature these
gifts are, I have declared at large in a peculiar Discourse on that subject.
(3.) On the duty of Believers or of the Church, which is, to choose, call, and
solemnly set apart unto the Office of the Ministry, such as the Lord Christ by
his Spirit, has made meet for it, according unto the rule of his Word.

If all these, or any of them do fail, I acknowledge that all Ministerial
Authority and Ability for the dispensation of Gospel Ordinances must fail also,
and consequently the state of the Church. And those who plead for the
continuation of a successive Ministry, without respect unto these things,
without resolving both the Authority and Office of it unto them, do but erect a
dead Image, or embrace a dead carcass, instead of the living and life-giving
Institutions of Christ. They take away the living Creature, and set up a skin
stuffed with straw. But if these things do unalterably continue; if the Law of
Christ can neither be changed, abrogated, or disannulled; if his dispensation
of Spiritual gifts according unto his promise cannot be impeded; if Believers
through his grace will continue in obedience unto his commands, it is not
possible there should be* an utter failure in this Office, and Office-Power of
this Ministry. It may fail in this or that place, in this or that Church, when
the Lord Christ will remove his Candlestick. But it has a living root whence
it will spring again in other places and Churches, whilst this world does
endure. Neither

4. Do they cease, because they have been all of them corrupted, abused, and
defiled in the Apostasy which fell out among all the Churches in the latter
Ages, as it was fully foretold in the Scripture. For (1.) This supposition
would make the whole Kingdom of Christ in the world to depend on the corrupt
Lusts and wills of men, which have got by any means, the outward possession of
the Administration of his Laws and Ordinances. This is all one as if we should
say, that if a pack of wicked Judges, should for a season pervert Justice,
Righteousness and Judgment, that the being of the Kingdom is so overthrown
thereby, as that it can never be restored. (2.) It would make all the duties
and all the privileges of all true Believers to depend on the wills of wicked
Apostates. For if they may not make use of what they have abused, they can
never yield Obedience to the commands of Christ, nor enjoy the privileges
which he has annexed unto his Church and Worship. (3.) On this supposition,
all Reformation of an Apostatized Church, is utterly impossible. But it is our
duty to heal even Babylon itself, by a reduction of all things unto their first
Institution, if it would be healed, Jerem. 51.9. and if not, we are to forsake
her, and reform ourselves, Rev. 18.4.

There is nothing therefore in all these pretenses, that should in the least
impeach the infallible continuation of the Evangelical Churches and Worship, as
to their right, unto the end of the world. And the Heads of those Arguments
whereby the Truth is invincibly confirmed, may be briefly touched on.

1. There are express Testimonies of the Will of Christ, and his promise for
its accomplishment, that the Church and all its Ordinances of Worship should be
continued always unto the end of the world. So as to the Church itself, Matthew.
16.18. Rev. 21.3. The Ministry, Matthew. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.13. Baptism, Matthew.
28.18, 19, 20. The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.26. As for other Institutions,
Public Prayer, Preaching the Word, the Lords day, singing of Gods Praises, the
exercise of Discipline with what belongs thereunto, they have their foundation
in the Law and Light of Nature, being only directed and applied unto the
Gospel-Church-state and Worship, by Rules of especial Institution; and they can
no more cease, than the original Obligation of that Law can so do.

If it be said, that notwithstanding what may be thus pleaded, yet de facto,
the true state of Gospel-Churches, and their whole Worship as unto its Original
Institution did fail under the Papal Apostasy, and therefore may do so again: I
Answer, (1.) We do not plead that this state of things must be always visible
and conspicuous, wherein all Protestant Writers do agree. It is acknowledged,
that as unto public View, Observation and Notoriety, all these things were
lost under the Papacy, and may be so again under a renewed Apostasy. (2.) I do
not plead it to be necessary de facto, that there should be really at all
times, a true visible Church, as the seat of all Ordinances and Administrations
in the World; but all such Churches may fail, not only as unto Visibility, but
as unto their Existence. But this Supposition of a failure of all Instituted
Churches and Worship, I grant only with these Limitations. (1.) That it is of
Necessity from innumerable Divine Promises, and the nature of Christ's Kingly
Office, that there be always in the world a number greater or lesser of sincere
Believers, that openly profess Subjection and Obedience unto him. (2.) That in
these Persons there resides an indefeazable Right always to gather themselves
into a Church State, and to administer all Gospel Ordinances, which all the
world cannot deprive them of; which is the whole of what I now plead for. And
let it be observed, that all the ensuing Arguments depend on this Right, and
not on any Matter of Fact. (3.) I do not know how far God may accept of
Churches in a very corrupt state, and of Worship much depraved, until they have
new means for their Reformation. Nor will I make any judgment of Persons as
unto their eternal Condition, who walk in Churches so corrupted, and in the
performance of Worship so depraved. But as unto them who know them to be so
corrupted and depraved, it is a damnable sin to join with them, or not to
separate from them, Revel. 18.4.

2. The Nature and Use of the Gospel Church State require and prove the
uninterrupted continuance of the Right of its Existence, and the Observance of
all Ordinances of Divine Worship therein, with a Power in them, in whom that
Right does indefeazably reside, that is, all true Believers, to bring it forth
into exercise and practice, notwithstanding the external Impediments which in
some places at some times may interrupt its exercise. In the Observation of
Christ's Institutions, and Celebration of the Ordinances of Divine Worship,
does the Church State of the Gospel, as professing, consist. It does so in
opposition, (1.) Unto the World and the Kingdom of Satan. For hereby do men
call Jesus Lord, as 1 Cor. 12.3. and avow their subjection unto his Kingly
Power. (2.) Unto the Church State of the Old Testament, as the Apostle disputes
at large in his Epistle unto the Hebrews. And this state of the professing
Church in this World is unalterable, because it is the best state that the
Believing Church is capable of. For so the Apostle plainly proves, that hereby
the believing Church is brought (...), which it was not under the Law; that is,
unto its Consummation, in the most complete Perfection that God has designed
unto it on this side Glory, Heb. 7.11, 19. For Christ in all his Offices, is
the immediate Head of it: Its Constitution, and the Revelation of the ways of
its Worship, are an effect of his Wisdom; and from thence is it eminently
suited unto all the ends of the Covenant, both on the part of God and man, and
is therefore liable to no Intercision, or Alteration.

3. The visible Administration of the Kingdom of Christ in this World, consists
in this Church state, with the Administration of his Institutions and Laws
therein. A Kingdom the Lord Jesus Christ has in this World; and though it be
not of the world, yet in the world it must be, until the World shall be no
more. The Truth of all God's Promises in the Scripture depends on this one
Assertion. We need not here concern ourselves what Notions some men have about
the exercise of this Kingdom in the world, with respect unto the outward
affairs and concerns of it. But this is certain, that this Kingdom of Christ in
the world, so far as it is external and visible, consists in the Laws he has
given, the Institutions he has appointed, the Rule or Polity he has
prescribed, with the due Observance of them. Now all these things do make,
constitute, and are the Church State and Worship enquired after. Wherefore as
Christ always has and ever will have an Invisible Kingdom in this world, in
the Souls of Elect Believers, led, guided, ruled by his Spirit; so he will have
a visible Kingdom also, consisting in a professed avowed Subjection unto the
Laws of his Word, Romans 10.10. And although this Kingdom, or his Kingdom in this
sense, may as unto the essence of it be preserved in the external Profession of
individual persons, and it may be, so exist in the world for a season; yet the
honor of it, and its complete establishment, consists in the visible
Profession of Churches, which he will therefore maintain unto the end. But by
Visible in this Discourse, I understand not that which is conspicuous and
eminent unto all, though the Church has been so, and shall yet be so again;
nor yet that which is actually seen or known by others; but only that which may
be so, or is capable of being so known. Nor do I assert a Necessity hereof, as
unto a constant preservation of Purity and Regularity in Order and Ordinances,
according to the Original Institution of them in any place; but only of an
unalterable Right and Power in Believers to render them visible; which it
becomes their indispensible Duty to do, when outward Impediments are not
absolutely insuperable. But of these things thus far, (...).

CHAP. X. What sort of Churches the Disciples of Christ, may* and ought to join
themselves unto as unto Entire Communion.
WE have proved before that it is the Duty of all individual Christians, to
give themselves up unto the Conduct, Fellowship and Communion of some
particular Church or Congregation. Our present Enquiry hereon is, that whereas
there is a great Diversity among professing Societies in the World, concerning
each whereof it is said, Lo here is Christ and lo there is Christ, what
Church, of what Constitution and Order, any one that takes care of his own
Edification and Salvation, ought to join himself unto. This I shall speak unto
first in General, and then in the Examination of one particular Case or
Instance, wherein many at this day are concerned. And some things must be
premised unto the right stating of the Subject of our Enquiry.

1. The Diversities and Divisions among Churches which respect is to be had
unto, in the choice of any which we will or ought to join unto; are of two
sorts.

(1.) Such as are occasioned by the remaining Weaknesses, Infirmities and
Ignorance of the best of Men, whereby they know but in part, and prophecy only
in part, wherein our Edification is concerned, but our Salvation not endangered.

(2.) Such as are in and about things Fundamental in Faith, Worship, and
Obedience; We shall speak to both of them.

2. All Christians were Originally of one Mind in all things needful unto
Joint-Communion, so as that there might be among them all, Love without
Dissimulation. Howbeit there was great variety not only in the Measure of their
apprehensions of the Doctrines of Truth, but in some Doctrines themselves, as
about the continuance of the Observations of the Law, or at least of some of
them; as also Oppositions from without unto the Truth, by Heretics and
Apostates; neither of which hindered the Church Communion of true Believers. But
the Diversity, Difference, and Divisions that are now among Churches in the
World, is the effect of the great Apostasy which befell them all in the latter
Ages, as unto the Spirit, Rule, and Practice of those which were planted by the
Apostles, and will not be healed, until that Apostasy be Abolished.

3. Satan having possessed himself of the Advantage of these Divisions, whereof
he was the Author, he makes use of them to act his Malice and Rage, in stirring
up and instigating one Party to Persecute, Oppress and Devour another, until
the Life, Power and Glory of Christian Religion is almost lost in the World. It
requires therefore great Wisdom to deport our selves aright among these
Divisions, so as to contribute nothing unto the Ends of Malice designed by
Satan in them.

4. In this state of things until it may be cured, which it will never be, by
any of the ways yet proposed and insisted on; the Enquiry is concerning the
Duty of any one who takes care of his own Soul, as unto a Conjunction with some
Church or other. And on the Negative Part I say,

1. Such an one is bound not to join with any Church or Society where any
fundamental Article of Faith is rejected or corrupted. There may be a
fundamental Error in a true Church for a season, when the Church erreth not
Fundamentally; 1 Cor. 15. 2 Timothy 2.18. But I suppose the Error in or against
the Foundation, is part of the Profession of the Church or Society to be joined
unto. For thereby the Nature of the Church is destroyed; it does not hold the
Head, nor abide on the Foundation, nor is the Ground and Pillar of Truth.
Wherefore although the Socinians under a Pretense of Love, Forbearance, and
Mutual Toleration, do offer us the Communion of their Churches, wherein there
is somewhat of Order and Discipline commendable; yet it is unlawful to join in
Church Fellowship or Communion with them. For their Errors about the Trinity,
the Incarnation of Christ, and his Satisfaction, are destructive of the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; and Idolatry, in the divine Worship of
a mere Creature, is introduced by them.

2. Where there (...) any Church taught or allowed, a Mixture of Doctrines or
Opinions, that are prejudicial unto Gospel* Holiness or Obedience, no man that
takes due care of his Salvation can join himself unto it. For the Original*
Rule and Measure of all Church Communion, is agreement in the Doctrine of
Truth. Where therefore there is either not a stable Profession of the same
Doctrine in all substantial Truths of the Gospel, but an uncertain sound is
given, some saying one thing, some another; or that Opposition is made unto any
Truths, of the importance before men^^oned; None can be bound or obliged to
hold Communion with it; nor can incur any blame by refraining from it. For it
is the Duty of a Christian in all things, (...); And to join with such a
Church, would (1.) Stain their Profession; (2.) Hinder their Edification; (3.)
Establish a new Rule of Communion unknown to the Scriptures; namely, besides
Truth; as might easily be manifested.

3. Where the Fundamentals of Religious Worship are corrupted or overthrown, it
is absolutely unlawful to join unto, or abide in any Church. So is it with the
Church of Rome. The various ways whereby the Foundations of Divine Religious
Worship are overthrown in that Church by Superstition and Idolatry have been
sufficiently declared. These render the Communion of that Church pernicious.

4. Nor can any man be obliged to join himself with any Church, nor can it be
his Duty so to do, where the Eternally fixed Rule and Measure of Religious
Worship, namely, that it be of Divine Institution, is varied or changed by any
Additions unto it, or Substractions from it. For whereas one principal end of
all Churches is the joint celebration of Divine Worship, if there be not a
certain stable Rule thereof in any Church of Divine Prescription, no Man can be
obliged unto Communion therewith.

5. Where the Fundamentals of Church Order, Practice and Discipline are
destroyed, it is not Lawful for any man to join in Church Communion. These
Fundamentals are of two sorts; (1.) Such as concern the Ministry of the Church;
(2.) Such as concern the Church it self.

There are four things that are necessary Fundamentals unto the Order of the
Church, on the Part of the Ministry.

(1.) That all the Ministers or Officers of it, be duly chosen by the Church
it self, and solemnly set apart in the Church unto their Office, according unto
the Rule and Law of Christ. This is Fundamental unto Church Order, the Root of
it, from whence all other Parts of it do Spring. And it is that which is (...)
or expressly provided for in the Scripture, as we shall see. If there be a
Neglect herein, and no other Relation required between Ministers, Elders,
Rulers, Bishops, and the Church, but what is raised and created by Ways and
Rules of men's appointment; or if there be a Temporary disposal of Persons into
a discharge of that Office, without a solemn Call, Choice, Ordination, and
Separation unto the Office itself and its work, the Law of Christ is violated,
and the Order of the Church disturbed in its Foundation.

(2.) That those who are called unto the Office of the Ministry be duly
qualified, by their Endowment with Spiritual Gifts for the Discharge of their
Duty, is fundamental unto the Ministry; That the Lord Jesus Christ does still
continue his Dispensation of Spiritual Gifts unto men, to fit and enable them
unto the Office and Work of the Ministry; that if he does not do so, or should
at any time cease so to do, the whole Office of the Ministry must cease, and
the Being of the Church with it; that it is altogether useless for any Churches
or Persons to erect an Image of the Gospel Ministry by outward Rites and
Ceremonies, without the enlivening form of these Spiritual Gifts, I have proved
sufficiently in my Discourse of Spiritual Gifts and their continuance in the
Church. Wherefore a Communication of Spiritual Gifts peculiarly enabling men
unto the Work of the Ministry, antecedent unto their solemn Separation unto the
Office, in some Good Measure, is absolutely necessary unto the due continuance
of the Office and its Work; See Ephesians. 4.7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. To suppose that
the Lord Christ does call and appoint men, unto a certain Office and Work in
his Church, secluding all others from any Interest in the one or other, and yet
not endow them with peculiar Gifts and Abilities for the discharge of that
Office and Work, is to ascribe that unto him, which is every way, unbecoming
his Wisdom and Grace, with his Love unto the Church. But when men look on all
Church Order, as a lifeless Machine to be acted moved and disposed by External
Rules, Laws, Canons and Orders, without respect unto the Actings of the Spirit
of Christ going before in the Rule of his Word to enliven every part of it, the
true Disciples of Christ will receive no advantage thereby.

(3.) It is of the same Importance that Persons so called, do take heed unto
their Ministry that they fulfill it, that they give themselves unto the Word and
Prayer, that they labor continually in the Word and Doctrine, and all those
other Duties which in the Scripture are prescribed unto them; and this not only
as unto the Matter of them, but as unto the Manner of their performance with
Zeal, Love, Compassion and Diligence. Where there is a great Defect in any of
these things, on what Pretense soever it be; Where Men esteem themselves
exempted from this Work, or not obliged unto it; when they suppose that they
may discharge their Office at a cheaper rate, and with less trouble, as unto
their present Interest, by such ways as I shall not here express, No Man is,
no Man can be obliged to confine his Church Communion, unto such a Ministry.

(4.) It is required that they be Examples, unto the Flock, in the Expression
of the Nature and Power of the Doctrine which they Preach, in their
Conversation, especially in Zeal, Humility, Self-denial, and readiness for the
Cross.

Where these things are not, there is such a defect in the Fundamentals of
Church Practice as unto the Ministry of it, that no man who takes care of his
own Edification, can join himself unto a Church, laboring under it. For
Ministers and Churches are nothing but instituted means of the Conversion of
Sinners, and the Edification of Believers. And when any of them through their
own default cease so to be, there is no Obligation unto any man to join or
continue in their Communion; nor do they contract any Guilt in a peaceable
departure from them, but discharge their Duty. That this be done peaceably
without strife or contention, without judging of others, as unto their Interest
in Christ, and Eternal Salvation, the Law of Moral Obedience does require. That
it be done with Love and Compassion and Prayer toward and for them who are
Left, is the peculiar Direction of that Moral Duty by the Gospel. Such a
Practice at present would fall under severe Charges and Accusations, as also
brutish Penalties in some places. But when all Church Craft shall be defeated,
and the uses that are made of its imaginary Authority be discarded, there will
be little occasion of this Practice, and none at all of Offense.

Again; There are Things Fundamental unto Church Practice and Order in the
Church itself, which where they are neglected, no Man ought of choice to join
himself unto that Church, seeing he cannot do it without the Prejudice of his
Edification, the furtherance whereof he ought to design in that Duty. And these
are,

(1.) That the Discipline of Christ be duly exercised in it, according unto
his Mind, and by the Rules of his Prescription. There never was any Sect,
Order, or Society of Men in the World, designed for the Preservation and
Promotion of Virtue and things Praiseworthy, but they had Rules of Discipline
proper unto the Ends of their Design, to be observed in and by all that belong
unto them. Where the Erection of such Societies is continued in the World, as
it is much in the Papacy, both their Constitution, and their Conversation,
depend on the especial Rules of Discipline which they have framed unto
themselves. And this is done by them in great Variety; for being ignorant of
the Discipline of the Gospel, and so esteeming it insufficient unto their
Design, they have made no end of coining Rules unto themselves. To suppose that
our Lord Jesus Christ, who in this Church state according unto his infinite
Wisdom, has erected the most perfect Society for the most perfect Ends, of
Religion, of Obedience toward God, of Love and Usefulness among our selves,
has not appointed a Discipline, and given Rules concerning its Administration,
for the Preservation of that Society, and the attaining of those Ends, is
highly injurious unto his Honor and Glory.

Where therefore there is a Church or any Society that pretends so to be,
wherein there is an utter Neglect of this Discipline of Christ, or the
Establishment of another, not administered by the Laws and Rules that he has
prescribed, no Disciple of Christ can be obliged to join unto, or to continue
in the total sole Communion of such a Church. And whereas there are two Parts
of this Discipline of Christ; That which is Private, among the Members of the
Church, for the Exercise and Preservation of Love; and that which is Public,
in and by the Authority of the Rulers of the Church, for the Preservation of
Purity and Order, a neglect in either of them, does much impeach the
Fundamental Constitution of a Church as unto its Practice.

2. There are sundry other things which belong unto this Discipline in General,
which are of great consideration in the Discharge of the Duty we enquire into.
Among them are,

(1.) That constant Difference be put between the Good and the Bad in all
Church Administrations;

(2.) That Persons openly or flegitiously wicked, be not admitted into the
Society of the Church, or a participation of its Privileges.

(3.) That Holiness, Love, and Usefulness, be openly avowed as the Design and
Interest of the Church. But they are all so comprised in the General Head of
Discipline, as that I shall not in particular insist upon them.

From what has been thus declared, it will appear on the other hand, what
Church it is that a Discipline of Christ, who takes due care of his own
Edification and Salvation, ought in Duty to join himself unto in complete
Communion. To Answer this Enquiry, is the End of all those Discourses and
Controversies which have been about the Notes of the true Church. I shall
briefly determine concerning it, according to the Principles before Evinced.

1. It must be such a Church as wherein all the Fundamental Truths of the
Gospel are believed, owned, and professed, without Controversy, and those not
borne withal by whom they are denied or opposed. Without this a Church is not
the Ground and Pillar of Truth, it does not hold the Head, it is not built on
the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Neither is it sufficient, that
those things are generally professed or not denied. A Church that is filled
with wranglings and contions about fundamental or important Truths of the
Gospel, is not of choice to be joined unto. For these things subvert the Souls
of Men, and greatly impede their Edification. And although both among distinct
Churches, and among the Members of the same Church, mutual Forbearance be to be
exercised, with respect unto a variety in Apprehensions in some Doctrines of
lesser Moment; Yet the Incursion that has been made into sundry Protestant
Churches in the last and present Age, of Novel Doctrines and Opinions, with
Differences, Divisions, and endless Disputes which have ensued thereon, have
rendered it very difficult to determine, how to engage in complete Communion
with them. For I do not judge, that any Man is, or can be obliged unto constant
total Communion with any Church, or to give up himself absolutely unto the
conduct thereof, wherein there are incurable dissensions about important
Doctrines of the Gospel. And if any Church, shall publicly avow, countenance,
or approve of Doctrines contrary unto those which were the Foundation of its
first Communion, the Members of it are at Liberty, to refrain the Communion of
it, and to provide otherwise for their own Edification.

2. It must be such a Church as wherein the Divine Worship Instituted or
approved by Christ himself, is diligently observed, without any Addition made
thereunto. In the Observance of this Worship as unto all external, occasional
Incidencies and Circumstances of the Acts wherein it does consist, it is left
unto the Prudence of the Church itself, according to the Light of Nature, and
general Rules of Scripture; and it must be so unless we shall suppose that the
Lord Jesus Christ, by making men his Disciples, does unmake them from being
rational Creatures, or refuses the Exercise of the rational Faculties of our
Souls in his service. But this is so remote from Truth, that on the contrary,
he gives them an improvement for this very end, that we may know how to deport
our selves aright in the Observance of his Commands, as unto the outward
discharge of them in his Worship and the Circumstances of it. And this he does
by that Gift of Spiritual Wisdom, whereof we shall Treat afterward.

But if Men, if Churches will make Additions in or unto the Rites of Religious
Worship, unto what is appointed by Christ himself, and require their Observance
in their Communion, on the force and efficacy of their being so by them
appointed, no Disciple of Christ is or can be obliged, by virtue of any Divine
Institution or Command, to join in total, absolute Communion, with any such
Church. He may be induced on various considerations to judge, that something of
that Nature at some season, may not be evil and sinful unto him, which
therefore he will bear with, or comply withal; Yet he is not, he cannot be
obliged by virtue of any Divine Rule or Command, to join himself with, or
continue in the Communion of such a Church. If any shall suppose that hereby
too much liberty is granted unto Believers in the choice of their Communion,
and shall thereon make severe Declamations, about the Inconveniences and Evils,
which will ensue; I desire they would remember the Principle I proceed upon,
which is that Churches are not such sacred Machines as some suppose, erected
and acted for the outward Interest and Advantages of any sort of Men; but only
means of the Edification of Believers, which they are bound to make use of, in
Obedience unto the Commands of Christ, and no otherwise. Whereas therefore the
Disciples of Christ, have not only a Divine Warranty justifying them in the
doing of it, but an express Command making it their indispensible Duty to join
in the Celebration of all that Religious Worship, which the Lord Christ the
only Lawgiver of the Church, and who was faithful both in and over the House of
God, as the Son, has Instituted and Commanded; but have no such Warranty or
Command for any thing else, it is their Duty to stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free. And if by the same Breath, in the same
Rule, Law or Canon, they are commanded and obliged to observe in the Worship of
God, what the Lord Christ has appointed, and what he has not appointed, both
on the same Grounds, namely, the Authority of the Church, and on the same
Penalties for their Omission, no man can be divinely obliged to embrace the
Communion of any Church on such Terms.

3. It is required that the Ministry of a Church so to be joined with, is not
defective in any of those things which according to the Rule of the Gospel are
fundamental thereunto. What these are, has been declared. And because
Edification, which is the End of Church Communion, does so eminently depend on
the Ministry of the Church, there is not any thing which we ought to have a
more diligent consideration of, in the joining of our selves unto any such
Communion. And where the Ministry of any Church, be the Church of what sort or
size it will, is incurably Ignorant or Negligent, or through a defect in Gifts,
Grace, or conscientious attendance unto their Duty, is insufficient unto the
due Edification of the Souls of them that believe, no man can account himself
obliged unto the Communion of the Church, but he that can be satisfied with a
Shadow and the Names of things, for the Substance and Reality of them.

If therefore it be granted, as I think it is, that Edification is the
principal End of all Church Communion, it is not intelligible how a man should
be obliged unto that Communion, and that alone, wherein due Edification cannot
be obtained. Wherefore, a Ministry enabled by Spiritual Gifts, and engaged by
sense of Duty to labor constantly in the use of all means appointed by Christ
for the Edification of the Church, or increase of his Mystical Body, is
required in such a Church, as a Believer may conscientiously join himself unto.
And where it is otherwise, let Men cry out Schism and Faction whilst they
please, Jesus Christ will acquit his Disciples, in the Exercise of their
Liberty, and accept them in the Discharge of their Duty.

If it be said, that if all men be thus allowed to judge of what is best for
their own Edification, and to act according unto the Judgment which they make,
they will be continually parting from one Church unto another, until all things
are filled with disturbance and Confusion; I say*

(1.) That the contrary Assertion, namely, that Men are not allowed to judge
what is meet and best for their own Edification, or not to act according to the
Judgment they make herein, may possibly keep up some Churches, but is the
ready way to destroy all Religion.

(2.) That many of those by whom this Liberty is denied unto professing
Christians, yet do indeed take it for granted, that they have such a Liberty,
and that it is their Duty to make use of it. For what are all the Contests
between the Church of Rome, and the Church of England, so far as Christians,
that are not Churchmen, are concerned in them? Is it not, in whether of these
Churches Edification may be best obtained? If this be not the Ball between us,
I know not what is. Now herein do not all the Writers and Preachers of both
Parties give their Reasons and Arguments unto the People, why Edification is
better to be had in the one Church then in the other? and do they not require
of them to form a Judgment upon those Reasons and Arguments, and to act
accordingly; if they do not, they do but make a Flourish, and act a Part, like
Players on a Stage, without any determinate Design.

(3.) All Christians actually do so; they do judge for themselves, unless they
are brutish; they do Act according unto that Judgment, unless they are hardened
in Sin; and therefore who do not so, are not to be esteemed Disciples of
Christ. To suppose that in all things of Spiritual and Eternal Concernment,
that men are not determined and acted, every one by his own Judgment, is an
Imagination of men who think but little of what they are, or do, or say, or
Write. Even those who shut their Eyes against the Light, and follow in the
Herd, resolving not to enquire into any of these things, do it, because they
judge it is best for them so to do.

(4.) It is commonly acknowledged by Protestants, that private Christians have
a Judgment of Discretion in things of Religion. The Term was invented to grant
them some Liberty of Judgment in Opposition unto the blind Obedience required
by the Church of Rome; but withal to put a restraint upon it, and a distinction
of some superior Judgment, it may be in the Church or others. But if by
Discretion, they mean the best of men's Understanding, Knowledge, Wisdom, and
Prudence, in and about the things wherein it is exercised, I should be glad to
be informed, what other Judgment, than this of Discretion in and about the
things of Religion, this or that or any Church in the World, can have or
exercise. But to allow men a Judgment of Discretion, and not to grant it their
Duty to act according unto that Judgment, is to oblige them to be Fools, and
to act, not discreetly, at least not according unto their own Discretion.

4. The same is to be spoken of Gospel Discipline, without which neither can
the Duties of Church Societies be observed, nor the Ends of them attained. The
neglect, the loss, the abuse hereof, is that which has ruined the Glory of
Christian Religion in the World, and brought the whole Profession of it into
Confusion. Hereon have the fervency and sincerity of true Evangelical mutual
Love been abated, yea, utterly lost. For that Love which Jesus Christ requires
among his Disciples, is such as never was in the World before amongst Men, nor
can be in the World, but on the Principles of the Gospel, and Faith therein.
Therefore it is called his New Commandment. The Continuation of it amongst the
Generality of Christians is but vainly pretended; little or nothing of the
Reality of it in its due Exercise is found. And this has ensued on the Neglect
of Evangelical Discipline in Churches, or the turning of it into a Worldly
Domination. For one principal End of it, is the Preservation, Guidance, and
acting of this Love. That mutual Watch over one another that ought to be in all
the Members of the Church, the Principal Evidence and fruit of Love without
Dissimulation, is also lost hereby. Most men are rather ready to say in the
Spirit and Words of Cain, Am I my Brothers Keeper, than to attend unto the
Command of the Apostles, Exhort one another daily, least any be hardened
through the Deceitfulness of Sin; Or comply with the Command of our Savior, if
thy Brother offend thee, tell him of it between him and thee. By this means
likewise is the Purity of Communion lost, and those received as principal
Members of Churches, who by all the Rules of Primitive Discipline, ought to be
cast out of them. Wherefore this also is to be considered in the Choice we are
to make of what Churches we will join our selves unto, as unto constant
complete Communion, and in whose Communion we will abide. For these things are
Matters of Choice, and consist in Voluntary free Acts of Obedience. With those
unto whom they are not so, who would on the one hand have them to be things
that men may be compelled unto, and ought so to be; or on the other that follow
no other Guidance in them but outward Circumstances from the Times and Places
where they are born and inhabit, I will have no Contest. It follows from hence
also, That,

Where there are many Churches wherein these things are found, whereon we may
lawfully and ought in Duty to join with some of them, in particular, every one
is obliged to join himself unto such a Church, as whose Principles and
Practices are most suited unto his Edification.

CHAP. XI. Of Conformity and Communion in Parochial Assemblies.
FROM what we have insisted on, we may borrow some Light into the Determination
of that Case, wherein Multitudes are at this day concerned. And the Case it
self may be briefly stated in this Enquiry; namely, Whether all Protestants,
Ministers and People, are bound to join themselves unto the Church of England,
as now by Law established in its Parochial Assemblies, as unto complete
constant Communion, without the use of any other Church means for their own
Edification; So as if they do not so do, they are Guilty of Schism. This is
that which is called Conformity unto the Church of England, which as unto
private Persons, can be expressed only in constant complete Communion in
Parochial Assemblies, according to their Present Constitution, without the Use
or Exercise of any other Church Worship or Discipline, but what is by Law
established in them. Refraining from an absolute compliance herein, is called
Schism. But whereas Ecclesiastical Schism, whatever it be in particular, in
its general nature has respect only unto divine Institutions; this which
respects only the Laws, Rules, and Determinations of men, can have no
alliance thereunto. Yet is it not only charged as such, without the least
countenance from Scripture or Antiquity so far as it may be allowed of
Authority with us, but the supposition of it, is accumulated with another Evil,
namely, that those who are so guilty (of it) in the Judgment of them who are
interested with secular Power, though Peaceable and Orthodox, ought to be
punished with various Penalties, gradually coming unto the loss of Goods,
Liberty, and in some Cases of Life it self. An Opinion Ignominious unto
Christian Religion, however vapoured withal by young Men, whose Wit flies above
all serious Consideration of things and their Circumstances; and countenanced
by others, from an influence of Interest, who otherwise would not be imposed
on, by such an Anti-Evangelical Presumption. I shall therefore at the utmost
distance from Interest or Passion, briefly consider the Case proposed, and give
an account of my Thoughts concerning it*

1. One or two things are usually premised unto the consideration of this case;
as namely,

(1.) That those who refrain from that Communion with the Church of England
which we insist upon, do yet agree therewith in all important Doctrines of
Faith, which is the Foundation, the Life and Soul of Church Union and
Communion. This I freely grant, but with this Limitation; that this Agreement
respects the Doctrine as declared at the first Reformation, and explained in
the Age next ensuing thereon. If there be a change made in or of these
Doctrines, or any of them, by any in or of the Church of England, we profess
our Disagreement from them; and do declare that thereby the Foundation of our
Communion with them is weakened, and the principal bond of it loosened.

(2.) That not only as Christians, but as Reformed Protestants, we do agree in
the Renunciation of the Doctrines and Worship of the Church of Rome, which are
opposed by the common consent of all those who are usually so called. Yet this
must be added thereunto; that if any in or of the Church of England, should
make an Accession unto any Parts of the Doctrine and Worship of the Roman
Church, not avowed or warranted by the consent of the Church in its first
Reformation, we are not, we cannot be obliged unto Communion with them therein;
and by their so doing, the Original Bond of our Communion is weakened, if not
dissolved.

2. These things being premised, we shall enquire in the first place, what is
the Rule of that Communion with the Church of England in its Parochial
Assemblies, which is required of us. If this be pleaded to be a Rule of divine
Prescription, we acknowledge that great diligence and humility are required
unto the consideration of it, that we be not mistaken. And if it prove to be
according to the Mind of Christ, that is, of his Institution, if we fail of a
compliance with it, we are guilty of Schism. But if the Rule, prescribing,
limiting, and exacting this Communion, be not so much as pleaded to be of
divine Institution, whatever fault there may be in our dissent from it, Schism
it is not; For Ecclesiastical Schism neither has nor can have respect unto
any thing but divine Institutions. For if it has, it is in the Power of any
sort of men, to make Schismatics of whom they please, as practically and in
pretense, it is come to pass at this day in the World. Now the Rule of the
Communion required, is the Law of the Land, the Book of Canons, with the
Rubric of the Common Prayer. If according to the Prescriptions, Directions,
and Commands, given in them, we do join our selves in Communion with Parochial
Assemblies, then are we judged conformable to the Church of England, and not
else. By and according unto these, are all enquiries made concerning Communion
with the Church; and if they are observed, the return is, Omnia been. Now this
Rule has no divine Warrant for its Institution, no Example in the Primitive
Churches, especially considering what are the things which it obliges us unto;
nor can be made consistent with the Liberty wherewith Christ has made his
Disciples free. A Dissent from this Rule, is as far from Schism as any man
need desire it. For nothing is so, but what respects some Command or
Institution of Christ, which immediately affects the Conscience. It is true,
the Lord Christ has Commanded that Love, Union, Peace and Order, whereof
Schism is a disturbance, and whereunto it is opposite. But they are that Love,
Union and Order which he has appointed. To suppose that he has left it unto
Men, to invent and appoint a new kind of Union and Order, which is done in the
Rule we treat of, which he never required, and then to oblige his Disciples
unto the Observation of it, be it what it will, so as that their dissent from
it should be Criminal, and that for this Reason, that it is so appointed of
men, is no small mistake. And if all that Love, Union, Peace and Order, which
the Lord Jesus has enjoined his Disciples, may be punctually observed, without
any respect unto this Rule, as a Rule of Church Communion, to dissent from it,
whatever fault of another kind it may be, is no more Schism than it is
Adultery. And if on some men's Arbitrary Constitution of this Rule, and the
Dissent of others from it, such Differences and Divisions ensue, as seem to
have the general Nature of Schism, the Evil of them belongs unto those alone,
by whom the Rule is framed. If indeed some should frame such a Rule of Church
Communion, because they suppose they see Cause for it, and would then leave it
unto others to observe, as they see Cause, if it be not of Use, it would not be
liable unto much abuse. But whereas our Lord Jesus Christ has given one and
the same Rule equally unto all his Disciples in these things, namely, that they
should observe and do, all that he has commanded them; for some of them on any
pretense or Plea whatever, as of their being the Church, or the like,
arbitrarily to frame a Rule of their own, as an Addition unto his, obliging all
others unto a strict Observance of it, because they have so framed it, is that
which neither the Scripture nor Primitive Antiquity know any thing of.

I will not enquire what is that Power and Authority whereby this Rule is
constituted and confirmed, nor in whom it does reside. The Name of the Church
is usually pretended and pleaded. But before any can be concerned herein, all
that has been pleaded for the true state and nature of Evangelical Churches
must be overthrown, which will not be done speedily. Railings, Revilings, and
Reproaches will not do it. But until this is done, it will be believed, that
every particular Congregation, is indispensibly obliged in itself to observe
and do all the Commands of Christ; and is left at Liberty so to regulate the
outward circumstances of its Worship and Order, as is best for its own
Edification, whereof it self is the most competent Judge. But as for a Church
of another sort, invested with Authority to make a Rule, not only as unto the
outward Circumstances of those Actions wherein Church Order and Worship do
consist, but as unto sundry Religious Rites and Observances which thereby are
added unto it, and impose the Observance of it, on a great Multitude of other
Congregations, without their consent, whether they judge the things enjoined,
to be for their Edification or otherwise, it is apparently not from Heaven, but
of Men. Wherefore leave Christians and Churches at that Liberty which Christ
has purchased for them, wherewith he has made them free, and then let those
who first break Union and Order, bear the Charge of Schism, which they cannot
avoid.

3. The Church Communion required by virtue of this Rule is constant and
complete, exclusive unto any other Church Order, or means of public
Edification. It does not command or appoint that men should communicate in
Parochial Assemblies, when there is Occasion, when it is for their Edification,
when scandal would arise if they should refuse it; but absolutely and
completely. And whereas there are many things relating unto Church Order and
Divine Worship enjoined in that Rule, there is no Distinction made between
them, that some things are always necessary, that is in the seasons of them,
and some things wherein men may forbear a Compliance, but they are all equally
required in their places and seasons; though perhaps on different Penalties.
And whoever fails in the Observation of any Ceremony, time or place, appointed
therein, is in the Power of them who are entrusted with the Administration of
Church Power or Jurisdiction; for the Discipline of the Church it cannot be
called. Suppose a Man would comply with all other things, only he esteems the
use of one Rite or Ceremony, as the Cross in Baptism, or the like, to be
unlawful; if he forbear the use of it, or to tender his Child unto Baptism
where it is used, he is to be cut off as a Schismatic from the Communion of
the Church, no less then if he had absolutely refused a Compliance with the
whole Rule. And therefore whatever Condescension and Forbearance in some things
is pretended, He that does not in all things observe the whole Rule, is in
Misericordia Concellarii; which often proves an uneasy Posture. If any men think
that the Lord Christ has given them such a Power and Authority over the Souls
and Consciences of his Disciples, as that they can bind them unto the Religious
Observance of every Rite and Ceremony that they are pleased to appoint, on the
Penalty of Excision from all Church Communion, and the Guilt of Schism, I
shall only say, that I am not of their Mind, nor ever shall be so.

4. This Communion contains a virtual Approbation of all that is contained in
the Rule of it, as Good for the Edification of the Church. It is certain that
nothing is to be appointed in the Church but what is so: even Order itself,
which these things it is said are framed for, is Good only with respect
thereunto. Now it is to be judged that whatever a Man practices in Religion,
that he approves of; for if he do not* he is a vile Hypocrite. Nor is he
worthy the Name of a Christian, who will practice any thing in Religion, but
what he approves. The Disputes that have been amongst us about doing things
with a doubting Conscience, upon the Command of Superiors, and consenting unto
the Use of things which we approve not of in themselves, tend all to Atheism,
and the eternal Dishonor of Christian Religon, begetting a frame of Mind which
an honest Heathen would scorn. Wherefore unless men be allowed to declare what
it is they approve, and what they do not, their Practice is their Profession of
what they approve, which is the whole Rule of Communion prescribed unto them.

5. These things being premised, I shall propose some of those Reasons, on the
account whereof Many cannot Conform unto the Church of England, by joining in
constant complete Communion with Parochial Assemblies, so as by their Practice
to approve the Rule of that Communion, obliging themselves to use no other
public means for their own Edification.

1. The Church of England in its Parochial Assemblies stands in need of
Reformation. For it is apparent, that either they fail in their Original
Institution, or else have degenerated from it. What has already been
discoursed, concerning the Original Institution of Churches, with men's
voluntary Coalescency into such sacred Societies, with what shall be afterward
treated, concerning their essential Parts in matter and form, will sufficiently
evidence their present Deviation from the Rule of their first Institution.
Neither so far as I know, is it pleaded that they are distinct Churches of
Divine Institution; but secular Appointments, as for other ends, so for an
accommodation of men in the Performance of some Parts of Divine Worship. And if
they are found no more, they can have no concernment into the Enquiry about
Schism. For withholding Church Communion from such Societies as are not
Churches, is a new kind of Schism, unknown to all Antiquity. And for that
which takes it self to be a Church by a divine warranty, suppose it be so, to
command constant complete Communion, exclusive unto all other Church Communion,
with that or them which are no Churches, determining a refusal thereof to be
Schism, is to undertake a Cause which needs not only great Parts, but great
Power also to defend it.

But let these Parochial Assemblies be esteemed Churches, without a supposition
whereof, I know not what Ecclesiastical concernment we can have in them; three
things will be said thereon;

(1.) That the Church of England (as in other things) so in these Parochial
Assemblies stands in need of Reformation.

(2.) That they neither do, nor will, nor can Reform themselves.

(3.) On this supposition, it is lawful for any of the Disciples of Christ, to
yield Obedience unto him by joining in such Societies for their Edification as
he has appointed; which is the whole of the Cause in hand. Nor does any
necessity from hence ensue of a departure from Communion with the Church of
England in Faith and Love, or the Profession of the same Faith, and the due
Exercise of all the Acts and Duties of Christian Love.

Unto the Proof of the first Assertion, some things are to be premised. As,

1. Churches instituted, planted, ruled according to the Mind of Christ in all
things may degenerate into a corrupt state, such as shall stand in need of
Reformation, in a neglect whereof they must perish as unto their Church state
and Privileges. This needs no confirmation; for besides that it is possible
from all the causes of such an Apostasy and defection, that so it should be,
and it is frequently foretold in the Scripture that so it would be, the Event
in and among all Churches that had originally a divine Institution, does make
uncontroulably evident. The seven Churches of Asia, most of them within few
years of their first Plantation, were so degenerated, that our Lord Jesus
Christ threatened them with Casting off, unless they reformed themselves. What a
woeful Apostasy all other Churches both of the East and West were involved in,
is known unto and confessed by all Protestants. But yet the case of none of
them was deplorable or desperate, until through Pride and carnal Interest they
fell some of them into a Persuasion that they needed no Reformation, nor could
be reformed, which is become a principal Article of Faith in the Roman Church.
There was a Reformation attempted, and attained in some measure, by some
Nations or Churches in the last Ages, from the Corruption and Impositions of
the Church of Rome. However none of them ever pretended that it was complete or
perfect, according to the Pattern of the Scripture, as unto the Institution and
Discipline of the Churches; no nor yet to the Example of the Primitive Church
of after Ages, as is acknowledged by the Church of England, in the beginning of
the Commination against Sinners. But suppose it to be complete, to conclude
that because an outward Rule of it was established, so long as that outward
Rule is observed, there can be no need of Reformation, is a way to lead
Churches into a Presumptuous Security unto their Ruin. For whereas Men being
secured in their Interests by that Rule, are prejudiced against any Progress in
Reformation beyond what they have attained, which that it should be a Duty is
contrary unto the whole nature of Christian Religion, which is the conduct of a
Spiritual Life, in the growth and increase of Light and a suitable Obedience;
so they are apt to think that whilst they adhere unto that Rule, they can stand
in no need of Reformation, which is but a new name for trouble and Sedition;
though it be the Foundation on which they stand. But generally Churches think
that others stand in need of Reformation, but they need none themselves. If
they would but give them leave to Reform themselves, who judge that it is
needful for them, without the least Prejudice unto their Church Profession, or
secular Interest, it is all that is desired of them.

2. Where Churches do so stand in need of Reformation, and will not Reform
themselves, being warned of their Duty, the Lord Christ threatens to leave
them, and assuredly will do so, in the time that he has limited unto his
Patience. This is the Subject of five of his Epistles or Messages unto the
Churches of Asia, Rev. chap. 2, 3. And where the Lord Christ does on any Cause
or Provocation, withdraw his Presence, in any kind or degree, from any Church;
it is the Duty of any of the Members of that Church, to remove from themselves
the Guilt of that Provocation, though it cannot be done without a Separation
from that Church. It it safer leaving of any Church whatever, then of Jesus
Christ. I suppose most men think, that if they had a Warning from Christ
charging their defection, and calling for Reformation, as those Churches of
Asia had, they would Repent and Reform themselves. But whereas it does not
appear that some of them did so, whereon they were not long after deserted and
destroyed; it is like that there are others who would follow their steps,
though one should rise from the dead to warn them of their danger. But this
Instruction that Churches who lose their first Faith, Love, and Works, who are
negligent in Discipline, and tolerate offensive Evils in Doctrines and Manners
among them, who are Lukewarm as unto Zeal, and dead for the greatest Part of
their Members, as unto the Life of Holiness, are disapproved by Christ, and in
danger of being utterly deserted by him, is given unto all Churches, no less
divinely, then if they had an immediate Message from Heaven about these things.
Those therefore who being under the Guilt of them, and do not reform
themselves, cannot claim the Necessity of a continuance in their Communion,
from any Disciples of Christ, as we shall see afterward.

3. Reformation respects either Doctrine and Worship; or Obedience becoming the
Gospel. The Debates about such a Reformation as concerns the retaining or
removing of certain Ceremonies, we concern not ourselves in at present. Nor
shall we in this Place insist on what concerns Doctrine and Worship, which may
afterward be spoken unto. But we shall confine our selves here, unto the
consideration of Gospel Obedience only. And we say,

That the Church of England in the Generality of its Parochial Assemblies, and
in itself, stands in need of Reformation, by reason of the woeful degeneracy of
the Generality of its Members, that is, the Inhabitants of the Land, from the
Rule of the Gospel and Commands of Christ, as unto Spiritual Light, Faith,
Love, Holiness, Charity, and abounding in the fruits of Righteousness unto the
Praise of God, by Jesus Christ. These things are the immediate ends of Church
Societies, the principal means whereby God is glorified in the World. Where
they are neglected, where they are not attained, where they are not duly
improved by the Generality of the Members of any Church, that Church I think,
stands in need of Reformation.

This Assertion may seem somewhat importune and severe. But when the sins of a
Church or Nation are come to that height in all Ranks, Sorts, and Degrees of
Men, that all Persons of Sobriety do fear daily that desolating Judgments from
God will break in upon us, it cannot be unseasonable to make mention of them,
when it is done with no other design but only to show the Necessity of
Reformation, or how necessary it is for some, if all will not comply therewith.
For if a City be on fire, it is surely lawful for any of the Citizens, to save
and preserve, if they can, their own houses, though the Mayor and Aldermen
should neglect the Preservation of the whole City in General.

It might be easily demonstrated what great numbers amongst us,

(1.) Who have imbibed Atheistical Opinions, and either vent them, or speak
presumptuously according unto their Influence and Tendency every day.

(2.) Who are profane Scoffers at all true Christian Piety and the due
expressions of the Power of Godliness, an Evil not confined unto the Laity;
such things being uttered and published by them, as should be astonishable unto
all that know the Fear of the Lord and his Terror.

(3.) Who are profoundly Ignorant of the Mysteries of the Gospel, or those
Doctrines of Christian Religion whose knowledge is of the highest importance
and necessity.

(4.) Who are openly flagitious in their Lives, whence all sorts of gross
Immoralities do fill the Land from one end unto the other.

(5.) Who live in a constant neglect of all more private holy Duties, whether
in their Families, or in Personal Retirements.

(6.) Who are evidently under the Power of Pride, Vanity, Covetousness,
Profaneness of Speech in cursed Oaths and Swearing.

(7.) Who instruct the worst of men unto an Approbation of themselves in such
ways as these, by petulant Scoffing at the very name of the Spirit and Grace of
Christ, at all Expectation of his Spiritual Aids and Assistances, at all
fervency in religious Duties, or other Acts of an holy Converse. These and such
like things as these do sufficiently Evidence the Necessity of Reformation. For
where they are continued, the Use and End of Church Societies is impaired or
lost. And it is in vain to pretend that this is the old Plea of them who ^aused
Schisms in the Church, namely, that bad men were mixed with the Good, for
which cause they rejected those Churches wherein that was allowed, as no true
Churches of Christ. For no such thing is included in what we assert, nor does
follow thereon. We do own that wicked Hypocrites may be joined in true
Churches, and be made Partakers of all the Privileges of them. Neither is this
a Cause of withdrawing Communion from any Church, much less of condemning it as
no true Church of Christ. But this we say, that if such Hypocrites discover
themselves, in open scandalous sins, which upon Examination will prove to be of
a larger extent then some suppose, with respect unto sins of Omission as well
as of Commission; if they are not dealt withal according as the Discipline of
Christ does require in such cases, the Church wherein they are allowed,
especially if the Number of such Persons be many, or the most, the Generality
of the People, and their sins notorious, does stand in need of Reformation; as
the Church of England does acknowledge in the Commination against Sinners.

The Substance of what is proposed under this consideration, may be expressed
in the ensuing Observations.

(1.) The Generality of the Inhabitants of this Nation, are joined and do
belong unto the Church of England, in its Parochial Assemblies.

(2.) That many walk and live, without any visible compliance unto the Rule of
Christ in Gospel Obedience; Yea

(3.) Great notorious provoking sins do abound among them, for which it ought
to be feared continually that the Judgments of God will speedily follow, as is
acknowledged in the Commination.

(4.) That hereon they all stand in need of Reformation, without which the
principal Ends of Church Communion cannot be obtained among them.

(5.) That this Reformation is the Duty of these Churches themselves, which if
it be neglected, they live in a contempt of the Commands of Christ. For,

(6.) Unto them, in the Preaching of the Word, and exercise of Discipline, are
the means of this Reformation committed; for we treat not at present of the
Power or Duty of the Supreme Magistrate in these things.

(7.) That this state of Churches, cannot hinder, nor ought so to do, if
continued in, the true Disciples of Christ from reforming themselves, by
endeavoring the due Observance of all his Commands.

2. In this state the Church of England does not, and it is to be feared, will
not, nor can reform itself. But although the weight of the whole Argument in
hand depends very much on this Assertion, yet I shall not insist on its
particular confirmation, for sundry Reasons not now to be mentioned. It is
enough that no such work has been as yet attempted, nor is at this day
publicly proposed, notwithstanding all the Mercies that some have received,
the losses which the Church for want of it has sustained, the Judgments for
Sins that are feared, which ought to be Motives thereunto. Yea the Generality
of Ecclesiastical Persons, seem to judge, that all things among them are as
they ought to be, that there is no Crime or Disorder, but only in complaining
of their Good Estate, and calling upon them for Reformation.

3. This being the state of the Parochial Churches in England, the Enquiry is,
Whether every Beleiver in England be indispensibly obliged by Virtue of any
Law, Rule or Direction of a divine Original, to continue in constant complete
Communion with them, so as not to make use of any other ways and means of
Christ Appointment for their own Edification, on the Penalty of the Guilt of
Schism. Now although we do not (as we shall see immediately) lay the weight of
refraining from their Communion on this consideration, yet is there enough in
it to warrant any Man in his so doing. For a Man in his conforming thereunto,
makes it a Part of his Religious Profession, not only that the Church wherein
he is joined, is a true Church, but that there is in its state and actings, a
due Representation of the Mind of Christ, as unto what he requires of his
Churches, and what he would have them to be. The Lord Christ is the Apostle and
High Priest of our Profession; and in all things that belong thereunto, we
declare that we do it in compliance with his Will, and we do so, or we are
Hypocrites. This no man can do in such a Church state, who is convinced of its
defects, without reflecting the greatest dishonor on Christ and the Gospel.

More weight will be added unto this Consideration, when we shall treat of the
Matter of Gospel Churches, or of what sort of Persons they ought to consist. In
the mean time those who pretend a Reverence unto Antiquity in those things
wherein they suppose Countenance to be given unto their Interest, may do well
sometimes to consider, what was the Discipline of the Primitive Churches, and
what were the Manners, the Lives, the Heavenly Conversations of their Members.
Because in the 3 d. and 4 th. Centuries there is mention made of Bishops
distinct from Presbyters, with some Ecclesiastical practices and Ceremonies in
Worship, not mentioned in the Scripture, nor known unto the Apostolical
Churches, shall we judge our selves obliged to conform thereunto as our Rule
and Pattern, so as that in the Judgment of some, they are to be esteemed no
Churches who conform not their outward state and practice unto the same Rule;
and shall we judge ourselves at liberty to reject all that they did in the
Exercise of Discipline, and in the Preservation of Purity of Life and Holiness
in the Churches, and that according to the Command of Christ and Rule of the
Scripture? Who knows not upon what diligent trial, and experience first
obtained of their Knowledge, Faith, and Godliness, they admitted Members into
their Churches? Yea such was their Care and Severity herein that they would not
admit a Roman Emperor unto Communion with them, unless he first confessed his
Sins, and joined amongst other Penitents, before his Admission. Eusebius. lib. 6.
cap. 33. Who knows not with what diligence they watched over the Walkings and
Conversations of all that were admitted among them, and with what Severity they
animadverted on all that fell into Scandalous Sins? What was hereon their
Conversation? in all Holiness, Righteousness, Temperance, Usefulness unto the
World, in Works of Charity and Benevolence, as all other Christian virtues, we
have sufficient Testimony. The Heathen who were morally Sober and Virtuous,
desired no more than that they might find out among them, an Indulgence unto
any sort of Sin, Crime, or Wickedness, which because they could not charge any
of them withal, they invented those brutish and foolish lies about their
Nightly Meetings. But when a sober Enquiry was made concerning them, their
Enemies were forced to confess, that they were guilty of no open Sin, no
Adulteries, no Swearings or Perjuries, as is evident in the Epistles of Pliny
and Trajan the Emperor. In particular they utterly rejected from their
Communion, all that resorted unto public Stage Plays, or other Spectacles, a
solemn Renunciation whereof was required of them who were admitted unto
Baptism when they were adult. See Clem. Pedag. lib. 3. cap. 12. If the Reader
would have an account of the Lives and Manners of the first Churches in their
Members, he may find it, in Clem. Epist. ad Cor. page 2, 3, 4. Justin Mart.
Apol. 2. Tertullian in his Apol. and lib. 2. Ad Vxor. and de cultu faeminarum.
Cyprian. Epist. 2. and 12. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 8. Athanas. Epist. ad
Solit. and Epiphan. lib. 3. T. 2 Sect. 24. and the multiplied complaints of
Chrysostom, concerning the beginning of Degeneracy in this Matter, with
others. If the Example of the Primitive Churches had been esteemed of any value
or Authority in these things, much of our present Differences had been
prevented.

2dly. The Constitution of these Parochial Assemblies is not from Heaven but of
Men. There is almost nothing which is required unto the Constitution of
Evangelical Churches found in them; Nor are they looked on by any as complete
Churches, but only as conveniences for the Observance of some Parts of the
Worship of God. What some have in their Wisdom found out for convenience,
others are engaged unto a compliance therewithal by necessity. For being born
within the Precincts of the Parish, makes them to belong unto the Assemblies of
it, whether they will or no. To refrain from the Communion of such Churches,
whose bond of Relation consists only in Cohabitation within the Precincts of a
political Constitution, is a new kind of Schism, which may be cured by a
removal out of those Precincts. If it be said that these Parochial Assemblies
have their Foundation in the Light of Nature, and are directed unto, in the
Institution of particular Churches in the Scripture, that they are not Men's
Inventions for convenience; but have somewhat Divine in them; I say, let them
be left unto the Warranty which they have from these Causes and Principles, let
nothing be mixed in their Constitution which is contrary unto them; nor let
them be abridged of what they direct unto, and there will be no more contending
about them, as unto their Constitution. For instance; whatever there is of
Warranty in the Light of Nature, or direction in Evangelical Institutions for
such Assemblies, they absolutely suppose these three things;

(1.) That a Conjunction in them is a Voluntary Act of free choice in them that
so join together in them. Other kind of Assemblies for the Worship of God,
neither the one nor the other do give the least countenance unto.

(2.) That they have in themselves sufficient Right, Power, and Authority unto
the attaining all the Ends of such Assemblies in Holy Worship and Rule. Other
kind of Churches they know nothing of.

(3.) That they are enabled to preserve their own Purity, and continue their
own Being. But all these things are denied unto our Parochial Assemblies by
Law, and therefore they can claim no Warranty from either of those Principles.
Wherefore there can be no Obligation upon any Believer to join themselves with
such Churches in constant Communion, as are judged none by them that appoint
them, or partially and improperly only so; or are of such a Constitution as
has in its essentially constituent Parts no Warranty either from the Light of
Nature or Scripture direction, so as that his dissent from them, should be
esteemed Schism. How far Communion with them for some Duties of Worship, which
is indeed all that they can pretend unto, may be admitted, we do not now
enquire.

3. There is not in them, (and therefore not in the Church of England, as unto
its present Profession) a fixed Standard of Truth, or Rule of Faith to be
professed, which every Believer may own, and have his Part or Interest therein.
This I grant is not from the Original Constitution of the Church, nor from what
is established by any Law therein, but from Persons who at present have the
Declaration of its Profession committed unto them. But from what cause soever
it be, it is sufficient to warrant any Man who takes care of his own
Edification and Salvation, to use his own liberty in the choice of the most
effectual Means unto those Ends. Wherefore some things may be added in the
farther Explanation of this Consideration. As,

(1.) It is the Duty of every Church, to be the Ground and Pillar of Truth, to
hold fast the form of wholesome Words, or to keep the Truth pure and
uncorrupted, from all mixture of false Doctrines, Errors, Heresies, or the
speaking of perverse things in it, unto the hurt of the Disciples of Christ. 1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Timothy 2.3. Acts 20.28, 29, 30. etc. When any Church cease so to
be, the Obligation unto Communion with it, is dissolved.

(2.) This is the principal End of the Ministry of the Church in particular.
Ephesians. 4.11, 13, 1 Timothy 6.20. And where those who possess and Exercise it do
eminently fail herein, it is the Duty of others to withdraw from them. For,

(3.) Every private man's Confession is included in the public Profession of
the Church or Assembly whereunto he belongs; And,

(4) Oneness or Agreement in the Truth, whereby we come to have one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, is the Foundation of all Church Communion; which if it be
taken away, the whole Fabric of it falls to the Ground. If the Trumpet in any
Church, as unto these things, gives an uncertain sound, no man knows how to
prepare himself for the Battle, or to fight the good fight of Faith.

It will be said that this cannot be justly charged on the Church of England,
yea not without open Wrong and Injustice. For she has a fixed invariable
Standard of Truth in the 39 Articles which contain its public Profession of
Faith, and the Rule of its Communion. Wherefore I say, that it is not the
primitive Constitution of the Church, nor its legal Establishment that are
reflected on; but only the present practice of so many as makes it necessary
for men to take the Care of their own Edification on themselves. But here also
some things are to be observed.

1. These Articles at present are exceeding defective, in their being a fixed
Standard of the Profession of Truth, with respect unto those Errors and
Heresies which have invaded and pestered the Churches, since their framing and
establishment. We know it was the constant invariable Custom of the Primitive
Churches, upon the Emergency of any new Errors or Heresies, to add unto the
Rule and Symbol of their Confession, a Testimony against them, so to preserve
themselves from all Communion in them, or participation of them. And an usage
it was both necessary and laudable, as countenanced by Scripture Example,
however afterward it was abused. For no Writing, such as all Church
Confessions are, can obviate unforeseen Heresies, or Errors not broached at the
time of its Writing, but only that which is of Divine Institution, wherein
infinite Wisdom has stored up Provision of Truth, for the Destruction of all
Errors, that the Subtilty or Folly of men can invent. When these Articles of
the Church of England were composed, neither Socinianisme, nor Arminianisme,
which have now made such an inroad on some Protestant Churches, were in the
World, either Name or Things. Wherefore in their Confession no Testimony could
be expressly given against them; though I acknowledge it is evident, from what
is contained in the Articles of it, and the approved Exposition they received
for a long time, in the Writings of the most eminent Persons of the Church,
that there is a virtual Condemnation of all those Errors, included therein. But
in that state whereunto things are come amongst us, some more express Testimony
against them is necessary, to render any Church the Ground and Pillar of Truth.

2. Besides a distinction is found out and passes current among us, that the
Articles of this Confession, are not Articles of Faith, but of outward
Agreement for Peace's sake among our selves; which is an Invention to help on
the ruin of Religion. For Articles of Peace in Religion concerning Matters of
Faith, which he that subscribes, does it not because they are true or Articles
of Faith, are an Engine to accommodate Hypocrisy and nothing else. But
according unto this Supposition they are used at men's pleasure, and turned
which way they have a Mind to. Wherefore,

3. Notwithstanding this Standard of Truth, Differences in important Doctrines,
wherein the Edification of the Souls of Men are highly concerned, do abound
among them, who manage the public Profession of the Church; I shall not urge
this any farther by Instances, in general it cannot modestly be denied. Neither
is this spoken to abridge Ministers of Churches of their due Liberty, in their
Mannagement of the Truths of the Gospel. For such a Liberty is to be granted, as

(1.) Arises from the distinct Gifts that men have received. For unto every
one is Grace given according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ; Ephesians. 4.7.
As every Man has received the Gift, so minister the same one to another, as
Good stewards of the manifold Grace of Gad, 1 Pet. 4.10.

(2.) As follows on that Spiritual Wisdom which Ministers receive in great
variety, for the Application of the Truths of the Gospel unto the Souls and
Consciences of Men. Hereon great variety in public Church-Administrations will
ensue, but all unto Edification.

(3.) Such as consists in a different Exposition of particular places of
Scripture whilst the Analogy of Faith is kept and preserved. Romans 12.6.

(4.) Such as admits of different stated Apprehensions in and about such
Doctrines, as wherein the practice and comfort of Christians are not
immediately, nor greatly concerned. Such a Liberty, I say, as the Dispensation
of Spiritual Gifts, and the different manner of their exercise as the
unsearchable depths that are in the Scripture not to be fathomed at once by any
Church, or any sort of Persons whatever, and our knowing the best of us, but in
part, with the difference of men's Capacities and Understandings, in and about
things not absolutely necessary unto Edification, must be allowed in Churches
and their Ministry. But I speak of that Variety of Doctrines, which is of
greater importance. Such it is, as will set men at liberty to make their own
Choice in the use of means for their Edification. And if such Novel Opinions,
about the Person, Grace, Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ, about the
Work of the Holy Spirit of God in Regeneration or the Renovation of our Nature
into the Image of God, as abound in some Churches, should at any time by the
suffrage of the Major Part of them who by Law are entrusted with its conduct,
be declared as the sense of the Church, it is and would be sufficient to
absolve any man from an Obligation unto its Communion, by virtue of its first
Institution and Establishment.

5. Evangelical Discipline is neither observed, nor attainable in these
Parochial Assemblies; nor is there any Releif provided by any other means for
that Defect. This has in general been spoken unto before; but because it
belongs in an especial manner unto the Argument now in hand, I shall yet
farther speak unto it. For to declare my Mind freely, I do not judge that any
man can incur the Guilt of Schism, who refraines from the Communion of the
Church, wherein the Discipline of the Gospel is either wholly wanting, or is
perverted into Rule and Domination which has no countenance given unto it in
the Word of Truth. And we may Observe.

1. The Discipline of the Church is that alone for which any Rule or Authority
is given unto it or exercised in it. Authority is given unto the Ministers of
the Church, to dispense the Word, and administer the Sacraments; which, I know
not why, some call the Key of Order. But the only End why the Lord Christ has
given Authority, or Rule, or Power for it unto the Church, or any in it, it is
for the Exercise of Discipline, and no other. Whatever Power, Rule, Dignity, or
Pre-eminence is assumed in the Churches, not merely for this End, is Usurpation
and Tyranny.

2. The outward means appointed by Jesus Christ; for the Preservation of his
Churches, in Order, Peace, and Purity, consists in this Discipline. He does by
his Word give Directions and Commands for this end, and it is by Discipline
alone that they are executed. Wherefore without it, the Church cannot live in
its Health, Purity, and Vigor; the Word and Sacraments are its Spiritual Food,
whereon its Life does depend. But without that Exercise and Medicinal
Applications unto its Distempers, which are made by Discipline, it cannot live
an healthy, vigorous, fruitful Life, in the things of God.

3. This Discipline is either private or public.

(1.) That which is private consists in the mutual watch that all the Members
of the Church have* over one another, with Admonitions, Exhortations, and
Reproves, as their Edification does require. The loss of this Part of the
Discipline of Christ in most Churches, has lost us much of the Glory of
Christian Profession.

(2.) That which is public, in the Rulers of the Church, with and by its own
consent. The Nature and Acts of it will be afterward considered.

4, There are three things considerable in this Discipline. (1.) The Power and
Authority whereby it is exercised. (2.) The Manner of its Administration. (3.)
The especial Object of it, both as it is Susceptive of Members, and Corrective;
Whereunto we may add its general End.

1. The Authority of it, is only a Power and Liberty to act, and ministerially
exercise the Authority of Christ himself. As unto those by whom it is
exercised, it is in them an Act of Obedience unto the Command of Christ; but
with respect unto its Object the Authority of Christ is exerted in it. That
which is exercised on any other Warranty or Authority, (as none can exert the
Authority of Christ, but by virtue of his own Institutions) whose Acts are not
Acts of Obedience unto Christ, whatever else it be, it belongs not unto the
Discipline of Evangelical Churches.

2. As unto the Manner of its Administration, as it is that which the Lord
Christ has appointed to express his Love, Care, and Tenderness toward the
Church. Hence the Acts of it which are corrective are called lamenting or
bewailing of them toward whom they are exercised; 2 Cor. 12.20. Whatever
therefore is done in it that is not expressive of the Love, Care, Patitience,
and Holiness of Christ, is dishonorable unto him.

3. The Object of it, as it is Susceptive of Members, is professed Believers;
and as it is corrective, it is those who stubbornly deviate from the Rule of
Christ, or live in disobedience to his Commands. Wherefore the general End of
its Institution, is to be a Representation of the Authority, Wisdom, Love,
Care, and Patience of Christ toward his Church, with a Testimony unto the
certainty, Truth, and Holiness of his future Judgment. The especial nature of
it, shall be afterward considered.

Unto this Discipline either as unto its Right or Exercise there is no Pretense
in Parochial Assemblies, yea it is expressly forbidden unto them. Whereas
therefore it is a Matter of so great importance in itself, so subservient unto
the Glory of Christ, so useful and necessary unto the Edification of his
Disciples, so weighty a Part of our Professed Subjection unto him, without
which no Church can be continued in Gospel Purity, Order and Peace; the total
want or neglect of it, is a sufficient cause for any man who takes care of his
own Salvation, or is concerned in the Glory and Honor of Christ, to refrain
the Communion of those Churches, wherein it is so wanting or neglected, or at
least not to confine himself thereunto.

It will be said that this defect is supplied, in that the Administration of
Church Discipline is committed unto others, namely, the Bishops and their
Officers, that are more meet and able for it, than the Ministers and People of
Parochial Assemblies. What therefore is wanting in them, is supplied fully
another way, so that no Pretense can be taken from hence, for refraining
Communion in them. But it will be said,

(1.) That this Discipline is not to be placed where and in what hands men
please, but to be left where Christ has disposed it.

(2.) That one Reason of the unmeetness of Parochial Churches for the Exercise
of this Discipline, is because they have been unjustly deprived of it for so
many Ages.

(3.) It is to be enquired, whether the pretended Discipline does in any thing
answer that which Christ has plainly and expressly ordained. For it a
Discipline should be erected whose Right of Exercise, is derived from secular
Power, whose Administration is committed unto Persons who pretend not in the
least unto any Office of Divine Institution, as Chancellours, Commissaries,
Officials, etc. every way unknown unto Antiquity, foreign unto the Churches
over which they Rule; exercising their pretended Power of Discipline, in a way
of Civil Jurisdiction, without the least regard unto the Rules or Ends of
Evangelical Discipline, mannaging its Administration in brawlings, contentions,
revilings, Fees, pecuniary Mulcts, etc. in open defiance of the Spirit,
Example, Rule, and Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ, it would be so far from
supplying this Defect, that it would exceedingly aggravate the Evil of it. God
forbid, that any Christian should look on such a Power of Discipline, and such
an Administration of it, to be that which is appointed by Jesus Christ, or any
way participant of the Nature of it. Of what Expediency it may be unto other
ends, I know not; but unto Ecclesiastical Discipline it has no Alliance, and
therefore in its Exercise, so far as it is Corrective, it is usually applied
unto the best and most sober Christians.

Wherefore to deal plainly in this case; Whereas there is neither the Power nor
Exercise of Discipline in Parochial Assemblies, or their Ministry, not so much
by their own Neglect, as because their Right thereunto is denied, and its
exercise wholly forbidden by them in whose Power they are; and whereas in the
supply that is made of this defect, a secular Power is erected,, coercive by
pecuniary and corporal Penalties administered by Persons, no way relating unto
the Churches over which they exercise this Power, by Rules of Humane Laws and
Constitutions, in litigious and oppressive Courts, in the room of that
Institution of Christ, whose Power and exercise is Spiritual, by spiritual
Means, according to the Scripture Rules; It is lawful for any man who takes
care of his own Salvation, and of the means of it, to withdraw from the
Communion of such Churches, so far as it hinders or forbids him the use of the
means appointed by Christ for his Edification. Men may talk what they please of
Schime, but he that forsakes the conduct of his own Soul, in things of so plain
an Evidence, must answer for it at his own Peril.

4. This Defect in Parochial Churches, that they are entrusted by Law, with no
Part of the Rule of themselves, but are wholly governed and disposed of by
others at their Pleasure, in the ways before mentioned, which shakes their very
Being as Churches, though there be in them Assemblies for Divine Worship,
founded in Common Right and the Light of Nature, wherein Men may be accepted
with God; is accompanied with such other wants and defects also, as will weaken
any Obligation unto complete and constant Communion with them. I shall give one
only Instance hereof. The Peoples free choice of all their Officers, Bishops,
Elders, Pastors, etc. is in our Judgment of Divine Institution, by virtue of
Apostolical Example and Directions. It is also so suitable unto the Light of
Nature, namely, that in a Society absolutely founded in the voluntary consent
of them who enter into it, and does actually exist thereby, without any
Necessity imposed on them from Prescription, former Usage, or the state of
being born in and under such Rules and Laws, as it is with men in their
Political Societies, the People should have the Election of them who are to
Rule among them and over them; there being no Provision of a Right unto a
successive Imposition of any such Rulers on them, without their own consent,
that nothing can rationally be pleaded against it. And therefore whereas in all
ordinarily settled Governments in the World, setting aside the confusion of
their Originals, by War and Conquests, the Succession of Rulers is either by
natural Generation, the Rule being confined unto such a Line, or by a Popular
Election, or by a Temperature of both; there has been a new way invented for
the Communication of Power and Rule in Churches, never exemplified in any
Political Society; namely, that it shall neither be Successive, as it was under
the Old Testament, nor Elective, nor by any Temperature of these two ways in
one, but by a strange kind of flux of it, through the hands of men who pretend
to have so received it themselves from others. But whether hereon the People of
the Church, can have that respect and Devotion unto them, as they would have
unto hereditary Rulers, (long Succession in Rulers, being the great cause of
Veneration in the People) especially such as had a Succession one unto another
by a Natural Descent through Divine Appointment, as the Priests had under the
Law, or as unto those whom on the account of their Worth, Ability, and Fitness
for the work of the Ministry among them, they do choose themselves, they may do
well to consider, who are concerned. The necessity there is of maintaining a
Reputation and Interest by secular Grandeur, Pomp and Power, of Ruling the
People of the Church in Church Matters by external force, with many other
Inconveniences, do all proceed from this Order of things, or rather disorder,
in the Call of men unto the Ministry. And hence it is that the City of God and
the People of Christ therein, which is indeed the only true free Society in the
World, have Rulers in it and over them, neither by a Natural Right of their
own, as in Paternal Government nor by hereditary Succession, nor by Election,
nor by any way or means wherein their own consent is included, but are under a
Yoke of an Imposition of Rulers on them, above any Society on the Earth
whatever. Besides there is that Relation between the Church and its Guides,
that no Law, Order, or Constitution can create without their mutual voluntary
Consent. And therefore this Right and Liberty of the People in every Church to
choose their own Spiritual Officers, was for many Ages preserved sacredly in
the primitive times. But hereof there is no shadow remaining in our Parochial
Churches; sundry Persons, as Patrons, and Ordinaries, have a concurring
Interest into the imposing of a Minister, or such whom they esteem so, upon any
such Church, without the Knowledge, Consent, or Approbation of the Body of the
Church, either desired or accepted. If there be any who cannot comply with this
Constitution of things relating unto the Ministry, because it is a Part of
their Profession of the Gospel which they are to make in the World, which yet
really consists only in an avowed subjection unto the Commands of Christ, they
can be no way obnoxious unto any charge of Schism upon their refusal so to do,
For a Schism that consists in giving a Testimony unto the Institutions of
Christ, and standing fast in the Liberty wherewith he has made Disciples free,
is that whose Guilt no man need to fear.

5. What remains of those Reasons whereon those who cannot comply with the
Conformity under Consideration, are cleared in point of Conscience from any
Obligation thereunto, and so from all Guilt of Schism whatever; belongs unto
the Head of Impositions on their Consciences and Practice which they must
submit unto. These being such as many whole Books have been written about, the
chief whereof have no way been answered, unless railings and scoffings with
contempt, and fierce Reproaches with false Accusations, may pass for Answers, I
shall not here again insist upon them. Some few things of that Nature I shall
only mention, and put an end unto this Dispute.

1. The Conformity required of Ministers consists in a public Assent and
Consent unto the Book of Common Prayer, with the Rubric in it, which contains
all the whole Practice of the Church of England, in its commands and
Prohibitions. Now these being things that concern the Worship of God in Christ,
the whole entire State, Order, Rule, and Government of the Gospel Church,
whoever gives solemnly this Assent and Consent unless he be allowed to enter
his Protestation, against those things which he dislikes, and of the sense
wherein he does so assent and consent, which by Law is allowed unto none, the
said Assent and Consent is his public Profession, that all these things, and
all contained in them, are according to the Mind of Christ, and that the
Ordering of them as such, is part of their professed Subjection unto his
Gospel. Blessed be God, most Ministers are too wise and honest, to delude their
Consciences with Distinctions, Equivocations, and Reservations, and do thereon
rather choose to suffer Penury and Penalty, then to make the least entrenchment
upon their own Consciences, or the honor of the Gospel in their Profession.
What they do and declare of this Nature, they must do it in Sincerity, as in
the sight of God, as approving what they do, not only as pardonable effects of
Necessity, but as that which is the best they have or can do in the Worship of
God; with a solemn Renunciation of whatever is contrary unto what they do so
approve. And whether this be a meet Imposition on the Consciences of Ministers,
with reference unto a great Book or Volume of a various composition, unto
things almost without number, wherein exceptions have been given of old and
lately, not answered, nor answerable, with Rules, Laws, Orders, not pretending
to be Scriptural Prescriptions, is left unto the Judgment of all, who have due
thoughts of their approaching Account before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ.

2. The Conformity that is required of others, being precisely, and without
Power of Dispensation in them by whom it is required, to answer the Rule or Law
of it before declared, every Man by his so conforming, does thereby take it on
his Conscience, and make it Part of his Christian Profession, that all which he
so conformes unto, is not only what he may do, but what he ought to do, both in
matter and manner, so far as the Law or any Part of it, does determine or
enjoin them. No man is allowed to make either distinction or Protestation with
respect unto any thing contained in the Rules, and therefore whatever he does
in compliance therewith, is interpretable in the sight of God and Man, as an
Approbation of the whole. Sincerity and Openness in Profession is indispensibly
required of us in order unto our Salvation. And therefore to instruct men as
unto the Worship of God, to do what they do not judge to be their Duty to do,
but only hope they may do it without Sin, or to join themselves in and unto
that Performance of it, which either they approve not of as the best, in the
whole, or not lawful or approveable in some Parts of it, is to instruct them
unto the Debauching of their Consciences and Ruin of their own Souls. Let
every one be persuaded in his own Mind; for what is not of Faith, is. Sin.

3. There is in this Conformity required a Renunciation of all other ways of
public Worship, or means of Edification, that may be made use of. For they are
all expressly forbidden in the Rule of that Conformity. No Man therefore can
comply with that Rule, but that a Renunciation of all other public ways of
Edification as unlawful, is part of the visible Profession which they make.
Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor, is no good Plea in Religion. It is
uprightness and Integrity, that will preserve Men, and nothing else. He that
shall endeavor to cheat his Conscience by Distinctions, and mental
Reservations, in any concernments of Religious Worship, I fear he has little
of it, if any at all, that is good for ought.

On these suppositions, I say, the Imposition of the things so often contended
about, on the Consciences and Profession of Christians, as namely, the constant
sole use of the Liturgy in all Church Administrations, in the Matter and
Manner prescribed; the Use and Practice of all Canonical Ceremonies, the
Religious Observation of stated Holidays, with other things of the like Nature,
is sufficient to warrant any sober, peaceable Disciple of Christ, who takes
care of his own Edification and Salvation to refrain the Communion required in
this Rule of Conformity, unless he be fully satisfied in his own Mind, that all
that it requires, is according to the Mind of Christ, and all that it forbids
is disapproved by him. And whereas the whole entire matter of all these
Impositions, are things whereof the Scripture, and the Primitive Churches, know
nothing at all, nor is there any rumor of them to be imposed in or on any
Church of Christ for some Centuries of years, I can but pity poor men who must
bear the charge and Penalties of Schism for dissenting from them, as well as
admire the fertility of their Inventions, who can find out Arguments to manage
such a charge on their Account.

But whereas the Dissent declared from that Communion with Parochial
Assemblies, is that whereon we are so fiercely charged with the Guilt of
Schism, and so frequently called Schismatics, I shall divert a little to
Enquire into the Nature and true Notion of Schism itself; and so much the
rather, because I find the Author of the Unreasonableness of Separation, omit
any Enquiry thereinto, that he might not loose the Advantage of any pretended
Description or Aggravation of it.

CHAP. XI. Of Schism
ALthough it be no part of my present Design to treat of the Nature of Schism,
yet with respect unto what has already been discoursed, and to manifest our
inconcernment in the Guilt of it, I shall, as was said, divert to give a plain
and brief Account of it. And in our Enquiry, I must declare my self wholly
unconcerned, in all the Discords, Divisions, and Seditions, that have fallen
out among Christians in the latter Ages, about things that were of their own
Invention. Schism is a Sin against Christian Love, with reference unto the
deportment of men in and about the Institutions of Christ and their Communion
in them. As for Contentions, Divisions, or Separations amongst men, about that
Order, Agreement, Unity or Uniformity which are of their own Appointment,
whatever Moral Evil they have had in them, they do not belong unto that Church
Schism, which we enquire after. Such have been the horrid Divisions* and
Fightings* that have prevailed at Seasons in the Church of Rome, a departure
from whose self-constituted State, Order, and Rule, has not the least Affinity
unto Schism. It will not therefore be admitted, that any thing can fall under
the note and Guilt of Schism, which has not respect unto some Church state,
Order, Rule, Unity or Uniformity, that is of Christ's Institution.

There are three Notions of Schism that deserve our Consideration.

1. The first is that of Divisions among the Members of the same Church, all of
them abiding still in the same outward Communion, without any Separation into
distinct Parties. And unto Schism in this Notion of it, three things do concur;

(1.) Want of that mutual Love, Condescension and Forbearance, which are
required in all the Members of the same Church, with the Moral Evils of
Whisperings, Back-bitings, and evil surmizes, that ensue thereon.

(2.) An undue Adherence unto some Church Officers above others, causing
disputes and janglings.

(3.) Disorder in the Attendance unto the Duties of Church Assemblies, and the
Worship of God performed in them. This is the only Notion of Schism, that is
exemplified in the Scripture, the only evil that is condemned under that name;
This will appear unto any who shall with heedfulness read the Epistles of Paul
the Apostle unto the Corinthians, wherein alone the nature of this Evil is
stated and exemplified. But this Consideration of Schism has been almost
utterly lost for many Ages; whatever men do in Churches, so that they depart
not from the outward Communion of them, it would be accounted ridiculous to
esteem them Schismatics. Yet this is that which if not only, yet principally
the Consciences of Men are to regard, if they will avoid the Guilt of Schism.
But this Notion of it, as was said, being not suited unto the Interest or
Advantages of any sort of men, in the charge of it on others; nor any way
subservient to secure the Inventions and Impositions of the most, is on the
matter lost in the World.

2. The second Instance of Ecclesiastical Schism, was given us in the same
Church of the Corinthians afterward, an account whereof we have in the Epistle
of Clemens or of the Church of Rome unto them, about it, the most eminent
Monument of primitive Antiquity; after the Writings by Divine Inspiration. And
that which he calls Schism in that Church, he calls also strife, contention,
sedition, tumult; And it may be observed concerning that Schism, as all the
Ancients call it.

1. That the Church continued its state and outward Communion. There is no
mention of any that separated from it, that constituted a New Church; only in
the same Church they agreed not, but were divided among themselves. Want of
Love and Forbearance, attended with strife and contention, among the Members of
the same Church, abiding in the same outward Communion, was the Schism they
were Guilty of.

2. The Effect of this Schism was, that the Body of the Church, or Multitudes
of the Members, by the Instigation of some few disorderly Persons, had deposed
their Elders and Rulers from their Offices, and probably had chosen others in
their places, though that be not mentioned expressly in the Epistle.

3. That the Church itself is not blamed, for assuming a Power unto themselves
to depose their Elders; much less that they had done it without the Consent,
Advice, or Authority of any Bishop, or other Church; but only that they had
dealt unjustly with those whom they had deposed, who in the Judgment of the
Church of Rome, unto which they had written for Advice, were esteemed not only
innocent, but such as had laudably and profitably, discharged their Office,
whereon the whole blame is cast on those who had instigated the Church unto
this Proceedure.

4. There was not yet, nor in an hundred and fifty years after, the least
mention or intimation, of any Schism in a dissent from any humanely invented
Rules or Canons, for Order, Government or Worship in any Church, or Religious
Ceremonies imposed on the Practice of any in divine Service, that is on any
Church, or any of the Members of it. There is not the least Rumor of any such
things in primitive Antiquity, no Instance to be given of any man charged with
Schism for a Dissent from such a Rule. Any such Rule, and any Ecclesiastical
Censure upon it, is apocriphal, not only unto the Scripture, but unto that
which I call primitive Antiquity. The first Attempt of any thing in this kind,
was in reference unto the time and day of the Observation of Easter. This was
the first Instance among Christians of an endeavor to impose the Observation
of humane or Church Constitutions or groundless Traditions, on any Churches or
Persons in them. And whereas that which was called a Schism between the
Churches of Italy and Asia or some of them, did ensue thereon; we have a most
illustrious Testimony from the best, the Wisest, and the Holiest of that Age,
(for Irenaeus in France, and Polycrates in Asia, were not alone herein.) that
the blame of all that Division and Schism was to be charged on them, who
attempted to deprive the Churches of their Liberty, and impose on them a
necessity of the Observation of the Time and Season which they had determined
on: After a Rebuke was given unto the Attempt of the Judaizing Christians, to
impose the Observation of Mosaical Ceremonies, from the pretense of their
divine Institution, on the Churches of the Gentiles, by the Apostles
themselves; this was the Original of all endeavors, to impose humane
Constitutions for which there was no such Pretense, upon the Practice of any.
And as it was an Original not unmeet for the beginning and foundation of such
Impositions, being in a matter of no Use unto the Edification of the Church; so
it received such a solemn Rebuke at its first entrance and Attempt, that had
it not been for the Ignorance, Pride, Interest and Superstition of some in the
following Ages, it had perished without Imitation. The Account hereof is given
in Eusebius, lib. 5. cap. 21, 22, 33; as also of the Rule which then prevailed,
though afterward shamefully forsaken, namely, that an Agreement in the Faith
was the only Rule of Communion, which ought to be kept under any diversity in
voluntary Observations. And the Discourse of Socrates on this Occasion; lib. 5.
cap. 21; Concerning the Non-Institution of any days of Fastings or Feastings,
or other Rites or Ceremonies then in use, with the Liberty which is therefore
to be left in such things unto all Christians, is the plain Truth, whatever
some except against it, declared with much Judgment and Moderation.

This Beginning, I say, had the Imposition of unscriptural, uninstituted Rites,
Ceremonies, and Religious Observations, among the Churches of Christ, and this
solemn Rebuke was given unto it. Howbeit the Ignorance, Superstition, and
Interest of following Ages, with the contempt of all Modesty, brake through the
boundaries of this Holy Rebuke, until their own Impositions and Observations,
became the substance of all their Church Discipline, unto the total subversion
of Christian Liberty.

Wherefore to allow Church Rulers, or such as pretend so to be, a Liberty and
Power, to appoint a Rule of Communion, comprizing Institutions and Commands of
sundry things, to be constantly observed in the whole Worship and Discipline of
the Church, not warranted in themselves by divine Authority, and then to charge
Beleivers, abiding firm in the Doctrine of the Faith with Schism, for a
Noncompliance with such Commands and Appointments, is that which neither in
the Scripture nor in Primitive Antiquity, has either Instance, Example,
President, Testimony, Rumor or Report to give Countenance unto it: The
Pedigree of this Practice cannot be derived one step higher than the fact of
Victor the Bishop of Rome, in the Excommunication of the Churches and
Christians of Asia, which was solemnly condemned as an Entrenchment on
Christian Liberty.

3. After these things the Notion of Schism began to be managed variously,
according unto the Interest of them who seemed to have the most Advantage in
the Application of it, unto those who dissented from them. It were an endless
thing to express the Rise and declare the Progress of these Apprehensions. But
after many loose and declamatory Discourses about it, they are gerally issued
in two Heads. The first is, that any kind of Dissent from the Pope and Church
of Rome, is Schism, all the Schism that is or can be in the World. The other
is, that a causeless Separation from a true Church, is Schism, and this only
is so. But whereas in this pretended Definition, there is no mention of any of
its internal Causes, nor of its formal Reason, but a bare Description of it by
an outward Effect, it serves only for a weapon in every man's hand to perpetuate
digladiations about it. For every Church esteems itself true, and every one
that separates himself, esteems himself to have just Cause so to do.

In the following Times, especially after the Rise and Prevalency of the Arian
Heresy, it was ordinary, for those of the Orthodox Persuasion, to forsake the
Communion of those Churches wherein Arian Bishops did preside, and to gather
themselves into separate Meetings or Conventicles for divine Worship, for which
they were accused of Schism, and in sundry places punished accordingly, yea
some of them unto the Loss of their Lives. Yet I suppose there are none now who
judge them to have been Schismatics.

The Separation of Novatus, and Donatus, from the Communion of the whole
Catholic Visible Church, on unwarrantable Pretenses, is that which makes the
loudest noise about Schism in Antiquity. That there was in what was done by
them and their Followers, the General Nature, and Moral Evil of Causeless
Schisms and Divisions, will be easily granted. But it is that wherein we are
not concerned, be the especial nature of Schism what it will. Nor did they
make use of any one Reason, whereon the Merit of the present Cause does depend.
The Novatians (the modester Sect of the two) pretended only a Defect in
Discipline, in granting Church Communion unto such as they would not have
received, though they were apparently in the wrong proceeding on mistaken
Principles. The Donatists pleaded only some Personal Crimes in some few
Bishops, fallen into in the time of Persecution, which they could never prove,
and thereon grew angry with all the World, who would not condemn them and
renounce their Communion as well as they. These slight Pretenses, they made the
Occasion and Reason, of renouncing the Communion of the whole visible Catholic
Church, in all its distributions for Communion, that is, all particular
Churches; and confined Sacraments and Salvation absolutely unto their own
Parties. And hereon they fell into many other woeful Miscarriages, especially
those of the latter sort. It is indifferent by what Name any are pleased to
call this Evil and Folly. A Sin and Evil it was, Schism or what you please to
term it, and justly condemned by all Christians not joining with them, in those
days. And that which was the animating Principle of the Tumult of the
Donatists, was a Supposition, that the Continuation of the true Church state
depended on the Successive Ordination of Bishops, which having as they thought
(unduely enough) failed in one or two Instances, it became the Destruction of a
Church state, not only in the Churches where such Mistakes had happened as they
surmized, but unto all the Churches in the World that would hold Communion with
them.

But in these things we have no concernment. Other Notions of Schism besides
those insisted on, we acknowledge not, nor is any other advanced with the least
Probality of Truth. Nor are we to be moved with outcries about Schism, wherein
without regard to Truth or Charity, men contend for their own Interest. Of
those Notions of it which have been received by men, sober and learned, we
decline a trial by none; that only excepted, that the Refusal of Obedience unto
the Pope and Church of Rome, is all that is Schism in the World, which indeed
is none at all.

That which is now so fiercely pleaded by some concerning different
Observations of external Modes, Rites, Customs, some, more, or none at all, to
make men Schismatics, is at once to judge all the Primitive Churches to be
Schismatical. Their Differences, Varieties, and Diversities among them, about
these things, cannot be enumerated; and so without any disadvantage unto the
Faith, or breach of Love, they continued to be, until all Church Order and
Power was swallowed up in the Papal Tyranny ten thousand times more pernicious,
then ten thousand such Disputes.

For a Close unto this whole Discourse, concerning the original nature and
state of Gospel Churches, I shall use that Liberty which Love of the Truth puts
into my Possession. Churches mentioned in the Scripture, ordained and appointed
by the Authority of Jesus Christ, were nothing but a certain number of Men and
Women Converted to God, by the preaching of the Gospel, with their baptized
seed, associating themselves in Obedience unto Christ's Commands, and by the
Direction of his Apostles, for the common Profession of the same Faith, the
Observance and Performance of all Divine Institutions of Religious Worship,
unto the Glory of God, their own Edification, and the Conversion of others.
These Believers thus associated in Societies, knowing the Command and
Appointment of Jesus Christ by his Apostles for that End, did choose from among
themselves, such as were to be their Rulers, in the Name and Authority of
Christ, according to the Law and Order of his institutions, who in the
Scripture are called on various Considerations, Elders, Bishops, Pastors and
the like names of Dignity, Authority and Office; who were to administer all the
solemn Ordinances of the Church among them. Unto this Office they were solemnly
appointed, ordained, or set apart, by the Apostles themselves, with fasting
Prayer and imposition of hands, or by other ordinary Officers after their
decease.

This was the way and method of the Call and setting apart of all Ordinary
Officers in the Church, both under the Old Testament and in the New. It is
founded in the Light of Nature. In the first Institution of ordinary Church
Rulers under the Law, the People looked out and chose fit Persons, whom Moses
set apart to the Office, Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14, 15. And in the Call of Deacons, Acts
6. The Apostle uses the same Words, or words of the same importance unto the
Church, as Moses did to the People; Acts 6.31. asserting the Continuation of
the same way and order in their Call. And whereas he who was first to be called
to Office under the New Testament after the Ascension of Christ, fell under a
double Consideration, namely of an Officer in general, and of an Apostle, which
office was extraordinary; there was a threefold Act in his Call; the People
chose two; one of which was to be an Officer, Acts 1.23; Gods immediate
Determination of one, as he was to be an Apostle, ver. 24. and the obedient
Consent of the People in compliance with that Determination, ver. 26.

The Foundation of these Churches was generally in a small number of Believers.
But their Church state was not complete until they were supplied with all
ordinary Officers, as Bishops and Deacons. The former were of of several sorts,
as shall be proved hereafter. And of them there were many in every Church,
whose number was increased as the Members of the Church were multiplied. So God
appointed in the Church of the Jews, that every ten Families should have a
peculiar Ruler of their own Choice; Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14, 15.

For there is no mention in the New Testament of any one single Bishop or
Elder, in any Church of any sort whatever, either Absolutely or by way of
Pre-eminence. But as the Elders of each Church were many, at least more
thenone, so there was a parity among them, and an Equality in Order, Power, and
Rule. Nor can any Instance be given unto the Contrary.

Of these Churches one only was originally planted, in one City Town, or
Village. This way was taken from Convenience for Edification, and not from any
positive Institution; and it may be otherwise where Convenience and Opportunity
do require it. The Number in these Churches Multiplying daily, there was a
necessity of the Multiplication of Bishops or Elders among them. Hereon the
Advantage of some one Person in Priority of Conversion, or of Ordination, in
Age, Gifts and Graces, especially in Ability for Preaching the Gospel and
administering the Holy Ordinances of the Church, with the Necessity of
preserving Order in the Society of the Elders themselves, gave him peculiar
Dignity, Pre-eminence and Title. He was soon after the Bishop without any
disadvantage to the Church.

For in those Churches, in some of them at least, Evangelists continued for a
long Season, who had the Administration of Church Affairs in their hands. And
some there were, who were of Note among the Apostles and eminently esteemed by
them, who had eminent, yea, Apostolical Gifts, as to Preaching of the Word and
Prayer, which was the peculiar work of the Apostle. These were the (...)
mentioned by Clemens. Of the many other Elders who were associated in the Rule
of the Church, it may be not many had Gifts for the constant Preaching of the
Word, nor were called thereunto. Hence Justin Martyr seems to assign the
constant public Administration of Sacred Ordinances unto one President. And
this also promoted the constant presidency of one, in whom the Apostolical Aid
by Evangelists might be supplied. These Churches thus fixed and settled in one
place, (each of them) City, Town, or Village, were each of them entrusted with
all the Power and Privileges which the Lord Christ has granted unto, or
endued his Church withal. This Power is called the power of the Keys, or of
binding and loosing, which has respect only unto the Consciences of Men, as
unto things Spiritual and Eternal, being merely Ministerial.

Every one of these Churches were bound by the Command of Christ to live in
Peace, and Unity through the Exercise of Peculiar sincere and fervent Love
among all their Members; as also to walk in Peace, and useful Communion with
all oth^^ Churches in the World, according as they had opp^^tunity of Converse
with them. And when on any occasion any Division or Schism fell out among any
of their Members in this Church state, it was severely rebuked by the Apostles.

All these Churches and all the Members of them, were obliged by virtue of
Divine Institution to obey their Guides, to Honor and Reverence them, and by
their voluntary Contribution, to provide for their Honorable Subsistence and
maintenance, according to their Ability. Other Church state neither the
Scripture nor Antiquity unto the End of the second Century do know any thing
of; which I shall hereafter more fully manifest. Neither was there any thing
known then to be Schism or so esteemed, but a Division falling out in some one
of these Churches; which happened for the most part, if not only, by some of
their Teachers, falling into heresy and drawing away Disciples after them,
Acts 20.30. or by various opinions about their Guides, 1 Cor. 1.12. or the
Ambition of some in seeking the Power and Authority of office among them. To
seek for any thing among those Churches, wherein our present Contest about
Schism is concerned, is altogether in vain. There was then no such
subordination of Churches, of many unto one, as is now pleaded; No such
distinction of Officers, into those who have a plenary and those who have a
partiary power only, in the Rule of the Church; No Church with a single
Officer over it, Comprehending in a Subjection unto its Jurisdiction, a
multitude of other Churches; No Invention, no Imposition of any Orders, Form^
of Prayer or Ceremonies of Worship not of Divine Institution were once thought
of, and when any thing of that Nature was first attempted, it caused great
troubles amongst them. In a Word, the things on the account of a Noncompliance
wherewithal we are vehemently charged with Schism, were then neither laid nor
hatched, neither thought of, nor invented.

To Erect new kinds of Churches, to introduce into them new Orders, new Rules,
Rites and Ceremonies, to impose their Observation on all Churches, and all
Members of them, and to charge their dissent with the guilt of Schism, that
Schism which is prohibited and condemned in the Scripture, has much of an
assumed Authority and Severity in it, nothing of Countenance from the Scripture
or Primitive Antiquity.

But after that Churches began to depart from this original Constitution by the
ways and means before declared, every alteration produced a new supposition of
Church Unity and peace, whereto every Church of a new Constitution laid claim;
New sorts of Schism were also coined and framed: For there was a certain way
found out and carried on in a Mystery of Iniquity, whereby those Meek, Holy,
Humble Churches or Societies of Christ's Institution, who as such, had nothing
to do with the things of the World, in Power, Authority, Dignity, Jurisdiction,
or Wealth, in some Instances wherein they got the Advantage one of another,
became in all these things to equal Kingdoms and Principalities, yea one of
them to Claim a Monarchy over the whole World.

During the Progression of this Apostasy, Church Unity and Schism declined
from their Center, and varied their state according unto the present Interest
of them that prevailed. Whoever had got Possession of the name of the Church in
a prevailing Reputation, though the state of it was never so Corrupt, made it
bite and devour, all that disliked it, and would swear that submission unto
them in all things, was Church-Unity, and to dissent from them was Schism.
Unto that state all the World know that things were come in the Church of Rome.
Howbeit what has been disputed about or contended for, of Power, Privileges,
Authority, Pre-eminence, Jurisdiction, Catholicisme, ways of Worship, Rule,
and Discipline, which the World is filled with such a noise about; and in the
dispute whereof so many various Hypotheses are advanced; that cannot be
accommodated unto such Christian Congregations as we have described, are but
the Effects of the Prudence or Imprudence of men, and what it will prove the
Event will show.

Things of this Nature being once well understood, will deliver the World from
innumerable fruitless, endless Contests; Sovereign Princes from all disturbance
on the account of Religion, and private Persons from the fatal Mistake of
entrusting the eternal Concernments of their Souls, unto their Relation unto
one Church, and not unto another; I am not so vain as at this time to expect
the Reduction of Christian Religion unto its primitive Power, Purity, and
Simplicity; nor do I reflect blame on them, who walk Conscientiously in such a
Church state and Order as they approve of, or suppose it the best they can
attain unto; only I think it Lawful for all Christ's Disciples at all times, to
yield Obedience unto all his Commands, and to abstain from being Servants of
Men in what he has not enjoined.

An Answer to Dr. Stillingfleets Book of the Unreasonableness of Separation, in
Defense of the Vindication of Non-Conformists from the Guilt of Schism.

THE Preceding Discourse was written for the most part, before the publishing
of the Treatise of the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, Entitled the
Unreasonableness of Separation. Yet was it not so without a Prospect, at least
a probable Conjecture, that something of the same kind and tendency with the
Doctors Book, would be published in Defense of the Cause which he had
undertaken. And I was not without hopes, that the whole of it might have been
both finished and communicated unto public view, before any thing farther were
attempted against our Cause, whereby many Mistakes might have been prevented.
For, as I was willing, yea very desirous if it were the Will of God, that I
might see before my departure out of this World, the Cause of Conformity, as
things are now stated between us and the Church of England, pleaded with
Judgment, Moderation, and Learning, with the best of those Arguments whereby
our Principles or Practices are opposed; so considering on what hand that work
was now like to fall, I thought, si pergania dextra, etc. and am of the same
Mind still. But my expectation being frustrate, of representing our whole Cause
truly stated, for the Prevention of Mistakes, by the coming out of this Book
against all sorts of Nonconformists, I thought it convenient to publish this
first Part of what I had designed, and to annex unto it the ensuing Defense of
the Vindication of Non-conformists, from the charge of Schism. For although I
do know that there is nothing material in the whole Book of the
Unreasonableness of Sepaeration, but what is obviated or answered before hand,
in the preceding Discourse; so as that the Principles and Demonstrations of
them contained therein may easily be applied unto all the Reasonings,
Exceptions, and Pleas, in and of that Book, to render them useless unto the End
designed, which is to reinforce a charge of Schism against us; Yet I think it
necessary to show how unsuccessful, from the disadvantage of his Cause, the
Doctor has been in his laborious endeavor to stigmatize all Protestant
Dissenters from the Church of England, with the odious name of Schismatics. I
have therefore altered nothing of what I had projected, either as to Matter or
Method in this first Part of the Discourse designed on the whole Subject of
Church Affairs. For as I have not found either Cause or Reason from any thing
in the Doctors Book to make the least change in what I had writt^n, so my
principal Design being the Instruction and confirmation of them, who have no
other Interest in these things, but only to know and perform their own Duty, I
was not willing to give them the trouble of perpetual diversions from the
Matter in hand, which all Controversial Writings are Subject unto. Wherefore
having premised some general Considerations of things insisted on by the Dr. of
no great Influence into the Cause in hand, and vindicated one Principle, a
supposition whereof we rely upon, namely, the Declension of the Churches in the
Ages after the Apostles, especially after the End of the second Century, from
the Primitive Institution of their State, Rule, and Order, in the Preface; I
shall now proceed to consider and examine distinctly what is opposed unto the
Defense of our Innocence as unto the Guilt of Schism. But some things must be
premised hereunto. As,

1. I shall not depart from the state of the Question as laid down by our
selves on our part, as unto our Judgment of Parochial Churches, and our
Refraining from Communion with them. Great Pains is taken to prove the several
sorts of Dissenters to be departed farther from the Church of England then they
will themselves allow, and on such Principles as are disavowed by them. But no
Disputations can force our Assent unto what we know to be contrary unto our
Principles and Persuasions.

2. We do allow those Parochial Assemblies, which have a settled unblamable
Ministry among them, to be true Churches, so far as they can pretend themselves
so to be; Churches, whose Original is from occasional Cohabitation within
Precincts limited by the Law of the Land; Churches, without Church Power to
choose or ordain their Officers, to provide for their own Continuation, to
admit or exclude Members, or to reform at any time what is amiss among them;
Churches, which are in all things under the Rule of those who are set over
them, by virtue of Civil Constitutions, foreign unto them, not submitted
willingly unto by them, and such for the most part as whose Offices and Power,
have not the least countenance given unto them from the Scripture or the
Practice of the Primitive Churches; Such as are Chancellours, Commissaries,
Officials, and the like; Churches in which for the most part through a total
Neglect in Evangelical Discipline, there is a great Degeneracy from the
exercise of Brotherly Love, and the Holiness of Christian Profession; whatever
can be ascribed unto such Churches, we willingly allow unto them.

3. We do and shall abide by this Principle, that communion in Faith and Love,
with the Administration of the same Sacraments, is sufficient to preserve all
Christians from the Guilt of Schism, although they cannot communicate together
in some Rites and Rules of Worship and Order. As we will not admit of any
presumed Notions of Schism, and inferences from them, nor allow that any thing
belongs thereunto, which is not contrary to Gospel Love, Rules and Precepts, in
the Observance of Christ's Institutions; so we affirm and shall maintain that
men abiding in the Principles of Communion mentioned, walking peaceably among
themselves, refraining Communion with others, peaceably, wherein they dissent
from them, ready to join with other Churches in the same Confession of Faith,
and in the Defense of it, and to concur with them in promoting all the real
ends of Christian Religion, not judging the Church state of others, so as to
renounce all Communion with them, as condemning them to be no Churches;
continuing in the occasional exercise of all Duties of Love toward them and
their Members, are unduely charged with with the Guilt of Schism, to the
disadvantage of the Common Interest of the Protestant Religion amongst us.

4. Whereas there are two parts of the Charge against us, the one for
refraining from total communion with Parochial Assemblies, which what it is,
and wherein it does consist, has been before declared; the other for gathering
ourselves into another Church Order in particular Congregations as the Reasons
and Grounds of the things themselves are distinct, so must they have a distinct
consideration, and be examined distinctly and apart.

These things being premised, I shall proceed to examine what the Reverend
Doctor has further offered, against our former Vindication of the
Non-conformists from the charge of Schism, and I desire the Reader to take
notice, that we delight not in these contentions, that we desire nothing but
mutual Love and Forbearance; but we are compelled by all Rules of Scripture and
natural Equity, to abide in this Defense of ourselves. For whereas we are
charged with a Crime, and that aggravated as one of the most heinous that men
can incur the Guilt of in this World, and to justify men in severities against
us; being not in the least convinced in our Consciences of any Accessions
thereunto, or of any Guilt on the account of it, I suppose the Doctor himself
will not think it reasonable that we should altogether neglect the Protection
of our own Innocence.

In the Method whereinto he has cast his Discourse, he begins with the
reinforcement of his Charge, against our refraining from total Communion with
Parochial Assemblies: If the Reader will be pleased to take a reveiw of what is
said in the preceding Discourse unto this Head of our Charge in several
Chapters, he will easily perceive that either the Reasonings of the Doctor
reach not the Cause in hand, or are insufficient to justify his Intention,
which I must say, though I am unwilling to repeat it, is by all ways and means,
to load us with the Guilt and disreputation of Schism.

That which I first meet withal directly unto this Purpose is, Part 2. page
157. The Forbearance of Communion with the Church of England in its Parochial
Assemblies (that is in the way and manner before described) he opposes with
two Arguments. The first respects those who allow occasional Communion with
Parochial Churches but will not comply with them in that which is constant and
absolute. For he says, if the first be lawful, the latter is necessary, from
the commands we have to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church. And the not
doing it, he says, is one of the provoking sins of the Non-conformists; but
whether it be a sin or no is sub Judice; that it is provoking unto some is
sufficiently evident. I shall not make this any part of my Contest. Those who
have so expressed their Charity; as to give countenance unto this pretended
Advantage, will easily free themselves from the force of this Inference. For it
must be remembered that this constant total Communion, does not only include a
conscientious Observance of all things appointed to be done by the Rules or
Canons in those Assemblies, but a Renunciation also of all other ways and means
of Edification by joint Communion, as unlawful and Evil. And it will be hard to
prove that on a Concession of the Lawfulness of Communion in some Acts of
Divine Worship, it Will be necessary for men to oblige themselves unto total
constant Communion, with a Renunciation and Condemnation of all other ways and
means of joint Edification. It may also be lawful to do a thing with some
respects and Limitations, at some times, which it, may not be lawful to do
absolutely and always. It may be necessary from outward circumstances to do
that Sometimes which is lawful in itself, though not necessary from itself; it
can never be necessary to do that which is unlawful. Of the first sort they
esteem occasional Communion, and the other of the latter.

Some time is spent in taking off an Exception unto this Inference from the
Practice of our Savior, who had occasional Communion with the Jews in the
Temple and Synagogues, which he proves to have been constant and perpetual, and
not occasional only, and that he prescribed the same Practice unto his
Disciples. But I think this labor might have been spared. For there is nothing
more clear and certain, then that our Lord Jesus Christ did join with the Jews
in the Observance of Gods Institutions among them, on the one hand; and on the
other, that he never joined with them in the observance of their own Traditions
and Pharasaical Impositions, but warned all his Disciples to avoid them and
refuse them, whose Example we desire to follow; for concerning all such
Observances in the Church, he pronounced that sentence, Every plant that my
Heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up.

But the Doctor proceeds unto a second Argument page 163, to the same Purpose,
from, as he calls it, the particular force of that Text, Phil. 3.16. As far as
we have already attained let us walk by the same Rule, mind the same things.
This is the Text which gave the first occasion unto this whole Dispute; The
Doctors Intention is so indefensible from this place, that I thought however he
might persist in the Defense of the Cause he had undertaken, he would have
forborne from seeking Comtenance unto it from these Words of the Apostle. But it
is fallen out otherwise, and I am here in the first place called unto an
Account, for the Exceptions I put in, unto his Application of these Words of
the Apostle, in my Vindication of the Non-conformists.

I will spare the Reader as much as is possible in the Repetition of things
formerly spoken, and the Transcription of his Words or my own, without
prejudice unto the Cause itself.

After a Reflection of some Obscurity and Intricacy on my Discourse, he
repeates my sense of the Words according unto his Apprehension under four
Heads; about which I shall not contend, seeing whether he has apprehended my
Mind aright or no, or expressed the whole of what I declared, belongs not unto
the Merit of the Cause in hand. Nor indeed do I yet know directly, what he
judges this Text does prove, or what it is that he inferrs from it, though I
know well enough what it is designed to give countenance unto, and what is the
Application that is made of it. And therefore he issues his whole Dispute about
it in this Enquiry, how far the Apostles Rule has an influence on this case.
But whosoever shall come unto a sedate Consideration of this Text and Context,
without Prejudice, without preconceived Opinions, without Interest in Parties
or Causes, will judge it to be a Matter of Art to apply them unto the present
Controversy, as unto the Imposition of an Arbitrary Rule of walking in
Churches, on all that are presumed to belong unto them.

But to clear these things the Doctor proposes three things to be debated.

1. Whether the Apostle speaks of different Opinions, or different Practices.

2. Whether the Rule he gives be mutual Forbearance.

3. How far the Apostle's Rule has an influence into this case.

The two first of these belong not at all unto the present Argument, and the
last is but faintly proposed and pursued, though it be the Foundation of his
whole Fabric. The Reader, if he will put himself to so much trouble, as to
compare my former Discourse with what is here offered in Answer or Opposition
unto it, he will easily see that nothing is pleaded, that may abate the force
of what was insisted on; For indeed the Discourse on these things consists for
the most part in Diversions from the Argument in hand, whereby an Appearance is
made of various Arguings, and the Proof of sundry things, which belong not unto
the Case in hand.

Without any long Deductions, artificial Insinuations, or diverting Reasonings,
without wresting the Text or Context, these things are plain and evident in
them;

(1.) A Supposition of Differences among Believers, in and about Opinions and
Practices, relating unto Religion and the Worship of God. So is at present
between us and those of the Church of England by whom we are opposed.

(2.) In this state, whilst these Differences do continue, there is one common
Rule according unto which those who so dissent among themselves are to walk in
the things wherein they are agreed. Such is the Rule of Faith and Love, which
we all assent unto and are agreed in.

(3.) This Rule cannot consist in a precise Determination of the things in
Difference, with an Authoritative Prescription of Uniformity in Opinions and
Practice, because it is directed unto, upon a supposition of the continuation
of those Differences between Believers.

(4.) That during the continuation of these Differences, or different
Apprehensions and Practices, whilst on all hands they use the means of coming
unto the Knowledge of the Truth in all things, that they should walk in Love,
mutually forbearing one another, in those things wherein they differed.

Until it be manifested that these things are not the Design of the Context,
and to contain the sense of the Words, they are not only useless unto the
Doctors Design, but opposite unto it, and destructive of it. But nothing is
here attempted unto that Purpose.

To draw any Argument from these Words applicable unto his Design, it must be
proved,

(1.) That besides the Rule of Faith, Love and Worship, given by Divine
Institution and Obligatory unto all the Disciples of Christ or all Churches, in
all times and Ages, that the Apostles gave a Rule concerning outward Rites,
Ceremonies, Modes of Worship, Feasts and Fastings, Ecclesiastical Government,
Liturgies, and the like, unto which all Believers ought to conform, on the
Penalty of being esteemed Schismatics, and dealt withal accordingly. For this
only is that wherein we are concerned.

(2.) That because the Apostles made such a Rule, (which we know not what it
is, or what is become of it) that the Guides of the Church (and that in such a
Church state as the Apostles knew nothing of) have Power to frame such a Rule
as that described, and to impose the Observation of it on all Believers, on the
Penalties before mentioned.

It is manifest that no Advantage unto the Cause of Imposition and Uniformity
as it is stated at present can be taken from these Words of the Apostle, unless
these two things be contained in them. But that either of them are so, our
Author does not say, nor go about to prove, in his large Discourse on this
Place. I might therefore forbear any farther Examination of it, without the
least disadvantage unto our Cause. But that I may not seem to wave the
consideration of any thing that is pretended Material, I shall enquire into the
Particulars of it.

He proceeds therefore to answer his own Quaries, which he judged conducing
unto his Purpose. The first of them is, whether the Apostle speaks of
different Principles or of different Practices. And I find nothing in the
Discourse ensuing, that has the least respect unto this Enquiry, until
toward, the close of it, where he grants that different Apprehensions are
intended, such as were accompanied with different Practices; But in Order
hereunto he gives us a large Account of the scope of the Place, and Design of
the Apostle in it. The Substance of it is; That the Apostle treates concerning
Judaical seducers; that the things in difference, were the different
Apprehensions of men about the Law, its Ceremonies and Worship, with the
continuation of them, and the different Practices that ensued thereon.

Be it so; What is our or his concernment herein? For it is most certain the
Apostle designed not the Imposition of these things on the Churches of the
Gentiles, nor did urge them unto an Uniformity in them, but declared their
Liberty from any Obligation unto them, and advised them to stand fast in that
Liberty, whatever others did practice themselves or endeavor to impose on
them. What this conduces unto his Purpose I cannot understand.

But on the Occasion of that Expression, being otherwise minded, He demands,
what sense can Dr. O. here put upon the being otherwise Minded; Otherwise then
what? As many as be perfect be thus minded, to pursue your main End; but if any
be otherwise minded; did any think they ought not to mind chiefly their great
end; that is incredible. Therefore the Apostle must be understood of somewhat
about which there were then very different Apprehensions; and that it is
certain there were, about the Law, among Christian Churches.

Neither do I well understand these things, or what is intended in them. For,

(1.) I never gave occasion to him or any else to think, that I would affix
such a sense unto the Apostles Words, as if they gave an Allowance to men to be
otherwise minded, as unto the pursuit of their main End, of living to God in
Faith and Love, with mutual Peace among themselves.

(2.) What then do I intend, by being otherwise minded; even the same that he
does, and nothing else, namely, different Apprehensions about some things in
Religion, and particularly those concerning the Law and its Ceremonies. For,

(3.) Let it be supposed that the Apostle in particular intends Dissentions
about the Law, and the Observance of its Institutions, yet he does not
determine the case from the especial circumstances of that Difference, so
adjudging the Truth unto one of the Parties at variance; but from a general
Rule how the Disciples of Christ ought to deport themselves toward one
another, during the continuation of such Differences. But,

(4.) The Truth is, the Apostle has dismissed the case proposed in the
Beginning of the Chapter; ver. 1.2, 3, etc. and upon the occasion of his
Expression of his own voluntary Relinquishment and Renunciation of all the
Privileges which the Jews boasted in, and of his Seize thereon in the
Mysteries of the Gospel; ver. 12, 13, 14. he gives a general Direction for the
walking of all Christians, in the several Degrees and Measures of their
Seize in the same kind. And herein he supposes two things. (1.) That
there were things, all the fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel concerning the
Person, Offices and Grace of Christ, which they had all in common attained
unto. Whereunto we have already attained; We, all of us in general. (2.) That
in some things there were different Apprehensions and Practices amongst them,
which hindered not their Agreement in what they had attained; if any one be
otherwise minded; one than another. We that are perfect and those which are
weak, let us walk by the same Rule.

Wherefore although I cannot discern how any thing in this Discourse has the
least Influence into the Case in hand, yet to give a little more Light unto the
Context, and to evidence its unserviceableness unto the Doctors Intention, I
shall give a brief account of the Judaical Teachers of those days.

The Jews were by this time distributed into three sorts;

(1.) Such as being obdurate in their Unbelief and Rejection of the Person of
Christ, opposed, persecuted and blasphemed the Gospel in all places. Thus was
it with the Generality of the Nation. And the Teachers of this sort advanced
the Excellency, Necessity, and Usefulness of the Law, in contradiction unto
Christ and the Gospel. These the Apostle describes, 1 These. 2.13, 14, 15. The
Jews; Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary unto all Men,
forbidding us to speak unto the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up
their sins always, for the wrath is come upon them unto the uttermost.

(2.) Such as professing Faith in Christ Jesus and Obedience unto the Gospel,
yet were of the Mind that the whole Law of Moses, was not only to be continued
and observed among the Jews, but also that it was to be imposed on the Gentiles
who were converted unto the Faith. They thought the Gospel did not erect a new
Church state with a new kind of Worship, but only was a peculiar way of
proselyting men into Judaisme; against which the Apostle disputes in his
Epistle unto the Hebrews, especially in the 7th. and 8th. Chapters. The
Teachers of this sort greatly troubled the Churches, even after the Declaration
of the Mind of the Holy Ghost in these things, by the Apostles; Act. 15. Those
who continued obstinate in this Persuasion, became afterward to be Ebionites
and Nazarenes, as they were called, wholly forsaking the Christian Church of
the Gentiles. These were generally of the Sect of the Pharisees, and seem to be
the least sort of the three; For,

(3.) There were others, who acquiescing in the Liberty of the Gentiles,
declared by the Apostles, Act. 15. yet judged themselves and all other
Circumcised Jews, obliged unto the Observation of the Law and its Institutions.
These legal Observances were of two sorts;

(1.) Such as were confined and limited unto the Temple, and unto the Land of
Canaan; And

(2.) Such as might be observed any where among the Nations; they acted
accordingly. Those who lived at Jerusalem adhered unto the Temple Worship, the
whole Church these did so. Their Judgment in these things is declared, Acts
21.20.21. Thou see Brother, how many thousands of the Jews there are which
believe, and they are all Zealous of the Law; and they are informed of thee,
that thou teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses,
saying, that they ought not to circumcise their Children, neither to walk after
the Customs. They were not at all offended with Paul, that he did not impose
the Law on the Gentiles ( ver. 25.) but only that (as they had been informed)
he taught the Jews to forsake the Law, and to reject all the Institutions of
it. This they thought unlawful for them. And this they spoke principally with
respect unto the Temple Service, as appears by the Advice given unto Paul on
this Occasion, ver. 23, 24. Those who lived amongst the Gentiles, knew that
there was no Obligation on them, unto the Sacrifices and especial Duties of the
Temple; but continued only in the observance of such Rites and Institutions,
about Meats, Washings, Days, New Moons, Sabbaths, and the like, which the
Gentiles were freed from.

Hence there were two sorts of Churches in those days (if not three) in
Separation more or less from the Apostate Church of the Unbelieving Jews, which
yet was not finally taken away.

(1.) The Church of Jerusalem and those Churches of Judea which were of the
same Mind and Communion with them. These continued in the Observance of all the
Law, and of the Services of the Temple, being allowed them by the Apostles.

(2.) Those of the Jews, who lived in the Nations, and observed all the Rites
of the Law, which were not confined unto the Land of Canaan. And

(3.) The Churches of the Gentiles which observed none of these things,
forbearing only their Liberty in one or two Instances, not to give the other
Offense. Some Differences and Disputes happened sometimes about these things
and the Practice of them, whereon Peter himself fell into a Mistake, Gal. 2.14.
And there seems to have been great Disputes about them at Rome, chap. 14. Yea
it is judged that according unto their different Apprehensions of these things,
there were two Churches at Rome, one of the Circumcision, the other of the
Gentiles, walking in distinct Communion each by themselves. However the
different Rule, of this kind that was between the Churches of Jerusalem and
Antioch is sufficiently declared, Acts 15. the one Church continuing Zealous of
the Law, and the other rejoiced for the Consolation of being delivered from it;
ver. 31. Yet was there no Schism between these Churches, but a constant
Communion in Faith and Love. Such differences in Opinions and Practices were
not yet formed into an Interest, obliging men to condemn them as Schismatics,
who differ from them. For not to speak of what Orders and Rules for decency,
particular Churches may make by common Consent among themselves, to make the
Observation of Arbitrary Institutions, not prescribed in the Scripture, upon
many Churches, to be the Rule of Communion in them and between them, which
whosoever observe not, are to be esteemed Guilty of Schism, which Victor,
Bishop of Rome first attempted, is contrary to the Rules of the Scripture, to
the Principles of Christian Faith, Love, and Liberty, to the Example of the
Apostles, has no countenance given unto it in the Primitive Churches, and will
certainly make our Differences Endless.

I judge that in the Beginning of the Chapter the Apostle intends those of the
first sort, and that as well because he calls them Dogs and the Concision,
which answers unto the Account he gives of them, 1 These. 2.14, 15; as also
because he speaks of them as those who advanced the pretended Privileges of
Judaisme, absolutely against Christ, the Gospel, and the Righteousness of God
revealed therein. Hereon in opposition unto them, he declares that they had
nothing to boast of, but what he himself had a Right unto as well as they, and
which he had voluntarily relinquished and renounced for Christ and the Gospel,
wherein he testifies what he had attained. If any one do judge, that he intend
those of the second sort, I will not contend about it, because of the severity
of Expression which he uses concerning them, Gal. 5.12. But discharging the
consideration of them, the Direction in this place concerns those of the third
sort only, answering unto that which was prescribed and followed by the
Apostles in all Places, namely, that there should be mutual Forbearance, in
some Difference of Practice between them and the Gentile Believers.

His second Enquiry, page 168, is, Whether the Rule which the Apostle lays
down, be only a Rule of mutual Forbearance. I do not find that I said any where
that it was only a Rule of mutual Forbearance, but that the Words of the
Apostle do enjoin a mutual Forbearance among those who are differently minded;
page 26. And I must here say, which I desire to do without offense, that there
is no need of any farther Answer unto that Part of the Doctors Discourse, but a
Transcription of that which he pretends to oppose; for what is spoken unto that
end, consists in a perpetual Diversion from the Argument in hand.

I did not before precisely determine, what was the Rule which the Apostle does
intend; only proved sufficiently, that it was not such a Rule as is pleaded for
by the Doctor. But the meaning of the Phrase and Expression is plain enough;
(...); it is directly used once more by the Apostle; Gal. 6.16 (...); as many
as walk according to this Rule; and what Rule is that? namely, what as unto the
substance of it he lays down in the Words foregoing, ver. 14, 15. God forbid
that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; For in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new
Creature; and as many as walk according unto this Rule, that is, the Rule of
Faith in Christ alone for Justification and Sanctification, without trusting
unto or resting on any of those things which were in difference among them. The
Places, in Scope, Design, and manner of Expression, are Parallel. For this is
plainly, that which he pleads for in this Context; namely, that Justification
and Sanctification are to be obtained alone through Christ and Faith in him by
the Gospel, without the least Aid and Assistance from the things that were in
Difference among them. Wherefore not farther to contend in so plain a Matter,
the Rule here intended by the Apostle, is no Book of Canons, but the Analogy of
Faith, or the Rule of Faith in Christ as declared in the Gospel, in opposition
unto all other ways and means of Justification, Sanctification and Salvation,
which we ought to walk in a Compliance withal, and that with Love and
Forbearance toward them that in things not Corruptive or Destructive of this
Rule, do differ from us.

But, says our Author, the sense according to Dr. O. is this; that those who
are agreed in the Substantials of Religion, should go on and do their Duty,
without regarding lesser Differences: Abate that Expression, of, without
regarding lesser Differences, which is not mine, and supply in the room of it,
mutually forbearing each other in lesser Differences; and be it so that it is
my sense; at first veiw it looks as like the sense of the Apostle as any man
need desire. But, says the Doctor, this sense is uncertain, because it sets no
bounds to Differences, and supposes the continuance of such Differences among
them, which he designed to prevent, by persuading them so often in this Epistle
to be of one Mind. Besides the Differences then on foot, were none of the
smaller Differences of Opinions, but that which they differed about, was urged
on the one hand as necessary to Salvation, and opposed on the other as
pernicious and destructive unto it. And again, page 169. Let Dr. O. name any
other smaller Differences of Opinions which might be an occasion of the
Apostle's giving such a Rule of mutual Forbearance.

I Answer briefly, (1.) The sense is very certain because it gives the due
bounds unto the Differences supposed; namely, such as concern not the
substantials of Religion.

(2.) It does suppose the continuance of these Differences, because the Apostle
does suppose the same; if any one be yet otherwise Minded; which hinders no
kind of endeavors to compose or remove them.

(3.) The Differences intended were not those between them who imposed the
Observation of the Law on the Gentiles as necessary unto Salvation, and those
by whom they were opposed; for the Apostle gives no such Rules as this, in that
Case.

(4.) I do expressly assign those lesser Differences which the Direction here,
is applicable unto; namely, those between the blind sort of Jews mentioned
before, and the Gentile Believers; which the Apostle states and applies the
same Rule unto; Romans 14. What remains in Answer unto this second Enquiry, does
proceed on Mistaken Suppositions. and concerns not the Case under Consideration.

Page 170. He proceeds unto his last Enquiry which indeed is alone pertinent
unto his Purpose; namely, How this Rule has an Influence on our Case.

What this Rule is, concerning which this Enquiry is made, he does not declare.
Either the precise Signification of the Rule in this Place, or the Direction
given with respect unto that Rule, may be intended; that is, the general Rule
of our Walking in our Profession of the Gospel, or the especial Rule given by
the Apostle with respect thereunto, in the case under consideration, may be so
intended. If by the Rule in the first sense, he understands a Rule, Canon, or
Command, Establishing a Church state, with Rites and Modes of Worship, with
Ceremonies, Orders, and Government, no where appointed in the Scripture or of
divine Revelation, it is openly evident that there was no such Rule then, that
no such is here intended; but that only whereunto the Grace of the Gospel in
Mercy and Peace is annexed, as Gal. 6.16. which is not such a Rule. If he
intend by it, a Direction, that where there are different Apprehensions in
Matters of less importance, not breaking in on the Analogy of Faith,
accompanied with different Practices, so far as they are necessary from those
different Apprehensions, the Major Part of those among whom the Differences
are, should compel the Minor, to forbear their Practice according unto their
Apprehensions, and comply with them in all things, on all sorts of Penalties,
if they refuse so to do, it will be hard to find such a Direction in these
Words. Yet this must be the Rule, and this the Direction that can give any
countenance unto the Doctor's Cause. But if by this Rule, the Analogy of
Faith, as before described, be intended, and the Direction be to walk according
to it, with mutual Forbearance and Love, as unto things of lesser Moment, then
this Rule has little advantageous Influence into it.

But then says the Doctor; so far as men agree they are bound to join
together, as to Opinion or Communion; I grant it (though it be not proved from
this Place) where such a Communion is required of them regularly, and in a way
of Duty. And

(2) Says he, That the best Christians are bound to unite with others though
of lower Seize, and to keep within the same Rule; No doubt; Howbeit the
Apostle speaks of no such things in this place but only that we should all
walk, according unto the same Rule, in what we have all attained. Yea but

(3) This Rule takes in all such Orders, which are lawful and judged necessary
to hold the Members of a Christian Society together; What Rule does this? Who
shall appoint the Orders intended? Who shall judge of their Necessity? Are they
of the Institution of Christ or his Apostles? Are they determined to be
necessary in the Scripture, the Rule of Faith? if so, we are agreed; But if by
these Orders he intends such as men do or may at any time, under pretense of
Church Authority invent and impose as necessary, making Alterations in the
Original State and Rule of the Church, as also in its Worship and Discipline,
it will be strange to me, if he can find them out, either in the Rule here
mentioned, or the Dir^^tion given with reference unto it; seeing such a
Practice seems to be plainly condemned in the Words th^^selves. And it is known
that this pretended Power of Rule or Canon making for the Unity of the Church
was that which at length ruined all Churches in their State, Order, and
Worship; if such a Ruin be acknowledged to have befallen them in the Roman
Apostasy.

He therefore Objects out of my Discourse, page 171. Let the Apostles Rule be
produced with any probability of Proof to be his, and we are all ready to
subscribe and conform unto it. To which he replies; This is the Apostles Rule
to go as far as they can, and if they can go no farther, to sit down quietly
and wait for further Instruction, and not to break the Peace of the Church,
upon present dissatisfaction, nor to gather new Churches out of others, upon
supposition of higher seize.

Answ. 1. Upon a supposition that those who make and impose these new
unscriptual Orders, are the Church, and that as the Church they have Authority
so to make and impose them; if this be not the Rule of the Apostle, I believe
some men judge it ought so to have been. But

2. The Apostle's Rule is not, that we should go as far as we can, as though
there were any thing of Dispute and Difficulty in the Matter; but that so far
as we have attained we should walk according to the same Rule.

3. He does not intimate any thing about breaking the Peace of the Church, but
only what would do so; by an Imposition on one another, in differences of
lesser Moment, whilst the general Rule of Faith and Love is attended unto.

4. To be quiet and wait for further Instruction, is the Direction given unto
both Parties, whilst the Differences did continue between them; and that in
opposition unto mutual Impositions.

5. A Church that is really so, or so esteemed, may break the Peace with its
own Members, and others, as well as they with it; and where the fault is, must
be determined by the Causes of what is done.

6. For what is added about gathering of Churches, it shall be considered in
its proper place. But as unto the Application of these things unto the present
Case, there lies in the bottom of them, such an unproved Presumption of their
being the Church, that is, according unto Divine Institution (for in their
being so in any other sense we are not concerned) of their Church Power and
Authority, by whom such Orders and Rules are made as we can by no means admit
of.

I can more warrantably give this as the Apostles Rule, than that of our
Author; What you have attained unto in the Knowledge of the Doctrine and
Mysteries of the Gospel, walk together in holy Communion of Faith and Love; but
take heed that you multiply not new Causes of Divisions and Differences by
inventing and imposing new Orders in Divine Worship, or the Rule of the Church,
casting them out, who agree with you in all things of divine Revelation and
Institution.

He adds from my Words; If the Rule reach our Case, it must be such as requires
things to be observed, as were never divinely appointed, as National Churches,
Ceremonies and Modes of worship; to which he Replies; And so this Rule does in
Order unto Peace, require the Observation of such things, which although they
be not particularly commanded of God, yet are enjoined by lawful Authority,
provided that they be not unlawful in themselves, nor repugnant unto the Word
of God.

Answ. 1. Let the Reader if he please, consult the place whence these Words are
taken in my Discourse, and he will find this Evasion obviated.

2. What is intended by this Rule? is it the Rule given by the Apostle? Who
that reads the Words can possibly pretend unto any such conception of their
meaning? If he understand a Rule of his own, I know not what it may or may not
include.

3. I deny, and shall for ever deny, that the Rule here intended by the Apostle
does give the least countenance unto the Invention and Imposition of things not
divinely instituted, not prescribed, not commanded in the Word, on the Pretense
that those who so invent and impose them, judged them lawful, and that they
have Authority so to do.

He Objects again unto himself out of my Discourse, that the Apostles never
gave any such Rules themselves about outward Modes of Worship with Ceremonies,
Feasts, Fasts, Liturgies, etc. Whereunto he Replies; What then? I say then,

1. It had been happy for Christians and Christian Religion if those who
pretended to be their Successors, had followed their Example, and made no such
Rules at all; that they would not have thought themselves wiser than they, or
more careful for the Good of the Church, or better acquainted with the Mind of
Christ in these things then they were. For that Multiplication of Rules, Laws,
Canons, about the things mentioned, and others of an alike nature, which the
Apostles never gave any Example of, or Encouragement unto, which afterward
ensued, has been a principal means of altering the state of the Church from
its Original Institution, of corrupting its Worship, Administering occasion unto
scandal and endless Strifes.

2. If the Apostles gave no such Rules themselves, it may be concluded safely,
that it was because in their Judgment, no such Rule was to be given. Other
Reason hereof cannot be assigned, for if it might have been done, according to
the Mind of Christ, and by virtue of the Commission which they had from him,
innumerable Evils might have been prevnted, by the doing of it. They foresaw
what Differences would arise in the Church, what Divisions, the darkness and
corrupt Lusts of men would cast them into, about such things as these, and
probably knew much whereunto the Mystery of Iniquity tended; yet would they not
appoint any Arbitrary Rules about things not ordained by our Lord Jesus Christ,
which might have given some bounds unto the Inclinations of men, in making and
multiplying Rules of their own, unto the ruin of the Church.

3. Then I say, we beg the Pardon of all who concern themselves herein, that we
scruple the Complying with such Rules, in Religion and the Worship of God, as
the Apostles thought not meet to appoint or ordain.

But he adds, It is sufficient that they gave this general Rule, that all
Lawful things are to be done for the Churches Peace.

Answ. What is to be done for the Churches Peace we shall afterward consider.
To be done, is intended of Acts of Religion in the Worship of God. I say then,
the Apostles never gave any such Rule, as that pretended. the Rule they gave
was that all things which Christ has commanded, were to be done and observed,
and for the doing of any thing else, they gave no Rule. Especially they gave
not such a large Rule as this, that might serve the turn and interest of the
worst of men, in imposing on the Church, whatever they esteemed Lawful, as (not
by virtue of any Rule of the Apostles, but in an open Rejection of all they
gave) it afterward fell out in the Church. This is a Rule, which would do the
Work to the Purpose of all that have the Reputation of Governors in the
Church, be it the Pope, or who it will. For they are themselves the sole Judges
of what is Lawful; the People, as it is pretended, understand nothing of these
things. Whatever therefore they have a Mind to introduce into the Worship of
God, and to impose on the Practice of men therein, is to be done by virtue of
this Apostolical Rule, for the Churches Peace, provided they judge it Lawful;
and surely no Pope was ever yet so stark mad, as to impose things in Religion,
which he himself judged unlawful. Besides, things may be Lawful in themselves,
that is, Morally, which yet, it is not Lawful to introduce into the Worship of
God, because not expedient, nor for Edification; Yea things may be Lawful to be
done sometimes, on some occasions, in the Worship of God, which yet, it would
be unlawful to impose by virtue of a general binding Rule for all times and
seasons. Instances may be multiplied in each kind. Therefore I say the Apostles
never gave this Rule; they opened no such Door unto Arbitrary Imposition; they
laid no such Yoke on the Necks of the Disciples, which might prove heavier, and
did so, then that of the Jewish Ceremonies which they had taken away; namely,
that they were to do and observe all that should by their Rulers be imposed on
them as lawful in their Judgment. This Soveraignity over their Consciences was
reserved by the Apostles unto the Authority of Christ alone, and their
Obedience was required by them, only unto his commands. This is that which I
see some would be at. To presume themselves to be the Church, at least the only
Rulers and Governors of it. To assume to themselves alone the Judgment of
what is Lawful, and what is unlawful to be observed in the Worship of God. To
avow a Power to impose what they please on all Churches, pretended to be under
their Command, so that they judge it lawful, be it never so useless or
trifling, if it has no other End but to be an Instance of their Authority, and
then assert that all Christian People must without further Examination submit
quietly unto this state of things, and comply with it, unless they will be
esteemed damned Schismatics. But it is too late to advance such Principles a
second time.

He adds from my Paper or as my sense, the Apostles gave Rules inconsistent
with any determining Rule, (viz.) of mutual Forbearance; Romans 14. But then,
says he, the meaning must be, that whatever Differences happen among
Christians, there must be no Determination either way: But this is direstly
contrary to the Decree of the Apostles at Jerusalem, upon the Difference that
happened in the Christian Churches. But they are not my Words which he reports.
I said not, that the Apostles gave Rules inconsistent with any determining
Rule; but with such a Rule, and the Imposition of the things contained in it,
on the Practice of men, in things not determined (that is whilst Differences
about them do continue) as he contends for. And

(1.) Notwithstanding this Rule of Forbearance given by the Apostle expressly,
Romans 14. Yet as unto the Right and Truth in the things wherein men are at
difference, every private Believer, is to determine of them so far as he is
able in his own Mind, Every one is to be fully persuaded in his own Mind in
such things, so far as his own Practice is concerned.

(2.) The Church wherein such Differences do fall out, may doctrinally
determine of the Truth in them, as it is the Ground and Pillar of Truth;
supposing them to be of such weight, as that the Edification of the Church is
concerned in them. For otherwise there is no need of any such Determination,
but every one may be left unto his own Liberty. There are Differences at this
day in the Church of England, in Doctrine, and Practice, some of them, in my
Judgment of more importance, then those between the same Church and us; yet it
does not think it necessary to make any Determination of them, no not
Doctrinally.

(3.) If the Church wherein such Differences fall out be not able in and of it
self to make a Doctrinal Determination of such Differences, they may and ought
to crave the Counsel and Advice of other Churches, with whom they walk in
Communion in Faith and Love. And so it was in the Case whereof an Account is
given us; Act. 15. The Determination or Decree there made concerning the
necessary Observance of the Jewish Rites by the Gentiles converted unto the
Faith, by the Apostles, Elders and Brethren, under the guidance of the Holy
Ghost as his Mind was revealed in the Scripture, gives not the least
Countenance unto the making and imposing such a Rule on all Churches and their
Members as is contended for.

For (1.) It was only a Doctrinal Determination, without Imposition on the
Practice of any.

(2.) It was a Determination against Impositions directly. And whereas it is
said, that it was a Determination contrary to the Judgment of the Imposers,
which shows, that the Rule of Forbearance where Conscience is alleged both
ways, is no standing Rule; I grant that it was contrary to the Judgment of the
Imposers, but imposed nothing on them, nor was their Practice concerned in that
erroneous Judgment. They were not required to do any thing contrary to their
own Judgment; and the not doing whereof did reflect on their own Consciences.
Wherefore the whole Rule given by the Apostle and the whole Determination made,
is that no Impositions be made on the Consciences or Practice of the Disciples
of Christ, in things relating to his Worship, but what were necessary by virtue
of Divine Institution. They added hereunto, that the Gentiles enjoying this
Liberty, ought to use it without offense; and were at Liberty by virtue of it,
to forbear such things, as wherein they had, or thought they had a natural
Liberty, in case they gave Offense by the use of them. And the Apostles who
knew the state of things, in the Minds of the Jews, and all other Circumstances
give an Instance in the things which at that season, were to be so forborne. And
whereas this Determination was not absolute and obligatory on the whole Case,
unto all Churches, namely, whether the Mosaical Law were to be observed among
Christians, but some Churches were left unto their own Judgment and Practice,
who esteemed it to be still in force, as the Churches of the Jews, and others
left unto their own Liberty and Practice also, who judged it not to oblige
them, both sides or Parties being bound to continue. Communion among them in
Faith and Love, there is herein a perpetual establishment of the Rule of mutual
Forbearance in such Cases; nothing being condemned but Impositions on one
another; nothing commended but an Abstinence from the use of Liberty in the
case of Scandal or Offense. I had therefore Reason to say, that the false
Apostles were the only Imposers, that is, of things not necessary by virtue of
any divine Institution. And if the Author insinuate, that the true Apostles
were such Imposers also, because of the Determination they made of this
Difference, he will fail in his Proof of it. It is true they imposed on, or
charged the Consciences of men, with the observance of all the Institutions and
Commands of Christ, but of other things none at all.

The last things which he endeavors an Answer unto on this occasion lies in
those words. The Jewish Christians were left unto their own Liberty, provided
they did not impose on others; and the Dissenters at this day desire no more
then the Gentile Church did (viz.) not to be imposed on to observe those things
which they are not satisfied it is the Mind of Christ, should be imposed on
them. So is my sense, in the places referred unto, reported, Nor shall I
contend about it, so as that the last Clause be change; for my Words are not,
they are not satisfied it is the Mind of Christ, that they should be imposed on
them; but they were not satisfied it is the Mind of Christ they should Observe.
This respects the things themselves, the other only their Imposition. And one
Reason against the Imposition opposed, is that the things themselves imposed,
are such as the Lord Christ would not have us observe; because not appointed by
himself.

But hereunto he answers two things.

1. That it was agreed by all the Governors of the Christian Church, that the
Jewish Christians should be left unto their own Liberty out of respect unto the
Law of Moses, and out of regard unto the Peace of the Christian Church, which
otherwise might have been extremely hazarded. But

(1.) The Governors of the Christian Church which made the Determination
insisted on, were the Apostles themselves.

(2.) There was no such Determination made, that the Jews should be left unto
their own Liberty in this Matter; but there was only a Connivance at their
Inclination to bear their old Yoke for a Season, The Determination was only on
the other hand, that no Imposition of it should be made on the Gentiles.

(3.) The Determination it self was no Act of Church Government or Power, but a
doctrinal Declaration of the Mind of the Holy Ghost.

(4.) It is well that Church Governors, once judged that Impositions in things
not necessary, were to be forborne for the sake of the Peace of the Church;
Others I hope may in due time be of the same Mind.

2. He says, The false Apostles imposing on the Gentile Christians had two
circumstances in it, which extremely alter their Case from that of our
Dissenters; For,

(1.) They were none of their lawful Governors, but went about as seducers,
drawing away the Disciples of the Apostles from them. It seems then,

(1.) That those who are lawful Governors, or pretend themselves so to be, may
impose what they please without Control, as they did in the Papacy, and the
Councils of it. But

(2.) Their Imposition was merely doctrinal, wherein there was no Pretense of
any Act of Government or governing Power; which made it less grievous, then
that which the Dissenters have suffered under. Were things no otherwise imposed
on us, we should bear them more easily.

(2.) Says he, They imposed the Jewish Rites as necessary to Salvation, and
not merely as indifferent things; And the Truth is, so long as they judged them
so to be, they are more to be excused in their doctrinal Impositions of them,
then others are, who by an Act of Government fortified with I know not how many
Penalties, do impose things which themselves esteem indifferent; and those on
whom they are imposed, do judge to be unlawful.

Whereas he adds that he has considered all things that are Material in
Discourse which seem to take off the force of the Argument drawn from this
Text; I am not of his Mind, nor I believe will any indifferent Person be so,
who shall compare what I wrote therein, with his exceptions against it; though
I acknowledge it is no easy thing to discover wherein the force of the
pretended Argument does lie; That, we must walk according unto the same Rule,
in what we have attained; that wherein we differ, we must wait on God for
Teaching and Instruction; that, the Apostles, Elders and Brethren at
Jerusalem, determined from the Scriptures, or the Mind of the Holy Ghost
therein, that the Jewish Ceremonies should not be imposed on the Gentile
Churches and Beleivers; and that thereon those Churches continued in Communion
with each other, who did, and did not observe those Ceremonies, are the only
Principles which in Truth the Doctor has to proceed upon. To infer from these
Principles and Propositions, that there is a National Church of Divine
Institution, for what is not so, has no Church Power properly so called; the
nature of its Power, being determined by the Authority of its Institution or
Erection; That this Church has Power in its Governors and Rulers, to invent
new Orders, Ceremonies and Rites of Worship, new Canons for the Observation of
sundry things in the Rule of the Church and Worship of God, which have no
Spring nor Cause but their own Invention and Prescription, and is authorized to
impose the Observation of them on all particular Churches and Believers who
never gave their consent unto their Invention or Prescription; and hereon to
declare them all to be wicked Schismatics, who yield not full Obedience unto
them in these things, it requires a great deal of Art and Skill, in the
Mannagers of the Argument.

SECT. II.
PArt 2. Sect. 21. page 176. Our Author proceeds to renew his Charge of Schism
or sinful Separation against those, who though they agree with us, says he, in
the substantials of Religion, yet deny any Communion with our Church to be
lawful. But apprehending that the state of the Question here insinuated, will
not be admitted, and that it would be difficult to find them out, who deny any
Communion with the Church of England to be lawful; he adds that he does not
speak of any improper Acts of Communion, which Dr. O. calls Communion in Faith
and Love; which they allow to the Church of England. But why the Acts hereof
are called improper Acts of Communion, I know not. Add unto Faith and Love, the
Administration of the same Sacraments, with Common Advice in things of Common
concernment, and it is all the Communion that the true Churches of Christ have
among themselves in the whole World. Yea this Church Communion is such, as that

(1.) Where it is not, there is no Evangelical Communion at all. whatever Acts
of Worship or Church Order men may agree in the Practice of, if the Foundation
of that Agreement be not laid in a joint Communion in Faith and Love, they are
neither accepted with God, nor profitable unto the Souls of men. For

(2.) These are the things, namely, Faith and Love, which enliven all joint
Duties of Church Order and Worship, are the Life and Soul of it; and how they
should be only improperly that, which they alone make other things to be
properly, I cannot understand.

(3.) Where there is no defect in these things, namely, in Faith and Love, the
Charge of Schism on dissenting in things of lesser Moment, is altogether
unreasonable. It is to be desired, that an overweening of our Differences, make
us not overlook the things wherein we are agreed. This is one of the greatest
Evils that attend this Controversy. Men are forced by their Interest, to lay
more weight on a few outward Rites and Ceremonies, which the World and the
Church might well have spared, had they not come into the Minds of some Men,
none know how, than upon the most important Graces and Duties of the Gospel.
Hence Communion in Faith and Love, is scarce esteemed worth taking up in the
streets, in comparison of Uniformity in Rites and Ceremonies. Let Men be as
void of, and remote from true Gospel Faith and Love as is imaginable; yet if
they comply quietly with, and have a little Zeal for those outward things, they
are to be approved of, as very orderly Members of the Church. And whatever
Evidences on the other hand, any can or do give of their Communion in Faith and
Love, with all that are of that Communion, yet if they cannot in Conscience
comply in the Observance of those outward things mentioned, they are to be
judged Schismatics, and Breakers of the Churches Unity; whereas no part of the
Churches Unity does or ever did consist in them.

In his Procedure hereon, our Author seems to embrace occasions of contending,
seeking for Advantages therein, in things not belonging unto the Merit of the
Cause, which I thought was beneath him. From my Concession that some at least
of our Parochial Churches are true Churches; he asks, in what sense? Are they
Churches rightly constituted, with whom they may join in Communion as Members;
I think it is somewhat too late now after all this dispute about the Reasons of
refraining from their Communion, and his severe Charges of Schism upon us for
our so doing, to make this Enquiry; Wherefore he Answers himself, No, but his
Meaning is, says he, that they are not guilty of any such heinous Errors in
Doctrine, or Idolatrous Practice in Worship, as should utterly deprive them of
the Being and nature of Churches, which I suppose are my Words. But then comes
in the Advantage; does, says he, this Kindness belong only unto some of our
Parochial Churches? I had thought that every Parochial Church was true or false
according unto its frame and constitution, which among us, supposes the owning
the Doctrine and Worship established in the Church of England. I answer
briefly; it is true, every Church is true or false according unto its Original
frame and Constitution. This frame and Constitution of Churches, if it proceed
from, and depend upon the Institution of Christ, it is true and approveable. If
it depend only on a National Establishment of Doctrine and Worship, I know not
well what to say unto it. But let any of these Parochial Churches be so
constituted, as to answer the legal establishment in the Land, yet if the
Generality of their Members are openly wicked in their Lives, and they have no
lawful or sufficient Ministry, we cannot acknowledge them for true Churches.
Some other things of the like nature do ensue, but I shall not insist on them.

He gathers up in the next place, the Titles of the Causes alleged, for our
refraining Communion with those Parochial Assemblies, which he calls our
Separation from them. And hereon he enquires whether these Reasons be a ground
for a Separation from a Church, wherein it is confessed there are no Heinous
Errors in Doctrine, or Idolatrous Practice in Worship, that is, as he before
cited my words, as should utterly deprive them of the Being and Nature of
Churches. And it they be not, then, says he, such a Separation may be a formal
Schism, because they set up other Churches of their own.

The Rule before laid down that all things lawful are to be done for the
Churches Peace, taking in the supposition on which it proceeds, is as
sufficient to establish Church Tyranny, as any Principle made use of by the
Church of Rome, notwithstanding its plausible Appearance. And that here
insinuated of the Unlawfulness of Separation from any Church in the World, (for
that which has pernicious Errors in Doctrine, and Idolatry in Worship,
destroying its Being, is no Church at all) is as good Security unto Churches,
in an Obstinate Refusal of Reformation, when the Souls of the People are ruined
amongst them for the want of it, as they need desire. And I confess I suspect
such Principles as are evidently suited unto the security of the Corrupt
Interests of any sort of Men.

I say therefore, (1.) That though a Church, or that which pretends itself on
any Grounds so to be, do not profess any heinous Error in Doctrine, nor be
guilty of Idolatrous Practice in Worship, destroying its Nature and Being, yet
there may be sufficient Reasons to refrain from its Communion in Church Order
and Worship, and to join in or with other Churches for Edification: That is,
that where such a Church is not capable of Reformation, or is obstinate in a
Resolution not to reform itself, under the utmost Necessity thereof; it is
lawful for all or any of its Members, to reform themselves, according to the
Mind of Christ, and commands of the Gospel.

(2.) That where Men are no otherwise Members of any Church, but by an
inevitable Necessity, and outward Penal Laws, preventing their own choice, and
any act of Obedience unto Christ in their joining with such Churches, the Case
is different from theirs, whose Relation unto any Church, is founded in their
own voluntary choice, as submitting themselves unto the Laws, Institution, and
Rule of Christ in that Church; which we shall make use of afterward.

(3.) The Doctor might have done well to have stated the true nature of
Schism, and the formal Reason of it, before he had charged a formal Schism,
on a Supposition of some outward Acts only.

(4.) What is our Judgment concerning Parochial Assemblies; how far we separate
from them, or refrain Communion with them, what are the Reasons whereon we do
so, has been now fully declared, and thereunto we must appeal on all
occasions; for we cannot acquiesce in what is unduely imposed on us, either as
unto Principles or Practice.

To show, as he says, the Insufficiency of our Cause of Separation, he will
take this way, namely, to show the great absurdities that follow on the
allowance of them; and adds,

These five especially I shall insist upon;
1. That it weakens the Cause of Reformation. 2. That it hinders all Union
between the Protestant Churches. 3. That it justifies the ancient Schisms,
which have been always condemned by the Christian Church. 4. That it makes
Separation Endless. 5. That it is contrary to the Obligation that lies on all
Christians to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church.
Now as I shall consider what He offers on these several Heads, and his
Application of it unto the case in hand, so I shall confirm the Reasons already
given of our Separation (if it must be so called) from Parochial Assemblies,
with these five Considerations.

1. That they strengthen the Cause of Reformation. 2. That they open a way to
Union between all Protestant Churches. 3. That they give the just Grounds of
condemning the ancient Schisms that ever any Christian Church did justly
condemn. 4. That they give due bounds unto S^paration. 5. That they absolutely
comply with all the Commands of the Scripture for the Preservation of the Peace
and Unity of the Church.
I shall begin with the consideration of the Absurdities, charged by Him on our
Principles and Practice.

The first of them is, That it weakens the Cause of the Reformation. This he
proves by long Quotations out of some French Divines. We are not to expect that
they should speak unto our Cause or make any Determination in it, seeing to the
principal of them, it was unknown. But they say that which is contrary unto our
Principles; so they may do, and yet this not weaken the Cause of the
Reformation. For it is known that they say somewhat also, that is contrary to
the Principles of our Episcopal Brethren, for which one of them is sufficiently
reviled; but yet the Cause of Reformation is not weakened thereby.

The first Testimony produced is that of Calvin; A large Discourse he has (
Institut. lib. 4. cap. 1.) against Causeless Separations from a true Church;
and by whom are they not condemned? No determination of the Case in hand, can
be thence derived; nor are the Grounds of our refraining Communion with
Parochial Assemblies, the same, with those which he condemns as insufficient
for a total Separation; nor is the Separation he opposed in those days, which
was absolute and total, with a condemnation of the Churches from which it was
made, of the same nature with that wherewith we are charged, at least not with
what we own and allow. He gives the Notes of a true Church to be, the pure
Preaching of the Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments according unto
Christ's Institution. Where these are he allows a true Church to be, not only
without Diocesan Episcopacy, but in a form, and under a Rule opposite unto it,
and inconsistent with it. And if he did at all speak to our Case, as he does
not, nor unto any of the Grounds of it, why should we be pressed with his
Authority on the one hand more then others from whom he differed also on the
other. Besides there is a great deal more belongs unto the pure preaching of
the Word, and the Administration of the Sacraments according unto Christ's
Institution, then some seem to apprehend. They may, they ought to be so
explained, as that from the consideration of them, we may justify our whole
Cause. Both these may be wanting in a Church, which is not guilty of such
heinous Errors in Doctrine, or Idolatry in Worship, as should overthrow its
Being. And their want, may be a just Cause of refraining Communion from a
Church, which yet we are not obliged to condemn as none at all.

Calvin expresses his Judgment, N. 12. I would not give Countenance unto
Errors, no not to the least; so as to cherish them by flattery or Connivance.
But though I say, that the Church is not to be forsaken for tristing
Differences, wherein the Doctrine, (of the Gospel) is retained safe and sound,
wherein the Integrity of Godliness does abide, and the use of the Sacraments
appointed of the Lord is preserved; and we say the same.

And this very Calvin who does so severely condemn Separation from a true
Church as by him stated, did himself quietly and peaceably withdraw and depart
from the Church of Geneva, when they refused to admit that Discipline, which he
esteemed to be according to the Mind of Christ. It is certain therefore that by
the Separation which he condemns, he does not intend the peaceable
Relinquishment of the Communion of any Church, as unto a constant participation
of all Ordinances in it, for want of due means of Edification, much less that
which has so many other Causes concurring therewith.

For the other Learned Men whom he quotes unto the same purpose, I see not any
thing that gives the least countenance unto his Assertion that our Principles
weaken the Cause of the Reformation. It is true they plead other Causes of
Separation from the Church of Rome, than those insisted on by us, with respect
unto the Church of England; and indeed they had been otherwise much to blame*
having so many things as they had, to plead of greater importance. Did we say
that the Reasons which we plead, are all that can be pleaded to justify the
Separation of the Reformed Churches from the Church of Rome, it would weaken
the Cause of Reformation. For we should then deny that Idolatry and fundamental
Errors in Faith, were any Cause or Ground of that Separation. However we know
that the Imposition of them on the Faith and Practice of all Christians, is
more pleaded in Justification of a Separation from them, then the things
themselves. But allowing those greater Reasons to be pleaded against the Roman
Communion as we do, it does not in the least follow that our Reasons for
refraining Communion with Parochial Assemblies, does weaken the Cause of the
Reformation.

However, let me not be misinterpreted as unto that expression of destroying
our Faith, which the Communion required with the Church of England, as unto all
the important Articles of it, does not do, and I can subscribe unto the Words
of Daille, as quoted by our Author out of his Apology: If, says he, the Church
of Rome has not required any thing of us, which destroys our Faith, offends
our Consciences, and overthrows the Service which we believe due to God; if the
Differences have been small, and such as we might safely have yielded unto;
then he will grant their Separation was rash and unjust, and they guilty of the
Schism.

He closes his Transcription of the Words of sundry Learned Men, who have
justified the Separation of the reformed Churches from the Church of Rome,
wherein we are not in the least concerned with an Enquiry, What Triumph would
the Church of Rome make over us had we no other reasons to justify our
Separation from them, but only those which (as is pretended) we plead in our
Cause. I say whereas we do plead, confirm and justify all the Reasons and
Causes pleaded for the Separation of the Reformed Churches from them, not
opposing, not weakening any of them, by any Principle or Practice of ours, but
farther press the force of the same reasonings and causes in all Instances
whereunto they will extend, I see neither what cause the Papists have of
Triumph, no^ any thing that weakens the Cause of the Reformation. He adds
further, how should we be hissed and laughed at all over the Christian World,
if we had nothing to allege for our Separation from the Roman Church, but such
things as these? I answer, that as the Case stands, if we did allege no other
Reasons but those which we insist on for our refraining Communion with our own
Parochial Assemblies, we should deserve to be derided, for relinquishing the
Plea of those other important Reasons which the Heresies and Idolatries and
Tyranny of that Church do render just and equal. But if we had no other Causes
of Separation from the Church of Rome, but what we have for our Separation from
our Parochial Assemblies at home, as weak as our Allegations are pretended to
be, we should not be afraid to defend them against all the Papists in the
World; and let the World act like itself in hissing.

Whereas therefore the Cause of Reformation is not in any thing weakened by our
Principles, No Argument, no Reason solidly pleaded to justify the Separation
from the Church of Rome being deserted by us, neither Testimony, Proof, nor
Evidence being produced to evince that it is weakened by us, I shall in the
Second place, as was before proposed, prove that the whole Cause of the
Protestants Separation from the Church of Rome, is strengthened and confirmed
by us.

There were some general Principles on which the Protestants proceeded in their
Separation from the Church of Rome, and which they constantly pleaded in
Justification thereof.

The first was, that the Scripture, the Word of God is a perfect Rule of Faith
and Religious Worship; so as that nothing ought to be admitted which is
repugnant unto it in its general Rule or especial Prohibitions, nothing imposed
that is not prescribed therein, but that every one is at liberty to refuse and
reject any thing of that kind. This they all contended for, and confirmed their
Assertion by the express Testimonies of the Writers of the Primitive Churches.
To prove this to have been their Principle in their Separation from the Church
of Rome were to light, as they say, a Candle in the Sun. It were easy to fill
up a Volume with Testimonies of it. After a while this Principle began to be
weakened, when the Interest of men made them except from this Rule, things of
outward Order, with some Rites and Ceremonies, the ordaining whereof, they
pleaded to be left unto Churches as they saw Good. Hereby this Principle, I
say, was greatly weakened. For no certain bounds could ever be assigned unto
those things that are exempted from the Regulation of the Scripture. And the
same Plea might be managed for many of the Popish Orders and Ceremonies that
were rejected, as forcibly as for them that were retained. And whereas all the
Reformed Churches agreed to abide by this Principle in Matters of Faith, there
fell out an admirable Harmony in their confessions thereof. But leaving the
Necessity of attending unto this Rule, in the Matter of Order, Ceremonies,
Rites and Modes of Worship, with the state of Churches, in their Rule and
Polity, those Differences and Divisions ensued amongst them, which continue
unto this day. But this Persuasion in some places made a farther Progress,
namely, that it was lawful to impose on the Consciences and Practices of men,
such things in Religious Worship, provided that they concerned outward Order,
Rites, Rule and Ceremonies, as are no where prescribed in the Scripture, and
that on severe Penalties Ecclesiastical and Civil. This almost utterly
destroyed the great fundamental Principle of the Reformation, whereon the first
Reformers justified their Separation from the Church of Rome. For whereas it is
supposed the Right of them who are to be the imposers, to determine what does
belong unto the Heads mentioned, they might under that pretense impose what
they pleased, and refuse those whom they imposed them on, the Protection of the
aforesaid Principle, namely, that nothing ought to be so imposed that is not
prescribed in the Scripture. This has proved the Rise of all endless
Differences and Schisms amongst us, nor will they be healed until all
Christians are restored unto their Liberty, of being obliged in the things of
God, only unto the Authority of the Scripture.

The Words of Mr. Chillingsworth unto this purpose are Emphatical, which I
shall therefore transcribe, though that be a thing which I am very averse from.

Require (says he) of Christians only to believe Christ, and to call no man
Master but him only; let those leave claiming of Infallibity who have no Right
unto it, and let them that in their Words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in
their Actions; In a word, take away Tyranny which is the Devils Instrument to
support Errors and Superstitions and Impieties in the several Parts of the
World, which could not otherwise long withstand the Power of Truth, I say, take
away Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full Liberty of
captivating their understandings to the Scripture only; that universal Liberty
thus moderated may quickly reduce Christendom to Truth and Unity; Part 1. chap.
4. Sect. 16.

This fundamental Principle of the first Reformation we do not only firmly
adhere unto, rejecting all those Opinions and Practices whereby its force is
weakened and impaired, but also do willingly suffer the things that do befall
us, in giving our Testimony thereunto. Neither will there ever be Peace among
the Churches of Christ in this World, until it be admitted in its whole
Latitude; especially in that Part thereof wherein it excludes all Impositions
of things not prescribed in the Scripture. For there are but few Persons who
are capable of the subtilty of those Reasonings, which are applied to weaken
this Principle in its whole extent. All men can easily see this, that the
sufficiency of the Scripture in general as unto all the ends of Religion, is
the only Foundation they have to rest and build upon. They do see actually,
that where Men go about to prescribe things to be observed in Divine Worship,
not appointed in the Scripture, that no two Churches have agreed therein; but
endless contentions have ensued; that, No man can give an Instance in
particular of any thing that is necessary unto the Rule of the Church, or the
Observance of the commands of Christ in the Worship of God, that is not
contained in the Scripture; and hereon are ready to resolve to call no man
Master, but Christ; and to admit of nothing in Religion, but what is warranted
by his Word.

Secondly. The second Principle of the Reformation, whereon the Reformers
justified their Separation from the Church of Rome, was this, That Christian
People were not tied up unto blind Obedience unto Church Guides, but were not
only at Liberty, but also obliged to judge for themselves, as unto all things
that they were to believe and practice in Religion and the Worship of God. They
knew that the whole Fabric of the Papacy did stand on this Basis or Dunghill,
that the Mystery of Iniquity was cemented by this Device, namely, that the
People were ignorant, and to be kept in Ignorance, being obliged in all things
unto an implicit Obedience unto their pretended Guides. And that they might
not be capable of, nor fit for any other condition, they took from them the
only means of their Instruction unto their Duty, and the Knowledge of it, that
is, the Use of the Holy Scripture. But the first Reformers did not only
vindicate their Right unto the Use of the Scripture itself, but insisted on it
as a Principle of the Reformation, (and without which they could never have
carried on their Work) that they were in all concernments of Religion to judge
for themselves. And Multitudes of them quickly manifested how meet and worthy
they were to have this Right restored unto them, in laying down their Lives for
the Truth, suffering as Martyrs under the Power of their Bishops.

This Principle of the Reformation in like manner, is in no small degree
weakened by many, and so the Cause of it. Dr. Still. himself, page 127, 128.
denies unto the People all Liberty or Ability to choose their own Pastors, to
judge what is meet for their own Edification, what is Heresy or a pernitio^^
Error, and what is not, or any thing of the like nature. This is almost the
same with that of the Pharisees concerning them who admired and followed the
Doctrine of our Savior, (...). Joh. 7.49. This Rabble which knows not the Law.
Yet was it this People whom the Apostles directed to choose out from among
themselves Persons meet for an Ecclesiastical Office; Act. 6. The same People
who joined with the Apostles and Elders in the consideration of the grand Case
concerning the continuation of the legal Ceremonies, and were associated with
them in the Determination of it; Act. 15. The same to whom all the Apostolical
Epistles, excepting some to particular Persons, were written, and unto whom
such Directions were given, and Duties enjoined in them, as suppose not only a
Liberty and Ability to judge for themselves in all Matters of Faith and
Obedience, but also an especial Interest in the Order and Discipline of the
Church; Those who were to say unto Archippus; (their Bishop) take heed unto the
Ministry thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it; Col. 4. unto whom
of all sorts, it is commanded that they should examine and try Antichrists,
Spirits, and false Teachers, that is, all sorts of Heretics, Heresies and
Errors, 1 John chap. 2.3. etc. That People, who even in following Ages, adhered
unto the Faith and the Orthodox Profession of it, when almost all their Bishops
were become Arian Heretics; and kept their private Conventicles in opposition
unto them, at Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria and other places, and who
were so many of them burned here in England by their own Bishops on the
Judgment they made of Errors and Heresies. And if the present People with whom
the Dr. is acquainted be altogether unmeet for the Discharge of any of these
Duties, it is the fault of some body else, beside their own.

This Principle of the Reformation, in Vindication of the Rights, Liberties,
and Privileges of the Christian People, to judge and choose for themselves in
Matters of Religion, to join freely in those Church Duties which are required
of them, without which the work of it had never been carried on, we do abide by
and maintain. Yea we meet with no Opposition more fierce, than upon the Account
of our Asserting the Liberties and Right of the People in reference unto Church
Order and Worship. But I shall not be afraid to say, that as the Reformation
was begun and carried on, on this Principle, so when this People shall through
an Apprehension of their Ignorance, Weakness, and Unmeetness, to discern and
judge in Matters of Religion for themselves and their own Duty, be kept and
debarred from it; or when through their own Sloth, Negligence and Vitiousness,
they shall be really incapable to manage their own Interest in Church Affairs,
as being fit only to be governed, if not as brute Creatures, yet as Mute
Persons, and that these things are improved by the Ambition of the Clergy,
engrossing all things in the Church unto themselves, as they did in former
Ages, if the Old Popedom do not return, a new one will be erected, as bad as
the other.

Thirdly another Principle of the Reformation is, that there was not any
Catholic, Visible, Organical, Governing Church, traduced by Succession into
that of Rome, (...) all Church Power and Order was to be derived. I will not
say that this Principle was absolutely received by all the first Reformers here
in England; yet it was by the Generality of them in the other Parts of the
World. For as they constantly denied that there was any Catholic Church, but
that invisible of Elect Believers, allowing the External Denomination of the
Church unto the diffused Community of the baptized World; so believing and
professing that the Pope is Antichrist, that Rome is Mystical Babylon, the Seat
of the Apostatized Church of the Gentiles, devoted to destruction, they could
acknowledge no such Church state in the Roman Church, nor the derivation of any
Power and Order from it. So far as there is a Declension from this Principle,
so far the Cause of the Reformation is weakened, and the principal Reason of
Separation from the Roman Church is rejected, as shall be farther manifested,
if occasion require it.

This Principle we do firmly adhere unto; and not only so, but it is known,
that our fixed Judgment concerning the Divine Institution, Nature and Order of
Evangelical Churches, is such, as is utterly exclusive of the Roman Church, as
a body organized in and under the Pope and his Hierarchy, from any pretense
unto Church State, Order or Power. And it may be hence judged who do most
weaken the Cause of Reformation, we or some of them at least, by whom we are
opposed.

A second Absurdity that he charge on our way is, that it would make Union
among the Protestant Churches impossible, supposing them to remain as they are.
Sect. 24. page 186. To make good this Charge, he insists on two things.

(1.) That the Lutheran Churches have the same and more Ceremonies, and
unscriptural Impositions then our Church has.

(2.) That notwithstanding these things yet many learned Protestant Divines,
have pleaded for Union and Communion with them, which upon our Principles and
Suppositions, they could not have done. But whether they plead for Union and
Communion with them, by admitting into their Churches, and submitting unto
those Ceremonies and unscriptural Impositions, which is alone unto the Doctors
Purpose; or whether they judge their Members obliged to Communicate in local
Communion with them, under those Impositions, he does not declare. But whereas
neither we nor our Cause are in the least concerned in what the Dr. here insist
upon, yet because the Charge is no less, then that our Principles give
disturbance unto the Peace and Union of all Protestant Churches, I shall
briefly manifest that they are not only conducive thereunto, but such as
without which that Peace and Union will never be attained.

1. It is known unto all, that from the first Beginning of the Reformation,
there were Differences among the Churches, which departed from the Communion of
the Church of Rome. And as this was looked on as the greatest Impediment unto
the Progress of the Reformation, so it was not morally possible that in a work
of that Nature, begun and carried on by Persons of all for us, in many Nations,
of diverse Tongues and Languages, none of them being divinely inspired, that it
should otherwise fall out. God also in his Holy Wise Providence suffered it so
to be, for Causes known then to himself, but since sundry of them have been
made manifest in the Event. For whereas there was an Agreement in all
fundamental Articles of Faith among them, and all necessary means of
Salvation, a farther Agreement considering our Sloth, Negligence, and proness
of men to abuse security and Power, might have produced as evil effects, as the
Differences have done; For those which have been on the one hand, and those
which have been on the other, have been and would have been from the corrupt
Affections of the Minds of men, and their secular Interests.

2. These Differences were principally in or about some Doctrines of Faith,
whereon some fiery Spirits among them, took occasion mutually, and unjustly
enough, to charge each other with Heresy, especially was this done among the
Lutherans, whose writings are stuffed with that Charge, and miserable Attempts
to make it Good. There were also other Differences among them, with respect
unto Church Order, Rites, Ceremonies, and Modes of Worship. The Church of
England as unto the Government of the Church, and sundry other things, took a
way by it self, which at present we do not consider.

3. Considering the Agreement in all fundamental Articles of Faith between
these Churches thus at Difference, and of what great use their Union might be,
unto the Protestant Religion, both as unto its Spiritual and Political Interest
in this World, the effecting of such an Union among them, has been attempted
by many. Private Persons, Princes, Colloquies or Synods of some of the Parties
at variance have sedulously engaged herein. I wish they had never missed it, in
stating the nature of that Union which in this case is alone desirable and
alone attainable; Nor in the Causes of that disadvantagious Difference that was
between them. For hence it is come to pass, that although some Verbal
Compositions have sometimes by some been consented unto, yet all things
continue practically amongst them, as they were from the Beginning. And there
are yet Persons who are mannaging Proposals for such an Union, with great
Projection in point of Method for the compassing of it, and stating of the
Principles of Agreement, some whereof I have by me. But the present state of
things in Europe, with the Minds of Potentates not concerned in these things,
leave little encouragement for any such Attempt, or expectation of any Success.

4. After the trial and experience of an hundred and fifty years, it is
altogether in vain, to be expected that any farther Reconciliation or Union
should be effected between these Protestant Churches by either Parties
Relinquishment of the Doctrines they have so long taught, professed and
contended for, or of their Practice in Divine Worship, which they have so long
been accustomed unto. We may as well expect that a River should run backwards,
as expect any such things.

In this state of things, I say, the Principles we proceed upon, are the most
useful unto the procuring of Peace and Union among these Churches, in the state
wherein they are, and without which it will never be effected. I shall
therefore give an Account of those of them, which are of this Nature and
Tendency.

1. And the first is, the absolute necessity of a general Reformation in Life
and Manners of all sorts of Persons; belonging unto these Churches. It is
sufficiently known what a woeful Condition the Profession even of the Protestant
Religion is fallen into. How little evidence is there left of the Power of
Evangelical Grace, working in the Hearts of Men! what little diligence in the
Duties of Holiness and Righteousness! What a Deluge of all sorts of Vices has
overwhelmed the Nations! and what indications there are of the Displeasure of
God against us, on the account of these things! Who does not almost tremble at
them? Calvin, unto whom I was newly sent by our Reverend Author, in Answer to
them who pleaded for a Separation from a true Church, because of the Wickedness
of many of its Members, or any of them, adds unto it; It is a most just
Offense, and unto which there is too much occasion given in this Miserable Age.
Nor is it lawful to excuse our cursed sloth, which the Lord will not let go
unpunished, as he begins already to chastise us with grievous stripes. Woe
therefore unto us who by our dissolute licentiousness in flagitious sins, do
cause that the weak Consciences of men should be wounded for us. And if it were
so then, the matter is not much mended in the Age wherein we live. The Truth
is, Sin and Impiety are come to that height and impudence, Sensuality and
Oppression are so diffused among all sorts of Persons, Conformity unto the
fashion* of the World, become so universal, and the Evidences of Gods
Displeasure, with the Beginnings and Entrances of his Judgments, are so
displayed, as that if the Reformation pleaded for be not speedily endeavored,
and vigorously pursued, it will be too late to talk of Differences and Union;
Destruction will swallow up all. Until this be agreed on, until it be attempted
and effected in some good Measure, all endeavors for farther Union, whatever
there appearing success should be (as probably it will be very small) will be
of no use unto the honor of Religion, the Glory of Christ, nor Good of the
Souls of men. In the mean time Individual Persons will do well to take care of
themselves.

2. That all these differing Churches, and whilst these Differences do
continue, be taught to prefer their general Interest in opposition unto the
Kingdom of Satan and Antichrist in the World, before the lesser things wherein
they differ, and those occasional Animosities that will ensue upon them. It
has been observed in many places that the nearer some Men or Churches come
together in their Profession, the more distant they are in their Affections; as
the Lutherans in many places do more hate the Calvinists then the Papists, I
hope it is not so among us. This makes it evident that the Want of necessary
Peace and Union among Churches, does not proceed from the things themselves
wherein they differ, but from the corrupt Lusts, and Interests of the Persons
that differ. This Evil can no otherwise be cured, but by such a Reformation as
shall in some measure reduce Primitive Simplicity, Integrity and Love, such as
were among the Churches of the Converted Jews and Gentiles, when they walked
according unto the same Rule, in what they had attained, forbearing one another
in Love, as unto the things wherein they differed, Until this also be effected,
all endeavors for farther Union, whilst these Differences continue, (as they
are like to do, unless the whole frame of things in Europe should be changed by
some great Revolution) will be fruitless and Useless.

Were this conscientiously insisted on, out of a pure Love unto Jesus Christ,
with Zeal for his Glory, it would not only be of more use, then innumerable
wrangling Disputes about the points in Difference, but more then the exactest
Methods in contriving Formularies of Consent, or Colloquies, or Synodical
Conferences of the Parties at variance, with all their Solemnities, Orders,
Limitations, Precautions, Concessions and Orations. Let men say what they will,
it must be the Revival, Flourishing and Exercise of Evangelical Light, Faith
and Love, that shall heal the Differences and breaches that are among the
Churches of Christ; nor shall any thing else be honored with any great
influence into that work.

3. That all Communion of Churches as such, consists in the Communion of Faith
and Love, in the Administration of the same Sacraments, and common Advice in
things of common concerment. All these may be observed, when for sundry
Reasons, the Members of them cannot have local presential Communion in some
Ordinances, with each Church distinctly. If this Truth were well established
and consented unto, men might be easily convinced, that there is nothing
wanting unto that Evangelical Union among Churches which the Gospel requires,
but only their own humble, holy, peaceable Christian walking in their several
Places and Stations. But where men put their own Interests and Possession of
present Advantages, clothed under the Pretense of things necessary thereunto,
into Conditions of Communion, or divest it of that latitude wherein Christ has
left it, by new Limitations of their own, it will never be attained on the true
Evangelical Principles, that it must proceed upon. For however any may be
displeased with it, I must assert and maintain, that there is nothing required
by our Lord Jesus Christ, unto this end of the Communion of Churches, nor to
any other end of Church Order or Worship whatever, but that only in whose
Observance and Performance, there is an actual Exercise of Evangelical Grace in
Obedience unto him.

4. That all Private Members of these several Churches which agree in the
Communion before mentioned, be left unto their own Liberty and Consciences, to
communicate in any of those Churches, either occasionally or in a fixed way and
manner. Neither Orders nor compulsory Decrees will be useful in this Matter, in
comparison of their own declared Liberty. And so it was among the Primitive
Churches.

5. Where Men are invincibly hindered from total communion with any Church, by
Impositions which they cannot comply withal without Sin, or by continuing in
it, are deprived of the due means of their Edification, the Churches whereunto
they did belong refusing all Reformation; it is lawful for them in Obedience
unto the Law of Christ, to reform themselves, and to make use of the means
appointed by him for their Edification, abiding constantly in the Communion of
all true Churches before described. I confess this is that which we cannot
digest; namely, an Imagination that the Lord Jesus Christ has obliged his
Disciples, those that believe in him, to abide always in such Societies, as
wherein, not only things are imposed on their Obedience and Observance which he
has not commanded, but they are also forced to live in the Neglect of
expressed Duties which he requires of them, and the want of that means of
their own Edification, which without the restraint at present upon them, they
might enjoy according unto his Mind and Will. Believers were not made for
Churches* nor for the advantage of them that Rule in them; but Churches were
made for Believers and their Edification, nor are of any use farther then they
tend thereunto.

These are the Premises whereon we proceed in all that we do; and they are so
far from being Obstructive of the Peace and Union of the Protestant Churches,
as that without them, they will never be promoted nor attained. And I do beg of
this Worthy Person that he would not despise these things, but know assuredly,
that nothing would be so effectual to procure the Union he desires, as an
Universal Reformation of all sorts of Persons, according unto the Rule and Law
of Christ, which it may be, no man has greater Ability and Opportunity in
conjunction for, than himself. For woe be unto us, if whilst we contend about
outward Peace in smaller things, we neglect to make Peace with God, and so
expose our selves and the whole Nation unto his desolating Judgment, which
seem already to be impendent over us.

The third Absurdity which he charge on our Practice is, that it will
justify the ancient Schisms which have been always condemned in the Christian
Church; and in the mannagement of this Charge, he proceeds, if I mistake not,
with more then ordinary vehemence and severity, though it be a Matter wherein
we are least of all concerned.

To make Effectual this Charge, He first affirms in general, that setting aside
a few things, they pleaded the same Reasons for their Separation, as I do for
ours; Which how great a Mistake it is shall be manifested immediately.
S^condly, He gives Instances in several Schisms, that were so condemned by the
Christian Church, and whose Practice is justified by us.

In Answer hereunto, I shall first premise some things in general, showing the
Insufficiency of this Argument to prove against us the Charge of Schism, and
then consider the Instances produced by him. I say,

1. In times of Decay, the declining times of Churches or states, it cannot be,
but that some will be uneasy in their Minds, although they know not how to
remedy what is amiss, nor it may be fix on the particulars which are the right
and true Causes of the state which they find troublesome unto them. And whilst
it is so with them, it is not to be admired at, that some Persons do fall into
irregular Attempts for the redressing of what is amiss. The Church, where the
instances insisted on happened, was falling into a Mysterious Decay from its
original Institution, Order and Rule, which afterward increased more and more
continually. But all being equally involved in the same Declension, the
Remedies which they proposed who were uneasy either in themselves or in the
manner of their Application, were worse then the Disease; which yet lying
uncured and continually increasing, proved in the issue the Ruin of them all.
But here lay the Original of the Differences and Schisms which fell out in the
3 d, 4 th, and 5 th Centuries; that having all in some Measure departed from
the Original Institution, Rule and Order of Evangelical Churches, in sundry
things, and cast themselves into new forms and Orders, their Differences and
Quarrels related all unto them, and could have had no such occasion, had they
kept themselves unto their Primitive Constitution. Wherefore those Schisms
which were said to be made by them that continued sound in the Faith, as those
of the Andeans, and Meletians as by some is pretended, and Johannites at
Constantinople, with sundry other, seeing they disserted not any Order of
Divine Institution, but another which the Churches were insensibly fallen into;
No Judgment can be made upon a mere Separation, whether of the Parties at
Difference were to blame; I am sure enough that sometimes neither of them could
be excused. Whether the Causes, Reasons, Ends, Designs, and ways of the
Mannagement of those Differences that were between them, on which Schisms in
their present Order did ensue, were just, regular, according to the Mind of
Christ, proceeding from Faith and Love, is that whose Determination must fix
aright the Guilt of the Divisions that were among them. And whereas we judge
most of those who so separated from the Church of old, as is here alleged, to
have failed in these things, and therein to have contracted Guilt unto
themselves, as occasioning unwarrantable Divisions, and missing wholly the only
way of Cure for what was really blameworthy in others; Yet whereas we allow
nothing to be Schism properly, but what is contrary to Christian Love, and
destructive of some Institution of Christ, we are not much concerned who was in
the Right or Wrong, in those Contests which fell out among the Orthodox
themselves, but only as they were carried on unto a total Renunciation of all
Communion whatever; but only that which was enclosed unto their own Party.

2. To Evidence that we give the least countenance unto the ancient Schisms,
or do contract the Guilt with the Authors of them, the thing aimed at, there
are three things incumbent on him to prove.

1. That our Parochial Churches from whom we do refrain actual presential
Communion in all Ordinances, where it is required by Law, which cannot be many
and but one at one time, do succeed into the room of that Church, in a
Separation from which, those Schisms did consist. For we pass no Judgment on
any other Church; but what concerns our selves as unto present Duty, though
that in a Nation may be extended unto many or all of the same sort. But these
Schisms consisted in a professed Separation from the whole Catholic Church,
that is, all Christians in the World, who joined not with them, in their
Opinions and Practices, and from the whole Church state then passant and
allowed. But our Author knows full well, that there are others, who long before
our Parochial Churches, do lay claim unto the absolute enclosure of this Church
state unto themselves, and thereon condemn both him and us, and all the
Protestants in the World, of the same Schism that those of old were guilty of;
especially they make a continual Clamor about the Novatians and Donatists. I
know that he is able to dispossess the Church of Rome from that Usurpation of
the State and Rights of the ancient Catholic Church, from whence those
Separations were made, and it has been sufficiently done by others. But so
soon as we have cast that out of Possession, to bring in our Parochial
Assemblies into the room of it, and to press the Guilt of Separation from them,
with the same Reasons and Arguments, as we were all of us but newly pressed
withal by the Romanists, namely, that hereby we give countenance unto them, yea
do the same things with them, who made Schisms in Separating from the
Catholic Church of old, is somewhat severe and unequal.

Wherefore unless the Church from which they separated, which was the whole
Catholic Church in the World, not agreeing and acting with them, and those
Parochial Assemblies from whose Communion we refrain, are the same and of the
same consideration, nothing can be argued from those ancient Schisms against
us, nor is any countenance given by us unto them, For if it be asked of us,
whether it be free or lawful, for Believers to join in Society and full
Communion with other Churches, besides those that are of our way, and especial
Communion, we freely answer, that we no way doubt of it, nor do judge them for
their so doing.

2. It must be proved unto the End proposed, that the Occasions and Reasons of
their Separation of old, were the same, or of the same nature only, with those
which we plead, for our refraining Communion from Parochial Assemblies. Now
though the Dr. here makes a flourish with some Expressions about Zeal,
Discipline, Purity of the Church, Edification (which he will not find in any of
their Pretenses) yet in truth there is not one thing alleged, wherein there is
a Coincidence between the Occasions and Reasons pleaded by them, and ours.

It is known that the principal thing in general which we insist upon, is the
unwarrantable Imposition of unscriptural Terms and Conditions of Communion
upon us; was there any such thing pleaded by them that made the Schisms of
Old? indeed they were all of them imposers, and separated from the Church
because they would not submit unto their Impositions. Some Bishops, or some
that would have been Bishops but could not, entertaining some new Conceit of
their own, which they would have imposed on all others, being not submitted
unto therein, were the Causes of all those Schisms which were justly esteemed
Criminal. So was it with the Novatians and Donatists in an especial manner.
Even the great Tertullian (though no Bishop) left the Communion of the Church
on this Ground. For because they would not admit of the strict Observance of
some Austere Severities in Fasting, Abstinence from sundry Meats, and
Watching, with the like, which he esteemed necessary, though no way warranted
by Scripture Rule or Example, he utterly renounced their Communion; and
countenanced himself by adhering unto the Dotages of Montanus. It is true, some
of them contended for a Severity of Discipline in the Church, but they did it
not, upon any pretense of the Neglect of it in them unto whom the
Administration of it was committed; but for the want of establishing a false
Principle, Rule, or Erroneous Doctrine which they advanced; namely, that the
most sincere penitents were never more to be admitted into Ecclesiastical
Communion; whereby they did not establish but overthrow one of the Principal
ends of Church Discipline. They did not therefore press for the Power or the
Use of the Keys, as is pretended, but advanced a false Doctrine in prejudice
both unto the Power and Use of them. They pretended indeed unto the Purity of
the Church, not that there were none impure, wicked, and hypocritical among
them, but that none might be admitted who had once fallen, though really made
pure by sincere Repentance. This was their Zeal for Purity. If a Man were
overtaken, if they could catch him in such a fault, as by the Rules of the
passaint Discipline, he was to be cast out of the Church, there they had him
safe for ever. No Evidence of the most sincere Repentance, could prevail for a
Readmission into the Church. And because other Churches would admit them, they
renounced all Communion with them, as no Churches of Christ. Are these our
Principles, are these our Practices? do we give any countenance unto them by
any thing we say or do? I somewhat wonder that the Dr. from some general
Expressions, and casting their Pretenses under new Appearances should seem to
think that there is the least Coincidence, between what they insisted on, and
what we plead in our own Defense. He may see now more fully, what are the
Reasons of our Practice, and I hope thereon will be of another Mind; not as
unto our Cause in general, which I am far enough from the expectation of, but
as unto this invidious Charge of giving Countenance unto the Schisms condemned
of old in the Church. And we shall see immediately, what were the Occasions of
those Schisms which we are as remote from giving countenance unto, as unto the
Principles and Reasons which they pleaded in their own Justification.

3. It ought also to be proved, that the Separation which is charged on us, is
of the same nature with that charged on them of old, for otherwise we cannot be
said to give any Countenance unto what they did. For it is known they so
separated from all other Churches in the World, as to confine the Church of
Christ unto their own Party, to condemn all others, and to deny Salvation unto
all that abode in their Communion, which the Donatists did with the greatest
fierceness. This was that which if any thing, did truly and properly
constitute them Schismatics; as it does those also, who deny at this day,
Church State and Salvation, unto such Churches as have not Diocesan Bishops.
Now there is no Principle in the World that we do more abhor. We grant a Church
state unto all, however it may be defective or corrupted, and a possibility of
Salvation unto all their Members, which are not gathered in pernicious Errors,
overthrowing the Foundation, nor Idolatrous in their Worship, and who have a
lawful Ministry with sufficient means for their Edification, though low in its
Measures and Degrees. We judge none but with respect unto our own Duty, as unto
the Impositions attempted to be laid on us, and the Acts of Communion required
of us; which we cannot avoid; Nor can any man else, let him pretend what he
will to the contrary, avoid the making of a Judgment for himself in these
things, unless he be brutish, These things are sufficient to evidence that
there is not the least countenance given unto the ancient Schisms by any
Principles of ours; yet I shall add some farther Considerations on the
Instances he gives unto the same Purpose.

The first is, that the Novatians whose Pretenses were the Discipline and
Purity of the Churches, wherein he says, there was a Concurrence of Dr. OF s
Pleas; Zeal for Reformation of Discipline, the greater Edificatian of the
People, and the asserting of their Right in choosing such a Pastor as was
likely to promote their Edification. I am sorry that Interest and Party should
sway with learned Men, to seek Advantages unto their Cause so unduly* The story
in short is this; Novatus or Novatianus rather, being disappointed in his
ambitious Design to have been chosen Bishop of the Church of Rome, Cornelius
being chosen by much the Major Part of the Church, betook himself to indirect
means to weaken and invalidate the Election of Cornelius. And this he did by
raising a new Principle of false Doctrine, whereunto he as falsely accommodated
the Matter of Fact. The Error he broached and promoted was that there was no
place for Repentance (such as whereon they should be admitted into the Church)
unto them who had fallen into sin after Baptism, nor as some add any Salvation
to be obtained by them who had fallen in the time of Persecution. This the
ancient Church looked on as a pestilent Heresy; and as such was it condmened
in a considerable Counsel at Rome with Cornelius. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43; where
also is reported the Decree which they made in the Case, wherein they call his
Opinion Cruel or inhumane and contrary to Brotherly Love. As such it is
strenuously confuted by Cyprian Epist. 82. ad Antonianum. But because the
Church would not submit unto this Novel false Opinion of his, contrary to the
Scripture and the Discipline of the Church, he and all his Followers separated
from all the Churches in the World, and rebaptized all that were baptized in
the Orthodox Churches, they denying unto them the means of Salvation. Cyprian
ad Julian: Epist. 73. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 8. That which was most probably false
also in Matter of Fact when this foolish Opinion, which Dionysius of Alexandria
in his Epistle to Dionysius of Rome, calls a most profane Doctrine, reflecting
unmerciful cruelty on our most gracious Lord Jesus Christ; Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
8. was invented to be subservient unto, was that many of those by whom
Cornelius was chosen Bishop, were such as had denied the Faith under the
Persecution of Decius the Emperor. This also was false in Matter of Fact. For
although that Church continued in the ancient Faith and practice of receiving
penitents after their Fall, yet there were no such number of them, as to
influence the Election of Cornelius. So Cyprian testifies, Factus est
Cornelius Episcopus, de Dei and Christi ejus judicio, de Clericorum poene
omnium Testimonio, de suffragio Plebis, etc. Epist. 52. On that false Opinion
and this frivolous Pretense they continued their Schism; Hence afterward,
when Constantine the Emperor spoke with Acesius the Bishop of the Novatians at
Constantinople finding him sound in the Faith of the Trinity, which was then
impugned by Arius, he asked him why then he did not communicate with the
Church; whereon he began to tell him a story of what had happened in the time
of Decius the Emperor, pleading nothing else for himself; the Emperor replying
only, O Acesius, set up a ladder and climb alone by thy self into Heaven, left
him. Socrat. lib. 1: cap. 7.

This Error endeavored to be imposed on all Churches, this false Pretense in
Matter of Fact, with the following Pride in the condemnation of all other
Churches, denying unto them the lawful use of the Sacraments, and rebaptizing
them who were baptized in them, do if we may believe the Doctor herein contain
all my Pleas for the forbearance of Communion with Parochial Assemblies, and
have countenance given unto them by our Principles and Practices.

Of the Meletians whom he reckons up in the next place, no certain Account can
be given, Epiphanius reports Meletus himself to have been a Good honest
Orthodox Bishop; and in the Difference between him and Peter Bishop of
Alexandria to have been more for Truth, as the other was more for Love and
Charity. And according unto him, it was Peter and not Meletus that began the
Schism; Haeres. 68. N. 2, 3. But others give quite another account of him.
Socrates affirms that in time of Persecution he had sacrificed to Idols, and
was for that Reason deposed from his Episcopacy by Peter of Alexandria; Lib. 3.
cap. 6. Hence he was enraged against him, and filled all Thebais and Egypt
with Tumults against him, and the Church of Alexandria, with intolerable
Arrogance, because he was convicted of sundry Wickednesses by Peter. Theod.
Hist. lib. 1. cap. 8. And his Followers quickly complied with the Arians for
their Advantage. The Error he proceeded on according to Epiphanius, was the
same with that of Novatus; which how it could be, if he himself had fallen in
Persecution, and Sacrificed, as Socrates relates, I cannot understand. This
Schism of Bishop Meletius also it is thought meet to be judged, that we should
give Countenance unto.

All things are in like manner uncertain concerning Audus and his Followers,
whom he mentions in the next place. The Man is represented by Epiphanius to
have been a Good Man, of an holy Life, sound in the Faith, full of Zeal and
Love to the Truth. But finding many things amiss in the Church, among the
Clergy and People, he freely reproved them, for Covetousness, Luxury, and
Disorders in Ecclesiastical Affairs. Hereon he stirred up the hatred of many
against himself, as Chrysostom did for the same cause afterward at
Constantinople. Hereupon he was vexed, persecuted and greatly abused, all which
he bare patiently and continued in the Discharge of his Duty, as it fell out
also with Chrysostom. Nevertheless he abode firmly and tenaciously in the
Communion of the Church; but was at length cast out, as far as it appears by
him, for the honest discharge of his Duty; whereon he gathered a great Party
unto himself. But Theodoret and others, affirm him to have been the Author of
the impious heresy of the Anthropomorphitae, his principal followers being
those Monks of Egypt which afterward made such Tumults in defense of that
foolish Imagination; and that this was the Cause why he was cast out of the
Church, and set up a Party of the same Opinion with him, lib. 4. cap. 10. Yea
he also ascribes unto him some foolish Opinions of the Manichees. What is our
concernment in these things I cannot imagine.

Eustathius the Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, and his Followers, are also
instanced in, as Orthodox Schismatics, and as such were condemned in a Council
at Gongrae in Paphlagonia. But indeed before that Council, Eustathius had been
condemned by his own Father Eulanius and other Bishops, at Caesarea in
Cappadocia. And he was so for sundry foolish Opinions and evil Practices,
whereby he deserved to be so dealt withal. It does not unto me appear certainly
whether he fell into those Opinions before his Rejection at Caesarea, where he
was principally it not only charged with his undecent and fantastical habit and
Garments. Wherefore at the Council of Gangrae. he was not admitted to make any
Apology for himself, nor could be heard, because he had innovated many things,
after his Deposition at Caesarea; such as forbidding of Marriage, shaving of
Women, denying the lawfulness of Priests keeping their Wives, who were married
before their Ordination, getting away Servants from their Masters, and the
like; Socrat. Hist. lib. 2. chap. 3. These were his Pretenses of Sanctity and
Purity, as the Dr. acknowledges; and I appeal unto his Ingenuity and candor,
whether any Countenance be given unto such Opinions and Practices thereon, by
any thing we say or do.

This Instance and some others of an alike Nature, the Doctor affirms that he
produced in his Sermon, but that they were gently passed over by my self and
Mr. B. I confess, I took no notice of them, because I was satisfied that the
cause under Consideration was no way concerned in them. And the Dr. might to as
Good Purpose have instanced in forty other Schisms, made for the most Part by
the Ambition of Bishops, in the Churches of Alexandria, Antioch,
Constantinople, Rome, and sundry other places; yea, in that made by Epiphanius
himself at Constantinople, upon as weighty a Cause, as that of those who
contended about, and strove for and against the driving of sheep over the
Bridge, where there were none present.

The story of the Luciferians, is not worth repeating; In short, Lucifer the
Bishop of Caralli in Sardinia, being angry that Paulinus whom he had ordained
Bishop at Antioch was not received, fell into great dissension with Eusebius
Bishop of Vercells in Italy, who had been his Companion in Banishment, because
he approved not what he had done at Antioch; And continuing to contend for his
own Bishop, it occasioned a great Division among the People, whereon he went
home to his own Place, leaving behind him a few followers, who wrangled for a
time about the Ordination of Bishops by Arians, by whose means Lucifer had been
banished, and so after a while disappeared.

I had almost missed the Instance of the Donatists. But the story of them is so
well known, that it will not bear the Repetition. For although there be no
mention of them in Socrates or Zozoman, nor the History of Theodoret, yet all
things that concerned them are so fully declared in the Writings of Austin and
Optatus against them as there needs no other account of them. And this Instance
of an Heretical Schism, is that which the Papists vehemently urge against the
Church of England itself, and all other Protestants. Here their Weapon is
borrowed for a little while, to give a wound unto our Cause, but in vain. Yet I
know full well that it is easier for some men on their Principles, to flourish
with this Weapon against us, than to defend themselves against it in the hands
of the Papists. In brief these Donatists were upon the matter of the same
Opinion with the Novatians; and as these grounded their dissension, on the
receiving those into the Church who had fallen and sacrificed under Decius; so
did these on a pretense of severity against those who had been Traditors, under
Maximinus. Upon this Pretense improved by many false Allegations, Donatus and
those that followed him rejected Cecilianus who was lawfully chosen and
ordained Bishop of Carthage, setting up one Majorinus in opposition unto him.
Not succeeding herein, on this foolish unproved Pretense, that Cecilianus had
been ordained by Traditor, they rejected the Communion of all the Churches in
the World, confined the whole Church of Christ unto their own Party; denied
Salvation unto any other, rebaptized all that came unto them from other
Churches, and together with a great number of Bishops that joined with them,
fell into most extravagant Exorbitances.

Upon the Consideration of these Schisms, the Dr. concludes, that on these
Grounds there has scarce been any considerable Schism in the Christian
Church, but may be justified upon Dr. OF s Reasons, for Separation from our
Church. Concerning which I must take the Liberty to say, that I do not remember
that ever I read in any Learned Author, an Inference made, or Conclusion
asserted, that had so little countenance given unto it by the Premises whence
it is inferred, as there is into this, by the Instances before insisted on,
whence it is pretended to be educed.

All that is of Argument in this story, is this, that there were of old some
Bishops, with one or two who would have been Bishops, and could not, who to
exalt and countenance themselves against those who were preferred to
Bishoprics, before them, and above them, invented and maintained false
doctrinal Principles, the confession whereof they would have imposed on other
Churches; and because they were not admitted, they separated at once from all
other Churches in the World, but their own, condemning them as no Churches, as
not having the Sacraments or means of Salvation; for which they were condemned
as Schismatics; therefore those who own not Subjection to Diocesan Bishops, by
virtue of any Institution or Command of Christ, who refrain Communion from
Parochial Assemblies, because they cannot without Sin to themselves, comply
with all things imposed on them in the Worship of God, and Ecclesiastical Rule,
without judging their state, or the Salvation of their Members, are in like
manner as they, guilty of Schism.

But we have fixed grounds whereon to Try, Examine, Judge and Condemn all
Schisms that are justly so called, all such as those before mentioned. If
Separations arise and proceed from Principles of false Doctrine and Errors,
like those of the Novatians and Donatists; if they are occasioned by Ambition
and desire of Pre-eminence, like those that fell out among the Bishops of those
days, when their Parishes and claims were not regulated by the Civil Power as
now they are; If they do so from a Desire to impose Principles and Practices
not warranted in the Scripture, on others, as it was with Tertullian; If for
slight Reasons they rend and destroy that Church state and order which
themselves approve of, as it was with all the ancient Schismatics, who were
Bishops, or would feign to have been; if those that make them or follow in them
deny Salvation unto all that join not with them, and condemn all other Churches
as being without Gods Covenant, and the Sacraments, as did the Donatists, and
those do, who deny these things unto all Churches who have not Diocesan
Bishops; if there be not a sufficient justifiable Cause pleaded for it, that
those who make such a separation cannot abide in the Communion which they
forsake, without wounding their own Consciences, and do give Evidences of their
abiding in the Exercise of Love toward all the true Disciples of Christ, we
are satisfied that we have a Rule infallibly directing us, to make a Judgment
concerning it.

Our Author adds, Sect. 26. p. 197. Another Argument against this course of
separation is, that these Grounds will make separation endless; which is to
suppose all the Exhortations of the Scripture to Peace and Unity among
Christians, useless. But why so? Is there nothing in the Authority of Christ,
and the sense of the Account which is to be given unto him, nothing in the Rule
of the Word, nothing in the works of the Ministry, and exercise of Gospel
Discipline, to keep professed Disciples of Christ unto their Duty, and within
the bounds of order Divinely prescribed unto them, unless they are fettered and
staked down with humane Laws and Constitutions? Herein I confess I differ, and
shall do so whilst I am in this World from our Reverend Author and others. To
say as he does, (upon a supposition of the taking away of humane Impositions,
Laws and Canons) that there are no bounds set unto separation but what the
fancies of men will dictate unto them, is dishonorable unto the Gospel and
somewhat more. To suppose that the Authority of Christ, the Rule of the Word,
and the Work of the Ministry, are not sufficient to prescribe bounds unto
separation efficaciously affecting the Consciences of Beleivers; or that any
other bounds can be assigned as obligatory unto their Consciences, is what
cannot be admitted. The Lord Christ has commanded Love and Union among his
Disciples; he has ordained order and Communion in his Churches, he has given
unto them and limited their Power, he has prescribed* Rules whereby they and
all their Members ought to walk; he has forbidden all Schisms and Divisions,
he has appointed and limited all necessary separations, and has truly given
all the bounds unto it, that the Consciences of men are or can be affected
withal. But then it is said, if this be all, separation will be endless, if
such a separation be intended as is an unlawful Schism, I say, it may be it
will, even as Persecution and other evils, sins and wickednesses will be,
notwithstanding his severe Prohibition of them. What he has done is the only
means to preserve his own Disciples from all sinful separation, and is
sufficient thereunto. Herein lies the Original mistake in this matter; we have
lost the Apprehension that the Authority of Christ in the Rule of his Word, and
Works of his Spirit, is every way sufficient for the Guiding, Governing, and
Preserving of his Disciples, in the Church Order by him prescribed, and the
observance of the Duties by him commanded. It has been greatly lost in the
World for many Ages, and therefore instead of Faithful Ministerial Endeavors
to enforce a sense of it on the Consciences of all Christians, they have been
let loose from it, through a confidence in other devises, to keep them unto
their Duty and Order. And if these devises, be they Ecclesiastical Canons or
Civil Penalties, be not enforced on them all, the World is made to believe,
that they are left unto the dictates of their own fancies and Imaginations, as
if they had no concern in Christ or his Authority, in this matter But for my
part I shall never desire, nor endeavor to keep any from Schism or
separation, but by the ways and means of Christ's appointment, and by a sense of
his. Authority on their own Consciences.

The remainder of his Discourse on this Head, consists in a lepid Dram^tical
Oration, framed and feigned for one of his Opposers; wherein he makes him
undertake the patronage of Schism before Cyprian and Austi^. The Learned Person
intended is very well able to defend and vindicate himself, which I suppose
also he will do. In the mean time I cannot but say two things.

(1.) That the Imposition on him of extenuating the Guilt of any real Schism,
is that which none of his Words do give the least countenance unto.

(2.) That the Doctors attempt in his feigned Oration to accommodate, his
Principles, or Ours, unto the case of the Donatists for their Justification,
(the weakness whereof is evident to every one who knows any thing of the case
of the Donatists,) is such an instance of the Power of Interest, a design to
maintain a Cause, causelessly undertaken, by all manner of Artifices and
Pretenses, prevailing in the minds of men otherwise Wise and Sober, as is to be
lamented.

We come at length in the 5th. place. Sect, 28. p. 209. unto that which is
indeed of more importance duly to be considered, then all that went before. For
as our Author observes, it is that, wherein the Consciences of men are
concerned. This Argument therefore he takes from the Obligation which lies upon
all Christians to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church. For the
confirmation of this Argument, and the Application of it unto the case of them
who refrain from total Communion with our Paroc^ial Assemblies which alone is
the case in hand, he lays down sundry suppositions, which I shall consider in
their Order, although they may be all granted without any disadvantage unto our
Cause. But they will be so the better, when they are rightly stated.

1. His first supposition is, that Christians are under the strictest
Obligations to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church.

This being the foundation of all that follows, it must be rightly stated. And
to that end three things may be enquired into.

(1.) What is that Church, whose Peace and Unity we are obliged to preserve.
For there are those who lay the firmest claim unto the Name, Power, and
Privileges of the Church, with whom we are obliged to have neither Peace nor
Unity in the Worship of God.

(2.) What is that Peace and Unity which we are so obliged to preserve.

(3.) By what means they are to be preserved.

1. We are obliged to follow Peace with all men, to seek Peace and pursue it,
and if it be possible to live peaceably with all men.

2. There is a peculiar Obligation upon us, to seek the Peace and prosperity of
the whole visible Church of Christ on Earth, and therein as we have Opportunity
to do good unto the whole household of Faith. And considering what Differences,
what Divisions, what Exasperations there are among Professors of the Name of
Christ all the World over, to abide steadfast in seeking the Good of them all,
and doing Good unto them, as we have opportunity, is as evident an indication
of Gospel Love, as any thing else whatever can be.

(3.) As unto particular Churches, there is an especial Obligation upon us, to
preserve their Peace and Unity from our own voluntary consent, to walk in them
in Obedience unto the Commands of Christ. Where this is not, we are left unto
the general Obligation of seeking the Peace of all men, and of the whole
professing Church in an especial manner, but have no other peculiar obligation
thereunto. For being cast into Churches of this or that form, merely by humane
Constitutions and Laws, or by inveterate Traditions, lays no new obligation
upon any to seek their Peace and Unity; but whilst they abide in them, they are
left unto the influence of other general Commands which are to be applied unto
their present circumstances. For into what state or condition soever Christians
are cast, they are obliged to live peaceably whilst they abide in it.

2. It may be enquired what is that Peace and Unity of the Church, that we are
bound to preserve. There may be an Agreement, with some kind of Peace and Unity
in Evil. They are highly pretended unto in the Church of Rome, but they are so
in Idolatry, Superstition and Heresy. There may be Peace and Unity, in any
false and heretical Church; the Unity of Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Evil. But
the Peace and Unity which we are obliged to observe in particular Churches, is
the Consent and Agreement of the Church in general and all the Members of it,
walking under the conduct of this Guide in a due observation of all the
Institutions and Commands of Christ, performing toward the whole and each
other, the mutual Duties required by him, from a Principle of Faith and Love.
This, and this alone, is that Unity and Peace, which we are peculiarly obliged
to preserve in particular Churches, what is more then this, relates unto the
general Commands of Love, Unity and Peace before mentioned.

3. Wherefore 3dly, This states the means whereby we are to preserve this Peace
and Unity; for we are not to endeavor it,

(1.) By a Neglect or Omission of the observance of any of the Commands of
Christ. Nor,

(2.) By doing or practicing any thing in divine Worship which he has not
appointed. Nor,

(3.) By partaking in other men's sins, through a neglect of our own duty. Nor,

(4.) By foregoing the means of our own Edification which he Commands us to
make use of. For these things have no Tendency to the Preservation of that
Peace, and his third supposition, is, That nothing can discharge a Christian
from the Obligation to Communion, with his fellow members, but what is allowed
by Christ or his Apostles, as a sufficient Reason of it. It is fully agreed
unto, where a man is a member of any Church of Divine Institution by his own
Consent, and virtual consideration, nothing can discharge him, from Communion
with that Church, but what is allowed by Christ as a sufficient Reason for it.

But a little farther Enquiry may be made into these things; It was before
asserted that all things lawful were to be done for the Preservation of the
Peace of the Church. Here it is pleaded that there are many Obligations on us,
to preserve its Peace and Unity. I desire to know, unto whom these Rules are
Obligatory? who they are that ought to yield Obedience unto them? If it be
said, that these Rules are not prescribed unto the Rulers and Guides of the
Church, but unto them only who are under their Conduct, I desire a proof of it,
for at the first veiw it is very absurd. For as the preservation of the Peace
and Unity of the Church, is properly incumbent on them who are the Rulers of
it, and it is continually pleaded by them that so it does, so all the Rules
given for that End, do or should principally and in the first place, affect
them, and their Consciences. And these are the Rules of their Duty herein which
are laid down by the Dr. I desire therefore to know, that since there are such
obligations on us to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church, that for that
End we must do what we lawfully may; whether the same Rule does not oblige us
to forbear the doing of what we may lawfully forbear, with respect unto the
same End. Nay this Obligation of forbearing what we may do, and yet may forbear
to do without sin, for the Peace and Unity of the Church, especially when any
would be offended with our doing that which we may lawfully forbear to do, is
exemplified in the Scripture, confirmed by Commands and Instances, is more
highly rational, and less exposed unto danger in Practice, than the other of
doing what we can.

Now things that are not necessary in themselves, nor necessary to be observed
by a just Scandal and Offense in case of their omission, are things that may be
Lawfully forborne. Suppose now the Rules insisted on to be given principally and
in the first place unto the Rulers of the Church; I desire to know whether they
are not obliged by them, for the preservation of the Peace and Unity of the
Church, to forbear the imposition of such things on the practice of the whole
Church in the Worship of God, as being no way necessary in themselves, nor such
whose omission or the omission of whose Imposition, can give Scandal or Offense
unto any; if they are obliged by them so to do, it will be evident where the
blame of the Division amongst us must Lie. To say they are not obliged hereunto
by virtue of these Rules, is to say, that although the preservation of the
Peace and Unity of the Church be incumbent on them in a particular manner, and
the chief of them can assign no other End of the office they lay Claim unto,
but only its expediency, or as is pretended, its necessity unto the
preservation of the Peace and Unity of the Church; Yet they are not by virtue
of any Divine Rules obliged thereunto. But it seems to me somewhat unequal,
that in this Contest about the preservation of the Peace of the Church, we
should be bound by Rules to do all that we can, whatever it be, and those who
differ from us, be left absolutely at their liberty, so as not to be obliged to
forbear, what they may lawfully so do. But to proceed.

Upon these suppositions and in the Confirmation of them, the Dr. produces a
passage out of Irenaeus, whose impartial Consideration he charge on us with
great Solemnity, as we Love our own Souls. Now although that passage in that
great and Holy Person, be not new unto me, having not only read it many a time
in his book, but frequently met with it urged by Papists against all
Protestants. Yet upon the Drs. intimation, I have given it again the
Consideration required; The Words as they Lie in the Author are to this purpose.

We shall also judge them, who make Schisms being vain (qui sunt immanes, or
inanes) not having the Love of God, rather considering their own Profit, than
the Unity of the Church; who for small or any causes, rend and divide the
Glorious body of Christ, and as much as in them lies destroy it; speaking Peace
but designing War, straining at a Gnat, and swallowing a Camel. For there can
be no rebuke of things by them, to equal the mischief of Schism. Lib. 4. cap.
62.

I know not why he should give us such a severe Charge for the impartial
Consideration of these words; that as we love our souls; we should impartially
and without prejudice consider them? We hope that out of Love to the Truth, the
Glory of Christ, and Care of our own Souls, we do so Consider, and have long
since so considered, whatever belongs unto the Cause wherein we engaged, and
the Oppositions that are made unto it. Nor will we be offended with any, that
shall yet Call on us to persist and proceed in the same way. But why such a
Charge should be laid on us with respect unto these words of Irenaeus, I know
not. For although we greatly value the Words and Judgment of that Holy Person,
that great Defender of the Mystery and Truth of the Gospel, and of the Liberty
of the Churches from unwarrantable impositions, yet it is the Word of Christ
and his Apostles alone, whereby we must be regulated and determined in these
things, if we Love our own souls.

Besides! What are we Concerned in them; is every Separation from a Church a
Schism? Our Author shows the contrary immediately; Is refraining Communion in
a Church state not of Divine Institution, and in things not prescribed by the
Lord Christ in the Worship of God, holding Communion in Faith and Love with all
the true Churches of Christ in the World, a damnable Schism, or any Schism at
all? has the Reverend Author in his whole Book once attempted to prove it to
be so, though this be the whole of the matter in difference between us? is our
Forbearance of Communion in Parochial Assemblies upon the Reasons before
pleaded, especially that of humane impositions, of the same Nature with the
Schism from the whole Catholic Church, without pretense of any such
Impositions? Does he judge us to be such as have no Love unto God? such as
prefer our own profit before the Unity of the Church? I heartily wish and pray,
that he may never have a share in that profit and advantage which we have made
unto our selves by our principles and practice. Poverty, Distress. Ruin to our
Families, Dangers, Imprisonments, Revilings with Contemptuous reproaches,
Comprize the profit we have made unto our selves. Is our refraining Communion
in some outward Order, Modes and Rites of Men's institution, our want of
conscientious submission unto the Courts of Chancellours, Commissaries,
Officials, etc. a rending and destroying of the glorious Body of Christ? is it
Cemented, United, and Compacted or fitly framed together by these things? They
formerly pretended to be his Coat, and must they now be esteemed to be his
glorious Body, when they no way belong unto the one or the other. Is the
Application of these things unto us, an effect of that Love, Charity and
Forbearance which are the only preventive means of Schism, and whereof if men
are void, it is all one upon the matter whether they are Schismatics or no,
for they will be so when it is for their Advantage. Wherefore we are not
concerned in these things. Let whosoever will declare and vehemently assert us
to be guilty of Schism, which they cannot prove, we can cheerfully subscribe
unto these Words of Irenaeus.

It may not be impertinent on this occasion to desire of some others, that as
they Love their own Souls, and have compassion for the Souls of other men; they
would seriously consider, what state and Condition things are come unto in the
Church of England; how much Ignorance, Profaneness, Sensuality, do spread
themselves over the Nation; what Neglect of the most important Duties of the
Gospel? Yea what scoffing at the power of Religion does abound amongst us? What
an utter decay and loss there is of all the primitive Discipline of the Church,
what Multitudes are in the way of Eternal Ruin, for want of due Instruction and
Example from them who should lead them; How great a necessity there is of an
universal Reformation, and how securely Negligent of it, all sorts of Persons
are? What have been the pernicious Effects of imposing things unnecessary and
unscriptural on the Consciences and Practices of men in the Worship of God,
whereby the Church has been deprived of the labor of so many faithful
Ministers, who might have at least assisted in preventing that Decay of
Religion which every day increases among us; How easy a thing it were for
them, to restore Evangelical Peace and Unity amongst all Protestants, without
the loss of their Ministry, without the diminution of their Dignity, without
deprivation of any part of their Revenues, without the Neglect of any Duty,
without doing any thing against their light and Consciences, with respect unto
any Divine Obligation; and thereon set themselves seriously to endeavor the
Remedy of these and other Evils of the like nature, under a sense of that great
Account which they must shortly give before the Judgment seat of Jesus Christ.

He proceeds to Consider the Cases wherein the Scripture allows of Separation,
which he affirms to be three.

The First is in Case of Idolatrous Worship. This none can Question, they do
not see, from whom yet we all separate as from Idolaters.

The second is in Case of false Dostrine being imposed instead of true; which
he confirms with sundry Instances. But there is a little Difficulty in this
Case, for,

(1.) It is uncertain when a Doctrine may be said to be imposed. Is it when it
is taught and preached by the Guides and Governors of the Church, or any of
them without control? if so, then is such preaching a sufficient cause of
Separation, and will justify them who do at present separate from any Church,
whose Ministers preach false Doctrine. How false Doctrine can be otherwise
imposed I know not, unless it be, by exacting an express Confession of it as
Truth.

(2.) What false Doctrine it is, which is of this Importance, as to justify
Separation, is not easily determinable.

(3.) If the Guides and Governors of the Church do teach this false Doctrine,
who shall judge of it, and determine it so to be, and that ultimately, so as to
separate from a Church thereon, shall the People do it themselves? are they
meet? are they Competent for it? are they to make such a Judgment on the
Doctrine of their Guides; do they know what is heresy; have they read
Epiphanius or Binius? How comes this allowance to be made unto them, which else
where is denied?

The Third is; in Case Men make things indifferent necessary to Salvation and
divide the Church on that account. But,

(1.) I know not which is to precede or go before, their Division of the
Church, or the just Separation, nor how they are to be distinguished; but it
was necessary to be so expressed.

(2.) There are two things in such an Imposition, first the practice of the
things imposed, Secondly the Judgment of them that impose them. The former
alone belongs unto them who are imposed on; and they may submit unto it,
without a Compliance with the Doctrine, as many did in the Apostles days. For
the Judgment of the imposers, it was their own Error and concernment only,

(3.) Why is not the imposing of things indifferent, so as to make the
observation of them necessary unto men's Temporal Salvation in this World, so as
that the Refusal of it, shall really affect the Refusers with Trouble and
Ruin, as just a Cause of Separation, as the imposing of them as necessary unto
Eternal Salvation, which shall never affect them.

(4.) This making things indifferent necessary unto Salvation, and as such
imposing of them on others, is a thing impossible, that never was, nor ever can
be. For it is the Judgment of the Imposers that is spoken of, and to judge
things indifferent in themselves, to be in themselves necessary to Salvation,
is a Contradiction. If only the Judgment of the Imposers that such things are
not indifferent, but necessary to Salvation, be intended, and otherwise the
things themselves may lawfully be imposed, I know not how this differs from the
Imposition of indifferent things, under any other pretense.

In his following Discourse concerning miscarriages in Churches, where no
Separation is enjoined, we are not at all concerned, and therefore shall not
observe the mistakes in it, which are not a few.

But may there not be other Causes of peaceable withdrawing from the Communion
of a Church, besides these here enumerated?

(1.) Suppose a Church should impose the Observation of Judaical Ceremonies and
make their observation necessary, though not to Salvation, Yet unto the Order
and Decency of Divine Worship. It may declare them to be in themselves
indifferent; but yet make them necessary to be observed. Or

(2.) Suppose a Church should be so degenerated in the Life and Conversation of
all its Members, that being immersed in various sins, they should have only a
form of Godliness, but deny the power of it? the Rule of the Apostle being to
avoid and turn away from them.

(3.) Suppose a Church be fallen into such decays, in Faith, Love, and fruits
of Charity, as that the Lord Jesus Christ by his word, declares his
Disapprobation of it, and in that State refuses to reform itself, and
persecutes them who would reform themselves; Or

(4.) Suppose the Ministry of any Church, be such as is insufficient and unable
to dispense the Word and Sacraments unto Edification, so as that the whole
Church may perish as unto any Relief by or from the Administration of the
Ordinances of the Gospel? I say in these and such other Cases, a peaceable
withdrawing from the Communion of such Churches, is warrantable by the Rule of
the Scripture.

SECT. III.
THE third Part of the Drs. Discourse he designs to examine the Pleas as he
speaks, for Separation. And these he refers to four Heads, whereof the first
respects the Constitution of the Church. And those which relate hereunto are
four also.

(1.) That Parochial Churches are not of Christ's Institution.

(2.) That Diocesan Churches are unlawful.

(3.) That our National Church has no Foundation.

(4.) That the People are deprived of their Right in the Choice of their
Pastors.

The first of these, Namely that our Parochial Churches are not of Christ's
Institution, he begins withal, and therein I am alone called to an Account. I
wonder the Dr. should thus state the Question between us. The meaning of this
Assertion, that our Parochial Churches are not of Christ's Institution, must be
either, they are not so because they are Parochial, or at least in that they
are Parochial. But is this my judgment, have I said any thing to this purpose;
yea he knows full well, that in my judgment there are no Churches directly of
divine Institution, but those that are Parochial or particular Churches. We are
not therefore to expect much in the ensuing disputation, when the state of the
Question is so mistaken at the entrance.

If he say, or intend* that there are many things in their Parochial Churches,
observed, practiced and imposed on all their members, in and about the Worship
of God, which are not of divine institution, we grant it to be our judgment,
and part of our plea in this case. But this is not at all spoken unto.

Wherefore the greatest part of the ensuing discourse on this Head, is spent in
perpetual diversions from the state of the case under consideration, with an
attempt to take advantage for some reflections, or an appearance of success,
from some passages and expressions, belonging nothing at all unto the merit of
the cause; a course which I thought so Learned a Person would not have taken,
in a case wherein Conscience is so nearly concerned.

Some mistakes occurring in it, have been already rectified; as that wherein he
supposes that my Judgment is for the Democratical Government of the Church;
as also what he alleges in the denial of the gradual declension of the
Primitive Churches, from their first original Institution has been examined.

I shall therefore plainly and directly propose the things which I assert and
maintain in this part of the Controversy; and then Consider what occurrs in
opposition unto them, or otherwise seems to be of any force toward the End in
general of charging us with, Schism, and they are these that follow.

1. Particular Churches or Congregations, with their Order and Rule are of
Divine institution, and are sufficient unto all the ends of Evangelical
Churches. I take Churches and Congregations in the same sense and notion as the
Church of England does, defining the Church by, a Congregation of Beleivers,
otherwise there may be occasional Congregations, that are not stated Churches.

2. Unto these Churches, there is committed by Christ himself, all the ordinary
power, and privileges that belong unto any Church under the Gospel, and of
them is required the observance of all Church Duties; which it is their sin to
omit.

3. There is no Church of any other form, kind, nature or constitution, that is
of Divine institution. Things may be variously ordered in and amongst
Christians; or their Societies may be cast, or disposed of, into such
respective Relations to, and dependence on one another, in compliance with the
political State, and other circumstances of Times and Places, as may be thought
to tend unto their advantage. That which we affirm is, that no alteration of
their state from the nature and kind of particular Churches is of divine
institution.

4. Such Churches whose frame, constitution and power, are destructive of the
Order, Liberty, Power, Privileges and Duties of particular Churches, are so
far contrary unto divine Institution, and not to be complied withal.

Hereon we affirm, That whereas we are excluded from total Communion in our
Parochial Assemblies, by the imposition of things unto us unlawful and sinful,
as indispensible conditions of their Communion, and cannot comply with them in
their Rule and Worship on the reasons before alleged, it is part of the Duty
we owe to Jesus Christ, to gather our selves into particular Churches or
Congregations, for the celebration of Divine Worship, and the observation,
doing, or performance of all his Commands. These are the things which in this
case we adhere unto, and which must all of them be overthrown, before any
color can be given unto any charge of Schism against us, and what is spoken
unto this purpose in the Drs. Discourse, we shall now consider. Only I desire
the Reader to remember, that all these Principles or assertions, are fully
confirmed in the preceding discourse.

That which first occurs in the Treatise under consideration unto the point in
hand, is the exception put in unto a passage in my former discourse, which is
as follows.

We do not say that because Communion in Ordinances should be only in such
Churches as Christ has instituted, that therefore it is lawful and necessary
to separate from Parochial Churches; but if it be on other grounds necessary so
to separate or withhold Communion from them, it is the Duty of them that do so,
to join themselves in or unto some other particular Congregation.

I have not observed any occasion wherein the Dr. is more vehement in his
Rhetoric, then he is on that of this passage, which yet appears to me to be
good sense and innocent.

1. Hereunto he says, (1.) p. 221. That this is either not to the business, or
it is a plain giving up the cause of Independency. If he judge that it is not
to the business, I cannot help it, and he might as I suppose have done well to
have taken no notice of it; as I have dealt with many passages in his
Discourse. But if it be a giving up of the cause of Independency, I say
whatever that be, let whosoever will take it, and dispose of it as it seems good
unto them, but in proof hereof he says.

(1.) Wherefore did the dissenting Brethren so much insist upon their separate
Congregations, when not one of the things now particularly alleged against our
Church was required of them.

I Answer,

(1.) If any did in those times plead for separate Congregations, let them
answer for themselves, I was none of them. They did indeed plead for distinct
Congregations, exempt in some few things, from a penal Rule, then endeavored
by some to be imposed on all. But there was no such difference nor restraint of
Communion between any of them, as it is at present between us and Parochial
Churches.

(2.) It is very possible that there may be other reasons of forbearing a
conjunction in some acts of Church Rule, which was all that was pleaded for by
the dissenting Brethren, then those which are alleged against total Communion
with Parochial Churches in Worship, Order and Discipline.

2. He adds secondly, but if he insists on those things common to our Church
with other reformed Churches, then they are such things as he supposes contrary
to the first institution of Churches, etc.

I fear I do not well understand what this means, nor what it tends unto, but
according as I apprehend the sense of it; I say

(1.) I insist principally on such things as are not common unto them with
other reformed Churches, but such as are peculiar unto the Church of England.
These vary the terms and practice of our Communion, between them and it.

2. The things we except against in Parochial Churches, are not contrary to
their first institution as Parochial, which as has been proved is the only
kind of Churches, that is of divine institution; but are contrary unto what is
instituted to be done and observed in such Churches; which one observation
makes void all that he would infer from the present suppositions; as,

3. He enquireth hereon, what difference there is between s^perating from our
Churches, because Communion in Ordinances is only to be enjoyed in such
Churches, as Christ has instituted, and separating from them, because they
have things repugnant unto the first institution of Churches.

The Dr. I fear would call this Sophistry in another or at least complain that
it is somewhat odly and faintly expressed. But we shall consider it as it is,

(1.) Separation from Parochial Churches, because Communion in Ordinances is
only to be enjoyed in such Churches as Christ has instituted, is denied by us;
it is so in the assertion opposed by him; and I do not know whether it be laid
down by him, as that which we affirm or which we deny.

(2.) There is great Ambiguity in the latter clause; of separating from them,
because they have things repugnant unto the first institution of Churches. For
it is one thing, to separate from a Church because it is not of divine
institution, that is, not of that kind of Churches which are divinely
instituted, and another to do so, because of things practiced and imposed in it
contrary to divine institution, which is the case in hand.

4. But he after says, Is not this the primary Reason of separation, because
Christ has appointed unalterable Rules for the Government of his Church, which
are not to be observed in Parochial Churches?

I answer no; it is not so, for there may be an omission, at least for a
season, in some Churches of some Rules that Christ has appointed in the
Government of his Church, (and we judge his Rules as unto Right unalterable)
which may not be a just cause of separation. So the Church of the Jews
continued a long time in the omission of the Observance of the feast of
Tabernacles. But the principal Reason of the Separation we defend, is the
practicing and imposing of sundry things in the Worship of the Church, not of
divine institution, yea in our judgment contrary thereunto, and the framing of
a rule of Government of men's devising, to be laid on all the Members of them,
This is the primary Cause pleaded herein.

But because the Dr. proposes a Case on those suppositions, whereon he seems
to lay great weight, though indeed however it be determined it conduces
nothing unto his End, but argues only some keenness of Spirit against them whom
he opposes, I shall at large Transcribe the whole of it.

Let us then, (says he) (1.) suppose that Christ has by unalterable Rule
appointed that a Church shall Consist only, of such a number of men, as may
meet in one Congregation so qualified; and that those by entering into Covenant
with each other, (whereof we shall treat hereafter) become a Church and choose
their Officers, who are to Teach and Admonish and administer Sacraments, and to
exercise discipline by the Consent of the Congregation. And let us (2) suppose
such a Church not yet gathered, but there lies fit matter for it dispersed up
and down in several parishes. (3) Let us suppose D. O. about to gather such a
Church; (4) Let us suppose not one thing peculiar to our Church, required of
these Members, neither the Aerial sign of the Cross, nor kneeling at the
Communion, etc. I desire to know whether D. O. be not bound by this unalterable
rule, to draw these Members from Communion with Parochial Churches on purpose
that they might form a Congregational Church according to Christ's Institution?
either then he must quit these unalterable Rules and Institutions of Christ,
(which he will never do whilst he lives) or he must acknowledge, that setting
up a Congregational Church, is the primary Ground of this Separation from our
Parochial Churches. etc.

The whole Design hereof is to prove, that we do not withhold Communion from
their Parochial Assemblies, because of the things that are practiced and
imposed in them, in the Worship of God, and Church Rule; but because of a
necessity apprehended of setting up Congregational Churches. I Answer,

1. We know it is otherwise, and that we plead the true Reason and that which
our Consciences are regulated by, in refraining from their Communion, and it is
in vain for him or any Man else to endeavor so to Birdlime our understandings
by a multiplicity of Questions as to make us think we do not judge, what we do
judge, or do not do what we know our selves well enough to do. If we cannot
Answer Sophismes against Motion, we can yet rise up and walk.

2. These things are consistent, and are not capable of being opposed one to
the other; Namely, that we refrain Communion on the Reasons alleged, and
thereon judge it necessary to erect Congregational Churches; which we should
have no occasion to do, were not we excluded from Communion in Parochial
Assemblies, as we are.

3. The Case being put unto me, I answer plainly unto the Doctors last
supposition whereon the whole depends, that if those things which we except
against, as being unduely practiced and imposed in Parochial Assemblies, were
removed and taken away, I would hold Communion with them, all the Communion
that any one is obliged to hold with any Church, and would in nothing separate
from them. This spoils the whole Case. But then he will say, I am no
Independent; I cannot help that, he may judge as he sees Cause; for I am
nullius addictus jurare in verba Magistria designing to be the Disciple of
Christ alone.

4. But yet suppose that in such Churches all the things excepted against being
removed, there is yet a defect in some unalterable Rule, that Concerns the
Government of the Churches, that they answer not in all things the strictness
laid down in the Drs first supposition (although it is certain that if not all
of them absolutely, yet the most of them, and of the most importance, would be
found virtually in Parochial Assemblies, upon the removal of the things
excepted against) the Enquiry is, what I would do then, or whether I would not
set up a Congregational Church, gathered out of other Churches; I Answer, I
tell you plainly what I would do;

(1.) If I were joined unto any such Church, as wherein there were a defect in
any of the Rules appointed by Christ for its Order and Government, I would
endeavor peaceably, according as the Duties of my state and Calling did
require* to introduce the Practice and Observance of them.

(2.) In case I could not prevail therein, I would consider whether the want of
the things supposed, were such, as to put me on the practice of any thing
unlawful, or cut me short of the necessary means of Edification; and if I found
they do not so do, I would never for such defects separate or withdraw
Communion from such a Church. But,

5. Suppose that from these defects should arise not only a real Obstruction
unto Edification, but also a necessity of practicing some things unlawful to be
Observed, wherein no forbearance could be allowed, I would not condemn such a
Church, I would not separate from it, would not withdraw from Acts of Communion
with it, which were Lawful; but I would peaceably join in fixed Personal
Communion with such a Church as is free from such defects; and if this cannot
be done without the gathering of a new Church, I see neither Schism nor
Separation in so doing. Wherefore notwithstanding all the Drs Questions and his
Case founded on as many suppositions as he was pleased to make, it abides firm
and unshaken, that the Ground and reason of our refraining communion from
Parochial Assemblies, is the Practice and Imposition of things not lawful for
us to observe in them. And it is unduely affirmed ( p. 223.) that upon my
Grounds, Separation is necessary, not from the particular conditions of
Communion with them, but because Parochial Churches are not formed after the
Congregational way. For what form of Churches they have, be it what it will, it
is after the Congregational way. And it is more unduely affirmed, and contrary
unto the Rules of Christian Charity, that this plea of ours, is a necessary
piece of Art to keep fair with the Presbyterian Party. For as we design to keep
fair, as it is called, with no Parties, but only so far as Truth and Christian
Love require, and so we design it with all Parties whatsoever; so the Plea has
been always insisted on by us, and was the cause of Nonconformity in
multitudes of our Persuasion, before they had any opportunity to Gather any
Congregational Churches according to the Rule of the Gospel. Such things will
never help nor adorn any Cause in the Issue.

But he presses the due Consideration of this Art, (that, as I suppose, they
may avoid the snare of it) on the Presbyterians, by minding them what was done
in former times, in the debate of the dissenting Brethren, and the setting up
of Congregational Churches in those days. For says he, Have those of the
Congregational way since altered their Judgment? Has D. O. yielded that in
case some terms of Communion in our Church, were not insisted on, they would
give over Separation? were not their Churches first gathered out of
Presbyterian Congregations; and if Presbytery had been settled upon the Kings
Restoration, would they not have continued in their Separation?

Answ. 1, There is no Difference that I know of, between Presbyterians and
those whom he calls Independents, about particular Churches. For the
Presbyterians allow them to be of Divine Institution; grant them the exercise
of Discipline, by their own Eldership in all ordinary cases, and none to be
exercised in them, without them or their own consent, as also their Right unto
the choice of their own Officers; so that there could be no separation between
them on that Account.

2. When they begin in good earnest to reform themselves and to take away the
unsufferable Conditions of Communion excepted against, they may know more of my
Judgment if I am alive, (which I do not believe I shall be) as unto Separation;
though I have spoken unto it plainly enough already.

3. It cannot be said, that the Churches of the Independents were gathered out
of Presbyterian Churches, for the Presbyterian Government was never here
established; and each Party took Liberty to reform themselves according
according to their principles, wherein there was some difference.

4. Had the Presbyterian Government been settled at the Kings Restoration, by
the Encouragement and Protection of the Practice of it, without a rigorous
Imposition of every thing supposed by any to belong thereunto, or a mixture of
Humane Constitutions, if there had any Appearance of a Schism or Separation
continued between the Parties, I do Judge they would have been both to blame.
For as it cannot be expected that all Churches and all Persons in them, should
agree in all Principles and Practices belonging unto Church Order, nor was it
so in the days of the Apostles, nor ever since among any true Churches of
Christ; so all the Fundamental Principles of Church Communion, would have been
so fixed and agreed upon between them, and all offenses in Worship so removed,
as that it would have been a matter of no great Art absolutely to unite them,
or to maintain a firm Communion among them, no more then in the days of the
Apostles, and the Primitive times, in Reference to the differences that were
among Churches in those days. For they allowed distinct Communion upon
distinct Apprehensions of things belonging unto Church Order or Worship, all
keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. If it shall be asked
then, why did they not formerly agree in the Assemby? I Answer, (1.) I was none
of them, and cannot tell. (2.) They did agree in my Judgment well enough, if
they could have thought so; and farther I am not concerned in the Difference.

It is therefore notorious, that occasion is given unto our refraining free
Communion with Parochial Churches by the unwarrantable Imposition of things,
not lawful for us to observe, both in Church Order and Worship; nor is it
candid in any to deny it, though they are otherwise minded as unto the things
themselves.

His second exception is unto a saying which I Quoted out of Justice Hobarts
Reports, who says, We know well that the Primitive Church in its greatest
purity was but voluntary Congregations of Believers, submitting themselves to
the Apostles and other Pastors, to whom they did minister of their temporals as
God did move them. Hereunto with a Reflection on a dead man, I know not why, he
replies, that this is not to the purpose, or rather quite overthrows my
hypothesis. But why so? He will prove it with two Arguments,

The first is this, Those voluntary Congregations over which the Apostles were
set, were no limited Congregations of any one particular Church, but those
Congregations over which the Apostles were set are those of which Justice
Hobart speaks, and therefore it is plain he spoke of all the Churches which
were under the care of the Apostles, which he calls voluntary Congregations.

Answ. 1. Whereas this Argument seems to be cast into the form of a Syllogism,
I could easily manifest how asyllogistical it is, did I delight to contend with
him, or any else. But

2. The Conclusion which he infers is directly what I plead for, Namely, that
all the Churches under the care of the Apostles were Voluntary Congregations.

3. There is Fallacy in that Expression, no limited Congregations of any one
particular Church; no such thing is pretended, but particular Churches are
Congregations. Such were all the Churches over which the Apostles were set, and
therefore Justice Hobart speaks of them all. This then is that which he seems
to oppose, namely, that all the Churches under the care of the Apostles were
particular voluntary Congregations, as Justice Hobart affirms, and this is that
which in the close, he seems to grant.

His second Argument which is no less Ambiguous, no less a Rope of Sand than
the former, is this, Those voluntary Congregations over whom the Apostles
appointed Pastors after their decease, were no particular Congregations in one
City. But those of whom Justice Hobart speaks were such, for he says they
first submitted unto the Apostles and afterward to other Pastors; What then?
why Justice Hobart could not be such a stranger to Antiquity as to believe that
the Christians in the Age after the Apostles, amounted but to one Congregation
in a City.

Answ. 1. What this is designed to prove, or disprove, or how it does either of
them I do not understand; But I deny the proposition. The Voluntary
Congregations over whom the Apostles appointed Pastors were all of them
particular Congregations, either in one City or more Cities, for that is
nothing unto our purpose.

2. Not to engage Justice Hobart or his honor, I do confess my self such a
stranger unto Antiquity (if that may be esteemed the reason of it) as not to
believe that the Christians in the Age after the Apostles amounted to any more
than one Church or Congregation in a City; and shall acknowledge my self
beholding to this Reverend Author, if he will give me one undoubted Instance
where they so did* Only let the Reader observe, that I intend not Occasional
meetings of any of the Church with or without their Elders, which were
frequent. They met in those days, in Fields, in Mountains, in Dens and Caves
of the Earth, in burying places, in houses hired or borrowed, in upper Rooms,
or Cellars, whereof a large story might easily be given, if it were to our
present purpose. Dionysius of Alexandria sums them up briefly (...); a Field,
a Desert, a Ship, an Inn, a Prison, were places of our Meetings: Eusebius. lib. 7.
cap. 22. but I speak of stated Churches, with their Worship, Power, Order and
Rule. But whether there were more such Churches in any one City; is a matter of
Fact that shall be immediately enquired into. All that I here assert and
confirm from the words of Justice Hobart, is that the Churches in the days of
the Apostles were particular voluntary Congregations. And the Dr. will find it
a Difficult Task to prove that this overthrows my Hypothesis.

Our Author in the next place opposes what I affirmed of the gradual deviation
of the Churches after the Apostles from the Rule of their first Institution;
which has been already accounted for.

Sect. 4. p. 224. Upon an occasional Expression of mine, about the Church of
Carthage in Cyprians time, he gives us a large Account of the state of the
Church of Carthage at that Time, wherein we are not much concerned. My Words
are, Vindic. p. 41. Though many Alterations were before that time, introduced
into the Order and Rule of the Churches, yet it appears that when Cyprian was
Bishop of the Church of Carthage, that the whole Community of the Members of
that Church did meet together to determine of things that were of their common
Interest, according unto what was judged to be their Right and Liberty in those
days.

I thought no man who is so Conversant in the Writings of Cyprian as our Author
apparently is, could have denied the Truth hereof, nor do I say it is so done
by him; only he takes occasion from hence to discourse at large concerning the
state of the Church at Carthage in those days in Opposition to Mr. Cotton, who
affirms that there was found in that Church the express and lively lineaments
of the very body of Congregational Discipline. Herein I am not concerned, who
do grant that at that time there were many Alterations introduced into the
Order and Rule of the Church; but that the People did meet together unto the
Determination of things of their common Interest, such as were the choice of
their Officers, and the readmission of them into the Fellowship of the Church
who had fallen through infirmity in time of Persecution, or public offenses
and divisions, is so evident in the Writings of Cyprian, wherein he ascribes
unto them the right of choosing Worthy, and of rejecting Unworthy Officers, and
tells them that in such Cases he will do nothing without their consent, that it
cannot be gainsaid. But hereon he asks, where I had any Reason to appeal to
St. Cyprian for the Democratical Government of the Church; which indeed I did
not do, nor any thing which looked like unto it; And he adds that they have
this Advantage from the appeal, that we do not suppose any Deviation then from
the Primitive Institution, whereas my words are Positive, that before that time
there were many Alterations introduced into the Rule and Order of the Church;
such things will partiallity in a Cause, and aiming at Success in Disputation,
produce.

M. Cotton affirms, that the lineaments of the Congregational Discipline are
found in that Church; that there is therein a just Representation of an
Episcopal Church; that is I presume Diocesan, because that alone is unto his
purpose. It is not lawful to make any Church after the time of the Apostles the
Rule of all Church State and Order; nor yet to be absolutely determined in
these things, by the Authority of any man not divinely inspired, And yet I
cannot but wish, that all the three parties dissenting about Church Order, Rule
and Worship, would attempt an agreement between themselves, upon the
Representation made of the state of the Church of Carthage in the days of
Cyprian, (which all of them lay some claim unto) although it will be an
Abridgement of some of their pretensions. It might bring them all nearer
together, and it may be all of them in some things nearer to the Truth; for it
is Certain,

1. That the Church of Carthage was at that time a particular Church; There was
no more Church but one in that City. Many occasional Meetings and Assemblies in
several places for Divine Exercises, and Worship there were. But stated
Churches with Officers of their own, Members peculiarly belonging unto them,
Discipline among them, such as our Reverend Author does afterward affirm and
describe our Parochial Churches to be, there were none, nor is it pretended
that there were.

2. That in this one Church, there were Many Presbyters or Elders, who ruled
the whole Body or Community of it, by common Advice and Counsel, whether they
were all of them, such as labored in the Word and Doctrine, with the
Administration of the Sacraments, or attended unto Rule only, it does not
appear. But that they were many, and such as did not stand in any peculiar
Relation unto any part of the people, but concurred in common, to promote the
Edification of the whole Body, as Occasion and Opportunity did require; is
evident in the account given of them by Cyprian himself.

3. That among those Elders, in that one Church, there was one peculiarly
called the Bishop, who did constantly preside amongst them, in all Church
affairs, and without whom ordinarily nothing was done, as neither did he any
thing, without the advice of the Elders, and consent of the People. How far
this may be allowed for Orders sake is worth consideration; of Divine
institution it is not. But where there are many Elders, who have equal interest
in, and right unto the rule of the whole Church, and the Administration of all
Ordinances, it is necessary unto Order, that one do preside in their meetings
and consultations, whom custom gave some pre-eminence unto.

4. That the people were ruled by their own consent, and that in things of
greatest importance, as the choice of their Officers, the casting out and the
receiving in of lapsed members, had their suffrage in the determination of them.

5. That there was no Imposition of Liturgies, or Ceremonies, or any humane
invention in the Worship of God, on the Church or any members of it, the
Scripture being the sole acknowledged Rule in Discipline and Worship.

This was the state and order of the Church of Carthage in those days, and
although there were some alterations in it, from the first divine Institution
of Churches, yet I heartily wish, that there were no more difference amongst
us, then what would remain upon a supposition of this state.

For what remains of the Opposition made unto what I had asserted concerning
Congregational or particular Churches, I may refer the Doctor and the Reader,
unto what has been farther pleaded concerning them, in the preceding
discourse, nor am I satisfied that he has given any sufficient answer unto
what was before alleged in the vindication, but has passed by what was most
pregnant with Evidence unto the Truth, and by a mistake of my mind or Words
diverts very much from the state of the Question, which is no other but what I
laid down before, yet I will consider what is material in the whole of his
Discourse on this subject.

SECT. 5. p. 234, He says, I affirm that as to the matter of fact concerning
the Institution of Congregational Churches, it seems evidently exemplyfied in
the Scripture; for which I refer the Reader unto what is now again declared
in the confirmation of it. And he adds, The matter of Fact is that when
Churches grew too big for one single Congregation in a City, then a new
Congregational Church was set up under new Officer, with a separate power of
Government; that is in that City. But this is not at all the matter of Fact. I
do not say that there were originally more particular Churches then one in one
City; I do grant, in the words next quoted by him, that there is not express
mention made, that any such Church did divide it self into more Congregations
with new Officers. But this is the matter of Fact, that the Apostles appointed
only particular Congregations, and that therefore they did not oblige the
Christians about in a Province or Diocese, to be of that Church which was first
erected in any Town or City, but they founded new Churches, with new Officers
of their own, in all places where there were a sufficient number of Believers,
to make up such a Church. And this I prove, from the instance of the Church of
Jerusalem, which was first planted; but quickly after there were Churches
gathered and settled in Judea, Gallilee, and Samaria. They planted Churches,
(...), in the Cities and Villages as Clemens speaks. But, what says he, is
this to the proof of the Congregational way, this it is, namely, That the
Churches instituted by the Apostles were all of them Congregational, not
Diocesan, Provincial or National; but says he, the thing I desired was, that
when the Christians in one City multiplied into more Congregations, they would
prove that they did make new and distinct Churches; He may desire it of them
who grant that the Christians did multiply in one City, into more Congregations
then one (which I deny) until the end of the second Century; although they
might and did occasionally meet, especially in times of Persecution in distinct
Assemblies. Neither will their multiplication into more Congregations without
distinct Officers, at all help the cause he pleads for; for his Diocesan
Church, consists of many distinct Churches with their distinct Officers,
Order and Power, as he afterward describes our Parishes to do under one
Bishop. Yet such is his apprehension of the Justice of his cause, that what
has been pleaded twenty times against it, namely, That speaking of one City
the Scripture still calls it the Church of that place, but speaking of a
Province as Judea, Galilee, Samaria, Galatia, Macedonia, it speaks of the
Churches of them, which evidently proves, that it knows nothing of a Diocesan,
Provincial or National Church; he produces in the justification of it, because
he says, that it is evident then, that there was but one Church in one City,
which was never denied. There were indeed then many Bishops in one Church,
Phil. 1.1. Acts 20.28. And afterward when one Church had one Bishop only, yet
there were two Bishops in one City, which requires two Churches, as Epiphanus
affirms, (...). Haeres. 68. S. 6.

For Alexandria never had two Bishops as other Cities had. Whether he intend
two Bishops in one Church, or two Churches in one City, all is one to our
purpose.

But the Dr. I presume makes this observation rather artificially to prevent an
Objection against his main Hypothesis, then with any design to strengthen it
thereby. For he cannot but know how frequently it is pleaded in opposition unto
any National Church State, as unto its mention in the Scripture. For he that
shall speak of the Churches, in Essex, Suffolk, Hartfordshire, and so of other
Counties, without the least intimation of any general Church unto which they
should belong, would be judged to speak rather the Independent then the
Episcopal Dialect.

But says he. p. 236. I cannot but wonder what Dr. O. means, when after he
has produced the Evidence of distinct Churches in the same Province, he calls
this plain Scripture Evidence and practice for the erecting particular distinct
Congregations; who denies that? (I say then, it is incumbent on him to prove,
if he do any thing in this cause, that they erected Churches of another sort,
kind and order also.) But says he, I see nothing like a proof, of distinct
Churches in the same City, which was the thing to be proved, but because it
could not be proved, was prudently let alone.

But this was not the thing to be proved, nor did I propose it to confirmation,
nor assert it, but have proved the contrary unto the end of the second Century.
This only I assert that every Church in one City, was only one Church; and
nothing is offered by the Doctor to the contrary, yea he affirms the same.

But says he, sect. 6. p. 237. Dr. O. says, That the Christians of one City
might not exceed the bounds of a particular Church or Congregation, no although
they had a multiplication of Bishops or Elders in them, and occasional distinct
Assemblies for some Acts of Divine Worship. But then, says he, The notion of a
Church is not limited in the Scripture to a single Congregation. Why so; for
says he, if occasional Assemblies be allowed for some Acts of Worship, why not
for others; I say because they belong unto the whole Church, or are Acts of
Communion in the whole Church Assembled, and so cannot be observed in
occasional meetings, do this says the Apostle, when you come together in one
place. And if says he, the number of Elders be unlimited, then every of those
may attend the occasional distinct Assemblies for Worship, and yet altogether
make up the Body of one Church, and so say I, they may, and yet be one Church
still joining together in all Acts of Communion, that are proper and peculiar
unto the Church. For as the meetings intended were occasional so also was the
attendance of the Elders unto them, as they found occasion, for the Edification
of the whole Church.

It may be the Dr. is not so well acquainted with the Principles and Practice
of the Congregational way, and therefore thinks that these things are contrary
unto them. But those of that way, do maintain that there ought to be in every
particular Congregation unto the compleatness of it, many Elders or Overseers;
that the number of them ought to be increased, as the increase of the Church
makes it necessary for their Edification, that the members of such a Church may
and ought to meet occasionally in distinct Assemblies, especially in the time
of Persecution, for Prayer, Preaching of the Word and mutual Exhortation; so
when Peter was in Prison after the Death of James, many met together in the
House of Mary to Pray, Acts 12.12. Which was not a meeting of the whole Church.
And that there were such private meetings, of the Members of the same Church in
times of Persecution, among the Primitive Churches, may be proved by a
Multiplication of instances; but still they continued one Church, and joined
together in all Acts of Church Communion properly so called, especially if it
were possible every Lord's Day, as Justin Martyr declares that the Church did in
his time. For all the Christians says he then, in the City and Villages about,
gathered together in one place for the Ends mentioned. But still these distinct
occasional Assemblies, did not constitute any distinct Societies or
Corporations, as the distinct Companies do in a City. But says he, grant one
single Bishop over all these Elders, and they make up that representation of a
Church, which we have from the best and purest Antiquity. I say we would
quickly grant it, could we see any warrant for it, or if he could prove that so
it was from the beginning. However this is no part of our present contest,
namely, whether some while after the days of the Apostles, in Churches that
were greatly increased, and many Elders in them, there was not one chosen, (as
at Alexandria,) by those Elders themselves, to preside among them, who in a
peculiar manner was called a Bishop. But if I mistake not, that alone which
would advantage his cause is to prove, that there were in one City, or any
where else, many, not occasional Assemblies of Christians or Church Members,
but many stated, fixed Churches, with Officers of their own, peculiarly related
unto them, entrusted with Church Power and Privileges, at least as much as he
afterward pleads to be in our Parochial Churches, all under the Government of
one single Bishop, making up a new Church state beyond that of particular
Congregations, by their Relation unto him as their common Pastor. This I take
it, is that which should have been proved.

All the difficulty wherewith our assertion is accompanied, arises from the
multiplication of Believers, and the increase of Churches, in the Apostles time
or presently after. For this seems to be so great, as that those in one City
could not continue in one Church, notwithstanding the advantages of occasional
Assemblies. The Church of Jerusalem had 5000 in it at the same time; the word
grew and prevailed at Ephesus and other places; whereto I shall briefly answer
as hastening unto a close of this unpleasing labor. I say therefore.

1. Whatever difficulty may seem to be in this matter, yet in point of Fact, so
it was; there was no Church before the end of the second Century of any other
species, nature or kind, but a particular Congregational Church only, as has
been proved before; let any one instance be produced of a Church of one
denomination, National, Provincial, or Diocesan, or of any other kind then that
which is Congregational, and I will give over this contest. But when a matter
of Fact is certain, it is too late to enquire how it might be. And on this
occasion I shall add that if in that space of time, namely, before the end of
the second Century, any proof or undoubted Testimony can be produced, of the
Imposition of the necessary use of Liturgies, or of stated Ceremonies of the
practice of Church discipline consistent with that now in use in the Church of
England, it will go a great way in the determination of the whole Controversy
between us.

2. The admirable prevalency of the Gospel in those days, consisted principally
in its spreading it self all the World over, and planting seminaries for
farther conversions in all Nations. It did indeed prevail more in some Cities
and Towns then in others; in some places many were converted, in others the
tender of it was utterly rejected; how be it it prevailed not unto the
gathering of such great numbers into any Church solely, as might destroy, or be
inconsistent with its Congregational Institution. For not all, not it may be
half, not sometimes a third Part, of them who made some Profession of the
Truth, and attended unto the Preaching of the Word, and many of whom underwent
Martyrdom, were admitted as complete Members of the Church, unto all the parts
of its Communion. Hence there were many who upon a general account were
esteemed Christians, and that justly, where the Churches were but small.

3. It does not appear that in the next Age after the Apostles, the Churches
were any where so increased in number as to bear the least Proportion with the
Inha^itants of the Cities and Towns wherein they were. The Church of Smyrna in
the days of Polyicarpus may justly be esteemed one of the greatest in those
days, both from the Eminency of the Place and Person who was justly accounted
the great Instructor of all Asia, as they called him when he was carried unto
the Stake. But this Church gives such an Account of it self in its Epistle
unto the Churches of Pontus about the Martyrdom of Polycarpus, as manifest the
Church there to have been a very small number, in Comparison of the multitude
of the other Inhabitants, so as that it was scarcely known who or what they
were. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. So in the Excellent Epistle of the Churches of
Vienna and Lions, unto the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, concerning the
Persecutions that befell them, as they declare themselves to have been
particular Churches only, so they make it evident that they bore in number no
proportion unto the Inhabitants of the places where they were, who could scarce
discover them by the most diligent search. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap, 1.

4. As for the Church of Jerusalem in particular, notwithstanding the great
number of its original Converts, who probably were many of them strangers,
occasionally present at the Feast of Pentecost, and there instructed in the
knowledge of the Truth, that they might in the several Countries whither they
immediately returned, be instruments of the propagation of the Gospel, it is
Certain that many years after it consisted of no greater Multitude then could
come together in one place, to the Mannagement of Church Affairs Acts, 15.20,
21. Nor is it likely that Pella an obscure place, whose name probably had never
been known, but on this occasion, was like to receive any great Multitudes; nor
does Epiphanius say, as our Author pretends, that they spread themselves from
thence to Coelosyria and Decapolis and Basanitis. For he affirms expressly that
all the Disciples which went from Jerusalem dwelt at Pella. Only he says that
from thence the Sect of the Nazarenes, took its original, which spread it self
(afterward) in Coelosyria, Decapolis and Basanitis. (...) (speaking of that
Sect) (...); They dwelled all at Pella.

Sect. 7. p. 239. He quotes another saying of mine, namely, that I cannot
discern the least necessity of any positive Rule or Direction in this Matter,
seeing the Nature of the thing, and the duty of Man does indispensibly require
it. And hereon he Attempts to make advantage, in opposition unto another saying
as he supposes of mine; Namely, that the Institution of Churches, and the
Rules for their disposal and Government throughout the World are the same,
stated and unalterable; from whence he makes many inferences to countenance him
in his Charge of Schism. But why should we contend fruitlesly about these
things? had he been pleased to read a little farther on the same page, he would
have seen that I affirm the Institution itself to be a plain Command, which
considering the Nature of the duties required of men in Church Relation, is
sufficient to oblige them thereunto, without any new Revelation unto that
purpose, which renders all his Queries, Exceptions and Inferences of no use.
For I do not speak in that place of the Original Institution of Churches whose
Laws and Rules are Universal and Unalterable, but our actual gathering into
particular Churches, for which I say the necessity of Duty is our Warrant, and
the Institution it self a Command. No great Advantage will be made any way of
such Attempts.

The like I must say of his following Discourse, p. 241 concerning Churches in
private Families, wherewith I am dismissed. I do grant that a Church may be in
a Family. There was so in the Family of Abraham before the Law. And if a Family
do consist of such Numbers, as may constitute a Church meet for the Duties
required of it, and the Privileges entrusted with it; If it has Persons in it
furnished with Gifts and Graces, fit for the Ministerial Office, and they be
lawfully called and set apart thereunto, I see no Reason why they should not be
a Church, although they should be all in the same family. But what is this to
the imprisoning of all Religious Worship in private Families, that never were
Churches, nor can so be, with the Admission of some other which our Author
would justify from this Concession, I know not. But it is easy to see what
our Condition should always be, if some men's Power did answer their Desires.

But the Will of God be done. I shall not farther concern my self to consider
things Charged but not proved, repeated but not Confirmed, depending on a
misunderstanding, or misapprehension of Words, wherein the merit of the Cause
is not concerned.

That which I first undertook was a Vindication of the Non-conformists from the
Charge of the Guilt of Schism. And this I engaged in for no other Reason, but
to remove as far as in me lay, the Obstruction that seemed to be cast by the
Drs. Sermon unto the uniting of all Protestants in the same Common Interest
against Popery. For although the Design might be Good, as I hope it was, and he
might judge well of the Seasonableness of what he proposed unto its End; yet we
found it, (it may be from the Circumstances of it, as unto time and place) to
be of a contrary tendency, to the raising of new disputes, creating of new
Jealousies, and weakening the hands of Multitudes, who were ready and willing to
join entirely in opposition unto Popery, and the defense of the Protestant
Religion. For if a Party of Soldiers (as the Dr. more then once alludes unto
that sort of men) should be drawing up in a field, with others, to oppose a
Common Enemy, some Persons of great Authority and Command in the Army, should
go unto them, and declare, that they were not to be trusted, that they
themselves were Traitors and Enemies, fit to be destroyed when the Common Enemy
was dispatched or reconciled, it would certainly abate of their Courage and
Resolution in what they were undertaking, with no less hazard, then any others
in the Army.

I have here again unto the same End Vindicated the Principles of the former
Vindication, with what Brevity I could. For the Truth is, I meet with nothing
Material in the Drs. large Discourse as unto what he Charge on those of the
Congregational Persuasion, but what is obviated in the foregoing Treatise. And
if any thing of the same Nature be further offered in opposition unto the same
Principles, it shall (if God give Life and Strength be considered in and with
the Second Part of it, Concerning the Matter, Form, Rule, Polity, Offices,
Officers, and Order of Evangelical Churches, which is designed; And it is
designed not for Strife and Contention with any, which if it be possible, and
as far as in me lies I shall always avoid, but for the Edification of them,
by whom it is desired.

FINIS.

