Sold by Saml: James Bookseller at the Bible in Gutter Lane Cheap side London
Where may be had Bibles and Common Prayers. Books of Divinity, History,
Physic, Mathematics, Poetry, Voyages and Travels etc.

N. B. Ready Money for any Library or Parcel of Books

Saml. Sympson Sculpt



THE Nature, Power, Deceit, and Prevalency of the remainders of Indwelling-Sin
IN BELIEVERS.

Together with the ways of its Working, And Means of Prevention. Opened,
evinced and applied, with a Resolution of sundry Cases of Conscience thereunto
appertaining.

O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death! I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Romans 7. 24, 25. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Sign of the Atlas
in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange. 1675.

THE PREFACE.
THAT the Doctrine of Original Sin, is one of the fundamental Truths of our
Christian Profession, has been always owned in the Church of God. And an
especial part it is of that peculiar possession of truth, which they enjoy,
whose Religion toward God is built upon, and resolved into Divine Revelation.
As the world by its Wisdom never knew God aright, so the Wise Men of it were
always utterly ignorant of this inbred evil in themselves and others. With us
the Doctrine and Conviction of it, lie in the very foundation of all wherein we
have to do with God, in reference unto our pleasing of him here, or obtaining
the enjoyment of him hereafter. It is also known what influence it has into
the great truths concerning the Person of Christ, his mediation, the fruits and
effects of it, with all the benefits that we are made partakers of thereby.
Without a supposition of it, not any of them can be truly known, or savingly
believed. For this cause has it been largely treated of by many holy and
Learned Men, both of old and of latter days. Some have labored in the
discovery of its nature, some of its guilt and demerit; by whom also the truth
concerning it has been vindicated from the opposition made unto it, in the
past and present Ages. By most these things have been considered in their full
extent and latitude, with respect unto all men by nature, with the estate and
condition of them who are wholly under the power and guilt of it. How thereby
men are disenabled and incapacitated in themselves to answer the obedience
required either in the Law, or the Gospel, so as to free themselves from the
Curse of the one or to make themselves partakers of the blessing of the other,
has been by many also fully evinced. Moreover, that there are Remainders of it
abiding in Believers after their Regeneration and Conversion to God, as the
Scripture abundantly testifies; so it has been fully taught and confirmed; as
also how the guilt of it is pardoned unto them, and by what means the power of
it is weakened in them. All these things I say have been largely treated on, to
the great benefit and edification of the Church. In what we have now in design,
we therefore take them all for granted, and endeavor only farther to carry on
the discovery of it in its actings and oppositions to the Law and Grace of God
in Believers. Neither do I intend the discussing of any thing that has been
controverted about it. What the Scripture plainly reveals and teaches
concerning it, what Believers evidently find by experience in themselves, what
they may learn from the Examples and acknowledgments of others, shall be
represented in a way suited unto the capacity of the meanest and weakest who is
concerned therein. And many things seem to render the handling of it at this
season, not unnecessary. The Effects and fruits of it which we see in the
Apostasies and backslidings of many, the scandalous sins and miscarriages of
some, and the course and lives of the most, seem to call for a due
consideration of it. Besides of how great concernment a full and clear
acquaintance with the power of this Indwelling-Sin (the matter designed to be
opened) is unto Believers, to stir them up to watchfulness and diligence, to
faith and prayer, to call them to repentance, humility, and self-abasement,
will appear in our progress. These in general were the ends aimed at in the
ensuing Discourse, which being at first composed and delivered for the use and
benefit of a few, is now by the Providence of God made public. And if the
Reader receive any advantage by these weak endeavors, let him know that it is
his duty, as to give Glory unto God, so to help them by his prayers, who in
many temptations and Afflictions are willing to labor in the Vineyard of the
Lord, unto which work they are called.

CHAP. I.
Indwelling-Sin in Believers, treated of by the Apostle, Romans 7. 21. The Place
explained.

IT is of Indwelling-sin, and that in the remainders of it in Persons after
their Conversion to God, with its power, efficacy, and effects, that we intend
to treat. This also is the great design of the Apostle, to manifest and evince
in c. 7. of the Epistle to the Romans. Many indeed are the contests about the
principal scope of the Apostle in that Chapter, and in what state the Person
is, under the Law, or under Grace whose condition he expresses therein. I
shall not at present enter into that dispute, but take that for granted, which
may be undeniably proved and evinced; namely, that it is the condition of a
Regenerate Person, with respect unto the remaining power of Indwelling-sin,
which is there proposed, and exemplified by, and in the Person of the Apostle
himself. In that discourse therefore of his, shall the foundation be laid of
what we have to offer upon this subject. Not that I shall proceed in an
Exposition of his Revelation of this Truth, as it lies in its own contexture,
but only make use of what is delivered by him, as occasion shall offer it self.
And here first occurreth, that which he affirms, ver. 21. I find then a Law,
that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

There are four things observable in these words.

First, The Appellation he gives unto Indwelling-Sin, whereby the expresses
its power and efficacy, it is a Law. For that which he terms a Law, in this
verse, he calls in the foregoing, sin that dwells in him.

Secondly, The way whereby he came to the discovery of this Law, not
absolutely, and in its own nature, but in himself, he found it; I find a Law.

Thirdly, The frame of his soul and inward Man with this Law of Sin, and under
its discovery, He would do good.

Fourthly, The state and activity of this Law, when the soul is in that frame,
when it would do good, it is present with him. For what ends and purposes we
shall show afterward.

The first thing observable is the Compellation here used by the Apostle, he
calls Indwelling-Sin a Law. It is a Law.

A Law is taken either properly, for a directive Rule; or improperly, for an
operative effective Principle, which seems to have the force of a Law. In its
first sense, it is a Moral Rule which directs and commands, and sundry ways
moves and regulates the mind, and the will, as to the things which it requires,
or forbids. This is evidently the general nature and work of a Law. Some things
it commands, some things it forbids, with Rewards and Penalties, which move and
impel men to do the one, and avoid the other. Hence in a secondary sense, an
inward principle, that moves and enclines constantly unto any Actions, is
called a Law. The principle that is in the nature of every thing, moving and
carrying it toward its own end and rest, is called the Law of Nature. In this
respect every inward principle that inclines and urges unto operations or
actings suitable to it self, is a Law. So Romans 8. 2. The powerful and effectual
working of the Spirit and grace of Christ in the hearts of Believers, is called
the Law of the Spirit of life. And for this reason does the Apostle here call
Indwelling-sin a Law. It is a powerful and effectual indwelling-principle,
inclining and pressing unto actions agreeable and suitable unto its own nature.
This and no other is the intention of the Apostle in this expression. For
although that term, a Law, may sometimes intend a state and condition, and if
here so used, the meaning of the words should be, I find that this is my
condition, this is the state of things with me, that when I would do good evil
is present with me, which makes no great alteration in the principal intendment
of the place; yet properly it can denote nothing here, but the chief subject
treated of. For although the name of a Law be variously used by the Apostle in
this Chapter; yet when it relates unto sin, it is nowhere applied by him to the
condition of the person, but only to express either the nature, or the power of
sin it self: so ver. 23. I see another Law in my members, warring against the
Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity unto the law of sin which is in
my Members. That which he here calls the Law of his mind, from the principal
subject and seat of it, is in it self no other but the Law of the Spirit of
life, which is in Christ Jesus, chap. 8. 2. or the effectual power of the
Spirit of grace, as was said. But the Law as applied unto sin, has a double
sense; for as in the first place, I see a Law in my Members, it denotes the
being and nature of sin; so in the latter, leading into captivity to the Law of
sin which is in my Members, it signifies its power and efficacy. And both these
are comprised in the same name singly used, ver. 20. Now that which we observe
from this name, or term of a Law attributed unto sin, is, That There is an
exceeding efficacy and power in the remainders of Indwelling-sin in Believers,
with a constant working toward evil.

Thus it is in Believers, it is a Law even in them, though not to them. Though
its rule be broken, its strength weakened and impaired, its root mortified, yet
it is a Law still of great force and efficacy. There where it is least felt, it
is most powerful. Carnal men in reference unto spiritual and moral duties, are
nothing but this Law, they do nothing but from it, and by it. It is in them a
ruling and prevailing principle of all moral actions, with reference unto a
supernatural and eternal end. I shall not consider it in them in whom it has
most power, but in them in whom its power is chiefly discovered and discerned,
that is in Believers, in the others only in order to the farther conviction and
manifestation thereof.

2dly, The Apostle proposes the way whereby he discovered this Law in himself,
(...), I find then, or therefore a Law. He found it; it had been told him there
was such a Law, it had been preached unto him. This convinced him, that there
was a Law of Sin. But it is one thing for a man to know in general, that there
is a Law of Sin: Another thing for a man to have an experience of the power of
this Law of sin in himself. It is preached to all; all men that own the
Scripture acknowledge it, as being declared therein; but they are but few that
know it in themselves, we should else have more complaints of it than we have,
and more contendings against it, and less fruits of it in the world. But this
is that which the Apostle affirms; not that the Doctrine of it had been
preached unto him, but that he found it by experience in himself. I find a Law;
I have experience of its power and efficacy. For a man to find his sickness and
danger thereon from its effects, is another thing than to hear a discourse
about a disease from its causes. And this experience is the great preservative
of all Divine Truths in the soul. This it is to know a thing indeed, in
reality, to know it for our selves, when as we are taught it from the Word, so
we find it in our selves. Hence we observe,

Secondly, Believers have experience of the power and efficacy of
Indwelling-Sin. They find it in themselves, they find it as a Law. It h^th a
self-evidencing efficacy to them that are alive to discern it: They that find
not its power, are under its Dominion. Whosoever contend against it, shall know
and find, that it is present with them, that it is powerful in them. He shall
find the stream to be strong, who swims against it, though he who rouls along
with it, be insensible of it.

Thirdly, The general frame of Believers notwithstanding the inhabitation of
this Law of Sin, is here also expressed. They would do good. This Law is
present (...). The habitual inclination of their will is unto good. This Law in
them, is not a Law unto them, as it is to Unbelievers. They are not wholly
obnoxious to its power, nor morally unto its commands. Grace has the
Sovereignty in their souls; This gives them a Will unto good; they would do
good, that is, always and constantly, 1 John 3. 9. (...), to commit sin, is to
make a trade of sin, to make it a man's business to sin; so it is said, a
Believer does not commit sin. And so (...), to do that which is good; to will
to do so; is to have the habitual bent and inclination of the will set on that
which is good, that is, morally and spiritually good, which is the proper
subject treated of; whence is our Third Observation.

There is, and there is through grace kept up in Believers, a constant and
ordinarily prevailing will of doing good, notwithstanding the power and efficacy
of Indwelling-Sin to the contrary.

This in their worst condition, distinguishes them from Unbelievers in their
best. The Will in unbelievers is under the power of the Law of sin. The
opposition they make to sin, either in the root, or branches of it, is from
their light, and their consciences; the will of sinning in them is never taken
away* Take away all other considerations and hindrances, whereof we shall
treat afterward, and they would sin willingly always. Their faint endeavors
to answer their convictions, are far from a will of doing that which is good.
They will plead indeed, that they would leave their sins, if they could, and
they would fain do better than they do. But it is the working of their Light
and Convictions, not any spiritual inclination of their wills, which they
intend by that expression. For where there is a will of doing good, there is a
choice of that which is good for its own excellency sake, because it is
desirable and suitable to the soul, and therefore to be preferred before that
which is contrary. Now this is not in any unbelievers; they do not, they cannot
so choose that which is spiritually good, nor is it so excellent or suitable
unto any principle that is in them: only they have some desires to attain that
end, whereunto that which is good does lead, and to avoid that evil which the
neglect of it tends unto. And these also are for the most part so weak and
languid in many of them, that they put them not upon any considerable
endeavors; witness that luxury, sloth, worldliness and security, that the
generality of men are even drowned in. But in believers there is a will of
doing good, an habitual disposition and inclination in their wills unto that
which is spiritually good. And where this is, it is accompanied with answerable
effects. The will is the principle of our moral actions, and therefore unto the
prevailing disposition thereof, will the general course of our actings be
suited. Good things will proceed from the good treasures of the heart. Nor can
this disposition be evidenced to be in any but by its fruits. A will of doing
good, without doing good, is but pretended.

Fourthly, There is yet another thing remaining in these words of the Apostle,
arising from that respect that the presence of sin has unto the time and
season of duty: When I would do good, (says he) evils is present with me.

There are two thing to be considered in the will of doing good, that is in
Believers.

First, There is its habitual residence in them. They have always an habitual
inclination of will unto that which is good. And this habitual preparation for
good is always present with them, as the Apostle expresses it, ver. 18. of this
Chapter.

Secondly, There are special times and seasons for the exercise of that
principle. There is a, When I would do good, a season wherein this or that
good, this or that duty is to be performed and accomplished, suitably unto the
habitual preparation and inclination of the will.

Unto these two, there are two things in Indwelling-sin opposed. To the
gracious principle residing in the will, inclining unto that which is
spiritually good, it is opposed as it is a Law that is a contrary priciple
inclining unto evil, with an aversation from that which is good. Unto the
second, or the actual willing of this or that good in particular, unto this,
when I would do good, is opposed the presence of this Law, evil is present with
me, (...); evil is at hand and ready to oppose the actual accomplishment of the
good aimed at. Whence,

Fourthly, Indwelling-sin is effectually operative in rebelling and inclining
to evil, when the will of doing good is in a particular manner active, and
inclining unto obedience.

And this is the description of him who is a Believer, and a sinner, as every
one who is the former, he is the latter also. These are the contrary
principles, and the contrary operations that are in him. The principles are a
will of doing good on the one hand, from grace, and a Law of sin on the other.
Their adverse actings and operations are insinuated in those expressions, When
I would do good, evil is present with me. And these both are more fully
expressed by the Apostle, Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other;
so that I cannot do the things that I would.

And here lie the springs of the whole course of our obedience. An acquaintance
with these several principles, and their actings, is the principal part of our
wisdom. They are, upon the matter, next to the free grace of God in our
Justification by the blood of Christ, the only things wherein the glory of God
and our own souls are concerned. These are the springs of our holiness, and our
sins, of our joys and troubles, of our refreshments and sorrows. It is then all
our concernments to be thoroughly acquainted with these things, who intend to
walk with God, or to glorify him in this world.

And hence we may see what wisdom is required, in the guiding and management of
our hearts and ways before God. Where the subjects of a Ruler are in fewds and
oppositions one against another, unless great wisdom be used in the government
of the whole, all things will quickly be ruinous in that State. There are these
contrary principles in the hearts of Believers, and if they labor not to be
spiritually wise, how shall they be able to steer their course aright? Many men
live in the dark to themselves all their days; what ever else they know, they
know not themselves. They know their outward estates, how rich they are, and
the condition of their bodies as to health and sickness they are careful to
examine; but as to their inward man, and their principles as to God and
Eternity, they know little or nothing of themselves. Indeed few labor to grow
wise in this matter, few study themselves as they ought, are acquainted with
the evil of their own hearts as they ought, on which yet the whole course of
their obedience, and consequently of their eternal condition does depend. This
therefore is our wisdom, and it is a needful wisdom, if we have any design to
please God, or to avoid that which is a provocation to the eyes of his glory.

We shall find also in our inquiry hereinto, what diligence and watchfulness is
required unto a Christian conversation. There is a constant enemy unto it in
every ones heart: and what an enemy it is we shall afterward show, for this is
our design to discover him to the uttermost. In the mean time we may well
bewail the woeful sloth and negligence that is in the most, even of Professors.
They live and walk as though they intended to go to heaven hood-wink^, and
asleep, as though they had no enemy to deal withal. Their mistake therefore
and folly will be fully laid open in our Progress.

That which I shall principally fix upon, in reference unto our present design,
from this place of the Apostle, is that which was first laid down, namely, that
there is an exceeding efficacy and power in the remainder of indwelling-sin in
Believers, with a constant inclination and working toward evil.

Awake therefore, all of you in whose hearts are any thing of the ways of God.
Your enemy is not only upon you, as on Sampson of old, but is in you also. He
is at work by all ways of force and craft, as we shall see. Would you not
dishonor God and his Gospel, would you not scandalize the Saints and ways of
God, would you not wound your consciences, and endanger your souls, would you
not grieve the good and holy Spirit of God, the Author of all your comforts;
would you keep your garments undefiled, and escape the woeful temptations and
pollutions of the days wherein we live; would you be preserved from the number
of the Apostates in these latter days? awake to the consideration of this
cursed enemy, which is the spring of all these and innumerable other evils, as
also of the ruin of all the souls that perish in this world.

CHAP. II.
Indwelling^Sin a Law. In what sense it is so called. What kind of Law it is.
An inward effective Principle called a Law. The power of sin thence evinced.

THat which we have proposed unto consideration is the power and efficacy of
Indwelling-sin. The ways whereby it may be evinced are many. I shall begin with
the Appellation of it in the place before mentioned, it is a Law; I find a Law,
says the Apostle. It is because of its power and efficacy that it is so
called; so is also the principle of grace in Believers the Law of the spirit of
life, as we observed before, Romans 8. 3. which is the exceeding greatness of the
power of God in them, Ephesians. 1. 19. Where there is a Law* there is power.

We shall therefore show both what belongs unto it, as it is a Law in general,
and also what is peculiar or proper in it, as being such a Law as we have
described.

There are in general two things attending every Law, as such.

First, Dominion. Romans 7. 1. The Law has dominion over a man whilst he lives;
(...), it Lordeth it over a man. Where any Law takes place, (...), it has
dominion. It is properly the act of a Superior, and it belongs to its nature
to exact obedience by way of dominion. Now there is a twofold dominion, as
there is a twofold Law. There is a moral authoritative dominion over a man,
and there is a real effective dominion in a man. The first is an affection of
the Law of God, the latter of the Law of sin. The Law of sin has not in it
self a moral dominion, it has not a rightful dominion or authority over any
man, but it has that which is equivalent unto it; whence it is said (...), to
reign as a King, Romans 6. 12. and (...), to Lord it, or have dominion, ver. 14.
as a Law in general is said to have, chap. 7. 1. But because it has lost its
complete dominion, in reference unto Believers, of whom alone we speak, I shall
not insist upon it in this utmost extent of its power. But even in them it is a
Law still, though not a Law unto them; yet, as was said, it is a Law in them.
And though it have not a complete, and as it were a rightful dominion over
them, yet it will have a domination as to some things in them. It is still a
Law, and that in them, so that all its actings are the actings of a Law; that
is, it acts with power, though it have lost its complete power of ruling in
them. Though it be weakened, yet its nature is not changed. It is a Law still,
and therefore powerful. And as its particular workings (which we shall
afterward consider) are the ground of this Appellation, so the term it self
teaches us in general, what we are to expect from it, and what endeavors it
will use for dominion, to which it has been accustomed.

Secondly, A Law, as a Law, has an efficacy to provoke those that are
obnoxious unto it unto the things that it requires. A Law has Rewards and
Punishments accompanying of it. These secretly prevail on them to whom they are
proposed, though the things commanded be not much desirable, And generally all
Laws have their efficacy on the minds of men from the Rewards and Punishments
that are annexed unto them. Nor is this Law without this spring of power: it
has its rewards and punishments. The pleasures of sin are the rewards of sin;
a reward that most men lose their souls to obtain. By this the Law of sin,
contended in Moses against the Law of grace, Heb. 11. 25, 26. He chose rather
to suffer afflictions with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season; for he looked unto the recompense of reward. The contest was
in his mind between the Law of sin, and the Law of grace. The motive on the
part of the Law of sin, wherewith it sought to draw him over, and wherewith it
prevails on the most, was the reward that it proposed unto him, namely that he
should have the present enjoyment of the pleasures of sin, By this it contended
against the reward annexed unto the Law of Grace, called the Recompense of
reward.

By this sorry reward does this Law keep the world in obedience to its
commands. And experience show us, of what power it is to influence the minds of
men. It has also Punishments that it threatens men with, who labor to cast
off its yoke. What ever evil, trouble or danger in the world attends Gospel
obedience; what ever hardship or violence is to be offered to the sensual part
of our natures in a strict course of mortification, sin makes use of as if they
were punishments attending the neglect of its commands. By these it prevails on
the fearful, who shall have no share in life eternal, Rev. 21. 8. And it is
hard to say by whether of these, its pretended rewards, or pretended
punishments, it does most prevail, in whether of them its greatest strength
does lie. By its rewards it inticeth men to sins of commission, as they are
called, in ways and actions tending to the satisfaction of its lusts. By its
punishments it induces men to the omitting of duties, a course tending to no
less a pernicious event than the former. By which of these the Law of sin has
its greatest success in and upon the souls of men, is not evident, and that
because they are seldom or never separated, but equally take place on the same
persons. But this is certain, that by tenders and promises of the pleasures of
sin on the one hand, by threats of the deprivation of all sensual contentments;
and the infliction of temporal evils on the other, it has an exceeding
efficacy on the minds of men, oftentimes of Believers themselves. Unless a man
be prepared to reject the reasonings that will offer themselves from the one
and the other of these, there is no standing before the power of this Law. The
world falls before them every day, With what deceit and violence they are urged
and imposed on the minds of men, we shall afterward declare; as also what
advantages they have to prevail upon them. Look on the generality of men, and
you shall find them wholly by these means at sins disposal. Do the profits and
pleasures of sin lie before them, nothing can withhold them from reaching after
them. Do difficulties and inconveniences attend the duties of the Gospel, they
will have nothing to do with them, and so are wholly given up to the Rule and
Dominion of this Law.

And this l^ght in general we have into the power and efficacy of
Indwelling-sin from the general nature of a Law, whereof it is partaker.

We may consider nextly what kind of Law in particular it is, which will
farther evidence that power of it, which we are enquiring after. It is not an
outward, written, commanding, directing Law, but an inbred, working, impelling,
urging Law. A Law proposed unto us, is not to be compared for efficacy to a Law
inbred in us. Adam had a Law of sin proposed to him in his temptation, but
because he had no Law of Sin inbred and working in him, he might have withstood
it. An inbred Law must needs be effectual. Let us take an example from that
Law, which is contrary to this Law of Sin. The Law of God, was at first inbred
and natural unto man, it was concreated with his faculties, and was their
rectitude both in being and operation in reference to his end of living unto
God, and glorifying of him. Hence it had an especial power in the whole soul,
to enable it unto all obedience, yea, and to make all obedience easy and
pleasant. Such is the power of an inbred Law. And though this Law as to the
rule and dominion of it, be now by nature cast out of the soul, yet the
remaining sparks of it, because they are inbred, are very powerful and
effectual, as the Apostle declares, Romans 2. 14, 15. Afterward God renews this
Law, and writes it in Tables of Stone; but what is the efficacy of this Law;
will it now as it is external, and proposed unto men, enable them to perform
the things that it exacts and requires? not at all. God knew it would not,
unless it were turned to an internal Law again; that is until of a moral
outward rule, it be turned into an inward real principle. Wherefore God makes
his Law internal again, and implants it on the heart as it was at first, when
he intends to give it power to produce obedience in his people, Jer. 31. 31,
32, 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts.
This is that which God fixes on, as it were upon a discovery of the
insufficiency of an outward Law leading men unto Obedience. The written Law,
says he, will not do it; Mercies and Deliverances from distress will not
effect it; Trials and Afflictions will not accomplish it; then says the Lord,
will I take another course; I will turn the written Law, into an internal
living Principle, in their hearts, and that will have such an efficacy, as
shall assuredly make them my People, and keep them so. Now such is this Law of
Sin, it is an Indwelling-Law, Romans 7. 17. It is sin that dwells in me, ver.
20. Sin that dwells in me, ver. 21. It is present with me, ver. 23. It is in
my Members; yea, it is so far in a man, as in some sense it is said to be the
man himself, ver. 18. I know that in me, that is in my flesh there dwells no
good thing. The flesh, which is the Seat and Throne of this Law, yea, which
indeed is this Law, is in some sense the man himself, as Grace also is the new
man. Now from this consideration of it, that it is an Indwelling-Law inclining
and moving to sin, as an inward habit or Principle, it has sundry advantages
increasing its strength and farthering its power. As,

First, It always abides in the soul, it is never absent. The Apostle twice
uses that expression, it dwells in me. There is its constant residence and
habitation. If it came upon the soul only at certain seasons, much obedience
might be perfectly accomplished in its absence. Yea, and as they deal with
usurping Tyrants, whom they intend to thrust out of a City, the gates might be
sometimes shut against it, that it might not return. The soul might fortify it
self against it. But the soul is its home, there it dwells, and is no wanderer.
Where ever you are, whatever you are about, this Law of Sin is always in you.
In the best that you do, and in the worst. Men little consider what a dangerous
companion is always at home with them. When they are in Company, when alone,
by night or by day, all is one, sin is with them. There is a living coal
continually in their houses, which if i^ be not looked unto, will fire them,
and it may be consume them. O the woeful security of poor souls! How little do
the most of men think of this Inbred Enemy, that is never from home! How little
for the most part does the watchfulness of any Professors answer the danger of
their state and condition.

Secondly, It is always ready to apply it self to every end and purpose that
it serves unto. It does not only dwell in me, says the Apostle, but when I
would do good, it is present with me: There is somewhat more in that
expression, than mere indwelling. An Inmate may dwell in an house, and yet not
be always m^dling with what the good man of the house has to do, (that so we
may keep to the allusion of Indwelling, used by the Apostle.) But it is so with
this Law, it does so dwell in us, as that it will be present with us in every
thing we do, yea, oftentimes when with most earnestness we desire to be quit of
it, with most violence it will put it self upon us: When I would do good, it is
present with me. Would you pray, would you hear, would you give Alms, would you
meditate, would you be in any duty acting faith on God, and love toward him,
would you work righteousness, would you resist temptations, this troublesome
perplexing Indweller will still more or less put it self upon you, and be
present with you; so that you cannot perfectly and completely accomplish the
thing that is good, as our Apostle speaks, ver. 18. Sometimes men by harkening
to their temptations, do stir up, excite and provoke their lusts; and no wonder
if then they find them present and active. But it will be so, when with all our
endeavors we labor to be free from them. This Law of Sin dwells in us, that
is, it adheres as a depraved principle unto our minds in darkness, and vanity,
unto our Affections in sensuality, unto our wills in a loathing of, and
aversation from that which is good, and by some, more, or all of these, is
continually putting it self upon us, in inclinations, motions, or suggestions
to evil, when we would be most gladly quit of it.

Thirdly, It being an indwelling-Law, it applies it self to its work with great
facility and easiness, like the sin that does so easily beset us, Heb. 12. 1.
It ^ath a great facility and easiness in the application of it self unto its
work; it needs no doors to be opened unto it, it needs no Engines to work by.
The soul cannot apply it self to any duty of a man, but it must be by the
exercise of those faculties wherein this Law has its residence. Is the
Understanding or the Mind to be applied unto any thing? there it is in
ignorance, darkness, vanity, folly, madness. Is the Will to be engaged, there
it is also in spiritual deadness, stubborness, and the roots of obstinacy? Is
the heart and Affections to be set on work, there it is in inclinations to the
world, and present things, and sensuality, with proneness to all manner of
defilements? Hence it is easy for it to insinuate it self into all that we do,
and to hinder all that is good, and to further all sin and wickedness. It has
an intimacy, an inwardness with the soul, and therefore in all that we do, does
easily beset us. It possesses those very faculties of the soul, whereby we
must do, what we do, what ever it be, good or evil. Now all these advantages it
has as it is a Law, as an Indwelling-Law which manifests its power and
efficacy. It is always resident in the soul, it puts its self upon all its
actings, and that with easiness and facility.

This is that Law which the Apostle asfirms, that he found in himself, this is
the title that he gives unto the powerful and effectual remainders of
Indwelling-Sin, even in Believers, and these general evidences of its power
from that Appellation have we. Many there are in the world, who find not this
Law in them, who whatever they have been taught in the word, have not a
spiritual sense and experience of the power of Indwelling-Sin, and that because
they are wholly under the Dominion of it. They find not that there is darkness
and folly in their minds, because they are darkness it self, and darkness will
discover nothing. They find not deadness and an indisposition in their hearts
and wills to God, because they are dead wholly in trespasses and sins. They are
at peace with their lusts, by being in bondage unto them. And this is the state
of most men in the world, which makes them woefully despise all their eternal
concernments. Whence is it that men follow and pursue the world with so much
greediness, that they neglect Heaven, and life, and immorrality for it every
day? Whence is it that some pursue their sensuality with delight, they will
drink, and revel, and have their sports, let others say what they please?
Whence is it that so many live so unprofitably under the word, that they
understand so little of what is spoken unto them, that they practice less of
what they understand, and will by no means be stirred up to answer the mind of
God in his calls unto them? It is all from this Law of Sin, and the power of it
that rules and bears sway in Men, that all these things do proceed; but it is
not such persons of whom at present we particularly treat.

From what has been spoken, it will ensue, that if there be such a Law in
Believers, it is doubtless their duty to find it out, to find it so to be.

The more they find its power, the less they will feel its effects. It will not
at all advantage a man to have an hectical distemper, and not to discover it; a
fire lying secretly in his house, and not to know it. So much as Men find of
this Law i^ them, so much they will abhor it and themselves, and no more.
Proportionably also to their discovery of it, will be their earnestness for
Grace; not will it rise higher. All watchfulness and diligence in obedience
will be answerable also thereunto. Upon this one hinge, or finding out, and
experiencing the power and the efficacy of this Law of Sin, turns the whole
course of our lives. Ignorance of it breeds senslesness, carelessness, sloth,
security and pride, all which the Lords soul abhors. Eruptions into great,
open, conscience-wasting, scandalous sins, are from want of a due spiritual
consideration of this Law. Enquire then how it is with your souls, what do you
find of this Law, what experience have you of its power and efficacy? Do you
find it dwelling in you, always present with you, exciting it self, or putting
forth its poison with facility and easiness, at all times, in all your duties,
when you would do good? what humiliation, what self-abasement, what intensness
in prayer, what diligence, what watchfulness does this call for at your hands?
What spiritual wisdom do you stand in need of? What supplies of Grace, what
assistance of the Holy Ghost will be hence also discovered? I fear we have few
of us a diligence proportionable to our danger.

CHAP. III.
The Seat or subject of the Law of Sin. The Heart, What meant thereby.
Properties of the Heart as possessed by sin. Unsearchable. Deceitful. Whence
that Deceit arises. Improvements of these Considerations.

HAving manifested Indwelling-Sin whereof we treat in the remainders of it in
Believers, to be a Law, and evinced in general, the power of it from thence, we
shall now proceed to give particular instances of its efficacy and advantages,
from some things that generally relate unto it as such. And these are three.
First, Its seat and subject: Secondly, Its natural properties; and Thirdly, Its
operations and the manner thereof, which principally we aim at, and shall
attend unto.

First, For the Seat and subject of this Law of Sin, the Scripture every where
assigns it to be the heart. There Indwelling-Sin keeps its especial residence.
It has invaded and possessed the Throne of God himself, Eccles. 9. 3. Madness
is in the heart of men whilst they live. This is their madness, or the root of
all that madness which appears in their lives, Matthew. 15. 19. Out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false
Witness, Blasphemies, etc. There are many outward temptations and provocations
that befall men, which excite and stir them up unto these evils. But they do
but as it were, open the Vessel, and let out what is laid up and stored in it.
The root, rise, and spring of all these things is in the heart. Temptations and
occasions put nothing into a man, but only draw out what was in him before.
Hence is that summary description of the whole work and effect of this Law of
sin, Genesis 6. 5. Every imagination of the thoughts of Man's heart is only evil
continually; So also, Chap. 8. 21. The whole work of the Law of Sin, from its
first rise, its first coining of actual sin, is here described, and its seat,
its workhouse, is said to be the heart. And so it is called by our Savior,
The evil treasure of the heart, Luke 6. 45. An evil man, out of the evil
treasure of his heart, brings forth evil things. This treasure is the
prevailing principle of moral actions that is in men. So in the beginning of
the Verse, our Savior calls Grace the good treasure of the heart of a good
man, whence that which is good does proceed. It is a principle constantly and
abundantly inciting and stirring up unto, and consequently bringing forth
actions conformable, and like unto it, of the same kind and nature with its
self. And it is also called a treasure for its abundance. It will never be
exhausted, it is not wasted by men's spending on it: yea, the more lavish men
are of this stock, the more they draw out of this treasure, the more it grows
and abounds: As men do not spend their Grace, but increase it by its exercises,
no more do they their Indwelling-Sin. The more men exercise their Grace in
duties of obedience, the more it is strengthened and increased. And the more
men exert and put forth the fruits of their lust, the more is that enraged and
increased in them. It feeds upon its self, swallows up its own poison, and
grows thereby. The more men sin, the more are they inclined unto sin. It is
from the deceitfulness of this Law of Sin, whereof we shall speak afterward at
large, that men persuade themselves, that by this or that particular sin, they
shall so satisfy their lusts, as that they shall need to sin no more. Every
sin increases the principle, and fortifieth the habit of sinning. It is an
evil treasure that increases by doing evil. And where does this treasure lie?
It is in the heart, there it is laid up, there it is kept in safety. All the
men in the world, all the Angels in Heaven, cannot dispossess a man of this
treasure, it is so sa^ely stored in the heart.

The heart in the Scripture is variously used. Sometimes for the mind and
understanding; sometimes for the will; sometimes for the Affections; sometimes
for the Conscience; sometimes for the whole soul. Generally it denotes the
whole soul of man, and all the faculties of it, not absolutely, but as they are
all one principle of moral operations, as they all concur in our doing good or
evil. The mind as it enquireth, discerns, and judges what is to be done,
what refused; the Will, as it chooses, or refuses, and avoids; the Affections
as they like or dislike, cleave to, or have an aversation from that which is
proposed to them; the conscience as it warns, and determines, are all together
called the heart. And in this sense it is that we say the seat and subject of
this Law of Sin is the heart of man. Only we may add, that the Scripture
speaking of the heart, as the principle of men's good or evil actions, does
usually insinuate together with it two things belonging unto the manner of
their performance.

First, A suitableness and pleasingness unto the soul in the things that are
done. When men take delight, and are pleased in and with what they do, they are
said to do it heartily with their whole hearts. Thus when God himself blesses
his People in love and delight, he says, he does it with his whole heart, and
his whole soul, Jer. 32. 41.

Secondly, Resolution and constancy in such actions. And this also is denoted
in the Metaphorical expression before used of a Treasure, from whence men do
constantly take out the things which either they stand in need of; or do intend
to use.

This is the subject, the seat, the dwelling place of the Law of Sin. The heart
as it is the entire principle of moral operations, of doing good or evil, as
out of it proceed good or evil. Here dwells our Enemy: This is the Fort, the
Citadel of this Tyrant, where it maintains a rebellion against God all our
days. Sometimes it has more strength, and consequently more success;
sometimes less of the one, and of the other, but is always in rebellion
whilst we live.

That we may in our passage take a little view of the strength and power of sin
from this seat and subject of it, we may consider one or two properties of the
heart that exceedingly contribute thereunto. It is like an Enemy in war, whose
strength and power, lie not only in his numbers, and force of Men or Arms, but
also in the unconquerable Forts that he does possess. And such is the heart to
this enemy of God and our souls, as will appear from the properties of it,
whereof one or two shall be mentioned.

First, It is unsearchahle. Jer. 17. 9, 10. Who can know the heart? I the Lord
search it. The heart of man is pervious to God only; hence he takes the honor
of searching the heart to be as peculiar to himself, and as fully declaring him
to be God, as any other glorious Attribute of his Nature. We know not the
hearts of one another, we know not our own hearts as we ought. Many there are
that know not their hearts as to their general bent and disposition, whether it
be good or bad, sincere and sound, or corrupt and naught; but no one knows
all the secret intrigues, the windings and turnings, the actings and
aversations of his own heart. Has any one the perfect measure of his own light
and darkness? Can any one know what actings of choosing or aversation his Will
will bring forth, upon the proposal of that endless variety of objects that it
is to be exercised with? Can any one traverse the various mutability of his
affections? Do the secret springs of acting and refusing in the soul, lie
before the eyes of any man? Does any one know what will be the motions of the
mind or will, in such and such conjunctions of things? Such a suiting of
objects, such a pretension of reasonings, such an appearance of things
desirable? All in heaven and earth but the Infinite All-seeing God, are utterly
ignorant of these things. In this unsearchable heart dwells the Law of sin, and
much of its security, and consequently of its strength, lies in this, that it
is past our finding out. We fight with an enemy whose secret strength we cannot
discover, whom we cannot follow into its retirements. Hence oftentimes, when we
are ready to think sin quite ruined, after a while we find it was but out of
fight. It has coverts and retreats in an unsearchable heart, whither we cannot
pursue it. The soul may persuade it self all is well, when sin may be safe in
the hidden darkness of the mind, which it is impossible that he should look
into, for what ever makes manifest is light. It may suppose the will of sinning
is utterly taken away, when yet there is an unsearchable reserve for a more
suitable object, a more vigorous temptation than at present it is tried withal.
Has a man had a contest with any lust, and a blessed victory over it by the
holy Ghost, as to that present trial; when he thinks it is utterly expelled, he
ere long finds that it was but retired out of fight. It can lie so close in the
minds darkness, in the wills indisposition, in the disorder and carnality of
the affections, that no eye can discover it. The best of our wisdom is but to
watch its first appearances, to catch its first under-earth heavings and
workings and to set our selves in opposition to them; for to follow it into the
secret corners of the heart, that we cannot do. It is true, there is yet a
relief in this case, namely that he to whom the work of destroying the Law of
sin, and body of death in us is principally committed, namely the holy Ghost,
comes with his Ax to the very root, neither is there any thing in an
unsearchable heart that is not open and naked unto him, Heb. 4. 12. But we in a
way of duty may hence see what an enemy we have to deal withal.

Secondly, As it is unsearchable, so it is deceitful, as in the place above
mentioned; it is deceitful above all things, incomparably so. There is great
deceit in the dealings of men in the world, great in their counsels and
contrivances in reference to their affairs private and public; great deceit in
their words and actings: the world is full of deceit and fraud. But all this is
nothing to the deceit that is in man's heart toward himself, for that is the
meaning of the expression in this place, and not toward others. Now
incomparable deceitfulness, added to unsearchableness, gives a great addition
and increase of strength of the Law of sin, upon the account of its seat and
subject. I speak not yet of the deceitfulness of sin it self, but the
deceitfulness of the heart where it is seated. Prove. 26. 25. There are seven
abominations in the heart; that is, not only many, but an absolute complete
number, as seven denotes: and they are such abominations as consist in
deceitfulness; so the caution foregoing insinuates, Trust him not; for it is
only deceit that should make us not to trust in that degree and measure which
the object is cabable of.

Now this deceitfulness of the heart, whereby it is exceedingly advantaged in
its harboring of sin, lies chiefly in these two things.

First, That it abounds in contradictions, so that it is not to be found and
dealt withal according to any constant rule, and way of procedure. There are
some men that have much of this from their natural constitution, or from other
causes in their conversation. They seem to be made up of contradictions;
sometimes to be very wise in their affairs, sometimes very foolish; very open,
and very reserved; very facile, and very obstinate; very easy to be entreated,
and very revengeful, all in a remarkable height. This is generally accounted a
bad character, and is seldom found but when it proceeds from some notable
predominant lust. But in general, in respect of moral good or evil, duty or
sin, it is so with the heart of every man; flaming hot, and key cold; weak, and
yet stubborn; obstinate, and facile. The frame of the heart is ready to
contradict it self every moment. Now you would think you had it all for such a
frame, such a way; anon it is quite otherwise: so that none know what to expect
from it. The rise of this is the disorder that is brought upon all its
faculties by sin. God created them all in a perfect harmony and union. The Mind
and Reason were in perfect subjection and subordination to God, and his Will;
the Will answered in its choice of good, the discovery made of it by the mind;
the Affections constantly and evenly followed the Understanding and Will. The
minds subjection to God was the spring of the orderly and harmonious motion of
the soul, and all the wheels in it. That being disturbed by sin, the rest of
the faculties move cross and contrary one to another; the Will chooses not the
good which the Mind discovers, the Affections delight not in that which the
Will chooses, but all jar and interfere, cross and rebel against each other.
This we have got by our falling from God. Hence sometimes the Will leads, the
Judgment follows. Yea, commonly the Affections that should attend upon all, get
the sovereignty, and draw the whole soul captive after them. And hence it is,
as I said, that the heart is made up of so many contradictions in its actings.
Sometimes the mind retains its sovereignty, and the affections are in
subjection, and the will ready for its duty. This puts a good face upon things.
Immediately the rebellion of the affections, or the obstinacy of the will take
place and prevail, and the whole Scene is changed. This, I say, makes the heart
deceitful above all things; it agrees not at all in it self, is not constant to
it self, has no order that it is constant unto, is under no certain conduct
that is stable, but if I may so say, has a rotation in it self, where
oft-times the feet lead and guide the whole.

Secondly, Its deceit lies in its full promisings upon the first appearance of
things. And this also proceeds from the same principle with the former.
Sometimes the affections are touched and wrought upon, the whole heart appears
in a fair frame, all promises to be well. Within a while the whole frame is
changed; the mind was not at all affected or turned; the affections a little
acted their parts and are gone off, and all the fair promises of the heart are
departed with them. Now add this deceitfulness to the unsearchableness before
mentioned, and we shall find, that at least the difficulty of dealing
effectually with sin in its seat and throne, will be exceedingly increased. A
deceiving and a deceived heart, who can deal with it? especially considering
that the heart imploys all its deceits unto the service of sin, contributes
them all to its furtherance. All the disorder that is in the heart, all its
false promises, and fair appearances, promote the interest and advantages of
sin. Hence God cautions the people to look to it, left their own hearts should
entice and deceive them.

Who can mention the treacheries and deceits that lie in the heart of man? It
is not for nothing that the holy Ghost so expresses it, It is deceitful above
all things; uncertain in what it does, and false in what it promises. And
hence moreover it is, amongst other causes, that in the pursuit of our war
against sin, we have not only the old work to go over and over, but new work
still while we live in this world; still new stratagems and wiles to deal
withal, as the manner will be where unsearchableness and deceitfulness are to
be contended with.

There are many other properties of this feat and subject of the Law of sin,
which might be insisted on to the same end and purpose, but that would too far
divert us from our particular design; and therefore I shall pass these over
with some few considerations.

Never let us reckon that our work in contending against sin, in crucifying,
mortifying, and subduing of it, is at an end. The place of its habitation is
unsearchable; and when we may think that we have thoroughly won the field, there
is still some reserve remaining that we saw not, that we knew not o^. Many
Conquerors have been ruined by their carelessness after a victory; and many have
been spiritually wounded after great successes against this enemy. David was
so, his great surprizal into sin was after a long profession, manifold
experiences of God, and watchful keeping himself from his iniquity. And hence
in part has it come to pass, that the profession of many has declined in
their old age, or riper time, which must more distinctly be spoken to
afterward. They have given over the work of mortifying of sin, before their
work was at an end. There is no way for us to pursue sin in its unsearchable
habitation, but by being endless in our pursuit. And that command of the
Apostle which we have, Colos. 3. 5. on this account is as necessary for them to
observe, who are toward the end of their race, as those that are but at the
beginning of it. Mortify therefore your members that are on the earth; be
always doing it whilst you live in this world. It is true, great ground is
obtained, when the work is vigorously and constantly carried on; sin is much
weakened, so that the soul presses forwards toward perfection. But yet the
work must be endless, I mean whilst we are in this world. If we give over, we
shall quickly see this enemy exerting it self with new strength and vigor. It
may be, under some great affliction, it may be in some eminent enjoyment of
God, in the sense of the sweetness of blessed communion with Christ, we have
been ready to say, that there was an end of sin, that it was dead and gone for
ever: But have we not found the contrary by experience? has it not manifested
that it was only retired into some unsearchable recesses of the heart, as to
its in-being and nature, though it may be greatly weakened in its power? Let us
then reckon on it, that there is no way to have our work done, but by always
doing of it; and he who dies fighting in this warfare, dies assuredly* a
Conqueror.

Secondly, Has it its residence in that which is various, inconstant,
deceitful above all things, this calls for perpetual watchfulness against it.
An open enemy that deals by violence only, always gives some respite; you know
where to have him, and what he is doing, so as that sometimes you may sleep
quietly without fear: But against adversaries that deal by deceit and
treachery, (which are long swords, and reach at the greatest distance) nothing
will give security but perpetual watchfulness. It is impossible we should in
this case be too jealous, doubtful, suspicious, or watchful. The heart has a
thousand wiles and deceits, and if we are in the least off from our watch, we
may be sure to be surprised. Hence are those reiterated commands and cautions
given for watching, for being circumspect, diligent, careful, and the like.
There is no living for them who have to deal with an enemy deceitful above all
things, unless they persist in such a frame. All cautions that are given in
this case are necessary, especially that, remember not to believe. Does the
heart promise fair, rest not on it, but say to the Lord Christ, Lord, do thou
undertake for me. Does the Sun shine fair in the morning, reckon not therefore
on a fair day; the clouds may arise and fall: though the morning give a fair
appearance of serenity and peace, turbulent affections may arise, and cloud the
soul with sin and darkness.

Thirdly then, commit the whole matter with all care and diligence unto him who
can search the heart to the uttermost, and knows how to prevent all its
treacheries and deceits. In the things before mentioned lies our duty, but here
lies our safety. There is no treacherous corner in our hearts, but he can
search it to the uttermost; there is no deceit in them but he can disappoint it.
This course David takes, Psalm. 139. after he had set forth the Omnipresence of
God, and his Omniscience, verse. 8, 9, 10. he makes improvement of it, verse 23.
Search me, O Lord, and try me. As if he had said, It is but a little that I
know of my deceitful heart, only I would be sincere, I would not have reserves
for sin retained therein; wherefore do thou, who art present with my heart, who
know my thoughts long before, undertake this work, perform it thoroughly, for
thou alone art able so to do.

There are yet other arguments for the eviden^ing of the power and strength of
Indwelling-sin from whence it is termed a Law, which we must pass through
according to the order wherein before we laid them down.

CHAP. IV.
Indwelling Sin Enmity against God. Thence its power. Admits of no peace nor
rest: Is against God himself, Acts it self in aversation from God; and
propensity to Evil. Is Universal. To all of God. In all of the soul. Cons^ant.

WE have seen the seat and subject of this Law of Sin. In the next place we
might take a view of its nature in general, which also will manifest its power
and efficacy. But this I shall not enlarge upon; it being not my business to
declare the nature of Indwelling-Sin, it has also been done by others. I shall
therefore only in reference unto our special design in hand, consider one
property of it, that belongs unto its nature: And this always where ever it
is. And this is that which is expressed by the Apostle, Romans 8. 7. The carnal
mind is enmity against God; that which is here called, (...), the wisdom of the
flesh, is the same with the Law of Sin, which we insist on. And what says he
hereof? Why it is (...), enmity against God It is not only an Enemy, for so
possibly some Reconciliation of it unto God might be made, but it is Enmity it
self, and so not capable of accepting any terms of peace. Enemies may be
reconciled, but enmity cannot. Yea, the only way to reconcile Enemies, is to
destroy the enmity. So the Apostle in another case tells us, Romans 5. 10. We who
were Enemies, are reconciled unto God; that is, a work compassed and brought
about by the blood of Christ; the reconciling of the greatest enemies. But when
he comes to speak of enmity, there is no way for it, but it must be abolished
and destroyed, Ephesians. 2. 15. Having abolished in his flesh the enmity: There is
no way to deal with any enmity whatever, but by its abolition or destruction.

And this also lies in it as it is enmity, that every part and parcel of it, if
we may so speak, the least degree of it that can possibly remain in any one,
whilst, and where there is any thing of its nature, is enmity still. It may
not be so effectual and powerful in operation, as where it has more life and
vigor, but it is enmity still. As every drop of poison, is poison, and will
infect, and every spark of fire, is fire, and will burn; so is every thing of
the Law of Sin, the last, the least of it, it is enmity, it will poison, it
will burn. That which is any thing in the abstract is still so; whilst it has
any being at all. Our Apostle who may well be supposed to have made as great a
progress in the subduing of it, as any one on the earth, yet after all cries
out for deliverance, as from an irreconcilable Enemy, Romans 7. 24. The meanest
acting, the meanest and most imperceptible working of it, is the acting and
working of enmity. Mortification abates of its force, but does not change its
nature. Grace changes the nature of man, but nothing can change the nature of
sin. What ever effect be wrought upon it, there is no effect wrought in it, but
that it is enmity still, sin still. This then by it is our astate and
condition, God is love, 1 John. 4. 8. He is so in himself, eternally excellent
and desirable above all. He is so to us, he is so in the blood of his Son, and
in all the inexpressible fruits of it, by which we are what we are, and wherein
all our future hopes and expectations are wrapped up. Against this God we carry
about us an enmity, all our days. An enmity that has this from its nature,
that it is incapable of cure or reconciliation. Destroyed it may be it shall
be, but cured it cannot be. If a man has an Enemy to deal withal that is too
mighty for him, as David had with Saul, he may take the course that he did;
consider what it is that provoked his Enemy against him, and so address himself
to remove the cause and make up his peace, 1 Samuel 26. 19. If the Lord have
stirred thee up against me, let him accept an Offering, but if they be the
Children of men, cursed be they of the Lord; come it from God or man, there is
yet hopes of peace. But when a man has enmity it self to deal withal, nothing
is to be expected but continual fighting to the destruction of the one party.
If it be not overcome and destroyed, it will overcome and destroy the soul.

And herein lies no small part of its power which we are enquiring after; it
can admit of no terms of peace, of no composition. There may be a composition,
where there is no Reconciliation. There may be a truce where there is no peace.
But with this Enemy we can obtain neither the one, nor the other. It is never
quiet conquering, nor conquered, which was the only kind of Enemy that the
famous Warrior complained of, of old. It is in vain for a man to have any
expectation of rest from his lust, but by its death, of absolute freedom, but
by his own. Some in the tumultuating of their corruptions, seek for quietness
by laboring ^o satisfy them, making provision for the flesh to fulfill the
lusts thereof; as the Apostle speaks, Romans 13. 14. This is to aslake Fire by
Wood and Oil. As all the fuel in the world, all the fabric of the creation
that is combustible, being cast into the fire, will not at all satisfy it, but
increase it; so is it with satisfaction given to sin by sinning, it does ^ut
inflame and increase. If a man will part with some of his goods unto an enemy,
it may satisfy him; but enmity will have all, and is not one whit the more
satisfied, that if he had received nothing at all. Like the lean Cattle that
were never the less hungry, for having devoured the fat. You cannot bargain
with the fire to take but so much of your houses, ye have no way but to quench
it. It is in this case, as it is in the contest between a wise Man and a Fool,
Prove. 29. 9. Whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest. What ever frame or
temper he be in, his importunate folly makes him troublesome. It is so with
this Indwelling-Sin, whether it rage or laugh, whether it violently tumultuate,
as it will do on provocations and temptations, it will be outrageous in the
soul, or whether ^t seem to be pleased and contented, to be satisfied, all is
one, there is no peace, no rest to be had with it, or by it. Had it then been
of any other nature, some other way might have been fixed on, ^ut being it
consists in enmity, all the relief the soul ^ath must lie in its ruin.

Secondly, It is not only said to be enmity, but it is said to be enmity
against God. It has chosen a great enemy indeed. It is in sundry places
proposed as our Enemy, 1 Pet. 2. 11. Abstain from fleshly lusts, which war
against the soul. They are enemies to the soul, that is, to our selves.
Sometimes as an Enemy to the Spirit that is in us, The flesh lusts or
fights against the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. It fights against the Spirit, or the
Spiritual principle that is in us, to conquer it* it fights against our souls
to destroy them. It has special ends and designs against our souls, and
against the principle of Grace that is in us; but its proper formal object is
God, it is enmity against God. It is its work to oppose Grace, it is a
consequent of its work to oppose our souls, which follows upon what it does,
more than what it intends; but its nature and formal design is to oppose God;
God as the Lawgiver, God as holy, God as the Author of the Gospel, a way of
salvation by Grace, and not by works, is the direct object of the Law of Sin.
Why does it oppose duty, so that the good we would do, we do not, either as to
matter or manner? Why does it render the soul carnal, indisposed, unbelieving,
unspiritual, weary, wandering? It is because of its enmity to God, whom the soul
aims to have communion withal in duty. It has as it were that command from
Satan, which the Assyrians had from their King, Fight neither with small nor
great, save only with the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22. 31. It is neither great
nor small, but God himself, the King of Israel, that sin sets it self against.
There lies the secret formal reason of all its opposition to good, even because
it relates unto God. May a road, a trade, a way of duties be set up, where
communion with God is not aimed at, but only the duty it self, as is the manner
of men in most of their superstitious Worship, the opposition that will lie
against it from the Law of Sin will be very weak, easy and gentle. Or as the
Assyrians because of his show of a King, assaulted Jehosaphat, but when they
found that it was not Ahab, they turned back from pursuing of him. Because
there is a show and appearance of the Worship of God, sin may make head against
it at first, but when the duty cries out in the heart, that indeed God is not
there; Sin turns away to seek out its proper Enemy, even God himself elsewhere.
And hence do many poor Creatures spend their days in dismal tiring
Superstitions, without any great reluctance from within, when others cannot be
suffered freely to watch with Christ in a spiritual manner one hour. And it is
no wonder that men fight with carnal weapons for their Superstitious Worship
without, when they have no fighting against it within. For God is not in it;
and the Law of Sin makes not opposition to any duty, but to God in every duty.
This is our state and condition, all the opposition that arises in us unto any
thing that is spiritually good, whether it be from darkness in the mind, or
aversation in the will, or sloth in the Affections, all the secret arguings and
reasonings that are in the soul in pursuit of them, the direct object of them
is God himself. The enmity lies against him, which consideration surely should
influence us to a perpetual constant watchfulness over our selves.

It is thus also in respect of all propensity unto sin, as well as aversation
from God. It is God himself that is aimed at. It is true, the pleasures, the
wages of sin do greatly influence the sensual carnal affections of men; but it
is the Holiness and Authority of God, that sin it self rises up against: It
hates the yoke of the Lord; Thou have been weary of me, says God to sinners,
and that during their performance of abundance of duties. Every act of sin is a
fruit of being weary of God. Thus Job tells us, what lies at the bottom in the
heart of sinners; they say to the Lord, depart from us; it is enmity against
him and aversation from him. Here lies the formal nature of every sin, it is an
opposition to God, a casting off his yoke, a breaking off the dependence which
the Creature ought to have on the Creator. And the Apostle, Romans 8. 7. gives
the reason why he affirms the carnal mind to be enmity against God; namely,
because it is not subject to the will of God, nor indeed can be. It never is,
nor will, nor can be subject to God, its whole nature consisting in an
opposition to him. The soul wherein it is, may be subject to the Law of God,
but this Law of Sin sets up in contrariety unto it, and will not be in
subjection.

To manifest a little farther the power of this Law of Sin from this property
of its nature, that it is enmity against God; one or two inseparable Adjuncts
of it may be considered, which will farther evince it.

First, it is universal; Some contentions are bounded unto some particular
concernments, this is about one thing, that about another. It is not so here;
the enmity is absolute and universal, as are all enmities that are grounded in
the nature of the things themselves. Such enmity is against the whole kind of
that which is its object. Such is this enmity; for First, It is Universal to
all of God; and Secondly, It is Universal in all of the soul.

First, It is universal to all of God. If there were any thing of God, his
nature, properties, his mind or will, his Law or Gospel, any duty of obedience
to him, of communion with him, that sin had not an enmity against, the soul
might have a constant shelter and retreat within it self, by applying it self
to that of God, to that of duty toward him, to that of communion with him,
that sin would make no opposition against. But the enmity lies against God, and
all of God, and every thing wherein or whereby we have to do with him. It is
not subject to the Law, nor any part nor parcel, word or tittle of the Law.
Whatever is opposite to any thing as such, is opposite unto all of it. Sin is
enmity to God as God, and therefore to all of God. Not his Goodness, not his
Holiness, not his Mercy, not his Grace, not his Promises: There is not any
thing of him, which it does not make head against; nor any duty, private,
public, in the heart, in external works, which it opposes not. And the nearer
(if I may so say) any thing is to God, the greater is its enmity unto it. The
more of spirituality and holiness is in any thing, the greater is its enmity.
That which has most of God, has most of its opposition. Concerning them in
whom this Law is predominant, God says, Ye have set at naught all my counsel,
and you would have none of my reproof, Prove. 1. 25. Not this or that part of
Gods counsel, his mind or will is opposed, but all his counsel; whatever he
calls for, or guides unto, in every particular of it, all is set at naught,
and nothing of his reproof attended unto. A man would think it not very strange
that sin should maintain an enmity against God in his Law, which comes to judge
it, to condemn it; but it raises a greater enmity against him in his Gospel,
wherein he tenders mercy and pardon, as a deliverance from it, and that merely
because more of the glorious properties of God nature, more of his excellencies
and condescension, is manifested therein, than in the other.

Secondly, It is universal in all of the soul. Would this Law of Sin have
contented it self to have subdued any one faculty of the soul, would it have
left any one at liberty, any one affection free from its yoke and bondage, it
might possibly have been with more ease opposed, or subdued. But when Christ
comes with his spiritual power upon the soul to conquer it to himself, he has
no quiet landing place. He can set foot on no ground but what he must fight for
and conquer. Not the mind, not an Affection, not the will, but all is secured
against him. And when Grace has made its entrance; yet sin will dwell in all
its coasts. Were any thing in the soul at perfect freedom and liberty, there a
stand might be made to drive it from all the rest of its holds: But it is
universal, and wars in the whole soul. The mind has its own darkness and
vanity to wrestle with; the will its own stubborness, obstinacy and
perverseness, every affection its own frowardness and aversation from God, and
its sensuality to deal withal; so that one cannot yield relief unto one
another, as they ought; they have as it were, their hands full at home. Hence
it is that our knowledge is imperfect, our obedience weak, love not immixed,
fear not pure, delight not free and noble. But I must not insist on these
particulars, or I could abundantly show how diffused this principle of enmity
against God is through the whole soul.

Secondly, Hereunto might be added its constancy. It is constant unto it self,
it wavers not, it has no thoughts of yielding or giving over, notwithstanding
the powerful opposition that is made unto it both by the Law and Gospel, as
afterward shall be showed.

This then is a third Evidence of the power of sin, taken from its nature and
properties, wherein I have fixed but on one instance for its Illustration,
namely, that it is enmity against God, and that universal and constant. Should
we enter upon a full description of it, it would require more space and time
than we have allotted to this whole subject. What has been delivered might
give us a little sense of it, if it be the will of God, and stir us up unto
watchfulness. What can be of a more sad consideration than that we should carry
about us constantly that which is enmity against God, and that not in this or
that particular, but in all that he is, and in all wherein he has revealed
himself. I cannot say it is well with them who find it not. It is well with
them indeed in whom it is weakened, and the power of it abated. But yet for them
who say it is not in them, they do but deceive themselves, and there is no
truth in them.

CHAP. V.
Nature of Sin farther discovered as it is enmity against God. Its aversation
from all good, opened. Means to prevent the effects of it prescribed.

WE have considered somewhat of the nature of Indwelling-sin, not absolutely,
but in reference unto the discovery of its power. But this more cleary
evidenceth it self in its actings and operations. Power is an act of life, and
operation is the only discoverer of life. We know not that any thing lives, but
by the effects and works of life. And great and strong operations discover a
powerful and vigorous life. Such are the operations of this Law of sin, which
are all demonstrations of its power.

That which we have declared concerning its nature, is that it consists in
enmity. Now there are two general heads of the working or operation of enmity.
First, Aversation. Secondly, Opposition.

First, Aversation. Our Savior describing the enmity that was between himself
and the Theachers of the Jews, by the effects of it, says in the Prophet, My
soul loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me, Zach. 7. 8. Where there is
mutual enmity, there is mutual aversation, loathing, and abomination. So it was
between the Jews and the Samaritans, they were enemies, and abhorred one
another; as Joh. 4. 9.

Secondly, Opposition, or contending against one another, is the next product
of enmity, Isa. 63. 10. He was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against
them; speaking of God toward the people. Where there is enmity, there will be
fighting, it is the proper and natural product of it. Now both these effects
are found in this Law of sin.

First, For Aversation, there is an aversation in it unto God, and every thing
of God, as we have in part discovered in handling the enmity it self, and so
shall not need much to insist upon it again. All indisposition unto duty,
wherein communion with God is to be obtained, all weariness of duty, all
carnality or formality under duty, it all springs from this root. The wise man
cautions us against this evil, Eccles. 5. 1. When thou go to the house of
God, keep thy foot. Have thou any spiritual duty to perform, and do thou
design the attaining of any communion with God? look to thy self, take care of
thy affections, they will be gadding and wandering, and that from their
aversation to what thou have in hand. There is not any good that we would do,
wherein we may not find this aversation exercising it self. When I would do
good, evil is present with me; at any time, at all times, when I would do any
thing that is spiritually good, it is present; that is, to hinder me, to
obstruct me in my duty, because it abhors and loathes the thing which I have in
hand, it will keep me off from it if it be possible. In them in whom it
prevails, it comes at length unto that frame which is expressed, Ezech. 33. 31.
It will allow an outward bodily presence unto the worship of God, wherein it is
not concerned, but it keeps the heart quite away.

It may be some will pretend, they find it not so in themselves, but they have
freedom and liberty in and unto all the duties of obedience that they attend
unto. But I fear, this pretended liberty will be found upon examination to
arise from one or both of these causes. First, Ignorance of the true state and
condition of their own souls, of their inward man and its actings toward God.
They know not how it is with them, and therefore are not to be believed in what
they report. They are in the dark and neither know what they do, nor whither
they are going. It is like the Pharisee knew little of this matter, which made
him boast of his duties to God himself. Or, secondly, It may be what ever
duties of worship or obedience such persons perform, they may through want of
faith, and an interest in Christ, have no communion with God in them. And if
so, sin will make but little opposition unto them therein. We speak of them
whose hearts are exercised with these things, and if under their complaints of
them, and groanings for deliverance from them, others cry out unto them, Stand
off, we are holier than ye, they are willing to bear their condition, as
knowing that their way may be safe, though it be troublesome, and being willing
to see their own dangers, that they may avoid the ruin which others fall into.

Let us then a little consider this aversation in such acts of obedience, as
wherein there is no concernment but that of God and the soul. In public duties
there may be a mixture of other considerations; they may be so influenced by
custom and necessity, that a right judgment cannot from them be made of this
matter. But let us take into consideration the duties of retirement, as private
Prayer and Meditation, and the like; or else extraordinary duties, or duties to
be performed in an extraordinary manner.

First, In these will this aversation and loathing oftentimes discover it self
in the affections. A secret striving will be in them about close and cordial
dealing with God. Unless the hand of God in his Spirit be high and strong upon
the soul, even when convictions, sense of duty, dear and real esteem of God,
and communion with him, have carried the soul into its closet, yet if there be
not the vigor and power of a spiritual life constantly at work, there will be
a secret lothness in them unto duty; yea, sometimes there will be a violent
inclination to the contrary; so that the soul had rather do any thing, embrace
any diversion, though it would it self thereby, than vigorously apply it self
unto that which in the inward man it breaths after. It is weary before it
begins, and says, when will the work be over? Here God and the soul are
immediately concerned, and it is a great conquest to do what we would, though
we come exceedingly short of what we should do. Secondly, It discovers it self
in the mind also: when we address our selves to God in Christ, we are, as Job
speaks, to fill our mouths with arguments, Job 23. 4. that we may be able to
plead with him, as he calls upon us to do, Isa. 43. 26. Put me in remembrance,
let us plead together. Whence the Church is called upon to take unto it self
words or arguments in going to God, Hos. 14. 2. The sum is, that the Mind
should be furnished with the considerations that are prevailing with God, and
be in readiness to plead them, and to manage them in the most spiritual manner
to the best advantage. Now is there no difficulty to get the mind into such a
frame, as to lay out it self to the utmost in this work? to be clear, steady,
and constant in its duty? To draw out, and make use of its stores and furniture
of promises and experiences? It starts, wanders, flags all from this secret
aversation unto communion with God, which proceeds from the Law of
Indwelling-sin. Some complain that they can make no work of Meditation, they
cannot bend their minds unto it. I confess there may be a great cause of this,
in their want of a right understanding of the duty it self, and of the ways of
manageing the soul in it, which therefore I shall a little speak to afterward.
But yet this secret enmity has its hand in the loss they are at also, and that
both in their minds and in their affections. Others are forced to live in
family and public duties, they find such little benefit and success in
private. And here has been the beginning of the Apostasy of many Professors,
and the source of many foolish sensual opinions. Finding this aversation in
their minds and affections from closeness and constancy in private spiritual
duties, not knowing how to conquer and prevail against these difficulties
through him who enables us, they have at first been subdued to a neglect of
them, first partial, then total, until having lost all conscience of them, they
have had a door opened unto all sin and licentiousness, and so to a full and
utter Apostasy. I am persuaded there are very few that apostatize from a
profession of any continuance, such as our days abound withal, but their door
of entrance into the folly of backsliding, was either some great and notorious
sin that bloodied their consciences, tainted their affections, and intercepted
all delight of having any thing more to do with God; or else it was a course of
neglect in private duties, arising from a weariness of contending against that
powerful aversation which they found in themselves unto them. And this also
through the craft of Satan has been improved into many foolish and sensual
opinions, of living unto God without, and above any duties of communion. And we
find, that after men have for a while choked and blinded their consciences
with this pretense, cursed wickedness or sensuality has been the end of their
folly. And the reason of all this is, that the giving way to the Law of sin in
the least, is the giving strength unto it: To let it alone is to let it grow,
not to conquer it is to be conquered by it.

As it is in respect of private, so it is also in respect of public duties,
that have any thing extraordinary in them. What strivings, struglings, and
pleadings are there in the heart about them, especially against the
spirituality of them? Yea, in and under them, will not the mind and affections
sometimes be entangled with things uncouth, new and strange unto them, such as
at the time of the least serious business, a man would not deign to take into
his thoughts. But if the least loose, liberty or advantage be given unto
Indwelling-sin, if it be not perpetually watched over, it will work to a
strange and an unexpected issue. In brief, let the soul uncloath any duty what
ever, private or public, any thing that is called Good, let a man divest it of
all outward respects which secretly insinuate themselves into the mind, and
give it some complacency in what it is about, but do not render it acceptable
unto God, and he shall assuredly find somewhat of the power, and some of the
effects of this aversation. It begins in lothness and indisposition, goes on
with intangling the mind and affections with other things, and will end, if not
prevented, in weariness of God, which he complains of in his people, Isa. 43.
22. They ceased from duty because they were weary of God.

But this instance being of great importance unto Professors in their walking
with God, we must not pass it over without some intimations of directions for
them in their contending against it, and opposition to it. Only this must be
premised, that I am not giving directions for the mortifying of Indwelling-sin
in general, which is to be done alone by the Spirit of Christ, by virtue of our
union with him, Romans 8. 13. but only of our particular duty, with reference
unto this especial evil or effect of Indwelling-sin that we have a little
insisted on, or what in this single case the wisdom of faith seems to direct
unto, and call for; which will be our way and course in our process upon the
consideration of other effects of it.

First, The great means to prevent the fruits and effects of this aversation,
is the constant keeping of the soul in an universally holy frame. As this
weakens the whole Law of sin, so answerably all its properties; and particulary
this aversation. It is this frame only that will enable us to say with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 57. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed. It is
utterly impossible to keep the heart in a prevailing holy frame in any one
duty, unless it be so in and unto all and every one. If sin intanglements get
hold in any one thing, they will put themselves upon the soul in every thing. A
constant even frame and temper in all duties, in all ways, is the only
preservative for any one way. Let not him who is neglective in public persuade
himself, that all will be clear and easy in private or on the contrary. There
is an harmony in obedience, break but one part and you interrupt the whole. Our
wounds in particular arise generally from negligence as to the whole course. So
David informs us, Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have a
respect unto all thy commandments. An universal respect to all Gods
commandments, is the only preservative from shame. And nothing have we more
reason to be ashamed of, than the shameful miscarriages of our hearts in point
of duty, which are from the principle before mentioned.

Secondly, Labor to prevent the very beginnings of the workings of this
aversation; let grace be beforehand with it in every duty. We are directed, 1
Pet. 4. 7. to watch unto prayer; and as is is unto prayer, so unto every duty;
that is, to consider and take care that we be not hindered from within, nor
from without, as to a due performance of it. Watch against temptations to
oppose them, watch against the Aversation that is in sin to prevent it. As we
are not to give place to Satan, no more are we to sin. If it be not prevented
in its first attempts, it will prevail. My meaning is, whatever Good, as the
Apostle speaks, we have to do, and find evil present with us, as we shall find
it present, prevent its parlying with the soul, its insinuating of poison into
the mind and Affections, by a vigorous, holy, violent stirring up of the grace,
or graces that are to be acted and set at work peculiary in that duty. Let
Jacob come first into the world, or if prevented by the violence of Esau let
him lay hold on his heel to overthrow him, and obtain the birthright. Upon the
very first motion of Peter to our Savior, crying, Master, spare thy self, he
immediately replies, get thee behind me Satan. So ought we to say, get thee
gone thou Law of Sin, thou present evil, and it may be of the same use unto us.
Get grace then, up betimes unto Duty, and be early in the rebukes of sin.

Thirdly, Though it do its worst, yet be sure it never prevail to a conquest.
Be sure you be not wearied out by its pertinacy, nor driven from your hold by
its importunity; Do not faint by its opposition. Take the Apostles advice Heb.
6. 11. We desire that every one of you, do show the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope unto the end that ye be not slothful. Still hold out in the
same diligence. There are many ways whereby men are driven from a constant
holy performance of duties, all of them dangerous, if not pernicious to the
soul. Some are diverted by business, some by company, some by the power of
temptations, some discouraged by their own darkness; but none so dangerous as
this, when the soul gives over in part, or in whole, as wearied by the
Aversation of sin unto it, or to communion with God in it. This argues the
souls giving up of it self unto the power of sin, which unless the Lord break
the snare of Satan therein, will assuredly prove ruinous. Our Saviors
instruction is, that we ought always to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18. 1.
Opposition will arise, none so bitter and keen as that from our own hearts; if
we faint we perish. Take heed lest you be wearied, says the Apostle, and faint
in your minds, Heb. 12. 3. Such a fainting as is attended with a weariness and
that with a giving place to the Aversation working in our hearts, is to be
avoided, if we would not perish. The caution is the same with that of the same
Apostle, Romans 12. 12. Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing
instant in prayer. And in general with that of Chap. 6. 12. Let not sin
therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lust
thereof. To cease from duty, in part, or in whole, upon the Aversation of sin
unto its spirituality, is to give sin the Rule, and to obey it in the lust
thereof. Yield not then unto it, but hold out the conflict; wait on God and ye
shall prevail, Isa. 40. 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be
weary, and they shall walk and not faint. But that which is now so difficult,
will increase in difficulty if we give way unto it. But if we abide in our
station, we shall prevail, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Fourthly, Carry about a constant humbling sense of this close aversation unto
spiritualness that yet lies in our nature. If men find the efficacy of it, what
should, what consideration can be more powerful to bring them unto humble
walking with God. That after all the discoveries that God has made of himself
unto them, all the Kindness they have received from him, his doing of them good
and not evil in all things, there should yet be such an heart of unkindness and
unbelief, still abiding, as to have an Aversation lying in it to Communion with
Him: How ought the thoughts of it to cast us into the dust, to fill us with
shame and self-abhorrency all our days? What have we found in God in any of our
approaches or addresses unto him, that it should be thus with us? What iniquity
have we found in him? Has he been a Wilderness unto us, or a Land of Darkness?
Did we ever lose any thing by drawing nigh unto him? Nay, has not therein lain
all the rest and peace which we have obtained? Is not he the Fountain and
Spring of all our mercies, of all our desirable things? Has he not bid us
welcome at our coming? Have we not received from him more than heart can
conceive, or tongue express? What ails then our foolish and wretched hearts, to
harbor such a cursed secret dislike of him and his ways? Let us be ashamed and
astonished at the consideration of it, and walk in ^n humbling sense of it all
our days. Let us carry it about with us in the most secret of our thoughts.
And as this is a Duty in it self acceptable unto God, who delights to dwell
with them that are of an humble and contrite spirit; so it is of exceeding
efficacy to the weakening of the evil we ^reat of.

Fifthly, Labor to possess the mind with the beauty and excellency of
spiritual things, that so they may be presented lovely and desirable to the
^oul, and this cursed aversation of sin will be weakened thereby. It is an
innate acknowledged principle, that the soul of man will not keep up cheerfully
unto the Worship of God, unless it have a discovery of a beauty and comeliness
in it. Hence when men had lost all spiritual sense and savor of the things of
God, to supply the want that was in their own souls, they invented outwardly
pom^ous and gorgeous ways of worship, in Images, Paintings, Pictures, and I
know not what carnal ornaments which they have called the beauties of holiness.
Thus much however was discovered therein, that the mind of man must see a
beauty, a desirableness in the things of Gods Worship, or it will not delight
in it, aversation will prevail. Let then the soul labor to acquaint it self
with the spiritual beauty of obedience, of Communion with God, and of all
Duties of immediate approach to him, that (...) may be filled with delight in
them. It is not my present work to discover the heads and springs of that
beauty and desirableness which is in spiritual duties, in their relation to
God, the eternal spring ^f all beauty, to Christ, the Love, desire, and hope of
all Nations, to the Spirit the great Beautifier of souls, rendering them by his
grace all glorious within, in their suitableness to the souls of Men, as to
their actings toward their last end, in the rectitude and holiness of the Rule
in attendance whereunto they are to be performed; But I only say at present in
general, that to acquaint the soul thoroughly with these things is an eminent
way of weakening the Aversation spoken of.

CHAP. VI.
The Work of this Enmity against God, by way of Opposition. First, It lusts.
Wherein the lusting of Sin consists. It surprising of the soul. Readiness to
close with Temptations. Its fighting and warring. (1.) In Rebellion against the
Law of Grace. (2.) In Assaulting the soul.

HOw this enmity works by way of Aversation has been declared, as also the
means that the soul is to use for the preventing of its effects and prevalency.
The second way whereby it exerts its self is Opposition. Enmity will oppose and
contend with that wherewith it is at enmity. It is so in things natural and
moral. As light and darkness, heat and cold, so virtue and vice oppose each
other. So is it with sin and Grace, says the Apostle, these are contrary one
to the other, Gal. 5. 17. (...), they are placed and set in mutual opposition,
and that continually and constantly, as we shall see.

Now there are two ways whereby Enemies manage an opposition. First, By
force: and Secondly, by fraud and deceit. So when the Egyptians became Enemies
to the Children of Israel, and managed an enmity against them, Exodus 1. 10.
Pharaoh says, Let us deal wisely, or rather cunningly and subtly with this
People; for so Stephen with respect to this word, expresses it, Acts 7. 19. by
(...); He used all manner of fraudulent Sophistry. And unto this deceit they
added force, in their grievous oppressions. This is the way and manner of
things where there is a prevailing enmity. And both these are made use of by
the Law of Sin in its enmity against God, and our souls.

I shall begin with the First; or its actings as it were in a way of force, in
an open downright opposition to God and his Law, or the Good that a Believing
soul would do in obedience unto God, and his Law. And in this whole matter, we
must be careful to stear our course aright, taking the Scripture for our Guide,
with Spiritual Reason and Experience for our Companions. For there are many
Shelves in our course, which must diligently be avoided, that none who consider
these things be troubled without cause, or comforted without a just foundation.

In this First way, whereby this sin exerts its enmity in opposition, namely,
as it were by force or strength, there are four things expressing so many
distinct degrees in its progress and procedure in the pursuit of its enmity.

First, Its general Inclination, it lusts, Gal. 5. 17.

Secondly, Its particular way of contending, it fights or wars, Romans 7. 23.
James 4. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 11.

Thirdly, Its success in this contest, it brings the soul into Captivity to the
Law of Sin, Romans 7. 23.

Fourthly, Its growth and rage upon success, it comes up to madness, as an
enraged Enemy will do, Eccles. 9. 3. All which we must speak to in order.

First, In general it is said to Lust, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against
the Spirit. This word expresses the general nature of that opposition which
the Law of Sin makes against God, and the Rule o^ his Spirit or Grace in them
that believe, and therefore the least degree of that opposition is expressed
hereby. When it does any thing it lusts. As because burning is the general
acting of fire, what ever it does else, it does also burn. When fire does any
thing, it burns: And when the Law of Sin does any thing, it lusts.

Hence all the actings of this Law of Sin are called the lusts of the flesh,
Gal. 5. 16. Ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Romans 13. 14. Make no
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Nor are these lusts of the
flesh those only whereby men act their sensuality in riot, drunkenness,
uncleaness, and the like, but they comprehend all the actings of the Law of Sin
whatever in all the faculties and Affections of the soul. Thus Ephesians. 2. 3. We
have mention of the desires, or wills, or lusts of the mind, as well as of the
flesh. The mind the most spiritual part o^ the soul has its lusts, no less
than the sensual appetite, which seems sometimes more properly to be called the
flesh. And in the products of these lusts, there are defilements of the Spirit,
as well as of the flesh, 2 Cor. 7. 1. that is, of the mind and understanding,
as well as of the Appetite and Affections, and the body that attends their
service. And in the blamelesness of all these consists our holiness, 2 Thessalonians.
5. 23. The God of peace, sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole
Spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Yea, by the flesh in this matter the whole Old man, or the Law of
Sin is intended, John 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh; that is,
it is all so, and nothing else. And what ever remains of the old nature in the
new man is flesh still. And this flesh lusts; this Law of Sin does so, which
is the general bottom and foundation of all its opposition unto God. And this
(...) does two ways.

First* In an hidden close propensity unto all evil. This lies in it
habitually. Whilst a man is in the state of nature, fully under the power and
dominion of this Law of Sin, it is said, that every figment of his heart is
evil, and that continually, Genesis 6. 5. It can frame, fashion, produce, or act
nothing but what is evil: because this habitual propensity unto evil, that is
in the Law of Sin, is absolutely predominant in such a one. It is in the heart
like poison that has nothing to allay its venomous qualities, and so infects
whatever it touches. And where the power and dominion of it is broken, yet in
its own nature it has still an habitual propensity unto that which is evil,
wherein its lusting does consist.

But here we must distinguish between the habitual frame of the heart, and the
natural propensity or habitual inclination of the Law of Sin in the heart. The
habitual inclination of the heart is denominated from the principle that bears
Chief or Sovereign Rule in it; and therefore in Believers it is unto Good, unto
God, unto holiness, unto obedience. The heart is not habitually inclined unto
evil by the remainders of Indwelling Sin, but this Sin in the heart has a
constant habitual propensity unto evil in its self, or its own nature. This the
Apostle intends by its being present with us; it is present with me, that is,
always, and for its own end, which is to lust unto sin.

It is with Indwelling-Sin as with a River; whilst the Springs and Fountains
of it are open, and waters are continually supplied unto its streams, set a
damm before it, and it causes it to rise and swell, until it bear down all,
or overflow the banks about it. Let these waters b^ abated, dried up in some
good measure, in the springs of them, and the remainder may be coerced and
restrained. But still as long as there is any running water it will constantly
press upon what stands before it, according to its weight and strength, because
it is its nature so to do. And if by any means it make a passage, it will
proceed. So is it with Indwelling-Sin: whilst the springs and fountains of it
are open, in vain is it for men to set a damm before it by their convictions,
resolutions, vows and promises. They may check it for a while, but it will
increase, rise high, and rage at one time or another, until it bears down all
those convictions and resolutions, or makes it self an underground-passage by
some secret lust that shall give a full vent unto it. But now suppose that the
springs of it are much dried up by Regenerating Grace, the streams or actings
of it abated by Holiness, yet whilst any thing remains of it, it will be
pressing constantly to have vent, to press forward into actual sin. And this is
its lusting.

And this habitual propensity in it is discovered two ways.

First, In its unexpected surprizals of the soul into foolish sinful figments
and imaginations which it looked not for, nor was any occasion administered unto
them. It is with Indwelling-Sin, as it is with the contrary principle of
sanctifying Grace. This gives the soul, if I may so say, many a blessed
surprizal. It oftentimes ingenerates and brings forth an holy spiritual frame
in the heart and mind, when we have had no previous rational considerations to
work them thereunto. And this manifests it to be an habitual principle
prevailing in the mind: So Cant. 6. 12. Or ever I was aware my soul made me as
the Chariots of Aminadab; that is, free, willing and ready for communion with
Christ. (...) I knew not; it was done by the power of the Spirit of Grace, so
that I took no notice of it, as it were, until it was done. The frequent
actings of Grace in this manner, exciting acts of faith, love and complacency
in God, are Evidences of much strength and prevalency of^ in the soul. And thus
also is it with Indwelling-Sin; ere the soul is aware, without any provocation
or temptation, when it knows not, it is cast into a vain and ^oolish frame. S^n
produces its figments secretly in the heart, and prevents the minds
consideration of what it is about. I mean hereby those Actus primo primi, first
acts of the soul, which are thus far involuntary, as that they have not the
actual consent of the Will unto them; but are voluntary as far as sin has its
residence in the Will. And these surprizals, if the soul be not awake to take
speedy care for the prevention of their tendency, do oftentimes set all as it
were on fire, and engage the mind and affections into actual sin. For as by
Grace we are oftentimes ere we are aware made as the Chariots of a willing
people, and are far engaged in heavenly-mindedness and communion with Christ,
making speed in it as in a Chariot; so by sin are we oftentimes, ere we are
aware, carried into distempered affections, foolish imaginations, and pleasing
delightfulness in things that are not good nor profitable. Hence is that
caution of the Apostle, Gal. 6. 1. (...), If a man be surprised at unawares
with a fault or in a transgression. I doubt not but the subtilty of Satan, and
the power of temptation, are there taken into consideration by the Apostle,
which causes him to express a man's falling into sin, by (...), if he be
surprised; So this working of Indwelling-Sin also has its consideration in it,
and that in the chiefest place without which nothing else could surprise us.
For without the help thereof, what^ver comes from without, from Satan, or the
world, must admit of some parley in the mind before it be received, but it is
from within, from our selves that we are surprised. Hereby are we disappointed
and wrought over to do that which we would not, and hindered from the doing of
that which we would.

Hence it is, that when the soul is oftentimes doing as it were quite another
thing, engaged quite upon another design, sin starts that in the heart or
imaginations of it, that carries it away into that which is evil and sinful.
Yea, to manifest its power, sometimes when the soul is seriously engaged in the
mortification of any sin, it will by one means or other lead it away into a
dalliance with that very sin whose ruin it is seeking, and whose mortification
it is engaged in. But as there is in this operation of the Law of Sin, a
special enticing or entangling, we shall speak unto it fully afterward. Now
these surprizals can be from nothing but an habitual propensity unto evil in
the principle from whence they proceed. Not an habitual inclination unto actual
sin in the mind or heart, but an habitual propensity unto evil in the sin that
is in the mind or heart. This prevents the soul with its figments. How much
communion with God is hereby prevented, how many Meditations are disturbed, how
much the minds and Consciences of Men have been defiled by this acting of sin,
some may have observed. I know no greater burden in the life of a Believer
than these involuntary surprizals of soul involuntary I say, as to the actual
consent of the Will, but not so in respect of that corruption which is in the
Will, and is the Principle of them. And it is in respect unto these, that the
Apostle makes his complaint, Romans 7. 24.

Secondly, This habitual inclination manifests it self in its readiness and
promptness, without dispute or altercation to join and close with every
temptation, whereby it may possibly be excited. As we know it is in the nature
of fire to burn, because it immediately lays hold on whatever is combustible.
Let any temptation whatever be proposed unto a man, the suitableness of whose
matter unto his corruptions, or manner of its proposal, makes it a temptation;
immediately he has not only to do with the temptation as outwardly proposed,
but also with his own heart about it. Without farther consideration or debate,
the temptation has got a friend in him. Not a moments space is given between
the proposal, and the necessity there is incumbent on the soul to look to its
enemy within. And this also argues a constant habitual propensity unto evil.
Our Savior said of the assaults and temptations of Satan, The Prince of this
world comes, and he has no part in me, Joh. 14. 30. He had more temptations
intensively and extensively, in number, quality and fierceness, from Satan and
the world, than ever had any of the sons of men: But yet in all of them, he had
to deal only with that which came from without. His holy heart had nothing to
like them, suited to them, or ready to give them entertainment: The Prince of
this world had nothing in him. So it was with Adam; when a temptation be fell
him, he had only the outward proposal of it to look unto, all was well within,
until the outward temptation took place and prevailed. With us it is not so.

In a City that is at unity in it self, compact and entire, without divisions
and parties, if an enemy approach about it, the Rulers and Inhabitants have no
thoughts at all but only how they may oppose the enemy without, and resist him
in his approaches. But if the City be divided in it self, if there be factions
and Traitors within, the very first thing they do, is to look to the enemies at
home, the Traitors within; to cut off the head of Sheba, if they will be safe.
All was well with Adam within doors, when Satan came, so that he had nothing to
do but to look to his assaults and approaches. But now on the access of any
temptation, the soul is instantly to look in, where it shall find this Traitor
at work, closing with the baits of Satan, and stealing away the heart. And
this it does always, which evinceth an habitual inclination. Psalm. 38. 17.
says David, I am ready to halt, or for halting; (...), I am prepared and
disposed unto hallucination, to the slipping of my foot into sin, verse 16. as
he expounds the meaning of that phrase, Psalm. 73. 2, 3. There was from
Indwelling-sin a continual disposition in him to be slipping, stumbling,
halting on every occasion or temptation. There is nothing so vain, foolish,
ridiculous, fond, nothing so vile and abominable, nothing so atheistical or
execrable, but if it be proposed unto the soul in a way of temptation, there is
that in this Law of sin which is ready to answer it, before it be decried by
grace. And this is the first thing in this lusting of the Law of sin, it
consists in its habitual propensity unto evil, manifesting it self by the
involuntary surprisals of the soul unto sin, and its readiness without dispute
or consideration to join with all temptations whatsoever.

Secondly, Its lusting consists in its actual pressing after that which is
evil, and actual opposition unto that which is good. The former instances
showed its constant readiness to this work, this now treats of the work it
self. It is not only ready, but for the most part always engaged. It lusts
faith the holy Ghost, it does so continually. It stirs in the soul by one
act or other constantly, almost as the spirits in the blood, or the blood in
the veins. This the Apostle calls its tempting, Jam. 1. 14. Every man is
tempted of his own lust. Now what is it to be tempted? It is to have that
proposed to a man's consideration, which if he close withal, it is evil, it is
sin unto him. This is sins trade; (...), it lusts. It is raising up in the
heart, and proposing unto the mind and affections, that which is evil, trying,
as it were, whether the soul will close with its suggestions, or how far it can
carry them on, though it do not wholly prevail. Now when such a temptation
comes from without, it is unto the soul an indifferent thing, neither good nor
evil unless it be consented unto. But the very proposal from within, it being
the souls own act, is its sin. And this is the work of the Law of sin; it is
restlesly and continually raising up, and proposing innumerable various forms
and appearances of evil, in this or that kind, indeed in every kind, that the
nature of man is capable to exercise corruption in. Something or other, in
matter, or manner, or circumstance, inordinate, unspiritual, unanswerable unto
the Rule, it ha^cheth and proposes unto the soul. And this power of sin to
beget figments and idea's of actual evil in the heart the Apostle may have
respect unto, 1 Thessalonians. ^. 22. (...), Keep your selves from every evil figment
or idea of sin in the heart; for the word there used does not any where
signify an outward form or appearance; neither is it the appearance of evil,
but an evil idea or figment that is intended. And this lusting of sin is that
which the Prophet expresses in wicked men, in whom the Law of it is
predominant, Isa. 57. 20. The wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot
rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. A similitude most lively expressing
the lustings of the Law of sin, restlesly and continually bubling up in the
heart, with wicked, foolish and filthy imaginations and desires. This then is
the first thing in the opposition that this enmity makes to God, namely in its
general inclination, it lusts.

Secondly, There is its particular way of contending, it fights or wars; that
is, it acts with strength and violence, as men do in war. First, it lusts
stirring and moving inordinate figments in the Mind, desires in the appetite
and the Affections, proposing them to the W^ll. But it rests not there, it
cannot rest: it urges, presses and pursues its proposals with earnestness,
strength and vigor, fighting, and contending, and warring to obtain its end
and purpose. Would it merely s^^r up and propose things to the soul, and
immediately acquiesce in the sentence and judgment of the mind that the thing
is evil, against God, and his will, and not farther to be insisted on, much sin
might be prevented that is now produced. But it rests not here, it proceeds to
carry on its design, and that with earnestness and contention. By this means,
wicked men inflame themselves, Isa. 57. 5. They are self-inflamers, as the word
signifies, unto sin, every spark of sin is cherished in them until it grows
into a flame, and so it will do in others where it is so cherished.

Now this fighting or warring of sin consists in two things.

First, In its rebellion against grace, or the Law of the mind.

Secondly, In its assaulting the soul, contending for Rule and Sovereignty over
it.

The first is expressed by the Apostle, Romans 7. 23. I find, says he, another
Law, (...), rebelling against the Law of my mind. There are, it seems, two Laws
in us, the Law of the flesh, or of sin; and the Law of the mind, or of grace.
But contrary Laws cannot both obtain Sovereign power over the same person, at
the same time. The sovereign power in Believers, is in the hand of the Law of
grace; so the Apostle declares, verse 22. I delight in the Law of God in the
inward man. Obedience unto this Law is performed with delight and complacency
in the inward man, because its authority is lawful and good. So more expressly*
chap. 6. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the
Law but under grace. Now to war against the Law that has a just Sovereignty,
is to rebel; and so (...) signifies; it is to rebel, and ^ught to have been
so translated, reb^lling against the Law of my mind. And this rebellion
consists in a stubborn obstina^e opposition unto the commands and directions of
the Law of grace. Does the Law of the mind command any thing as duty? does it
severely rise up against any thing that is evil? When the lusting of the Law of
sin rises up to this degree, it contends against obedience with all its might,
the effect whereof, as the Apostle tells us, is the doing of that which we
would not, and the not doing of that which we would, verse 15, 16. And we may
gather a notable instance of the power of sin in this its rebellion from this
place. The Law of grace prevails upon the Will, so that it would do that which
is good. To will is present with me, ver. 18. When I would do good, ver. 19.
And again, ver. 21. And I would not do evil, ver. 19. 20. And it prevails upon
the understanding, so that it approves or disapproves according to the dictates
of the Law of grace. Ver. 16. I consent unto the Law that it is good; and verse
15. The Judgment always lies on the side of grace. It prevails also on the
affections, ver. 22. I delight in the Law of God in the inward man. Now if this
be so, that grace has the Sovereign power in the Understanding, Will, and
Affections, whence is it that it does not always prevail, that we do not always
do that which we would, and abstain from that which we would not? Is it not
strange that a man should not do that which he chooses, wills, likes,
delights in? Is there any thing more required to enable us unto that which is
good? The Law of grace does all as much as can be expected from it, that which
in it self is abundantly sufficient for the perfecting of all holiness in the
fear of the Lord. But here lies the difficulty, in the intangling opposition
that is made by the rebellion of this Law of sin. Neither is it expressible
with what vigor and variety sin acts it self in this matter. Sometimes it
proposes diversions, sometimes it causes weariness, sometimes it finds out
difficulties, sometimes it stirs up contrary affections, sometimes it begets
prejudices, and one way or other intangles the soul, so that it never suffers
grace to have an absolute and complete success in any duty. Verse 18. (...), I
find not the way perfectly to work out, or accomplish that which is good; so
the word signifies; and that from this opposition and resistance that is made
by the Law of sin. Now this rebellion appears in two things.

First, In the opposition that it makes unto the general purpose and course of
the soul.

Secondly, In the opposition it makes unto particular duties.

First, In the opposition it makes to the general purpose and course of the
soul. There is none in whom is the Spirit of Christ, that is his, but it is his
general design and purpose to walk in an universal conformity unto him in all
things. Even from the inward frame of the heart, to the whole compass of his
outward actions, so it is with him. This God requires in his Covenant, Genesis 17.
1. Walk before me, and be thou perfect. Accordingly his design is to walk
before God, and his frame is sincerity and uprightness therein. This is called,
Cleaving unto the Lord with purpose of heart, Acts. 11. 23. that is, in all
things, and that not with a sloathful, dead, ineffectual purpose, but such as
is operative, and sets the whole soul at work in pursuit of it. This the
Apostle sets forth, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend that
for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self
to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. He uses
three words excellently expressing the souls universal pursuit of this purpose
of heart in cleaving unto God, First, says he, (...), ver. 12. I follow after,
prosecute; the word signifies properly to persecute, which with what
earnestness and diligence it is usually done, we know. Secondly, (...), I reach
forward, reaching with great intention of spirit and affections. It is a great
and constant endeavor that is expressed in that word. Thirdly, (...), say we,
I press toward the mark, that is, even as men that are running for a prize.
All set forth the vigor, earnestness, diligence and constancy that is used in
the pursuit of this purpose. And this the nature of the principle of Grace
requires in them in whom it is. But yet we see with what failings, yea
fallings, their pursuit of this course is attended. The ^rame of the heart is
changed, the heart is stolen away, the affections entangled, eruptions of
unbelief and distempered passions discovered, carnal wisdom with all his
attendances are set on work; all contrary to the general principle and purpose
of the soul. And all this is from the rebellion of this Law of sin, stirring up
and provoking the heart unto disobedience, The Prophet gives this character of
hypocrites, Hos. 10. 2. Their heart is divided, therefore shall they be found
faulty. Now though this be wholly so in respect of the mind and judgment in
hypocrites only, yet it is partially so in the best, in the sense described.
They have a division, not of the heart, but in the heart; and thence it is that
they are so often found faulty. So says the Apostle, so that we cannot do the
things that we would, Gal. 5. 17. We cannot accomplish the design of close
walking according to the Law of grace, because of the contrariety and rebellion
of this Law of sin.

Secondly, It rebels also in respect unto particular duties. It raises a
combustion in the soul against the particular commands and designings of the
Law of grace: You cannot do the things that you would; that is, the duties
which you judge incumbent on you which you approve and delight in in the inward
man, you cannot do them as you would. Take an instance in prayer. A man
addresseth himself unto that duty, he would not only perform it, but he would
perform it in that manner that the nature of the duty, and his own condition do
require. He would pray in the spirit, fervently, with sighs and groans that
cannot be uttered; in faith with love and delight, pouring forth his soul unto
the Lord: this he aims at. Now oftentimes he shall find a rebellion, a fighting
of the Law of sin in this matter. He shall find difficulty to get any thing
done, who thought to do all things. I do not say, that it is thus always, but
it is so when sin wars and rebels, which expresses an especial acting of its
power. Woeful intanglements do poor creatures oftentimes meet withal upon this
account. Instead of that free enlarged Communion with God that they aim at, the
best that their souls arrive unto, is but to go away mourning for their folly,
deadness and indisposition. In a word, there is no command of the Law of Grace
that is known, liked of, and approved by the soul, but when it comes to be
observed, this Law of sin one way or other makes head and rebels against it.
And this is the first way of its fighting.

Secondly, It does not only rebel and resist, but it assaults the soul; it sets
upon the Law of the mind and grace, which is the second part of its warring, 1
Pet. 2. 11. (...), they fight, or war against the soul. Jam. 4. 1. (...), They
fight, or war in your members. Peter shows what they oppose and fight against,
namely the Soul, and the Law of Grace therein; James, what they fight with, or
by, namely the members, or the corruption that is in our mortal bodies. (...)
is to rebel against a superior; (...) is to assault or war for superiority. It
takes the part of an Assailant as well as of a resister. It makes attempts for
rule and sovereignty, as well as opposes the rule of grace. Now all war and
fighting has somewhat of violence in it, and there is therefore some violence
in that acting of sin, which the Scripture calls fighting and warring. And this
assailing efficacy of sin, as distinguished from its rebelling before treated
of, consists in these things that ensue.

First, All its positive actings in stirring up unto sin, belong to this head.
Oftentimes by the vanity of the mind, or the sensuality of the affections, the
folly of the imaginations, it sets upon the soul then, when the Law of grace is
not actually putting it on duty, so that therein it does not rebel but assault.
Hence the Apostle cries out, Romans 7. 24. Who shall deliver me from it, who
shall rescue^ me out of its hand, as the word signifies. When we pursue an
enemy, and he resists us, we do not cry out, Who shall deliver us, for we are
the assailants; but, Who shall rescue me, is the cry of one^ who is set upon by
an enemy. So it is here, a man is assaulted by his own lusts, as James speaks.
By the way side, in his employment, under a duty, sin sets upon the soul with
vain imaginations, foolish desires, and would willingly employ the soul to make
provision for its satisfaction; which the Apostle cautions us against, Romans 13.
14. (...), Do not accomplish the providence or projection of the flesh, for its
own satisfaction.

Secondly, Its importunity and urgency seems to be noted in this expression of
its warring. Enemies^ in war are restless, pressing and importunate. So is the
Law of sin. Does it set upon the soul? cast off its motions, it returns again;
rebuke them by the power of grace, they withdraw for a while, and return again.
Set before them the Cross of Christ, they do as those that came to take him, at
sight of him they went backwards, and fell unto the ground, but they arose
again and laid hands on him. Sin gives places for a season, but returns and
presses on the soul again. Mind it of the love of God in Christ, though it be
stricken, yet it gives not over. Present Hellfire unto it, it rusheth into the
midst of those flames. Reproach it with its ^olly and madness, it knows no
shame, but presses on still. Let the thoughts of the mind strive to fly from
it, it follows as on the wings of the wind. And by this importunity it wearies
and wars out ^he soul, and if the great remedy, Rom 8. 13. come not timely, it
prevails to a conquest. There is nothing more mavelous nor dreadful in the
work^ng of sin, than this of its importunity. The soul knows not what to make
of it; it dislikes, ab^ors, abominates the evil it tends unto, it despises the
thoughts of it, hates them as hell, and yet is by ^t self imposed on with them,
as if it were another person, an express enemy got within him. All this the
Apostle discovers, Romans 7. 15, 17. The things that I do I hate; it is not of
outward actions, but the inward risings of the mind that he ^reats. I hate
them, says he, I abominate them. But why then will he have any thing more to
do with them? If he hate them, and abhor himself for them, let them alone, have
no more to do with them, and so end the matter. Alas, says he, verse 17. It is
no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. I have one within me that is
my enemy, that with endless restless importunity puts these things upon me,
even the things that I hate and abominate; I cannot be rid of them, I am weary
of my self, I cannot fly from them; O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me? I do not say that this is the ordinary condition of Believers, but
thus it is often, when this Law of Sin rises up to war and fighting. It is not
thus with them in respect of particular sins, this or that sin, outward sins,
sins of life or conversation; but yet in respect of vanity of mind, inward and
spiritual distempers, it is often so. Some I know pretend to great perfection,
but I am resolved to believe the Apostle before them all and every one.

Thirdly, It carries on its war, by entangling of the Affections and drawing
them into a combination against the mind. Let Grace be enthroned in the mind
and judgment, yet if the Law of Sin lays hold upon, and entangles the
Affections, or any of them, it has gotten a Fort from whence it continually
assaults the soul. Hence the great duty of mortification is chiefly directed to
take place upon the Affections, Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your Members
which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate Affection,
concupiscence and covetousness which is Idolatry. The members that are upon the
Earth, are our Affections. For in the outward part of the body, sin is not
seated: in particular, not covetousness which is there enumerated to be
mortified amongst our Members that are on the Earth. Yea, after Grace has
taken possession of the soul, the Affections do become the principal seat of
the remainders of sin. And therefore Paul says, that this Law is in our
Members, Romans 7. 23. and James, that it wars in our Members, Chap. 4. 1. that
is, our Affections. And there is no estimate to be taken of the work of
mortification aright, but by the Affections. We may every day see Persons of
very eminent Light, that yet visibly have unmortified hearts and conversations.
Their Affections have not been crucified with Christ. Now then when this Law of
Sin can possess any Affection whatever it be, love, delight, fear, it will make
from it, and by it, fearful assaults upon the soul. For instance, has it got
the love of any one entangled with the world, or the things of it, the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life: How will it take
advantage on every occasion, to break in upon the soul? It shall do nothing,
attempt nothing, be in no place, or company, perform no duty, private or
public, but sin will have one blow or other at it; it will be one way or other
soliciting for it self.

This is the sum of what we shall offer unto this acting of the Law of Sin in
a way of fighting and warring against our souls, which is so often mentioned in
the Scripture. And a due consideration of it is of no small advantage unto us,
especially to bring us unto self-abasement, to teach us to walk humbly and
mournfully before God. There are two things that are suited to humble the souls
of men. And they are, First, A due consideration of God, and then of
themselves. Of God in his Greatness, Glory, Holiness, Power, Majesty and
Authority; of our selves in our mean, abject, and sinful condition. Now of all
things in our condition, there is nothing so suited unto this end and purpose,
as that which lies before us; namely, the vile remainders of enmity against God
which are yet in our hearts and natures. And it is no small evidence of a
gracious soul, when it is willing to search it self in this matter, and to be
helped therein from a word of truth. When it is willing that the Word should
dive into the secret parts of the heart, and rip open what ever of evil and
corruption lies therein. The Prophet says of Ephraim, Hos. 10. 11. He loved to
tread out the corn; he loved to work when he might eat, to have always the
corn before him; but God says he, would cause him to plough; a labor no less
needful, though at present not so delightful. Most men love to hear of the
doctrine of Grace, of the pardon of sin, of free love, and suppose they find
food therein; however it is evident that they grow and thrive in the life and
notion of them. But to be breaking up the fallow ground of their hearts, to be
enquiring after the weeds and Briars that grow in them, they delight not so
much. Though this be no less necessary than the other. This path is not so
beaten as that of Grace, nor so trod in, though it be the only way to come to a
true knowledge of Grace it self. It may be some who are wise and grown in other
truths, may yet be so little skilled in searching their own hearts, that they
may be slow in the perception and understanding of these things. But this sloth
and neglect is to be shaken off, if we have any regard unto our own souls. It
is more than probable, that many a false Hypocrite who have deceived themselves
as well as others, because they thought the Doctrine of the Gospel pleased
them, and therefore supposed they believed it, might be delivered from their
soul ruining deceits, if they would diligently apply themselves unto this
search of their won hearts. Or would other Professor^ walk with so much
boldness and security as some do, if they considered a right what a deadly
watchful Enemy they continually carry about with them and in them; Would they
so much indulge as they do to carnal joys, and pleasures, or pursue their
perishing affairs with so much delight and greediness as they do? It were to be
wished, that we would all apply our hearts more to this work, even to come to a
true understanding of the nature, power and subtilty of this our Adversary,
that our souls may be humbled; and that,

First, In walking with God; His delight is with the humble and contrite ones,
those that tremble at his word, the mourners in Sion, and such are we only,
when we have a due sense of our own vile condition. This will beget reverence
of God, sense of our distance from him, admiration of his Grace and
condescension, a due valuation of mercy, far above those light verbal aerie
seize that some have boasted of.

Secondly, In walking with others, it lays in provision to prevent those great
evils of judging, spiritual unmercifulness, harsh censuring, which I have
observed to have been pretended by many, who at the same time, as afterward
has appeared, have been guilty of greater or worser crimes, than those which
they have raved against in others. This, I say, will lead us to meekness,
compassion, readiness to forgive, to pass by offenses, even when we shall
consider what is our state, as the Apostle plainly declares, Gal. 6. 1. The man
that understands the evil of hi sownheart, how vile it is, is the only useful,
fruitful and solidly believing and obedient person. Others are fit only to
delude themselves, to disquiet Families, Churches, and all Relations whatever.
Let us then consider our hearts wisely, and then go and see if we can be proud
of our gifts, our graces, our valuation and esteem amongst Professors, our
enjoyments. Let us go then and judge, condemn, reproach others that have been
tempted; we shall find a great inconsistency in these things. And many things
of the like nature might be here added upon the consideration of this woeful
effect of* Indwelling-Sin. The way of opposing and defeating its design herein
shall be afterward considered.

CHAP. VII.
The Captivating power of Indwelling-Sin, wherein it consists. The prevalency
of Sin, when from it self, when from Temptation. The Rage and Madness that is
in Sin.

THe third thing assigned unto this Law of Sin in its opposition unto God, and
the Law of his Grace, is, that it leads the soul Captive, Romans 7. 23. I find a
Law leading me Captive, (Captivating me) unto the Law of Sin. And this is the
utmost height which the Apostle in that place carries the opposition and
warring of the remainders of Indwelling-Sin unto; closing the consideration of
it with a complaint of the state and condition of Believers thereby; and an
earnest prayer for deliverance from it, ver. 24. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death. What is contained in this expression,
and intended by it, shall be declared in the ensuing Observations.

First, It is not directly the power and actings of the Law of Sin that are
here expressed, but its success in and upon its actings. But success is the
greatest evidence of power, and leading Captive in War is the height of
success. None can aim at greater success, than to lead their Enemies Captive.
And it is a peculiar expression in the Scripture of great success. So the Lord
Christ on his victory over Satan, is said to lead Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4.
8. That is, to conquer him, who had conquered and prevailed upon others. And
this he did when by death he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is
the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. Here then a great prevalency and power of sin in its
warring against the soul is discovered. It so wars, as to lead Captive; which
had it not great power, it could not do, especially against that resistance of
the soul which is included in this expression.

Secondly, It is said, that it leads the soul captive unto the Law of Sin. Not
to this or that sin, particular sin, actual sin, but to the Law of Sin. God for
the most part orders things so, and gives out such supplies of grace unto
Believers, as that they shall not be made a prey unto this or that particular
sin, that it should prevail in them, and compel them to serve it in the lusts
thereof, that it should have Dominion over them, that they should be Captives
and slaves unto it. This is that which David prays so earnestly against,
Psalm. 19. 12, 13. Cleanse thou me from secret faults, keep back thy servant
also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me, then shall I
be upright. He supposes the continuance of the Law of Sin in him, ver. 12.
which will bring forth errors of life, and secret sins against which he finds
relief in pardoning and cleansing mercy which he prays for. This says he will
be my condition. But for sins of pride and boldness, such all sins are, that
get Dominion in a man, that make a Captive of a man, the Lord restrain thy
servant from them. For what sin soever gets such power in a man, be it in its
own nature small or great, it becomes in him in whom it is, a sin of boldness,
pride, and presumption. For these things are not reckoned from the nature or
kind of the sin, but from its prevalency and customariness, wherein its pride,
boldness* and contempt^ of God does consist. To the same purpose, if I mistake
not, prays Jabez, 1 Chronicles. 4. 10. O that thou would bless me indeed and
enlarge my Coast, and that thine hand may be with me, and that thou would
keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me. The holy man took occasion from
his own name to pray against sin that that might not be a grief and sorrow to
him by its power and prevalency. I confess sometimes it may come to this with a
Believer, that for a season he may be lead Captive by some particular sin. It
may have so much prevalency in him, as to have power over him. So it seems to
have been with David when he lay so long in his sin without repentance. And was
plainly so with those in Isa. 57. 17, 18. For the iniquity of his covetousness
was I wroth, and smote him, I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly
in the way of his heart; I have seen his ways, and will heal him. They
continued under the power of their covetousness: so that no dealings of God
with them, for so long a time could reclaim them. But for the most part when
any Lust or Sin does so prevail, it is from the advantage and fartherance that
it has got by some powerful temptation of Satan. He has poisoned it, enflamed
it, and entangled the soul. So the Apostle speaking of such as through sin were
fallen off from their holiness says, they were in the snare of the Devil,
being taken Captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Though it were their own
lust, that they served, yet they were brought into bondage thereunto, by being
entangled in some snare of Satan. And thence they are said to be taken alive,
as a poor Beast in a toil.

And here, by the way we may a little enquire whether the prevailing power of a
particular sin in any, be from it self, or from the influence of temptation
upon it, concerning which at present take only these two Observations.

First, Much of the prevalency of sin upon the soul is certainly from Satan,
when the perplexing and captivating sin has no peculiar footing, nor advantage
in the nature, constitution, or condition of the sinner. When any lust grows
high and prevailing more than others upon its own account, it is from the
peculiar advantage that it has in the natural constitution, or the station or
condition of the person in the world. For otherwise the Law of Sin gives an
equal propensity unto all evil, an equal vigor unto every lust. When therefore
it cannot be discerned, that the captivating sin is peculiary fixed in the
nature of the sinner, or is advantaged from his education or employment in the
world, the prevalency of it is peculiary from Satan. He has got to the root of
it, and has given it poison and strength. Yea, perhaps sometimes that which
may seem to the soul to be the corrupt lusting of the heart, is nothing but
Satan's imposing his suggestions on the imagination. If then a man find an
importunate rage from any corruption, that is not evidently seated in his
nature: Let him as the Papists say, cross himself, or fly by faith to the Cross
of Christ, for the Devil is nigh at hand.

Secondly, When a Lust is prevalent unto Captivity where it brings in no
advantage to the flesh, it is from Satan. All that the Law of Sin does of it
self, is to serve the providence of the flesh, Romans 13. 14. And it must bring
in unto it somewhat of the profits and pleasures that are its object. Now if
the prevailing sin do not so act it self, if it be more spiritual and inward,
it is much from Satan by the imagination, more than the corruption of the heart
it self. But this by the way.

I say then, that the Apostle treats not here, of our being captivated unto
this or that sin, but unto the Law of Sin. That is, we are compelled to bear
its presence and burden whether we will or no. Sometimes the soul thinks or
hopes that it may through grace be utterly freed from this troublesome Inmate.
Upon some sweet enjoyment of God, some full supply of grace, some return from
wandering, some deep affliction, some through humiliation, the poor soul begins
to hope that it shall now be freed from the Law of Sin. But after a while it
perceives that it is quite otherwise. Sin acts again, makes good its old
station, and the soul finds that whether it will or no, it must bear its yoke.
This makes it sigh and cry out for deliverance.

Thirdly, This leading Captive argues a prevalency against the renitency or
contrary actings of the will. This is intimated plainly in this expression;
namely, that the will opposes, and makes head as it were against the working
of sin. This the Apostle declares in those expressions which he uses, ver. 15,
19, 20. And herein consists the lusting of the Spirit against the flesh, Gal.
5. 17. That is, the contending of grace to expel and subdue it. The spiritual
habits of grace that are in the Will, do so resist and act against it. And the
excitation of those habits by the Spirit are directed to the same purpose. This
leading Captive, is contrary I say, to the inclinations and actings of the
renewed will. No man is made a Captive but against his will. Captivity is
misery and trouble, and no man willingly puts himself into trouble. Men choose
it in its causes, and in the ways and means leading unto it, but not in it
self. So the Prophet informs us, Hos. 5. 11. Ephraim was not willingly
oppressed and broken in Judgment; that was his misery and trouble; but he
willingly walked after the Commandment of the Idolatrous Kings which brought
him thereunto. Whatever consent then the soul may give unto sin, which is the
means of this Captivity, it gives none to the Captivity it self; that is
against the will wholly. Hence these things ensue.

First, That the power of sin is great, which is that which we are in the
demonstration of; and this appears in its prevalency unto Captivity; against
the actings and contendings of the will for liberty from it. Had it no
opposition made unto it, or were its Adversary, weak, negligent, slothful, it
were no great evidence of its power, that it made Captives. But its prevailing
against diligence, activity, watchfulness, the constant renitency of the will,
this evinceth its efficacy.

Secondly, This leading Captive intimates manifold particular successes. Had it
not success in particular it could not be said at all to lead captive. Rebel
it might, assail it might, but it cannot be said to lead Captive without some
successes. And there are several degrees of the success of the Law of Sin in
the soul. Sometimes it carries the Person unto outward actual sin which is its
utmost aim. Sometimes it obtains the consent of the will, but is cast out by
grace, and proceeds no farther. Sometimes it wearies and entangles the soul,
that it turns aside as it were, and leaves contending which is a success also.
One or more, or all of these must be, where Captivity takes place. Such a kind
of course does the Apostle ascribe unto covetousness, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Thirdly, This leading captive manifests this condition to be miserable and
wretched. To be thus yoked and dealt withal against the judgment of the mind,
the choice and consent of the will, its utmost strivings and contendings, how
sad is it? When the neck is sore and tender with former pressures, to be
compelled to bear the yoke again, this pierces, this grieves, this even breaks
the heart. When the soul is principled by grace unto a loathing of sin, of
every evil way, to an hatred of the least discrepancy between it self and the
holy will of God, then to be imposed on by this Law of sin, with all that
enmity and folly, that deadness and filth, wherewith it is attended: what more
dreadful condition? All captivity is dreadful in its own nature; the greatest
aggravation of it is from the condition of the Tyrant unto whom any one is
captivated. Now what can be worse than this Law of sin? Hence the Apostle
having once mentioned this captivity, cries out as one quite weary and ready to
faint, ver. 24.

Fourthly, This condition is peculiar to Believers. Unregenerate men are not
said to be led captive to the Law of sin. They may indeed be led captive unto
this or that particular sin or corruption, that is, they may be forced to serve
it against the power of their convictions. They are convinced of the evil of
it, an adulterer of his uncleanness, a drunkard of his abomination, and make
some resolutions, it may be, against it. But their lust is too hard for them,
they cannot cease to sin, and so are made captives or slaves to this or that
particular sin. But they cannot be said to be led captive to the Law of sin,
and that because they are willingly subject thereunto. It has, as it were, a
rightful dominion over them, and they oppose it not, but only when it has
irruptions to the disturbance of their consciences. And then the opposition
they make unto it is not from their wills, but is the mee^ acting of an
affrighted conscience, and a convinced mind. They regard not the nature of sin,
but its guilt and consequences. But to be brought into captivity, is that which
befalls a man against his will. Which is all that shall be spoken unto this
degree of the actings of the power of sin, manifesting it self in its success.

The fourth and last degree of the opposition made by the Law of sin to God,
and the Law of his Will and Grace, is in its Rage and Madness. There is Madness
in its nature, Eccles. 9. 3. The heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and
madness is in their heart. The evil that the heart of man is full of by nature,
is that Indwelling-sin whereof we speak. And this is so in their heart, that it
rises up unto madness. The holy Ghost expresses this rage of sin by a fit
similitude which he uses in sundry places, as Jer. 2. 24. Hos. 8. 9. It makes
men as a wild Ass; she traverseth her ways, and ^^^^^eth up the wind, and
runs whither her mind or lust leads her. And he says of Idolaters enraged
with their lusts, that they are mad upon their idols, Jer. 5. 38. We may a
little consider what lies in this madness and rage of sin, and how it rises up
thereunto.

^^rst, For the nature of it, it seems to consist in a violent, heady,
per^inacious pressing unto evil or sin. Violence, importunity and pertinacy are
in it. It is the tearing and torturing of the soul by any sin to force its
consent, and to obtain satisfaction. It rises up in the heart, is denied by
the Law of grace, and rebuked; it returns and exerts its poison again; the soul
is startled, casts it of; it returns again with new violence and importunity,
the soul cries out for help and deliverance, looks round about to all springs
of Gospel grace and relief, trembles at the furious assaults of sin, and casts
it self into the arms of Christ for deliverance. And if it be not table to take
that course, it is foiled and hurried up and down through the mire and filth of
foolish imaginations, corrupt and noisome lusts, which rend and tear it, as if
they would devour its whole spiritual life and power. See 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. 2
Pet. 2. 14. It was not much otherwise with them whom we instanced in before,
Isa. 57. 17. They had an inflamed enraged lust working in them; even
covetousness, or the love of this world, by which, as the Apostle speaks, men
pierce themselves through with many sorrows. God is angry with them, and
discovers his wrath by all the ways and means that it was possible for them
to be made sensible thereof. He was wroth and smo^e them; but though it may be
this staggered them a little, yet they went on. He is angry, and hides himself
from them, deserts them as to his gracious assisting comforting Presence. Does
this work the effect? No they go on frowardly still, as men mad on their
covetousness. Nothing can put a stop to their raging lusts. This is plain
madness and fury. We need not seek far for instances, we see men mad on their
lusts every day: And which is the worst kind^ of madness, their lusts do not
rage so much in them, as they rage in the pursuit of them. Are those greedy
pursuits of things in the world, which we see some men engaged in, though they
have other pretenses, indeed an^ thing else but plain madness in the pursuit of
their lusts? God who searches the hearts of men, knows, that the most of
things that are done with other pretenses in the world, are nothing but the
actings of men mad^ and furious in the pursuit of their lusts.

Secondly, That sin arises not unto this height ordinarily, but when it has
got a double advantage.

First, That it be provoked, enraged and h^eightned by some great temptation.
Though it be a^ poison in it self, yet being inbred in nature, it grows not
violently outrageous without the contribution of some new poison of Satan unto
it in a suitable t^mptation. It was the advantage that Satan got against
David, by a suitable temptation that raised his lusts to that rage and madness,
which it went forth unto in the business of Bathsheba and Vriah. Though sin be
always a fire in the bones, yet it flames not, unless Satan come with his
bellows to blow it up. And let any one in whom the Law of sin ^riseth to this
height of rage, seriously consider, and he may find out where the devil stands
and puts in the business.

Secondly, It must be advantaged by some former entertainment and prevalency.
Sin grows not to this height at its first assault. Had it not been suffered to
make its entrance, had there not been some yielding in the soul, this had not
come about* The great wisdom and security of the soul in dealing with
in-dwelling sin, is to put a violent stop unto its beginnings, its first
motions and actings. Venture all on the first attempt. Die rather than yield
one step unto it. If through the deceit of sin, or the negligence of the soul,
or its carnal confidence, to give bounds to lusts actings at other seasons, it
makes any entrance into the soul, and finds any entertainment, it gets strength
and power, and insensibly arises to the frame under consideration. Thou had
never had the experience of the fury of sin, if thou had not been content
with some of its dalliances. Had thou not brought up this servant, this slave
delicately, it would not have now presumed beyond a son. Now when the Law of
sin in any particular has got this double advantage, the furtherance of a
vigorous temptation, and some prevalency formerly obtained, whereby it is let
into the strengths of the soul, it often rises up to this frame whereof we
speak.

Thirdly, We may see what accompanies this rage and madness, what are the
properties of it, and what effects it produces.

First, There is in it the casting off, for a time at least, of the yoke, rule
and government of the Spirit and Law of Grace. Where Grace has the dominion,
it will never utterly be expelled from its Throne, it will still keep its right
and sovereignty. But its influences may for a season be intercepted, and its
government be suspended by the power of sin. Can we think that the Law of grace
had any actual influence of rule on the heart of David, when upon the
provocation received from Nabal, he was so hurried with the desire of
self-revenge, that he cried, gird on your swords, to his companions, and
resolved not to leave alive one man of his whole household, 1 Samuel 25 34. Or
that Asa was in any better frame, when he smote the Prophet, and put him in
Prison, that spoke unto him in the name of the Lord. Sin in this case is like
an untamed Horse, which having first cast off his Rider, runs away with
fierceness and rage. It first casts off a present sense of the yoke of Christ,
and the Law of his Grace, and then hurries the soul at its pleasure. Let us a
little consider how this is done.

The seat and residence of grace is in the whole soul; it is in the Inner man,
it is in the mind, the will, and the affections; for the whole soul is renewed
by it unto the Image of God, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. And the whole man is a new
Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. And in all these does it exert its power and efficacy;
Its Rule or Dominion is the pursuit of its effectual working in all the
faculties of the soul, as they are one united principle of moral and spiritual
operations. So then, the interrupting of its exercise, of its Rule and Power by
the Law of Sin* must consist in its contrary acting in and upon the faculties
and affections of the soul, whereon, and by which grace should exert its power
and efficacy. And this it does. It darkens the mind, partly through innumerable
vain prejudices, and false reasonings, as we shall see when we come to consider
its deceitfulness; and partly through the steaming of the Affections, heated
with the noisome lusts that have laid hold on them. Hence that saving light
that is in the mind is clouded and stifled, that it cannot put forth its
transforming power to change the soul into the likeness of Christ discovered
unto it, which is its proper work, Romans 12. 2. The habitual inclination of the
will to obedience, which is the next way of the working of the Law of grace, is
first weakened, then cast aside, and rendered useless by the continual
solicitations of sin and temptation; so that the will first lets go its hold,
and disputes whether it shall yield or no; and at last gives up it self to its
Adversary; and for the Affections commonly the beginning of this evil is in
them. They cross one another, and torture the soul with their impetuous
violence. By this way is the Rule of the Law of Grace intercepted by the Law of
Sin, even by imposing upon it in the whole seat of its Government. When this is
done, it is sad work that sin will make in the soul. the Apostle warns
Believers to take heed hereof, Romans 6. 12. Let not sin therefore reign in your
mortal bodies that you should obey it in the lusts thereof. Look to it that it
get not the Dominion, that it usurp not Rule, no not for a moment. It will
labor to intrude it self into the Throne, watch against it, or a woeful state
and condition lies at the door. This then accompanies this rage and madness of
the Law of Sin. It casts off during its prevalency the Rule of the Law of Grace
wholly. It speaks in the soul, but is not heard, it commands the contrary, but
is not obeyed. It cries out, do not this abominable thing which the Lord
hates, but is not regarded; that is, not so far as to be able to put a present
stop to the rage of sin, and to recover its own rule, which God in his own time
restores to it by the power of his Spirit dwelling in us.

Secondly, Madness or rage are accompanied with fearlesness and contempt of
danger. It takes away the power of consideration, and all that influence that
it ought to have upon the soul. Hence sinners that are wholly under the power
of this rage, are said, to run upon God and the thick bosses of his buckler,
Job 16. 21. That wherein he is armed for their utter ruin. They despise the
utmost that he can do to them, being secretly resolved to accomplish their
lusts though it cost them their souls. Some few considerations will farther
clear this unto us.

First, Ofttimes when the soul is broken loose from the power of renewing
grace, God deals with it to keep it within bounds by preventing grace. So the
Lord declares that he will deal with Israel, H^s. 2. 6. seeing ^hou have
rejected me, I will take another course with thee. I will lay obstacles before
thee that thou shall not be able to pass on whither the fury of thy lusts would
drive thee. He will propose that to them from without, that shall obstruct them
in their progress.

Secondly, These hindrances that God laves in the way of sinners, as shall be
afterward at large declared; are of two sorts.

First, Rational considerations taken from the consequence of the sin and evil
that the soul is solicited unto, and perplexed withal. Such are the fear of
Death, Judgment, and Hell, falling into the hands of the Living God, who is a
consuming fire. Whilst a man is under the power of the Law of the Spirit of
Life, the Love of Christ constrains him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The principle of his
doing good and abstaining from evil, is faith working by love, accompanied with
a following of Christ because of the sweet ^avour of his name. But now when
this blessed (...) yoke is for a season cast off, so as was manifested before,
God sets an hedge of terror before the soul, minds it of Death and Judgment
to come, flashes the flames of Hell Fire in the face, fills the soul with
consideration of all the evil consequence of sin to deter it from its purpose.
To this end does he make use of all threatenings recorded in the Law and Gospel.
To this Head also may be referred all the considerations that may be taken from
things temporal, as shame, reproach, scandal, punishments, and the like. By the
consideration of these things, I say, does God set an hedge before them.

Secondly, Providential Dispensations are used by the Lord to the same purpose,
and these are of two sorts;

First, Such as are suited to work upon the soul, and to cause it to desist and
give over in its lustings and pursuit of sin. Such are Afflictions and Mercies,
Isa. 57. 17. I was wroth and I smote them, I testified my dislike of their
ways by Afflictions; So Hos. 2. 9, 11, 12. God chastens men with pains on
their bodies, says he, in Job, to turn them from their purpose, and to hide
sin from them, Job 33. 17, 19. And other ways he has to come to them and
touch them, as in their Names, Relations, Estates and desirable things. Or else
he heaps mercies on them that they may consider whom they are rebelling
against. It may be signal distinguishing mercies are made their portion for
many days.

Secondly, Such as actually hinder the soul from pursuing sin, though it be
resolved so to do. The various ways whereby God does this, we must afterward
consider.

These are the ways I say, whereby the soul is dealt withal, after the Law of
Indwelling-Sin has cast off for a season the influencing power of the Law of
Grace. But now when lust rises up to rage or madness, it will also contemn all
these, even the Rod and him that has appointed it. It will rush on shame,
reproaches, wrath, and whatever may befall it. That is, though they be
presented unto it, it will venture upon them all. Rage and madness is fearless.
And this it does two ways.

First, It possess^th the mind, that it suffers not the consideration of these
things to dwell upon it, but renders the thoughts of them slight and evanid. Or
if the mind do force it self to a contemplation of them, yet it interposeth
between it and the Affections, that they shall not be influenced by it in any
proportion to what is required. The soul in such a condition will be able to
take such things into contemplation, and not at all to be moved by them. And
where they do prevail for a season, yet they are insensibly wrought off from
the heart again.

Secondly, By secret stubborn resolves to venture all upon the way wherein it
is.

And this is the second branch of this Evidence of the power of sin, taken from
the opposition that it makes to the Law of Grace, as it were by the way of
force, strength and violence; the consideration of its deceit does now follow.

CHAP. VIII.
Indwelling-Sin proved powerful from its deceit. Proved to be deceitful. The
General Nature of Deceit. Jam. 1. 14. opened. How the mind is drawn off from
its Duty by the Deceitfulness of Sin. The principal Duties of the mind in our
Obedience. The ways and Means whereby it is turned from it.

THE second part of the evidence of the power of Sin from its manner of
operation, is taken from its deceitfulness. It adds in its working, deceit unto
power. The efficacy of that must needs be great, and is carefully to be watched
against, by all such as value their souls, where power and deceit are combined,
especially advantaged and assisted by all the ways and means before insisted
on.

Before we come to show wherein the nature of this deceitfulness of sin does
consist, and how it prevails thereby, some testimonies shall be briefly given
in unto the thing it self, and some light into the general nature of it.

That Sin, Indwelling-Sin, is deceitful, we have the express Testimony of the
Holy Ghost, as Heb. 3. 13. Take heed that ye be not hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin. Deceitful it is, take heed of it, watch against it, or it
will produce its utmost effect in hardening of the heart against God. It is on
the account of sin, that the heart is said to be deceitful above all things,
Jer. 17. 9. Take a man in other things, and as Job speaks, though he would be
wise and crafty, he is like the wild Asses Colt, Job 11. 12. a poor, vain,
empty, nothing. But consider his heart on the account of this Law of Sin, it is
crafty and deceitful above all things, They are wise to do evil, says the
Prophet, but to do good they know not, Jer. 4. 22. To the same purpose speaks
the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 2. The old man is corrupt according to deceitful lusts.
Every lust, which is a branch of this Law of Sin, is deceitful; and where there
is poison in every stream, the Fountain must needs be corrupt. No particular
lust has any deceit in it, but what is communicated unto it from this Fountain
of all actual lust, this Law of Sin. And (2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.) the coming of the
Man of Sin, is said to be in and with the deceivableness of unrightcousness.
Unrighteousness is a thing generally decryed and evil spoken of amongst men, so
that it is not easy to conceive how any man should prevail himself of a
reputation thereby. But there is a deceivableness in it, whereby the minds of
men are turned aside from a due consideration of it; as we shall manifest
afterward. And thus the account which the Apostle gives concerning those who
are under the power of sin is, that they are deceived, Titus 3. 3. And the life
of evil men, is nothing but deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3. 13. So that
we have sufficient Testimony given unto this qualification of the Enemy with
whom we have to deal; he is deceitful, which consideration of all things puts
the mind of man to a loss in dealing with an Adversary. He knows he can have no
security against one that is deceitful, but in standing upon his own guard and
defense all his days.

Farther to manifest the strength and advantage that sin has by its deceit, we
may observe that the Scripture places it for the most part as the head and
spring of every sin, even as though there were no sin followed after, but where
deceit went before. So 1 Timothy 2. 13, 14. The reason the Apostle gives why Adam
though he was first formed, was not first in the transgression, is because he
was not first deceived. The Woman though made last, yet being first deceived,
was first in the sin. Even that first sin began in deceit, and until the mind
was deceived, the soul was safe. Eve therefore did truly express the matter,
Genesis 3. 13. though she did it not to a good end; the Serpent beguiled me, says
she, and I did eat. She thought to extenuate her own crime, by charging the
Serpent. And this was a new fruit of the sin she had cast her self into. But
the matter of fact was true, she was beguiled before she eat; deceit went
before the transgression. And the Apostle shows that Sin and Satan still take
the same c^urse, 2 Cor. 11. 3. There is says he, the same way of working
toward actual sin, as was of old; beguiling, deceiving goes before, and sin
that is the actual accomplishment of it follows after. Hence all the great
works that the Devil does in the world, to stir men up to an opposition unto
the Lord Jesus Christ and his Kingdom, he does them by deceit, Rev. 12. 9. The
Devil who deceives the whole world. It were utterly impossible men should be
prevailed on to abide in his service, acting his designs to their eternal, and
sometimes their temporal ruin, were they not exceedingly deceived. See also
Chap. 20. 10.

Hence are those manifold Cautions that are given us to take heed, that we be
not deceived, if we would take heed that we do not sin. See Ephesians. 5. 6. 1 Cor.
6. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 33. Gal. 6. 7. Luke 21. 8. From all which testimonies we may
learn the influence that deceit has into sin, and consequently the advantage
that the Law of Sin has to put forth its power by its deceitfulness. Where it
prevails to deceive, it fails not to bring forth its fruit.

The ground of this efficacy of sin by deceit is taken from the faculty of the
soul affected with it. Deceit properly affects the mind; it is the mind that is
deceived. When sin attempts any other way of entrance into the soul, as by the
Affections, the mind retaining its right and Sovereignty, is able to give check
and control unto it. But where the mind is tainted, the prevalency must be
great. For the mind or understanding is the leading faculty of the soul, and
what that fixes on, the will and affections rush after, being capable of no
consideration but what that presents unto them. Hence it is, that though the
entanglement of the Affections unto sin be oft-times most troublesome, yet the
deceit of the mind is always most dangerous; and that because of the place
that it possesses in the soul, as unto all its operations. Its Office is to
guide, direct, choose and lead; and if the light that is in us be darkness, how
great is that darkness.

And this will farther appear, if we consider the nature of deceit in general.
It consists in presenting unto the soul, or mind, things otherwise than they
are, either in their Nature, Causes, Effects, or present respect unto the soul.
This is the general nature of deceit, and it prevails many ways. It hides what
ought to be seen and considered, conceals circumstances and consequences,
presents what is not, or things as they are not, as we shall afterward
manifest in particular. It was showed before, that Satan beguiled and deceived
our first Parents; that term the Holy Ghost gives unto his temptation and
seduction. And how he did deceive them the Scripture relates, Genesis 3. 4, 5. He
did it by representing things otherwise than they were. The fruit was
desirable, that was apparent unto the eye. Hence Satan takes advantage secretly
to insinuate, that it was merely an abridgement of their happiness, that God
aimed at in forbidding them to eat of it. That it was for a trial of their
obedience* that certain though not immediate (...) would ensue upon the eating
of it, he hides from ^^^m; only he proposes the present advantage of
knowledge, and so presents the whole case quite otherwise unto them, than
indeed it was. This is the ^^^re of deceit; it is a Representation of a matter
under disguises, hiding that which is undesirable, proposing that which indeed
is not in it, that the mind may make a false judgment of it. So Jacob deceived
Isaac by his Brothers raiment, and the skins on his hands and neck.

Again, Deceit has advantage by that way of management which is inseparable
from it. It is always carried on by degrees, by little and little, that the
whole of the design and aim in hand be not at once discovered. So dealt Satan
in that great deceit beforementioned; he proceeds in it by steps and degrees.
First, He takes off an objection, and tells them they shall not die; then
proposes the good of knowledge to them, and their being like to God thereby.
To hide and conceal ends, to proceed by steps and degrees, to make use of what
is obtained, and thence to press on to farther effects, is the true nature of
deceit. Steven tells us, that the King of Egypt dealt subtly or deceitfully
with their kindred, Acts 7. 19. How he did it we may see, Exodus 1. he did not
at first fall to killing and slaying of them, but says, verse. 10. Come, let us
deal wisely; beginning to oppress them. This brings forth their bondage, ver.
11. Having got this ground to make them slaves, he proceeds to destroy their
children, ver. 16. He fell not on them all at once, but by degrees. And this
may suffice to show in general, that sin is deceitful, and the advantages that
it has thereby.

For the Way, and Manner, and Progress of sin in working by deceit, we have it
fully expressed, James 1. 14, 15. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of
his own lust and enticed, then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin,
and sin when it is finished brings forth death. This place declaring the
whole of what we aim at in this matter, must be particularly insisted on.

In the foregoing verse, the Apostle manifests that men are willing to drive
the old trade, which our first Parents at the entrance of sin set up withal,
namely of excusing themselves in their sins, and casting the occasion and blame
of them on others. It is not, say they, from themselves, their own nature and
inclinations, their own designings, that they have committed such and such
evils, but merely from their temptations. And if they know not where to fix the
evil of those temptations, they will lay them on God himself, rather than go
without an excuse or extenuation of their guilt. This evil in the hearts of men
the Apostle rebukes, verse 13. Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted
of God; for God cannot be tempted of evil, neither tempts he any man. And to
show the justness of this reproof in the words mentioned, he discovers the true
causes of the rise and whole progress of sin, manifesting that the whole guilt
of it lies upon the sinner, and that the whole punishment of it, if not
graciously prevented, will be his lot also.

We have therefore, as was said, in these words the whole progress of lust or
indwelling-sin, by the way of subtilty, fraud and deceit, expressed and limited
by the Holy Ghost. And from hence we shall manifest the particular ways and
means whereby it puts forth its power and efficacy in the hearts of men by
deceitfulness and subtilty; and we may observe in the words,

First, The utmost End aimed at in all the actings of sin, or the tendency of
it in its own nature, and that is death: Sin when it is finished brings forth
death; the everlasting death of the sinner: pretend what it will, this is the
end it aims at and tends unto. Hiding of ends and designs, is the principal
property of deceit. This sin does to the utmost; other things innumerable it
pleads, but not once declares that it aims at the death, the everlasting death
of the soul. And a fixed apprehension of this end of every sin, is a blessed
means to prevent its prevalency in its way of deceit or beguiling.

Secondly, The general way of its acting toward that end, is by Temptation;
Every man is tempted of his own lust. I purpose not to speak in general of the
nature of Temptations, it belongs not unto our present purpose, and besides I
have done it elsewhere. It may suffice at present to observe, that the life of
temptation lies in deceit. So that in the business of sin, to be effectually
tempted, and to be beguiled or deceived, are the same. Thus it was in the first
temptation, it is every where called the Serpents beguiling or deceiving, as
was manifested before: The Serpent beguiled Eve, that is, prevailed by his
temptations upon her. So that every man is tempted, that is, every man is
beguiled or deceived by his own lust, or indwelling-sin, which we have often
declared to be the same.

The Degrees whereby sin proceeds in this work of tempting or deceiving, are
five. For we showed before, that this belongs unto the nature of deceit that it
works by degrees, making its advantage by one step to gain another.

The first of these consists in drawing off, or drawing away; Every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust.

The second is in enticing; and is enticed.

The third, in the conception of sin; when lust has conceived, when the heart
is enticed, then lust conceives in it.

The fourth is the bringing forth of sin in its actual accomplishment, When
lust has conceived it brings forth sin. In all which there is a secret
allusion to an adulterous deviation from conjugal duties, and conceiving or
bringing forth children of whoredom and fornication.

The fifth is, the finishing of sin, the completing of it, the filling up of
the measure of it, whereby the end originally designed by lust is brought
about: Sin when it is finished brings forth death. As lust conceiving,
naturally and necessarily brings forth sin, so sin finished, infallibly
procures eternal death.

The first of these relates to the Mind; that is drawn off, or drawn away by
the deceit of sin. The second unto the Affections, they are enticed or
entangled. The third to the Will, wherein sin is conceived; the consent of the
Will being the formal conception of actual sin. The fourth to the Conversation,
wherein sin is brought forth; it exerts it self in the lives and courses of
men. The fifth respects an obdurate course in sinning, that finisheth,
consummates, and shuts up the whole work of sin, whereon ensues death or
eternal ruin.

I shall principally consider the three first, wherein the main stength of the
deceit of sin does lie, and that because in Believers, whose state and
condition is principally proposed to consideration, God is pleased, for the
most part, graciously to prevent the fourth instance, or the bringing forth of
actual sins in their conversations; And the last always and wholly, or their
being obdurate in a course of sin to the finishing of it. What ways God in his
grace and faithfulness makes use of to stifle the conceptions of sin in the
womb, and to hinder its actual production in the lives of men, must afterward
be spoken unto. The first three instances then we shall insist upon fully, as
those wherein the principal concernment of Believers in this matter does lie.

The first thing which sin is said to do, working in a way of deceit, is to
draw away, or to draw off; whence a man is said to be drawn off, or drawn away
and diverted, namely from attending unto that course of obedience and holiness,
which, in opposition unto sin and the Law thereof, he is bound with diligence
to attend unto.

Now it is the Mind that this effect of the deceit of sin is wrought upon. The
Mind or Understanding, as we have showed, is the guiding, conducting faculty of
the soul; it goes before in discerning, judging, and determining to make the
way of moral actions fair and smooth to the Will and Affections. It is to the
soul, what Moses told his Father-in-law that he might be to the People in the
Wilderness, as eyes to guide them, and keep them from wandering in that
desolate place. It is the eye of the soul, without whose guidance the Will and
Affections would perpetually wander in the Wilderness of this world, according
as any object, with an appearing present Good, did offer or present it self
unto them.

The first thing therefore that sin aims at in its deceitful working, is to
draw off and divert the mind from the discharge of its duty.

There are two things which belong unto the duty of the mind, in that special
office which it has in and about the obedience which God requires.

First, To keep it self and the whole soul in such a frame and posture, as may
render it ready unto all duties of obedience, and watchful against all
inticements unto the conception of sin.

Secondly, In particular carefully to attend unto all particular actions, that
they be performed as God requires, for matter, manner, time and season,
agreeable unto his Will, as also for the obviating all particular tenders of
sin in things forbidden. In these two things consists the whole duty of the
mind of a Believer. And from both of them does Indwelling-sin endeavor to
divert it, and draw it off.

The first of these is, the duty of the mind, in reference unto the general
frame and course of the whole soul; and hereof two things may be considered.
First, That it is founded in a due constant consideration; 1. Of our selves, of
sin and its vileness. 2. Of God, of his grace and goodness. And both these does
sin labor to draw it off from. Secondly, In attending to those Duties which
are suited to obviate the working of the Law of sin, in an especial manner.

First, It endeavors to draw it off from a due consideration, apprehension and
sensibleness of its own vileness, and the danger wherewith it is attended. This
in the first place we shall instance in. A due constant consideration of sin in
its nature, in all its aggravating circumstances, in its end and tendency,
especially as represented in the Blood and Cross of Christ ought always to
abide with us. Jer. 2. 19. Know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and
a bitter, that thou have for saken the Lord thy God. Every sin is a forsaking
of the Lord our God. If the heart know not, if it consider not, that it is an
evil thing and a bitter, evil in it self, bitter in its effects, fruit and
event, it will never be secured against it. Besides, that frame of heart which
is most accepted with God in any sinner, is the humble, contrite, self-abasing
frame: Isa. 57. 15. Thus says the high and losty one that inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a contrite and humble spirit: to revive the spirit of the humble, to revive
the spirit of the contrite ones. See also Luke 18. 13, 14. This becomes a
sinner, no garment sits so decently about him. Be clothed with humility, says
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5. 5. It is that which becomes us, and it is the only safe
frame. He that walks humbly walks safely. This is the design of Peter's
advice, 1 Epist. 1. 17. Pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. After
that he himself had miscarried by another frame of mind, he gives this advice
to all Believers; It is not a bondage, servile fear, disquieting and perplexing
the soul, but such a fear as may keep men constantly calling upon the Father,
with reference unto the final judgment, that they may be preserved from sin,
whereof they were in so great danger, which he advises them unto. If ye call on
the Father, who without respect of persons judges according to every man's
work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. This is the humble frame
of soul* and how is this obtained? how is this preserved? No otherwise but by a
constant deep apprehension of the evil, vileness, and danger of sin. So was it
wrought, so was it kept up in the approved Publican: God be merciful, says he,
to me a sinner: Sense of sin kept him humble, and humility made way for his
access unto a testimony of the pardon of sin.

And this is the great preservative through grace from sin, as we have an
example in the instance of Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. Upon the urgency of his great
temptation, he recoils immediately into this frame of spirit; How, says he,
can I do this thing, and sin against God? A constant steady sense of the evil
of sin, gives him such preservation, that he ventures Liberty and Life in
opposition to it. To fear sin, is to fear the Lord; so the holy man tells us
that they are the same, Job 28. 28. The fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to
depart from iniquity that is understanding.

This therefore in the first place, in general, does the Law of sin put forth
its deceit about, namely to draw the mind from this frame, which is the
strongest fort of the souls defense and security. It labors to divert the mind
from a due apprehension of the vileness, abomination, and danger of sin. It
secretly and insensibly insinuates lessening, excusing, extenuating thoughts of
it; or it draws it off from pondering upon it, from being conversant about it
in its thoughts so much as it ought, and formerly has been. And if after the
heart of a man has through the Word, Spirit and Grace of Christ been made
tender, soft, deeply sensible of sin, it becomes on any account, or by any
means whatever to have less, sewer, slighter, or less affecting thoughts of it,
or about it, the mind of that man is drawn away by the deceitfulness of sin.

There are two ways amongst others, whereby the Law of sin endeavors
deceitfully to draw off the mind from this duty, and frame ensuing thereon.

First, It does it by an horrible abuse of Gospelgrace. There is in the Gospel
a remedy provided against the whole evil of sin, the filth, the guilt of it,
with all its dangerous consequents. It is the Doctrine of the deliverance of
the souls of men from sin and death. A discovery of the gracious will of God
toward sinners by Jesus Christ. What now is the genuine tendency of this
doctrine, of this discovery of grace, and what ought we to use it and improve
it unto? This the Apostle declares, Tit. 2. 11, 12. The grace of God that
brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. This it teaches, this we ought to learn of it, and by
it. Hence Universal holiness is called a conversation that becomes the Gospel,
Phil. 1. 27. It becomes it as that which is answerable unto its end, aim, and
design, as that which it requires, and which it ought to be improved unto. And
accordingly it does produce this effect where the word of it is received and
preserved in a saving light, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. But
herein does the deceit of sin interpose it self. It separates between the
Doctrine of Grace, and the use and end of it. It stays upon its notions, and
intercepts its influences in its proper application. From the Doctrine of the
assured pardon of sin, it insinuates a regardlesness of sin. God in Christ
makes the proposition, and Satan and Sin make the conclusion. For that the
deceitfulness of sin is apt to plead unto a regardlesness of it from the grace
of God whereby it is pardoned, the Apostle declares in his reproof and
detestation of such an insinuation, Romans 6. 1. What shall we say then, shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. Men's deceitful hearts,
says he, are apt to make that conclusion; but far be it from us, that we
should give any entertainment unto it. But yet that some have evidently
improved that deceit unto their own eternal ruin, Jude declares, ver. 4.
Ungodly men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness. And we have had
dreadful instances of it in the days of temptation wherein we have lived.

Indeed in opposition unto this deceit lies much of the Wisdom of faith, and
power of Gospel Grace. When the mind is fully possessed with, and cast
habitually and firmly into the mould of the notion and Doctrine of Gospel Truth
about the full and free forgiveness of all sins in the blood of Christ, then to
be able to keep the heart always in a deep humbling sense of sin, abhorrency
of it, and self-abasement for it, is a great effect of Gospel-Wisdom and Grace.
This is the trial and touchstone of Gospel- Light. If it keep the heart
sensible of sin, humble, lowly, and broken on that account; If it teach us to
water a free pardon with tears, to detest forgiven sin, to watch diligently for
the ruin of that, which we are yet assured, shall never ruin us, it is
Divine, from above, of the Spirit of Grace. If it secretly and insensibly make
men loose and slight in their thoughts about sin, it is adulterate, selfish,
false. If it will be all, answer all ends, it is nothing.

Hence it comes to pass, that sometimes we see men walking in a bondage-frame
of Spirit all their days, low in their light, mean in their apprehensions of
Grace, so that it is hard to discern whether Covenant in their Principles they
belong unto; whether they are under the Law, or under Grace, yet walk with a
more conscientious tenderness of sinning, than many who are advanced into
higher degrees of light and knowledge than they. Not that the saving light of
the Gospel, is not the only Principle of saving holiness and obedience; but
that through the deceitfulness of sin it is variously abused to counteance the
soul in manifold neglect of duties, and to draw off the mind from a due
consideration of the nature, desert and danger of sin. And this is done several
ways.

First, The soul having frequent need of relief by Gospel Grace against a sense
of the guilt of sin, and Accusation of the Law, comes at length to make it a
common and ordinary thing, and such as may be slightly performed. Having found
a good medicine for its wounds, and such as it has had experience of its
efficacy, it comes to apply it slightly, and rather skinneth over, than cures
its sores. A little less earnestness, a little less diligence serves every
time, until the soul it may be begins to secure it self of pardom in course.
And this tends directly to draw off the mind from its constant and universal
watchfulness against sin. He whose light has made his way of access plain for
the obtaining of pardon, if he be not very watchful, he is far more apt to
become overly, formal, and careless in his work, than he who by reason of mists
and darkness, beats about to find his way aright to the Throne of Grace. As a
Man that has often traveled a Road passed on without regard or enquiry; but
he who is a stranger unto it observing all turnings, and enquiring of all
Passengers, secures his Journey beyond the other.

Secondly, The deceitfulness of sin takes advantage from the Doctrine of Grace,
by many ways and means to extend the bounds of the souls liberty beyond what
God has assigned unto it. Some have never thought themselves free from a legal
bondage-frame, until they have been brought into the confines of sensuality,
and some into the depths of it. How often will sin plead, this strictness, this
exactness, this solicitude is no ways needful; relief is provided in the
Gospel against such things. Would you live as though there were no need of the
Gospel? as though pardon of sin were to no purpose? But concerning these pleas
of sin from Gospel Grace, we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter in
particular.

Thirdly, In times of temptation this deceitfulness of sin, will argue expressly
for sin from Gospel Grace; at least it will plead for these two things.

First, That there is not need of such a tenacious severe contending against
it, as the principle of the new Creature is fixed on. If it cannot divert the
soul or mind wholly from attending unto temptations to oppose them, yet it will
endeavor to draw them off, as to the manner of their attendance. They need not
use that diligence which at first the soul apprehends to be necessary.

Secondly, It will be tendering relief as to the event of sin, that it shall
not turn to the ruin or destruction of the soul, because it is, it will, or
may be pardoned by the Grace of the Gospel. And this is true, this is the great
and only relief of the soul against sin, the guilt whereof it has contracted
already; the blessed and only remedy for a guilty soul. But when it is pleaded
and remembered by the deceitfulness of sin in compliance with temptation unto
sin, then it is poison; poison is mixed in every drop of this balsom, to the
danger, if not death of the soul. And this is the first way whereby the
deceitfulness of sin draws off the mind from a due attendance unto that sense
of its vileness, which alone is able to keep it in that humble, self-abased
frame that is acceptable with God. It makes the mind careless, as though its
work were needless, because of the abounding of Grace; which is a Soldiers
neglect of his station trusting to a reserve, provided indeed only in case of
keeping his own proper place.

Secondly, Sin takes advantage to work by its deceit in this matter of drawing
off the mind from a due sense of it, from the state and condition of men in the
world. I shall give only one instance of its procedure in this kind. Men in
their younger days have naturally their affections more quick, vigorous and
active, more sensibly working in them, than afterward. They do as to their
sensible working and operation naturally decay, and many things befall men in
their lives, that take off the edge and keenness of them. But as men lose in
their Affections, if they are not besotted in sensuality, or by the corruptions
that are in the world through lust, they grow and improve in their
Understandings, Resolutions, and Judgments. Hence it is, that if what had
place formerly in their Affections, do not take place in their minds and
judgments, they utterly lose them, they have no more place in their souls.
Thus men have no regard for, yea, they utterly despise those things which their
Affections were set upon with delight and greediness in their Childhood. But if
they are things that by any means come to be fixed in their Minds and
Judgments, they continue a high esteem for them, and do cleave as close unto
them, as they did when their Affections were more vigorous. Only as it were
they have changed their seat in the soul. It is thus in things spiritual; the
first and chiefest seat of the sensibleness of sin, is in the Affections; as
these in natural youth, are great and large, so are they spiritually in
spiritual youth, Jer. 2. 2. I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of
thine espousals. Besides such Persons are newly come off from their
convictions, wherein they have been cut to the heart, and so made tender.
Whatever touches upon a wound is thoroughly felt. So does the guilt of sin
before the wound given by conviction be thoroughly cured. But now when
affections begin to decay naturally, they begin to decay also as to their
sensible actings and motions in things spiritual. Although they improve in
Grace, yet they may decay in sense. At least spiritual sense is not radically
in them, but only by way of communication. Now in these decays, if the soul
take not care to fix a deep sense of Sin on the Mind and Judgment, thereby
perpetually to affect the heart and affections, it will decay. And here the
deceit of the Law of Sin interposeth it self. It suffers a sense of sin to
decay in the Affections, and diverts the mind from entertaining a due, constant
fixed consideration of it. We may consider this a little in persons that never
make a progress in the ways of God beyond conviction. How sensible of sin will
they be for a season? How will they then mourn and weep under a sense of the
guilt of it? How will they cordially and heartily resolve against it?
Affections are vigorous, and as it were bear rule in their souls. But they are
like an herb that will flourish for a day or two with watering, although it
have no root. For, a while after we see, that these men the more experience
they have had of sin, the less they are afraid of it, as the Wise Man
intimates, Eccles. 8. 11. And at length they come to be the greatest contemners
of sin in the world. No sinner like him that has sinned away his convictions
of sin. What is the reason of this? sense of sin was in their convictions fixed
on their Affections; as it decayed in them, they took no care to have it deeply
and graciously fixed on their minds. This the deceitfulness of sin deprived
them of, and so ruined their souls. In some measure it is so with Believers. If
as the sensibleness of the Affections decay, if as they grow heavy and obtuse,
great Wisdom and Grace be not used to fix a due sense of sin upon the mind and
judgment, which may provoke, excite, enliven and stir up the Affections every
day, great decays will ensue. At first, sorrow, trouble, grief, fear, affected
the mind, and would give it no rest. If afterward the mind do not affect the
heart with sorrow and grief, the whole will be cast out, and the soul be in
danger of being hardened. And these are some of the ways whereby the deceit of
sin diverts the mind from the first part of its safe preserving frame, or draws
it off from its constant watchfulness against sin and all the effects of it.

The second Part of this general duty of the mind, is to keep the soul unto a
constant, holy consideration of God and his Grace. This evidently lies at the
Springhead of Gospel-obedience. The way whereby sin draws off the mind from
this part of its duty is open and known sufficiently, though not sufficiently
watched against. Now this the Scripture every where declares to be the filling
of the minds of men with earthly things. This it places in direct opposition
unto that Heavenly frame of the mind, which is the spring of Gospel-obedience,
Col. 3. 2. Set your Affections on things above, not on things on the earth, or
set your minds. As if he had said, on both together you cannot be set or fixed,
so as principally and chiefly to mind them both. And the Affections to the one
and the other, proceeding from these different principles of minding the one
and the other, are opposed as directly inconsistent, 1 John 2. 15. Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world, if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him. And actings in a course suitable unto these
Affections are proposed also as contrary; you cannot serve God and Mammon.
These are two Masters whom no man can serve at the same time, to the
satisfaction of both. Every inordinate minding, then, of earthly things, is
opposed unto that frame wherein our minds ought to be fixed on God and his
Grace in a course of Gospel-obedience.

Several ways there are whereby the deceitfulness of sin draws off the mind in
this particular, but the chief of them is by pressing these things on the mind
under the notion of things lawful, and it may be necessary. So all those who
excuse themselves in the Parable, from coming in to the Marriage Feast of the
Gospel, did it on the account of their being engaged in their lawful Callings.
One about his Farm, another his Oxen, the means whereby he ploughed in this
world. By this plea were the minds of men drawn off from that frame of
Heavenliness which is required to our walking with God, and the rules of not
loving the world, or using it as if we used it not, are hereby neglected. What
wisdom, what watchfulness, what serious frequent trial and examination of our
selves is required, to keep our hearts and minds in an heavenly frame, in the
use and pursuit of earthly things, is not my present business to declare. This
is evident, that the engine whereby the deceit of sin draws off and turns aside
the mind in this matter, is the pretense of the lawfulness of things about
which it would have it exercise it self, against which very few are armed with
sufficient diligence, wisdom and skill. And this is the first and most general
attempt that indwelling-sin makes upon the soul by deceit: It draws away the
mind from a diligent attention unto its course in a due sense of the evil of
sin, and a due and constant consideration of God and his Grace.

CHAP. IX.
The deceit of Sin in drawing off the mind from a due attendance unto especial
Duties of Obedience, instanced in Meditation and Prayer.

HOw sin by its deceit endeavors to draw off the mind from attending unto that
holy frame in walking with God, wherein the soul ought to be preserved, has
been declared. Proceed we now to show how it does the same work in reference
unto those especial duties, by which the designs, workings and prevalency of it
may in an especial manner be obviated and prevented Sin indeed maintains an
enmity against all duties of obedience, or rather with God in them. When I
would do good, says the Apostle, evil is present with me. When ever I would do
good, or what good soever I would do, that is spiritually good, good in
reference unto God, it is present with me, to hinder me from it, to oppose me
in it. And on the other side, all duties of obedience do lie directly against
the actings of the Law of sin. For as the flesh in all its actings lusts
against the spirit, so the spirit in all its actings lusts against the flesh.
And therefore every duty performed in the strength and grace of the Spirit, is
contrary to the Law of sin. Romans 8. 13. If ye by the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the flesh. Actings of the Spirit of grace in duties does this work.
These two are contrary. But yet there are some duties, which in their own
nature, and by Gods appointment, have a peculiar influence into the weakening
and subduing the whole law of sin in its very principles, and chiefest
strengths. And these the mind of a Believer ought principally in his whole
course to attend unto. And these does sin in its deceit endeavor principally
to draw off the mind from. As in diseases of the body, some remedies, they say,
have a specific quality against distempers; so in this disease of the soul,
there are some duties that have an especial virtue against this sinful
distemper. I shall not insist on many of them, but instance only in two, which
seem to me to be of this nature; namely that by Gods designation they have a
special tendency toward the ruin of the Law of sin. And then we shall show
the ways, methods and means which the Law of sin uses to divert the mind from
a due attendance unto them. Now these duties are, first, Prayer, especially
private prayer: and, secondly, Meditation. I put them together, because they
much agree in their general nature and end, differing only in the manner of
their performance. For by Meditation, I intend meditating upon what respect and
suitableness there is between the Word and our own hearts, to this end, that
they may be brought to a more exact conformity. It is our pondering on the
truth as it is in Jesus, to find out the image and representation of it in our
own hearts; and so it has the same intent with Prayer, which is to bring our
souls into a frame in all things answering the mind and will of God. They are
as the blood and spirits in the veins, that have the same life, motion and use.
But yet because persons are generally at a great loss in this duty of
Meditation, having declared it to be of so great efficacy, for the controlling
of the actings of the Law of sin, I shall in our passage give briefly two or
three rules for the directing of Believers to a right performance of this great
duty, and they are these.

First, Meditate of God with God; that is, when we would undertake thoughts and
meditations of God, his Excellencies, his Properties, his Glory, his Majesty,
his Love, his Goodness, let it be done in a way of speaking unto God, in a deep
humiliation and abasement of our souls before him. This, will fix the mind, and
draw it forth from one thing to another, to give glory unto God in a due
manner, and affect the soul until it be brought into that holy admiration of
God and delight in him, which is acceptable unto him. My meaning is, that it be
done in a way of Prayer and Praise, speaking unto God.

Secondly, Meditate on the Word in the Word: that is, in the reading of it,
consider the sense in the particular passages we insist upon, looking to God
for help, guidance and direction in the discovery of his mind and will therein,
and then labor to have our hearts affected with it.

Thirdly, What we come short of in evenness and constancy in our thoughts in
these things, let it be made up in frequency. Some are discouraged because
their minds do not regularly supply them with thoughts to carry on their
meditations, through the weakness or imperfection of their inventions. Let this
be supplied by frequent returns of the mind unto the subject proposed to be
meditated upon, whereby new senses will still be supplied unto it. But this by
the way.

These duties, I say, amongst others (for we have only chosen them for an
instance, not excluding some others from the same place, office and usefulness
with them) do make an especial opposition to the very being and life of
Indwelling-sin, or rather faith in them does so. They are perpetually designing
its utter ruin. I shall therefore upon this instance in the pursuit of our
present purpose do these two things.

First, Show the suitableness and usefulness of this duty, or these duties, (as
I shall handle them jointly) unto the ruining of sin.

Secondly, Show the means whereby the deceitfulness of sin endeavors to draw
off the mind from a due attendance unto them.

For the first observe,

First, That it is the proper work of the soul in this duty, to consider all
the secret workings and actings of sin, what advantages it has got, what
temptations it is in conjunction withal, what harm it has already done, and
what it is yet farther ready to do. Hence David gives that title unto one of
his Prayers, Psalm. 102. A prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and
pours out his complaint before the Lord. I speak of that prayer which is
attended with a due consideration of all the wants, straits and emergencies of
the soul. Without this, Prayer is not Prayer; that is, what ever show or
appearance of that duty it has, it is no way useful, either to the glory of
God, or the good of the souls of men. A cloud it is without water, driven by
the wind of the breath of men. Nor was there ever any more present and
effectual poison for souls found out, than the binding of them unto a constant
form and usage of I know not what words in their prayers and supplications,
which themselves do not understand. Bind men so in their trades, or in their
businesses in this world, and they will quickly find the effect of it. By this
means are they disenabled from any due consideration of what a present is good
for them, or evil unto them, without which, to what use can prayer serve, but
to mock God, and delude men's own souls? But in this kind of Prayer which we
insist on, the Spirit of God falls in to give us his assistance, and that in
this very matter of finding out and discovering the most secret actings and
workings of the Law of sin. Romans 8. 26. We know not what to pray for as we
ought, but he helps our infirmities: he discovers our wants unto us, and
wherein chiefly we stand in need of help and relief. And we find it by daily
experience, that in prayer, Believers are led into such discoveries and
convictions of the secret deceitful work of sin in their hearts, as no
considerations could ever have led them into. So David, Psalm. 51. designing the
confession of his actual sin, having his wound in his prayer searched by the
skilful hand of the Spirit of God, he had a discovery made unto him of the root
of all his miscarriages in his original corruption, verse. 5. The Spirit in this
duty is as the candle of the Lord unto the soul* enabling it to search all the
inward parts of the belly. It gives a holy spiritual light into the mind,
enabling it to search the deep and dark recesses of the heart, to find out the
subtle and deceitful machinations, figments and imaginations of the Law of sin
therein. What ever notion there be of it, what ever power and prevalency in it,
it is laid hand on, apprehended, brought into the presence of God, judged,
condemned, bewailed. And what can possible be more effectual for its ruin and
destruction? For together with its discovery, application is made unto all that
relief which in Jesus Christ is provided against it, all ways and means whereby
it may be ruined. Hence it is the duty of the mind, to watch unto prayer, 1
Pet. 4. 7. To attend diligently unto the estate of our souls, and to deal
fervently and effectually with God about it. The like also may be said of
Meditation, wisely managed unto its proper end.

Secondly, In this duty there is wrought upon the heart a deep full sense of
the vileness of sin, with a constant renewed detestation of it, which, if any
thing, undoubtedly tends to its ruin. This is one design of prayer, one end of
the soul in it, namely to draw forth sin, to set it in order, to present it
unto it self in its vileness, abomination and aggravating circumstances, that
it may be loathed, abhorred, and cast away as a filthy thing; as Isa. 30. 22.
He that pleads with God for sins remission, pleads also with his own heart for
its detestation. Hos. 14. 3. Herein also sin is judged in the Name of God; for
the soul in its confession subscribes unto Gods detestation of it, and the
sentence of his Law against it. There is indeed a course of these duties, which
convinced persons do give up themselves unto, as a mere covert to their lusts:
they cannot sin quietly, unless they perform duty constantly. But that Prayer
we speak of, is a thing of another nature, a thing that will allow no
composition with sin, much less will serve the ends of the deceit of it, as the
other formal prayer does. It will not be bribed into a secret compliance with
any of the enemies of God, or the soul, no not for a moment. And hence it is,
that oftentimes in this duty, the heart is raised to the most sincere effectual
sense of sin, and detestation of it, that the soul ever obtains in its whole
cour^e of obedience. And this evidently tends also to the weakening and ruin of
the Law of sin.

Thirdly, This is the way appointed and blessed of God to obtain strength and
power against sin. Jam. 1. 5. Does any man lack, let him ask of God. Prayer is
the way of obtaining from God by Christ a supply of all our wants, assistance
against all opposition, especially that which is made against us by sin. This,
I suppose, need not be insisted on; it is in the notion and practice clear to
every Believer. It is that wherein we call, and upon which the Lord Jesus comes
in to our succor, with suitable help in a time of need, Heb. 2. 17.

Fourthly, Faith in Prayer countermines all the workings of the deceit of sin;
and that because the soul does therein constantly engage it self unto God to
oppose all sin whatsoever. Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn, and I will perfom it,
that I will keep thy righteous judgments. This is the language of every
gracious soul in its addresses unto God: the inmost parts thereof engage
themselves to God to cleave to him in all things, and to oppose sin in all
things. He that cannot do this, cannot pray. To pray with any other frame, is
to flatter God with our lips, which he abhors. And this exceedingly helps a
Believer in pursuing sin unto its ruin. For,

First, If there be any secret lust that lies lurking in the heart, he will
find it either rising up against this engagement, or using its artifices to
secure it self from it. And hereby it is discovered; and the conviction of the
heart concerning its evil furthered and strengthened. Sin makes the most
certain discovery of it self, and never more evidently than when it is most
severely pursued. Lusts in men are compared to hurtful and noisome beasts, or
men themselves are so because of their lusts, Isa. 11. 4, 5. Now such beasts
use themselves to their dens and coverts, and never discover themselves, at
least so much in their proper nature and rage, as when they are most earnestly
pursued. And so it is with sin and corruption in the heart.

Secondly, If any sin be prevalent in the soul, it will weaken it, and take it
off from the universality of this engagement unto God, it will breed a
tergiversation unto it, a slightness in it. Now when this is observed, it will
exceedingly awaken a gracious soul, and stir it up to look about it. As a
spontaneous lassitude, or a causeless weariness and indisposition of the body,
is looked on as the sign of an approaching Fever, or some dangerous distemper,
which stirs up men to use a timely and vigorous prevention, that they be not
seized upon by it; so is it in this case. When the soul of a Believer finds in
it self an indisposition to make fervent, sincere engagements of universal
holiness unto God, it knows that there is some prevalent distemper in it, finds
the place of it, and sets it self against it.

Thirdly, Whilst the soul can thus constantly engage it self unto God, it is
certain that sin can rise unto no ruinous prevalency. Yea, it is a conquest
over sin, a most considerable conquest, when the soul does fully and clearly,
without any secret reserve, come off with alacrity and resolution in such an
engagement; as Psalm. 18. 23. And it may upon such a success triumph in the
grace of God, and have good hope through faith, that it shall have a final
conquest, and what it so resolves, shall be done; that it has decreed a thing,
and it shall be established. And this tends to the disappointment, yea, to the
ruin of the Law of sin.

Fourthly, If the heart be not deceived by cursed hypocrisy, this engagement
unto God will greatly influence it unto a peculiar diligence and watchfulness
against all sin. There is no greater evidence of hypocrisy, than to have the
hear^ like the whorish woman, Prove. 7. 14. to say, I have paid my vows, now I
may take my self unto my sin. Or to be negligent about sin* as being satisfied
that it has prayed against it. It is otherwise in a gracious soul. Sense and
conscience of engagements against sin made to God, do make it universally
watchful against all its motions and operations. On these and sundry other
accounts, does faith in this duty exert it self peculiary, to the weakening of
the power, and stopping of the progress of the Law of sin.

If then the mind be diligent in its watch and charge, to preserve the soul
from the efficacy of sin, it will carefully attend unto this duty, and the due
performance of it, which is of such singular advantage unto its end and
purpose. Here therefore sin puts forth its deceit in its own defense: it
labors to divert and draw off the mind from attending unto this and the like
duties. And there are, among others, three engines, three ways and means,
whereby it attempts the accomplishment of its design.

First, It makes advantage of its weariness unto the flesh. There is an
Aversation, as has been declared in the Law of Sin unto all immediate
communion with God. Now this duty is such. There is nothing accompanies it
whereby the carnal part of the soul may be gratified, or satisfied, as there
may be somewhat of that nature in most public duties, in most that a man can
do, beyond pure acts of faith and love. No relief or advantage then coming in
by it, but what is purely spiritual, it becomes wearisome, burdensome to flesh
and blood. It is like traveling alone without Companion or diversion, which
makes the way seem long, but brings the Passenger with most speed to his
journeys end. So our Savior declares, when expecting his Disciples according
to their duty and present distress should have been engaged in this work, he
found them fast asleep, Matthew. 26. 41. The Spirit, says he, indeed is willing,
but the flesh is weak: And out of that weakness grew their indisposition unto,
and weariness of their Duty. So God complains of his People, Isa. 43. 22. Thou
have been weary of me. And it may come at length unto that height which is
mentioned, Mal. 1. 13. Ye have said, behold what a weariness is it, and ye have
snuffed at it, says the Lord of Hosts. The Jews suppose that it was the
language of men when they brought their Offerings or Sacrifices on their
shoulders, which they pretended wearyed them, and they panted and blowed as men
ready to faint under them, when they brought only the torn, and the lame, and
the sick. But so is this duty oftentimes to the flesh. And this the
deceitfulness of sin makes use of, to draw the heart by insensible degrees from
a constant attendance unto it. It puts in for the relief of the weak and weary
flesh. There is a compliance between spiritual flesh, and natural flesh in this
matter; they help one another, and an aversation unto this duty is the effect
of their compliance. So it was in the Spouse, Cant. 5. 2, 3. She was asleep
drowsing in her spiritual condition, and pleads her natural unfitness to rouse
her self from that state. If the mind be not diligently watchful to prevent
insinuations from hence, if it dwell not constantly on those considerations
which evidence an attendance unto this duty to be indispensible, if it stir not
up the principle of Grace in the heart to retain its Rule and Sovereignty, and
not to be dallied withal by foolish pretenses, it will be drawn off, which is
the effect aimed at.

Secondly, The deceitfulness of sin makes use of corrupt reasonings taken from
the pressing and urging occasions of life. Should we, says it in the heart,
attend strictly unto all duties in this kind, we should neglect our principal
occasions, and be useless unto our selves and others in the world. And on this
general account, particular businesses dispossess particular duties from their
due place and time. Men have not leisure to glorify God and save their own
souls. It is certain, that God gives us time enough for all that he requires of
us in any kind in this world. No duties need to justle one another, I mean
constantly. Especial occasions must be determined according unto especial
circumstances. But if in any thing we take more upon us than we have time well
to perform it in without robbing God of that which is due to him, and our own
souls, this God calls not unto, this he blesses us not in. It is more
tolerable that our duties of holiness and regard to God, should entrench upon
the duties of our Callings and employments in this world, than on the contrary;
and yet neither does God require this at our hands in an ordinary manner or
course. How little then will he bear with that which evidently is so much worse
upon all accounts whatever. But yet through the deceitfulness of sin, thus are
the souls of men beguiled. By several degrees they are at length driven from
their duty.

Thirdly, It deals with the mind to draw it off from its attendance unto this
duty by a tender of a compensation to be made in and by other duties. As Saul
thought to compensate his disobedience by Sacrifice. May not the same duty
performed in public, or in the Family suffice? And if the soul be so foolish
as not to answer, those things ought to be done, and this not to be left
undone, it may be ensnared and deceived. For besides a command unto it, namely
that we should personally watch unto prayer, there is as has been declared
sundry advantages in this duty so performed against the deceit and efficacy of
sin, which in the more public attendance unto it, it has not. These sin
strives to deprive the soul of by this commutation which by its corrupt
reasonings it tenders unto it.

Fourthly, I may add here that which has place in all the workings of sin by
deceit, namely, its feeding the soul with promises and purposes of a more
diligent attendance unto this duty when occasions will permit. By this means it
brings the soul to say unto its convictions of duty, as Felix did to Paul, Go
thy way for this time, when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.
And by this means oftentimes the present season and time, which alone is ours,
is lost irrecoverably.

These are some of the ways and means whereby the deceit of sin endeavors to
draw off the mind from its due attendance unto this duty, which is so
peculiarly suited to prevent its progress and prevalency, and which aims so
directly and immediately at its ruin. I might instance also in other duties of
the like tendency. But this may suffice to discover the nature of this part of
the deceit of sin. And this is the first way whereby it makes way for the
farther entangling of the Affections and the conception of sin. When sin has
wrought this effect on any one, he is said to be drawn away, to be diverted
from what in his mind he ought constantly to attend unto, in his walking before
the Lord.

And this will instruct us to see and discern where lies the beginning of our
declensions and failings in the ways of God, and that either as to our general
course, or as to our attendance unto especial duties. And this is of great
importance and concernment unto us. When the beginnings and occasions of a
sickness or distemper of body are known, it is a great advantage to direct in
and unto the cure of it. God to recall Sion to himself shows her where was the
beginning of her sin, Micah 1. 13. Now this is that which for the most part is
the beginning of sin unto us, even the drawing off the mind from a due
attendance in all things unto the discharge of its duty. The principal care and
charge of the soul lies on the mind; and if that fail of its duty, the whole is
betrayed, either as unto its general frame, or as unto particular miscarriages.
The failing of the mind, is like the failing of the Watchman in Ezekiel, the
whole is lost by his neglect. This therefore in that self-scrutiny and search
which we are called unto, we are most diligently to enquire after. God does not
look at what duties we perform, as to their number and tale, or as to their
nature merely, but whether we do them with that intention of mind and Spirit
which he requires. Many men perform duties in a road or course, and do not as
it were, so much as think of them. Their minds are filled with other things,
only duty takes up so much of their time. This is but an endeavor to mock God,
and deceive their own souls. Would you therefore take the true measure of your
selves: consider how it is with you as to the duty of your minds which we have
enquired after. Consider whether by any of the deceits mentioned, you have not
been diverted and drawn away; and if there be any decays upon you in any kind,
you will find that there has been the beginning of them. By one way or other
your minds have been made heedless, regardless, slothful, uncertain, being
beguiled and drawn off from their duty. Consider the charge, Prove. 4. 23, 25,
26, 27. May not such a soul say, if I had attended more diligently, if I had
considered more wisely the vile nature of sin, if I had not suffered my mind to
be possessed with vain hopes and foolish imaginations, by a cursed abuse of
Gospel Grace, If I had not permitted it to be filled with the things of the
world, and to become negligent in attending unto especial duties, I had not at
this day been thus sick, weak, thriftless, wounded, decayed, defiled. My
careless, my deceived mind, has been the beginning of sin and transgression
unto my soul. And this discovery will direct the soul unto a suitable way for
its healing and recovery, which will never be effected by a multiplying of
particular duties, but by a restoring of the mind, Psalm. 23. 3.

And this also does hence appear to be the great means of preserving our souls,
both as unto their general frame and particular duties according to the mind
and will of God; namely to endeavor after a sound and steadfast mind. It is a
signal Grace to have the Spirit of power and love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy
1. 7. A stable, solid, resolved mind in the things of God, not easily moved,
diverted, changed, not drawn aside, a mind not apt to hearken after corrupt
reasonings, vain insinuations, or pretenses to draw it off from its duty. This
is that which the Apostle exhorts Believers unto, 1 Cor. 15. 38. Therefore my
beloved Brethren, be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord. The stedfastness of our minds abiding in their duty, is the cause of all
our unmoveableness, and fruitfulness in obedience. And so Peter tells us that
those who are by any means led away, or enticed, they fall from their own
stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 7. And the great blame that is laid upon Backsliders
is, that they are not steadfast, Psalm. 78. 37. Their Spirit was not steadfast.
For if the soul be safe, unless the mind be drawn off from its duty, the
soundness and stedfastness of the mind is its great preservative. And there are
three parts of this stedfastness of the mind. First, A full purpose of cleaving
to God in all things. Secondly, A daily renovation and quickening of the heart
unto a discharge of this purpose. Thirdly, Resolutions against all dalliances
or parlies about negligencies in that discharge; which are not here to be
spoken unto.

CHAP. X.
The Deceit of Sin in drawing off the Mind from its Attendance unto particular
Duties farther discovered. Several things required in the Mind of Believers
with respect unto particular Duties of Obedience. The Actings of Sin in a way
of Deceit, to divert the mind from them.

WE have not as yet brought unto an Issue the First way of the working of the
deceit of sin, namely, in its drawing away of the mind from the discharge of
its duty, which we insist upon the longer upon a double account.

First, Because of its importance and concernment. If the mind be drawn off, if
it be tainted, weakened, turned aside from a due and strict attendance unto its
charge and Office, the whole Soul, Will, and Affections, are certainly
entangled and drawn into sin, as has been in part declared, and will
afterward farther appear. This we ought therefore to give diligent heed unto,
which is the design of the Apostles Exhortation, Heb. 2. 1. Therefore we ought
to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lost at any
time we should let them slip. It is a failure of our minds, by the
deceitfulness of sin, in losing the life, power, sense and impression of the
Word which he cautions us against. And there is no way to prevent it but by
giving of most earnest heed unto the things which we have heard, which
expresses the whole duty of our minds in attending unto obedience.

Secondly, Because the actings and workings of the mind being spiritual, are
such as the conscience unless clearly enlightened, and duly excited and stirred
up, is not affected withal, so as to take due notice of them. Conscience is not
apt to exercise reflex acts upon the minds failures, as principally respecting
the acts of the whole soul. When the Affections are entangled with sin (of
which afterward) or the Will begins to conceive it by its express consent,
Conscience is apt to make an uproar in the soul, and to give it no rest or
quiet until the soul be reclaimed, or it self be one way or other bribed or
debauched. But these neglects of the mind being spiritual, without very
diligent attendance, they are seldom taken notice of. Our minds are often in
the Scriptures, called our Spirits, as Romans 1. 9. Whom I serve in my Spirit;
and are distinguished from the soul, which principally intends the Affections,
in that distribution, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Sanctify you wholly, your whole spirit
and soul, that is, your mind and Affections. It is true where the Spirit is
used to express spiritual gifts, it is as unto those gifts opposed to our
understandings, 1 Cor 14. 15. Which is there taken for the first act of the
mind in a rational perception of things. But as that word is applied unto any
faculty of our souls, it is the mind that it expresses. This then being our
Spirit, the actings of it are secret and hidden, and not to be discovered
without spiritual wisdom and diligence. Let us not suppose then that we dwell
too long on this consideration, which is of so great importance to us, and yet
so hidden, and which we are apt to be very insensible of; and yet our
carefulness in this matter is one of the best evidences that we have of our
sincerity. Let us not then be like a man that is sensible, and complains of a
cut finger, but not of a decay of Spirits tending unto death. There remains
therefore as unto this head of our discourse, the consideration of the charge
of the mind in reference unto particular duties and sins. And in the
consideration of it, we shall do these two things.

First, Show what is required in the mind of a Believer in reference unto
particular duties.

Secondly, Declare the way of the working of the deceit of sin to draw it off
from its attendance thereunto. The like also shall be done with respect unto
particular sins, and their avoidance.

First, For the right performance of any Duty, it is not enough that the thing
it self required be performed, but that it be universally squared and fitted
unto the rule of it. Herein lies the great duty of the mind, namely, to attend
unto the Rule of duties, and to take care that all the concernments of them be
ordered thereby. Our progress in obedience, is our edification or building. Now
it is but a very little fartherance unto a building, that a man bring wood and
stones and heap them up together without order. They must be hewed and squared,
and fitted by line and rule, if we intend to build. Nor is it unto any
advantage unto our edification in faith and obedience, that we multiply duties,
if we heap them upon one another, if we order and dispose them not according to
rule. And therefore does God expressly reject a multitude of duties when not
universally suited unto the Rule, Isa. 1. 11. To what purpose is the multitude
of your Sacrifices; and v. 14. They are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear
them. And therefore all acceptable obedience is called a proceeding according
unto rule, Gal. 6. 16. it is a Canonical, or regular obedience. As letters in
the Alphabet heaped together signify nothing, unless they are disposed into
their proper order; no more do our duties without this disposal. That they be
so, is the great duty of the mind, and which with all diligence it is to attend
unto, Ephesians. 5. 15. Walk circumspectly, exactly, accurately, that is,
diligently in all things, take heed to the Rule of what you do. We Walk in
duties, but we walk circumspectly in this attention of the mind.

Secondly, There are some special things which the Rule directs unto, that the
mind is to attend in every duty; as,

First, That as to the matter of it, it be full and complete. Under the Law, no
Beast was allowed to be a Sacrifice that had any member wanting, any defect of
parts. Such were rejected as well as those that were lame or blind. Duties must
be complete as to the parts, the matter of them. There may be such a part of
the price kept back, as may make the tendering of all the residue unacceptable,
Saul sparing Agag and the fattest of the Cattle, rendered the destroying of all
the rest useless. Thus when men will give alms, or perform other services, but
not unto the proportion that the Rule requires, and which the mind by diligent
attention unto it might discover, the whole duty is vitiated.

Secondly, As to the Principle of it, namely, that it be done in faith, and
therein by an actual derivation of strength from Christ, ( John 15. 5.) without
whom we can do nothing. It is not enough that the Person be a Believer, though
that be necessary unto every good work, Ephesians. 2. 10. But also that faith be
peculiarly acted in every duty that we do. For our whole obedience is the
obedience of faith, Romans 1. 5. that is, which the Doctrine of faith requires,
and which the grace of faith bears or brings forth. So Christ is expressly
said to be our life, Col. 3. 4. Our spiritual life, that is the Spring, Author,
and Cause of it. Now as in life natural, no vital act can be performed, but by
the actual operation of the principle of life it self; So in life spiritual, no
spiritually vital act, that is, no duty acceptable to God, can be performed but
by the actual working of Christ, who is our life. And this is no other way
derived unto us but by faith. Whence says the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20. Christ
lives in me, and the life which I now lead in the flesh, is by the faith of
the Son of God. Not only was Christ his life, a living principle unto him, but
he led a life, that is, discharged vital actions in all duties of holiness and
obedience, by the faith of the Son of God, or in him; deriving supplies of
Grace and strength from him thereby. This therefore ought a Believer diligently
to attend unto, namely, that every thing he does to God, be done in the
strength of Christ; which wherein it consists ought diligently to be enquired
into by all who intend to walk with God.

Thirdly, In this respect unto Rule, the manner of the performance of every
duty is to be regarded. Now there are two things in the manner of the
performance of any duty which a Believer, who is trusted with spiritual light,
ought to attend unto.

First, that it be done in the way, and by the means that God has prescribed
with respect unto the ou^ward manner of its performance. And this is especially
to be regarded in duties of the worship of God; the matter and outward manner
whereof do both equally fall under his command. If this be not regarded, the
whole duty is vitiated. I speak not of them who suffer themselves to be deluded
by the deceitfulness of sin, utterly to disregard the rule of the word in such
things, and to worship God according to their own imaginations; but of them
principally, who although they in general prosess to do nothing but what God
requires, and as he requires it, yet do not diligently attend to the Rule, to
make the Authority of God to be the sole cause and reason both of what they do,
and of the manner of the performance of it. And this is the reason that God so
often calls on his People to consider diligently and wisely, that they may do
all according as he had commanded.

Secondly, The Affections of the heart and mind in duties belong to the
performance of them in the inward manner. The prescriptions and commands of God
for attendance hereunto are innumerable, and the want hereof renders every duty
an abomination unto him. A Sacrifice without an heart, without salt, without
fire, of what value is it? No more are duties without spiritual Affections. And
herein is the mind to keep the charge of God; to see that the heart which he
requires be tendered to him. And we find also that God requires especial
Affections to accompany special duties. He that gives with cheerfulness; which
if they are not attended unto, the whole is lost.

Fourthly, The mind is to attend unto the Ends of duties; and therein
principally the glory of God in Christ. Several other ends will sin and self
impose upon our duties: Especially two it will press hard upon us with: First,
Satisfaction of our convictions and consciences. Secondly, The praise of men.
For self-righteousness and ostentation are the main ends of Men that are fallen
off from God in all moral duties whatsoever. In their sins they endeavor for
to satisfy their lusts, in their duties, their conviction, and pride. These
the mind of a Believer is diligently to watch against, and to keep up in all a
single eye to the glory of God, as that which answers the great and general
rule of all our obedience; Whatever you do, do it all to the glory of God.
These and the like things, I say, which are commonly spoken unto, is the mind
of a Believer obliged to attend diligently and constantly unto, with respect
unto all the particular duties of our walking before God. Here then lies no
small part of the deceit of sin. Namely, to draw the mind off from this watch,
to bring an inadvertency upon it, that it shall not in these things keep the
watch and charge of the Lord. And if it can do so, and thereby strip our duties
of all their excellencies which lie in these concernments of them, that the
mind is to attend unto it will not much trouble it self nor us about the duties
themselves. And this it attempts several ways.

First, By persuading the mind to content it self with generals, and to take it
off from attending unto things in particular instances. For example; it would
persuade the soul to rest satisfied in a general aim of doing things to the
glory of God, without considering how every particular duty may have that
tendency. Thus Saul thought that he had fulfilled his whole duty, and done the
will of God, and sought his Glory in his war against Amalek, when for want of
attendance to every particular duty in that service, he had dishonored God,
and ruined himself and his Posterity. And men may persuade themselves, that
they have a general design for the Glory of God, when they have no active
principle in particular duties tending at all that way. But if, instead of
fixing the mind by faith on the peculiar advancing the glory of God in a duty,
the soul content it self with a general notion of doing so, the mind is already
diverted and draw off from its charge by the deceitfulness of sin. If a man be
traveling in a journey, it is not only required of him, that he bend his
course that way, and so go on, but if he attend not unto every turning, and
other occurrences in his way, he may wander and never come to his journeys end.
And if we suppose that in general we aim at the Glory of God, as we all prosess
to do, yet if we attend not unto it distinctly upon every duty that occurs in
our way, we shall never attain the end aimed at. And he who satisfies himself
with this general purpose, without acting it in every special duty, will not
long retain that purpose neither. It does the same work upon the mind in
reference unto the principle of our duties, as it does unto the end. Their
principle is, that they be done in faith, in the strength of Christ; but if men
content themselves that they are Believers, that they have faith, and do not
labor in every particular duty to act faith, to lead their spiritual lives in
all the acts of them by the faith of the Son of God, the mind is drawn off from
its duty. It is particular actions wherein we express and exercise our faith
and obedience; and what we are in them, that we are, and no more.

Secondly, It draws off the mind from the duties before mentioned, by
insinuating a secret contentment unto it from the duty it self performed, as to
the matter of it. This is a fair discharge of a natural conscience. If the duty
be performed, though as to the manner of its performance it come short almost
in all things of the rule, conscience and conviction will be satisfied. As
Saul, upon his expedition against Amalek, cries to Samuel, Come in, thou
blessed of the Lord, I have done the commandment of the Lord. He satisfied
himself, though he had not attended as he ought to the whole will of God in
that matter. And thus was it with them, Isa. 58. 3. wherefore have we fasted,
say they, and thou regardest it not; they had pleased themselves in the
performance of their duties, and expected that God also should be pleased with
them. But he shows them at large wherein they had failed, and that so far as to
render what they had done an abomination. And the like charge he expresses
against them, chap. 48. 1, 2. This the deceitfulness of sin endeavors to draw
the mind unto, namely to take up in the performance of the duty it self. Pray
thou ought, and thou have prayed, give alms thou ought, and thou have
given alms; quiet then thy self in what thou have done, and go on to do the
like. If it prevail herein, the mind is discharged from farther attendance and
watching unto duty, which leaves the soul on the borders of many evils. For,

Thirdly, Hence customariness in all duties will quickly ensue, which is the
height of sins drawing off the mind from duty. For men's minds may be drawn from
all duties, in the midst of the most abundant performance of them. For in and
under them, the mind may be subject unto an habitual diversion from its charge
and watch unto the rule. What is done with such a frame, is not done to God,
Amos 5. 25. None of their Sacrifices were to God, although they professed that
they were all so. But they attended not unto his Worship in faith, and unto his
glory, and he despised all their duties. See also Hos. 10. 1. And this is the
great reason why Professors thrive so little under the performance of a
multitude of duties. They attend not unto them in a due manner, their minds
being drawn off from their circumspect watch, and so they have little or no
communion with God in them, which is the end whereunto they are designed, and
by which alone they become useful and profitable unto themselves. And in this
manner are many duties of worship and obedience performed by a woeful generation
of Hypocrites, Formalists, and profane persons, without either life or light in
themselves, or acceptance with God; their minds being wholly estranged from a
due attendance unto what they do, by the power and deceitfulness of sin.

Secondly, As it is in respect of duties, so also it is in respect of sins.
There are sundry things in and about every sin that the mind of a Believer, by
virtue of its office and duty is obliged to attend diligently unto, for the
preservation of the soul from it. Things they are which God has appointed and
sanctified, to give effectual rebukes and checks to the whole working of the
Law of sin, and such as in the Law of grace, under which we are, are
exceedingly suited and fitted unto that purpose. And these the deceit of sin
endeavors by all means to draw off the mind from a due consideration of, and
attendance unto. Some few of them we shall a little reflect upon.

First, The first and most general is the Sovereignty of God, the great
Lawgiver, by whom it is forbidden. This Joseph fixed on in his great
temptation, Genesis 39. 9. How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
There was in it a great evil, a great ingratitude against man, which he pleads
also and insists upon, ver. 8, 9. but that which fixed his heart and resolution
against it, was the formality of it, that it was sin against God, by whom it
was severely forbidden. So the Apostle informs us, that in our dealing in any
thing that is against the Law, our respect is still to be unto the Lawgiver
and his Sovereignty: James 4. 11, 12. If thou judge the Law, thou art not a
doer of the Law, but a judge; there is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to
destroy. Consider this always, there is one Lawgiver, holy, righteous, armed
with Sovereign Power and Authority; he is able to save and destroy. Hence sin
is called a rebellion, a casting off his yoke, a despising of him, and that in
his Sovereignty, as the great Lawgiver; and this ought the mind always
practically to attend unto, in all the lustings, actings and suggestions of the
Law of sin, especially when advantaged by any suitable or vigorous temptation.
It is God that has forbidden this thing, the great Lawgiver, under whose
absolute Sovereignty I am, in dependence on whon I live, and by whom I am to be
disposed of, as to my present and eternal condition. This Eve fixed on at the
beginning of her temptation, God has said, we must not eat of this tree, Genesis
3. 3. but she kept not her ground, she abode not by that consideration, but
suffered her mind to be diverted from it by the subtilty of Satan, which was
the entrance of her transgression; and so it is unto us all in our deviations
from obedience.

Secondly, The deceit of sin, of every sin, the punishment appointed unto it in
the Law, is another thing that the mind ought actually to attend unto, in
reference unto every particular evil. And the diversions from this, that the
minds of men have been doctrinally and practically attended withal, have been
an inlet into all manner of abominations. Job professes another frame in
himself, chap. 31. 23. Destruction from God was a terror unto me, and by
reason of his highness I could not endure. Many evils he had mentioned in the
foregoing verses, and pleads his innocence from them, although they were such
as upon the account of his Greatness and Power, he could have committed easily
without fear of danger from men. Here he gives the reason that prevailed with
him so carefully to abstain from them, Destruction from God was a terror to
me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure. I considered, says he,
that God had appointed death and destruction for the punishment of sin, and
that such was his greatness, highness, and power, that he could inflict it unto
the uttermost, in such a way as no creature is able to abide or to avoid. So
the Apostle directs Believers always to consider what a fearful thing it is to
fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. And that because he has
said, Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, ver. 30. He is a sin-avenging God,
that will by no means acquit the guilty; as in the declaration of his gracious
Name, infinitely full of encouragements to poor sinners in Christ, he adds
that in the close, that he will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. That
he may keep upon the minds of them whom he pardons, a due sense of the
punishment that is due from his vindictive Justice unto every sin. And so the
Apostle would have us mind, that even our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29.
that is, that we should consider his holiness and vindictive Justice,
appointing unto sin a meet recompense of reward. And men's breaking through this
consideration, he reckons as the height of the aggravation of their sins, Romans
1. 32. They know that it is the judgment of God, that they which commit such
things were worthy of death, yet continued to do them: What hope is there for
such persons? There is indeed relief against this consideration for humbled
believing souls in the blood of Christ; but this relief is not to take off the
mind from it, as it is appointed of God to be a restraint from sin. And both
these considerations, even the Sovereignty of God, and the punishment of sin,
are put together by our Savior, Matthew. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the
body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell.

Thirdly, The consideration of all the love and kindness of God, against whom
every sin is committed, is another thing that the mind ought diligently to
attend unto. And this is a prevailing consideration, if rightly and graciously
managed in the soul. This Moses presses on the people, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do you
thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy Father that
bought thee? Has he not made thee, and established thee? Is this a requital
for Eternal Love, and all the fruits of it? for the love and care of a Father,
of a Redeemer, that we have been made partakers of? And it is the same
consideration which the Apostle manageth to this purpose, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having
therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. The
receiving of the promises ought to be effectual, as to stir us up unto all
holiness, so to work and effect an abstinence from all sin. And what Promises
are these? namely that God will be a Father unto us, and receive us, chap. 6.
17, 18. which compriseth the whole of all the love of God toward us here, and
to eternity. If there be any spiritual ingenuity in the soul, whilst the mind
is attentive to this consideration, there can be no prevailing attempt made
upon it by the power of sin. Now there are two parts of this consideration.

First, That which is general in it, that which is common unto all believers.
This is managed unto this purpose, 1 John 3. 1, 2, 3. Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God; therefore the world knows us not because it knew him not. Beloved, now
are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him for we shall see him as he
is. And every man that has this hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure.
Consider, says he, the love of God, and the previledges that we enjoy by it:
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God. Adoption is an especial fruit of it, and how great a
privilege is this? Such love it is, and such are the fruits of it, that the
world knows nothing of the blessed condition which we obtain and enjoy
thereby: The world knows us not. Nay, it is such love, and so unspeakably
blessed and glorious are the effects of it, that we our selves are not able to
comprehend them. What use then ought we to make of this contemplation of the
excellent unspeakable love of God? Why says he, Every one that has this hope
purifieth himself. Every man who being made partaker of this Love, and
thereupon an hope of the full enjoyment of the fruits of it, of being made like
to God in glory, purifieth himself, that is, in an abstinence from all and
every sin, as in the following words is at large declared.

Secondly, It is to be considered as to such peculiar mercies and fruits of
love, as every ones soul has been made partaker of. There is no Believer, but
besides the love and mercy which he has in common with all his brethren, he
has also in the lot of his inheritance, some enclosures, some especial mercies
wherein he has a single propriety. He has some Joy which no stranger
intermedleth withal, Prove. 14. 10. Particular applications of covenant love
and mercy to his soul. Now these are all provisions laid in by God, that they
may be born in mind against an hour of temptation, that the consideration of
them may preserve the soul from the attempts of sin. Their neglect is an high
aggravation of our provocations. 1 King. 11. 9. It is charged as the great evil
of Solomon, that he had sinned against special mercies, especial intimations of
love; he sinned after God had appeared to him twice. God required that he
should have born in mind that especial favor, and have made it an argument
against sin. But he neglected^, and is burdened with this sore rebuke. And
indeed all especial mercies, all especial tokens and pledges of love, are
utterly lost and misspent upon us, if they are not improved unto this end. This
then is another thing, that it is the duty of the mind greatly to attend unto,
and to oppose effectually unto every attempt that is made on the soul by the
Law of sin.

Fourthly, The considerations that arise from the blood and mediation of
Christ, are of the same importance. So the Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them,
and rose again. There is a constraining efficacy in this consideration, it is
great, forcible, effectual, if duly attented unto. But I must not here in
particular insist upon these things. Nor,

Fifthly, Shall I speak of the inhabitation of the Spirit, the greatest
privilege that we are made partakers of in this world. The due consideration
how he is grieved by sin, how his dwelling place is defiled thereby, how his
comforts are forfeited, lost, despised by it, might also be insisted on. But
the instances passed through are sufficient unto our purpose. Now herein lies
the duty of the mina, in reference unto particular sins and temptations. It is
diligently and carefully to attend unto those things, to dwell constantly upon
the consideration of them, to have them in a continual readiness to oppose unto
all the lustings, actings, warrings, attempts, and rage of sin.

In reference hereunto does sin in an especial manner put forth and act its
deceit. It labors by all means to draw off the mind from its due attendance
unto these things; to deprive the soul of this great preservative and antidote
against its poison. It endeavors to cause the soul to satisfy it self with
general undigested notions about sin, that it may have nothing in particular to
betake it self unto in its own defense, against its attempts and temptations.
And the ways whereby it does this may be also briefly considered.

First, It is from the deceit of sin that the mind is spiritually slothful,
whereby it becomes negligent unto this duty. The principal discharge of its
trust in this matter is expressed by watching, which is the great Caution that
the Lord Jesus gave unto his Disciples in reference unto all their dangers from
sin and Satan, Mark 14. 37. I say unto all watch. That is, use your utmost
diligence and circumspection, that you be not surprised and entangled with
temptations. It is called also consideration; Consider your ways; consider
your latter end; the want whereof God complains of in his People, Dent. 32. 29.
Now that which is contrary to these indispensible conditions of our
preservation, is spiritual slothfulness, as the Apostle declares, Heb. 6. 11,
12. And we desire that every one of you, do show the same diligence to the full
assurance of hope unto the end, that you be not slothful. If we show not
diligence, we are slothful, and in danger of coming short to inherit the
promises; See 2 Pet. 1. 5, 9. And besides this giving all diligence, add to
your faith virtue, to virtue, knowledge etc. For if these things be in you and
abound, that they make you that you shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus. But he that lacks these things is blind, and
cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins;
wherefore the rather Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election
sure; for if you do these things you shall never fall; For so an entrance shall
be administered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, ver. 9, 10. All this the mind is turned from, if once by
the deceit of sin it be made slothful. Now this sloth consists in three things.

First, Inadvertency; it does not set it self to consider and attend unto its
special concernments. The Apostle persuading the Hebrews with all earnestness
to attend diligently, to consider carefully that they may not be hardened by
the deceitfulness of sin, gives this reason of their danger, that they were
dull of hearing, Chap. 5. 11. That is, that they were slothful, and did not
attend unto the things of their duty. A secret regardlesness is apt to creep
upon the soul, and it does not set it self to a diligent marking how things go
with it, and what is continually incumbent on it.

Secondly, An unwillingness to be stirred up unto its duty, Prove. 19. 24. The
slothful man hides his hand in his bosom, and will not so much as bring it to
his mouth again. There is an unwillingness in sloth to take any notice of
warnings, calls, excitations, or stirrings up by the Word, Spirit, Judgments,
any thing that God makes use of, to call the mind unto a due consideration of
the condition of the soul. And this is a perfect evidence that the mind is made
slothful by the deceit of sin, when especial calls and warnings, whether in a
suitable word, or a pressing judgment, cannot prevail with it to pull its hand
out of its bosom, that is, to set about the special duties that it is called
unto.

Thirdly, Weak and ineffectual attempts to recover its self unto its duty,
Prove. 26. 14. As the door turns it self upon its hinges, so does the slothful
man upon his head. In the turning of a door upon its hinges, there is some
motion, but no progress. It removes up and down, but is still in the place and
posture that it was. So is it with the spiritually slothful man on his bed, or
in his security. He makes some motions or faint endeavors toward a discharge
of his duty, but goes not on. There where he was one day, there he is the next;
yea, there where he was one year, he is the next. His endeavors are faint,
cold, and evanid; he gets no ground by them, but is always beginning and never
finishing his work.

Fourthly, Heartlesness upon the apprehensions of difficulties and
discouragements, Prove. 22. 13. The slothful man says there is a Lion in the
way, I shall be slain in the Streets. Every difficulty deters him from duty. He
thinks it impossible for him to attain to that accuracy, exactness, and
perfection which he is in this matter to press after; and therefore contents
himself in his old coldness, negligence, rather than to run the hazard of an
universal circumspection. Now if the deceit of sin has once drawn away the
mind into this frame, it lays it open to every temptation and incursion of
sin. The Spouse in the Canticles seems to have been overtaken with this
distemper, Chap. 5. 1, 2, 3. And this puts her on various excuses why she
cannot attend unto the call of Christ, and apply her self unto her duty in
walking with him.

Secondly, It draws away the mind from its watch and duty in reference unto sin
by surprisals. It falls in conjunction with some urging temptation, and
surprizeth the mind into thoughts quite of another Nature than those which it
ought to insist upon in its own defense. So it seems to have been with Peter;
his carnal fear closing with the temptation wherein Satan sought to winnow him,
filled his mind with so many thoughts about his own imminent danger, that he
could not take into consideration the love and warning of Christ; nor the evil
whereunto his temptation led him, nor any thing that he ought to have insisted
on for his preservation. And therefore upon a review of his folly in neglecting
those thoughts of God, and the love of Christ, which through the assistance of
the Holy Ghost might have kept him from his scandalous fall, he wept bitterly.
And this indeed is the common way of the working of the deceit of sin, as unto
particular evils. It lays hold on the mind suddenly with thoughtfulness about
the present sin, possesses it, takes it up, so that either it recovers not it
self at all to the considerations mentioned, or if any thoughts of them be
suggested, the mind is so prepossest and filled, that they take no impression
on the soul, or make no abode in it. Thus doubtless was David surprised in the
entrance of his great sin. Sin and temptation did so possess and fill his mind
with the present object of his lust, that he utterly forgot, as it were, those
considerations which he had formerly made use of, when he so diligently kept
himself from his Iniquity. Here therefore lies the great wisdom of the soul, in
rejecting the very first motions of sin, because by parlies with them the mind
may be drawn off from attending unto its preservatives, and so the whole rush
into evil.

Thirdly, It draws away the mind by frequency and long continuance of its
solicitations, making as it were at last a conquest of it. And this happens not
without an open neglect of the soul, in want of stirring up it self to give an
effectual rebuke in the strength and by the Grace of Christ unto sin, which
would have prevented its prevalency. But of this, more shall be spoken
afterward. And this is the first way whereby the Law of sin acts its deceit
against the soul. It draws off the mind from attendance unto its charge and
Office, both in respect of duty and sin. And so far as this is done the Person
is said to be drawn away, or drawn off. He is tempted; every man is tempted,
when he is thus drawn away by his own lust, or the deceit of sin dwelling in
him. And the whole effect of this working of the deceituflness of sin may be
reduced unto these three heads.

First, The remission of an universally watchful frame of Spirit unto every
duty, and against all, even the most hidden and secret actings of sin.

Secondly, The omission of peculiar attending unto such duties as have an
especial respect unto the weakening and ruin of the whole Law of Sin, and the
obviating of its deceitfulness.

Thirdly, Spiritual sloth, as to a diligent regard unto all the especial
concernments of Duties and Sins. When these three things, with their branches
mentioned, less or more, are brought about, in, or upon the soul, or so far as
they are so, so far a man is drawn off by his own lust, or the deceit of sin.

There is no need of adding here any directions for the prevention of this
evil, they having sufficiently been laid down in our passage through the
consideration both of the duty of the mind, and of the deceit of sin.

CHAP. XI.
The working of Sin by Deceit to entangle the Affections. The ways whereby it
is done. Means of their prevention.

THe second thing in the words of the Apostle ascribed unto the deceitful
working of sin is its enticing. A man is drawn away and enticed. And this seems
particularly to respect the Affections, as drawing away does the mind. The Mind
is drawn away from duty, and the Affections are enticed unto sin. From the
prevalency hereof a man is said to be enticed, or entangled as with a bait; so
the word imports. For there is an allusion in it unto the bait wherewith a Fish
is taken on the hook which holds him to his destruction. And concerning this
effect of the deceit of sin, we shall briefly show two things.

First, What it is to be enticed, or to be entangled with the bait of sin, to
have the Affections tainted with an inclin^tion thereunto, and when they are so.

Secondly, What course sin takes, and what way it proceeds in, thus to
entice, ensnare, or entangle the soul.

For the first, First, The Affections are certainly entangled when they stir up
frequent imaginations about the proposed object which this deceit of sin
leads and enticeth toward. When sin prevails, and the Affections are gone
fully after it, it fills the imagination with it, possessing it with Images,
likenesses, appearances of it continually. Such Persons devise iniquity and
work evil on their beds, which they also practice when they are able, when it
is in the power of their hand, Mic. 2. 1. As in particular, Peter tells us that
they have Eyes full of an Adulteress, and they cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.
14. That is, their imaginations are possessed with a continual representation of
the object of their lusts. And it is so in part where the Affections are in
part entangled with sin, and begin to turn aside unto it. John tells us that
the things that are in the world, are the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, 1 Ep. 2. 14. The lust of the Eyes is that which by
them is conveyed unto the soul. Now it is not the bodily sense of seeing, but
the fixing of the imagination from that sense on such thing, that is intended.
And this is called the Eyes, because thereby things are constantly represented
unto the mind and soul, as outward objects are unto the inward sense by the
Eyes. And oftentimes the outward sight of the Eyes is the occasion of these
imaginations. So Achan declares how sin prevailed with him, Josh. 7. 21. First
he saw the wedge of Gold, and Babylonish garment, and then he coveted them. He
rolled them the pleasures, the profit of them, in his Imagination, and then
fixed his heart upon the obt^ining of them. Now the heart may have a settled,
fixed detestation of sin; but yet if a man find that the Imagination of the
mind is frequently solicited by it* and exercised about it, such a one may know
that his Affections are secretly enticed and entangled.

Secondly, This entanglement is heightened, when the Imagination can prevail
with the mind to lodge vain thoughts in it, with secret delight and
complacency. This is termed by Casuists, Cogitatio morosa cum delectatione, an
abiding thought with delight, which toward forbidden objects is in all cases
actually sinful. And yet, this may be, when the Consent of the Will unto sin is
not obtained; when the soul would not for the world do the thing, which yet
thoughts begin to lodge in the mind about. This lodging of vain thoughts in the
heart the Prophet complains of as a thing greatly sinful, and to be abhorred,
Jer. 4. 14. All these thoughts are Messengers that carry sin to and fro between
the Imagination and the Affections, and still increase it, enflaming the
Imagination, and more and more entangling the Affections. Achan thinks upon the
Golden Wedge, this makes him like it, and love it; by loving of it, his
thoughts are infected, and return to the Imagination of its worth, and goodly
show, and so by little and little the soul is enflamed unto sin. And here if
the Will parts with its Sovereignty, sin is actually conceived.

Thirdly, Inclinations, or readiness to attend unto extenuations of sin, or the
reliefs that are tendered against sin when committed, manifest the Affections
to be entangled with it. We have showed, and shall yet farther evidence that it
is a great part of the deceit of sin, to tender lessning and extenuating
thoughts of sin unto the mind. Is it not a little one? or there is mercy
provided, or it shall be in due time relinquished and given over, is its
language in a deceived heart. Now when there is a readiness in the soul to
hearken and give entertainment unto such secret insinuations arising from this
deceit, in reference unto any sin, or unapprovable course, it is an evidence
that the Affections are enticed. When the soul is willing, as it were to be
tempted, to be courted by sin, to hearken to its dalliances and solicitations,
it has lost of its conjugal Affections unto Christ, and is entangled. This is
looking on the Wine when it is red, when it gives its color in the Cup, when
it moves it self aright, Prove. 33. 21. A pleasing contemplation on the
invitations of sin, whose end the wise Man gives us, ver. 32. When the deceit
of sin has prevailed thus far on any Person, then he is enticed or entangled;
the Will is not yet come to the actual conception of this or that sin by its
consent, but the whole soul is in a near inclination thereunto. And many other
instances I could give as tokens and evidences of this entanglement. These may
suffice to manifest what we intend thereby.

Our next enquiry is, how, or by what means the deceit of sin proceeds thus to
entice and entangle the Affections; and two or three of its baits are manifest
herein.

First It makes use of its former prevalency upon the mind in drawing it off
from its watch and circumspection. Says the Wise man, Prove. 1. 17. Surely in
vain is the Not spread in the sight of any Bird; or before the eyes of every
thing that has a wing, as in the Original. If it has eyes open to discern the
snare, and a wing to carry it away, it will not be caught. And in vain should
the deceit of sin spread its snares and Nets for the entanglement of the ^^l,
whilst the Eyes of the mind are intent upon what it does, and so stir up the
wings of its Will and Affections to carry it away and avoid it. But if the Eyes
be put out or diverted, the wings are of very little use for escape. And
therefore this is one of the ways which is used by them who take Birds or
Fowls in their Nets, they have false lights, or shows of things to divert the
sight of their prey; and when that is done, they take the season to cast their
Nets upon them. So does the deceit of sin, it first draws off and diverts the
mind by false reasonings and pretenses, as has been showed, and then casts its
Net upon the Affections for their entanglement.

Secondly, Taking advantage of such seasons, it proposes sin as desirable, as
exceeding satisfactory to the corrupt part of our Affections. It gilds over the
object by a thousand pretenses which it presents unto corrupt lustings. This is
the laying of a bait, which the Apostle in this Verse evidently alludes unto. A
bait is some what desirable and suitable, that is proposed to the hungry
Creature for its satisfaction, and it is by all Artifices rendered desirable
and suitable. Thus is sin presented by the help of the imagination unto the
soul; that is, sinful and inordinate objects, which the Affections cleave unto,
are (...) ^^^sented. The Apostle tells us, that there are pleasures of sin,
Heb. 11. 35. which unless they are despis^d, as they were by Moses, there is no
escaping of sin it self Hence they that live in sin, are said to live in
pleasure, James 5. 5. Now this pleasure of sin consists in its suitableness
to give satisfaction to the flesh, to lust, to corrupt Affections. Hence is
that caution, Romans 13. 14. Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lust
thereof. That is, do not suffer your minds, thoughts, or affections to fix upon
sinful objects, suited to give satisfaction to the lusts of the flesh, to
nouri^ and cherish them thereby. To which purpose he speaks again, Gal. 5. 16.
Fulfill ye not the lusts of the flesh. Bring not in the pleasures of sin to
give them satisfaction. When men are under the power of sin, they are said to
fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the Mind, Ephesians. 2. 3. Thus therefore the
deceit of sin endeavors to entangle the Affections, by proposing unto them
through the assistance of the Imagination that suitableness which is in it to
the satisfaction of its corrupt lusts, now set at some liberty by the
inadvertency of the mind. It presents its Wine as sparkling in the cup, the
beauty of the Adulteress, the riches of the world unto sensual and covetous
persons, and somewhat in the like kind, in some degrees to Believers
themselves. When therefore, I say, sin would entangle the soul, it prevails
with the imagination to solicit the heart, by representing this false painted
beauty, or pretended satisfactoriness of sin: And then if Satan with any
peculiar temptation fall in to its assistance, it oftentimes inflames all the
affections, and puts the whole soul into disorder.

Thirdly, It hides the danger that attends sin, it covers it as the hook is
covered with the bait, or the net spread over with meat for the fowl to be
taken. It is not indeed possible that sin should utterly deprive the soul of
the knowledge of the danger of it. It cannot dispossess it of its notion or
persuasion that the wages of sin is death; and that it is the judgment of God,
that they that commit sin are worthy of death. But this it will do, it will so
take up and possess the mind and affections with the baits and desirableness of
sin, that it shall divert them from an actual and practical contemplation of
the danger of it. What Satan did in and by his first temptation, that sin does
ever since. At first Eve guards her self, with calling to mind the danger of
sin; if we eat, or touch it, we shall die, Genesis 3. 3. But so soon as Satan had
filled her mind with the beauty and usefulness of the fruit to make on wise,
how quickly did she lay aside her practical prevalent consideration of the
danger of eating it, the curse due unto it; or else relieves her self with a
vain hope and pretense that it should not be, because the Serpent told her so.
So was David beguiled in his great transgression, by the deceit of sin; his
lust being pleased and satisfied, the consideration of the guilt and danger of
his transgression was taken away: and therefore he is said to have despised the
Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 9. in that he considered not the evil that was in his heart,
and the danger that attended it in the threatening or commination of the Law.
Now sin when it presses upon the soul to this purpose, will use a thousand
wiles to hide from it the terror of the Lord, the end of transgressions, and
especially of that peculiar folly which it solicits the mind unto. Hopes of
pardon shall be used to hide it, and future repentance shall hide it, present
importunity of lust shall hide it, occasions and opportunities shall hide it,
surprizals shall hide it, extenuation of sin shall hide it, balancing of duties
against it shall hide it, fixing the imagination on present objects shall hide
it, desperate resolutions to venture the uttermost for the enjoyment of lust in
its pleasures and profits, shall hide it. A thousand wiles it has which cannot
be recounted.

Fourthly, Having prevailed thus far, gilding over the pleasures of sin, hiding
its end and demerit, it proceds to raise pervers reasonings in the mind, to fix
it upon the sin proposed, that it may be conceived and brought forth, the
affections being already prevailed upon; of which we shall speak under the next
head of its progress.

Here we may stay a little, as formerly, to give some few directions for the
obviating of this woeful work of the deceitfulness of sin. Would we not be
enticed or entangled, would we not be disposed to the conception of sin, would
we be turned out of the road and way which goes down to death; Let us take heed
of our Affections, which are of so great concernment in the whole course of our
obedience, that they are commonly in the Scripture called by the name of the
heart, as the principal thing which God requires in our walking before him. And
this is not slightly to be attended unto. Prove. 4. 23. says the wise man, Keep
thy heart with all diligence, or as in the Original, above or before all
keepings; Before every watch, keep thy heart. You have many keepings that you
watch unto; you watch to keep your lives, to keep your estates, to keep your
reputations, to keep up your families; but, says he, above all these keepings,
prefer that, attend to that of the heart, of your affections, that they be not
entangled with sin; there is no safety without it. Save all other things and
lose the heart, and all is lost, lost unto all eternity. You will say then,
what shall we do, or how shall we observe this duty?

First, Keep your affections as to their Object in general. This advice the
Apostle gives in this very case, Coloss. 3. his advice in the beginning of that
chapter is to direct us unto the mortification of sin, which he expressly
engages in, ver. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are on the earth.
Prevent the working and deceit of sin which wars in your members. To prepare
us, to enable us hereunto, he gives us that great direction, ver. 2. Set your
affections on things above, not on things of the earth. Fix your affections on
heavenly things, this will enable you to mortify sin: fill them with the
things that are above, let them be exercised with them, and so enjoy the
chiefest place in them. They are above, blessed and suitable objects, meet for,
and answering unto our affections. God himself, in his beauty and glory; the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is altogether lovely, the chiefest of ten thousand;
Grace and Glory, the Mysteries revealed in the Gospel, the blessedness promised
thereby. Were our affections filled, taken up, and possessed with these things,
as it is our duty that they should be, it is our happiness when they are; what
access could sin with its painted pleasures, with its sugared poisons, with its
envenomed baits, have unto our souls? how should we loath all its proposals,
and say unto them, Get ye hence as an abominable thing? For what are the vain
transitory pleasures of sin, in comparison of the exceeding recompense of
reward which is proposed unto us? Which argument the Apostle presses, 2 Cor. 4.
18.

Secondly, As to the Object of your affections in an especial manner; let it be
the Cross of Christ, which has an exceeding efficacy toward the
disappointment of the whole work of Indwelling-sin. Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that
I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus, whereby the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. The Cross of Christ he gloried and
rejoiced in; this his heart was set upon, and these were the effects of it; it
crucified the world unto him, made it a dead and undesirable thing. The baits
and pleasures of sin are taken all of them out of the world, and the things
that are in the world, namely the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life. These are the things that are in the world; from these does
sin take all its baits, whereby it enticeth and entangleth our souls. If the
heart be filled with the Cross of Christ, it casts death and undesirableness
upon them all, it leaves no seeming beauty, no appearing pleasure or comeliness
in them. Again, says he, It crucifieth me to the world; makes my heart, my
affections, my desires dead unto any of these things. It roots up corrupt lusts
and affections, leaves no principle to go forth and make provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Labor therefore to fill your hearts with
the Cross of Christ. Consider the sorrows he underwent, the curse he bore, the
blood he shed, the cries he put forth, the love that was in all this to your
souls, and the mystery of the grace of God therein. Meditate on the vileness,
the demerit, and punishment of sin as represented in the Cross, the blood, the
death of Christ. Is Christ crucified for sin, and shall not our hearts be
crucified with him unto sin? Shall we give entertainment unto that, or hearken
unto its dalliances, which wounded, which pierced, which slew our dear Lord
Jesus? God forbid. Fill your affections with the Cross of Christ, that there
may be no room for sin. The world once put him out of the house into a stable,
when he came to save us; let him now turn the world out of doors, when he is
come to sanctify us.

Secondly, Look to the vigor of the affections toward heavenly things; if
they are not constantly attended, excited, directed, and warned, they are apt
to decay, and sin lies in wait to take every advantage against them. Many
complaints we have in the Scripture of those who lost their first love, in
suffering their affections to decay. And this should make us jealous over our
own hearts, lest we also should be over-taken with the like backsliding frame.
Wherefore be jealous over them, often strictly examine them, and call them to
account, supply unto them due considerations for their exciting and stirring up
unto duty.

CHAP. XII.
The Conception of Sin through its Deceit. Wherein it consisteh. The consent of
the Will unto Sin. The Nature thereof. Ways and Means whereby it is obtained.
Other Advantages made use of by the Deceit of Sin. Ignorance, Errors.

THe third success of the deceit of sin in its progressive work, is the
Conception of actual sin. When it has drawn the mind off from its duty, and
entangled the affections, it proceeds to conceive sin in order to the bringing
of it forth. Then when lust has conceived it brings forth sin. Now the
conception of sin, in order unto its perpetration, can be nothing but the
consent of the Will: for as without the consent of the Will sin cannot be
committed, so where the Will has consented unto it, there is nothing in the
soul to hinder its actual accomplishment. God does indeed by various ways and
means frustrate the bringing forth of these adulterate conceptions, causing
them to melt away in the womb, or one way or other prove abortive, so that not
the least part of that sin is committed which is willed or conceived; yet there
is nothing in the soul it self that remains to give check unto it, when once
the will has given its consent. Ofttimes when a cloud is full of rain, and
ready to fall, a wind comes and drives it away. And when the Will is ready to
bring forth its sin, God diverts it by one wind or other, but yet the cloud was
as full of rain as if it had fallen, and the soul as full of sin as if it had
been committed.

This conceiving of lust or sin then, is its prevalency in obtaining the
consent of the will unto its solicitations. And hereby the soul is deflowered
of its chastity toward God in Christ, as the Apostle intimates, 2 Cor. 11. 2,
3. To clear up this matter we must observe,

First, That the Will is the Principle, the next seat and cause of obedience
and disobedience. Moral actions are unto us, or in us, so far good or evil as
they partake of the consent of the Will. He spoke truth of old who said, Omne
peccatum est adeo voluntarium, ut non ^it peccatum nisi sit voluntarium. Every
sin is so voluntary, that if it be not voluntary* it is not sin. It is most
true of actual sins. The formality of their iniquity arises from the acts of
the will in them, and concerning them, I mean, as to the persons that commit
them; otherwise in it self the formal reason of sin is its aberration from the
Law of God.

Secondly, There is a twofold consent of the will unto sin.

First, That which is full, absolute, complete, and upon deliberation. A
prevailing consent, the convictions of the mind being conquered, and no
principle of grace in the will to weaken it. With this consent the soul goes
into sin, as a Ship before the wind with all its sails displayed, without any
check or stop. It rusheth into sin like the horse into the battle. Men thereby,
as the Apostle speaks, giving themselves over to sin with greediness, Ephesians. 4.
19. Thus Ahabs will was in the murdering of Naboth, he did it upon
deliberation, by contrivance, with a full consent; the doing of it gave him
such satisfaction, as that it cured his malady or the distemper of his mind.
This is that consent of the will which is acted in the finishing and
completing of sin, in unregenerate persons, and is not required to the single
bringing forth of sin, whereof we speak.

Secondly, There is a Consent of the will, which is attended with a secret
renitency and volition of the contrary. Thus Peter's will was in the denying of
his Master. His will was in it, or he had not done it; it was a voluntary
action, that which he chose to do at that season. Sin had not been brought
forth, if it had not been thus conceived. But yet at this very time there was
resident in his will a contrary principle of love to Christ, yea, and faith in
him which utterly failed not. The ecafficy of it was intercepted, and its
operations suspended actually, through the violent urging of the temptation
that he was under; but yet it was in his will, and weakened his consent unto
sin, though it consented: It was not done with self-pleasing, which such full
acts of the will do produce.

Thirdly, Although there may be a predominant consent in the will, which may
suffice for the conception of particular sins, yet there cannot be an absolute,
total, full consent of the will of a Believer unto any sin: for,

First, There is in his will a principle fixed on good, on all good, Romans 7.
21. He would do good. The principle of grace in the will, inclines him to all
good. And this in general is pravalent against the principle of sin, so that
the will is denominated from thence. Grace has the rule and dominion, and not
sin, in the will of every Believer. Now that consent unto sin in the will,
which is contrary to the inclination and general prevailing principle in the
same will, is not, cannot be total, absolute and complete.

Secondly, There is not only a general, ^^^ng, prevailing principle in the will
against sin, but there is also a secret reluctance in it against its own act in
consenting unto sin. It is true, the soul is not sensible sometimes of this
reluctance, because the present consent carries away the prevailing act of the
will, and takes away the sense of the lusting of the spirit, or reluctance of
the principle of grace in the will. But the general rule holds in all things
at all times, Gal. 5. 17. The spirit lusts against the flesh: it does so
actually, though not always to the same degree, nor with the same success. And
the prevalency of the contrary principle in this or that particular act, does
not disprove it. It is so on the other side, There is no acting of grace in the
will but sin lusts against it, although that lusting be not made sensible in
the soul, because of the prevalency of the contrary acting of grace, yet it is
enough to keep those actings from perfection in their kind. So is it in this
Renitency of grace against the acting of sin in the soul; though it be not
sensible in its operations, yet it is enough to keep that act from being full
and complete. And much of spiritual wisdom lies in discerning aright between
the spiritual Renitency of the principle of grace in the will against sin, and
the rebukes that are given the soul by conscience upon conviction for sin.

Fourthly, Observe, that reiterated repeated acts of the consent of the will
unto sin, may beget a disposition, and inclineableness in it unto the like
acts, that may bring the will unto a proneness and readiness to consent unto
sin upon easy sollicitation^ which is a condition of soul dangerous, and
greatly to be watched against.

Fifthly, This consent of the will, which we have thus described, may be
considered two ways.

First, As it is exercised about the circumstances, causes, means and
inducements unto sin. Secondly, As it respects this or that actual sin. In the
first sense, there is a virtual consent of the will unto sin in every
inadvertency unto the prevention of it, in every neglect of duty that makes way
for it, in every harkening unto any temptation leading toward it. In a word,
in all the diversions of the mind from its duty, and intanglements of the
affections by sin before mentioned. For where there is no act of the will
formally, or virtually, there is no sin. But this is not that which we now
speak of. But in particular the consent of the will unto this or that actual
sin, so far as that either sin is committed, or is prevented by other ways and
means not of our present consideration. And herein consists the conceiving of
sin.

These things being supposed, that which in the next place we are to consider,
is the way that the deceit of sin proceeds in; to procure the consent of the
will, and so to conceive actual sin in the soul. To this purpose observe,

First, That the will is a rational appetite; Rational as guided by the mind;
and an appetite as excited by the Affections; and so in its operation or
actings has respect to both, is influenced by both.

Secondly, It chooses nothing, consents to nothing but sub ratione boni, as it
has an appearance of good, some present good. It cannot consent to any thing
under the notion or apprehension of its being evil in any kind. Good is its
natural and necessary object, and therefore whatever is proposed unto it for
its consent, must be proposed under an appearance of being either good in it
self, or good at present unto the soul, or good so circumstantiate as it is; So
that,

Thirdly, We may see hence the reason why the conception of sin is here placed
as a consequent of the minds being drawn away, and the Affections being
entangled. Both these have an influence into the consent of the will, and the
conception of this or that actual sin thereby. Our way therefore here is made
somewhat plain. We have seen at large how the mind is drawn away by the deceit
of sin, and how the Affections are entangled, that which remains is but the
proper effect of these things; For the discovery whereof we must instance in
some of the special deceits, corrupt and fallacious reasonings before
mentioned, and then show their prevalency on the Will to a consent unto sin.

First, The Will is imposed upon by that corrupt reasoning, that Grace is
exalted in pardon; and that mercy is provided for sinners. This first as has
been showed, deceives the mind, and that opens the way to the wills consent, by
removing a sight of evil which the will has an aversation unto. And this is
carnal hearts prevails so far as to make them think that their liberty consists
in being servants of corruption, 2 Pet. 2. 19. And the poison of it does
oftentimes taint and vitiate the minds of Believers themselves; whence we are
so cautioned against it in the Scripture. To what therefore has been spoken
before, unto the use and abuse of the Doctrine of the Grace of the Gospel, we
shall add some few more considerations, and fix upon one place of Scripture
that will give light unto it. There is a twofold Mystery of Grace; of walking
with God, and of coming unto God. And the great design of sin is to change the
Doctrine and Mystery of Grace in reference unto these things, and that by
applying those considerations unto the one, which are proper unto the other,
whereby each part is hindered, and the influence of the Doctrine of Grace into
them for their fartherance defeated; See 1 John 2. 1, 2. These things write I
unto you that ye sin not; and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins.
Here is the whole design and use of the Gospel briefly expressed, These things,
says he, I write unto you; what things were these? Those mentioned, v. 2. The
life was manifested, and we have seen it, and (...) witness, and show unto you
that eternal life which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us, that
is, the things concerning the person and mediations of Christ; and v. 7. that
pardon, forgiveness and expiation from sin is to be attained by the blood of
Christ. But to what end and purpose does he write these things to them, What do
they teach, what do they tend unto? An universal abstinence from sin; I write
unto you, says he, that you sin not. This is the proper, only, genuine end of
the doctrine of the Gospel. But to abstain from all sin, is not our condition
in this world. Chap. 1. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. What then shall be done in this case? In
supposition of sin, that we have sinned, is there no relief provided for our
souls and consciences in the Gospel? Yes, says he, If any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is a propitiation
for our sins. There is full relief in the propitiation and intercession of
Christ for us. This is the order and method of the Doctrine of the Gospel and
of the application of it to our own souls: First, To keep us from sin; and then
to relieve us against sin. But here entere^h the dece^t of sin, and puts this
new Wine into old Bottles, whereby the bottles are brok^n, and the Wine
perishes as to our benefit by it. It changes this method and order of the
application of Gospel Truths. It takes up the last first, and that excludes the
use of the first utterly. If any man sin there is pardon provided, is all the
Gospel that sin would willingly suffer to abide on the minds of men. When we
would come to God by believing, it would be pressing the former part of being
free from sin, when the Gospel proposes the latter principally, or the pardon
of sin for our encouragement. When we are come to God, and should walk with
him, it will have only the latter proposed, that there is pardon of sin, when
the Gospel principally proposes the former, of keeping our selves from sin.
The Grace of God bringing salvation having appeared unto us to that end and
purpose. Now the mind being entangled with this deceit, drawn off from its
watch by it, diverted from the true ends of the Gospel, does several ways
impose upon the will to obtain its consent.

First, By a sudden surprizal in case of temptation. Temptation is the
representation of a thing as a present good, a particular good, which is a real
evil, a general evil. Now when a temptation armed with opportunity and
provocation, befalls the soul, the principle of Grace in the will rises up
with a rejection and detestation of it. But on a sudden the mind being deceived
by sin, breaks in upon the will, with a corrupt fallacious reasoning from
Gospel Grace and Mercy, which first staggers, then abates the wills opposition,
and then causes it to cast the scale by its consent of the side of temptation,
presenting evil as a present good; and sin in the sight of God is conceived,
though it be never committed. Thus is the seed of God sacrificed to Moloch, and
the weapons of Christ abused to the service of the Devil.

Secondly, It does it insensibly. It insinuates the poison of this corrupt
reasoning by little and little, until it has greatly prevailed. And as the
whole effect of the Doctrine of the Gospel in holiness and obedience, consists
in the souls being cast into the frame and mould of it, Romans 6. 17. So the
whole of Apostasy from the Gospel, is principally the casting of the soul into
the mould of this false reasoning, that sin may be indulged unto upon the
account of Grace and pardon. Hereby is the soul gratified in sloth and
negligence, and taken off from its care, as to particular duties and avoidance
of particular sins. It works the soul insensibly off from the mystery of the
Law of Grace, to look for salvation as if we had never performed any duty,
being after we have done all unprofitable servants, with a resting on Sovereign
Mercy* through the blood of Christ, and to attend unto duties with all
diligence as if we looked for no mercy; that is with no less care, though with
more liberty and freedom. This the deceitfulness of sin endeavors by all
means to work the soul from, and thereby debaucheth the will when its consent
is required unto particular sins.

Secondly, The deceived mind imposes on the will to obtain its consent unto
sin, by proposing unto it, the advantages that may accrue and arise thereby,
which is one Medium whereby its self also is drawn away. It renders that which
is absolutely evil, a present appearing good. So was it with Eve, Genesis 3.
laying aside all considerations of the Law, Covenant, and threats of God, she
all at once reflects upon the advantages, pleasures and benefits which she
should obtain by her sin, and reckons them up to solicit the consent of her
will. It is, says she, good for food, pleasant to the Eyes, and to be desired
to make one wise. What should she do then but eat it; her will consented and
she did so accordingly. Pleas for Obedience are laid out of the way, and only
the pleasures of sin are taken under consideration. So says Ahab, 1 King. 21.
Naboth's Vineyard is near my house, and I may make it a Garden of Herbs,
therefore I must have it. These considerations a deceived mind imposed on his
Will; until it made him obstinate in the pursuit of his covetousness through
perjury and murder, to the utter ruin of himself and his Family. Thus is the
guilt and tendency of sin hid under the covert of advantages and pleasures, and
so is conceived or resolved on in the soul.

Secondly, As the mind being withdrawn, so the Affections being enticed and
entangled, do greatly farther the conception of sin in the soul by the consent
of the will; and they do it two ways.

First, By some hasty impulse and surprisal; being themselves ^^^^red up,
incited, and drawn forth by some violent provocation, or suitable temptation,
they put the whole soul as it were into a combustion, and draw the will into a
consent unto what they are provoked unto and entangled withal. So was the case
of David in the matter of Nabal. A violent provocation from the extreme
unworthy carriage of that foolish Churl, stirs him up to wrath and revenge, 1 Samuel 25. 13. He resolves upon it, to destroy an whole Family, the Innocent with
the Guilty, ver. 33, 34. Self-revenge, and murder, were for the season
conceived, resolved, consented unto, until God graciously took him off. His
entangled, provoked Affections, surprised his Will to consent unto the
conception of many bloody sins. The case was the same with Asa in his anger,
when he smote the Prophet, and with Peter in his fear when he denied his
Master. Let that soul which would take heed of conceiving sin, take heed of
entangled Affections. For sin may be suddenly conceived, the prevalent consent
of the will may be suddenly obtained, which gives the soul a fixed guilt,
though the sin it self be never actually brought forth.

Secondly, Enticed Affections procure the consent of the will by frequent
solicitations, whereby they get ground insensibly upon it, and Enthrone
themselves. Take an Instance in the Sons of Jacob, Genesis 37. 4. They hate their
Brother, because their Father loved him. Their Affections being enticed, many
new occasions fall out to entangle them farther, as his Dreams and the like.
This lay rankling in their hearts, and never ceased soliciting their wills,
until they resolved upon his death. The unlawfulness, the unnaturalness of the
action, the grief of their aged Father, the guilt of their own souls, are all
laid aside; that hatred and envy that they had conceived against him ceased not
until they had got the consent of their wills to his ruin. This gradual
progress of the prevalency of corrupt Affections to solicit the soul unto sin
the Wise Man excellently describes, Prove. 23. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. And this is
the common way of sins procedure in the destruction of souls which seem to have
made some good Engagements in the ways of God. When it has entangled them
with one temptation, and brought the will to some liking of it, that presently
becomes another temptation, either to the neglect of some duty, or to the
refusal of more light; and commonly that whereby men fall off utterly from God,
is not that wherewith they are first entangled. And this may briefly suffice
for the third Progressive Act of the deceit of sin. It obtains the wills
consent unto its conception, and by this means are multitudes of sins conceived
in the heart which very little less defile the soul, or cause it to contract
very little less guilt, than if they were actually committed.

Unto what has been spoken concerning the deceitfulness of indwelling-sin in
general, which greatly evidenceth its power and efficacy, I shall add as a
close of this discourse, one or two particular ways of its deceitful actings,
consisting in advantages that it makes use of, and means of relieving it self
against that disquisition which is made after it by the Word and Spirit for its
ruin. One head only of each sort we shall here name.

First, It makes great advantage of the darkness of the mind, to work out its
design and intendments. The shades of a mind totally dark, that is, devoid
utterly of saving grace, are the proper working place of sin. Hence the effects
of it are called, the works of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. Romans 13. 12. as
springing from thence. Sin works and brings forth by the help of it. The
working of lust under the covert of a dark mind, is as it were the upper Region
of hell; for it lies at the next door to it for filth, horror, and confusion.
Now there is a partial darkness abiding still in Believers; they know but in
part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Though there be in them all a principle of saving light,
the day star is risen in their hearts, yet all the shades of darkness are not
utterly expelled out of them in this life. And there are two parts, as it were,
or principal effects of the remaining darkness that is in Believers. First,
Ignorance, or a nescience of the will of God, either Juris or Facti, of the
Rule and Law in general, or of the reference of the particular fact that lies
before the mind unto the Law. Secondly, Error and mistakes, positively taking
that for truth which is falsehood, and that for light which is darkness. Now of
both these does the Law of sin make great advantage for the exerting of its
power in the soul.

First, Is there a remaining ignorance of any thing of the will of God, sin
will be sure to make use of it, and improve it to the uttermost. Though
Abimelech were not a Believer, yet he was a person that had a moral integrity
with him in his ways and actions; he declares himself to have had so, in a
solemn appeal to God the searcher of all hearts, even in that wherein he
miscarried, Genesis 20. 5. But being ignorant that fornication was a sin, or so
great a sin, as that it became not a morally honest man to defile himself with
it, lust hurries him into that intention of evil in reference unto Sarah, as we
have it there related. God complains that his people perished for lack of
knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. Being ignorant of the mind and will of God, they rushed
into evil at every command of the Law of sin. Be it as to any duty to be
performed, or as to any sin to be committed, if there be in it darkness or
ignorance of the mind about them, sin will not lose its advantage. Many a man
being ignorant of the duty incumbent on him for the instruction of his family,
casting the whole weight of it upon the public teaching, is by the
deceitfulness of sin brought into an habitual sloth and negligence of duty. So
much ignorance of the Will of God and duty, so much advantage is given to the
Law of sin. And hence we may see what is that true knowledge which with God is
acceptable; how exactly does many a poor soul, who is low as to notional
knowledge, yet walk with God? It seems they know so much, as sin has not on
that account much advantage against them; when others high in their notions,
give advantage to their lusts even by their ignorance, though they know ^itnot.

Secondly, Error is a worse part or effect of the minds darkness, and gives
great advantage to the Law of sin. There is indeed ignorance in every error,
but there is not error in all ignorance, and so they may be distinguished. I
shall need to exemplify this but with one consideration, and that is, of men,
who being zealous for some error, do seek to suppress and persecute the truth.
Indwelling-sin desires no greater advantage. How will it every day, every hour
pour forth wrath, revilings, hard speeches; breathe revenge, murder,
desolation, under the name perhaps of zeal. On this account we may see poor
creatures pleasing themselves every day, as if they vaunted in their
excellency, when they are foaming out their own shame. Under their real
darkness and pretended zeal, sin sits securely and fills Pulpits, Houses,
Prayers, Streets, with as bitter fruits of envy, malice, wrath, hatred, evi^
^urmises, false speakings, as full as they can hold. The common issue with such
poor creatures, is, the holy blessed meek Spirit of God withdraws from them,
and leaves them visibly and openly to that evil, froward, wrathful, worldly
spirit, which the Law of sin has cherished and heightened in them. Sin dwells
not any where more secure, than in such a frame. Thus I say, it lays hold in
particular of advantages to practice upon, with its deceitfulness, and therein
also to exert its power in the soul, whereof this single instance of its
improving the darkness of the mind unto its own ends, is a sufficient evidence.

Secondly, It uses means of relieving it self against the pursuit* that is
made after it in the heart by the Word and Spirit of grace. One also of its
wiles, in the way of instance, I shall name in this kind, and that i; the
alleviation of its own guilt. It pleads for it self, that it is not so bad, so
filthy, so fatal as is pretended; and this course of extenuation it proceds in
two ways. First, Absolutely; many secret pleas it will have that the evil which
it tends unto is not so pernicious as conscience is persuaded that it is, it
may be ventured on without ruin. These considerations it will strongly urge,
when it is at work in a way of surprizal, when the soul has no leisure or
liberty to weigh its suggestions in the balance of the Sanctuary, and not
seldom is the will imposed on hereby, and advantages gotten to shift it self
from under the sword of the Spirit. It is not such but that it may be let
alone, or suffered to die of it self, which probably within a while it will do;
no need of that violence which in mortification is to be offered; it is time
enough to deal with a matter of no greater importance hereafter; With other
pleas like those beforementioned. Secondly, Comparatively, and this is a large
field for its deceit and subtilty to lurk in. Though it is an evil indeed to be
relinquished, and the soul is to be made watchful against it, yet it is not of
the magnitude and degree; as we may see in the lives of others, even Saints of
God, much less such as some Saints of old have fallen into. By these and the
like pretenses, I say, it seeks to evade and keep its abode in the soul when
pursued to destruction. And how little a portion of its deceitfulness is it
that we have declared?

CHAP. XIII.
Several ways whereby the bringing forth of conceived Sin is obstructed.

BEfore we proceed to the remaining evidences of the power and efficacy of the
Law of sin, we shall take occasion from what has been delivered, to divert
unto one consideration that offers it self from that Scripture, which was made
the bottom and foundation of our discourse of the general deceitfulness of sin;
namely James 1. 14. The Apostle tells us that lust conceiving brings forth sin;
seeming to intimate, that look what sin is conceived, that also is brought
forth. Now placing the conception of sin, as we have done, in the consent of
the Will unto it, and reckoning, as we ought, the bringing forth of sin to
consist in its actual commission, we know that these do not necessarily follow
one another. There is a world of sin conceived in the womb of the wills and
hearts of men, that is never brought forth. Our present business then shall be
to enquire whence that comes to pass. I answer then;

First, That this is not so, is no thanks to sin, nor the Law of it. What it
conceives, it would bring forth; and that it does not, is for the most part but
a small abatement of its guilt. A determinate will of actual sinning, is actual
sin. There is nothing wanting on sins part, that every conceived sin is not
actually accomplished. The obstacle and prevention lies on another hand.

Secondly, There are two things that are necessary in the creature that has
conceived sin, for the bringing of it forth. First, Power. Secondly,
Continuance in the will of sinning, until it be perpetrated and committed.
Where these two are, actual sin will unavoidably ensue. It is evident
therefore, that that which hinders conceived sin from being brought forth, must
affect either the power or the will of the sinner. This must be from God. And
he has two ways of doing it. First, by his Providence, whereby he obstructs
the power of sinning. Secondly, By his Grace, whereby he diverts or changes the
will of sinning. I do not mention these ways of Gods dispensations thus
distinctly, as though the one of them were always without the other; for there
is much of grace in providential administrations, and much of the wisdom of
providence seen in the dispensations of grace. But I place them in this
distinction, because they appear most eminent therein. Providence in outward
acts respecting the power of the creature, Grace common or special in internal
efficacy, respecting his will. And we shall begin with the first.

First, When sin is conceived, the Lord obstructs its production by his
providence in taking away, or taking short that power which is absolutely
necessary for its bringing forth or accomplishment. As,

First, Life is the foundation of all power, the principle of operation. When
that cease, all power cease with it. Even God himself, to evince the
everlasting stability of his own power, gives himself the title of the living
God. Now he frequently obviates the power of exerting sin actually, by cutting
short and taking away the liv^s of them that have conceived it. Thus he dealt
with the Army of Senacherib, when according as he had purposed, so he threatened
that the Lord should not deliver Jerusalem out of his hand, 2 Kings 18. 35. God
threatens to cut short his power, that he should not execute his intendment,
chap. 19. 28. which he performs accordingly, by taking away the lives of his
soldiers, ver. 35. without whom it was impossible that his conceived sin
should be brought forth. This providential dispensation in the obstruction of
conceived sin, Moses excellently sets forth in the case of Pharaoh, Exodus 15.
9. 19. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil,
my lusts shall be satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, my hand shall
destroy them. Thou did blow with thy wind, the Sea covered them, they sank as
lead in the mighty waters. Sins conception is fully expressed, and as full a
prevention is annexed unto it. In like manner he dealt with the Companies of
Fifties and their Captains, who came to apprehend Elijah, 2 Kings 1. 10, 11.
Fire came down from Heaven and consumed them, when they were ready to have
taken him. And sundry other instances of the like nature might be recorded.
That which is of universal concernment, we have in that great providential
alteration, which put a period to the lives of men. Men living hundreds of
years, had a long season to bring forth the sins they had conceived; thereupon
the earth was filled with violence, injustice, and rapine, and all flesh
corrupted their ways, Genesis 6. 12, 19. To prevent the like inundation of sin,
God shortens the course of the pilgrimage of men in the earth, and reduces
their lives to a much shorter measure. Besides this general Law, God daily thus
cuts off persons, who had conceived much mischief and violence in their hearts,
and prevents the execution of it. Blood-thirsty and deceitful men do not live
out half their days. They have yet much work to do, might they have but space
given them to execute the bloody and sinful purposes of their minds. The
Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 146. 4. In the day that the breath of man goes forth,
his thoughts perish: he had many contrivances about sin, but now they are all
cut off. So also, Eccles. 8. 12, 13. Though a sinner do evil an hundred times,
and his days be prolonged; yet surely I know that it shall be well with them
that fear God, which fear before him; but it shall not be well with the wicked,
neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow, because he fears
not before God. How long soever a wicked man lives, yet he dies judicially, and
shall not abide to do the evil he had conceived.

But now seeing we have granted, that even Believers themselves may conceive
sin through the power and the deceitfulness of it, it may be enquired whether
God ever thus obviates its production and accomplishment in them, by cutting
off and taking away their lives, so as that they shall not be able to perform
it: I answer,

First, That God does not judicially cut off and take away the life of any of
his, for this end and purpose, that he may thereby prevent the execution, or
bringing forth of any particular sin that he had conceived, and which without
that taking away he would have perpetrated. For,

First, This is directly contrary to the very declared end of the patience of
God toward them, 2 Pet. 3. 9. This is the very end of the long-suffering of
God toward Believers, that before they depart hence, they may come to the
sense, acknowledgment, and repentance of every known sin. This is the constant
and unchangeable rule of Gods patience in the Covenant of Grace; which is so
far from being in them an encouragement unto sin, that it is a motive to
universal watchfulness against it, of the same nature with all Gospel Grace,
and of mercy in the blood of Christ. Now this dispensation whereof we speak,
would lie in a direct contradiction unto it.

Secondly, This also flows from the former, that whereas conceived sin contains
the whole nature of it, as our Savior at large declares, Matthew. 5. And to be
cut off under the guilt of it, to prevent its farther progress, argues a
continuance in the purpose of it without repentance; it cannot be but they must
perish for ever who are so judicially cut off. But God deals not so with his,
he casts not off the people whom he did foreknow. And thence David prays for
the patience of God beforementioned, that it might not be so with him, Psa.
39. 13. O spare me that I may recover strength, before I go hence and be no
more. But yet,

Secondly, There are some cases wherein God may, and does take away the lives
of his own to prevent the guilt that otherwise they would be involved in; As,

First, In the coming of some great temptation and trial upon the world. God
knowing that such and such of his would not be able to withstand it, and hold
out against it, but would dishonor him, and defile themselves, he may, and
doubtless often does take them out of the world, to take them out of the way of
it. Isa. 57. 1. The rig^teous is taken away from the evil to come; not only the
evil of punishment and judgment, but the evil of temptations and trials, which
oftentimes proves much the worse of the two. Thus a Captain in war will call
off a soldier from his watch and guard, when he knows that he is not able,
through some infirmity to bear the stress and force of the enemy that is coming
upon him.

Secondly, In case of their engagement into any way not acceptable to him,
through ignorance, or not knowing of his mind and will. This seems to have been
the case of Josiah. And doubtless the Lord does oftentimes thus proceed with
his. When any of his own are engaged in ways that please him not, through the
darkness and ignorance of their minds, that they may not proceed to farther
evil or mischief, he calls them off from their station and employment, and
takes them to himself, where they shall err and mistake no more. But in
ordinary cases, God has other ways of diverting his own from sin, than by
killing of them, as we shall see afterward.

Secondly, God providentially hinders the bringing forth of conceived sin, by
taking away, and cutting short the power of them that had conceived it; so that
though their lives continue, they shall not have that power, without which it
is impossible for them to execute what they had intended, or to bring forth
what they had conceived. Hereof also we have sundry instances. Thus was the
case with the Builders of Babel, Genesis 11. What ever it were in particular that
they aimed at, it was in the pursuit of a design of Apostasy from God. One
thing requisite to the accomplishing of what they aimed at, was the oneness of
their language; so God says, v. 6. They have all one language, and this they
begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained from them that they have
imagined to do. In an ordinary way they will accomplish their wicked design.
What course does God now take to obviate their conceived sin? does he bring a
flood upon them to destroy them, as in the old world sometime before? Does he
send his Angel to cut them off, like the Army of Senacherib afterward? Does he
by any means take away their lives? No, their lives are continued, but he
confounds their language, so that they cannot go on with their work, ver. 7.
takes away that wherein their power consisted. In like manner did he proceed
with the Sodomites, Genesis 19. 11. they were engaged in, and set upon the pursuit
of their filthy lusts. God smites them with blindness, so that they could not
find the door where they thought to have used violence for the compassing of
their ends; their lives were continued, and their will of sinning, but their
power is cut short and abridged. His dealing with Jeroboam, 1 King. 13. 4. was
of the same nature. He stretched out his hand to lay hold of the Prophet, and
it withered and became useless. And this is an eminent way of the effectual
acting of Gods providence in the world, for the stopping of that inundation of
sin, which would overflow all the earth were every womb of it opened. He cuts
men short of their moral power, whereby they should effect it. Many a wretch
that has conceived mischief against the Church of God, has by this means been
divested of his power, whereby he thought to accomplish it. Some have their
bodies smitten with diseases, that they can no more serve their lusts, nor
accompany them in the perpetrating of folly. Some are deprived of the
instruments whereby they would work. There has been for many days, sin and
mischief enough conceived, to root out the generation of the righteous from the
face of the earth, had men strength and ability to their will, did not God cut
off and shorten their power, and the days of their prevalency. Psa. 64. 6.
They search out iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search, both the inward
thought of every one of them and the heart is deep. All things are in a
readiness, the design is well laid, their counsels are deep and secret. What
now shall hinder them from doing what ever they have imagined to do? v. 7, 8.
But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded: so
they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves. God meets with them,
brings them down, that they shall not be able to accomplish their d^sign. And
this way of Gods preventing sin, seems to b^at e^st ordinarily, peculiar to the
men of the world; God deals thus with them every day, and leaves them to pine
away in their sins. They go all their days big with the iniquity they have
conceived, and are greatly burdened that they ^anno^ be delivered of it. The
Prophet tells us, that they practice iniquity that they had conceived, because
it is in the power of their hand, Micah 2. 1. If they have power for it, they
will accomplish it; Ezekiel. 22. 6. To their power they shed blood. This is the
measure of their sinning, even their power. They do many of them, no more evil,
they commit no more sin than they can. Their whole restraint lies in being cut
short in power in one kind or another. Their bodies will not serve them for
their contrived uncleanness; nor their hands for their revenge and rapine,
nor their Instruments for persecution; but they go burdened with conceived sin,
and are disquieted and tortured by it all their days. And hence they become in
themselves, as well as unto others, a troubled Sea that cannot rest, Isa. 57.
20.

It may be also in some cases, under some violent temptations, or in mistakes,
God may thus obviate the accomplishment of conceived sin in his own. And there
seems to be an instance of it in his dealing with Jehosaphat, who had designed
against the mind of God to join in affinity with Ahab, and to send his Ships
with him to Tarshish; but God breaks his Ships by a wind, that he could not
accomplish what he had designed. But in Gods dealing with ^is in this way,
there is a difference from the same dispensation toward others; for,

First, It is so onl^ in cases of exraordinary temptation. When through the
violence of temptation, and craft of Satan, they are hurryed from under the
conduct of the Law of grace, God one way or other takes away their power, or
may do so, that they shall not be able to execute what they had designed. But
this is an ordinary way of dealing with wicked men. This hook of God is upon
them in the whole course of their lives; and they struggle with it, being as a
wild Bull in a net, Isa. 51. 20. Gods Net is upon them, and they are filled
with fury that they cannot do all the wickedness that they would.

Secondly, God does it not to leave them to wrestle with Sin, and to attempt
other ways of its accomplishment upon the failure of that which they were
engaged in, but by their disappointment awakens them to consider their
condition, and what they are doing, and so consumes sin in the womb by the
ways that shall afterward be insisted on. Some Men's deprivation of power for
the committing of conceived contrived sin, has been sanctified to the changing
of their hearts from all dalliances with that or other sins.

Thirdly, God providentially hinders the bringing forth of conceived sin, by
opposing an external hindering power unto sinners. He leaves them their lives,
and leaves them power to do what they intend, only he raises up an opposite
power to coerce, forbid, and restrain them. An ^^stance hereof we have, 1 Samuel
14. 35. Saul had sworn that Jonathan should be put to death, and as far as
appears went on resolutely to have slain him; God stirs up the spirit of the
People, they oppose themselves to the wrath and fury of Saul, and Jonathan is
delivered. So also 2 Chronicles. 26. 7, 8, 19. when King Vzziah would have in his
own Person offered Incense contrary to the Law, Eighty Men of the Priests
resisted him, and drove him out of the Temple. And to this head are to be
referred all the assistances which God stirs up for deliverance of his
People against the fury of Persecutors. He raises up Saviors or Believers on
Mount Sion, to judge the Mount of Edom; so Rev. 12. 16. The Dragon, and those
acting under him, spirited by him, were in a furious endeavor for the
destruction of the Church; God stirs up the Earth to her assistance, even men
of the world, not engaged with others in the design of Satan, and by their
opposition hinders them from the execution of their designed rage. Of this
nature, seems to be that dealing of God with his own People, Hos. 2. 6, 7. They
were in the pursuit of their iniquities, following after their Lovers; God
leaves them for a while to act in the folly of their spirits, but he sets a
hedge, and a wall before them that they shall not be able to fulfill their
designs and lusts.

Fourthly, God obviates the accomplishment of conceived sin, by removing, or
taking away the ob^ects on whom, or about whom, the sin conceived was to be
committed. Acts 12. 11. yields us a signal Instance of this issue of
Providence: When the day was coming wherein Herod thought to have slain Peter
who was shut up in Prison, God sends and takes him away from their rage and
lying in wait. So also was our Savior himself taken away from the murderous
rage of the Jews before his hour was come, Joh. 8. 59. chap. 10, 39. Both
Primitive and latter times are full of stories to this purpose: Prison-doors
have been opened, and poor Creatures appointed to die have been frequently
rescued from the Jaws of death. In the World it self amongst the men thereof,
Adulterers and Adulteresses, the sin of the one is often hindered and stifled by
the taking away of the other. So wings were given to the woman to carry her
into the Wilderness and to disappoint the World in the execution of their rage,
Rev. 12. 14.

Fifthly, God does this by some eminent diversions of the thoughts of Men who
had conceived sin; Genesis 37. 24. The Brethren of Joseph cast him into a pit,
with an intent to famish him there; whilst they were as it seems, pleasing
themselves with what they had done, God orders a Company of Merchants to come
by, and diverts their thoughts with that new object from the killing, to the
selling of their Brother, verse. 26, 27. And how far therein they were
subservient to the infinitely wise Counsel of God, we know. Thus also when Saul
was in the pursuit of David, and was even ready to prevail against him to his
destruction. God stirs up the Philistines to invade the Land, which both
diverted his thoughts, and drew the course of his actings another way, 1 Samuel
27. 27.

And these are some of the ways whereby God is pleased to hinder the bringing
forth of conceived sin, by opposing himself and his Providence to the power of
the sinning Creature. And we may a little in our passage take a brief view of
the great advantages to Faith, and the Church of God, which may be found in
this matter. As,

First, This may give us a little insight into the ever to be adored Providence
of God, by these and the like ways in great variety obstructing the breaking
forth of sin in the World. It is he who makes those dams, and shuts up those
floodgates of corrupted Nature, that it shall not break forth in a deluge of
filthy Abominations to overwhelm the Creation with confusion and disorder. As
it was of old, so it is at this day; Every thought and imagination of the heart
of Man is evil, and that continually. That all the Earth is not in all places
filled with violence, as it was of old, is merely from the mighty hand of God
working effectually for the obstructing of sin. From hence alone it is, that
the Highways, Streets and Fields, are not all filled with violence, blood,
rapine, uncleanness, and every villainy that the heart of Man can conceive. O
the infinite beauty of divine Wisdom and Providence in the government of the
World! For the Conservation of it asks daily no less power and wisdom than the
first making of it did require.

Secondly, If we will look to our own Concernments, they will in a special
manner enforce us to adore the wisdom and efficacy of the Providence of God, in
stopping the progress of conceived sin. That we are at peace in our Houses, at
rest in our Beds, that we have any quiet iu our Enjoyments, is from hence
alone: Whose Person would not be defiled, or destroyed? whose Habitation would
not be ruined? whose blood almost would not be shed, if wicked Men had power to
perpetrate all their conceived sin? It may be the ruin of some of us has been
conceived a thousand times. We are beholding to this Providence of obstructing
sin, for our Lives, our Families, our Estates, our Liberties, for whatsoever
is, or may be dear unto us. For may we not say sometimes with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 57. 4. My Soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on
fire, even the sons of Men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue
a sharp sword. And how is the deliverance of Men contrived from such Persons,
Psalm. 58. 6. God breaks their teeth in their mouths, even the great teeth of
the young Lions. He keeps this fire from burning, or quenches it when it is
ready to break out into a flame. He breaks their spears and arrows, so that
sometimes we are not so much as wounded by them: Some he cuts off and
destroys, some he cuts short in their power, some he deprives of the
Instruments whereby alone they can work, some he prevents of their desired
opportunities, or diverts by other objects for their lusts, and oftentimes
causes them to spend them among themselves one upon another. We may say
therefore with the Psalmist, Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works,
in wisdom have thou made them all, the Earth is full of thy Riches; and with
the Prophet, Hos. 14. 9. Who is wise and he shall understand these things,
prudent and he shall know them; all the ways of the Lord are right, and the
Just shall walk in them, but the Transgressors shall fall therein.

Thirdly, If these and the like are the ways whereby God obviates the bringing
forth of conceived sin in wicked Men, we may learn hence how miserable their
condition is, and in what perpetual torment for the most part they spend their
days: They are like a troubled Sea, says the Lord, that cannot rest. As they
endeavor that others may have no peace, so it is certain that themselves have
not any; the principle of sin is not impaired nor weakened in them, the will of
sinning is not taken away: They have a Womb of sin that is able to conceive
Monsters every moment. Yea, for the most part they are forging and framing
folly all the day long: One lust or other they are contriving how to satisfy;
they are either devouring by malice and revenge, or vitiating by uncleanness,
or trampling on by ambition, or swallowing down by covetousness all that stand
before them. Many of their follies and mischiefs they bring to the very birth,
and are in pain to be delivered; but God every day fills them with
disappointment* and shuts up the womb of sin. Some are filled with hatred of
Gods people all their days, and never once have an opportunity to exercise it.
So David describes them, Psalm. 59. 6. They return at evening, they make a noise
like a Dog, and go round about the City. They go up and down and belch out with
their mouths, swords are in their lips; Verse. 7. and yet are not able to
accomplish their designs: What torture do such poor creatures live in? Envy,
malice, wrath, revenge, devour their hearts by not getting vent. And when God
has exercised the other acts of his wise Providence in cutting short their
power, or opposing a greater power to them when nothing else will do, he cuts
them off in their sins, and to the grave they go full of purposes of Iniquity.
Others are no less hurryed and diverted by the power of other lusts which they
are not able to satisfy: This is the sore travail they are exercised with, all
their days. If they accomplish their designs, they are more wicked and hellish
than before; and if they do not, they are filled whith vexation and
coffeehouse. This is the portion of them who know not the Lord, nor the
power of his grace. Envy not their condition, notwithstanding their outward
glittering show, their hearts are full of anxiety trouble and sorrow.

Fourthly, Do we see sometimes the floodgates of Men's lusts and rage set open
against the Church, and interest of it, and does prevalency attend them, and
power is for a season on their side, let not the Saints of God despond. He has
unspeakably various and effectual ways for the stifling of their conceptions
to give them dry breasts and a miscarrying womb. He can stop their fury when he
pleases; Surely, says David, the wrath of Man shall praise thee, the
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain, Psalm. 76. 10. When so much of their
wrath is let out as shall exalt his praise, he can when he pleases set up a
power greater than the combined strength of all sinning Creatures, and restrain
the remainder of the wrath that they had conceived. He shall cut off the spirit
of Princes, He is terrible to the Kings of the earth, v. 12. Some he will cut
off and destroy, some he will terrify and affright, and prevent the rage of
all. He can knock them on the head, or break out their teeth, or chain up their
wrath, and who can oppose him?

Fifthly, Those who have received benefit by any of the ways mentioned, may
know to whom they owe their preservation, and not look on it as a common thing.
When you have conceived sin, has God weakened your power for sin, or denied
you opportunity, or took away the object of your lusts, or diverted your
thoughts by new Providence, know assuredly that you have received mercy
thereby. Though God deal not these providence always in a subserviency to the
Covenant of Grace, yet there is always mercy in them, always a call in them to
consider the Author of them. Had not God thus dealt with you, it may be this
day you ha^ been a terror to your selves, a shame to your relations, and under
the punishment due to some notorious sins which you had conceived. Besides,
there is commonly an additional guilt in sin brought forth, above what is in
the mere conception of it. It may be others would have been ruined by it here,
or drawn into a partnership in sin by it, and so have been eternally ruined by
it, all which are prevented by these providence, and Eternity will witness,
tha^ there is a singularity of mercy in them. Do not look then on any such
things as common accidents, the hand of God is in them all; and that a merciful
hand if not despised: if it be, yet God does good to others by it, the World is
the better, and you are not so wicked as you would be.

Sixthly, We may also see hence the great use of Magistracy in the world, that
great appointment of God. Amongst other things, it is peculiarly subservient to
this holy Providence, in obstructing the bringing forth of conceived sin;
namely by the terror of him that bears the sword. God fixes that on the hearts
of evil men which he expresses, Romans 13. 4. If thou do that which is evil, be
afraid, for the power bears not the sword in vain, for he is the minister of
God, a revenger to execute wrath on them that do evil. God fixes this on the
hearts of men, and by the dread and terror of it closes the womb of sin, that
it shall not bring forth. When there was no King in Israel, none to put to
rebuke, and none of whom evil men were afraid, there was woeful work and havoc
amongst the children of men made in the world; as we may see in the last
Chapters of the book of Judges. The greatest mercies and blessings that in this
world we are made partakers of, next to them of the Gospel and Covenant of
Grace, come to us through this channel and conduit. And indeed, this whereof we
have been speaking, is the proper work of Magistracy, namely to be subservient
to the providence of God in obstructing the bringing forth of conceived sin.

These then are some of the ways whereby God providentially prevents the
bringing forth of sin, by opposing obstacles to the power of the sinner. And by
them sin is not consumed, but shut up in the womb. Men are not burdened for
it, but with it; not laden in their hearts and consciences with its guilt, but
perplexed with it power, which they are not able to exert and satisfy.

The way that yet remains for consideration whereby God obviates the production
of conceived sin, is his working on the Will of the sinners, so making sin to
consume away in the womb.

There are two ways in general whereby God thus prevents the bringing forth of
conceived sin, by working on the will of the sinner; and they are, first, by
Restraining Grace: secondly, by Renewing Grace. He does it sometimes the one
way, sometimes the other. The first of these is common to regenerate and
unregenerate persons, the latter peculiar to believers; and God does it
variously as to particulars by them both. We shall begin with the first of them.

First, God does this in the way of restraining grace by some arrow of
particular conviction, fixed in the heart and conscience of the sinner, in
reference unto the particular sin which he had conceived. This staggers and
changes the mind, as to the particular intended, causes the hands to hang
down, and the weapons of lust to fall out of them. Hereby conceived sin proves
abortive. How God does this work, by what immediate touches, strokes, blows,
rebukes of his Spirit; by what reasonings, arguments, and commotions of men's
own consciences, is not for us thoroughly to find out. It is done, as was said,
in unspeakable variety, and the works of God are past finding out. But as to
what light may be given unto it from Scripture instances, after we have
manifested the general way of Gods procedure, it shall be insisted on.

Thus then God dealt in the case of Esau and Jacob. Esau had long conceived his
brothers death, he comforted himself with the thoughts of it, and resolutions
about it, Genesis 27. 41. As is the manner of profligate sinners. Upon his first
opportunity he comes forth to execute his intended rage, and Jacob concludes
that he would smite the mother with the children, Genesis 32. 11. An opportunity
is presented unto this wicked and profane person, to bring forth that sin that
had laid in his heart now twenty years; he has full power in his hand to
perform his purpose. In the midst of this posture of things, God comes in upon
his heart with some secret and effectual working of his Spirit and power,
changes him from his purpose, causes his conceived sin to melt away, that he
falls upon the neck of him with embraces, whom he thought to have slain.

Of the same nature, though the way of it was peculiar, was his dealing with
Laban the Syrian, in reference to the same Jacob, Genesis 31. 24. By a dream, a
vision in the night, God hinders him from so much as speaking roughly to him.
It was with him as in Micah 2. 1. he had devised evil on his bed, and when he
thought to have practiced it in the morning, God interposed in a dream, and
hides sin from him, as he speaks, Job ^^, 15, 16, 17. To the same purpose is
that of the Psalmist concerning the people of God, Psalm. 106. 46. He made them
to be pitied of all those who carried them captives. Men usually deal in rigor
with those whom they have taken captive in war. It was the way of old to rule
captives with force and cruelty. Here God turns and changes their hearts, not
in general unto himself, but to this particular of respect to his people. And
this way in general does God every day prevent the bringing forth of a world of
sin. He sharpens arrows of conviction upon the spirits of men, as to the
particular that they are engaged in. Their hearts are not changed as to sin,
but their minds are altered as to this or that sin. They break, it may be, the
vessel they had fashioned, and go to work upon some other. Now that we may a
little see into the ways whereby God does accomplish this work, we must
premise the ensuing considerations.

First, That the general medium wherein the matter of restraining grace does
consist, whereby God thus prevents the bringing forth of sin, does lie in
certain Arguments and Reasonings, presented to the mind of the sinner, whereby
he is induced to desert his purpose, to change and alter his mind, as to the
sin he had conceived. Reasons against it are presented unto him, which prevail
upon him to relinquish his design, and give over his purpose. This is the
general way of the working of restraining grace, it is by arguments and
reasonings rising up against the perpetration of conceived sin.

Secondly, That no Arguments or Reasonings, as such, materially considered, are
sufficient to stop or hinder any purpose of sinning, or to cause conceived sin
to prove abortive, if the sinner have power and opportunity to bring it forth.
They are not in themselves, and on their own account restraining grace; for if
they were, the Administration and Communication of grace, as grace, were left
unto every man who is able to give advice against sin. Nothing is nor can be
called grace, though common, and such as may perish, but with respect unto its
peculiar relation to God. God by the power of his Spirit making arguments and
reasons effectual and prevailing, turns that to be grace, I mean of this kind,
which in it self, and in its own nature was bare reason. And that efficacy of
the Spirit, which the Lord puts forth in these persuasions and motives is that
which we call restraining grace. These things being premised, we shall now
consider some of the Arguments which we find that he has made use of to this
end and purpose.

First, God stops many men in their ways upon the conception of sin, by an
argument taken from the difficulty, if not impossibility of doing that they aim
at. They have a mind unto it, but God sets an hedge and a wall before them,
that they shall judge it to be so hard and difficult to accomplish what they
intend, that it is better for them to let it alone and give over. Thus Herod
would have put John Baptist to death upon the first provocation, but he feared
the multitude, because they accounted him as a Prophet, Matthew. 14. 5. He had
conceived his murder, and was free for the execution of it. God raised this
consideration in his heart, If I kill him, the people will tumultuate, he has
a great party amongst them, and sedition will arise that may cost me my life,
or Kingdom. He feared the multitude, and durst not execute the wickedness he
had conceived, because of the difficulty he foresaw he should be entangled
withal. And God made the argument effectual for the season; for otherwise we
know that men will venture the utmost hazards for the satisfaction of their
lusts; as he also did afterward. The Pharisees were in the very same state and
condition, Matthew. 21. 26. they would fain have decried the Ministry of John,
but durst not for fear of the people: and ver. 46. of the same Chapter, by the
same argument were they deterred from killing our Savior, who had highly
provoked them by a Parable, setting out their deserved and approaching
destruction. They durst not do it for fear of a tumult among the people, seeing
they looked on him as a Prophet. Thus God over-awes the hearts of innumerable
persons in the world everyday, and causes them to desist from attempting to
bring forth the sins which they had conceived. Difficulties they shall be sure
to meet withal, yea, it is likely, if they should attempt it, it would prove
impossible for them to accomplish. We owe much of our quiet in this world, unto
the efficacy given to this consideration in the hearts of men by the Holy
Ghost: Adulteries, rapins, murders, are obviated and stifled by it. Men would
engage into them daily, but that they judge it impossible for them to fulfill
what they aim at.

Secondly, God does it by an Argument taken ab incommodo, from the
inconveniences, evils, and troubles that will befall men in the pursuit of
sin. If they follow it, this or that inconvenience will ensue; this trouble,
this evil, temporal or eternal. And this Argument, as managed by the Spirit of
God, is the great engine in his hand whereby he casts up banks, and gives
bounds to the lusts of men, that they break not out to the confusion of all
that order and beauty which yet remains in the works of his hands. Paul gives
us the general import of this argument, Romans 2. 14, 15. For when the Gentiles
which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another. If any men in
the world may be thought to be given up to pursue and fulfill all the sins that
their lusts can conceive, it is those that have not the Law, to whom the
written Law of God does not denounce the evil that attends it. But though they
have it not, says the Apostle, they show forth the work of it, they do many
things which it requires, and forbear or abstain from many things that it
forbids, and so show forth its work and efficacy. But whence is it that they
so do? Why their thoughts accuse or excuse them. It is from the consideration
and arguings that they have within themselves about sin, and its consequents,
which prevail upon them to abstain from many things that their hearts would
carry them out unto. For Conscience is a man's prejudging of himself, with
respect unto the future judgment of God. Thus (...) was staggered in his
pursuit of sin, when he (...) at Paul's preaching of righteousness and judgment
to come, Act. 24. 25. So Job tells us, that the consideration of punishment
from God, has a strong influence on the minds of men to keep them from sin,
chap. 31. 1, 2, 3. How the Lord makes use of that consideration, even toward
his own, when they have broken the cords of his love, and cast off the rule of
his grace for a season, I have before declared.

Thirdly, God does this same work, by making effectual an Argument, ab inutili,
from the unprofitableness of the thing that men are engaged in. By this were
the Brethren of Joseph stayed from slaying him, Genesis 37. 26, 27. What profit is
it, say they, if we slay our Brother and conceal his blood? We shall get
nothing by it, it will bring in no advantage or satisfaction unto us. And the
heads of this way of Gods obstructing conceived sin, or the springs of these
kinds of Arguments, are so many and various, that it is impossible to insist
particularly upon them. There is nothing present, or to come, nothing belonging
to this life, or another, nothing desirable or undesirable, nothing good or
evil, but at one time or another, an Argument may be taken from it for the
obstructing of sin.

Fourthly, God accomplisheth this work by Arguments taken ab honesto, from what
is good and honest, what is comely, praiseworthy, and acceptable unto himself.
This is the great road wherein he walks with the Saints under their
temptations, or in their conceptions of sin. He recovers effectually upon their
minds a consideration of all those springs and motives to obedience, which are
discovered and proposed in the Gospel, some at one time, some at another. He
minds them of his own love, mercy, and kindness; his eternal Love, with the
fruits of it, whereof themselves have been made partakers. He minds them of the
blood of his Son, his Cross, sufferings, tremendous undertaking in the work of
mediation, and the concernment of his Heart, Love, Honor, Name, in their
obedience. Minds them of the Love of the Spirit, with all his Consolations
which they have been made partakers of, and privileges wherewith by him they
have been entrusted. Minds them of the Gospel, the glory and beauty of it as
revealed unto their souls. Minds them of the excellency and comeliness of
Obedience, of their performance of that duty they owe to God, that peace,
quietness, and serenity of mind that they have enjoyed therein. On the other
side, he minds them of being a provocation by sin unto the eyes of his glory,
saying in their hearts, Do not that abominable thing which my soul hates.
Minds them of their wounding the Lord Christ, and putting him to shame; of
their grieving the holy Spirit, whereby they are sealed to the day of
redemption; of their defiling his dwelling place. Minds them of the reproach,
dishonours, scandal which they bring on the Gospel and the profession thereof.
Minds them of the terrors, darkness, wounds, want of peace, that they may
bring upon their own souls. From these and the like considerations does God put
a stop to the progress of the Law of sin in the heart, that it shall not go on
to bring forth the evil which it has conceived. I could give instances in
Arguments of all these several kinds recorded in the Scripture, but it would be
too long a work for us, who are now engaged in a design of another nature. But
one or two examples may be mentioned. Joseph resists his first temptation on
one of these accounts, Genesis 39. 9. How can I do this great wickedness and sin
against God? The evil of sinning against God, his God, that consideration alone
detains him from the least inclination to his temptation. It is sin against God
to whom I owe all obedience, the God of my life, and of all my mercies, I will
not do it. The Argument wherewith Abigail prevailed on David, 1 Samuel 25. 31. to
withold him from self-revenge and murder, was of the same nature, and he
acknowledges that it was from the Lord, ver. 32. I shall add no more, for all
the Scripture motives which we have to duty, made effectual by grace, are
instances of this way of Gods procedure.

Sometimes, I confess, God secretly works the hearts of men by his own finger,
without the use and means of such Arguments as those insisted on, to stop the
progress of sin. So he tells Abimelech, Genesis 20. 6. I have withheld thee from
sinning against me. Now this could not be done by any of the Arguments which we
have insisted on, because Abimelech knew not that the thing which he intended
was sin; and therefore he pleads that in the integrity of his heart and
innocence of his hands he did it, ver. 5. God turned about his will and
thoughts, that he should not accomplish his intention; but by what ways or
means is not revealed. Nor is it evident what course he took in the change of
Esaus heart, when he came out against his Brother to destroy him, Genesis 33. 4.
whether he stirred up in him a fresh spring of natural affections, or caused
him to consider what grief by this means he should bring to his aged Father,
who loved him so tenderly; or whether being now grown great and wealthy, he
more and more despised the matter of difference between him and his Brother,
and so utterly slighted it, it is not known. It may be God did it by an
immediate powerful act of his Spirit upon his heart, without the actual
intervening of any of these or the like considerations. Now though the things
mentioned are in themselves at other times feeble and weak, yet when they are
managed by the Spirit of God to such an end and purpose, they certainly become
effectual, and are the matter of his preventing grace.

Secondly, God prevents the bringing forth of conceived sin by real spiritual
saving grace, and that either in the first conversion of sinners, or in the
following supplies of it. This is one part of the mystery of his grace and
love. He meets men sometimes in their highest resolutions for sin, with the
highest efficacy of his grace. Hereby he manifests the power of his own grace,
and gives the soul a farther experience of the Law of sin, when it takes such a
farewell of it, as to be changed in the midst of its resolutions to serve the
lusts thereof. By this he melts down the lusts of men, causes them to wither
at the root, that they shall no more strive to bring forth what they have
conceived, but be filled with shame and sorrow at their conception. An example
and instance of t^is proceeding of God, for the use and instruction of all
generations we have in Paul. His heart was full of wickedness, blasphemy, and
persecution; his conception of them was come unto rage and madness, and a full
purpose of exercising them all to the utmost; so the story relates it, Acts 9.
so himself declares the state to have been with him, Acts 26. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 1. 13. In the midst of all this violent pursuit of sin, a voice from
heaven shuts up the womb, and dries the breasts of it, and he cries, Lord, what
will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. The same person seems to intimate, that
this is the way of Gods procedure with others, even to meet them with his
converting grace in the height of their sin and folly, 1 Timothy 1. 16. For he
himself, he says, was a pattern of Gods dealing with others; as he dealt with
him, so also would he do with some such like sinners. For this cause I obtained
mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, as a
pattern to them which should here after believe on him to life everlasting. And
we have not a few examples of it in our own days. Sundry persons on set
purpose going to this or that place, to deride and scoff at the dispensation of
the Word, have been met withal in the very place wherein they designed to serve
their lusts and Satan, and have been cast down at the foot of God. This way of
Gods dealing with sinners is at large set forth, Job 33. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Dionysius the Areopagite is another instance of this work of Gods grace and
love. Paul is dragged either by him, or before him, to plead for his life, as a
setter forth of strange gods, which at Athens was death by the Law. In the
midst o^ this frame of spirit God meets with him by converting grace, sin
withers in the womb, and he^ cleaves to Paul and his doctrine, Acts 17. 18 --
34. The like dispensation toward Israel we have, Hos. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. But
there is no need to insist on more instances of this observation. God is
pleased to leave no Generation unconvinced of this truth, if they do but attend
to their own experiences, and the examples of this work of his mercy amongst
them. Every day, one or other, is taken in the fullness of the purpose of his
heart to go on in sin, in this or that sin, and is stopped in his course by the
power of converting grace.

Secondly, God does it by the same grace in the renewed communications of it,
that is, by special assisting grace. This is the common way of his dealing with
Believers in this case. That they also through the deceitfulness of sin, may be
carried on to the conceiving of this or that sin, was before declared. God puts
a stop to their progress, or rather to the prevalency of the Law of sin in
them, and that by giving in unto them special assistances needful for their
preservation and deliverance. As David says of himself, Psa. 73. 2. His feet
were almost gone, his steps had well nigh slipped; he was at the very brink of
unbelieving, despairing thoughts, and conclusions about Gods providence in the
government of the world; from whence he was recovered, as he afterward
declares. So is it with many a Believer, he is oftentimes at the very brink, at
the very door of some folly or iniquity, when God puts in by the efficacy of
actually assisting grace, and recovers them to an obediential frame of heart
again. And this is a peculiar work of Christ, wherein he manifests and exerts
his faithfulness toward his own. Heb. 2. 18. He is able to succor them that
are tempted. It is not an absolute power, but a power clothed with mercy, that
is intended. Such a power as is put forth from a sense of the suffering of poor
Believers under their temptations. And how does he exercise this merciful
ability toward us? chap. 4. 16. He gives forth, and we find in him Grace to
help in a time of need; seasonable help and assistance for our deliverance,
when we are ready to be overpowered by sin and temptation. When lust has
conceived, and is ready to bring forth, when the soul lies at the brink of some
iniquity, he gives in seasonable help, relief, deliverance, and safety. Here
lies a great part of the care and faithfulness of Christ toward his poor
Saints: he will not suffer them to be worried with the power of sin, nor to be
carried out unto ways that shall dishonor the Gospel, or fill them with shame
and reproach, and so render them useless in the world; but he steps in with the
saving relief and assistance of his grace, stops the course of sin, and makes
them in himself more than conquerors. And this assistance lies under the
Promise, 1 Cor. 10. 13. There has no temptation taken you but such as is
common to man, but God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that you are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that
you may be able to bear it. Temptation shall try us, it is for our good; many
holy ends does the Lord compass and bring about by it. But when we are tried to
the utmost of our ability, so that one assault more would over-bear us, a way
of escape is provided. And as this may be done several ways, as I have
elsewhere declared, so this we are now upon is one of the most eminent, namely
by supplies of grace, to enable the soul to bear up, resist, and conquer. And
when once God begins to deal in this way of love with a soul, he will not cease
to add one supply after another, until the whole work of his grace and
faithfulness be accomplished. An example hereof we have, Isa. 57. 17, 18. poor
sinners there are so far captivated to the power of their lusts that the first
and second dealings of God with them are not effectual for their delivery; but
he will not give over, he is in the pursuit of a design of love toward them,
and so cease not until they are recovered. These are the general heads of the
second way whereby God hinders the bringing forth of conceived sin, namely by
working on the Will of the sinner. He does it either by common convictions, or
special grace, so that of their own accord they shall let go the purpose and
will of sinning, that they are risen up unto. And this is no mean way of his
providing for his own glory, and the honor of his Gospel in the world, whose
Professors would stain the whole beauty of it, were they left to themselves to
bring forth all the evil that is conceived in their hearts.

Besides these general ways, there is one yet more special, that at once
works both upon the Power and Will of the sinner; and this is the way of
afflictions, concerning which one word shall close this discourse. Afflictions,
I say, work by both these ways, in reference unto conceived sin. They work
providentially on the power of the creature. When a man has conceived a sin,
and is in full purpose of the pursuit of it, God oftentimes sends a sickness
and abates his strength; or a loss cuts him short in his plenty, and so takes
him off from the pursuit of his lusts, though it may be his heart is not weaned
from them. His power is weakened, and he cannot do the evil he would. In this
sense it belongs to the first way of Gods obviating the production of sin.
Great afflictions work sometimes, not from their own nature immediately and
directly, but from the gracious purpose and intendment of him that sends them.
He insinuates into the dispensation of them that of grace and power, of love
and kindness, which shall effectually take off the heart and mind from sin.
Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I learned thy
commandments. And in this way because of the predominancy of renewing and
assisting grace, they belong unto the latter means of preventing sin.

And these are some of the ways, whereby it pleases God to put a stop to the
progress of sin, both in Believers and Unbelievers, which at present we shall
instance in; and if we would endeavor farther to search out his ways unto
perfection, yet we must still conclude that it is but a little portion which we
know of him.

CHAP. XIV.
The Power of Sin farther demonstrated by the Effects it has had in the Lives
of Professors. First in actual sins. Secondly in habitual Declensions.

WE are now to proceed unto other Evidences of that sad truth which we are in
the demonstration of. But the main of our work being past through, I shall be
more brief in the management of the Arguments that do remain.

That then which in the next place may be fixed upon, is the demonstration
which this Law of sin has in all Ages given of its power and efficacy, by the
woeful fruits that it has brought forth, even in Believers themselves. Now
these are of two sorts. First, the great actual eruptions of sin in their
Lives. Secondly, Their habitual declensions from the frames, state and
condition of Obedience and Communion with God, which they had obtained, both
which by the Rule of James before unfolded, are to be laid to the account of
this Law of sin, and belong unto the fourth head of its progress, and are both
of them convincing evidences of its power and efficacy.

First, Consider the fearful Eruptions of actual sins that have been in the
Lives of Believers, and we shall find our Position evidenced. Should I go
through at large with this Consideration, I must recount all the sad and
scandalous failings of the Saints that are left on record in the holy
Scripture. But the particulars of them are known to all; so that I shall not
need to mention them, no^ the many aggravations that in their circumstances
they are attended with: Only some few things tending to the rendering of our
present consideration of them useful, may be remarked. As,

First, They are most of them in the Lives of men that were not of the lowest
form or ordinary sort of Believers, but of men that had a peculiar eminency in
them on the account of their walking with God in their Generation. Such were
Noah, Lot, David, Hezekiah, and others. They were not men of an ordinary size,
but higher than their Brethren by the shoulders and upwards in Profession, yea
in real Holiness. And surely that must needs be of a mighty efficacy that could
hurry such Giants in the ways of God into such abominable sins as they fell
into. An ordinary Engine could never have turned them out of the course of
their obedience. It was a poison that no Athletick constitution of spiritual
health, no Antidote could withstand.

Secondly, And these very men, fell not into their great sins at the beginning
of their profession, when they had had but little experience of the goodness of
God, of the sweetness and pleasantness of Obedience, of the power and craft of
sin, of its impulsions, solicitations and surprizals, but after a long course
of walking with God, and acquaintance with all these things; together with
innumerable motives unto watchfulness. Noah according to the lives of men in
those days of the World, had walked uprightly with God some hundreds of years
before he was so surprised as he was, Genesis 9. Righteous Lot seems to have been
toward the end of his days, ere he defiled himself with the abominations
recorded. David in a short Life, had as much experience of Grace and Sin, and
as much close spiritual Communion with God as ever had any of the Sons of men,
before he was cast to the ground by this Law of sin. So was it with Hezekiah in
his degree, which was none of the meanest. Now to set upon such persons, so
well acquainted with its power and deceit, so armed and provided against it,
that had been conquerours over it for so many years, and to prevail against
them, it argues a power and efficacy too mighty for every thing but the spirit
of the Almighty to withstand. Who can look to have a greater stock of Inherent
Grace than those men had; to have more experience of God, and the excellency of
his ways, the sweetness of his love, and of communion with him than they had;
who has either better furniture to oppose sin withal, or more obligation so to
do, than they? and yet we see how fearfully they were prevailed against.

Thirdly, As if God had permitted their Falls on set purpose, that we might
learn to be wary of ^his powerful enemy, they all of them fell out when they
had newly received great and stupendous mercies from the hand of God, that
ought to have been strong Obligations unto diligence and watchfulness in close
obedience. Noah was but newly come forth of that world of waters wherein he saw
the ungodly world perishing for their sins, and himself preserved by that
astonishable Miracle which all Ages must admire: Whilst the Worlds desolation,
was an hourly remembrancer unto him of his strange preservation by the
immediate care and hand of God, he falls into Drunkenness. Lot had newly seen
that which every one that thinks on cannot but tremble. He saw, as one speaks,
Hell coming out of Heaven upon unclean sinners, the greatest evidence, except
the Cross of Christ; that God ever gave in his Providence of the Judgment to
come. He saw himself and Children delivered by the special care and miraculous
hand of God; and yet whilst these strange mercies were fresh upon him, he fell
into Drunkenness and Incest. David was delivered out of all his troubles and
had the necks of his Enemies given him round about, and he makes use of his
Peace from a world of trials and troubles to contrive Murder and Adultery.
Immediately, it was, after Hezekiahs great and miraculos deliverance that he
falls into his carnal pride and boasting. I say, their falls in such seasons,
seem to be permitted on set purpose, to instruct us all in the Truth that we
have in hand; so that no persons, in no seasons, with wht^ furniture of Grace
soever, can promise themselves security from its prevalency, any other ways,
than by keeping close constantly to him, who has supplies to give out that are
above its reach and efficacy. Methinks this should make us look about us. Are
we better than Noah, who had that testimony from God, that he was a perfect man
in his Generation, and walked with God? Are we better than Lot, whose Righteous
Soul was vexed with the evil deeds of ungodly men, and is thereof commended by
the Holy Ghost? Are we more holy, wise, and watchful than David, who obtained
this testimony, that he was a man after Gods own heart? Or better than
Hezekiah, who appealed to God himself, that he had served him uprightly with a
perfect heart? and yet what prevalency this Law of sin wrought in and over
them, we see. And there is no end of the like examples; they are all set up as
Buoys to discover unto us the Sands, the Shelves, the Rocks, whereupon they
made their shipwreck, to their hazard, danger, loss, yea and would have done to
their ruin, had not God been pleased in his faithfulness graciously to prevent
it. And this is the first part of this Evidence of the power of sin, from its
effects.

Secondly, It manifests its power in the habitua^ declensions from zeal and
holiness, from the frame* state and condition of Obedience and Communion with
God, whereunto they had attained, which are found in many Believers. Promises
of growt^ and improvement are many, and precious; the Means excellent and
effectual; the benefits great and unspeakable: Yet it often falls out, that
instead hereof, decays and declensions are found upon Professors, yea in and
upon many of the Saints of God. Now whereas this must nee^ principally and
chiefly be from the strength an^ efficacy of indwelling sin, and is therefore a
great evidence thereof; I shall first evince the Observation it self to be
true; namely, That some of the Saints themselves do oftentimes so decline from
that growth and pimrovement in faith, grace, and holiness which might justly be
expected from them; and then show that the cause of this evil lies in that,
that we are treating of. And that it is the cause of total Apostasy in unsound
Professors, shall be after declared. But this is a greater work which we have
in hand. The prevailing upon true Believers unto a sinful declension and
gradual Apostasy, requires a putting forth of more strength and efficacy, than
the prevailing upon unsound Professors unto total Apostasy. As the wind which
will blow down a dead tree that has no root, to the ground, will scarcely
shake or bow a living well-rooted tree. But this it will do. There is mention
made in the Scripture of the First ways of David, and they are commended above
his later, 2 Chronicles. 17. 3. The last ways even of David were tainted with the
power of In-dwelling Sin. Though we have mention only of the actual eruption of
sin, yet that uncleanness, and pride which was working in him in his Numbering
of the People; were certainly rooted in a declension from his first frame.
Those rushes did not grow without mire. David would not have done so in his
younger days, when he followed God in the wilderness of temptations and trials,
full of faith, love, humility, brokenness of heart, zeal, tender affection unto
all the Ordinances of God, all which were eminent in him. But his strength is
impaired by the efficacy and deceitfulness of sin; his Locks cut, and he
becomes a prey to vile Lusts and Temptations. We have a notable Instance in
most of the Churches that our Savior awakens to the consideration of their
condition, in the Revelations: We may single out one of them: Many good things
there were in the Church of Ephesus, Chap. 2. 2, 3. for which it is greatly
commended; but yet it is charged with a decay, a declension, a gradual falling
off and Apostasy, ver. 4, 5. Thou have left thy first Love, remember therefore
whence thou art fallen, and do thy first works. There was a decay both Inward
in the frame of heart, as to faith, and love, and outward as to obedience and
works, in comparison of what they had formerly, by the testimony of Christ
himself. The same also might be showed concerning the rest of those Churches,
only one or two of them excepted. Five of them are charged with decays and
declensions. Hence there is mention in the Scripture of the Kindness of Youth,
of the Love of Espousals, with great commendation, Jer. 2. 2, 3. of our first
Faith, 1 Timothy 5. 12. of the beginning of our confidence, Heb. 3. 14. And
cautions are given, that we lose not the things that we have wrought, 2 John 8.
But what need we look back or search for Instances to confirm the truth of this
Observation? An habitual declension from first Engagements unto God, from first
Seize of Communion with God, from first strictness in Duties of
Obedience, is ordinary and common amongst Professors* Might we to this purpose
take a general view of the Professors in these Nations, among whom the (...) of
the (...) of us will be found in part or in whole, in somewhat or in all, to
fall, we might be plentifully convinced of the truth of this Observation. Is
their Zeal for God as warm, living, vigorous, effectual, solicitous, as it was
in their first giving themselves unto God? Or rather, is there not a common,
slight, selfish frame of spirit in the room of it come upon most Professors?
iniquity has abounded, and their love has waxed cold. Was it not of old a
burden to their spirits to hear the Name, and ways, and Worship of God
blasphemed and profaned? could they not have said with the Psalmist, Ps. 119.
136. Rivers of water run down our eyes because men keep not thy Law? Were not
their souls solicitous about the Interest of Christ in the World, like Eli's
about the Ark? Did they not contend earnestly for the Truth once delivered to
the Saints, and every parcel of it? especially wherein the grace of God, and
the glory of the Gospel was especially concerned: Did they not labor to judge
and condemn the World by an holy and separate conversation? And do now the
generality of Professors abide in this frame? have they grown, and made
improvement in it? or is there not a coldness and indifferency grown upon the
spirits of many in this thing? Yea, do not many despise all these things, and
look upon their own former Zeal, as folly? May we not see many who have
formerly been of esteem in ways of Profession, become daily a scorn and
reproach through their miscarriages, and that justly, to the men of the World?
Is it not with them as it was of old with the Daughters of Sion, (Isa. 3. 24.)
when God judged them for their sins and wantonness? Has not the World, and
self utterly ruined their Profession? and are they not regardless of the things
wherein they have formerly declared a singular concernment? Yea, are not some
come partly on one pretense, partly on another, to an open enmity unto, and
hatred of the ways of God? they please them no more, but are evil in their
eyes. But not to mention such open Apostates any farther, whose Hypocrisy the
Lord Jesus Christ will ^^ortly judge; how is it with the best? are not almost
all men grown cold and slack as to these things? are they not less concerned in
them than formerly? are they not grown weary, selfish in their Religion, and so
things be indifferent well at home, scarce care how thy go abroad in the world?
At least do they not prefer their ease, credit, safety, secular advantages
before these things? A frame that Christ abhors, and declares, that those in
whom it prevails are none of his: Some indeed seem to retain a good zeal for
Truth, but wherein they make the fairest appearance, therein will they be found
to be most abominable: They cry out against Errors, not for Truth, but for
Parties and Interests sake. Let a man be on their Party, and promote their
Interest, be he never so corrupt in his Judgment, he is embraced, and it may be
admired. This is not zeal for God, but for a man's self. It is not the Zeal of
thine House has eaten me up, but, Master, forbid them because they follow not
with us. Better it were doubtless for men never to pretend unto any Zeal at
all, than to substitute such warthful selfishness in the room of it.

Secondly, Is men's delight in the Ordinances and Worship of God the same as in
former days? Do they find the same sweetness and relish in them as they have
done of old? How precious has the Word been to them formerly? What joy and
delight have they had in attendance thereon? How would they have run and gone
to have been made partakers of it, where it was dispensed in its power and
purity, in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit? Did they not call the
Sabbath their delight, and was not the approach of it a real joy unto their
Souls? Did they not long after the converse and communion of Saints? and could
they not undergo manifold perils for the attainment of it? And does this frame
still abide upon them? are there not decays and declensions to be found amongst
them? May it not be said, Gray hairs are here and there upon them, and they
perceive it not? Yea, are not men ready to say with them of old, What a
weariness is it? Mal. 1. 3. It is even a burden and a weariness to be tied up
to the observation of all these Ordinances. Wha^ need we be all out so strict
in the observation of the Sabbath? What need we hear so often? What need this
distinction in hearing? Insensibly a great disrespect, yea, even a contempt of
the pleasant and excellent ways of Christ and his Gospel, is fallen upon many
Professors.

Thirdly, May not the same conviction be farther carried on, by an enquiry into
the universal course of obedience, and the performance of duties that men have
been engaged in. Is there the same conscientious tenderness of sinning abiding
in many as was in days of old? the same exact performance of private duties?
The same love to the brethren? the same readiness for the Cross? the same
humility of mind and spirit? the same self-denial? The steam of men's lusts,
wherewith the air is tainted, will not suffer us so to say.

We need then go no farther than this wretched Generation wherein we live, to
evince the truth of the observation laid down, as the foundation of the
instance insisted on, the Lord give repentance before it be too late.

Now all these declensions, all these decays that are found in some Professors,
they all proceed from this root and cause, they are all the product of
Indwelling sin, and all evince the exceeding power and efficacy of it. For the
proof whereof I shall not need to go farther than the general rule which out of
James we have already considered; namely that lust or indwelling sin, is the
cause of all actual sin, and all habitual declensions in Believers. This is
that which the Apostle intends in that place to teach and declare. I shall
therefore handle these two things, and show, First, That this does evince a
great efficacy and power in sin. Secondly, Declare the ways and means whereby
it brings forth or brings about this cursed effect; all in design of our
general end, in calling upon and cautioning Believers to avoid it, to oppose it.

First, It appears to be a work of great power and efficacy, from the provision
that is made against it, which it prevails over. There is in the Covenant of
grace plentiful provision made, not only for the preventing of declensions and
decays in Believers, but also for their continual carrying on toward
perfection. As,

First, The Word it self, and all the Ordinances of the Gospel, are appointed
and given unto us for this end, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. That which is the
end of giving Gospel Officers to the Church is the end also of giving all the
Ordinances to be administered by them. For they are given for the work of the
ministry, that is, for the administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel. Now
what is, or what are these ends? They are all for the preventing of decays and
declensions in the Saints, all for the carrying them onto Perfection, so it is
said, ver. 12. In general it is for the perfecting of the Saints, carrying on
the work of grace in them, and the work of holiness and obedience by them; or
for the edifying of the body of Christ, their building up in an-encrease of
faith and love, even of every true member of the mystical body. But how far are
they appointed thus to carry them on, thus to build them up? Has it bounds
fixed to its work? does it carry them so far, and then leave them? No, says
the Apostle, verse 13. The dispensation of the Word of the Gospel, and the
Ordinances thereof, is designed for our help, assistance, and furtherance,
until the whole work of faith and obedience is consummate. It is appointed to
perfect and complete that faith, knowledge, and growth in grace and holiness,
which is allotted unto us in this world. But what and if oppositions and
temptations do lie in the way, Satan and his instruments working with great
subtilty and deceit? Why verse 14. these Ordinances are designed for our
safe-guarding and deliverance from all their attempts and assaults, that so
being preserved in the use of them, or speaking the truth in love, we may grow
up unto him in all things who is the head, even Christ Jesus. This is in
general the use of all Gospel Ordinances, the chief and man end for which they
were given and appointed of God; namely to preserve Believers from all decays
of faith and obedience, and to carry them on still toward perfection. These
are means which God, the good Husbandman, makes use of, to cause the Vine to
thrive and bring forth fruit. And I could also manifest the same to be the
especial end of them distinctly. Briefly, the Word is milk and strong meat, for
the nourishing and strengthening of all sorts, and all degrees of Believers. It
has both seed and water in it, and manuring with it, to make them fruitful.
The Ordinance of the Supper is appointed on purpose for the strengthening of our
faith in the remembrance of the death of the Lord, and the exercise of love one
toward another. The communion of Saints is for the edifying each other in
faith, love, and obedience.

Secondly, There is that which adds weight to this consideration. God suffers
us not to be unmindful of this assistance he has afforded us, but is
continually calling upon us to make use of the means oppointed for the
attaining of the end proposed. He shows them unto us, as the Angel showed the
water-spring to Hagar^ Commands, Exhortations, Promises, Threatenings, are
multiplied to this purpose; see them summed up, Heb. 2. 1. He is continually
saying to us, Why will you die? why will you wither and decay? Come to the
Pastures provided for you, and your souls shall live. If we see a Lamb run from
the fold into the Wilderness, we wonder not if it be torn and rent of wild
beasts: If we see a Sheep leaving its green Pastures and watercourse, to
abide in dry barren Heaths, we count it no marvel, nor enquire farther, if we
see him lean and ready to perish. But if we find Lambs wounded in the fold, we
wonder at the boldness and rage of the beasts of prey, that durst set upon them
there. If we see Sheep pining in full pastures, we judge them to be diseased
and unsound. It is indeed no marvel that poor creatures, who for sake their own
mercies, and run away from the pasture and fold of Christ in his Ordinances,
are rent and torn with diverse lusts, and do pine away with hunger and famine.
But to see men living under, and enjoying all the means of spiritual thriving,
yet to decay, not to be fat and flourishing, but rather daily to pine and
wither, this argues some secret powerful distemper, whose poisonous and noxious
qualities hinder the virtue and efficacy of the means they enjoy. This is
Indwelling-sin. So wonderfully powerful, so effectually poisonous it is, that
it can bring leanness on the souls of men in the midst of all precious means of
growth and flourishing. It may well make us tremble to see men living under,
and in the use of the means of the Gospel, preaching, praying, administration
of Sacrameats, and yet grow colder every day than other in zeal for God, more
selfish and worldly, even habitually, to decline as to the degrees of holiness
which they had attained unto.

Thirdly, Together with the dispensation of the outward means of spiritual
growth or improvement, there are also supplies of grace continually afforded
the Saints from their Head, Christ Jesus. He is the Head of all the Saints. And
he is a living Head, and so a living Head, as that he tells us, that because he
lives, we shall live also, Joh. 14. 19. He communicates of spiritual life to
all that are his. In him is the fountain of our life, which is therefore said
to be hid with him in God, Col. 3. 3. And this life he gives unto his Saints,
by quickening of them by his Spirit, Romans 9. 11. And he continues it unto them,
by the supplies of living grace which he communicates unto them. From these
two, his quickening of us, and continually giving out supplies of life unto us,
he is said to live in us, Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me. The spiritual life which I have is not mine own, not from my self was it
educed, not by my self is it maintained, but it is merely and solely the work
of Christ; so that it is not I that live, but he lives in me, the whole of my
life being from him alone. Neither does this living head communicate only a
bare life unto believers, that they should merely live and no more a poor,
weak, dying life, as it were, but he gives out sufficiently to afford them a
strong, vigorous, thriving, flourishing life, Joh. 10. 10. He comes not only
that his sheep may have life, but that they may have it more abundantly; that
is, in a plentiful manner, (...) as that they may flourish, be fat and
fruitful^ Thus is it with the whole body of Christ and every member thereof,
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Whereby it grows up into him in all things, which is the Head,
even Christ; from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted, by
that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self
in love. The end of all communications of grace, and supplies of life from this
living and blessed Head, is the increase of the whole body, and every member of
it, and the edifying of it self in love. His treasures of grace are
unsearchable, his stores inexhaustible. His life, the fonutain of ours, full
and eternal, his heart bounteous and large, his hand open and liberal; so that
there is no doubt but that he communicates supplies of grace for their increase
in holiness abundantly unto all his Saints. Whence then is it that they do not
all flourish and thrive accordingly? As you may see it oftentimes in a natural
body, so is it here. Though the seat and rise of the blood and spirits in head
and heart be excellently good and sound, yet there may be a withering member in
the body; somewhat intercepts the influences of life unto it. So that though
the heart and head do perform their office, in giving of supplies no less to
that, than they do to any other member, yet all the effect produced, is merely
to keep it from utter perishing; it grows weak and decaies every day. The
withering and decaying of any member in Christ's mystical body, is not for the
want of his communication of grace for an abundant life, but from the powerful
interception that is made of the efficacy of it, by the interposition and
opposition of In-dwelling Sin. Hence it is that where Lust grows strong, a
great deal of Grace will but keep the Soul alive, and not give it any eminency
in fruitfulness at all. Oftentimes Christ gives very much Grace, where not many
of its effects do appear. It spends its strength, and power, in withstanding
the continual assaults of violent corruptions and lusts, so that it cannot put
forth its proper virtue toward farther fruitfulness. As a virtuous Medicine,
that is fit both to check vicious and noxious humors, and to comfort, refresh
and strengthen Nature, if the evil humor be strong and greatly prevailing,
spends its whole strength and virtue in the subduing and correcting of it,
contributing much less to the relief of Nature than otherwise it would do, if
it met not with such oppositions: So is it with the eye salve, and the healing
grace which we have abundantly from the wings of the Sun of Righteousness. It
is forced oftentimes, to put forth its virtue to oppose and contend against,
and in any measure subdue prevailing lusts and corruptions: That the Soul
receives not that strengthening unto duties and fruitfulness which otherwise
it might receive by it, is from hence. How sound, healthy, and flourishing, how
fruitful and exemplary in holiness, might many a soul be, by and with that
grace which is continually communicated to it from Christ, which now by reason
of the power of in-dwelling sin is only not dead* but weak, withering and
useless. And this, if any thing, is a notable evidence of the efficacy of
in-dwelling sin, that it is able to give such a stop, and check to the mighty
and effectual power of Grace, so that notwithstanding the blessed and continual
supplies that we receive from our Head, yet many Believers do decline and
decay, and that habitually, as to what they had attained unto; their last ways
not answering their first. This makes the Vineyard in the very fruitful hill to
bring forth so many wild Grapes. This makes so many trees barren in fertile
fields.

Fourthly, Besides the continual supplies of Grace that constantly according to
the tenure of the Covenant are communicated unto Believers, which keeps them
that they thirst no more as to a total indigence, there is moreover a readiness
in the Lord Christ to yield peculiar succor to the souls of his, according as
their occasions shall require. The Apostle tells us, that he is a merciful
High Priest and able, (that is ready prepared and willing) to succor them that
are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. And we are on that account, invited to come with
boldness to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need; that is, grace sufficient, seasonable, suitable unto any
special trial or Temptation that we may be exercised withal. Our merciful
High Priest is ready to give out this especial seasonable Grace, over and above
those constant Communications of supplies of the Spirit, which we mentioned
before. Besides the never-failing Springs of ordinary Covenant grace, he has
also peculiar refreshing showers for times of drought. And this is exceedingly
to the advantage of the Saints, for their preservation and growth in grace; and
there may very many more of the like nature be added. But now I say
notwithstanding all these, and the residue of the like importance, such is the
power and efficacy of indwelling-Sin, so great its deceitfulness and
restlesness, so many its wiles and temptations, it often falls out that many of
them for whose growth and improvement all this provision is made, do yet as was
showed, go back and decline, even as to their course of walking with God.
Sampsons strength fully evidenced it self when he brake seven new Withs, and
seven new Cords, wherewith he was bound, as burning tow, and as thread. The
noxious humor in the body which is so stubborn, as that no use of the most
sovereign remedies can prevail against it, ought to be regarded. Such is this
indwelling-sin if not watched over: It breaks all the cords made to bind it;
it blunts the instruments appointed to root it up; it resists all healing
Medicines though never so sovereign, and is therefore assuredly of exceeding
efficacy. Besides, Believers have innumerable Obligations upon them from the
Love, the Command of God, to grow in grace, to press forward toward
perfection, as they have abundant means provided for them so to do. Their doing
so, is a matter of the greatest advantage, profit, sweetness, contentment unto
them in the world: It is the burden, the trouble of their Souls, that they do
not so do, that they are not more holy, more zealous useful, fruitful; they
desire it above Life it self; they know it is their duty to watch against this
Enemy, to fight against it, to pray against it, and so they do. They more
desire his destruction, than the enjoyment of all this world* and all that it
can afford. And yet notwithstanding all this such is the subtilty, and fraud,
and violence, and fury, and urgency, and importunity of this Adversary, that it
frequently prevails to bring them into the woeful condition mentioned. Hence it
is with Believers sometimes as it is with men in some places at Sea; they have
a good and fair gale of wind, it may be all night long; they ply their
tackling, attend diligently their business, and it may be take great
contentment to consider how they proceed in their Voyage: In the morning, or
after a season coming to measure what way they have made, and what progress
they have had, they find that they are much backward of what they were, instead
of getting one step forward; falling into a swift tide, or current against
them, it has frustrated all their Labors, and rendered the wind in their
Sails almost useless; somewhat thereby they have born up against the stream,
but have made no progress. So is it with Believers: They have a good gale of
supplies of the Spirit from above, they attend duties diligently, pray
constantly, hear attentively, and omit nothing that may carry them in their
Voyage toward Eternity. But after a while, coming seriously to consider by the
examination of their hearts and ways, what progress they have made, they find
that all their assistance, and duties, have not been able to bear them up
against some strong tide or current of Indwelling-Sin. It has kept them indeed
that they have not been driven and split on rocks and shelves; it has
preserved them from gross, scandalous sins, but yet they have lost in their
spiritual frame, or gone backwards, and are entangled under many woeful decays;
which is a notable evidence of the Life of Sin, about which we are treating.
Now because the end of our discovering this power of Sin, is, that we may be
careful to obviate and prevent it in its operation, and because of all the
effects that it produces there is none more dangerous or pernicious than that
we have last insisted on, namely, that it prevails upon many Professors unto an
habitual declension from their former ways and Seize, notwithstanding
all the sweetness and excellency which their Souls have found in them, I shall,
as was said, in the next place consider by what Ways and Means, and through
what assistance it usually prevails in this kind, that we may the better be
instructed to watch against it.

CHAP. XV.
Decays in Degrees of Grace caused by Indwelling Sin. The Ways of its
prevalency to this purpose.

THE Ways and Means whereby In-dwelling Sin prevails on Believers unto
habitual declensions and decaies, as to degrees of Grace and Holiness, is that
now which comes under consideration, and are many.

First, Upon the first Conversion and calling of Sinners unto God and Christ,
they have usually many fresh Springs breaking forth in their Souls, and
Refreshing showers coming upon them, which bear them up to an high rate of
Faith, Love, Holiness, Fruitfulness and Obedience. As upon a Land-flood when
many lesser streams run into a River, it swells over its bounds, and rouls on
with a more than ordinary fullness. Now if these Springs be not kept open, if
they prevail not for the continuance of these showers, they must needs decay
and go backwards. We shall name one or two of them.

First, They have a fresh, vigorous sense of Pardoning Mercy. According as this
is in the Soul, so will its Love and delight in God, so will its Obedience be.
As, I say, is the sense of Gospel-pardon, so will be the life of Gospel-love.
Luke 7. 47. I say unto thee, says our Savior of the poor Woman, her sins,
which were many, are forgiven, for she loved much, but to whom little is
forgiven, the same loves little. Her great love was an evidence of great
forgiveness; and her great sense of it. For our Savior is not rendering a
reason of her forgiveness, as though it were for her Love, but of her Love,
that it was because of her forgiveness. Having in the foregoing Parable from
Verse 38. and onwards, convinced the Pharisees with whom he had to do, that he
to whom most was forgiven would love most, as Verse 43. He thence gives an
account of the great love of the Woman springing from the sense she had of the
great forgiveness which she had so freely received. Thus sinners at their first
Conversion are very sensible of great forgiveness: Of whom I am chief, lies
next their heart. This greatly subdues their hearts and spirits unto all in
God, and quickens them unto all Obedience; even that such poor cursed sinners
as they were, should so freely be delivered and pardoned. The love of God and
of Christ in their forgiveness, highly conquers and constrains them to make it
their business to live unto God.

Secondly, The fresh taste they have had of spiritual things, keeps up such a
favor and relish of them in their Souls, as that worldly Contentments whereby
men are drawn off from close walking with G^d, are rendered sapless and
undesireable unto them. Having tasted of the Wine of the Gospel they desire no
other, for they say, this is best. So was it with the Apostles upon that option
offered them as to a departure from Christ, upon the Apostasy of many false
Professors; Will ye go away also? Joh. 6. 67. They answer by Peter, Lord, to
whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life? Verse. 68. They had such
a fresh savor and relish of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Grace of
Christ upon their Souls, that they can entertain no thoughts of declining from
it. As a man that has been long kept in a dungeon, if brought forth on a
sudden into the Light of the Sun, finds so much pleasure and contentment in it,
in the beauties of the old Creation, that he thinks he can never be weary of
it, nor shall ever be contented on any account to be under darkness again. So
is it with Souls when first transl^ted into the mavelous Light of Christ, to
behold the beauties of the New Creation. They see a new Glory in him, that has
quite sullied the desireableness of all earthly diversions. And they see a new
guilt and filth in sin, that gives them an utter abhorrency of its old delights
and pleasures; and so of other things.

Now whilst these and the like Springs are kept open in the Souls of converted
sinners, they constrain them to a vigorous active Holiness. They can never do
enough for God; so that oftentimes their Zeal, as Saints, suffers them not to
escape without some blots on their Prudence as men, as might be instanced in
many of the Martyrs of old.

This then is the first, at least one way whereby indwelling-sin prepares men
for decays and declensions in Grace and Obedience: It endeavors to stop or
taint these springs. And there are several ways whereby it brings this to
pass.

First, It works by sloth and negligence. It prevails in the Soul to a neglect
of stirring up continual thoughts of, or about the things that so powerfully
influence it unto strict and fruitful obedience. If care be not taken, if
diligence and watchfulness be not used, and all means observed that are
appointed of God, to keep a quick and living sense of them upon the Soul, they
will dry up and decay, and consequently that Obedience that should spring from
them will do so also. Isaac dug Wells, but the Philistines stopped them, and
his Flocks had no benefit by them. Let the heart never so little di^use it self
to gracious soul-affecting thoughts of the Love of God, the Cross of Christ,
the greatness and excellency of Gospel mercy, the beauties of holiness, they
will quickly be as as much estranged to a man, as he can be to them. He that
shuts his eyes for a season in the Sun, when he opens them again can see
nothing at all. And so much as a man loses of faith toward these things, so
much will they lose of power toward him. They can do little or nothing upon
him, because of his unbelief, which formerly were so exceedingly effectual
toward him. So was it with the Spouse in the Canticles, chap. 5. 2. Christ
calls unto her, ver. 1. with a mavelous loving and gracious invitation unto
communion with himself. She who had formerly been ravished at the first hearing
of that joyful sound, being now under the power of sloth and carnal ease,
returns a sorry excusing answer to his Call, which ended in her own signal loss
and sorrow. Indwelling-sin, I say, prevailing by spiritual sloth upon the souls
of men unto an inadvertency of the motions of Gods Spirit in their former
apprehensions of divine Love, and a negligence of stirring up continual
thoughts of faith about it, a decay grows insensibly upon the whole soul. Thus
God often complains that his people had forgotten him, that is, grew unmindful of
his Love and Grace, which was the beginning of their Apostasy.

Secondly, By unframing the soul, so that it shall have formal, weary,
powerless thoughts of those things, which should prevail with it unto diligence
in thankful obedience. The Apostle cautions us, that in dealing with God, we
should use reverence and godly fear, because of his purity, holiness, and
Majesty, Heb. 12. 28, 29. And this is that which the Lord himself spoke in the
destruction of Nadab and Abihu, I will be sanctified in them that come to me,
Lev. 10. 3. He will be dealt withal ^in an awful, holy, reverent manner. So are
we to deal with all the things of God, wherein, or whereby we have communion
with him. The soul is to have a great Reverence of God in them. When men begin
to take them into slight and common thoughts, not using and improving them unto
the utmost for the ends whereunto they are appointed, they lose all their
beauty, and glory, and power toward them. When we have any thing to do wherein
faith and love toward God is to be exercised, we must do it with all our
hearts, with all our minds, strength and souls, not slightly and perfunctorily,
which God abhors; he does not only require that we bear his Love and Grace in
remembrance, but that, as much as in us lies, we do it according to the worth
and excellency of them. It was the sin of Hezekiah, that he rendered not again
according to the benefits done to him, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. So whilst we consider
Gospel truths, the uttermost endeavor of the soul ought to be, that we may be
changed into the same image or likeness, 2 Cor. 3. 18. that is, that they may
have their full power and effect upon us. Otherwise James tells us what our
beholding the glory of the Lord in a glass, there mentioned by the Apostle,
that is, reading or hearing the mind of God in Christ revealed in the Gospel,
comes unto, chap. 1. verse. 23, 24. It is but like unto a man beholding his
natural face in a glass, for he beholds himself and goes away, and straight
way forgets what manner of man he was. It makes no impression upon him,
begets no Idea nor image of his likeness in his imagination, because he does it
only slightly, and with a transient look. So is it with men that will indeed
think of Gospel truths, but in a slight manner, without endeavoring with all
their hearts, minds, and strength, to have them ingrafted upon their souls, and
all the effects of them produced in them. Now this is the way of sinners, in
their first engagements unto God. They never think of pardoning mercy, but they
labor to affect their whole souls with it, and do stir up themselves unto
suitable affections and returns of constant obedience. They think not of the
Excellency of Christ, and spiritual things, now newly discovered unto them in a
saving light, but they press with all their might after a farther, a fuller
enjoyment of them. This keeps them humble and holy, this makes them thankful
and fruitful. But now if the utmost diligence and carefulness be not used to
improve and grow in this Wisdom, to keep up this frame, indwelling-sin working
by the vanity of the minds of men; will insensibly bring them to content
themselves with slight and rare thoughts of these things, without a diligent
sedulous endeavor to give them their due improvement upon the soul. As men
decay herein, so they will assuredly decay and decline in the power of
holiness, and close walking with God. The springs being stopped or tainted, the
streams will not run so swiftly, at least not so sweetly as formerly. Some by
this means under an uninterrupted profession, insensibly wither almost into
nothing. They talk of Religion and spiritual things as much as ever they did in
their lives, and perform duties with as much constancy as ever they did, but
yet have poor lean starvling souls, as to any real and effectual communion with
God. By the power and subtilty of indwelling-sin they have grown formal, and
learned to deal about spiritual things in an overly manner, whereby they have
lost all their life, vigor, favor, and efficacy toward them. Be always
serious in spiritual things, if ever you intend to be bettered by them.

Thirdly, Indwelling-sin oftentimes prevails to the stopping of these springs
of Gospel obedience, by false and foolish opinions, corrupting the simplicity
of the Gospel. False opinions are the works of the flesh. From the vanity and
darkness of the minds of men, with a mixture more or less of corrupt
affections, do they mostly proceed. The Apostle was jealous over his
Corinthians in this matter, he was afraid lest their minds should by any means
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. which he
knew would be attended by a decay and declension in faith, love, and obedience.
And thus matters in this case often fall out. We have seen some, who after they
have received a sweet taste of the love of God in Christ, of the excellency of
pardoning mercy, and have walked humbly with God for many years, in the faith
and apprehension of the truth, have by the corruption of their minds from the
simplicity that is in Christ by false and foolish opinions, despised all their
own experiences, and rejected all the efficacy of truth, as to the fartherance
of their obedience. Hence John cautions the Elect Lady and her children to take
heed they were not seduced, lest they should lose the things that they had
wrought, 2 Epist. v. 8. lest they should themselves cast away all their former
obedience as lost, and a thing of no value. We have innumerable instances
hereof in the days wherein we live. How many are there, who not many years
since put an unspeakable value on the pardon of sin in the blood of Christ, who
delighted in Gospel discoveries of spiritual things, and walked in obedience
unto God on the account of them, who being beguiled and turned aside from the
truth as it is in Jesus, do despise these springs of their own former
obedience? And as this is done grossly and openly in some, so there are more
secret and more plausible insinuations of corrupt opinions, tainting the
springs and fountains of Gospel obedience, and through the vanity of men's
minds, which is a principal part of indwelling-sin, getting ground upon them.
Such are all those that tend to the extenuation of special Grace in its
freedom, and efficacy, and the advancement of the wills or the endeavors of
men in their spiritual power and ability: They are all works of the flesh, and
howsoever some may pretend an usefulness in them to the promotion of holiness,
they will be found to taint the springs of true Evangelical obedience,
insensibly to turn the heart from God, and to bring the whole soul into a
spiritual decay.

And this is one way whereby Indwelling-sin produces this pernicious effect,
of drawing men off from the power, purity, and fruitfulness attending their
first conversion, and engagements unto God, bringing them into habitual
declension, at least as unto degrees of their holiness and grace. There is not
any thing we ought to be more watchful against, if we intend effectually to
deal with this powerful and subtle enemy. It is no small part of the wisdom of
faith, to observe whether Gospel truths continue to have the same savor unto,
and efficacy upon the soul, as formerly they have had; and whether an endeavor
be maintained to improve them continually as at the first. A commandment that
is always practiced, is always new, as John speaks of that of Love. And he
that really improves Gospel truths, though he hears them a thousand times, they
will be always new and fresh unto him, because they put him on newness of
practice. When to another that grows common under them, they are burdensome
and common unto him; and he even loathes the Manna that he is so accustomed unto.

Secondly, Indwelling-sin does this, by taking men off from their watch against
the returns of Satan. When our Lord Christ comes first to take possession of
any soul for himself, he binds that strong man and spoils his goods; he
deprives them of all his power, dominion and interest. Satan being thus
dispossessed and frustrated in his hopes and expectations, leaves the soul, as
finding it newly mortified to his baits. So he left our Savior upon his first
fruitless attempts. But it is said, He left him only for a season, Luke 4. 13.
He intended to return again, as he should see his advantage. So is it with
Believers also. Being cast out from his interest in them, he leaves them for a
season, at least comparatively he does so. Freed from his assaults and
perplexing temptations, they proceed vigorously in the course of their
obedience, and so flourish in the ways of God. But this holds not; Satan
returns again, and if the soul stands not continually upon his guard against
him, he will quickly get such advantages, as shall put a notable interruption
upon his fruitfulness and obedience. Hence some, after they have spent some
time, it may be some years in cheerful exemplary walking with God, have upon
Satan's return, consumed all their latter days in wrestling with perplexing
temptations, wherewith he has entangled them. Others have plainly fallen under
the power of his assaults. It is like a man, who having for a while lived
usefully amongst his neighbors, done good, and communicated according to his
ability, distributing to the poor, and helping all round about him, at length
falling into the hands of vexatious, wrangling oppressive men, he is forced to
spend his whole time and revenue in defending himself against them at Law, and
so becomes useless in the place where he lives. So is it with many a Believer;
after he has walked in a fruitful course of obedience to the glory of God, and
edification of the Church of Christ, being afresh set upon by the ret^rn of
Satan in one way or other, he has enough to do all the remainder of his life
to keep himself a^ive; in the mean time a to many graces, woefully decaying and
going backward. Now this also, though Satan has an hand in it, is from
Indwelling-sin: I mean, the success is so which Satan does obtain in his
undertaking. This encourages him, makes way for his return, and gives
entrance to his temptations. You know how it is with them, out of whom he is
cast only by Gospel conviction; after he has wandered and waited awhile, he
says, He will return to his house from whence he was ejected. And what is the
issue? Carnal lusts have prevailed over the man's convictions, and made his soul
fit to entertain returning devils. It is so as to the measure of prevalency,
that Satan obtains against Believers, upon advantages administered unto him, by
sins disposing the soul unto an obnoxiousness to his temptations.

Now the way and means whereby Indwelling-sin does give advantage to Satan for
his return, are all those which dispose them toward a declension which shall
afterward be mentioned. Satan is a diligent, watchful, and crafty adversary,
he will neglect no opportunity, no advantage that is offered unto him. Wherein
then soever our spiritual strength is impaired by sin, or which way soever our
lusts press, Satan falls in with that weakness, and presses toward that
ruin. So that all the actings of the Law of sin are subservient to this end of
Satan. I shall therefore only at present mention one or two, that seem
princicipally to invite Satan to attempt a return.

First, It intangleth the soul in the things of the world, all which are so
many Purveyors for Satan. When Pharaoh had let the people go, he heard after a
while that they were entangled in the wilderness and supposes that he shall
therefore now overtake them and destroy them. This stirs him up to pursue after
them. Satan finding those whom he has been cast out from, entangled in the
things of the world, by which he is sure to find an easy access unto them, is
encouraged to attempt upon them afresh; as the Spider to come down upon the
strongest fly that is entangled in his web. For he comes by his temptations
only to impel them unto that whereunto by their own lusts they are inclined, by
adding poison to their lusts, and painting to the objects of them. And
oftentimes by this advantage he gets so in upon the souls of men, that they are
never well free of him more whilst they live. And as men's diversions increase
from the world, so do their entanglements from Satan. When they have more to do
in the world than they can well manage, they shall have more to do from Satan
than they can well withstand. When men are made spiritually faint, by dealing
in and with the world, Satan sets on them a^ Amalek did on the faint and weak
of the people that came out of Egypt.

Secondly, It produces this effect by making the soul negligent, and taking it
off from its watch. We have before showed at large that it is one main part of
the effectual deceitfulness of Indwelling sin, to make the soul inadvertent, to
turn it off from the diligent watchful attendance unto its duty, which is
required. Now there is not any thing in reference whereunto diligence and
watchfulness is more strictly enjoined; than the returning assau^ts of Satan, 1
Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant; and why so? because of your adversary the
Devil. Unless you are exceeding watchful, at one time or other he will surprise
you. And all the injunctions of our blessed Savior, to watch, are still with
reference unto him, and his temptations. Now when the soul is made careless and
inadvertent, forgetting what an enemy it has to deal withal, or is lifted up
with the successes it has newly obtained against him, then in Satan's time to
attempt a re-entrance of his old habitation; which if he cannot obtain, yet he
makes their lives uncomfortable to themselves, and unfruitful to others, in
weakening their root, and withering their fruit through his poisoning
temptations. He comes down upon our duties of obedience, as the fowls upon
Abraham's sacrifice, that if we watch not, as he did, to drive them away, [for
by resistance he is overcome and put to flight] he will devour them.

Thirdly, Indwelling-sin takes advantage to put forth its efficacy and deceit,
to withdraw men from their primitive zeal and holiness, from their first
faith, love, and works by the evil examples of Professors amongst whom they
live. When men first engage into the ways of God, they have a reverent esteem
of those whom they believe to have been made partakers of that mercy before
themselves; these they love and honor, as it is their duty. But after a while
they find many of them walking in many things unevenly, crookedly, and not
unlike the men of the world. Here sin is not wanting to its advantage.
Insensibly it prevails with men to a compliance with them. This way, this
course of walking, does well enough with others, why may it not do so with us
also? Such is the inward thought of many, that works effectually in them. And
so through the craft of sin, the generation of Professors corrupt one another.
As a stream arising from a clear spring or fountain, whilst it runs in its own
peculiar channel, and keeps its water unmixed, preserves its purity and
cleanness, but when it falls in its course with other streams that are turbid
and foul, though running the same way with it, it becomes muddy and discolored
also. So is it in this case. Believers come forth from the spring of the New
birth with some purity and cleanness, this for a while they keep in the course
of their private walking with God; but now when they come sometimes to fall
into society with others, whose profession flows and runs the same way with
theirs, even toward heaven, but yet are mudded and sullied with sin and the
world, they are often corrupted with them, and by them, and so decline from
their first purity, faith, and holiness. Now lest this may have been the case
of any who shall read this discourse, I shall add some few cautions that are
necessary to preserve men from this infection.

First, In the body of Professors there is a great number of hypocrites. Though
we cannot say of this or that man, that he is so, yet that some there are, is
most certain. Our Savior has told us that it will be so to the end of the
world. All that have Oil in their Lamps, have it not in their vessels. Let men
take heed how they give themselves up unto a conformity to the Professors they
meet withal, lest instead of Saints and the best of men, they sometimes propose
for their example hypocrites, which are the worst, and when they think they are
like unto them who bare the image of God, they conform themselves to those, who
bare the Image of Satan.

Secondly, You know not what may be the present temptations of those whose ways
you observe. It may be they are under some peculiar desertion from God, and so
are withering for a season, until he send them some refreshing powers from
above. It may be they are entangled with some special corruptions, which is
their burden, tat you know not of; and for any voluntarily to fall into such a
frame, as others are cast into by the power of their temptations, or to think
that will suffice in them, which they see to suffice in others whose distempers
they know not, is folly and presumption. He that knows such or such a person to
be a living Man, and of an healthy constitution, if he see him go crawling up
and down about his affairs, feeble and weak, sometimes falling, sometimes
standing, and making small progress in any thing, will he think it sufficient
for himself to do so also? will he not inquire whether the person he sees, have
not lately fallen into some distemper or sickness, that has weakened him, and
brought him into that condition? Assuredly he will so do. Take heed,
Christians, many of the Professors with whom ye do converse are sick, and
wounded; the wounds of some of them do stink, and are corrupt because of their
folly. If you have any spiritual health, do not think their weak and uneven
walking will be accepted at your hands; much less ^^ink it will be well for you
to become sick and to be wounded also.

Thirdly, Remember that of many of the best Christians, the worst only is known
and seen. Many who keep up precious Communion with God, do yet oftentimes by
their natural temper^ of freedom or passion, not carry so glorious appearances
as others, who perhaps come short of them in Grace and the power of Godliness.
In respect of their outward Conversation it may seem they are scarcely saved,
when in respect of their Faith and Love they may be eminent. They may, as the
Kings Daughter, be all glorious within, though their Clothes be not always of
wrought Gold. Take heed then that you be not infected with their worst, when ye
are not able it may be to imitate them in their best; but to return.

Fourthly, Sin does this work by cherishing some secret particular lust in the
heart. This the soul contends against faintly, It contends against it upon the
account of sincerity, it cannot but do so; but it does not make through-work
vigorously to mortify it by the strength and power of Grace. Now where it is
thus with the Soul, an habitual dec^ension as to holiness will assuredly ensue.
David shows us how in his first days he kept his heart close unto God, Psalm 18.
23. I was upright before him, (...) I kept my self from mine iniquity. His
great care was lest any one lust should prevail in him, or upon him, that might
be called his iniquity in s^ peculiar manner. The same course steered Paul also
^ Cor. 9. 27* he was in danger to be lifted up by his spiritua^ ^evelations and
Enjoyments. This makes him keep his body in subjection, that no carnal
reasonings or vain imagination might take place in him. But where indwelling
Sin has provoked, irritated, and given strength unto a special lust, it proves
assuredly a Principal Means of a general declension. For as an infirmity and
weakness in any one vital part, will make the whole body consumptive, so will
the weakness in any one Grace, which a perplexing lust brings with it, make the
Soul. It every way weakens spiritual strength. It weakens Confidence in God in
Faith and Prayer. The knees will be feeble, and the hands will hang down in
dealing with God, where a galling and unmortified lust lies in the heart. It
will take such hold upon the soul, that it shall not be able to look up, Psalm.
40. 12. It darkens the mind by innumerable foolish imaginations, which it stirs
up to make provision for its self. It galls the Conscience with those spots and
stains, which in and by its actings it brings upon the soul. It contends in the
Will for Rule and Dominion: An active stirring corruption would have the
commanding power in the soul, and it is ever and anon ready to take the Throne.
It disturbs the thoughts, and sometimes will even frighten the soul from
dealing with it by meditation, lest corrupt affections being entangled by it,
Grace loses ground instead of prevailing. It breaks out oftentimes into
scandalous sins, as it did in David and Hezekiah, and loads the sinner with
sorrow and discouragemen. By these and the like means it becomes to the soul
like a moth in a garment, to eat up and devour the strongest threeds of it, so
that though the whole hang loose together, it is easily torn in pieces. Though
the soul with whom it is thus, do for a season keep up a fair profession, yet
his strength is secretly devoured; and every temptation tears and rents his
Conscience at pleasure. It becomes with such Men as it is with some who have
for a many years been of a sound strong athletick constitution. Some secret
hectical distemper seizes on them: For a season they take no notice of it; or
if they do, they think they shall do well enough with it, and easily shake it
off when they have a little leisure to attend unto it: But for the present they
think as Sampson with his locks cut, they will do as at other times. Sometimes
it may be they complain that they are not well, they know not what aileth them,
and it may be rise violently in an opposition to their distemper; but after a
while struggling in vain, the vigor of their spirits and strength failing them,
they are forced to yield to the power of a consumption. And now all they can do
is little enough to keep them alive. It is so with Men brought into spiritual
decays by any secret perplexing corruption. It may be they have had a vigorous
principle of obedience and holiness: Indwelling Sin watching its opportunities,
by some temptation or other, has kindled and inflamed some particular lust in
them. For a while it may be they take little notice of it. Sometimes they
complain, but think they will do as in former times, until being insensibly
weakened in their spiritual strength, they have work enough to do in keeping
alive what remains and is ready to dye, Hos. 5. 13. I shall not add any thing
here as to the prevention and obviating this advantage of Indwelling-sin,
having elsewhere treated of it peculiarly and apart.

Fifthly, It works by negligence of private conmunion with God in Prayer and
Meditation. I have showed before how Indwelling Sin puts forth its
deceitfulness in diverting the soul from watchfulness in and unto these duties.
Here if it prevails, it will not fail to induce an habitual declension in the
whole course of Obedience. All neglect of private duties is principled by a
weariness of God as he complains, Isa. 43. 22. Thou have not called upon Me,
thou have been weary of Me. Neglect of invocation proceeds from weariness. And
where there is weariness, there will be withdrawing from that whereof we are
weary. Now God alone being the fountain and spring of spiritual life, if there
be a weariness of him, and withdrawing from him, it is impossible but that
there will a decay in the Life ensue. Indeed what men are in these^ duties, I
mean as to Faith and Love in them, that they are and no more. Here lies the
root of their obedience, and if this fail all fruit will quickly fail. You may
sometimes see a Tree flourishing with leaves and fruit goodly and pleasant.
After a while the leaves begin to decay, the fruit to wither, the whole to
droop. Search, and you shall find the root, whereby it should draw in moisture
and fatness from the Earth to supply the body and branches with sap and juice
for growth and fruit, has received a wound, is some way perished, and does not
perform its duty, so that though the branches are flourishing a while with what
they had received their sustenance being intercepted they must decay. So it is
here. These duties of private Communion with God, are the means of receiving
supplies of spiritual strength from him; of sap and fatness from Christ the
Vine and Olive. Whilst they do so, the conversation and course of obedience
flourishes and is fruitful, all outward duties are cheerfully and regularly
performed. But if there be a wound, a defect, a failing in that which should
first take in the spiritual radical moisture, that should be communicated unto
the whole, the rest may for a season maintain their station and appearance, but
after a while profession will wither, fruits will decay, and the whole be ready
to die. Hence our Savior lets us know, Matthew. 6. 6. what a man is in secret,
in these private duties, that he is in the eyes of God, and no more. And one
reason amongst others is, because they have a more vigorous acting of unmixed
grace than any other duties whatever. In all or most particular duties, besides
the influence that they may have from carnal respects, which are many, and the
ways of their insinuation subtle, and imperceptible, there is an allay of
gifts, which sometime even devours the pure Gold of Grace which should be the
chief and Principal in them. In these, there is immediate intercourse between
God, and that which is of himself in the soul. If once sin by its deceits and
treacheries, prevail to take off the Soul from diligent attendance unto
Communion with God, and constancy in these duties, it will not fail to effect a
declining in the whole of a man's obedience. It has made its entrance, and will
assuredly make good its progress.

Sixthly, Growing in Notions of Truth without answerable practice, is another
thing that Indwelling-sin makes use to bring the souls of Believers under a
decay. The Apostle tells us, that knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8. 1. If it be
alone, not improved in practice, it swells men beyond a due proportion. Like a
man that has a Dropsy, we are not to expect that he has strength to his
bigness. Like trees that are continually running up an head, which keeps them
from bearing fruit. When once men have attained to this, that they can
entertain and receive Evangelical truths in a new and more Glorious light, or
more clear discovery than formerly, or new manifestations of Truth which they
knew not before, and please themselves in so doing, without diligent endeavors
to have the power of those truths and notions upon their hearts and their souls
made conformable unto them, they generally learn so to dispose of all truths
formerly known, which were sometimes inlaid in their hearts with more efficacy
and power. This has proved, if not the ruin, yet the great impairing of many
in these days of light wherein we live. By this means from humble close
walking, many have withered into an empty, barren, talking profession. All
things almost have in a short season become alike unto them: Have they been
true or false, so they might be debating of them, and disputing about them, all
is well. This is food for sin, it hatcheth, increases it, and is increased by
it. A notable way it is for the vanity that is in the mind, to exert it self
without a rebuke from conscience. Whilst men are talking, and writing, and
studying about Religion, and hearing Preaching, it may be, with great delight,
as those in Ezekiel chap. 33. 32. Conscience. unless thoroughly awake and
circumspect, and furnished with spiritual wisdom and care, will be very well
pacified, and enter no rebukes or pleas against the way that the soul is in.
But yet all this may be nothing but the acting of that natural vanity which
lies in the mind, and is a principal part of the sin we treat of. And generally
this is so, when men content themselves, as was said, with the notions of
truth, without laboring after an experience of the power of them in their
hearts, and the bringing forth the fruit of them in their lives, on which a
decay must needs ensue.

Seventhly, Growth in carnal wisdom is another help to sin in producing this
sad effect. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, says the Prophet, has perverted
thee, Isa. 47. 10. So much as carnal wisdom increases, so much faith decays.
The proper work of it is to teach a man to trust to and in himself, of faith to
trust wholly in another. So it labors to destroy the whole work of faith, by
causing the soul to return into a deceiving fullness of his own. We have woeful
examples of the prevalency of this principle of declension in the days werein
we live. How many a poor, humble, broken hearted creature, who followed after
God in simplicity and integrity of spirit, have we seen, through the
observation of the ways and walkings of others, and closing with the
temptations to craft and subtilty, which opportunities in the world have
administered unto them, come to be dipped in a worldly carnal frame, and utterly
to wither in their profession. Many are so sullied hereby, that they are not to
be known to be the men they were.

Eighthly, Some great sin lying long in the heart and conscience unrepented of,
or not repented of as it ought, and as the matter requires, furthers
indwelling-sin in this work. The great turn of the life of David, whence his
first ways carried the reputation, was in the harboring his great sin in his
conscience without suitable repentance. It was otherwise we know with Peter,
and he had another issue. A great sin will certainly give a great turn to the
life of a Professor. If it be well cured in the blood of Christ, with that
humiliation which the Gospel requires, it often proves a means of more
watchfulness, fruitfulness, humility, and contentation, than ever the soul
before obtained. If it be neglected, it certainly hardens the heart, weakens
spiritual strength, enfeebles the soul, discouraging it unto all communion with
God, and is a notable principle of a general decay. So David complains, Ps. 38.
5. My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness. His present
distemper was not so much from his sin, as his folly, not so much from the
wounds he had received, as from his neglect to make a timely application for
their cure. It is like a broken bone, which being well set, leaves the place
stronger than before; if otherwise, makes the man a Cripple all his days. These
things we do but briefly name, and sundry other advantages of the like nature
that sin makes use of to produce this effect, might also be instanced in; but
these may suffice unto our present purpose. What ever it uses, it self is
still the principle; and this is no small demonstration of its efficacy and
power.

CHAP. XVI.
The strength of Indwelling-sin, manifested from its power and effects in
persons unregenerate.

IT is of the power and efficacy of Indwelling-sin, as it remains in several
degrees in Believers that we are treating. Now I have elsewhere showed, that
the nature and all the natural properties of it do still remain in them. Though
therefore we cannot prove directly what is the strength of sin in them, from
what its power is in those, in whom it is only checked and not at all weakened;
yet may we from an observation thereof caution Believers of the real power of
that mortal enemy with whom they have to do.

If the Plague do violently rage in one City, destroying multitudes, and there
be in another an infection of the same kind, which yet arises not unto that
height and fury there, by reason of the correction that it meets withal from a
better air, and remedies used; yet a man may demonstrate unto the Inhabitants
the force and danger of that Infection got in among them, by the effects that
it has and does produce among others, who have not the benefit of the
preventives and preservatives which they enjoy; which will both teach them to
value the means of their preservation, and be the more watchful against the
power of the infection that is among them. It is so in this case. Believers may
be taught what is the power and efficacy of that plague of sin, which is in and
among them, by the effects the same plague produces in and among others, who
have not those corrections of its poison, and those preservatives from death
which the Lord Jesus has furnished them withal.

Having then fixed on the Demonstration of the power of sin, from the effects
it does produce, and having given a double instance hereof in Believers
themselves, I shall now farther evidence the same truth, or pursue the same
evidence of it, by showing somewhat of the power that it acts in them who are
unregenerate, and so have not the remedies against it which Believers are
furnished withal.

I shall not handle the whole power of sin in unregenerate persons, which is a
very large field, and not the business I have in hand; but only by some few
instances of its effects in them, intimate, as I said, unto Believers, what
they have to deal withal.

First then, it appears in the violence it offers to the nature of man,
compelling them unto sins, fully contrary to all the principles of the
reasonable nature wherewith they are endued from God. Every creature of God
has in its creation, a Law of operation implanted in it, which is the rule of
all that proceeds from it, of all that it does of its own accord. So the fire
ascends upwards, bodies that are weighty and heavy descend; the water flows,
each according to the Principles of their nature, which give them the Law of
their Operation. That which hinders them in their operation is force and
violence, as that which hinders a stone from descending, or the fire from going
upwards. That which forces them to move contrary to the Law of their nature,
as a stone to go upwards, or the fire to descend, is in its kind the greatest
violence, of which the degrees are endless. Now that which should take a great
Millstone, and fling it upwards into the air, all would acknowledge to be a
matter of wonderful force, power, and efficacy.

Man also has his Law of Operation and working concreated with him. And this
may be considered two ways; either, first, as it is common to him with other
creatures; or as peculiar, with reference unto that special end for which he
was made. Some things are, I say, in this Law of Nature common to man with
other creatures; as to nourish their young, to live quietly with them of the
same kind and race with them; to seek and follow after that which is good for
them in that state and condition wherein they are created. These are things
which all bruit living creatures have in the Law of their nature, as Man also
has.

But now besides these things, man being creaated in an especial manner to give
Glory to God by rational and moral obedience, and so to obtain a reward in the
enjoyment of him; there are many things in the Law of his creation that are
peculiar to him; as to love God above all, to seek the enjoyment of him as his
chiefest Good and last End, to enquire after his Mind and Will, and to yield
obedience, and the like. All which are part of the Law of his Nature.

Now these things are not distinguished so, as though a man might perform the
actions of the Law of his nature which are common to him with other creatures,
merely from the principles of his nature as they do; but the Law of his
dependence upon God, and doing all things in obedience unto him, passes on
them all also. He can never be considered as a mere creature, but as a creature
made for the glory of God, by rational moral obedience; rational, because by
him chosen, and performed with reason; and moral, because regulated by a Law
whereunto Reason does attend.

For instance; It is common to man with other creatures, to take care for the
nourishing of his children, of the young helpless ones that receive their being
by him. There is implanted in him, in the principles of his nature concreated
with them, a love and care for them; so is it with other living creatures. Now
let other creatures answer this instinct and inclination, and be not hardened
against them like the foolish Ostrich, unto whom God has not imparted this
natural wisdom, Job 59. 16, 17. they fully answer the Law of their Creation.
With Man it is not so; it is not enough for him to answer the instinct and
secret impulse and inclination of his nature and kind, as in the nourishing of
his children; but he must do it also in subjection to God, and obey him
therein, and doing it unto his glory; the Law of Moral Obedience passing over
all his whole being and all his operations; but in these things lie, as it
were, the whole of a man, namely in the things which are implanted in his
nature as a creature, common to him with all other living creatures, seconded
by the Command or Will of God, as he is a creature capable of yielding moral
obedience, and doing all things for his glory.

That then, which shall drive and compel a man to transgress this Law of his
nature, which is not only as to throw milstones upward, to drive Beasts from
taking care of their young, to take from Cattle of the same kind the hearding
of themselves in quietness, but moreover, to cast off what lies in him his
fundamental dependence on God, as a creature made to yield him obedience, must
needs be esteemed of great force and efficacy.

Now this is frequently done by Indwelling-sin, in persons unregenerate. Let us
take some few instances.

First, There is nothing that is more deeply inlaid in the principles of the
natures of all living creatures, and so of man himself, than a love unto, and a
care for the preservation and nourishing of their young: many bruit creatures
will die for them, some feed them with their own flesh and blood; all deprive
themselves of that food which nature directs them to as their best, to impart
it to them; and acting in their behalf to the utmost of their power.

Now such is the efficacy, power, and force of Indwelling-sin in man, an
infection that the nature of other creatures knows nothing of, that in many it
prevails to stop this fountain, to beat back the stream of natural affections,
to root up the principles of the Law of nature, and to drive them unto a
neglect, a destruction of the fruit of their own loins. Paul tells us of the
old Gentiles, they were (...), Romans 1. 31. without natural affection; that
which he aims at is that barbarous custom among the Romans, who oft-times to
spare the trouble in the education of their children, and to be at liberty to
satisfy their lusts, destroyed their own children from the womb. So far did
the strength of sin prevail to obliterate the Law of nature, and to repel the
force and power of it.

Examples of this nature are common in all Nations; amongst our selves, of
women murdering their own children, through the deceitful reasoning of sin. And
herein sin turns the strong current of nature, darkens all the light of God in
the soul, controuls all natural principles, influenced with the power of the
command and will of God. But yet this evil has, through the efficacy of sin,
received a fearful aggravation. Men have not only slain, but cruelly sacrificed
their children to satisfy their lusts. The Apostle reckons Idolatry, and so
consequently all superstition, among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 20. that
is, the fruit and product of indwelling sin. Now from hence it is that men have
offered that horrid and unspeakable violence to the Law of Nature mentioned. So
the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 106. 37, 38. The same is again mentioned, Psalm. 7.
31. and in sundry other places. The whole manner of that abomination I have
elsewhere declared. For the present it may suffice to intimate, that they took
their children and burnt them to ashes in a soft fire; the wicked Priests that
assisted in the sacrifice affording them this relief, that they made a noise
and clamor, that the vile wretches might not hear the woeful moans and cries of
the poor dying tormented Infants. I suppose in this case we need no farther
evidence. Naturalists can give no rational account, they can only admire the
secret force of that little Fish, which, they say, will stop a ship in full
sail in the midst of the Sea. And we must acknowledge, that it is beyond our
power to give an account of that secret force, and unsearchable deceit that is
in this inbred Traitor, Sin; that cannot only stop the course of nature, when
all the sails of it that carry it forward are so filled, as they are in that of
affections to children; but also drive it backward with such a violence and
force, as to cause men so to deal with their own children, as a good man would
not be hired with any reward to deal with his dog. And it may not be to the
disadvantage of the best, to know and consider, that they carry that about
them, in them, which in others has produced these effects.

The like may be spoken of all other sins against the prime dictates of the Law
of Nature, that mankind is or has been stained and defamed withal. Murder of
Parents and Children, of Wives and Husbands, Sodomy, Incest, and the like
enormities; in all which, sin prevails in men against the whole Law of their
Being and dependence upon God.

What should I reckon up the murders of Cain and Abel, the treason of Judas,
with their aggravations; or remind the filth and villainy of Nero, in whom sin
seemed to design an instance of what it could debase the nature of man unto: In
a word, all the studied, premeditated perjuries; all the designed, bloody
revenges; all the filth and uncleanness; all the enmity to God and his ways
that is in the world, is fruit growing from this root alone.

Secondly, It evidences its efficacy in keeping men off from believing under
the dispensation of the Gospel. This evidence must be a little further cleared.

First, Under the dispensation of the Gospel, there are but few that do
believe. So the Preachers of it complain, Isa. 53. 1. Who has believed our
report? which the Apostle interprets of the paucity of Believers, Joh. 12. 38.
our Savior Christ himself tells us, that many are called, the Word is preached
unto many, but few are chosen. And so the Church complains of its number, Mic.
6. 1. Few there be who enter the narrow gate, daily experience confirms this
woeful observation. How many Villages, Parishes, yea, Towns may we go unto,
where the Gospel, it may be, has been preached many years, and perhaps scarce
meet a true Believer in them, and one who shows forth the death of Christ in
his conversation. In the best places, and most eminent for profession, are not
such persons like the berries after the shaking of an Olive Tree, two or three
in the top of the upmost boughs, and 4 or 5 in the highest branches?

Secondly, There is proposed to men in the preaching of the Gospel, as motives
unto Believing every thing in conjunction, that severally prevail with men to
do what ever else they do in their lives. What ever any one does with
consideration, he does it either because its reasonable and good for him so to
do, or profitable and advantageous, or pleasant, or lastly, necessary for the
avoidance of evil; whatever, I say, men do with consideration, whether it be
good or evil, whether it be in the works of this life, or in things that lead
to another; they do it from one or other of the reasons or motives mentioned.
And, God knows, oft-times they are very poor and mean in their kind, that men
are prevailed upon by. How often will men for a very little pleasure, a very
little profit, be induced to do that which shall imbitter their lives, and damn
their souls. And what industry will they use to avoid that which they apprehend
evil or grievous to them. And any one of these is enough to oil the wheels of
men's utmost endeavors, and set men at work to the purpose.

But now all these things center in the proposal of the Gospel, and the command
of Believing; and every one of them in a kind, that the whole world can propose
nothing like unto it.

It is the most reasonable thing that can be proposed to the understanding of a
man; that he who thr^ough his own default has lost that way of bringiug glory
of God, and saving his own soul, (for which ends he was made) that he was first
placed in, should accept of, and embrace, that other, blessed, easy, safe,
excellent way, for the attaining the ends mentioned, which God in infinite
Grace, Love, Mercy, Wisdom, and Righteousness has found out, and does propose
unto him. And,

Secondly, It is the profitablest thing that a man can possibly be invited
unto; if there be any profit, or benefit, any advantage in the forgiveness of
sins, in the love and favor of God, in a blessed immortality, in eternal
glory. And,

Thirdly, It is most pleasant also; surely it is a pleasant thing to be brought
out of darkness into light, out of a dungeon unto a Throne, from captivity and
slavery to Satan and cursed lusts, to the glorious liberty of the children of
God, with a thousand heavenly sweetnesses not now to be mentioned. And,

Fourthly, It is surely necessary, and that not only from the command of God,
who has the Supreme Authority over us, but also indispensibly so for the
avoidance of eternal ruin of body and soul, Mat. 16. 16. It is constantly
proposed under these terms, believe, or you perish under the weight of the
wrath of the great God, and that for evermore.

But now notwithstanding that all these considerations are preached unto men,
and pressed upon them in the Name of the great God from day to day, from one
year to another; yet, as was before observed, very few there are who set their
hearts unto them, so as to embrace that which they lead unto. Tell men ten
thousand times, that this is Wisdom, yea, Riches, that all their profit lies in
it, that they will assuredly and eternally perish, and that it may be within a
few hours, if they receive not the Gospel, assure them that it is their only
interest and concernment, let them know that God himself speaks all this unto
them; yet all is one, they regard it not, set not their hearts unto it, but, as
it were, plainly say, We will have nothing to do with these things; they will
rather perish in their lusts than accept of mercy.

Thirdly, It is Indwelling-sin that both disenableth men unto, and hinders them
from believing, and that alone. Blindness of mind, stubbornness of the will,
sensuality of the affections, all concur to keep poor perishing souls at a
distance from Christ. Men are made blind by sin, and cannot see his
Excellencies, obstinate and will not lay hold of his Righteousness senseless
and take no notice of their own eternal concernments.

Now certainly that which can prevail with men wise and sober, and prudent in
other things, to neglect and despise the love of God, the blood of Christ, the
eternal welfare of their own souls, upon weak and worthless pretenses, must be
acknowledged to have an astonishable force and efficacy accompanying it.

Whose heart, who has once heard of the ways of God, can but bleed to see poor
souls eternally perishing under a thousand gracious invitations, to accept of
mercy and pardon in the blood of Christ? And can we but be astonished at the
power of that principle from whence it is, that they run headlong to their own
destruction? And yet all this befalls them from the power and deceit of sin that
dwells in them.

3. It is evident in their total Apostasies. Many Men not really converted, are
much wrought upon by the Word. The Apostle tells us, that they do clean escape
them that live in Error, as 2 Pet. 2. 18. They separate themselves from
Idolatry and false Worship, owning and professing the Truth; and they also
escape the pollution of the world, ver. 20. that is, the corruption that is in
the world, through lust, as he expresses it, chap. 1. verse 4. those filthy
corrupt and unclean ways, which the Men of the world, in the pursuit of their
lusts, do walk and live in; these they escape from, in the amendment of their
lives, and ordering of their Conversation according to the Convictions which
they have from the Word. For so he tells us, that all this is brought about,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; that is, by the
preaching of the Gospel; they are so far wrought upon, as to forsake all ways
of false Worship, to profess the truth, to reform their lives, and to walk
answerable to the Convictions that are upon them.

By this means do they gain the Reputation of Professors, They have a Name to
live, Rev. 3. 1. and are made partakers of some, or all of those privileges of
the Gospel, that are numbered by the Apostle, Heb. 6. 4, 5.

It is not my present business to show how far, or wherein a Man may be
effectually wrought upon by the Word, and yet not be really wrought over to
close with Christ; or what may be the utmost bounds and limits of a common work
of grace upon unregenerate Men; It is on all hands confessed, that it may be
carried on so far, that it is very difficult to discern between its effects and
productions, and those of that Grace which is special and saving.

But now, notwithstanding all this, we see many of these daily fall off from
God, utterly and wickedly some into debaucherie and uncleanness, some to
worldliness and covetousness, some to be Persecutors of the Saints, all to the
perdition of their own souls. How this comes about, the Apostle declares in
that place mentioned; they are, says he, entangled again; to entice and
entangle as I have showed before from James 1. 14, 15. is the proper work of
Indwelling Sin; it is that alone which entangles the Soul; as the Apostle
speaks v. 18. They are allured from their whole Profession, into cursed
Apostasy through the lusts of the flesh.

It prevails upon them through its deceit and power to an utter relinquishment
of their Profession; and their whole engagement unto God: And this several ways
evinces the greatness of its strength and efficacy:

1. In that it gives stop or control unto that exceeding greatness of power
which is put forth in the Word, in their Conviction and Reformation. We see it
by experience, that Men are not easily wrought upon by the Word; the most of
men can live under the dispensation of it all the days of their lives, and
continue as senseless and stupid as the seats they sit upon, or the flint in the
Rock of Stone. Mighty difficulties, and prejudices must be conquered, great
strokes must be given to the Conscience before this can be brought about. It is
as the stopping of a River in his course, and turning his streams another way;
the hindering of a stone in his falling downwards, or the turning away of the
wild Ass, when furiously set to pursue his way, as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 2.
24. to turn Men from their corrupt ways, sins and pleasures, to make them pray,
fast, hear, and do many things contrary to the Principle of flesh, which is
secretly predominant in them, willingly and gladly; to cause them to profess
Christ and the Gospel, it may be under some trials and reproaches, to give them
Light to see into sundry mysteries, and gifts for the discharge of sundry
duties; to make dead, blind, senseless Men, to walk, and talk, and do all the
outward offices and duties of living and healthy Men; with the like
attendencies of Conviction and Reformation, are the effects and products of
mighty power and strength. Indeed the power that the Holy Ghost puts forth by
the word, in the staggering and conviction of sinners, in the wakning of their
Consciences, the enlightening of their minds, the changing of their affections,
the awing of their hearts, the reforming of their lives, and compelling them to
duties, is unexpressible.

But now, unto all these is there check and control given by Indwelling Sin. It
prevails against this whole work of the Spirit by the Word, with all the
advantages of Providential Dispensations, in Afflictions and Mercies, wherewith
it is attended. When Sin is once enraged, all these things become but like the
withs and cords wherewith Sampson was bound before his head was shaven: Cry but
to it, the Philistines are upon thee, here is a subtle, a suitable temptation,
now show thy strength and efficacy, all these things become like Towe that have
smelt the fire. Conscience is stifled, Reputation in the Church of God
despised, Light supplanted, the impressions of the Word cast off, convictions
digested, Heaven and Hell are despised; Sin makes its way through all, and
utterly turns the Soul from the good and right ways of God. Sometimes it does
this subtly by imperceptible degrees, taking off all force of former
impressions from the Spirit, by the Word, sullying Conscience by degrees,
hardening the Heart, and making sensual the Affections by various workings, that
the poor backslider in heart scarce knows what he is doing, until he be come to
the very bottom of all impiety, profaneness, and enmity against God. Sometimes
falling in conjunction with some vigorous temptation, it suddenly, and at once
plunges the Soul into a course of alienation from God, and the profession of
his ways.

2. It takes them off from those hopes of Heaven, which upon their Convictions,
Obedience, and temporary Faith or believing, they had attained. There is a
general hope of Heaven, or at least of the escaping of Hell, of an
untroublesome immortality in the most sottish and stupid Souls in the World,
who either by tradition or instruction from the Word, are persuaded that there
is another state of things to come after this life; but it is in unconvinced,
unenlightened Persons, a dull, senseless, unaffecting thing, that has no other
hold upon them, nor power in them, but only to keep them free from the trouble
and perplexity of contrary thoughts and apprehensions. The matter is otherwise
with them who by the Word are so wrought upon as we have before declared; their
hope of Heaven and a blessed Immortality is oft-times accompanied with great
joys, and exultations, and is a relief unto them, under and against the worst
of their fears and trials; It is such, as they would not part withal for all
the World; and upon all occasions they retreat in their minds unto it, for
comfort and relief.

Now all this by the Power of Sin are they prevailed withal to forgo. Let
Heaven go if it will, a blessed Immortality with the enjoyment of God himself,
Sin must be served, and provision made to fulfill the lusts thereof.

If a Man, in the things of this World, had such a hope of a large Inheritance,
of a Kingdom, as wherein he is satisfied that it will not fail him* but that in
the issue he shall surely enjoy it, and lead an happy and a glorious life in
the possession of it many days; if one should go to him and tell him, It is
true, the Kingdom you look for is an ample and honorable Dominion, full of all
good things desirable, and you may attain it; but come, cast away all hopes and
expectations of it, and come join with Me in the service and slavery of such or
such an oppressing Tyrant. You will easily grant; he must have some strange
bewitching power with him, that should prevail with a Man in his wits to follow
his advice.

Yet thus it is, and much more so in the case we have in hand. Sin it self
cannot deny, but that the Kingdom of Heaven which the Soul is in hope and
expectation of, is glorious and excellent, nor does it go about to convince
him, that his thoughts of it are vain, and such as will deceive him, but
plainly prevails with him to cast away his hopes, to despise his Kingdom that
he was in expectation of, and that upon no other motive but that he may serve
some worldly, cruel, or filthy and sensual lust; Certainly here lies a secret
efficacy, whose depths cannot be fathomed.

3. The Apostle manifests the power of the entanglements of sin in and upon
Apostates, in that it turns them off from the way of righteousness after they
have known it, 2 Pet. 2. 21. It will be found at the last day an evil thing and
a bitter, that Men live all their days in the service of sin, self, and the
World, refusing to make any trial of the ways of God whereunto they are
invited; though they have no experience of their excellency, beauty,
pleasantness, safety, yet having evidence brought unto them from God himself,
that they are so, the refusal of them will, I say, be bitterness in the latter
end. But their condition is yet far worse, who as the Apostle speaks, having
known the way of righteousness, are by the power of Indwelling Sin turned aside
from the holy Commandment. To leave God for the Devil, after a Man has made
some trial of him and his service; Heaven for Hell; after a Man has had some
chearing, refreshing thoughts of it, the fellowship of the Saints, for an
Alehouse or a brothel-house; after a man has been admitted unto their
Communion, and tasted of the pleasantness of it, to leave walking in pure,
clear, straight paths, to wallow in mire, draughts and filth, this will be for
a lamentation; Yet this does sin prevail upon Apostates unto; and that against
all their Light, Conviction, Experiences, Professions, Engagements, or whatever
may be strong upon them to keep them to the known ways of Righteousness.

4. It evinces its strength in them by prevailing with them unto a total
renunciation of God as revealed in Christ, and the Power of all Gospel Truth,
in the Sin against the Holy Ghost. I do not now precisely determine what is the
Sin against the Holy Ghost; nor wherein it does consist. There are different
apprehensions of it; all agree in this; that by it an end is put to all
dealings between God and Man in a way of Grace. It is a sin unto death. And
this does the hardness and blindness of many Men's hearts bring them to; they
are by them at length set out of the reach of Mercy. They choose to have no more
to do with God; and God swears that they shall never enter into his Rest. So
Sin brings forth death. A Man by it, is brought to renounce the End for which
he was made; wilfully to reject the Means of his coming to the enjoyment of
God, to provoke him to his face; and so to perish in his Rebellion.

I have not mentioned these things, as though I hoped by them to set out to the
full the power of Indwelling Sin in unregenerate Men; only by a few Instances I
thought to give a glimpse of it. He that would have a fuller view of it, had
need only to open his eyes, to take a little view of that wickedness which
reigns, yea rages all the World over. Let him consider the prevailing flood
of the things mentioned by Paul to be the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20,
21. that is, among the Sons of Men, in all places, Nations, Cities, Towns,
Parishes; and then let him add thereunto but this one consideration, that the
World, which is full of the steam, filth, and blood of these abominations, as
to their outward actings of them, is a Pleasant Garden, a Paradise, compared to
the heart of Man, wherein they are all conceived, and hourly millions of more
vile abominations, which being stifled in the womb, by some of the ways before
insisted on, they are never able to bring forth to light. Let a Man I say using
the Law for his Light and Rule, take this course, and if he have any spiritual
discerning, he may quickly attain satisfaction in this matter.

And I showed in the entrance of this discourse, how this consideration does
fully confirm the Truth proposed.

CHAP. XVII.
The strength of Sin Evidenced from its Resistance unto the power of the Law.

THE measure of the strength of any Person, or defenced City, may be well taken
from the opposition that they are able to withstand, and not be prevailed
against. If we hear of a City that has endured a long siege from a potent
Enemy, and yet is not taken or conquered, whose walls have endured great
batteries, and are not demolished, though we have never seen the place, yet we
conclude it strong, if not impregnable.

And this Consideration will also evidence the power and strength of
Indwelling-sin; it is able to hold out, and not only to live, but also to
secure its reign and dominion against very strong opposition that is made unto
it.

I shall instance only in the opposition that is made unto it, by the Law,
which is oft-times great and terrible, always fruitless; all its assaults are
born by it, and it is not prevailed against. There are sundry things wherein
the Law opposes it self to sin, and the power of it. As,

First, It discovers it; sin in the Soul is like a secret hectical distemper in
the body; its being unknown and unperceived, is one great means of its
prevalency. Or as Traitors in a Civil State, whilst they lie hid, they
vigorously carry on their design. The greatest part of Men in the World, know
nothing of this sickness, yea death of their Souls. Though they have been
taught somewhat of the doctrine of it, yet they know nothing of its power. They
know it not so, as to deal with it as their mortal Enemy. As a Man, whatever he
be told, cannot be said to know, that he has an^ hectical Fever, if he love
his life, and set no^ himself to stop its progress.

This then the Law does, it discovers this enemy; it convinces the soul that
there is such a traitor harboring in his bosom, Romans 7. 7. I had no^ known
sin but by the Law, for I had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou
shall non covet. I had not known it, that is, fully, clearly, distinctly.
Conscience will somewhat tumultuate about it; bu^ a man cannot know it clearly
and distinctly from thence. It gives a man such a sight of it, as the blind man
had in the Gospel upon the first touch of his eyes, He saw men like trees
walking, obscurely, confusedly; but when the Law comes, th^^ gives the soul a
distinct sight of this indwelling-sin* Again, I had not known it, that is, the
depths o^ it, the root, the habitual inclination of my nature to sin, which is
here called lust; as it is by James, chap. 1. 14. I had not known it, or not
known it to be sin, but by the Law.

This then the Law does, it draws out this Traitor from its secret lurking
places, the intimate recesses of the soul. A man when the Law comes, is no more
ignorant of his enemy; if the will now perish by him, it is openly and
knowingly; he cannot but say that the Law warned him of him, discovered him
unto him, yea, and raised a concourse about him in the soul of various
affections, as an Officer does, that discovers a Thief or Robber, calling out
^or assistance to apprehend him.

Secondly, The Law not only discovers sin, but discovers it to be a very bad
inmate, dangerous, yea, pernicious to the soul. Romans 7. 13. Was then that which
is good (that is, the Law) made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it
might appear sin, working death in me by that which is good, that sin by the
commandment might become exceeding sinful. There are many things in this verse
wherein we are not at present concerned; that which I only aim at, is, the
manifestation of sin by the Law; it appears to be sin; and the manifestation of
it in its own colors; it appears to be exceeding sinful. The Law gives the
soul to know the filth and guilt of this Indwelling-sin, how great they are,
how vile it is; what an abomination, what an enmity to God, how hated of him,
the soul shall never more look upon it as a small matter, what thoughts soever
it had of it before, whereby it is greatly surprised.

As a man that finds himself somewhat distempered, sending for a Physician of
skill, when he comes, requires his judgment of his distemper. He considering
his condition, tells him, Alas, I am sorry for you, the case is far otherwise
with you than you imagine, your disease is mortal, and it has proceeded so far
pressing upon your spirits, and infecting the whole mass of your blood, that I
doubt unless most effectual remedies be used, you will live but a very few
hours.

So is it in this case, a man may have some trouble in his mind and conscience
about Indwelling-sin; he finds all not well, as it should be with him, more
from the effects of sin, and its continual eruptions* than the nature of it,
which he hopes to wrestle withal: but now when the Law comes, that lets the
soul know, that its disease is deadly and mortal, that it is exceeding sinful,
as being the root and cause of all his alienation from God; and thus also the
Law proceeds against it.

Thirdly, The Law judges the person, or lets the sinner plainly know what he
is to expect upon the account of this sin. This is the Laws proper work, its
discovering property is but preparative to its judging. The Law is it self,
when it is in the Throne. Here it minceth not the matter with sinners, as we
use to do one with another, but tells him plainly, Thou art the man, in whom
this exceeding sinful sin does dwell, and you must answer for the guilt of it.
And this, methinks, if any thing, should rouse up a man to set himself in
opposition to it, yea, utterly to destroy it. The Law lets him know that upon
the account of this sin, he is obnoxious to the curse and wrath of the great
God against him; yea, pronounces the sentence of everlasting condemnation upon
him upon that account: abide in this state and perish, is its language. It
leaves not the soul without this warning in this world, and will leave it
without excuse on that account in the world to come.

Fourthly, The Law so follows on its sentence, that it disquiets and affrights
the soul, and suffers in not to enjoy the least rest or quietness in harboring
its sinful inmate. When ever the soul has indulged to its commands, made
provision for it, immediately the Law flies upon it, with the wrath and terror
of the Lord, makes it quake and tremble: It shall h^ve no rest, but is like a
poor beast that has a deadly arrow sticking in its sides, that makes it
restless where ever it is, and whatever it does.

Fifthly, The Law stays not here, but also it slays the soul, Romans 7. 3. that
is, by its conviction of the nature, power, and desert of this indwelling-sin,
it deprives him in whom it is of all that life of self-righteousness and hope,
which formerly he sustained himself withal: It leaves him as a poor, dead,
helpless, hopeless creature. And all this in the pursuit of that opposition
that it makes against this sin. May we not now expect, that the power of it
will be quelled, and its strength broken; that it will die away before these
strokes of the Law of God; but the truth is, such is its power and strength,
that it is quite otherwise; like him whom the Poets feign to be born of the
Earth, when one thought to slay him by casting him on the ground, by every fall
he recovered new strength, and was more vigorous than formerly: So is it with
all the falls and repulses that are given to Indwelling-sin by the Law. For,

First, It is not conquered. A conquest infers two things in respect of the
conquered: First, Loss of Dominion; and, secondly, loss of strength. Where ever
any one is conquered, he is dispoiled of both these. He loses both his
authority and his power. So the strong man armed, being prevailed against, he
is bound, and his goods are spoiled. But now neither of these befalls
Indwelling-sin by the assaults of the Law; it loses not one jot of its
dominion nor strength by all the blows that are given unto it. The Law cannot
do this thing, Romans 8. 3. it cannot deprive sin of its power and d^minion; for
he that is under the L^w is also (...) sin; that is, what ever power the Law
gets upon the conscience of a man, so that he fears to sin, lest the sentence
and curse of it should befall him, yet sin still reigns and rules in his heart.
Therefore says the Apostle, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you,
for you are not under the Law but under Grace; intimating plainly that though a
Person be in never so much subjection to the Authority of the Law, yet that
will not exempt and acquit him from the dominion of sin. Yea, the Law by all
its work upon the Soul, instead of freeing and acquitting it from the reign of
sin, and bondage unto it, does accidentally greatly increase its misery and
bondage; As the sentence of the Judge on the Bench against a Malefactor adds to
his misery. The Soul is under the dominion of sin, and it may be, abides in its
woeful condition in much security; fearing neither Sin nor Judgment. The Law
setting upon him in this condition by all the ways forementioned, brings him
into great trouble and perplexity, fear and terror, but delivers him not at
all. So that it is with the Soul, as it was with the Israelites when Moses had
delivered his Message unto Pharaoh, they were so far from getting liberty by
it, that their bondage was increased, and they found that they were in a very
evil case; Exodus 5. 17. yea and we shall see, that sin does like Pharaoh;
finding its rule disturbed, it grows more outragiously oppressive, and doubles
the bondage of their Souls. This is not then the work of the Law to destroy
sin, or deprive it of that dominion which it has by nature.

Nor does it by all these strokes of the Law lose any thing of its strength. It
continues both its authority and its force; It is neither destroyed, nor
weakened. Yea,

Secondly, It is so far from being conquered, that it is only enraged. The
whole work of the Law, does only provoke and enrage sin; and cause it as it
has opportunity, to put out its strength with more power and vigor and force
than formerly. This the Apostle shows at large, Romans 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

But you will say, Do we not see it by experience; that many are wrought upon
by the preaching of the Law to a relinquishment of many sins, and amendment of
their Lives, and to a great contending against the Eruptions of those other
corruptions which they cannot yet mortify; and it cannot be denied, but that
great is the power and efficacy of the Law, when preached and applied to the
Conscience in a due manner: I answer,

First, It is acknowledged, that very great and effectual is the power of the
Law of God. Great are the effects that are wrought by it; and it shall surely
accomplish every end for which of God it is appointed. But yet the subduing of
sin, is none of its work; it is not designed of God unto that purpose; and
therefore it is no dishonor, if it cannot do that which is not its proper
work, Romans 8. 3.

Secondly, Whatever effects it have upon some, yet we see that in the most,
such is the power and prevalency of sin, that it takes no impression at all
upon them. May you not see every where men living many years in Congregations
where the Law is powerfully preached, and applied unto the Consciences as to
all the ends and purposes for which the Lord is pleased to make use of it, and
not once be moved by it; that receive no more impression from the strokes of
it, than blows with a straw would give to an Adamant. They are neither
convinced by it, nor terrifyed, nor awed, nor instructed, but continue deaf,
ignorant, senless, secure, as if they had never been told of the guilt of sin,
or terror of the Lord. Such as these are Congregations full of, who proclaim
the triumphing power of sin, over the dispensation of the Law.

Thirdly, When any of the Effects mentioned are wrought, it is not from the
power of the letter of the Law, but from the actual efficacy of the Spirit of
God, putting forth his virtue and power for that end and purpose; And we deny
not but that the Spirit of the Lord is able to restrain and quell the power of
lust when he pleases; and some ways whereby he is pleased so to do we have
formerly considered. But,

Fourthly, Notwithstanding all that may be observed of the power of the Law
upon the Souls of Men, yet it is most evident that Lust is not conquered, nor
subdued, nor mortified by it. For,

First, Though the course of sin may be repelled for a season by the
dispensation of the Law, yet the Spring and Fountain of it, is not dried up
thereby, Though it withdraws and hides it self for a season, it is as I have
elsewhere showed, but to shift out of a storm, and then to return again. As a
Travailer, in his way meeting with a violent storm of thunder and rain,
immediately turns out of his way, to some House or Tree for his shelter; but
yet this causes him not to give over his Journey; so soon as the storm is
over, he returns to his way and progress again. So is it with Men in bondage
unto sin: They are in a course of pursuing their lusts; the Law meets with them
in a storm of thunder and lightning from Heaven, terrifies and hinders them in
their way; this turns them for a season out of their course, they will run to
prayer or amendment of life, for some shelter from the storm of wrath which is
feared coming upon their Consciences. But is their course stopped, are their
Principles altered? not at all; so soon as the storm is over, that they begin
to wear out that sense and the terror that was upon them, they return to their
former course, in the service of sin again. This was the state with Pharaoh
once and again.

Secondly, In such seasons sin is not conquered but diverted. When it seems to
fall under the power of the Law, indeed it is only turned into a new channel,
it is not dried up. If you go and set a damm against the streams of a River,
that you suffer no water to pass in the old course and channel, but it breaks
out another way, and turns all its streams in a new course, you will not say
you have dried up that River; though some that come and look into the old
channel may think perhaps that the waters are utterly gone; so is it in this
case; the streams of sin it may be run in open sensuality, and profaneness; in
drunkenness and vitiousness; the preaching of the Law sets a damm against these
course; Conscience is terrified, and the Man dares not walk in the ways
wherein he has been formerly engaged; His Companions in sin not finding him in
his old ways begin to laugh at him, as one that is converted and growing
precise; Professors themselves begin to be persuaded, that the work of God is
upon his heart, because they see his old streams dried up; but if there have
been only a work of the Law upon him, there is a damm put to his course, but
the Spring of sin is not dried up, only the streams of it are turned another
way: It may be the Man is fallen upon other more secret, or more spiritual
sins; or if he be beat from them also, the whole strength of lust and sin will
take up its residence in self-righteousness, and pour out thereby as filthy
streams as in any other way whatever. So that notwithstanding the whole work of
the Law upon the Souls of Men, Indwelling-sin will keep alive in them still,
which is another evidence of its great power and strength.

I shall yet touch upon some other evidences of the same truth, that I have
under consideration; but I shall be brief in them: In the next place then, the
great endeavors of Men ignorant of the Righteousness of Christ for the
subduing and mortifying of sin, which are all fruitless, do evidence the great
strength and power of it.

Men who have no strength against sin, may yet be made sensible of the strength
of sin. The way whereby for the most part they come to that knowledge, is by
some previous sense that they have of the guilt of sin. This Men have by the
Light of their Consciences; they cannot avoid it: This is not a thing in their
choice, whether they will or no, they cannot but know sin to be evil, and that
such an evil that renders them obnoxious to the Judgment of God. This galls
the Minds and Consciences of some so far, as that they are kept in awe, and
d^re not sin as they would. Being awed with a sense of the guilt of sin, and
the terror of the Lord, Men begin to endeavor to abstain from sin, at least
from such sins as they have been most terrified about. Whilst they have this
design in hand, the strength and power of sin begins to discover it self unto
them; They begin to find that there is something in them, that is not in their
own power; for notwithstanding their resolutions and purposes, they sin still;
and that so, or in such a manner, as that their Consciences inform them that
they must therefore perish eternally. This puts them on self-endeavours to
suppress the eruption of sin, because they cannot be quiet unless so they do;
nor have any rest or peace within. Now being ignorant of that only way whereby
sin is to be mortified, that is by the Spirit of Christ, they fix on many ways
in their own strength to suppress it, if not to slay it; as being ignorant of
that only way whereby Consciences burdened with the guilt of sin may be
pacified, that is by the blood of Christ; they endeavor by many other ways to
accomplish that end in vain; for no Man by any self-endeavours can obtain peace
with God. Some of the ways whereby they endeavor to suppress the power of
sin, which casts them into an unquiet condition, and their insufficiency for
that end, we must look into.

First, They will promise and bind themselves by Vows from those sins, which
they have been most liable unto, and so have been most perplexed withal. The
Psalmist shows this to be one great Engine whereby false and hypocritical
Persons do endeavor to extricate and deliver themselves out of trouble and
perplexity; They make Promises to God; which he calls, flutering him with the
lips, Psalm. 78. 36. So is it in this case; being freshly galled with the guilt
of any sin, that by the power of their temptations, they, it may be, have
frequently been overtaken in, they vow and promise, that at least for some such
space of time as they will limit, they will not commit that sin again, and this
course of proceeding is prescribed unto them by some who pretend to direct
their Consciences in this Duty. Conscience of this, now makes them watch over
themselves as to the outward act of the sin that they are galled with; and so
it has one of these two effects; for either they do abstain from it for the
time they have prefixed; or they do not: If they do not, as seldom they do,
especially if it be a sin that has a peculiar root in their nature and
constitution, and is improved by custom into an habit, if any suitable
temptation be presented unto them; their sin is increased, and therewith their
terror, and they are woefully discouraged in making any opposition to sin; and
therefore for the most part after one or two vain attempts, or more it may be,
knowing no other way to mortify sin, but this of vowing against it, and
keeping of that Vow in their own strength, they give over all contests, and
become wholly the servants of sin, being bounded only by outward
considerations, without any serious endeavors for a recovery. Or Secondly,
suppose that they have success in their Resolutions, and do abstain from actual
sins their appointed season; commonly one of these two things ensue; either
they think that they have well discharged their Duty, and so may a little now,
at least for a season, indulge to their corruptions, and lusts, and so are
entangled again in the same snares of sin as formerly; or else they reckon that
their vow and promise has preserved them, and so sacrifice to their own net
and drag, setting up a Righteousness of their own against the grace of God;
which is so far from weakening Indwelling-sin, that it strengthens it in the
root and Principle, that it may hereafter reign in the Soul in security. Or at
the most, the best success that can be imagined unto this way of dealing with
sin, is but the restraining of some outward eruptions of it, which tends
nothing to the weakening of its power; and therefore such persons by all their
endeavors are very far from being freed from the inward toyling, burning,
disquieting, perplexing power of sin. And this is the state of most Men that
are kept in bondage under the power of conviction; Hell, Death, and the Wrath
of God are continually presented unto their Consciences; this makes them labor
with all their strength against that in sin which most enrageth their
Consciences, and most increases their fears; that is the actual eruption of
it; for, for the most part while they are freed from that, they are fafe;
though in the mean time, sin lie tumultuating in and defiling of the heart
continually. As with running fores, outward repelling medicines may skin them
over, and hinder their corruption from coming forth; but the issue of them is,
that they cause them to fester inwardly, and so prove, though it may be not so
noisome and offensive as they were before, yet far more dangero^^ So is it with
this repelling of the power of co^^^ption by Men's Vows, and promises against
it; external eruptions are it may be restrained for a season; but the inward
root and principle is not weakened in the least. And most commonly this is the
issue of this way; that sin having gotten more strength, and being enraged by
its restraint, breaks all its bounds, and captivates the Soul unto all filthy
abominations; which is the Principle as was before observed of most of the
visible Apostasies which we have in the World, 2 Pet. 2. 19, 20.

The Holy Ghost compares sinners, because of the odious, fierce, poisonous
nature of this Indwelling-sin, unto Lions, Bears, and Asps, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8,
9. Now this is the excellency of Gospel Grace, that it changes the Nature and
inward Principles of these otherwise passionate and untamed Beasts, making the
Wolf as the Kid, the Lion as the Lan^, and the Bear as the Cow. When this is
effected, they may safely be trusted in; a little Child may lead them: But
these self-endeavours do not (...) all change the Nature, but restrain their
outwar^ violence: He that takes a Lion, or a Wolf, and shuts him up from
ravening, whilst yet his inward violence remains, may well expect that (...)
one time or other they will break their bonds, and fall to their former ways
of rapine and violence. However, shutting them up, does not as we see, change
their Natures, but only restrain their rag^ from doing open spoil. So it is in
this case; it is Grace alone that changes the heart, and takes away that
poison and fiercerness that is in them by nature; Men's self-endeavours do b^^
coerce them as to some outward eruptions. But,

Secondly, Beyond bare Vows and Promises with some watchfulness to observe them
in a rational use of ordinary means, Men have put, and some do yet put
themselves on extraordinary ways of mortifying sin. This is the foundation of
all that has a show of Wisdom and Religion in the Papacy; their hours of
Prayer, Fastings, their immuring and cloystering themselves, their Pilgrimages,
Penances, and self-torturing Discipline, spring all from this root. I shall not
speak of the innumerable evils that have attended these self-invented ways of
Mortification, and how they all of them have been turned into means, occasions,
and advantages of sinning; nor of the horrible hypocrisy which evidently
cleaves unto the most of their Observers; nor of that superstition which gives
life to them all, being a thing riveted in the natures of some, and their
constitutions, fixed on others by inveterate prejudices; and the same by others
taken up for secular advantages; but I will suppose the best that can be made
of it, and it will be found to be a self-invented design of Men ignorant of the
Righteousness of God, to give a check to this power of Indwelling-sin whereof
we speak. And it is almost incredible, what fearful self-macerations, and
horrible sufferings this design has carried Men out unto: And undoubtedly
their blind zeal and superstition will rise in judgment, and condemn the
horrible sloth and negligence of the most of them to whom the Lord has granted
the saving Light of the Gospel. But what is the end of these things? The
Apostle in brief gives us an account; Romans 9. 31, 32. They attain not the
Righteousness aimed at; they come not up unto a conformity to the Law; sin is
not mortified; no nor the power of it weakened; but what it loses in sensual,
in carnal pleasures, it takes up with great advantage, in blindness, darkness,
superstition, self-righteousness, and soul-pride, contempt of the Gospel, and
the righteousness of it, and reigns no less, than in the most proffigate
sinners in the World.

Lastly, The strength, efficacy and power of this Law of Sin, may be farther
evidenced from its life and in-being in the Soul, notwithstanding the wound
that is given unto it, in the first conversion of the Soul to God; and the
continual opposition that is made unto it by Grace. But this is the subject and
design of another Endeavor.

It may now be expected, that we should here add the especial Uses of all this
discovery that has been made of the Power, Deceit, Prevalency and Success, of
this great Adversary of our Souls. But as for what concerns that Humility,
self-Abasement, Watchfulness, Diligence, and Application unto the Lord Christ
for relief, which will become those who find in themselves by Experience the
power of this Law of Sin, have been occasionally mentioned and inculcated
through the whole preceding Discourse, so for what concerns the actual
Mortification of it, I shall only recommend unto the Reader for his Direction,
another small Treatise written long since unto that purpose, which I suppose he
may do well to consider together with this, if he find these things to be his
Concernment.

To the Only Wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion, and Power,
both Now and Ever. Amen.

FINIS.

