An Advertisment, concerning the Printing and Publishing of Ancient and other
Useful Books.
Whereas diverse Persons of eminent Quality and Learning, have made it their
complaint that several useful and necessary Books are lost to the World, and
never likely to be published, because men of Trade, only intent upon their gain,
will not be at the expense and hazard of such impressions, as chiefly point at
the honor and improvement of knowledge; and endeavor to frustrate the design
lately conceived in this place of publishing from MSS. copies in Libraries,
considerable Writers not yet Printed, and of making more correct and perfect
editions of many of the ancient Fathers and Authors, by collating them with
MSS. copies that have not yet bin considered; and also of bringing down the
excessive price of books, and advancing the Printing manufacture in this
Nation: And whereas we the undertakers for the Press in the University of
Oxford have bin earnestly desired by the said honorable Persons, that we would
effectually proceed in the editions of those books which we have publicly
declared to be ready for the Press, and have propounded others themselves which
they esteem equally desirable: to which our answer was that we are and shall be
always ready to Print whatever Book shall be proposed to us for the public
service, in whatever Language and Faculty it happen to be, and shall take care
for the accurate correction thereof, provided that there shall be certainly
taken off five hundred copies of every book when it is printed: which offer the
said honorable Persons have approved, and have desired that it might be
publicly signified, not doubting but that so many will be found to join with
them as would make up the number required, and free the Press from dependence
upon men of trade, and other hazards; and also open a way for the publishing of
all useful books.

In consideration of the premises, and compliance with the desires above
expressed, we the Undertakers for the Press in the University of Oxford do
publicly offer, tha if twenty five Persons shall please so far to promite this
affair, as to make a correspondence each with twenty Persons, for whom they
will be responsible, that they will join in the before mention's engagement, of
taking off such book or books as they desire to have printed, that then the
edition of the said book or books shall immediately be set in hand with,
according to the direction and appointment of the said five and twenty Persons,
or the major part of them, who shall order the Paper, Character, disposition of
the Work, and price thereof; and the book or books, when finished, shall be
delivered to the hands or order of the said five and twenty Persons, for the
use of themselves, and those whom they correspond with. Which course shall be
continued fromm time to time upon the terms above expressed.

Books in the THEATER Press upon the account of the Undertakers of the
University, besides those set in hand with by M. Pit and his Partners.
JOsephus his Works Gr. Lat. St. Cyprians Works Lat. Ptolemies Harmonics Gr.
Lat. Job. Scotus Erigena of the Division of Nature Lat. Lactantius his Works
Lat. A Comment on Hosea by Dr. Pocock English. The four Evangelists in he
Egyptian Tongue.
Books ready for the Press.
Damascius of the Principles of things Gr. never Printed. Jo. Antiochen. Hist.
Gr. Lat. never Printed. Arabic Proverbs to the number of six thousand, never
Printed. Juchasin, or an account of Learned men among the Jews Heb. and Lat.
The New Testament in Greek diligently revised, and collated with many MSS. not
before met with. The Targum on the Books of Chronicles Heb. and Lat. by Mr.
Sam. Clerk. A Concordance of the Septuagint, according to the Greek Alphabet.
Cesars Commentaries in Lat. revised, and Illustraed with Figures. The Epistles
of Libanius Gr. never Printed. The Saxon Glossary and Etymologicon of Mr.
Francis Junius never Printed. The Letters of Thomas Becket Lat. never yet
Printed. English-Historians in Latin, not yet extant, such as are "The Annals
of England by N. Trivet, with the continuation of Adam Merimuth. "The Annals of
Burton. "The English Chronicle by Peter de Ickham. "The Antiquities of
Glastenbury, by William of Malmsbury. "His fifth Book of Bishops. "The History
of England by Jo. Ross. "The Chronicle of S. Swithins Monastery. "The Annals of
England by Th. Otterburn. "Chron. of the Monastry of Mailrose. "Chron. of
England by Jo. Merilynch. "Chron. of the Monastry of St. Edmund. "The Genealogy
of the Kings of England and Catalogue of Abbots of Glassenbury. "History of
Bishops of Bath and Wells. "The Title of Edward the third to the Kingdom of
France. Several Tracts of Sir Henry Spelman in English never yet Printed.
Commentaries on several Books of the Holy Scripture in English never Printed.
Books making ready for the Press.
Justin Martyr, and other of the Greek Fathers revised in their Text and new
Translated. Several Acts of the Ancient Martyrs, Lat. not yet Printed. Plutarch
and other Classical Greek Writers Collated with MSS. and new Translated.
Several Greek Councils never Printed. The Commentaries of Saadias and other
Robbins on part of the H. Bible in Arabic, net yet Printed. Math. Quaestor
against the Latins or Roman Church, Gr. never Printed. The Ancient
Mathematicians; as Euclid. Archimedes, Apollonius, Pappus, Serenus etc. Gr. and
Lat. Collated with MSS. some of them never ye Printed. Heraclius the Emperor's
Astronomy Gr. and Lat. never Printed. Vettius Valens Astrol. Gr. and Lat. never
Printed. Cyrills Gloss. Gr. never Printed. The Ancient Greek Grammarians; as
"Herodian his Epitome of the 20 Books of Theodosius, never Printed.
"Chaeroboscus his Canons never Printed. "Porphyries Gram. never Printed.
"Herodians Scholia on Homer, never Printed. "Several Scholia on the Greek Poets
not yet Printed.
The Poliorcetics of Athenaeus, Bito and others, never Printed. The Misna Heb.
and Lat. Dionys. Exig. as it supposed, his Catena on the Epistles of S. Paul in
Syriac, never Printed. Abdollatiph Ebn Yuseph Bagdadensis Arab. and Lat. of
things remarkable in Egypt. Abulfedas Geogr. Arab. and Lat. never Printed. The
Liturgy of the Coptites in the Egyptian Tongue. The Psalter in the Egyptian
Tongue. The Writers of the British History many of which were never Printed. or
not in the Volume put forth at Frankford. A Grammar of the Malaian Tongue. The
Saxon Homilies. The Saxon Chronicle, and other Writers of the Saxon History, a
great part of which never Printed. The Saxon and English Laws, till Acts of
Parliament, many of which never Printed. The Writers of the English History put
forth by Sr. Henry Savil and others Collated with better Copies, and
exceedingly much corrected. Jo. Lelands Works several of which never yet
Printed. Lives of eminent Persons both Foreigners and English, many of which
never Printed. Several Latin Classical Writers Collated with MSS. and
illustrated with Annotations.

