A Short and Plain ANSWER TO TWO QUESTIONS:

I. Where was your Religion before Luther?

II. How know you the Scriptures to be the Word of God?

By a Protestant.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Jonathan Hutchinson Bookseller in the City of
Durham. 1682.

SIR,
I Have received your Letter, wherein you seem to be at a loss for a ready and
pertinent Answer to Two capping Questions, by which the Papists are wont to
puzle and confound those silly Souls, whom they compass Sea and Land to make
Proselites. I know you are well satisfied, that Popery is a grand Cheat, upheld
by fraud and violence, and has nothing truly Rational to Recommend it: But yet
sometimes a Man of honesty and good Principles may be at a stand to render a
satisfying Reason of his Belief, and to obviate the cunning Craftiness of
those, who lie in wait to deceive. I suppose moreover you cannot expect any
thing from me, but what has been said before, and what is infinitely better
performed in some hundreds of Printed Books already extant, than any Scribbling
of mine will ever amount unto. But yet since Men oftimes make most use of those
Reasons, which arise in their own Minds, by thinking and Meditation; I shall,
for my own satisfaction, rather than for yours, note down, as briefly and
plainly as I can, such Answers to those two Questions you mention, as shall at
present occur to my Thoughts; which nevertheless I shall communicate to you, if
perhaps they may be worth your Acceptance. The first is,

Where was your Religion before Luther?
To this the Answer will be very short and easy, but then it will cast the
whole stress of the Business upon the later Question. I say then, That our
Religion, as to the Rules and Principles of it, was before Luther, where it
has been ever since, in the Scriptures: And as to the Profession of it, it
has been owned and maintained by the Faithful in all Ages, namely, such as
have been kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation, against whom
the Gates of Hell and Rome have not been able to prevail. The Protestant
Religion, we contend for, is nothing else, but Christianity uncorrupted, which
was in its greatest purity before ever the Pope was heard of in the World. And
Popery, that we oppose, is Christianity adulterated, or rather Paganism
Christianized, which was in the Cradle when the Mystery of Iniquity began to
work, and grew up to be the Man of Sin, when Popes had gulled the World into so
much Slavery, as to endure their trampling upon Princes. And this truth, as it
appears in great measure from the Fathers and Historians of the Church, and
from all Antiquity, that has had the good fortune to escape the Expurgatory
Index; so it is more especially, and most evidently manifest from the
Scriptures, which makes way for the second Question, which is the main Subject
of this Epistle, namely,

How know you the Scriptures to be the Word of God?
With this Question chiefly, they think to undo the simpler sort of Heretics,
as they are pleased to speak; and it is not impossible but some weak and
unsteady Minds may be shaken by it. For since we never heard God vocally
pronounce it, nor ever saw him deliver it unto the World, as his Act and Deed;
they would have us so easy and credulous as to believe, that there is no way
to be assured of its being his Word, but upon the Authority of the Church, and
that no Church but theirs, can have that Authority. But this Plea, is as far
from satisfying an inquisitive Mind, as my Arguments are like to be from
convincing our Adversaries. Now, if any unlearned, well meaning Person, shall
happen to be attackt by this, or any such like Question, and shall doubt of his
own ability, to repel the Sophistry, whereby they are wont to manage their
needy Cause: I should advise him to deal with them, as our Savior sometime did
with the captions and impertment Jews; namely, to answer their Question by
asking another. As, Who gave you Authority to call in question the Scriptures?
How dare you insinuate doubts into any Christians mind concerning the Truth and
Authority of that Book, which is the Rule of our Duty both to God and Man? Away
with these too curious Questions, of which a Fool may ask more than a Wise Man
can tell how to answer. It argues a desperate Cause, and a Religion highly
suspicious, that cannot be maintained otherwise, than by such Pleas, as tend to
make Men Atheists.

But though it be safe and prudent for some People to put them off in this
manner, yet without any tergiversation, I shall address my self to answer
directly, so soon as I have propounded a Query or two, which, I think, will
tend to introduce an Answer to this grand Question of theirs. I demand
therefore of our Adversaries, How they know that the Sun shines, or, that there
are any Bodies in the World? Why may not all the Objects we discern about us,
be certain Phantasms only, or Apparitions of the Brain, which have no real
Existence in Nature? Or, how come we to be assured, that our whole Life is any
more than a Dream? For since in our Dreams, we verily believe the truth and
reality of such things, as we laugh at when we are awake: Why may we not
hereafter awake into another State of Life, in which we shall conclude our Life
past, to have been a mere shadow?

If they will answer these Enquiries, according to the Nature of their own
Principles, then, all the proof we are to expect, is only this: We have heard
many People say this and the other; Or, Thus we have been taught by our Parents,
or by our Tutors and Governors; and we believe them, and trouble our selves no
further. In this manner they would have us to speak in the Case of the
Scriptures. They will not allow us to expect, or to endeavor, any Rational
satisfaction in the point; it is enough if we can but gape so wide, as to
swallow that Trojan Horse of Papal Authority. But verily we are not yet
persuaded to make our selves Brutes, for the Catholic Cause; that is, we are
unwilling to lay aside our own Senses and Humane Faculties, to commit the whole
Reason and Conduct of our Lives to he said and she said.

And surely he that should pretend to dispute, and yet so palpably beg the
Question, would gain to be laughed at instead of a Conclusion. Upon supposition
therefore, that they would be a little more Philosophical and Gentile, in
answering my Questions, in case they were propounded to them; I will endeavor
the like, according to my small skill, in answer to theirs. And that I may deal
as civilly as I can, I shall insist particularly, upon none but the first,
between which and this Question of theirs, I will run a Parallel, and attempt
to show, that by the same Arguments they will prove that the Sun gives Light, I
will prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God.

In the first place then I shall consider what would be said by our
Adversaries, in Answer to those extravagant Questions, I mentioned even now;
and if I mistake their Sense in this matter, I pray do you inform me better by
the next opportunity; For I seldom come in their Company, and when I do, if
they forbear, I am not forward to raise Disputes. I suppose therefore they
would tell me, That these Questions are about such things, as all the World
takes for granted upon the Evidence of Sense, and the uniform Experience of all
Ages; that thus to deny Principles, were to turn Sceptick, and so take the
ready way never to come to any Conclusion; just as if one that pretended to the
Mathematics, should deny the Definitions and Postulata of Geometry, which have
endured the Test of most Ages, and, as the common Notions and Sentiments of
Mankind, have bid defiance to all Exceptions. Who would trouble his head to
Argue with such a Person, as should deny that two and three make five, or that
the whole is bigger than the half? We find by daily experience, and no body can
persuade us to the contrary, that when the Sun is above the Horizon we can see
our way before us, the Objects that are about us, and how to do our business,
which in the dark we cannot do. If any Man walk in the day, (says our Savior)
he stumbleth not; Why? Because he sees the light of this World; he needs not
that any Man should tell him it is light, he sees it himself, and his own sight
is beyond all other Men's Arguments. But if a Man walk in the dark, he
stumbleth; and when Night comes, Men cannot work. So that these Questions you
propound, are altogether unquestionable; (1.) From the undeniable Evidence of
our Senses; (2.) From the clearest inferences of Reason; And (3.) From the
universal acknowledgment of Mankind.

In this manner I presume, they would answer my Queries, nor do I know any
better way: And just thus it is in the Case before us; for, from these very
grounds it will appear, that the Scriptures have proceeded from God. The Sun
does not more plainly direct our Steps, than the Scriptures do our Lives and
Actions. The first enlightens our Natural, and the latter, our Moral walking.
The one makes us discern the Creatures that are about us, the other teaches how
to use them to our greatest Comfort, and highest Advantage. By the one we may
conclude there is a God, as he is knowable by the things that are made; by the
other we are instructed what to think of Him, and how to behave our selves in
reference to Him, and to our Neighbor. The Scriptures are a Lamp unto our
Feet, and a Light unto our Ways; and whilst we take heed thereunto we walk
securely, and never fail to find the benefit thereof; but when we forsake their
Conduct, we fall into a thousand Errors and mischiefs, oftimes discovered to
our outward Senses, in the discomposure of our Bodies, and detriment of our
Estates; often too in the trouble, and disorder of our Minds, and not seldom in
both these respects at once.

As for Example, the Scripture Commands us to live soberly, to love our
Neighbor, to feed the hungry, to forgive injuries, and to deal justly with all
Men. And what are the consequences of our Obedience in these things? Why these,
some sleep, a healthful Body, a peaceful Soul, a cheerful Life, Bread to eat,
the love of Neighbors, the Prayers of the Poor, and a kind of universal
Respect and deference, which virtue does command wherever it comes. But then
our Disobedience to these Precepts is usually followed with restless Nights,
racking Pains, anxious Thoughts, scaring Dreams, trembling fears, perplexing
doubts, the hatred of some, the Curses of others, and the just condemnation of
all. It Is true, there are some reserved Cases; God does sometimes try a
virtuous Soul with Afflictions, and often makes a Soul virtuous by Afflictions:
He does again sometimes feed the Epicure unto the day of Slaughter, and court
the Vicious by Temporal Enjoyments to reclaim them. Yet, in the mean time, the
Good are born up with peace of Mind, and expectation of a Crown; and the Wicked
are busied in stupefying their Senses to abate the Sting of Conscience and fear
of Hell.

But not withstanding these reserved Cases, I dare adventure to affirm, that
there is not any thing in the World, whereof I am more certain, than that the
Scripture is a most excellent Rule for the Government of my Life and Actions;
and the ground of this Assurance, in a great measure is taken from Sense. I am
no more assured that the Sun shines, or the Fire warms, than I am, that my
Conformity to the Scriptures is highly advantageous to me. The Sun is not more
necessary to the being of Mankind, than the Scriptures are to his well-being.
The one gives natural Life and light to the Creation, the other enlightens the
Mind, and teaches how to manage our Lives, and the Blessings thereof, to the
best purpose. Without the first the World would be a Chaos, without the later
it would be a kind of Hell. Now the very first step of Reason, infers the
Conclusion: For, from whence should such a Treasure of Wisdom and Truth
proceed, but from the inexhaustible Fountain of all Goodness, God Almighty?

And let any Man in the World (unto whose hands Divine Providence shall bring
it) carefully peruse that Book, and consider well the vast Stock of Wisdom, the
immense Treasures of Love and Bounty therein contained; Let him observe the
excellent Rules it propounds, so fitted for all purposes and occasions of
Humane Life, that an universal Conformity to it, would make Heaven upon Earth;
Let him mark how all the Disorders and Miseries, Contentions and Bloodshed in
the World, proceed from Men's disobedience thereunto, and do Constitute the
formal Reason of Hell it self; And in a word, let him observe, that whatever he
does well, and which afterward leaves him a grateful Relish and easiness of
Mind, is done according to the Precepts of that Book; and whatever he does
amiss, which leaves a Sting and Poison behind it, is nothing else but a
deviation from that Rule: I say, Let him but diligently read, and impartially
consider these things, and he can be no better assured, that there is a God,
who is Good and Wise, Merciful and Just, than that the Holy Scriptures are the
Result of his Goodness and Mercy, toward the Sons of Men; and that they do
contain a declaration of his Mind with respect unto us, and the Rule of our
Duty in relation to him.

Why might not our Adversaries demand of us, how we come to be certain, that
God is Righteous and the Devil Wicked? Is it lest the Question should recur
upon themselves? For since so many of their holy Fathers, have been so
Flagicious, as History makes mention, and since Villainy is so far Patronized by
their Church, that the blackest Criminals in that Communion, are oftimes
Canonized for the greatest Saints: One would be apt to suspect, they Worship no
other Deity but the Pope, and that whilst they pronounce his Holiness, the
secret Reservation may be, his Wickedness.

I have heard indeed of a Pope that made this Question, unless perhaps it were
spoken by way of Exclamation; Quantum lucri ista fabula de Christo nobis
peperit! And this seems to be the proper language of that Church: For if they
did believe the New Testament to be ought but a Fable, they could not allow
those Doctrines and Practices, that are every where visible amongst them. For I
reckon, that imposing upon the Conscience things unrevealed, and beyond all
possibility of belief, upon no less penalty than the Inquisition here, and
Damnation hereafter, is the very next door to Infidelity and Atheism. How can
he be said to believe the Truth, that would force another to believe a Lie? So
that whilst our Adversaries would seem to question the grounds upon which we
assent unto the Scriptures; it is more than probable, they themselves do not
believe them at all.

I nothing doubt, for all that, but there are within the Romish Church,
thousands of pious and devout Souls, whose Education and other unhappy
Circumstances, God will in great Mercy consider; and, though under gross Error
and much Ignorance, will bring them through the power of his Grace unto
Salvation. If their Foundation be upon the Rock, though they have built thereon
Hay and Stubble, they may indeed suffer loss, but shall escape utter Ruin. I
think too there are amongst them, some Learned Men, as the Jansenists, and
perhaps some others, whose Lives and Principles are far better than the rest,
and who by an odd kind of fatality preserve their Station in that Church.
These, if they pursue their own Rules and Practice according to what they
Write, shall not (I hope) smart with the rest, when God comes to visit their
iniquity. But as for those designing Men, whose business it is to pry into the
Cabinets of Princes, and to influence the Affairs of Kingdoms for the advantage
of the Catholic Cause; who though Priests, affect to be Ministers of State,
not of Jesus Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World; they whose Gospel is
Fire and Sword, and their glad tidings of Salvation some Bloody Massacre; whose
Faith is in the Pope, and whose Heaven it is, to be Courted and Canonized by a
Scarlet Whore: I look upon these to be a Generation of the vilest Wretches that
ever the Earth bore, and in a far worse condition than Turks or Pagans. And yet
these are the Men that would have me receive the Scriptures upon their Credit,
who are the great Shame and Discredit of that Holy Christian Religion contained
therein, and whose Lives are one entire contradiction thereunto.

I suppose it will not be denied, that, had we no inspired Writings at all to
direct us, there were nevertheless many reasons to believe the Being of God.
Scarce any People under Heaven so brutish, as not to have some impressions of a
Deity. Scarce any Person in the World so profligate, as not to have some checks
of Conscience: Besides what Arguments may be drawn from the Beauty of
Providence and Harmony of the Creation. Now the very Notion of a God includes
Goodness, and the Notion of Goodness supposes a God: One is the Stream, the
other is a Fountain. Let any Man try how he can fancy the Stream that should
proceed from no Original Fountain at all. It is not imaginable sure, that any
Creature should be in the World, or that good things should be bestowed upon
any Creature, but they must proceed from some Original, and that can be nothing
else but God blessed for ever. From whence I argue thus; If the invisible
things of him, from the Creation, be clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, much more may the visible Characters of Divine Goodness,
every where evident in the Scriptures, be clearly concluded to be from God.

Will any man object and say, Where are those visible Characters of Divine
Goodness contained in the Scriptures? Many People cannot see them. True indeed,
and there are some too that cannot see the Sun, but then they are blind, and
cannot see any thing at all. The Sun illuminates the material visible World,
and the Scripture gives us a prospect of a Spiritual World, and lets us see
things Divine; but then we must have Eyes, and if we complain of darkness in
the Meridian light, where is the fault? Now if any Man will say, he can see no
marks nor footsteps of Divine Goodness in the Scriptures; I would ask him,
whether health and vigor of body, whether easiness and pleasure of Mind, are
good things or not? And whether he would choose to lie upon a Rack, or a Bed of
Roses? Or suppose a Man by his own default, and wilfulness in going astray, be
fallen into a Pit, where he is certain either to be stung with Vermin, or to
die by wild Beasts, or famish to Death; Would he not account it a kindness, not
only to be delivered from the present danger, but conducted throughout the
remainder of his journey, in such a way, as is both safe and easy? If he
answer in the Affirmative, he yields the Cause; if he deny, he must be a Mad
Man, past all sense of understanding of good or evil. Now if I pursue our
Adversaries to the Gates of Bedlam, they must excuse me, if I there bid
farewell, and follow them no further. The sum is this; That which teaches us
the best way imaginable, to preserve health in our Bodies and peace in our
Souls, to live comfortably at Home and profitably to our Neighbors, to Honor
our Creator and know our selves, to avoid Misery and attain Happiness, must
needs be an excellent Rule, very much for our good, and must proceed from the
true Fountain of all Goodness. But such is the Scripture, therefore it is the
Word of God.

Thus far I have considered the Scripture, in reference chiefly to its Utility;
Let us now observe it a little with respect to its Verity: For sometimes it
happens, that a thing may be useful, which yet is not exactly true; As for
Example, Decimal Arithmetic resolves a Question speedily, but not altogether
exactly; yet it will come so near the truth, as not to miss the 10000th. part
of a Farthing. And a Clock will follow the Motion of the Sun for a weeks time,
with the Error only of some few Minutes; but neither the one nor the other in
strictness of speech can be said to be true, though both are very useful. But
now, if the Scriptures appear to be both useful in the highest degree, and
infallibly true, it must needs speak the very great Perfection of those Sacred
Writings. They may be distinguished into four parts according as they contain,

1. Things related, or matter of History; 2. Things foretold, or matter of
Prophecy; 3. Things to be done, as matter of Action, or Duty; 4. Things to be
believed, or matter of Faith.
As for the Historical part of that Book, how has it bidden defiance to Time
to discover any just Exception! Nay, even the Enemies of Truth, have owned and
confirmed the matters of Fact therein contained. And many profane Writers, who
either knew not of, or have not rightly acknowledged the Scriptures, have
nevertheless inserted into their own Stories, the same things therein
contained, as is well known, and has been often observed by those that look into
Books. And though the Divine History bears such Authority and Majesty in its
Style, that it needs not the Confirmation of Profane ones; yet the Testimony
of Adversaries against themselves, is always considerable.

And has not much of the Prophetic part been verified to the amazement of all
those that duly consider it? How many, and how punctually were the Prophesies,
concerning our Redemption by Christ? How plain was that, concerning the Type
thereof, namely, Isreal's deliverance from Egyptian Slavery, Genesis 15. verse 13,
14. and yet how wonderfully fulfilled, many hundreds of Years after they were
foretold? But I am not at leisure to enlarge upon these things, many Learned
Men have done it, more especially the incomparable Sir Charles Wolseley.

And then for the Preceptive part, containing Rules of Life and Manners, it is
so Rooted in the Nature of things, so obvious to Sense, so agreeable to Reason,
so beneficial to the World, and so confirmed by the Experience of all Men,
whose Faculties are not depraved, That Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before
one jot or tittle thereof shall fail, or be found deficient.

Lastly, The Divine Mysteries therein revealed, as the Doctrine of the Trinity,
the Incarnation of the Blessed Jesus, etc. though they are above our Capacity,
to explain the Nature of them, yet are they so suitable to Gods Goodness, and
do make such a Harmony of Divine Attributes, that Reason it self, will rather
from thence infer the truth of their being, than that they cannot be, because
we understand not the manner how they are. How could God be Just, if Justice
were not satisfied? And could be Merciful, if all Men were to be damned; How
could lost Man Redeem himself? Or, how could he be saved, if he should suffer
for himself? But now in the Person of our Blessed Redeemer, the Law is
satisfied, Justice is done, and even thereby, Mercy does the more eminently
appear; God is glorified, and Man is not left to perish in his iniquity. If a
Man will be so morose as to urge, that Three in one, Eternal Generations, a
Virgins Conception, and the like, sound so harsh to Humane understanding, that
they cannot be true: He may after the same rate conclude, that there is no such
thing as Humane Generation, since the Nature and process thereof, is very
obscurely, if at all understood. That there are no Souls, because it is not yet
agreed, whether they are immediately Created of God, or they are Ex traduce, or
Pre-existent. No such thing as Milk in a Woman's Breast, since Anatomists are
confounded with difficulties to find what Matter it is made of, or by what
secret Channels conveyed thither: In so much that one very Learned Writer in
that Faculty, flies to the force of Imagination to produce it. No such thing as
Quantity, because no Man ever yet could demonstrate unexceptionably, whether it
be infinitely divisible, or ultimately resolvable into indivisibles. No Bodies
in the World, since no Man knows what kind of Original Particles they are made
of. These and many things more, as to the manner how they are, have
difficulties attending them, which are insuperable and incomprehensible. And
methinks it is somewhat hard, that we should do things our selves, and see many
things before our Eyes, of which we can give no tolerable account, and should
yet think, that God cannot do somewhat more than we can apprehend; and should
be so inclinable to reject even God himself, his Word, and all his Works of
Wonder, if they will not accommodate themselves to our little understandings.

From these considerations, and many more, that will occur to any impartial
thinking Man, it does appear beyond all possibility of doubting, that the
Scripture is most certainly true; and if so, it must be the Word of God; for it
testifies of it self, that it is given by Divine Inspiration. Never did any
Book contain so much Wisdom, Kindness, and Usefulness to the Sons of Men as it
does. Sum up the whole World together, except the Bible and what is taken out
of it, and the Total will neither afford you half so many Excellent Rules, and
Observations, for the government of Men's Lives, nor one thousand part of that
clear discovery of Divine Truth, which that Book contains. Shall we now say,
that this Book is a Forgery, a Cheat and Imposture of the Devil? For so it must
be, if it be not the Word of God. And what follows? Why, that a Corrupt Tree
brings forth good Fruit, and that most pure and wholesome Streams proceed from a
putrid Fountain. That truth is falsehood, that good is evil, and that light is
darkness. He that denies the Scriptures to be the Word of God, must quit his
Sense, his Reason, and his Conscience, that he may admit of these Conclusions.

To which it may be added, That all the malicious and cunning Adversaries of
God and true Religion; all the Pagans, Popes, and Hellish Apostates; all the
Devils themselves, and their incarnate Brethren the Jesuits, with all their
Subtilty and Contrivance, have not been able to destroy nor discredit that
Book: No, nor to Corrupt it neither, in any such degree, but that still there
remains good Copies thereof in several Languages. And though there may be
deficiency and Humane frailty, in some Readings and Versions, as to some
particular words, yet is not that any blemish unto, or diminution of the Beauty
and Excellency of the whole, but may rather teach us to value it the more: For
since neither the failings of some, nor the fraud of others has availed in
Sixteen hundred years, to do any substantial damage to that Book, it is a
convincing Argument, that Divine Providence has been engaged for it is
preservation.

If it should be here objected, That since there are so many various Readings
of the Scriptures, it may be doubtful which of them is the best: I readily
grant it, but then there can be no doubt, but that every one of them, for the
main Substance of it, is the Word of God. Let us suppose Religio Medici to be
turned into several Laguages; there may be diverse faults in every one of them,
as is observed to be in the Latin Copy, and some of them very gross ones: But,
will any body from thence infer, that Sir Tho. Brown is not the Author? For
though indeed he is not the Author of those Errors, wherein the true Sense of
some particular Words is mistaken: Yet since they are not such, nor so many, as
to evacuate the design and scope of the Book, much less to denominate the whole
Work from the Translator; I may say, with good Propriety of speech, that that
Book was written by the Learned Sir T. Brown, though I should find the same in
Latin or French, and had never seen the Original English. Thus I scruple not
to say, the Rhemists Translation is the Word of God. That is, for the
Substance, and main Purpose of it, it is not so spoiled as to lose the Nature
of Divine Truth, but is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction in Righteousness: And, to such as cannot procure a better, it
may doubtless be sufficient to make them Wise unto Salvation. But I intend not
in the mean time, to Entitle God Almighty to the failings or frauds of that
Version, or of any other.

The Errors that have been occasioned from various Copies taken, and
Translations made, are either of Infirmity or Knavery. As for this latter, I
suppose it cannot be proved, that ever any Person was so audacious, as to
attempt the palpable Corruption of the Scriptures, until the Aspiring Popes had
set up an infallible Chair at Rome, a Court only fit to protect such
Undertakings, because indeed it could not be supported without them. So that in
the Primitive Times, the Errors which have crept into the Bible, have been
first, only such failings as have escaped unawares in the Transcribing thereof:
And secondly, afterward, when it came to be Translated into other Languages,
some difficulty and contest could not choose but arise, about the rendering such
words as were of various, and doubtful signification, from which I believe
there are very few Languages entirely free. Now I say, it was impossible that
both these together, whilst Men were sincere and honest, should ever stifle or
quench the Divine Spirit which breaths every where in those Sacred Writings,
And we may reasonably suppose, that the Christian Church was stockt with a
competent number of good Copies, before the Mystery of Iniquity came to such a
height, as to attempt the wilful depravation of the Scriptures.

Two things are considerable in this matter; First, That in the Infant State of
Christianity, Believers were cordial, and in good earnest, about the business
of Religion. The power of Godliness prevailed, and those who called themselves
Christians, were really such; nor had they yet learned those Crafts of Cousnage
and Deceit, which afterward, the Mystery of Iniquity furnished the World
withal. And therefore they would be careful, in the highest degree, to
Transmit faithful Copies of those precious Papers unto Posterity: A Duty more
especially incumbent on them, who had the keeping of the true Originals.
Secondly, That God Almighty, having by the Holy Ghost inspired his Penmen, to
deliver his Mind unto the World, it is not likely, that he should relinquish
the same, to perish in the hands of ignorant or wicked Men: For since the
Blessed Spirit did so manifestly appear in it, Divine Providence was sure to
guard it, and will doubtless secure it to the end of the World.

These inducements, with others of like nature, are sufficient I count, to
convince any Man, unto whose hands the Bible shall come, that it does contain
the words of Eternal Life: For it carries that Self-evidencing Light, that
Majestic plainness, that unaffected Gravity, and substantial Utility
throughout the whole; that no Man, who will but consider, can possibly doubt of
its Original. And though Men's Corruptions may prevail so far with them, as to
make them pretend at least, to call in question the Being of God, as well as
the Truth of his Word: Yet it shall certainly operate upon them so far, as to
leave them without excuse. I do not believe, that Nature ever yet produced so
profligate a Wretch, but would be sensible of some reluctance and grief, to see
his Child murdered, his House fired, and have his Limbs torn asunder, without
any just cause or provocation given. But if these things have no evil in them,
why should any body be grieved at them? If they have, why should any one do the
like to his Neighbor? Now, if Men ought not to do wrong in one respect, no
more ought they to do it in any other: From whence ought to follow the
universal rectitude of all our actions. And where are there such Rules of
Equity and Righteousness as the Scriptures afford, teaching us to do unto
others, as we would that they should do unto us? The faithful observation of
which short Precept, would confine Astrea to this lower World, and yet banish
all her Courts, as being useless: It would set such a face on things, as would
far exceed all the imaginary beauties of the Golden Age. From whence now should
this proceed, but from the Fountain of all Righteousness, God Almighty?

There is yet a further means of assurance, that the Scriptures are the Word of
God, namely, from the evidence of the Spirit bearing witness in our
Consciences, to the truth of those things contained in our Bibles; of which
there is a Counter-part written in our Hearts, and attested by the Holy Ghost.
There are indeed many false Spirits, and many vain pretenses to the true one;
yet a measure thereof is given to every Child of God, and promised to all
those, that seek it with sincerity and perseverance. Now I say this Evidence of
the Spirit, wherever it is, does fill the Mind with assurance and satisfaction,
about Divine Truth, beyond all Arguments: It is so convincing, that St. Paul
calls it a Demonstration. And though perhaps it may not have that force to
those who deride it in others, and stifle its motions in their own Breasts,
(for neither is Geometrical Demonstration of force to them that understand it
not) yet to a mind enlightened by it, and brought under the power of it, the
Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit, is beyond all other Arguments and
Demonstrations whatsoever.

To sum up all, we need not to go to a Corrupt and Adulterous Church, to have
its Authority and Imprimatur stamped upon our Bibles, from whence on the
contrary it ought to derive its own Authority: And it will one day sink under
the weight and force of those Laws and Precepts, which it now vainly pretends
to Authorize. I say then, the Scriptures are known to be the Word of God beyond
all possibility of mistake or dubitation, by Evidence of Sense, by Arguments of
Reason, and by Demonstration of the Spirit.

This (Sir) is all, I shall trouble you with in this Matter, till either I have
your Objections, or some further opportunity of discovering my Zeal to serve
you, according to the utmost of my power.

I am Sir, etc.

FINIS.
These Books following to be Sold by Jonathan Hutchinson in Durham.
Folio.
DR. Hammond 's Annotation on the New Testament.

H. Grotii Opera omnia Theologica 4 vol. 1679.

Eusebii, Socratis, Sozomeni, Theodoriti and Evagrii Historia Ecclesiast Gr.
Lat. notis Hen. Valesii 3 vol. Mogunt. 1672 -- 77 -- 79.

Bishop Tailor 's Course of Sermons for all the Sundays in the Year.

-- His Ductor Dubitantium, or Rule of Conscience.

Quarto.
Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism.

Dr. Donns Pseudo Martyr.

Rogers on the Thirty nine Articles of the Church of England.

Octavo.
Dr. Combars Exposition of the Book of Common Prayer, 4 Parts.

Dr. Hammond 's Practical Catechism.

Bishop Morton of Episcopacy.

Dr. Basire of Sacrilege Arraigned and Condemned by St. Paul.

Twelves.
Dr. Breviul on the Sacrament.

Bishop Cousins Devotions.

THE END.

