A GUIDE TO Church Fellowship and Order. According to the Gospel-Institution:
WHEREIN These following Particulars are distinctly handled:

I. The Necessity of Believers to join themselves in Church Order, II. The
Subject Matter of the Church. III. The Continuation of a Church State, and of
the Administration of Evangelical Ordinances of Worship, briefly vindicated.
IV. What sort of Churches the Disciples of Christ may, and ought to join
themselves unto, as unto Entire Communion.
By the Late Pious and Learned Minister of the Gospel, John Owen, D. D.

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, etc.

London, Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street, 1692.

A GUIDE TO Church Fellowship and Order, According to the Gospel-Institution.
CHAP. I. The Necessity of Believers to join themselves in Church Order.
IT is the Duty of every Believer, of every Disciple of Christ, to join
himself, for the due and orderly observation and performance of the Comm^nds of
Christ, unto the Glory of God, and their own Edification, Ma^th. 28.18, 19, 20.

This in general is gr^nted by all sorts and Parties of men; the grant of it,
is the ground whereon they stand in the management of their mutual fe^ds in
Religion, pleading that men ought to be of, or join themselves unto this or
that Church, still supposing that it is their Duty to be of one or another.

Yea, it is granted also that Persons ought to choose what Churches they will
join themselves unto, wherein they may have the best advan^age unto their
Edification and Salvation. They are to choose to join themselves unto that
Church which is in all things most according to the mind of God.

This it is supposed is the Liberty and Duty of every Man; for if it be not so,
it is the foolishest thing in the World, for any to attempt to get others from
one Church unto another; which is almost the whole business of Religion, that
some think themselves concerned to attend unto.

But yet notwithstanding these Concessions, when things come to the ^ri^l in
particular, there is very little g^anted in compliance with the Assertion laid
down. For besides that it is not a Church of Divine Institution, that is
intended in these Concessions, when it comes unto the issue, where a Man is
born, and in what Church he is Baptized in his Infancy, there all choice is
prevented, and in the Communion of that Church he is to abide, on the penalties
of being esteemed and dealt with as a Schismatic. In what National Church any
person is baptized, in that National Church he is to continue, or answer the
contrary at his peril. And in the Precincts of what Parish his Habitation falls
to be, in that particular Parish Church is he bound to Communicate in all
Ordinances of Worship. I say, in the judgment of many, whatever is pretended of
men's j^yning themselves unto the truest and purest Churches, there is no
Liberty of Judgment or Practice in either of these things left unto any of the
Disciples of Christ

Wherefore the Liberty and Duty proposed, being the Foundation of all orderly
Evangelical Profession, and that wherein the Consciences of Believers are
greatly concerned, I shall lay down one Proposition wherein it is asserted, in
the sense I intend, and then fully confirm it.

The Proposition it self is this:

It is the duty of every one who professes Faith in Christ Jesus, and takes
due care of his own Eternal Salvation, voluntarily and by his own choice to
join himself unto some particular Congregation of Christ's Institution, for his
own Spiritual Edification, and the right discharge of his Commands.

1. THIS Duty is prescribed (1.) unto them only who profess Faith in Christ
Jesus, who own themselves to be his Disciples, that call Jesus Lord. For this
is the method of the Gospel, that first men by the Preaching of it be made
Disciples, or be brought unto Faith in Christ Jesus, and then be taught to do
and observe whatever he commands, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. first to believe, and
then to be added unto the Church, Act. 2.41, 42, 46, 47. Men must first join
themselves unto the Lord, or give up themselves unto him, before they can give
up themselves unto the Church, according to the mind of Christ, 2 Cor. 8.5. We
are not therefore concerned at present as unto them, who either not at all
profess Faith in Christ Jesus, or else through ignorance of the Fundamental
Principles of Religion, and wickedness of Life, do d^stroy or utterly render
useless that Profession. We do not say it is the duty of such persons, that is,
their immediate duty, in the state wherein they are, to join themselves unto
any Church. Nay, it is the duty of every Church, to refuse them their
Communion, whilst they abide in that state. There are other duties to be in the
first place pressed on them* whereby they may be made meet for this. So in the
Primitive times, although in the extraordinary Conversions unto Christianity
that were made among the Jews, who before belonged unto Gods Covenant, they
were all immediately added unto the Church, yet afterward, in the ordinary way
of the Conversion of men, the Churches did not immediately admit them into
complete Communion, but kept them as Catechumeners, for the e^crease of their
knowledge, and trial of their profession, until they were judged meet to be
joined unto the Church. And they are not to blame who receive not such into
complete Communion with them, unto whom it is not a present duty to desire that
Communion. Yea, the admission of such persons into Church-Societies, much more
the compelling of them to be Members of this or that Church, almost wheth^r
they will or no, is contrary to the rule of the Word, the example of the
Primitive Church^s, and a great expedient to harden men in their sins.

We do therefore avow, that we cannot admit any into our Church Societies, as
to complete Membership, and actual Interest in the privileges of the Church,
who do not, by a profession of Faith in, and obedience unto Jesus Christ, no
way contradicted by sins of life, manifest themselves to be such, as whose duty
it is, to join themselves unto any Church. Neither do we injure any baptized
Persons hereby, or oppose any of their Right unto, and Interest in the Church,
but only as they did universally in the Primitive Churches, after the death of
the Apostles, we direct them into that way and method, wherein they may be
received unto the glory of Christ, and their own edification. And we do
therefore affirm, that we will never deny that Communion unto any person, high
or low, rich or poor, old or young, male or female, whose duty it is to desire
it.

2. IT is added in the description of the Subject, That it is such an one who
takes due care of his own Salvation. Many there are who profess themselves to
be Christians, who it may be hear the word willingly, and do many things
gladly, yet do not esteem themselves obliged unto a diligent enquiry into, and
a precise observation of all the commands of Christ. But it is such whom we
intend, who constantly fix their minds on the enjoyment of God, as their
chiefest good and utmost end, who thereon duly consider the means of attaining
it, and apply themselves thereunto. And it is to be feared, that the number of
such persons will not be found to be very great in the world; which is
sufficient to take off the reproach from some particular Congregations of the
smalness of their number. Such they ever were, and such is it foretold that
they should be. Number was never yet esteemed a note of the true Church, by any
but those, whose worldly interest it is that it should so be; yet at present
absolutely in these Nati^ns, the number of such persons is not small.

3. Of these persons it is said, that it is their duty so to dispose of
themselves. It is not that which they may do, as a convenience, or an
advantage; not that which others may do for them, but which they must do for
themselves in a way of duty. It is an Obediential Act unto the commands of
Christ; whereunto is required subjection of Conscience unto his Authority,
Faith in his promises, as also a respect unto an appeara^ce before his
Judgment-Throne at the last day. The way of the Church of Rome to compel men
into their Communion, and keep them in it, by fire and faggot, or any other
means of external force, derives more from the Alcoran than the Gospel. Neither
does ir answer the mind of Christ in the Institution, End, and Order of
Church-Societies, that men should become Members of them, partly by that which
is no way in their own power, and partly by what their wills are regulated in,
by the Laws of men. For it is, as was said, commonly esteemed, that men being
born and baptized in such a Nation, are t^ereby made members of the Church of
that Nation; and by living within such Parochial Precincts, as the Law of the
Land has Arbitrarily established, are members of this or that particular
Congregation. At least they are accounted so far to belong unto these Churches,
as to render them liable unto all outward punishments, that shall be thought
meet to be inflicted on them, who comply not with them. So far as these
persuasions and actings according unto them, do prevail, so far are they
destructive of the principal foundation of the external Being and Order of the
Church. But that men's joining themselves in, or unto any Church Society, is, or
ought to be, a voluntary act, or an act of free choice, in mere obedience unto
the Authority and commands of Christ, is so sacred a truth, so evident in the
Scripture, so necessary from its subject matter, so testified unto by the
practice of all the first Churches; as that it despises all opposition. And I
know not how any can reconcile the common practice of giving men the reputation
or reality of being Members of, or belonging unto this or that Church, as unto
total Communion, who desire or choose no such thing, unto this acknowledged
principle.

5. THERE is a double jo^ning unto the Church; (1.) That which is, as unto
total Communion in all the duties and privileges of the Church, which is that
whereof we treat. (2.) An adherence unto the Church, as unto the means of
Instruction and Edification to be attained thereby. So persons may adhere unto
any Church, who yet are not meet, or free on some present consideration, to
confederate with it, as unto total Communion; see Act. 5.13, 14. And of this
sort in a peculiar manner, are the baptized Children of the members of the
Church. For although they are not capable of performing Church duties, or
enjoying Church Priviledges in their tender years; nor can have a right unto
total Communion* before the testification of their own voluntary corsent
thereunto, and choice thereof; yet are they in a peculiar manner under the care
and inspection of the Church, so far as the outward administration of the
Covenant in all the means of it, is committed thereunto; and their duty it is,
according to their capacity, to attend unto the Ministry of that Church
whereunto they do belong.

6. THE Proposition respects a visible professing Church. And I intend such a
Church in general, as avoweth Authority from Christ; (1.) For the Min^sterial
Preaching of the Word; (2.) Administration of the Sacraments; (3.) For the
Exercise of Evangelical Discipline; and (4.) To give a public testimony
against the Devil and the World, not contradicting their profession with any
corrupt Principles or Practices inconsistent with it. What is required in
particular, that any of them may be meet to be joined unto such a Church, we
shall afterward enquire.

7. IT is generally said, that out of the Church there is no Salvation; and the
truth hereof is testified unto in the Scriptures, Act. 2.47. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.
Matthew. 16.18. Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Joh. 10.16.

8. THIS is true both positively and negatively of the Catholic Church
invisible of the Elect: All that are of it shall be saved; and none shall be
saved but those that belong unto it, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Of the Catholic
visible professing Church negatively; that no Adult person can be saved, that
does not belong unto this Church, Romans 10.10.

9. THIS Position of Truth is abused by Interest and Pride; an enclosure of it
being made by them, who of all Christians in the World can lay the least and
weakest claim unto it; namely, the Church of Rome. For they are so far from
being that Catholic Church, out of which there is no Salvation, and wherein
none can perish, like the Ark of Noah, that it requires the highest charity to
reckon them unto that visible professing Church, whereof the greatest part may
perish; and do so undoubtedly.

10. Our enquiry is, what truth there is in this Assertion, with respect unto
these particular Churches or Societies, for the celebration of Gospel Worship
and Discipline, whereof we treat. And I say,

1. No Church, of what den^mination soever, can lay a claim unto this
Privilege* as belonging unto it self alone. This wa^ the ancient Donatism;
They confined Salvation unto the Churc^es of their way alone. And after many
false charges of it on others, it begins really to be renewed in our d^ys. For
some dispute, that Salvation is confined unto that Church alone, wherein there
is a Succession of Diocesan Bishops; which is the height of Donatism. The
Judgments and Determinations made concerning the Eternal Salvation or Damnation
of Men, by the measures of some differences among Christians about Churches,
their State and Order, are absurd, foolish, and impious, and for the most part
used by them, who sufficiently preclaim, that they know neither what it is to
be saved, nor do use any diligence about the necessary means of it. Salvation
depends absolutely on no particular Church State in the world; he knows not the
Gospel, who can really think it does. Persons of Believers are not for the
Church, but the Church is for them: if the Ministry of Angels be for them who
are Heirs of Salvation, much more is the Ministry of the Church so. If a man be
an Adulterer, an Idolater, a Rayler, a hater and scoffer of Godliness; if he
choose ^o live in any known sin, without Repentance, or in the neglect of any
known duty; if he be ignorant and profane; in a word, if he be not bo^n again
from above, be he of what Church he will, and whatsoever place he possess
therein, he cannot be saved. And on the other side, if a man believe in Christ
Jesus, that is, know him in his Person, Offices, Doctrine and Grace, trust unto
him for all the ends of the wisdom and love of God toward Mankind in him; if
he endeavor to yield sincere and universal obedience unto all his commands,
and to be confirmed unto him, in all things following his example, having for
these ends received of his Spirit, though all the Churches in the world should
reject him, yet he shall undoubtedly be saved. If any shall hence infer, that
then it is all one of what Church any one is: I answer, (1.) That although the
being of this or that* or any particular Church in the world, will not secure
the Salvation of any men; yet the adherence unto some Churches, or such as are
so called, in their constitution and worship, may prejudice, yea, ruin the
Salvation of any that shall so do. (2.) The choice of what Church we will join
unto, belongs unto the choice and use of the means for our Edification. And he
that makes no conscience hereof, but merely with r^spect unto the event of
being saved at last, will probably come short thereof,

2. ON this Supposition, that there be no insuperable difficulties lying in the
way of the discharge of this duty, as that a person be cast by the providence
of God into such a place or season, as wherein there is no Church that he can
possibly join himself unto, or that he be unjustly refused Communion, by
unwarrantable conditions of it, as it was with many during the preval^ncy of
the Papacy in all the Western Empire; it is the indisp^nsible duty of every
Disciple of Christ, in order unto his Edification and Salvation, voluntarily,
and of his own choice, to join himself in and unto some particular
congregation, for the Celebration of divine Worship, and the due observation of
all the Institutions and commands of Christ; which we shall now farther confirm.

1. THE foundation of this duty, as was before declared* does lie in the law
and light of Nature. Man cannot exercise the principal powers and faculties of
his Soul, with which he was created, and whereby he is enabled to glorify God,
which is the end of him and them, without a consent and conjunction in the
Worship of God in Communion and Society, as has been proved before.

2. The way whereby this is to be done, God has declared and revealed from the
beginning, by the Constitution of a Church State, through the addition of
Arbitrary Institutions of worship, unto what was r^quired by the Law of Nature.
For this gives the true state, and is the formal reason of a Church, namely, a
divine Addition of Arbitrary Institutions of worship, unto the necessary
Dictates of the Law of Nature, unto that end. And the especial nature of any
Church State, does depend on the especial nature of those Institutions, which
is constitutive of the difference between the Church State of the Old Testament
and that of the New.

3. SUCH a Church State was constituted and appointed under the Old Testament,
founded in and on an especial Covenant between God and the People, Exodus 24.
Unto this Church every one that would please God, and walk before him, was
bound to join himself, by the ways and means that he had appointed for that
end; namely, by Circumcision, and their laying hold on the Covenant of God,
Exodus 12.48. Isa. 56.4. And this joining unto the Church, is called joining
unto the Lord, Isa. 56.6. Jerem. 50.5. as being the means thereof; without
which it could not be done. Herein was the Tabernacle of God with men, and he
dwelt among them.

4. AS a new Church State is prophesied of under the New Testament. Ezekiel.
34.25, 26, 27. Isa. 66.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. and other places innumerable; so it
was actually erected by Jesus Christ, as we have declared. And whereas it is
introduced and established in the place and room of the Church State under the
Old Testament, which was to be removed at the time of Reformation, as the
Apostle demonstrates at large in his Epistle to the Hebrews; all the commands,
promises, and threatenings given or annexed unto that Church State, concerning
the conjunction of men unto it, and walking in it, are transferred unto this of
the new erection of Christ. Wherefore although the State of the Church it self,
be reduced from that which was Nationally Congregational, unto that which is
simply and absolutely so; and all Ordinances of its instituted worship are
changed, with new rules for the observation of what we are directed unto by the
light of Nature: yet the commands, promises, and threatenings, made and given
unto it as a Church, are all in full force with respect unto this new
Church State; and we need no new commands to render it our duty to join in
Evangelical Churches, for the ends of a Church in general.

5. THE Lord Christ has disposed all the ways and means of edification, unto
these Churches; so that ordinarily, and under an expectation of his presence in
them, and concurrence unto their efficacy, they are not otherwise to be
enjoyed. Such are the ordinary dispensation of the Word, and Administration of
the Sacraments. For any Disciple of Christ to live in a neglect of these
things, and the enjoyment of them according to his mind, is to despise his care
and wisdom, in providing for his eternal welfare.

6. HE has prescribed sundry duties unto us, both as necessary, and as
evidences of our being his Disciples, such as cannot be orderly performed, but
as we are members of some particular Congregation: this also has been before
declared*

7. THE Institution of these Churches, is the way which Christ has ordained to
render his Kingdom visible or conspicuous, in distinction from, and opposition
unto, the Kingdom of Satan and the world. And he does not in a due manner,
declare himself a subject in or unto the Kingdom of Christ, who does not
solemnly engage in this way. It is not enough to constitute a legal subject of
the Kingdom of England, that he is born in the Nation, and lives in some
outward observance of the Laws of it, if he refuse solemnly to express his
Allegiance in the way appointed by the Law for that end. Nor will it constitute
a regular subject of the Kingdom of Christ, that he is born in a place where
the Gospel is professed, and so professes a general compliance therewith; if
he refuse to testify his subjection, by the way that Christ has appointed for
that end. It is true, the whole Nation in their civil relation and
subordination according to Law, is the Kingdom of England. But the
representation of the Kingly power and rule in it, is in the Courts of all
sorts, wherein the Kingly power is acted, openly and visibly. And he that lives
in the Nation, yet denies his h^mage unto these Courts, is not to be esteemed a
Subject. So does the whole visible professing Church, in one or more Nations,
or lesser precincts of people and places constitute the visible Kingdom of
Christ; yet is no particular person to be esteemed a legal true Subject of
Christ, that does not appear in these his Courts with a Solemn expression of
his Homage unto him.

8. THE whole Administration of the Rule and Discipline appointed by Christ, is
confined unto these Churches; nor can they be approved by whom that rule is
despised. I shall not argue farther, in a case whose truth is of so
uncontrollable evidence. In all the writings of the New Testament, recording
things after the Ascension of Christ, there is no mention of any of his
Disciples with approbation, unless they were extraordinary Officers, but such
as were entire Members of these Assemblies.

CHAP. II. The Subject Matter of the Church.
THE Church may be considered eith^r as unto his Essence, Constitution and
Being; or as unto its Power and Order, when it is Organized. As unto its
Essence and Being, its constituent parts are its Matter and Form. These we must
enquire into.

By the Matter of the Church, we understand the persons whereof the Church does
consist, with their Qualifications: And by its Form, the reason, cause and way
of that kind of Relation among them, which gives them the Being of a Church,
and the^ewithal an Interest in all that belongs unto a Church, either
privilege, or power, as such.

Our first Enquiry being concerning what sort of Persons our Lord Jesus Christ
requires and admits to be the visible Subjects of his Kingdom, we are to be
regulated in our Determination by respect unto his Honor, Glory, and the
Holiness of his Rule. To reckon such persons to be Subject^ of Christ, Members
of his Body, such as he requires and owns, (for others are not so) who would
not be tolerated, at least not approved, in a well governed Kingdom or
Commonwealth of the World, Psalm. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 24.3, 4. Psalm. 93.5. 2
Cor. 8.23. Ephesians. 5.27.
is highly dishonorable unto him. But it is so come to pass, that let Men be
never so notoriously and fl^gitiously wicked, until they become p^sts of the
earth, yet are they esteemed to belong to the Church of Christ. And not only
so, but it is thought little less than Schism to forbid them the Communion of
the Church in all its sacred Privileges. Howbeit, the Scripture does in general
represent the Kingdom or Church of Christ, to consist of persons called Saints,
separated from the World, with man^ other things of alike nature, as we shall
see immediately. And if the Honor of Christ were of such weight with us as it
ought to be, if we understood aright the nature and e^ds of his Kingdom, and
that the peculiar Glory of it, above all the Kingdoms in the World, consists in
the Holiness of its Subject^, such an Holiness as the world in its wisdom
knows not, we would duly consider whom we avow to belong thereunto. Those who
know ought of these things, will not profess that persons openly profane,
vicious, sensual, wicked and ignorant, are approved and owned of Christ as the
Subjects of his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
or that it is his will that we should receive them into the Communion of the
Church But an old opinion of the unlawfulness of separation from a Church, on
the account of the mixture of wicked men in it, is made a scarecrow to
frighten men from attempting the Reformation of the greatest Evils, and a
covert for the composing Churches of such members only.

Some things therefore are to be premised unto what shall be offered unto the
right stating of this Enquiry: As,

1. THAT if there be no more required of any as unto Personal Qualifications in
a visible uncontrollable profession, to constitute them Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, Ezekiel. 22.26.
and Members of his Church, but what is required by the most righteous and
severe Laws of men to constitute a good Subject or Citizen, the distinction
between his visible Kingdom and the Kingdoms of the World, as unto the
principal causes of it, is utterly lost. No^ all negative Qualifications, as
that Men are not Oppressors, Drunkards, Revilers, Swearers, Adulterers, etc.
are required hereunto. But yet it is so fallen out, that generally more is
required to constitute such a Citizen as shall represent the righteous Laws he
lives under, than to constitute a Member of the Church of Christ.

2. THAT whereas Regeneration is expressly required in the Gospel, Joh. 3.3.
Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.
to give a Right and Privilege unto an entrance into the Church or Kingdom of
Christ, whereby that Kingdom of his is distinguished from all other Kingdoms in
and of the World, unto an Inte^est wherein never any such thing was required;
it must of necessity be something better, more excellent and sublime than any
thing the Laws and Polities of men pretend unto or prescribe. Wherefore it
cannot consist in any outward Rites, easy to be observed by the worst and
vilest of men, besides the Scripture gives us a description of it, in
opposition unto its consisting in any such Rite, 1 Pet. 3.21. And many things
required unto good Citizens, are far better than the mere observation of such a
Rite.

Of this Regeneration baptism is the Symbol, the Sign, Joh. 3.5. Act. 2.38. 1
Pet. 3.21.
Expression and Representation. Wherefore unto those who are in a due manner
partakers of it, it gives all the external Rights and Privileges which belong
unto them that are Regenerate, until they come unto such Seasons, wherein the
personal performance of those Duties whereon the continuation of the estate of
visible Regeneration does depend, is required of them. Herein if they fail,
they lose all privilege and benefit by their Baptism.

So speaks the Apostle in the case of Circumcision under the Law, Romans 2.25.
For Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but if thou be a
breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision. It is so in the
case of baptism. Verily it profits, if a man stand unto the Terms of the
Covenant which is tendered therein between God and his Soul; for it will give
him Right unto all the outward Privileges of a Regenerate State; but if he do
not, as in the sight of God his baptism is no baptism, Phil. 3.18, 19.
as unto the real Communication of Grace and acceptance with him so in the
sight of the Church, Tit. 1.15, 16.
it is no baptism, as unto a participation of the external Rights and
Privileges of a Regenerate state.

4. GOD alone is judge concerning this Regeneration, Act. 15.^8. Rev. 2.23.
as unto its internal, real principle and state in the Souls of men whereon the
participation of all the spiritual advantages of the Covenant of Grace does
depend: The Church is judge of its evidences and fruits in their external
Demonstration, as unto a participation of the outward Privileges of a
Regenerate state, Act. 8.13.
and no farther. And we shall hereon briefly declare what belongs unto the
forming of a right judgment herein, and who are to be esteemed fit Members of
any Gospel Church State, or have a right so to be.

1. SUCH as from whom we are obliged to withdraw or withold Communion, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Phil. 3.18, 19. 2 These. 3, 6. 2 Timothy 3.5. Romans 9, 6, 7. Tit.
1.16.
can be no part of the matter constituent of a Church, or are not mere Members
for the first constitution of it. But such are all Habitual Sinners; those who
having prevalent habits and Inclinations unto Sins of any kind unmortified, do
walk according unto them. Such are profane Swearers, Drunkards, Fornicators,
Covetous, Oppressors, and the like, who shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10.11. Phil. 3.18 19. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 2 Timothy 3.5. as a man living and
dying in any known Sin, that is habitually, without Repentance cannot be saved;
so a man known to live in Sin, cannot regularly be received into any Church. To
compose Churches of Habitual Sinners, and that either as unto Sins of
Commission, or Sins of Omission, is not to erect Temples to Christ, but Chapels
unto the Devil.

2. SUCH as being in the fellowship of the Church, are to be admonished of any
scandalous Sin, which if they repent not of, Mat. 18.16, 17, 18.
they are to be cast out of the Church, are not mere Members for the Original
Constitution of a Church. This is the state of them who abide Obstinate in any
known Sin, 1 Cor. 5.11.
whereby they have given Offense unto others, without a professed Repentance
thereof, although they have not lived in it habitually.

3. THEY are to be such as visibly answer the Description given of Gospel
Churches in the Scripture, so as the Titles assigned therein unto the Members
of such Churches, may on good grounds be appropriated unto them. To comp^^^
Churches of such Persons as do not visibly answer the character given of what
they were of old, and what they were always to be by virtue of the Law of
Christ o^ Gospel-contitution, is not Church Edification, but Destruction. And
those who look on the things spoken of all Church Members of old, as that they
were Saints by calling, lively stones in the house of God, justified and
sanctified, separate from the World, etc. as those which were in them, and did
indeed belong unto them, but even deride the necessity of the same things in
present Church Members, or the Application of them unto those who are so* are
themselves no small part of that woeful Degeneracy which Christian Religion is
fallen under. Let it then be considered what is spoken of the Church of the
Jews in their Dedication unto God, as unto their Typical H^lines^, with the
Application of it unto Christian Churches in real Holiness, 1 Pet. 2.5.9. with
the Description given of them constantly in the Scripture, as Faithful, Holy,
Believing, as the House of God, as his Temple wherein he dwells by his Spirit,
as the Body of Christ united and comp^cted by the communication of the Spirit
unto them; as also what is said concerning their ways, walkings and duties; and
it will be uncontrolably evident of what sort our Church Members ought to be;
nor are those of any other sort able to discharge the Duties which are
incumbent on all Church Members, nor to use the Privileges they are entrusted
withal. Wherefore, I say, ^o suppose Churches regularly to consist of such
persons for the greater part of them, as no way answer the Description given of
Church Members in their Original Institution, nor cap^ble to discharge the
Duties prescribed unto them, but giving evidence of Habits and Actions
inconsistent therewithal, is not only to disturb all Church Order, but utterly
to overthrow the Ends and Being of Churches, Nor is there any thing ^ore
scandalous unto Christian Religion, than what Bellarmine affirms to be the
judgment of the Papists in opposition unto all others; namely, that no internal
Virtue or Grace is required unto the Constitution of a Church in its Members.
Lib. 3. d^ Eccles. cap 2.

4. THEY must be such as do make an open profession of the subjection of their
Souls and Consciences unto the Authority of Christ in the Gospel, Romans 10.10. 2
Cor. 8.5. Chap. 9.13. Matthew. 10.32, 33. Luke 9.16. 2 Timothy 2.12. Romans 15.9. Joh.
12.42. 1 John 4.2, 3, 15.
and their readiness to yield Obedience unto all his Commands. This I suppose
will not be denied; for not only does the Scripture make this Profession
necessary unto the participation of any benefit or privilege of the Gospel; but
the nature of the things themselves requires indispensably that so it should
be. For nothing can be more unreasonable than, that men should be taken into
the privileges attending Obedience unto the Laws and Commands of Christ,
without avowing or professing that Obedience. Wherefore, our Enquiry is only
what is required unto such a Profession, as may render men meet to be Members
of a Church, and give them a Right thereunto. For to suppose such a confession
of Christian Religion to be compliant with the Gospel, which is made by many
who openly live in Sin* being disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate,
is to renounce the Gospel it self, Christ is not the High Priest of such a
Profession. I shall therefore declare briefly what is necessary unto this
Profession, that all may know what it is which is required unto the entrance of
any into our Churches, wherein our Practice has been sufficiently traduced.

1. THERE is required unto it a competent knowledge of Doctrines and Mystery of
the Gospel, especially concerning the Person and Offices of Christ. The
Confession hereof, was the ground whereon he granted the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, or all Church Power unto Believers, Matthew, 16.17, 18, 19. The first
Instruction which he gave unto his Apostles, was, That they should teach men by
the preaching of the Gospel, in the knowledge of the Truth revealed by him. The
knowledge required in the Members of the Judaical Church, that they might be
translated into the Christian, was principally, if not solely, that of his
Person, and the acknowledgment of him to be the true Messiah, the Son of God.
For as on their unbelief thereof their Eternal ruin did depend, as he told
them, if you believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sins; so the
confession of him was sufficient on their part unto their Admission into the
Gospel Church State. And the Reasons of it are apparent. With others, an
Instruction in all the Mysteries of Religion, especially in those that are
fundamental, is necessary unto the Profession we enquire after. So Justin
Martyr tells us what pains they took in those Primitive Times, to instruct
those in the Mysteries of Religion, who upon a general Conviction of its Truth,
were willing to adhere unto the Profession of it. And what was their Judgment
herein, is sufficiently known, from the keeping a multitude in the state of
Catecumens, before they would admit them into the Fellowship of the Church.
They are not therefore to be blamed, they do but discharge their Duty, who
refuse to receive into Church Communion such as are ignorant of the fundamental
Doctrines and Mysteries of the Gospel; or if they have learned any thing of
them from a form of words, yet really understand nothing of them. The
promiscuous driving of all sorts of persons who have been baptized in their
Infancy, unto a participation of all Church privileges, is a profanation of the
holy Institutions of Christ. This knowledge therefore belonging unto profession
is it self to be professed.

2. THERE is required unto it a professed subjection of Soul and Conscience
unto the Authority of Christ in the Church, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. 2 Cor. 8.5.
This in general is performed by all that are Baptized when they are Adult, as
being by their own actual consent baptized in the Name of Christ. And it is
required of all them who are baptized in their Infancy, when they are able with
Faith and Understanding to profess their consent un^o, and abiding in that
Covenant whereinto they were initiated.

3. An Instruction in, and consent unto the Doctrine of Self-denial and bearing
of the Cross, Matthew. 10.37, 38, 39. Mar. 8.34.38. Luke 9.23. Phil. 3.18. Act.
4.10, 11, 20. Act. 24.14.
in a particular manner: For this is made indispensably necessary by our
Savior himself, unto all that will be his Disciples. And it has been a great
disadvantage unto the Glory of Christian Religion, that men have not been more
and better instructed therein. It is commonly thought, that who ever will, may
be a Christian at an easy rate, it will cost him nothing. But the Gospel gives
us another account of these things. For it not only warns us, that Reproaches,
Hatred, Sufferings of all sorts, oft-times to Death it self, are the common lot
of all its Professors, who will live godly in Christ Jesus; but also requires,
that at our initiation into the Profession of it, we consider aright the dread
of them all, and engage cheerfully to undergo them. Hence, in the Primitive
Times, whilst all sorts of miseries were continually, presented unto them who
embraced the Christian Religion, their willing engagement to undergo them, who
were converted, was a firm evidence of the sincerity of their Faith, as it
ought to be unto us also in times of Difficulty and Persecution. Some may
suppose that the Faith and Confession of this Doctrine of Self-denial and
readiness for the Cross, is of use only in time of Persecution, and so does not
belong unto them who have continually the countenance and favor of public
Authority. I say, it is, at least as they judge, well for them; with others it
is not so, whose outward state makes the public avowing of this Duty
indispensably necessary unto them: And I may add it as my own thoughts, (though
they are not my own alone) That notwithstanding all the Countenance that is
given unto any Church by the public Magistracy, yet whilst we are in this
World, those who will faithfully discharge their Duty, as Ministers of the
Gospel especially, shall have need to be prepared for sufferings. To escape
sufferings, and enjoy worldly advantages by sinful compliances, or bearing with
men in their Sins, is no Gospel Direction.

4, Conviction and Confession of Sin, with the way of deliverance by Jesus
Christ, is that answer of a good Conscience, that is required in the Baptism of
them that are Adult. 1 Pet. 3.

5. Unto this Profession is required the constant performance of all known
Duties of Religion, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
both of Piety in the public and private Worship of God, as also of Charity
with respect unto others. Show me thy Faith by thy Works.

6. A careful Abstinence from all known Sins, giving scandal or offense, either
unto the World, or unto the Church of God. And the Gospel requires, 1 Cor.
10.32. Phil. 1.10.
that this Confession be made ( with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation) against (1.) Fear, (2.) Shame, (3.) The Course of the World, (4.)
The Opposition of all Enemies whatever.

Hence it appears, that there are none excluded from an Entrance into the
Church State, but such as are either, (1.) grossly Ignorant, or, (2.)
Persecutors, or reproachers of those that are good, or of the ways of God
wherein they walk; or, (3.) Idolaters; or, (4.) Men scandalous in their Lives
in the Commission of Sins, or Omission of Duties, through vicious Habits or
Inclinations; or, (5.) such as would partake of Gospel Privileges and
Ordinances, yet openly avow that they will not submit unto the Law and Commands
of Christ in the Gospel, concerning whom, and the like, the Scripture Rule is
peremptory; From such turn away.

And herein we are remote from exceeding the example and care of the Primitive
Churches. Yea, there are but few, if any, that arrive unto it. Their endeavor
was to Preach unto all they could, and rejoiced in the multitudes that came to
hear the Word. But if any did essay to join themselves unto the Church, their
diligence in their Examination and Instruction, their severe Enquiries into
their Conversation, their disposing of them for a long time into a state of
Expectation for their Trial, before their Admittance, were remarkable. And some
of the Ancients complain, that their promiscuous Admittance of all sorts of
persons that would profess the Christian Religion, into Church Membership,
which took place af^erwards, ruined all the Beauty, Order and Discipline of the
Church.

The things ascribed unto those who are to be esteemed the proper Subject
Matter of a Visible Church, are such as in the judgment of Charity entitles
them unto all the Appellations of Saints, Called, Sanctified, that is Visibly
and by P^ofession, which are given unto the Members of all the Churches in the
New Testament, and which must be answered in those who are admitted into that
Priledge, if we do not wholly neglect our only Patterns. By these things,
although they should any of them, not be real living Members of the Mystical
Body of Christ, unto whom he is an Head of spiritual and vital influance; yet
are they mere Members of that Body of Christ unto which he is an Head of Rule
and Government; as also mere to be estee^ed Su^jects of his Kingdom. And none
are excluded but such, as concerning whom Rules are given, either to withdraw
from them, or to cast them ^ut of Church Society, or are expressly excluded by
God himself from any share in the Prieiledges of his Covenant, Psalm. 50.16, 17.
But unto the Wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy Mouth? Seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my w^rds behind thee.

Advertisement.
OF the Subject Matter of the Church: You may be sa^isfied farther in a Book
l^tely Published: Entitled, The true Nature of a G^spel Church and its
Government: ^y the same Author, wherein those following particulars are
distinctly handled.

I. The Subject Matter of the Church. II. Formal Cause of a particular Church.
III. Of the Polity unto, or Discipline of the Church in General. IV. The
Officers of the Church. V. The Duty of Pastors of Churches. VI. The Office of
Teachers in the Church. VII. Of the Rule of the Church, or of Ruling Elders.
VIII. The Nature of the Polity or Rule, with the Duty of Elders. IX. Of
Deacons. X. Excommunication. XI. Of the Communion of Churches.
Sold at the Bible in Newgate-street, by William Marshal.

CHAP. III. The Continuation of a Church State* and of the Administration of
Evangelical Ordinances of Worship, briefly Vindicated.
THE Controversy about the Continuation of a Church State, and the
Administration of Gospel Ordinances of Worship, is not new, in this Age, though
some pride themselves, as though the Invention of the Error whereby they are
denied, were their own: In former Ages, both in the Papacy, and among some of
them that forsook it, there were diverse who on a pretense of a peculiar
Spiritually, and imaginary Seize in Religion, wherein these things are
unnecessary, rejected their Observation. I s^pp^se it necessary briefly to
confirm the Truth, and Vindicate it from this exception, because though it be
sufficiently w^ak in it self, yet what it is, lies against the Foundation of
all that we are pleading about. But to reduce things into the lesser compass; I
shall first confirm the Truth by those Arguments or Considerations, which will
defeat all the Pleas and Pretenses of them, by whom it is opposed; and then
confirm it by positive Testimonies and Arguments, with all Brevity possible.

First, therefore I shall argue from the removal of all causes, whereon such a
Cess^tion of Churches and Ordinances is pretended. For it is granted on all
hands, that they had a Divine Original and Institution, and were observed by
all the Disciples of Christ, as things by him commanded. If now therefore they
cease as unto their force, efficacy and use, it must be on some of these
Reasons.

1. Because a limited Time and Season was fixed upon them, which is now
expired. So was it with the Church State and Ordinances of old; they were
appointed unto the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10 They had a certain time
prefixed unto their duration, according to the Degrees of whose approach they
waxed old, and at length utterly disappeared, chap. 8.13. until that time they
were all punctually to be observed, Mal. 4.4. But there were many antecedent
Indications of the Will of God concerning their Cessation and Abolition,
whereof the Apostle disputes at large in his Epistle unto the Hebrews. And from
a pretended supposition, that such was the state of Evangelical Ordinances,
namely, that they had a time prefixed unto their Duration, did the first
opposition against them arise. For Montanus, with his Followers, imagined that
the appointments of Christ and his Apostles in the Gospel, were to continue in
force only unto the coming of the Paraclete, or the Comforter, promised by him.
And adding a new Frenzy hereunto, that that Paraclete was then first come in
Montanus, they rejected the Institutions of the Gospel, and made new Laws and
Rules for themselves. And this continues to be the principal pretense of them
by whom the use of Gospel Ordinances is at present rejected, as that which is
of no force or efficacy. Either they have received, or do speedily look for
such a Dispensation of the Spirit, or his Gifts, as wherein they are to cease
and disappear. But nothing can be more vain than this pretense.

1. It is so as unto the limitation of any Time, as unto their Duration and
Continuance. For (1.) There is no Intimation given of any such thing, either in
the Divine-Word, Promise, Declaration about them, or the Nature of the
Institutions themselves. But whereas those of the Old Testament were in Time to
be removed, that the Church might not be offended thereby, seeing Originally
they were all of immediate Divine Institution, God did by all manner of ways,
as by Promises, express Declarations, and by the Nature of the Institutio^s
themselves, foresignifie their removal, as the Apostle proves at large in his
Epistle to the Hebrews. But nothing of this Nature can be pretended concerning
the Gospel Church state or Worship. (2.) There is no Prediction or Intimation
of any other way of Worship, or serving God in this World, that should be
introduced in the room of that established at first; so that upon a Cessa^ion
thereof, the Church must be left unto all uncertainties and utter ruin. (3.)
The principal Reason why a Church State was erected of old, and Ordinances of
Worship appointed therein, that were all to be removed and taken away, was,
that the Son, the Lord over his own House, might have the Pre-eminence in all
things. His Glory it was to put an end unto the Law, as given by the
Disposition of Angels, and the Ministry of Moses, by the Institution of a
Church State and Ordinances of his own appointment. And if his Revelation of
the Will of God therein be not complete, perfect, ultimate, unalterable, if it
be to expire, it must be, that Honor may be given above him, unto one greater
than he.

2. It is so, as unth their Decay, or the loss of their primitive Force and
Efficacy. For their Efficacy unto their proper Ends, depends on, (1.) The
I^^^i^ution of Christ: This is the Foundation of all Spiritual Efficacy unto
Edification in the Church, or whatever belongs thereunto. And therefore
whatever Church State may be framed, or Duties, ways or means of Worship
appointed by Men, that have not his Institution, how specious soever they may
appear to be, have no Spiritual Force or Efficacy, as unto the Edification of
the Church, But whilst this Institution of Christ continues irrevocable, and is
not Abrogated by a greater Power than what it was enacted by, whatever defect
there may be as unto Faith and Obedience in Men, rendering them useless and
ineffectual unto themselves; however they may be corrupted by additions unto
them, or detractions from them, changing their Nature and Use; in themselves
they continue to be of the same Use and Efficacy as they were at the beginning.
(3.) On the Promise of Christ, that he will be present with his Disciples in
the Observation of his Commands unto the Consumation of all things, Matt.
28.20. To deny the continued accomplishment of this Promise, and that on any
pretense whatever, is the Venom of Infidelity. If therefore they have an
irrevocable Divine Institution; if Christ be present in their Administrations,
as he was of old, Revel. 2.1. there can be no abatement of their Efficacy unto
their proper ends, in the Nature of Instrumental Causes. (3.) On the Covenant
of God, which gives an infal^i^le i^seperable Conjunction between the Word, or
the Church and its Institution by the Word, and the Spirit, Isa. 59.21. God's
Covenant with his People is the Foundation of every Church State, of all
Offices, Powers, Privileges, and Duties there unto belonging. They have no
other end, they are of no other use, but to Communicate, express, declare, and
exemplify on the one hand, the Grace of God in his Covenant unto his People;
and on the other, the Duties of his People according unto the Tenor of the same
Covenant unto him. They are the Way, means, and Instruments appointed of God
for this end, and other end they have none. And hereon it follows, that if it
be not in the power of Men, to appoint any thing that shall be a means of
Communication between God and his People, as unto the Grace of the Covenant, on
the one Hand, or the Duties of Obedience which it requires, on the other^; they
have no power to erect any new Church State, or enact any thing in Divine
Worship, not of his Institution. This being the state of Churches and their
Ordinances, they cannot be altered, they cannot be liable unto any decay,
unless the Covenant whereunto they are annexed, be altered or decayed. And
therefore the Apostle to put finally and absolutely his Argument unto an Issue,
to prove that the Mosaical Church State and Ordinances were changed, because
useless and ineffectual, does it on this ground, that the Covenant whereunto
they were annexed, was changed and become useless. This I suppose at present
will not said concerning the New Covenant, whereunto all Ordinances of Divine
Worship are inseparably annexed.

Men might at a cheaper Rate, as unto the Eternal interest of their own Souls,
provide another Covering for their sloth, negligence, unbelief, and indulgence
unto proud foolish imaginations, whereby they render the Churches and
Ordinances of the Gospel useless and ineffectual unto themselves; thereby
charging them with a decay and uselesness, and so refl^cting on the honor and
faithfulness of Christ himself.

2. THEY do not cease, because there is at present, or at least there is
shortly to be expected, such an effusion of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit,
as to render all these external Institutions needless, and consequently
useless. This also is falsely pretended. For (1.) The greatest and most
plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit in his Gifts and Graces, was in the days
of the Apostles, and of the first Churches planted by them; nor is any thing
beyond it, or indeed equal unto it, any more to be expected in this World. But
yet then was the G^spel Church State erected, and the use of all its Ordinances
of Worship enjoined. (2.) The Ministry of the Gospel which comprizeth all the
Ordinances of Church worship, as its object and end, is the Ministration of the
Spirit, and therefore no supplies or Communication of him can render it
useleless. (3.) One of the principal ends for which the Communication of the
Spirit is promised unto the Church, is to make and render all the Institutions
of Christ effectual unto its edification. (4.) 1 John 2.20, 27. is usually
pleaded as giving countenance unto this fond pretense. But (1.) The Unction
mentioned by the Apostle, was then upon all Believers. Yet (2.) It is known
that then they all walked in Church Order, and the sacred observation of all
the Institutions of Christ. (3) If it takes away any thing, it is the Preaching
of the Wo^d, or all manner of Teaching and Instruction; which is to overthrow
the whole Scripture, and to reduce Religion, into Barbarism (4) Nothing is
in^^nded in these words* bu^ the d^f^^rent way of Teaching, and degrees of
Success, betw^en that under the Law, and t^a^ now established in the Gosp^^ by
the (...) effusion of the Spirit, a^ (...) been (...) at large elsewhere. Nor
3. Do they cease in their Administration, for want either of Authority or
Ability in dispense them; which is pleaded unto the same end. But neither is
thi^ pre^en^^ of any force; it only begs the thing in Question. The Au^hority
of Office for the Administration of all other Ordinances, is an Institution.
And to say that all Institutions cease, because none have Authority to
administer them, is to say they must all cease, because they are ceased. (2.)
The Office of the Minist^y for the continuation of the Church State, and
Administration of all Ordinances of Worship unto the end of the World, is
sufficiently secured. (1.) By the Law, constitution and appointment of our Lord
Jesus Christ, erecting that Office, and giving waranty for its continuance to
the Comsumation of all things, Matt. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.13. (2.) By his
continuance according unto his promise to communicate Spiritual Gifts unto Men,
for the Ministerial Edification of the Church. That this he does so continue to
do, that is is the principal external Evidence of his abiding in the discharge
of his M^diatory Office, and of what nature these gifts are, I have declared at
large in a peculiar Discourse on that subject. (3.) On the duty of Believers or
of the Church, which is, to choose; call, and so^emnly set apart unto the
Office of the Ministry, such as the Lord Christ by his Spirit, has made meet
for it, according unto the rule of his word.

If all these, or any of them do fail, I acknowledge that all Ministerial
Authority and Ability, for the dispensation of Gospel Ordinances must fail
also, and consequently the state of the Church. And those who plead for the
continuation of a successive Ministry, without respect unto these things,
without resolving both the Authority and Office of it unto them, do but erect a
dead Image, or embrace a dead carcass, instead of the living and life giving
Institutions of Christ. They take away the living Creature, and set up a skin
stuffed with straw. But if these things do unalterably continue; if the Law of
Christ can neither be changed, abrogated, or disannulled, if his dispensation
of Spiritual gifts according unto his promise cannot be impeded; if Believers
through his grace will continue in ob^dience unto his commands, it is not
possible there should be an utter failure in this Office, and Office-power of
this Ministry. It may fail in this or that place, in this or that Church, when
the Lord Christ will remove his Candl^stick. But it has a living root whence
it will spring again in other places and Churches, whi^st this world does
endure. Neither

4. Do they cease, because they have been all of them corrupted, abused, and
defiled in the Apostasy which fell out among all the Ch^rches in the latter
Ages, as it was fully foretold in the Scripture. For (1.) This supposition
would make the whole Kingdom of Christ in the world to depend on the corrupt
Lusts and wills of men, which have got by any m^^ns, the outward possession of
the Administration of his Laws and Ordinances. This is all one as if we should
say, that if a pack of wicked Judges should for a season p^rvert Justice,
Righteousness and Judgment, that the being of the Kingdom is so overthrown
thereby, as that it can never be restored. (2.) It would make all the d^^ies
and all the privileges of all true Believers to depend on the wills of wicked
Apostares. For if they may not make use of what they hrve abused, they can
never yield Obedience to the c^mmands of Christ, nor enjoy the privileges
which he has annexed unto his Church and Worship. (3.) On this supposition,
all Reformation of an Apostarized Church, is utterly impossible. But it is our
duty to heal even Babylon it self* by a reduction of all things unto their
first Institution, if it would be healed, Jerem. 51.9. and if not, we are to
forsake her, and reform our selves, Rev. 18.4.

There is nothing therefore in all these pretenses, that should in the least
impeach the infallible continuation of the Evangelical Churches and Worship, as
to their right, unto the end of the world. And the Heads of those Arguments
whereby the Truth is invincibly confirmed, may be briefly touched on.

1. There are express Testimonies of the Will of Christ, and his promise for
its accomplishment, that the Church and all its Ordinances of Worship should be
continued always unto the end of the world. So as to the Church it self, Matthew.
16.13. Rev. 21.3. The Ministry, Matthew. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.13. Baptism, Matthew.
28.18, 19, 20. The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.26. As for other Institutions,
Public Prayer, Preaching the word, the Lords day, singing of Gods Praises, the
exercise of Discipline with what belongs thereunto, they have their foundation
in the Law and Light of Nature, being only direct^d and applied unto the
Gospel-Church-state and worship, by Rules of especial Institution, and they can
no more cease, than the original Obligation of that Law can so do.

If it be said, that notwithstanding what may be thus pleaded, yet de facto,
the true state of Gospel-Churches, and their whole worship as unto its Original
Institution did fail under the Papal Apostasy, and therefore may do so again: I
Answer, (1.) We do not plead that this state of things must be always visible
and conspicuous, wherein all Protestant Writers do agree. It is acknowledged,
that as unto public view, Observation and Notoriety, all these things were
lost under the Papacy, and may be so again under a renewed Apostasy. (2.) I do
not plead it to be necessary de facto, that there should be really at all
times, a true visible Church as the seat of all Ordinances and Administrations
in the world; but all such Churches may fail, not only as unto Visibility, but
as unto their Existence. But this supposition of a failure of all instituted
Churches and Worship, I grant only with these Limitations. (1.) That it is of
Necessity from innumerable Divine Promises, and the nature of Christ's Kingly
office* that there be always in the world a number greater or lesser of sincere
Believers, that openly profess subjection and obedience unto him. (2.) That in
these Persons there resides an indefeazable Right always to gather themselves
into a Church state, and to administer all Gospel ordinances, which all the
world cannot deprive them of; which is the whole of what I now plead for. And
let it be observed, that all the ensuing Arguments depend on this Right, and
not on any Matter of Fact. (3.) I do not know how far God may accept of
Churches in a very corrupt state, and of worship much depraved* until they have
new means for their Reformation. Nor will I make any judgment of Persons as
unto their eternal Condition, who walk in Churches so corrupted, and in the
performance of worship so depraved. But as unto them who know them to be so
corrupted and depraved, it is a damnable sin to join with them, or not to
separate from them, Revel. 18.4.

2. The Nature and Use of the Gospel Church State require and prove the
uninterrupted continuance of the Right of its Existence, and the observance of
all Ordinances of Divine Worship therein, with a Power in them, in whom that
Right does indefeazably reside, that is, all true Believers, to bring it forth
into exercise and practice notwithstanding the external Impediments which in
some places at some times may interrupt its exercise. In the observation of
Christ's Institutions, and Celebration of the ordinances of Divine Worship,
does the Church State of the Gospel, as professing, consist. It does so in
opposition. (1.) Unto the World and the Kingdom of Satan. For hereby do men
call Jesus Lord, as 1 Cor. 12.3 and avow their subjection unto his Kingly
Power, (2.) Unto the Church State of the Old Testament, as the Apostle disputes
at large in his Epistle unto the Hebrews. And this state of the professing
Church in this World is unalterable, because it is the best state that the
Believing Church is capable of. For so the Apostle plainly proves, that hereby
the believing Church is brought (...), which it was not under the Law; that is,
unto its Consummation, in the most complete Perfection that God has designed
unto it on this side Glory, Heb. 7.^1, 19. For Christ in all his Offices* is
the immediate Head of it: Its Const^^u^ion, and the Revelation of the ways of
its W^rship, are an effect of his Wisd^m; and from thence is it eminently
suited unto all the ends of the Covenant, both on the part of God and man, and
is therefore liable to no Intercision, or Alteration.

3. The visible Administration of the Kingdom of Christ in this World, consists
in this Church State, with the Administration of his Institutions and Laws
therein. A Kingdom the Lord Jesus Christ has in this World; and though it be
not of the World, yet in the World it must be, until the World shall be no
more. The Truth of all God's Promises in the Scripture depends on this one
Assertion. We need not here concern our selves what Notions some men have about
the exercise of this Kingdom in the world, with respect unto the outward
affairs and concerns of it. Rut this is certain, that this Kingdom of Christ in
the world, so far as it is external and visible, consists in the Laws he has
given, the Institutions he has appointed, the Rule or Polity he has
prescribed, with the due observance of them, Now all these things do make,
constitute, and are the Church State and Worship enquired after. Wherefore as
Christ always h^^h and ever will have an Invisible Kingdom in this world, in the
Souls of Elect Believers, led, guided, ruled by his Spirit; so he will have a
visible Kingdom also, consisting in a professed avowed Subjection unto the Laws
of his word, Romans 10.10. And although this Kingdom, or his Kingdom in this
sense, may as unto the essence of it be preserved in the external Profession of
individual persons, and it may be, so exist in the world for a season; yet the
honor of it, and its complete establishment, consists in the visible
profession of Churches, which he will therefore maintain unto the end. But by
Visible in this Discourse, I understand not that which is conspicuous and
eminent unto all, though the Church has been so, and shall yet be so again;
nor yet that which is actually seen or known by others; but only that which may
be so, or is capable of being so known. Nor do I assert a Necessity hereof, as
unto a constant preservation of Purity and Regularity in Order and Ordinances,
according to the Original Institution of them in any place; but only of an
unalterable Right and Power in Believers to render them visible; which it
becomes their indispensible Duty to do, when outward Impediments are not
absolutely insuperable. But of these things thus far, (...).

CHAP. IV. What sort of Churches the Disciples of Christ, may, and ought to
join themselves unto as unto Entire Communion.
WE have proved before that it is the Duty of all individual Christians, to
give themselves up unto the Conduct, Fellowstip and Communion of some
particular Church or Congregation. Our present Enquiry he^eon is, that whereas
there is a great Diversity among professing Societies in the World, concerning
each whereof it is said, L^ here is Christ, and Lo there is Christ, what
Church, of what Constitution and Order, any one that takes care of his own
Edification and Salvation, ought to join himself unto. This I shall speak unto
first in General, and then in the Examination of one particular Case or
Instance, wherein many at this day are concerned. And ^ome things must be
premised unto the right stating of the Subject of our Enquiry.

1. The Diversities an^ Divisions among Churches which respect is to be had
unto, in the choice of any which we will or ought to join unto; are of two
sorts.

(1.) Such as are ^ccasi^ned by the remaining Weaknesses, Infirmities and
Ignorance of the best of Men, whereby they know but in part, and Prophecy only
in part wherein our Edification is concerned, but our Salvation not endangered.

(2.) Such as are in and about things Fundamental in Faith, Worship and
Obedience; We shall speak to both of them.

2. All Christians were Originally of one Mind in all things needful unto
Joynt-Communion, so as that there might be among them all, Love without
Dissimulation. Howbeit, there was great Variety, not only in the Measure of
their apprehensions of the Doctrines of Truth, but in some Doctrines
themselves, as about the continuance of the observations of the Law, or at
least of some of them; as also Oppositions from without unto the Truth, by
Heretics and Apostates; neither of which hindered the Church Communion of true
Believers. But the Diversity, Difference, and Divisions that are now among
Churches in the World, is the effect of the great A^ostasie which befell them
all in the latter Ages, as unto the Spirit, Rule, and Practice of those which
were planted by the Apostles, and will not be healed, until that Apostasy be
Abolished.

3. S^tan having possessed himself of the Advantage of these Divisions, where^f
he was the Author, he mak^s use of them to act his Malice and R^ge* in stirring
up and i^stigating one Party to Persecute, Oppress and Devour anoth^r, until
the Life, Power and Glory of Christian Religion is almost lost in the World. It
require^ therefore great Wisdom to depart our selves aright among these
Divisions, so as to con^ribute nothing unto the Ends of Malice designed by
Satan i^ them.

4. In this sta^e of things until it may be cured, which it ^ill never be, by
any of the ways yet proposed and insisted on; the Enquiry is concerning the
Duty of any one who takes care of his own Soul, as unto a Conjunction with some
Church or other. And on the Negative Part I say,

1. Such an one is boun^ not to join with any Church or Society where any
Fundamental Article of Faith is rejected or corrupted. There may be a
Fundamental Error in a true Church for a season, when the Church erreth not
Fundamentally; 1 Cor. 15. 2 Timothy 2.18. But I suppose the Error in or against
the Foundation, is part of the Profession of the Church or Society to be joined
unto. For thereby the Nature of the Church is destroyed; it does not hold the
Head, nor abide on the Foundation, nor is the Ground and Pillar of Truth.
Wherefore alth^ugh the So^i^i^^s under a Pretense of Love, Forbearance, and
Mutual Toleration, do offer us the Communion of their Churches, wherein there
is somewhat of Order and Discipline commendible; yet it is unlawful to join in
Church Fellowship or Communion with them. For their Errors about the Trinity,
the Incarnation of Christ, and his Sati^faction, are destructive of the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; and Idolotry, in the Divine Worship of
a mere Creature, is introduced by them.

2. Where there is any Church taught or allowed, a Mixture of Doctrines or
Opinions, that are preju^icial unto Gospel Holiness or Obedience, no man that
takes due care of his Salvation can join himself unto i^. For the Original Rule
and Measure of all Church Communion, is agreement in the Doctrine of Truth.
Where therefore there is either not a stable Profession of the some Doctrine in
all substantial Truths of the Gospel, but an uncertain s^u^d is given, some
s^ying one thing, some anoth^r; or that Opposition is made unto any Truths, of
the Importance before mentioned; None can be bound or obliged to hold Communion
with it; nor can incur any blame by refraining from it. For it is the Duty of a
Christian in all things, (...); And to join with such a Church, would (1.)
Stain their Profession, (2.) Hinder their Edification; (3.) Establish a new
Rule of Communion unknown to the Scriptures; namely, besides Truth; as might
easily be manifested.

3. Where the Fundamentals of Religious Worship, are corrupted or overthrown,
it is absolutely unlawful to join unto, or abide in any Church. So is it with
the Church of Rome. The various ways whereby the Foundations of Divine
Religious Worship, are overthrown in that Church by Superstition and Idolatry,
have been sufficiently declared. These render the Communion of that Church
pernicious.

4. Nor can any Man be obliged to join himself with any Church, nor can it be
his Duty so to do, where the Eternally fixed Rule and Measure of Religious
Worship, namely, that it be of Divine Institution, is varied or change by any
Additions unto it, or Substractions from it. For whereas one principal end of
all ^hurches is the joint celebration of Divine Worship, if there be not a
certain stable Rule thereof in any Church of Divine Prescription, no Man can be
obliged unto Communion therewith.

5. Where the Fundamentals of Church Order, Practice and Discipline are
destroyed, it is not lawful for any man to join in Church Communion. These
Fundam^ntals are of two sorts; (1.) Such as concern the Ministry of the Church;
(2.) Such as concern the Church it self.

There are four things that are necessary Fundamentals unto the Order of the
Church, on the part of the Ministry.

(1.) That all the Ministers or Officers of it, be duly chosen by the Church it
self, and solemnly set apart in the Church unto their Office, according unto
the Rule and Law of Christ. This is Fundamental unto Church Order, the Root of
it, from whence all other parts of it do Spring. And it is that which is (...),
or expressly provided for in the Scripture, as we shall see. If there be a
neglect herein, and no other Relation required between Ministers, Elders,
Rulers, Bishops, and the Church, but what is raised and created by Ways and
Rules of men's appointment, or if there be a Temporary disposal of Persons into
a discharge of that Office, without a solemn Call, Choice, Ordination, and
Separation unto the Office it self and its work, the Law of Christ is violated,
and the Order of the Church disturbed in its Foundation.

(2.) That those who are called unto the Office of the Ministry be duly
qualified, by their Endowment with Spiritual Gifts for the discharge of their
Duty, is Fundamental unto the Ministry; that the Lord Jesus Christ does still
continue his Dispensation of Spiritual Gifts unto Men, to fit and enable them
unto the Office and work of the Ministry; that if he does not do so, or should
at any time cease so to do, the whole Office of the Ministry must cease, and
the Being of the Church with it, that it is altogether useless for any Churches
or Persons to erect an Image of the Gospel Ministry by outward Rites and
Ceremonies, without the enlivening form of these Spiritual Gifts, I have proved
sufficiently in my Discourse of Spiritual Gifts and their c^ntinuance in the
Church. Wherefore a Communication of Spiritual Gifts peculiarly enabling Men
unto the Work of the Ministry, antecedent unto their solemn Separation unto the
Office, in some good Measure, is absolutely necessary unto the due continuance
of the Office and its Work; See Ephesians. 4.7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. To suppose that
the Lord Christ does call and appoint Men, unto a certain Office and Work in
his Church, secluding all others from any Interest in the one or other, and yet
not endow them with peculiar Gifts and Abilities for the discharge of that
Office and Work, is to ascribe that unto him, which is every way* unbecoming
his Wisdom and Grace, with his Love unto the Church. But when Men look on all
Church Order, as a lifeless Machine to be acted moved and disposed by External
Rules, Laws, Canons and Orders, without respect unto the Actings of the Spirit
of Christ going before in the Rule of his Word, to enliven every part of it,
the true Disciples of Christ will receive no advantage thereby.

(3.) It is of the same Importance that Persons so called do take heed unto
their Ministry that they fulfill it, that they give themselves unto the Word
and Prayer, that they labor continually in the Word and Doctrine, and all
those other Duties which in the Scripture are prescribed unto them; and this
not only as unto the Matter of them, but as unto the Manner of their
performance with Zeal, Love, Compassion and Diligence. Where there is a great
Defect in any of these things, on what Pretense soever it be; where Men esteem
themselves exempted from this Work, or not obliged unto it; when they suppose
that they may discharge their Office at a cheaper rate, and with less trouble,
as unto their present Interest, by such ways as I shall not here express, No
Man is, no Man can be obliged to confine his Church Communion, unto such a
Ministry.

(4.) It is required that they be Examples, unto the Flock, in the Expression
of the Nature and Power of the Doctrine which they Preach, in their
Conversation, especially in Zeal, Humility, Self-denial, and readiness for the
Cross.

Where these things are not, there is such a defect in the Fundamentals of
Church Practice, us unto the Ministry of it, that no Man who takes care of his
own Edification, can join himself unto a Church, laboring under it. For
Ministers and Churches are nothing but instituted means of the Conversion of
Sinners, and the Edification of Believers. And when any of them through their
own default cease so to be, there is no obligation unto any man to join or
continue in their Communion; nor do they contract any Guilt in a peaceable
departure from them, but discharge their Duty. That this be done peaceably
without strife or contention, without judging of others, as unto their Interest
in Christ, and Eternal Salvation, the Law of Moral Obedience does require. That
it be done with Love and Compassion and Prayer toward, and for them who are
left, is the peculiar Direction of that moral Duty by the Gospel. Such a
Practice at present would fall under severe charges and accusations, as also
brutish Penalties in some places. But when all Church Craft shall be defeated,
and the uses that are made of its imaginary Authority be discarded, there will
be little occasion of this Practice, and none at all of Offense.

Again; There are Things Fundamental unto Church Practice and Order in the
Church it self, which where they are neglected, no man ought of choice to join
himself unto that Church, seeing he cannot do it without the Prejudice of his
Edification, the furtherance whereof he ought to design in that Duty. And these
are,

(1.) That the Discipline of Christ be duly exercised in it, according unto his
mind, and by the Rules of his Prescription. There never was any Sect, Order, or
Society of men in the world, designed for the Preservation and Promotion of
Virtue and things Praiseworthy, but they had Rules of Discipline proper unto
the Ends of their Design, to be observed in and by all that belong unto them.
Where the Erection of such Societies is continued in the World, as it is much
in the Papacy, both their Constitution, and their Conversation, depend on the
especial Rules of Discipline which they have framed unto themselves. And this
is done by them in great Variety; for being ignorant of the Discipline of the
Gospel, and so esteeming it insufficient unto their Design, they have made no
end of Coining Rules unto themselves. To suppose that our Lord Jesus Christ,
who in this Church State according unto his infinite Wisdom, has erected the
most perfect Society for the most perfect Ends, of Religion, of Obedience
toward God, of Love and Usefulness among our selves, has not appointed a
Discipline, and given Rules concerning its Administration, for the Preservation
of that Society, and the attaining of those Ends, is highly injurous unto his
Honor and Glory.

Where therefore there is a Church or any Society that pretends so to be,
wherein there is an utter Neglect of this Discipline of Christ, or the
establishment of another, not administered by the Laws and Rules that he
prescribed, no Disciple of Christ can be obliged to join unto, or to continue
in the Total sole Communion of such a Church. And whereas there are two Parts
of this Discipline of Christ; That which is Private, among the Members of the
Church, for the Exercise and Preservation of Love; and that which is Public,
in and by the Authority of the Rulers of the Church, for the Preservation of
Purity and Order, a Neglect in either of them, does much impeach the
Fundamental Constitution of a Church as unto its Practice.

2. There are sundry other things which belong unto this Discipline in General,
which are of great consideration in the Discharge of the Duty we enquire into.
Among them are,

(1.) That constant Difference be put between the Good and the Bad in all
Church Administrations;

(2.) That Persons openly or fl^gitiously wicked, be not admitted into the
Society of the Church, or a participation of its Privileges.

(3.) That Holiness, Love, and Usefulness, be openly avowed as the Design and
interest of the Church. But they are all so comprised in the General Head of
Discipline, as that I shall not in particular insist upon them.

From what has been thus declared, it will appear on the other hand, what
Church it is that a Disciple of Christ* who takes due care of his own
Edification and Salvation, ought in duty to join himself unto in complete
Communion. To ans^er this Enquiry, is the end of all those Discourses and
Controversies which have been about the Notes of the true Church. I shall
briefly determine concerning it, according to the Principles before Evinc^d.

1. IT must be such a Church as wherein all the Fundamental Truths of the
Gospel are believed, owned, and professed, without Controversy, and those not
born withal by whom they are denied or opposed. Without this a Church is not
the Ground and Pillar of Truth, it does not hold the Head, it is not built on
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. Neither is it sufficient, that
those things are generally professed or not denied. A Church that is filled
with wranglings and contentions about fundamental or important Truths of the
Gospel, is not of choice to be joined unto. For these things subvert the Souls
of Men, and greatly impede their Edification. And although both among distinct
Churches, and among the Members of the same Church, mutual Forbearance be to be
exercised, with respect unto a variety in Apprehensions in some Doctrines of
lesser Moment; Yet the Incursion that has been made into sundry Protestant
Churches in the last and present Age, of Novel Doctrines and Opinions, with
Differences, Divisions, and endless Disputes which have ensued thereon, have
rendered it very difficult to determine, how to engage in complete Communion
with them. For I do not judge, that any man is, or can be obliged unto constant
total Communion with any Church, or to give up himself absolutely unto the
conduct thereof, wherein there are incurable dissensions about important
Doctrines of the Gospel. And if any Church, shall publicly avow, countenance,
or approve of Doctrines contrary unto those which were the Foundation of its
first Communion, the Members of it are at Liberty, to refrain the Communion of
it, and to provide otherwise for their own Edification.

2. IT must be such a Church as wherein the Divine Worship Instituted or
approved by Christ himself, is diligently observed, without any Addition made
thereunto. In the Observation of this Worship as unto all external, occasional
Incidencies and Circumstances of the Acts wherein it does consist, it is left
unto the Prudence of the Church it self, according to the Light of Nature, and
general Rules of Scripture; and it must be so unless we shall suppose that the
Lord Jesus Christ, by making men his Disciples, does unmake them from being
rational Crea^ures, or refuses the Exercise of the rational Faculties of our
Souls in his service. But this is so remote from Truth, that on the contrary,
he gives them an improvement for this very end, that we may know how to deport
our selves aright in the Observance of his Commands, as unto the outward
discharge of them in his Worship and the Circumstances of it. And this he does
by that Gift of Spiritual Wisdom, whe^eof we shall treat afterward.

But if Men, if Churches, will make Additions in or unto the Rites of religious
Worship, unto what is appointed by Christ himself, and require their Observance
in their Communion, on the force and efficacy of their being so by them
appointed, no Disciple of Christ is or can be obliged, by virtue of any Divine
Institution or Command, to join in total, absolute Communion, with any such
Church. He may be induced on various considerations to judge, that something of
that Nature at some season, may not be evil and sinful unto him, which
therefore he will bear with, or comply withal; yet he is not, he cannot be
obliged by virtue of any Divine Rule or Command, to join himself with, or
continue in the Communion of such a Church. If any shall suppose that hereby
too much Liberty is granted unto Believers in the choice of their Communion,
and shall thereon make severe Declamations, about the Inconveniences and Evils,
which will ensue; I desire they would remember the Principle I proceed upon,
which is, that Churches are not such sacred Machines as some suppose, erected
and acted for the outward Interest and Advantages of any sort of men; but only
means of the Edification of Believers, which they are bound to make use of, in
Obedience unto the Commands of Christ, and no otherwise. Whereas therefore the
Disciples of Christ, have not only a Divine warranty justifying them in the
doing of it, but an express command making it their indispensible Duty to join
in the Celeb^ation of all that Religious Worship, which the Lord Christ the
only Law giver of the Church, and who was faithful both in and over the House
of God, as the Son, ^ath Instituted and commanded; but have no such warranty or
command for any thing else, it is their Duty to stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made them free. And if by the same ^reath, in the same
Rule, Law or Canon, they are commanded and obliged to observe in the Worship of
God, what the Lord Christ has appointed, and what he has not appointed, both
on the same Grounds, namely, the Authority of the Church, and on the s^^e
Penalties of their Omission, no man can be divinely obliged to embrace the
Communion of any Church on such Terms.

3. IT is required that the Ministry of a Church so to be joined with, is not
defective in any of those things which according to the Rule of the Gospel are
fundamental thereunto. What these are, has been declared. And because
Edification, which is the end of Church Communion, does so eminently depend on
the Ministry of the Church, there is not any thing which we ought to have a
more diligent consideration of, in the joining of our selves unto any such
Communion. And where the Ministry of any Church, be the Church of what sort or
size it will, is incurably Ignorant or Negligent, or through a defect in Gifts,
Grace, or conscientious attendance unto their Duty, is insufficient unto the
due Edification of the Souls of them that believe, no man can account himself
obliged unto the Communion of the Church, but he that can be satisfied with a
Shadow and the Names of things, for the Substance and Reality of them.

If therefore it be granted, as I think it is, that Edification is the
principal End of all Church Communion, it is not intelligible how a Man should
be obliged unto that Communion, and that alone, wherein due Edification cannot
be obtained. Wherefore, a Ministry e^abled by Spiritual Gifts, and engaged by
sense of Duty to labor constantly in the use of all means appointed by Christ
for the Edification of the Church, or increase of his Mystical Body, is
required in such a Church, as a Believer may conscientiously join himself unto.
And where it is otherwise, let Men cry out Schism and Faction whilst they
please, Jesus Christ will acquit his Disciples, in the Exercise of their
Liberty, and accept them in the Discharge of their Duty.

If it be said, that if all Men be thus allowed to judge of what is best for
their own Edification, and to act according unto the Judgment which they make,
they will be continually pa^ting from on Church unto another, until all things
are filled with disturbance and Confusion; I say,

(1.) That the contrary Assertion, namely, that Men are not allowed to judge
what is mere and best for their own Edification, or not to act according to the
Judgment they make herein, may possible keep ^p some Churches, but is the ready
way to destroy all Religion.

(2.) That many of those by whom this Liberty is denied unto professing
C^ristians, yet do indeed take it for grant^d, that they have such a Liberty,
and that it is their Duty to make use of it. For what are all the Contests
between the Church of Rome, and the Church of England, so far as Christians,
that are not Churchmen, are concerned in them? Is it ^ot, in whether of these
Churches Edification may be best obtained? If this be not the Ball between us,
I know not what is. Now herein do all the Writers and Preachers of both Parties
give their Reasons and Arguments unto the People, w^y Edification is better to
be had in the one Church than in the other? And do they not require of them to
form a Judgment upon those Reasons and Arguments, and to act accordingly; if
they do not, they do but make a Fourish, and act a Part, like Players on a
stage, without any determinate design.

(3.) All Christians actually do so; they do judge for themselves, unless they
are brutish; they do Act according unto that Judgment unless they are hardened
in Sin; and therefore who do not so, are not to be esteemed Disciples of
Christ. To suppose that in all things of Spiritua^ and Eternal Concernment,
that men are not determined and acted, every one by his own Judgment, is an
Imagination of men who think but little of what they are, or do, or say, or
write. Even those who shut their Eyes against the Light, and follow in the
H^rd, resolving not to enquire into any of these things, do it, because they
judge it is best for them so to do.

(4.) It is commonly acknowledged by Protestants, that private Christians have
a Judgment of Discretion in things of Religion. The Term was invented to grant
them some Liberty of Judgment in Opposition unto the blind Obedience required
by the Church of Rome; but withal to put a restraint upon it, and a distinction
of some Superior Judgment, it may be, in the Church or others. But if by
Discretion, they mean the best of Men's Understanding, Knowledge, Wisdom, and
Prudence, in and about the things wherein it is exercised, I should be glad to
be informed, what other Judgment, than this of Discretion in and about the
things of Religion, this or that or any Church in the World, can have or
exercise. But to allow Men a Judgment of Discretion, and not to grant it their
Duty to act acconding unto that Judgment, is to oblige them to be Fools, and to
act, not discreetly, at least not according unto their own Discretion.

5. The same is to be spoken of Gospel Discipline, without which neither can
the Duties of Church Societies be observed, nor the ends of them attained. The
neglect, the loss, the abuse hereof, is that which has ruined the Glory of
Christian Religion in the World, and brought the whole Profession of it into
Confusion. Hereon have the servency and sincerity of true Evangelical mutual
Love been abated, yea, utterly lost. For that Love which Jesus Christ requires
among his Disciples, is such as never was in the World before amongst men, nor
can be in the World, but on the Principles of the Gospel, and Faith therein.
Therefore it is called his New Commandment. The Continuation of it amongst the
Generality of Christians is but vainly pretended; little or nothing of the
Reality of it in its due Exercise is found. And this has ensued on the Neglect
of Evangelical Discipline in Churches, or the turning of it into a Worldly
Domination. For one principal End of it, is the Preservation, Guidance, and
acting of this Love. That mutual Watch over one another that ought to be in all
the Members of the Church, the Principal Evidence and Fruit of Love without
Dissimulation, is also lost hereby. Most Men are rather ready to say in the
Spirit and Words of Cain, Am I my Brothers Keeper, than to attend unto the
Command of the Apostles. Exhort one another daily, least any be hardened
through the Deceitfulness of Sin; or comply with the Command of our Savior, if
thy Brother offend thee, tell him of it between him and thee. By this means
likewise is the Purity of Communion lost, and those received principal Members
of Churches, who by all the Rules of Primitive Discipline, ought to be cast out
of them. Wherefore this also is to be considered in the Choice we are to make
of what Churches we will join our selves unto, as unto constant complete
Communion, and in whose Communion we will abide. For these things are matters
of Choice, and consist in Voluntary free Acts of Obedience. With those unto
whom they are not so, who would on the one hand have them to be things that Men
may be compelled unto, and ought so to be; or on the other, that follow no
other Guidance in them but outward Circumstances from the Times and Places
where they are born and inhabit, I will have no Contest. It follows from hence
also, That,

Where there are many Churches wherein these things are found, whereon we may
lawfully and ought in Duty to join with some of them, in particular, every one
is obliged to join himself unto such a Church, as whose Principles and
Practices are most suited unto his Edification.

ADVERTISEMENT.
FOR your further carrying on of this Work, there is another Book Doctor Owen
lived to finish, and left it as his last Legacy to the Church, Entitled, The
true Nature of a Gospel Church, and its Government, wherein these following
particulars are distinctly handled:

I. The Subject Matter of the Church. II. Formal Cause of a particular Church.
III. Of the Polity, Rule, or Discipline of the Church in General. IV. The
Officers of the Church. V. The Duty of Pastors of Churches. VI. The Office of
Teachers in the Church. VII. Of the Rule of the Church, or of Ruling Elders.
VIII. The Nature of the Polity or Rule, with the Duty of Elders. IX. Of
Deacons. X. Excommunication. XI. Of the Communion of Churches.
In large Quarto, price bound 3 s.

Other Books lately Published of Dr. Owens: Left behind him fitted for the
Press.

1. A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin and Grace, Price Bound 1 s.

2. A Brief and Impartial Account of the Nature of the Protestant Religion, its
State and Fate in the World, its Strength and Weakness, with the Ways and
Indications of the Ruin or Continuance of its public National Profession.
Price 6 d*

3. A Brief Instruction in the Worship of God, and Discipline of the Church of
the New Testament; by way of Questions and Answers, with an Explication and
Confirmation of those Answers. Price Bound 1 s.

4 Meditations and Discourses concerning the Glory of Christ; Applied unto
unconverted Sinner^ and Saints, under Spiritual Decays, from Joh. 17.24. Bound
1 s.

These with the rest of Dr. Owen's Works that are in Print are sold by William
Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street; where you may be supplied of other
Authors Books following.

An Exposition of the whole Book of the Revelation, wherein the Visions and
Prophesies of Christ are opened and Expounded; By that Late Reverend Divine
Hansel Knowlls. Price Bound 2 s. 6 d.

Dr. Crisp^ Works in large Quarto, four parts. Bound 7 s.

A Plain and Familiar Conferrence, Concerning Gospel Churches, and Order; for
the information and benefit of those who shall seek the Lord their God, and ask
the way to Sion with their Faces thitherwards. Price Bound 1 s.

Ashwood's Heavenly Trade, or the best Merchandise. Price Bound 2 s. 6 d.

Ashwood's best Treasure, or the unsearchable Riches of Christ. Bound 2 s. 6 d.

Mr. Mead's Effigies, lately Engraven and Printed on large Paper. Price 6 d.

Mr. Caryls Effigies. large Paper 6 d.

Dr. Owen's Effigies in large Paper 6 d.

Mr. Bunyan's Effigies, large Paper 6 d.

Dr. Crisp's Effigies in Paper 6 d.

There is Newly Printed a Stitched Book, containing six Sheets; entitled, The
Sufficiency of the Spirits Teaching: By Sammuel How. Price 6 d.

Those that send for six Books shall have a seventh Gratis.

Likewise there is in the Press, and will be Published (if the Lord will)
February next, 1692. To Subscribers and others, Bound 12 s.

The Labors of John Bunyan, Author of the Pilgrims Progress, late Minister of
the Gospel, and Pastor of the Congregation at Bedford, Collected, and Printed
in Folio. by Procurement of his Church and Friends, and by his own Approbation
before his Death, that these his Christian Ministerial Labors, may be
preserved in the World.

He was an Eminent Convert, and Experienced Christian. He was an Excellent,
Eminent and Famous Gospel Minister. He has Suffered Twelve Years Imprisonment
for Gospel Preaching. His Books have sold admirably well. And he behaved
himself Wisely, Plainly, ^ouragiously, as a Follower of the Great Apostle Paul,
as he was a Follower of Christ. And theref^re all Christian People, may reckon
themselv^^ obliged to ^reserve these his Labors.

This Folio will contain Ten of his Excellent Manuscripts, prepared for the
Press, before his Death: and Ten of his Choice Books already Printed, but long
ago, and not now to be had. Their Titles are as follows, viz.

MANUSCRIPTS.
An Exposition on the Ten first Chapters of Genesis. Justification by Imputed
Righteousness. Paul's Departure and Crown. Israel's Hope Encouraged. Desires of
the Righteous granted. The Saints Privilege and Profit. Christ a complete
Savior. Saints knowlegde of Christ's Love. The House of the Forest of Labenon.
A Description of Antichrist.
BOOKS formerly Printed.

Saved by Grace. Christian Behavior. A Discourse of Prayer. The Strait Gate.
Gospel Truths opened. Light for them in Darkness. Instructions for the
Ignorant. A Map of Salvation, etc. The New Jerusalem. The Resurrection.
FINIS.

