A Peace Offering IN AN APOLOGY and humble PLEA FOR INDULGENCE AND LIBERTY OF
CONSCIENCE.

By sundry PROTESTANTS differing in some things from the PRESENT ESTABLISHMENT
about the Worship of GOD.

Ambigua de Religione Capita quae plurimum habere videntur obscuritatis, tantis
tamdiu animis decertata, apud Sapientes hoc fere Certum reliauerunt, nusquam
minus inveniri veritatem, quam ubi Cogitur Assensus.

Hugo Grotius. Exiguam sedem sacris, littusque rogamus
Innocuum, and cunctis undamque auramque patentem.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1667.

THE infinitely Wise and Holy GOD, who disposes of all things according to the
counsel of his own Will, having designed our portion in the World unto the
latter days thereof; wherein, besides those difficulties which in all Ages
attend them who are called unto the search and profession of the Truths of the
Gospel, we are forewarned of sundry Evils peculiar unto them, rendering them
perilous: as it is our duty to apply our selves to serve his good pleasure in
our Generation, without repining at that station which in his work he has
allotted unto us; so also diligently to take care, that we add not unto the
Evils of the days wherein we live; and that, what we may be called to suffer
in them according to his Will, may not be lost unto his holy Ends and Purposes
in the World, but some way or other redound unto his Glory. What shall befall
us in the course of our Pilgrimage, how we shall be disposed of, as to our
outward temporary concernments, as it is not in our power to order and
determine, so neither ought to be in our care, so as that we should be
anxiously solicitous thereabouts: All things of that nature belong unto his
sovereign Pleasure, who will make them work together for good to them that love
him. Resting in his Will as to our outward state and condition in this world,
with that of the Times and Seasons wherein our Lot is fallen, which he has put
in his own power, we shall endeavor in reference thereunto, to possess our
Souls in patience, waiting for that day which shall manifest every man's work of
what sort it is. And we know that it is but yet a little while, before it will
be no grief of heart unto us, for to have done or suffered any thing for the
Name of the Lord Jesus, according to his mind and will. For whereas we are well
assured, that the old Enemy of Mankind who is sometimes awake, and sowing of
Tares whilst Men sleep, is never so far asleep, whilst any are endeavoring to
sow the good seed of the Gospel, as not to stir up an opposition to their work,
and to labor the ruin of their persons; so we believe that every sincere
endeavor to promote the holy Truths, and Ways of God, according to that
measure of Light which he is pleased graciously to impart unto any of the Sons
of Men, is accepted and owned by him, who is a Rewarder of them that diligently
seek him; which is sufficient to secure their peace and consolation, under all
the evils that on the account of their work they may conflict withal. Neither
is it a small alleviation of any trouble that we may be exposed unto, that no
pretense, color, reason, or arguings for our sufferings, no means, ways, or
kinds of them, no ends unto them, can possibly be invented, proposed, pursued,
but what we are fully forewarned of; that so we might not at any time think our
selves surprised, as though some strange thing had happened unto us. This then
is our great concernment in the profession of Religion, this that which we
ought principally to attend unto, namely, To commend our Consciences unto God,
that in all sincerity and godly simplicity, we exercise our selves in the Work
that he calls us unto, not corrupting his Word, or staining our profession by a
conversation unbecoming the holiness of the Gospel; and for what may outwardly
befall us, though producing Heaviness and Sorrow for a season, the last day
will manifest to have been unspeakably more the concernment of other Men, than
our own. It is therefore on this account, and that duty which we owe unto all
the Sons of Men, especially those who in any place or degree have the rule and
disposal of us in this world and the things thereof, committed unto them, that
notwithstanding the hazard that attends us in the discharge of every duty of
this kind, we adventure to represent our Condition and desires unto all that
endeavor to follow after Truth with Peace. For as the Minds of Men are capable
of no greater Perfection, than what consists in receiving the whole Truth of
the Gospel, nor their Souls of greater blessedness, than attends obedience
thereunto, so every mistake of it, every prejudice against it, every opposition
unto it, or any part of it, are not only in themselves a corruption and
debasement of the mind, but are usually attended with consequents of greater
Evils, in and unto them by whom they are entertained. And this condition
oftentimes are men, otherwise upright and wise, cast into; either by their own
ingrafted prejudices, or neglect of that severe disquisition after Truth, which
all the Sons of it are obliged unto; or by suffering themselves to be imposed
on, by the suggestions of others, who perhaps sacrifice their actings in and
about the things of God, to some secular (and it may be very corrupt) ends of
their own. Hence Truth and Innocence, which cannot be oppressed, but when
clothed with misrepresentations and calumnies, have in all Ages been forced to
suffer the sad effects of their mistakes, who in the mean time professed highly
an avowment of them. So in particular, the foundation of all the miseries that
ever befell the Professors of the Truth of Christ, since the day that the Name
of Christian was known in the World, and consequently of all that evil and
confusion in the Earth, which the Lusts of men have produced, and the righteous
Judgment of God inflicted, have lain in general, either in the ignorance of
Men, of the genuine nature and tendency of the Truth it self, or in their
credulity, in giving credit unto those misrepresentations of it, which it has
always been the interest of many in the world, to frame and promote. Hence the
Professors of Christianity, and every particular way therein, in their
respective seasons and generations, have esteemed it their duty, not only unto
Themselves, to wave their imminent sufferings, if it were the will of God
thereby, but unto Others also, whom they judged to be engaged against God and
his Truth, in their persecution of them, to declare freely and fully what it
was that they did believe and practice; and therein plead the equity and
reasonableness of that deliverance which they aimed at; of Themselves from
suffering, and of Others from sinning. And herein had they before their eyes,
the Example of the Great Apostle of the Gentiles, who with various success did
often times make use of the like defensatives of himself, and his Doctrine. Nor
is it the least prescription of the Law of Nature implanted in the heart of man
by him that made it, that Innocence should so far undertake its own protection
and security, as to endeavor a removal of prejudicate imputations out of the
minds of them, in whose Judgment it is concerned. And this Law, all Men
universally yield obedience unto, who intend not to abuse such imputations unto
sinister ends, not suitable unto the innocence they profess, and so by
deserting their own unblameable defense, contract a guilt rendering them
incapable of it for the future. Whereas therefore it has pleased him in whose
hand our life, and breath, and all our ways are, to place us in that
condition, wherein by the apprehensions he has given us of his Mind and Will,
in some things relating unto his Worship, we are forced to differ from others,
we conceive it our Duty for the prevention of farther Evils; openly and
heartily to declare both what we profess, and what in all humility we desire
thereupon: And we cannot but hope, that when the matters of our difference are
known and considered, that they will not be judged of so high a demerit; as to
render a modest peaceable desire of Indulgence in our adherence unto them, a
new addition of guilt. For their case is miserable indeed, who being prejudged
into a condition of sufferings, though not convinced of evil, may not desire
relief from those, who alone are able to afford it; that also being made an
aggravation of their misery, by being made an aggravation of their supposed
guilt.

And in particular, this course is made at this season necessary unto us, from
the exasperation of the minds of many, in reference unto what we profess and
desire, with the prejudices that are taken up and improved unto our
disadvantage and trouble: For although we have with the joint Consent of all
our Churches some years since, publicly declared what is the Faith which we
profess, and the Way of the Worship of God wherein we walk, and did hope that
it would not be looked on as an unreasonable expectation, that our Confession
might have received a Christian charitable sedate consideration, before it were
condemned, or those that adhere unto it judged as evildoers for their so
doing; yet considering the sad exasperations of the Minds of Men, though upon
occasions wholly foreign to the matter of our Faith and Profession, we cannot
be without some apprehensions, that far the greatest part of those who are
loudest in their cries for severity against us, have scarce been so faithful
to Christian Candor and Ingenuity, as seriously to examine whether there be in
what we believe and practice, a just foundation for that kind of proceeding and
acting toward us, which they so earnestly desire to engage our Rulers into. If
for no other reason than, but to endeavor to call off the thoughts of Men from
Persons, and Personal Provocations, unto those things which are the pretended
foundation of their actions, and with reference whereunto, their Account must
be made at the last Day, when other men's real or apprehended Miscarriages will
give no countenance to theirs, we cannot but judge it a Duty incumbent on us,
to remind them what the things are which must give construction unto all that
in this matter they shall undertake or perform; and whereinto, under all
imputations whatever of things of other natures, our comfort, be it what it
will, true or false, in all our sufferings that we may be called unto, is
resolved. And we do know, that they will one day find themselves under a woeful
mistake, who suppose that their severity against us, will be any further
justified, than there is ground for it in the Principles which we profess in
the things of God; and this cannot but be evident unto them (if they will give
themselves but the liberty of unprejudiced consideration) who know that a
relinquishment of those Principles would instantly cause all those other Pleas
and Pretenses to vanish out of their minds, which at present they only make use
of. And therefore also shall we not much concern our selves in any other charge
that is laid against us, but only as to what we profess, and practice in the
ways and worship of God, as knowing that from thence alone all occasion is
taken for them. We shall therefore only briefly declare our sense of them, and
then proceed to that which is our real concernment. For there is not any new
thing herein under the Sun.

In all ages, where ever any way in Religion has been judged by the most,
rightly, or otherwise, to be contrary to the mind of God, as by them
apprehended, it has been immediately charged with the guilt of all the evils
that fell out in the days of its profession, though evidently they had other
Causes and Occasions. Such was the condition of Christianity in general of old,
as is manifest from the Apologetical Writings of Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Arnobius, Cyprian, Lactantius, Minutius Foelix, Augustine, and others. Upon
every occasion of trouble, the common cry was, Christianos ad Leones. Such was
also the condition of the Professors of the Protestant Religion, upon the first
Reformation, throughout the world; under which prejudice and imputation, they
are yet forced to suffer the wrath of men in many places. What ever
disadvantages then on this account we may be exposed unto, we have no reason to
complain or think strange of, it being no other than all men in the like
condition in all ages have had to conflict withal; and will have so, whilst
sin and darkness continue in the world. To commend our consciences unto God in
well-doing, is the only means of peace in our selves, and the whole Defensative
in reference unto others, which in this case is left unto us.

Moreover if any who either really make profession of any way in Religion, or
are generally esteemed so to do, fall into personal crimes and miscarriages,
which no way can secure it self against, men justly provoked thereby have
scarce the patience to attend unto any plea for the way it self, or those who
peaceably and innocently walk therein, though the charge against it be
altogether groundless and unreasonable. Thus the abominations of the Gnostics
of old, was charged upon the whole body of Christianity, and the unwarrantable
zeal of one man in firing a Temple in the Kingdom of Persia, reflected an
imputation of Sedition on all the Professors of the Gospel, to their
extirpation out of that Empire. But the unrighteousness of this charge is, we
hope, evident even to themselves, who would fain make use of it unto our
disadvantage; for no Society in the world can give security for the deportment
of all Individuals belonging unto it, according unto the Rules of the whole;
and if they may be charged with such miscarriages, it were easy to
demonstrate, that no Community, no Profession of men in the world, no Order, no
Way can be acquitted from guilt, or thought meet to have moderation exercised
toward it. Besides, we know not in particular, but that all occasions of
reflecting upon our Societies on this account, have, by the goodness of God
been prevented, for which we are humbly thankful unto his holy Majesty. But if
to accuse be enough to render any men nocent, none can be long innocent.
Thiaestaean Banquets, promiscuous Lusts and Incests, must on that ground be
thought to be the Ends of the, Primitive Assemblies of Christians. If men will
take to themselves the liberty of entertaining evil and groundless surmizes, it
is impossible for us, or any living, to set bounds to their imaginations. So
that we have nothing in this case to do, but to leave the Authors of such fake
and calumnious insinuations unto that Reward, which God and their own
Consciences will not suffer them to lose; and our Vindication unto the
Providence of God, over our present and future deportment. It may be thought of
nearer concernment unto us, when the late troubles in these Nations are
objected, and the remembrance of them renewed unto our prejudice. But whether
the frequent and importunate urging of them, since by his Majesty's Clemency
and Grace they are put into Legal Oblivion for ever, do tend unto the composure
and settlement of the minds of men, which is certainly the duty of all good
Subjects to aim at, we leave it unto the consideration of those who are wiser
than we, and on whom the care of the peace and welfare of the Kingdom is in an
especial manner incumbent. For our own parts, we shall only say, That whereas
they were neither begun, nor carried on, upon the account of that way in the
worship of God which we profess; may the remembrance of them be never so
severely revived, we cannot fear any just conclusion from thence, unto a
suspicion of Troubles of the like nature for the future; as well knowing the
absolute freedom of our Principles from any such tendency, as well as the
providential unravelling of all those interwoven Interests and Occasions, which
individual persons countenanced themselves withal in their engagements in them.

Magistracy we own, as the Ordinance of God, and His Majesty as the Person set
over us by his Providence, in the Chief and Royal Administration thereof: In
submission unto Him, we profess it our Duty to regulate our Obedience by the
Laws and Customs over which He presides in the Government of these Nations. So
that OUR PRACTICAL ADHERENCE UNTO OUR OWN AVOWED PRINCIPLES, is all that in
this matter can fall under the most suspicious and uncharitable surmize. That
there is any means of giving such absolute satisfaction concerning future
events, which depend on the minds and wills of men, as to leave all suspicion
concerning them impossible, we know not; much less to prevent some men's
pretending suspicions for ends best known unto themselves. But this we know,
that what ways or means soever are warranted, or established by the Laws of
this Land, or may be so, and they are such as mankind must content themselves
withal, as incapable of further or greater assurance, or what ever else may be
rationally and justly expected from us, we have given, and are ready to give
security by, against the Evils intimated in this Charge upon us; which being
the utmost that our Duty calls upon us for, we hope we shall not always suffer
for being the unhappy objects of some men's GROUNDLESS JEALOUSIES, which for us
to remove is altogether impossible, God himself having not appointed any way or
means for us to use to that end or purpose.

As then neither we nor others can hinder men from making use of this Pretense
for some ends of their own, (though we know, as it is used by them, it
contributes nothing to Public Tranquillity, and the composure of the minds of
men) so we hope that GOD will so far in his good time clear up the Innocence
and Sincerity of our Intentions, and their suitableness unto our declared
Principles, that no just occasion of reproach be administered unto Them, who
wait for Advantages against us.

And what are We, that Public Disturbance should be feared from us? Nec
pondera rerum, nec momenta sumus: by what way or means, were we never so
desirous, could we contribute any thing thereunto? what Designs are we capable
of? what Interests have we to pursue? what Assistance to expect or look after?
what Title to pretend? what hopes of Success? what Reward of any hazard to be
undergone? We have no Form of Government, Civil or Ecclesiastical, to impose on
the Nation; nay, no pretense unto Power to be exercised on the Persons of any
of his Majesty's Subjects; have no Expectations from Persons or Nations, that
might induce us to further or promote any sinister aims of other men: the
utmost of our aim is but to pass the residue of our Pilgrimage in peace,
serving God in the way of our Devotion. We covet no men's silver or their gold,
their places or preferments: our whole desire is that of Israel of old to their
brother Edom, Let us pass, we pray, through the Country; we will not pass
through the fields or through the vine-yards, neither will we drink of the
water of the wells; we will go by the Kings high way, we will not turn to the
right hand, nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders. May we thus far
prevail, under the protection of God's providence, his Majesty's favor, and
our own innocence; we have no Principles, we shall have no Reason, farther to
trouble our selves or others. If it be denied unto us, and we must yet be
scattered over the face of the earth, we shall pray for the prosperity of his
Majesty, and the Land of our Nativity, patiently bearing the indignation of the
Lord, against whom we have sinned, and waiting for his salvation.

That which of late is principally urged unto our prejudice, is, The
prohibition of that way of worship which we desire to walk in, and the
establishment of another by LAW, to whose Authority we owe subjection. When
this begins once to be pleaded, the real merits of the cause in debate is
usually over-seen, and the obedience required by Law is only insisted on; as
though that were grown a Civil difference by the interposition of a Law, which
before was purely Religious. This Paul himself found to be one of the most
difficult cases he had to contend withal; it was objected unto him, that he
taught Customs which it was not lawful for to do among the Romans, Acts 16. 21.
All that Doctrine which he had to declare, was antecedently in general
forbidden by Law; it being determined by the Romans, That no worship of God
should be admitted amongst them, not established by Public Authority. And had
not the Light and Truth of Christianity broken through that opposition, it must
have lain shut up in darkness to this day. For our parts, we have only this to
say, That there is no reason to urge this as a peculiar Objection against us,
it being the only Foundation of all others, and only occasion of the difference
about which we treat. Had not a Law enjoined the practice of some things in the
Worship of God, which according unto our present Light we cannot assent unto,
without ceasing to worship him, (for to worship him in our own thoughts,
against his mind and will, is to profane his Name and Worship) had it not
forbidden the exercise and discharge of some duties which we account our selves
obliged unto by the Authority of God himself, we had had no need to implore the
clemency of our Governors, to relieve us against that severity which we fear.
This then we acknowledge; but withal, to state this Difference upon its right
foundation, do solemnly in all sincerity protest before God, his holy Angels,
and all the world, That it is not out of any unwarrantable Obstinacy that we
are conscious of unto our selves; nor from any disaffection unto, or
dissatisfaction in the Government that God has set over us: but merely from a
sense of that account which we have one day to make before JESUS CHRIST, the
JUDGE of All, that we cannot yield that compliance unto the Act for Uniformity
which it requires of us. The Case then, notwithstanding this prejudice, is
still the same; Conscience toward God in the things of his own Worship, is
still, and alone concerned, whatever other pretenses and reasonings may in this
case be made use of, (as many are, and ever were in the like cases, and will so
be) the whole real cause of that severity which we humbly deprecate, and only
Reason lying against the Indulgence we desire, is our Profession and Practice
in the things that are not of this world, but purely relating to the Revelation
of the Mind and Worship of GOD. Whatever therefore men may plead, pretend or
urge of another nature, we are so far conscious unto our own Integrity, as to
be fully satisfied in our minds, That whatever Dangers we may be in this
matter exposed unto, or whatever we may be called to suffer, it is all merely
for believing in God, and worshipping of him, according to what he has been
pleased to reveal of his mind unto us. And as in this case, it is not in the
power of any of the sons of men to deprive us of that Consolation, which an
apprehension of the truth will afford unto them that sincerely and
conscientiously embrace it; so whether any men can commend their consciences to
God, according to the Rules of the blessed Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
our molestation and trouble, we leave it unto all unprejudiced men to judge.
And that we may yet farther remove all grounds of mistake, and obviate all
other pretenses against us, we shall heartily declare the general Principles
both of our Faith and Worship, and then leave our condition, whatever it may
be, to the Judgment of him, who has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
World in Righteousness, of his Majesty whom he has set over us in supreme
Power, and of all other Persons whatever, who have any sense of the Terror of
the Lord, the account we must make of serving Him according to what He is
pleased to reveal of himself unto us, the nature of things known only by Divine
Revelation, or of the infirm frail condition of Mankind in this World.

For the Faith which we profess, and which we desire to walk according unto, we
need not insist upon the particular heads of it; having some years since in our
Confessions publicly declared is, with the joint consent of all our Churches;
neither do we own or avow any Doctrine, but what is therein asserted and
declared. And we hope it will not be looked upon as an unreasonable Request, if
we humbly desire, That it may receive a Christian charitable sedate
consideration, before it be condemned. May we be convinced of any thing
therein, not agreeable unto the Scriptures, not taught and revealed in them, we
shall be with the first in its rejection. That this has been by any as yet
attempted, we know not; and yet are we judged, censured and reproached upon the
account of it: So far are Men degenerated from that frame of Spirit, which was
in the Christians of old; so far have they relinquished the ways wherein they
walk toward those who dissented from them.

Nor do we decline the Judgment of the Primitive Church; being fully
satisfied, That we teach and adhere unto, is as consonant unto the Doctrine
thereof, as that of any Church at this day in the World. The four first General
Councels, as to what was determined in them in matters of Faith, are confirmed
by Law in this Nation; which is all that from Antiquity has any peculiar stamp
of Authority put upon it amongst us; This also we willingly admit of, and fully
assert in our Confession. Neither does the addition of ours, disturb the
Harmony that is in the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, being in all
material points the same with them, and no otherwise differing from any of them
in things of less importance, than as they do one from another; and as all
Confessions have done, since the first Introduction of their use into the
Churches of God. That which amongst them is of most special regard and
consideration unto us, is that of the Church of England, declared in the
Articles of Religion: And herein in particular, what is purely Doctrinal, we
fully embrace, and constantly adhere unto. And though we shall not compare our
selves with others, in Ability to assert, teach and maintain it; yet we cannot,
whilst we are conscious unto our selves of our Integrity in our cordial
adherence unto it, but bear with regret the Clamorous Accusations of some
against us, for departing from the Church of England, who have not given that
testimony of their adherence unto Its Doctrine, which we have done, and by the
help of God shall continue to do. It is true indeed, there are some
Enlargements in our Confession of the things delivered in the Thirty Nine
Articles; some Additions of things not expressly contained in them, which we
were necessitated unto, for the full declaration of our Minds, and to obviate
that obloquy which otherwise we might have been exposed unto, as reserving our
Judgment in matters that had received great public debate since the composure
of those Articles: But yet we are fully persuaded, that there is not any
proposition in our whole Confession, which is repugnant unto any thing
contained in the Articles, or is not by just consequence deducible from them.
Neither were we the Authors of the Explanations or Enlargements mentioned;
there being nothing contained in them, but what we have learned and been
instructed in from the Writings of the most famous Divines of this Nation,
Bishops and Others, ever since the Reformation; which being published by Legal
Authority, have been always esteemed, both at home and abroad, faithfully to
represent the Doctrine of the Church of England. We have no new Faith to
Declare, no new Doctrine to Teach, no private Opinions to Divulge; no Point, or
Truth do we Profess, no not one, which has not been declared, taught, divulged
and esteemed as the common Doctrine of the Church of England ever since the
Reformation.

If then we evince not the Faith we profess to be consonant unto the
Scriptures, the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, of the four first General
Councels, the Confessions of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, and that in
particular of the Church of England, we shall acknowledge the Condition of
Things in reference unto that Liberty, which we humbly desire, to be otherwise
stated, than hitherto we have apprehended. But if this be the condition of our
Profession, as we hope it is manifest unto all Unprejudiced and Ingenious
Persons to be, who esteem it their Duty not to judge a matter of so great
importance before they hear it. We can hardly think that They give up
Themselves to the Conduct of the Meek and Holy Spirit of CHRIST, who are ready
to breathe out Extirpation against us, as to our Interest in this World, for
the profession of Those Principles in the things of God, which They pretend to
build their own Interests upon for another.

The NONCONFORMITY then that we may be charged with, being very remote from a
dissent unto that Doctrine which is here publicly avowed, and confirmed by
Law, it cannot but seem strange unto us, that any should endeavor to cast us
under the same severity with them who utterly renounce it: and would entayl
upon their Posterity, on the forfeiture of all their Public Rights, as
Englishmen, and benefit of their private Estates, not only an adherence unto
the Protestant Religion, but a Precise and Determinate Judgment and Practice
in things of very Little Concernment therein; and of none at all, as to public
Tranquillity.

Would it not seem strange, that a man might at as easy and cheap a rate,
renounce the Protestant Profession, and the Fundamental Doctrines of the Church
of England, in things indispensably necessary to Salvation, as to be mistaken,
or suspend his assent about things dark and disputable in their own nature, and
of very small importance, which way soever they are determined? So that Men in
the embracing or refusal of them, rebel not against that commanding Light of
God set up in their hearts to rule them in His Name, in that apprehension which
they have of the Revelation of his Will, which is unto them of great and
eternal moment.

They are then only things relating unto Outward Order and Worship, wherein our
dissent from the present Establishment of Religion, does consist; things about
which there has been variety of Judgment, and difference in Practice, from
the days of the Apostles, and probably will be so until the end of the World:
For we find by experience, that the late Expedient for the ending of
differences about them, by vindicating of them into the arbitrary disposal of
every Church, or those that preside therein, in whose Determinations all
persons are to acquiesce; is so far from accomplishing the work whereunto it is
designed, that it contributes largely to their increase and perpetuation. Our
only guilt then is, Our Not agreeing with others in those things wherein there
never yet was an agreement among Christians: Nor perhaps, had they all that
frame of Spirit in Moderation and mutual Forbearance which the Gospel requires
in them, would it ever by any way needful that there should so be.

For our parts, about these things we judge not other men, nor do, or ever did
seek to impose our apprehensions on their Judgments or Practice. What in them
is agreeable unto Truth, God knows, and will one day declare. Unto our present
Light in the Revelation of His Will, must our practice be conformed, unless to
please Men, and secure our transitory, perishing Concernments, we intend to
break his Bonds, and cast away his Cords from us.

And that it may the better appear what is both our Judgment and Practice, in
and about these things; unto what we have declared in the close of our
Confession, (which we suppose they cannot reasonably and with satisfaction to
their own Consciences, wholly overlook, who because thereof, are ready to
reflect with severe thoughts upon us) we shall now only add, The General
Principles whereunto all that we profess or practice in these things, is
resolved. And of them we humbly desire, that a Christian and Candid
Consideration may be had: As supposing that to pass a Sentence of Condemnation
against us for our dissent unto any thing, without a previous weighing of the
Reasons of that dissent, is scarce suitable unto that Law whereby we are Men,
and engaged into Civil Societies. As then Religion is publicly received and
established in this Nation, there are many outward Concernments of it, relating
unto Persons and Things, that are disposed and regulated by and according to
the Laws thereof: Such is that which is called, Power Ecclesiastical, or
Authority to dispose of those Affairs of the Church with coercive Jurisdiction,
which relates to the outward public Concernments of it, and the Legal
interests of Men in them. This we acknowledge and own to be vested in the
Supreme Magistrate, the Kings Majesty, who is the Fountain and Spring of all
Jurisdiction in his own Kingdoms whatever. No power can be put forth or
exercised toward any of his Subjects, which in the manner or nature of its
exertion, has the force of a Law, Sentence, or Jurisdiction; or which, as to
the effect of it, reaches either their Bodies, Estates, or Liberties, but what
is derived from him, and binding formally on that sole Reason, and no otherwise.

Hence we have no Principle in the least seducing us to transgress against any
of those Laws which in former days were looked on as safe Preservatives of the
Protestant Religion and Interest in this Nation. Did we assert a Foreign Power
over his Majesty's Subjects, and claim an obedience from them in some such
cases as might at our pleasure be extended to the whole that is due unto Him;
Did we, or any of us, by virtue of any Office we hold in the Church of God,
claim and exercise a Jurisdiction over the Persons of his Majesty's Subjects in
Form and Course of Law; Or did we so much as pretend unto the exercise of any
Spiritual Power that should produce effects on the Outward Man; We might well
fear, left just offense should be taken against us. But whereas the way wherein
we worship God is utterly unconcerned in these things, and we willingly profess
the Spring of all Outward Coercive Jurisdiction, to be in the Person of the
Kings Majesty alone, without the least intermixture of any other Power of the
same kind, directly or by consequence; we cannot but say with confidence, That
it will be utterly impossible to convince us, That on this account we are
Offenders.

For the Worship of God, and Order therein, (which is purely Spiritual and
Evangelical) we acknowledge indeed the Lord Jesus Christ to be the only
Institutor or Author of it, and the holy Scripture the only Principle
revealing, the only Rule to judge of it, and to square it by. It is not now our
design to plead the Truth of this Principle, nor yet to clear it from mistakes,
or vindicate it from opposition: All which are done elsewhere. Let it be
supposed to be an Error or Mistake, which is the worst that can be supposed of
It; we must needs say, That it is an Error which has so much seeming
countenance given unto it by innumerable places of Scripture, and by so many
Testimonies of the Ancient and Modern Doctors of the Church, and is every way
so free from the production of any Consequent of evil importance; That if there
be any faylure of the Minds of Men, in and about the things of God, which from
a common sense of the frailty of Humane Nature, may rationally expect
forbearance and pardon from them, who have the happiness to be from all
miscarriage of that kind (if any such there be) this may claim a share and
interest among them.

Nor are we able as yet to discern, how any acceptable account can be given to
the Lord Jesus, at the last day, of severity against This Principle, or those
that otherwise inoffensive, walk according to the Light of it.

Moreover, Whereas Principles True in Themselves, may in their application unto
Practice be pressed to give countenance unto that which directly they lead not
unto; We have the advantage yet farther particularly to declare, That in the
pursuit of it in the Worship of God we have no other Ordinances or
Administrations, but what are by the Law and Church of England. Now whatever
other occasion may be sought against us, (which we pray God not to lay to their
charge who delight in such practices) we know full well that we differ in
nothing from the whole form of Religion established in England, but only in
some few things in outward Worship, wherein we cannot consent without the
renunciation of this Principle, of whose falsehood we are not convinced. This
being our only crime, if it be a crime, this the only mistake that we are
charged with, in the things of God; we yet hope that sober men will not judge
it of so high a demerit, as to be offended with our humble desire of
Indulgence, and a share in that Princely favor toward persons of tender
consciences, which his Majesty has often declared his Inclinations for.

We confess that oftentimes, when such Dissents are made a crime, they are
quickly esteemed the greatest, yea, almost all that is criminal: but whether
such a Judgment owes not it self more to Passion, Prejudice, and private
Interest, than to right Reason, is not hard to determine.

For our parts, as we said before, they are no great things which we desire for
our selves, the utmost of our aim being to pass the remainder of the few days
of our Pilgrimage in the Land of our Nativity, serving the Lord according to
what he has been pleased to reveal of his mind and will unto us. And we
suppose that those who are forward in suggesting counsels to the contrary, know
not well how to countervail the Kings damage.

That this our desire is neither unreasonable nor unjust; that it contains
nothing contrary to the will of God, the practice of the Church of old, or to
the disadvantage of the public tranquillity of these Nations: but that all
outward violence and severity on the account of our dissent, is destitute of
any firm foundation in Scripture, Reason, or the present juncture of Affairs
amongst us, we humbly crave liberty, in the further pursuit of our own JUST
DEFENSE, briefly to declare and evidence.

The great Fundamental Law amongst men, from which all others spring, and
whereby they ought to be regulated, is that Law of Nature, by which they are
disposed unto Civil Society, for the good of the whole and every individual
Member thereof. And this good being of the greatest importance unto all, does
unspeakably out-ballance those Inconveniences which may befall any of them
through a restriction put upon them by the particular Laws and Bonds of the
Society wherein they are engaged. It is not impossible, but that sundry persons
might honestly improve many things unto their advantage in the increase of
their interest in things of this world, were not bounds set unto their
endeavors, by the Laws of the Community whereof they are members. But whereas
no Security may be obtained that they shall not have their particular limits
and concernments broken in upon by an hand of violence and injustice, but in a
pursuit of that Principle of Nature, which directs them to the only Remedy of
that Evil in Civil Society, they are all in general willing to fore-go their
particular advantages, for that which gives them Assurance and Peace in all
that they are, and enjoy besides. All such conveniences therefore as consist
in the things that are within the power of men, and are inferior to that Good
and Advantage which Public Society does afford, the Law of Nature directing
men unto their chiefest Good, commands them, as occasion requires, to forbear
and quit. Nor can any Community be established without obedience unto that
command. But of the things that are not within the power of men, there is
another reason. If the Law of Society did require that all men engaging
thereunto should be of one stature and form of visage, or should have the same
measure of Intellectual abilities, or the same conception of all objects of a
rational understanding, it were utterly impossible that any Community should
ever be raised among the sons of men.

As then all inconveniences, yea, and mischiefs relating unto things within
the power of men, are to be undergone and born with, that are less than the
Evils which nothing but Political Societies can prevent for the sake thereof:
So the allowance of those Differences which are inseparable from the nature of
man, as diversified in Individuals, and insuperable unto any of their
endeavors, is supposed in the Principles of its being and constitution. Yea,
this is one Principle of the Law of Nature, to which we owe the Benefits of
humane Conversation and Administration of Justice, that those differences
amongst men, which unto them are absolutely unavoidable, and therefore in
themselves not intrenching upon, nor disannulling the good of the whole, (for
nature does not intersere with itself) should be forborne and allowed among
them, seeing an endeavor for their extinguishment must irresistibly extinguish
the Community itself, as taking away the main supposal on which it is founded.
And in that harmony, which by an answerableness of one thing unto another,
rises from such differences, does the chiefest glory and beauty of Civil
Society consist; the several particulars of it also being rendered useful unto
the whole thereby. Of this nature are the things concerning which we discourse.
They relate, as is confessed, unto things spiritual and supernatural: that the
will of God in these things cannot be known but by Revelation from himself, all
men will acknowledge: and we suppose they will with no less readiness consent,
That Divine Revelation cannot be apprehended or assented unto, but according to
the nature and measure of that light, which God is pleased to communicate unto
them, unto whom such Revelation is made: That this Light does so equally affect
the minds of all men, or that it is possible it should do so, considering the
diverse ways and means of its communication, with the different dispositions of
them that receive it, that they should all have the same apprehensions of the
things proposed unto them, none will judge, but such as take up their
profession in these things on Custom, Prejudice or Interest. It will then hence
evidently follow, That men's apprehensions of things spiritual and supernatural,
such, we mean, as have no alliance unto the ingrafted Light of Nature, are not
absolutely under their own power, or depend on the liberty of their wills,
whereunto all Law is given. And therefore is the diversity in and about them to
be reckoned among those unavoidable differences which are supposed in the Law
of Civil Society, and without which supposal, every attempt for any such
Society would be destructive of it self. Among these apprehensions, and the
exercise of our consciences toward God upon them, lies all the difference from
the present Establishment, which we desire an Indulgence to be showed toward;
not at all questioning but that it is lawful for them who have attained unto an
agreement in them, so far as they have attained, to confirm and strengthen that
agreement among themselves, and render it desirable unto others, by all such
ways and means as by right, and the Laws of the Society whereof they are, they
may make use of.

And it is, as we humbly conceive, in vain pretended, That it is not the
apprehensions of men's minds, and their consciences unto God upon them, but only
their outward Actings that fall under the Penalties desired by some to be
indispensably imposed on Dissenters from the Established Form; seeing those
penalties are not only annexed unto Actions, which those apprehensions require,
as Duties unto God, but also unto a not acting contrary unto them, which
directly and immediately reflect on the Mind and Conscience it self: other
ways to reach the Consciences of their Brethren, it is utterly impossible to
find out. And to teach men that their Consciences toward God are not concerned
either in not acting according to their Light in his Worship, or in acting
against it, is to teach them to be Atheists.

We cannot therefore but hope that our distance from the present Establishment,
in some few things relating unto Supernatural Revelation, (especially whilst in
our agreement with it, there is a salve for all things in the least intrenching
on the Light of Nature, and all things whatever, that even of Revelation
itself, are necessary to the grand end of it, with Security against any thing
that may any way incommodate Public Tranquillity) being unto us insuperable,
and therefore provided for by the Fundamental Law of all Civil Societies, that
it will not always receive so severe a construction as to deprive us of the
Good and Benefit thereof. For to annex Penalties, which in their progress will
deprive men of all those advantages in their outward Concernments which Public
Society does or can afford, unto those Differences, without a supposition
whereof, and provision for, there could be no such Society at all, is to
destroy that whose good and preservation is intended.

And therefore the different Conceptions of the Minds of Men in the things
under consideration, with actings consonant unto them, being not only an
unavoidable Consequent of Natures constant production of the Race of Mankind,
in that various diversity which in all instances we behold, but also rendered
farther insuperable, from the nature of the things themselves about which they
are exercised, (being of Divine Revelation) they were ever in the World
esteemed without the Line of Civil Coercion and Punishment, until it came to
the Interest of some to offer Violence to those Principles of Reason in
Themselves, which any outward Alteration in the state of things, is capable of
rendering their own best Protection and Defense.

And on these Grounds, it is, That FORCE never yet attained, or long kept that
in RELIGION which it aimed at.

And the Great Roman Historian tells us, That it is Indecorum Principi
adtrectare, quod non obtineat; No way honorable unto a Sovereign Prince, to
attempt that which will never be accomplished.

But because what may seem obscure in this Reason of things and Principles of
Community, (which usually affect Them only, who without Interest or Prejudice,
give up Themselves to the Conduct of Rational and Sedate Consideration, with
which sort of Persons alone, we have not to deal) is exemplified in the GOSPEL,
whose furtherance is on all Hands pretended; We shall thence also briefly
manifest, that the way pretended for the promotion of its Interest, by Severity
in external Penalties, on the account of such Differences as we are concerned
in, is both opposite unto the Spirit of its Author, and contrary to the Rules
of it, with the Practice of Those who have walked according to them.

As among the many blessed Ends of the Conversation of our Lord Jesus Christ in
the Flesh, it was not of the least moment, that he might set us a Pattern, and
give us an example of that Frame of Heart, and Holiness of Life, whereby we may
become like unto our HEAVENLY FATHER, and be acceptable before Him; so in his
carrying on of that Design, there was not any thing that he more emphatically
called upon his Disciples to endeavor a Conformity unto him in, than in his
Meekness, Lowliness, Gentleness, and Tenderness toward all. These he took all
occasions for our good to show forth in Himself, and commend unto Others.
Whatever Provocation He met withal; whatever injurious Opposition He was
exposed unto, He did not contend, nor cry, nor cause his Voice to be heard with
Strife or Anger. The Sins of Men indeed, He reproved with all Authority, their
groundless Traditions in the Worship of God, He rejected; their Errors He
refuted by the Word: But to the Persons of Men, He was always Meek and Tender,
as coming to Save, and not Destroy; to keep Alive, and not to Kill. In the
Things of Man, He referred all unto the Just Authority and Righteous Laws of
Men; but in the Things of GOD, never gave the lest intimation of Severity, but
only in his Holy Threats of future Evil in the World to come, upon Men's Final
Impenitency and Unbelief. COERCE, FINE, IMPRISON, BANISH, Those that apprehend
not aright all and every thing that I would have you instructed in; are Words
that never proceeded out of His holy Mouth, Things that never entered into His
gracious Heart. And we are persuaded, that it is a thing of marvelous
difficulty, for any Man seriously to think, That He who was and is so full of
compassion toward all the Sons of Men, even the Worst of them, should ever
give the least consent unto the punishment, and gradual destruction, of Those
who in sincerity desire to love and obey Him, and do yet unavoidably mistake in
their apprehensions of some few things, pleaded to be according to His Mind,
their Love and Obedience unto Him thereby being no whit impeached. When some of
his Disciples of old, in zeal as they pretended, unto Himself, and the Truths
preached by Him, would have called for fire from Heaven, on those who had
contumeliously slighted Him upon a supposed diversity in Religion, for which
they thought themselves warranted (though falsely) by a President out of the Old
Testament; He lets them know, that it was an unacquaintedness with their own
spirits, causing them to imagine that to be Zeal for the Truth, which was
indeed but Self-Revenge, and private Interest, which had caused them to speak
so unadvisedly.

Now that the same mind might be in us that was in Jesus Christ, that His
Example is to be a Rule unto us, that we ought all to be baptized into the same
Spirit with Him; that what from His Frame of Heart and Actings, as revealed in
his Word, we can rationally conclude that He would approve or disallow, we
ought to square our Proceedings and Judgments unto, none that own his Name,
can deny.

And if Men would not stifle, but suffer themselves to be guided by the Power
of their Convictions, they would quickly perceive how inconsistent with it, are
their thoughts of Rigor and Severity toward those which differ from them in
some few things relating to the Mind of God in and about His Worship.

Certainly this Readiness of Servants; who are themselves pardoned Talents, to
fall with violence on their Fellows (upon the account of his Service, though
otherwise it may be poor and despicable in the World) for lesser Debts, and
those only supposed, not proved real, will appear at the Last Day, not to have
been so acceptable unto him, as some Men on grounds and pretenses utterly
foreign unto this whole business, are willing now to persuade themselves that
it is. Would men in these things, which are principally His, and not their own
Concernments, but as His, labor to be always clothed with his Spirit, and do
nothing but what they can rationally satisfy themselves, that He Himself would
do in like case; there would be an end not only of this Debate, but of many
other Mischiefs also, which the Christian World is at this day pestered withal.
And it must needs seem strange that Men can persuade themselves that they do
that for Christ which they cannot once think or imagine that He would do
Himself. Certainly setting aside provocations and prejudices, any Man who has
but read the Gospel, and gives any Credit unto it, is a competent Judge,
whether External Force in these Things, do more answer the Spirit of Christ, or
that from which He suffered.

But we have not only His Heart and Actings for our Example, but His Word also,
as revealed by Himself and His Apostles, as our Rule in this matter.

With nothing more does it abound as to our Duty in this World, than with
Precepts for, and Exhortation unto mutual forbearance of one another in our
Mistakes and Failings. And although there be force and Light enough in its
General Rules, to guide us in all particulars, yet lest any should imagine that
the Cause under Consideration, about different Apprehensions and Practices in
some things relating to the Worship of God, might be exempted from them, even
that also is variously instanced in; and confirmed by Examples approved by
himself. The great Apostle, who gives us that general Rule, That we should walk
together in one mind, so far as. we have attained, and for other things of
difference, wait for the Revelation of the Mind of God unto them that differ,
Phil. 3. 15, 16. every where applies his own Rule unto the great difference
that was in those days, and long after, between the Jewish and Gentile
Believers. The one continued under a supposal of an obligation to the
observation of Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies, from which the other was
instructed that they were set at liberty. This difference, as is the manner
among the Sons of Men, wrought various Jealousies between them, with disputes
and censurings of each other; whereof the Apostle gives us a full account,
especially in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 14. 15. Neither did they rest
here, but those of the Circumcision every where kept their Assemblies and
Worship distinct from the Cougregations of the Gentile-Believers; Hence in most
places of note, there were two Churches, one of the Jews, and another of the
Gentiles, walking at peace in the Faith of the Gospel, but differing as to some
Ceremonial Observances. The whole Society of the Apostles, observing their
difference, to prevent any evil consequent in their Assembly at Jerusalem,
assigned to the several Parties their particular bounds, how far they should
accommodate themselves unto one another by a mutual condescension; that they
might walk in love and Peace, as to what remained of difference among them. The
Jews are taught by them not to impose their Rites and Ceremonies on the
Gentiles; and the Gentiles to abstain from some things for a season, whereunto
their liberty did extend, whereby the other were principally provoked.

Their Bounds being so fixed, and their general duty stated, both parties were
left at liberty, as to their practice in the things wherein they could not yet
be recondiled: and in that different practice did they continue for many years,
until the occasion of their division was, by the providence of God in the
destruction of the Judaical Church, utterly taken away.

These were the Rules they proceeded by, this their course and practice, which
unquestionably under the Lord Jesus were entrusted with supreme Authority over
the whole Church, of that kind which is not transmitted unto any of the sons of
men after the ceasing of their Office and Work, and were guided infallibly in
all their determinations. Coercions, Restraints, corporal punishments, were far
from their thoughts; yea, the very exercise of any Ecclesiastical Power against
them who dissented from what they knew to be truth, so that in general they
were sound in the Faith, and walked in their Lives as became the Gospel.

And whereas they sometimes carry the matter to a supposal of disobedience unto
those important things which they taught and commanded in the Name of their
Lord and Master, and thereupon proceeded to denounce Threatenings against the
Disobedient, they expressly disclaim all thoughts of proceeding against them, or
any power or warrant from Christ committed unto them, (or any others, or that
afterward in his Providence should so be, so to do) with external carnal force
and penalties; avowing their Authority over all, that was ever to be put forth
in things of that nature, to be spiritual, and in a spiritual manner only to be
exercised, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.

And because the Church might not seem to be disadvantaged by this disclamour
of Power externally, to coerce such as received not the truth that it embraced,
and to be cast into a worse condition than that of the Jews which went before,
whose Ordinances being carnal, were established and vindicated by carnal Power:
St. Paul lets them know, That this alteration is for the better; and the
coercion of miscarriages under the Gospel, by threatenings of the future
Judgment, which would have a special respect unto them, more weighty than the
severest Penalties that were appointed by Moses Law, Heb. 10. 28, 29, 30.

Not that lesser Differences in apprehensions of the mind of God in his Word,
had any punishment assigned unto them under the Old Testament, whose penalties
concerned them only who turned away to the worship of any other god but the God
of Israel, (and such no man pleads for) But that the whole nature of the
Ordinances and Worship of the Church being changed from carnal and earthly, to
heavenly and spiritual; so also are the Laws of Rewards and Punishments annexed
unto them. These were the Rules, this the Practice in this case, of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. These Rules, this Practice, has he recorded
in his Word for our Instruction and Direction.

Might all those who profess Obedience unto his Name, be prevailed on to
regulate their judgments by them, and square their proceedings unto them, the
Church of God would have peace, and the work of God be effectually carried on
in the world, as in the days of old. And for our parts, we will never open our
mouths to deprecate any severity that may be warranted from the Gospel, or
Apostolical direction and practice; against any mistake of that importance in
the things of God, as our Principles and ways may rationally be supposed to be.
For although we are persuaded, that what we profess and practice is according
unto the mind of Christ; yet because it is our lot and portion to have our
Governors and Rulers otherwise minded, we are contented to be dealt withal
so, as the blessed Gospel will warrant any to deal with them, who are so far in
the wrong, as we are supposed to be. And if herein we cannot prevail, we shall
labor to possess our souls in patience, and to commit our cause to him that
judges righteously.

This we know, That the Judgment and Practice of the first Churches after the
days of the Apostles, was conform to the Rules and Examples that by them were
given unto them. Differences in External Rites of Worship, which were found
amongst them, where the substance of Faith was preserved, they looked upon as
no breach of Union at all. A long Catalogue of such differences, as were from
time immemorial amongst them, is given us by Socrates the Historian. And he who
first disturbed the peace of the Churches about them, by dividing their
communion, (Victor of Rome) is left branded upon record, with the censures of
the principal persons for Learning and Holiness throughout the world, in those
days. Nor is our dissent from the present Establishment of any larger extent,
than such as the general consent of all the first Churches extended the bond of
their communion unto.

Impositions of things indifferent, with subscriptions to precise
determinations on points doubtful and ambiguous, with confinements of men's
practices in all outward ceremonies and circumstances of Worship, were things
not born in the world for some hundreds of years after the first planting of
Churches. Origin in his third Book against Celsus pleads expressly, That there
ever were differences amongst Professors of Christianity from the beginning;
and that it was impossible but that there should so be, which yet he shows
hindered not their Faith, Love and Obedience. Justin Martyr in his second
Apology, declares his forbearance, and the Churches of those days, toward
those who believing in Christ, yet thought themselves obliged to the
observation of Mosaical Rites and Ceremonies, provided that they did not impose
the practice of them upon others. Ignatius before them, in his Epistle to the
Philadelphians, professes, That to persecute men on the account of God or
Religion, is to make our selves conformable to the Heathen that know not God.
Tertullian, Origin, Arnobius, and Lactantius, openly pleaded for a Liberty in
Religion, as founded in the Law of Nature, and their consistence of Faith with
Compulsion, in that extent which we aim not at. The Synod of Alexandria, in the
case of Athanasius, condemns all external force in Religion, and reproacheth
the Arians, as the first Inventers and Promoters of it.

It is indeed pleaded by some, That the Christians of those days had reason to
assert this Liberty, because there was then no Christian Magistrate, who might
make use of the Civil Sword in their behalf, or for the punishment of
Dissenters from them; and that this was the reason of their so doing.

But the Dishonesty of this pretense is notorious. They affirm directly, That
no force, coercion or restraint, is to be used in or about the Worship of God,
nor outward power in a way of Penalties, to be exercised over the consciences
of men herein.

To say they thus pleaded and pretended, merely to serve their own present
condition and occasion, but that upon the alteration of things they would be
otherwise minded, is calumniously to reflect upon those holy Witnesses of
Christ, the guilt of the highest hypocrisy imaginable. And men cannot invent a
more effectual means to cast contempt on all Religion, and to root a due sense
of it out of the world, than by fomenting such imaginations. Let them therefore
rest in peace, under that reputation of holiness and sincerity which they
justly deserve; what ever be the issue of things with us, or those which may
suffer with us in the like condition.

But neither were they alone: the great CONSTANTINE himself, the first
Christian Magistrate with Supreme Power, by a public Edict declared, THAT THE
LIBERTY OF WORSHIP WAS NOT TO BE DENIED UNTO ANY. And until the latter end of
his Reign, there were no thoughts of exercising severity, with reference unto
any divisions amongst CHRISTIANS about the WORSHIP of GOD.

After the rise of the Arian Heresy, when the interposition of Civil Censures
upon the account of Difference about things spiritual, had made an entrance by
the solicitations of some zealous persons for the banishment of Arius, and some
of his Copartners; it is not easy to relate what miseries and confusions were
brought upon the Churches thereby, imprisonments, banishments, and ruin of
Churches, make up much of the Ecclesiastical History of those days.

After a while, Arius is recalled from banishment, and Athanasius driven into
it. In a short tract of time, Arianism it self got the Civil Sword in many
places, wherewith it raged against all the Orthodox Professors of the Deity of
the Son of God, as the Synod of Alexandria complains.

Much they suffered in the days of Constantius, unto whom the words of Hillary
in this case are worthy consideration: Let (says he) your Clemency take care
and order, that the Presidents of the Provinces look to Public Civil Affairs,
which alone are committed to them, but not meddle in things of Religion. And
again, Let your gentleness suffer the People to hear them teaching whom they
desire, whom they think well of, whom they choose. GOD TEACHES, rather than BY
FORCE EXACTETH the Knowledge of Himself, and ascertaining the Authority of his
Commands by Works of Power, DESPISES ALL COMPELLED Confession of Him. If Force
be used to compel Men unto the True Faith, the Bishops that profess it would
interpose, and say, God is the God of the whole World, he needs no compelled
obedience, nor requires any such Confession of him. He is not to be deceived,
but to be well pleased. Whence is it then, that persons are taught how to
worship God by Bonds and Perils? These are the words of Hillary.

But the same Persons suffered more during the Reign of Valens, who was
dissuaded from Cruelty against the Christians by Themistius, a Pagan
Philosopher, on the Principles of Common Reason and Honesty; plainly telling
him, That by the way he used, he might force some to venerate his Imperial
Robes, but never any one to worship God aright.

But the best Emperors in the mean time bewailed those fierce Animosities,
whereby every Sect and Party labored to oppress their Adversaries, according
as they had obtained an Interest in Imperial Favor, and kept themselves from
putting forth their Authority against any Dissenters in Christian Religion, who
retained the Foundation of the Faith in any competent measure. Valentinianus by
public Decree, granted liberty of Religion unto all Christians, as Zosomen
testifies, Lib. 6. Ammianus Marcellinus in his History observes the same,
Gratian made a Law, that Religion should be free to all sorts and sects of
Christians, except the Manichees, Eunomians, and Photinians; and that they
should have their Meetings free; as both Socrates and Zosomen acquaint us.

Neither have they been without their Followers in those Ages wherein the
Differences about Religion have risen to as great a height as they are capable
of in this World.

Nor will Posterity be ever able to take off the lasting Blot from the Honor
of Sigismund the Emperor, who suffered himself to be imposed upon by the
Council of Constance to break his word of Safety and Liberty, to John Hus, and
Jerome of Prague.

And what did Charles the Fifth obtain, by filling the World with Blood and
Uprores, for the extirpation of Protestantism? Notwithstanding all his
Victories and Successes, which for a while smiled upon Him, his whole Design
ended in loss and disappointment.

Ferdinand his Brother and Successor, made wise by his Example, kept constant
the peace of the Empire, by a constant peace granted to the Consciences of Men.

His Son Maximilian continually professed, That the Empire of Conscience
belonged unto GOD alone, wherein He would never interpose. And upon the Return
of Henry the Third of France out of Poland, He gave Him that Advice to this
purpose, which it had been happy for that Prince, if He had understood and
followed, before He came to dye. But then even He also, having the severe
Instruction given Him of His own Experience, left that as His last Advice to
his Counselors, That they should no more with Force interpose in the matters
of Religion.

Rodulphus who succeeded Maximilian, by the same means for a long time
preserved the peace of the Empire. And after he had by the persuasions of some,
whose interest it was so to persuade him, interdicted the Protestants in
Bohemia the use of their Religion upon the tidings of a defeat given to his
Forces in Hungary by the Turks, he instantly replied, I looked for no other
issue, since I invaded the Throne of God, imposing on the Consciences of Men:
and therefore granted them their former Liberty.

Does not all the World behold the contrary issue of the Wars in France, and
those in the United Provinces, begun and carried on on the same account: The
Great Henry of France winding up all the differences thereof, by granting
Liberty to the Hugonots, laid a firm Foundation of the future Peace, and
present Greatness of that Kingdom. Whereas the Cruelty of the Duke D'Alva, and
his Successors, implacably pursuing the Netherlands to ruin on the same
account, has ended in the utter loss of sundry Provinces, as to the Rule and
Authority that he and they endeavored absolutely to inthrone, and rendered the
rest of them scarce worth the keeping.

The World is full of Instances of the like kind.

On the other hand, When by the crafty Artifices and carnal Interests of some,
the Principle of External Coercion for lesser Differences in matters of
Christian Religion, came to be inthroned, and obtained place in the Emperial
Constitutions, and Laws of other Kingdoms, the main use that was made of it,
was to drive Truth, and the purity of the Gospel, out of the World, and to
force all men to center in a Profession and Worship, framed to the Interest of
some few men, who made no small advantage of it.

According as the Power and Purity of Religion decayed, so did this persuasion
get ground in the Minds of Men, until it became almost all the Religion that
was in the World, That those who submitted not unto the Dictates of them who by
various ways obtained a mixture of Power, Civil and Ecclesiastical, into their
hands, should be destroyed; and rooted out of the Earth.

This Apostasy from the Spirit, Principles, Rules, and Commands of the Gospel,
this Open Contradiction to the Practice of the Apostles, their Successors,
first Churches, best and wisest Emperors, attended with the woeful consequents
that have ensued thereon, in the ruin of Souls, proscriptions of the Truth,
Martyrdom of thousands and ten thousands, commotions of Nations, and the
destruction of many of them, We hope will not be revived in these days of
Knowledge, and near approach of the Judge of all.

We trust that it will not be thought unequal, if we appeal from the example of
the Professors of Christianity under its woeful Degeneracy, unto the first
Institution and public instance of its Profession: especially being encouraged
by the Judgment, Example, and Practice of many Wise and Mighty Monarchs in
these Latter Days.

The Case is the same as it was of old; no new Pretenses are made use of, no
Arguments pleaded, for the Introduction of Severity, but such as have been
pretended at all times by those who were in possession of Power, when they had
a mind to ruin any that dissented from them.

That the end of their Conventicles was for Sin and Uncleanness; that the
permission of them was against the Rules of Policy, and Laws of the Empire;
that they were Seminaries of Sedition; that GOD was displeased with the
confusion in Religions introduced by them; that Errors and mis-apprehensions of
GOD were nourished in them; that they disturbed the Union, Peace, and Love that
ought to be maintained among Mankind; that they proceeded upon Principles of
Pride, Singularity, Faction, and Disobedience unto Superiors; was from the
first entrance of Christianity into the World, charged on the Professors of it.

The same Arguments and Considerations are constantly still made use of, and
insisted on, by all men that intend Severity toward them that differ from them.

And they are such as will evidently serve alike any Party or Persuasion, that
in any place at any time, shall be accompanied with Power: And so have been
oftener managed in the hands of Error, Superstition, and Heresy, than of Truth
and Sobriety.

Wherefore the Bishop of Rome, observing the unreasonableness of destroying
Mankind upon such loose Principles and Pretenses as are indifferently suited
unto the Interest and Cause of all who have Power to make use of them, because
they all suppose the thing in question, namely, That they who enjoyed Power,
did also enjoy the Truth; found out a way to appropriate the whole advantage of
them to himself, as having attained the ascription of an INFALLIBILITY unto
him, in determining what is the Truth in all things wherein Men do or may
differ about Religion, or the Worship of God.

This being once admitted and established, there seems great force in the
foregoing pleas and reasonings: and no great danger in acting suitably unto
them, but that the admission of it is more pernicious unto Religion, than all
the consequents which it pretends to obviate. But where this infallible
determination, is disclaimed, to proceed unto outward punishment for such
conceptions of men's minds and consciences in the things of God, as he is
pleased to impart unto them, which may be true and according to his will, upon
reasons and pretenses, invented originally for the service of error, and made
use of for the most part unto that purpose, being more fit for that work than
for a contribution of any assistance unto truth, is that which we know not how
men can commend their Consciences unto God in.

Besides what is it that is aimed at by this external coercion and punishment?
that all men may be of one mind in the matter of the Worship of God, a thing
that never was, nor ever will be by that means affected in this world, for
neither is it absolutely possible in itself, neither is the means suited to the
procurement of it, so far as it is possible. But whom neither the reason of the
thing it self will convince, nor the constant experience of so many ages, it is
in vain for any to contend withal.

In the mean time we know, that the most of them who agree together to press
for severity against us for dissenting from them, do differ among themselves in
things of far greater importance in the Doctrine of the Gospel, than those are
wherein we differ from them: whence it must needs be evident to all what is the
ground of their Zeal in reference unto us and others.

But all these considerations are quickly in the thoughts of some, removed out
of the way, by pretenses that the indulgence and liberty desired, will
certainly produce all sorts of evils both in Religion it self, and in the Civil
state; which being mentioned before in general; shall now be a little further
considered. For this is principally, if not solely pleaded for the refusal and
the rejection of them. Neither does this course of procedure seem to be
unwisely fixed upon; by those who suppose it to be their interest to manage
their opposition unto such an indulgence, wherein yet we hope they will at
length discover their mistake.

For whereas the arguments to be in this case insisted on, consist merely in
conjectures, jealousies and suppositions of what may come to pass, none knows
when, or where; it is easy for any to dilate upon them at their pleasure, nor
is it possible for any to give satisfaction to all that men may conjecture, or
pretend to fear. Suppose all things that are evil, horrid, pernicious to truth
and mankind, and when they are sufficiently aggravated; affirm that they will
ensue upon this forbearance, which that all, or any of them will so do, no man
can tell, and this design is satisfied. But it is sufficiently evident that
they are all false or mistaken suppositions, that can give countenance unto
these pretenses.

For either it must be pretended, that truth and order, which those who make
use of those reasonings, suppose themselves possessed of, have lost the power and
efficacy of preserving themselves, and of preventing the evils summoned up to
be represented as the consequents of indulgence without external force, and
coercion, which they have had sometimes and elsewhere; or that indeed they have
all actually followed and ensued upon such indulgence, in all times and places.
The latter of these is so notoriously contradicted by the experience of the
whole world, especially of sundry Kingdoms and Dominions in Europe, as France,
Germany, Poland, and others, that it may not hope for admittance with the most
obnoxious credulity. For the former, it is most certain that the truth of the
Gospel did never so prevail in the world, as when there was a full liberty, as
unto civil punishments, granted unto persons to dissent in it, and about it.

And if that which is now so called, continues not to have the same effect, it
may justly be feared that it is not indeed what it is called, or that it is not
managed in a due manner. It is then altogether uncertain, that upon the
indulgence desired, such variety of opinions will ensue as is pretended, and
unquestionably certain, that all such as produce practices contrary to civil
Society, moral honesty, or the light of nature, ought in all instances of them
to be restrained. For the conscience of a man can dictate no such thing unto
him, there being an inconsistency in them with that supreme light, which rules
in Conscience, whilst it may be so called. And it is a hard thing to ruin
multitudes at present sober and honest, lest by not doing so, some one or other
may prove brainsick, frantic, or vicious, who also may be easily restrained
when they appear so to be.

And moderate liberty will certainly appear to be Religious security in this
matter, if the power of it, as well as the profession be regarded. For it is
the interest of them who plead for indulgence, to watch and contend against
error and heresy, no less than theirs by whom it is opposed. For professing
all material truths with them, they are not to be supposed to value or esteem
them less than they. And it may be it will appear, that they have endeavored
as much their suppression in the way warranted by the Gospel, as those who
profess such fears of their increase.

They are Protestants only of whom we speak, and to suppose that they will not
do their utmost for the opposing of the rise, growth, or progress of what ever
is contrary to that Religion which they profess, or that their interest therein
is of less concernment unto them than that of others from whom they differ, is
but a groundless surmise.

But it is yet further objected, that the indulgence desired has an
inconsistency with public peace and tranquillity, the other head of the general
accusation before mentioned. Many fears and suspicions are mustered up, to
contribute assistance unto this objection also. For we are in the field of
surmises, which is endless and boundless. Unto such as make use of these
pretenses, we can truly say, that might we by any means be convinced of the
truth of this suggestion, we should not only desist from our present
supplication, but speedily renounce those very principles which necessitate us
thereunto. For we assuredly know, that no divine truth, nothing really relating
unto the worship of God, can cause or occasion any civil disturbances, unless
they arise from corrupt affections in them that profess it, or in them that
oppose it. And as we shall labor to free our selves from them on the one hand,
so it is our desire and prayer, that others may do so also on the other, which
will give sufficient assurance to tranquillity. But we are moreover wholly freed
from any concernment in this objection, in that, He who is undoubtedly the best
and most competent Judge of what will contribute to the peace of the Kingdom,
and what is inconsistent therewith, and who is incomparably most concerned in
the one or the other, even the King's Majesty himself has frequently declared
his Royal Intentions for the granting of the indulgence desired, who would
never have been induced thereunto, had he not perfectly understood its
consistency with the peace and welfare of the Kingdom. And as our confidence in
those Royal Declarations has not hitherto been weakened by the interveniency
of so many occasions, as have cast us under another condition, so we hope that
our peaceable deportment has in some measure contributed in the thoughts of
prudent men, unto the facilitating of their accomplishment. And as this will be
to the lasting renown of his Majesty, so it will appear to be the most suitable
unto the present state of things in this Nation, both with respect unto it
self, and the Nations that are round about us. And we think it our duty to
pray, that his Majesty may acquire those Glories in his Reign, which none of
his subjects may have cause to mourn for, and such will be the effect of
clemency and righteousness.

We find it indeed still pretended, that the allowance of meetings for the
worship of God, how ever ordered and bounded, will be a means to procure and
further sedition in the Commonwealth, and to advantage men in the pursuit of
designs to the disturbance of the Kingdom. But it were equal that it should be
proved, that those who desire this indulgence have such inclinations and
designs, before such pretenses be admitted as of any force. For our parts, we
expect no liberty, but from his Majesty's favor and authority, with the
concurrence of the Farliament; which when we have obtained, (as at no time,
what ever our condition be, have we the least thoughts or inclinations unto any
sedition or public disturbance) so having an obligation upon us in the things
of our greatest interest in this world, we know not from what sort or party of
men, more cordial adherence unto, and defense of public peace and tranquillity,
can justly be expected. For where there are more causes and reasons of
compliance and acquiescency, than there are on the contrary, it is rationally
to be supposed that they will prevail. And to surmise the acting of multitudes,
contrary to their own Interests, and acknowledged obligation of favor, is to
take away all assurance out of humane affairs.

Neither is there any color of sound reason in what is pretended, of the
advantage that any may have to promote seditious designs, by the meetings of
the Dissenters pleaded for in the worship of God. For doubtless the public
peace will never be hazarded by such designs, whilst they are managed by none
but such as think to promote and carry them on in assemblies of promiscuous
multitudes of men women and children, unknown too, for the most part, unto
themselves, and to one another. But these things are spoken, because they have
been wonted so to be; other considerations to confirm them are none.
Conscience, Interest, sense of obligations, the only safe rules amongst men to
judge by of future events, all plead an expectation of the highest tranquillity
in the minds and spirits of men, upon the indulgence desired.

And there lies a ready security against the pretended fears of the contrivance
of sedition, in assemblies of men women and children, strangers to one another
in a great measure, by commanding all Meetings to be disposed in such a way, as
that they may be exposed to all, and be under the constant inspection of
Authority.

As for other courses of Severity, with respect to the peace and prosperity of
the Kingdom, it may not be amiss a little to consider, who, and what are the
dissenters from the present establishment. For the persons themselves, they are
mostly of that sort and condition of men in the Commonwealth, upon whose
industry and endeavors in their several ways and callings, the trade and
wealth of the Nation does much depend. And what advantage it will be to the
Kingdom to break in upon them unto their discouragement, fear or ruin, we
suppose no man can divine. Those who think there are enough for the work
without them, and that their exclusion will make room for others, does gratify
indeed thereby some particular persons, intent upon their own private
advantages, which they would willingly advance in the ruin of their
neighbors; but scarce seem to have taken a right measure of the state of the
whole. For whereas it may be sometimes, there may in some places be too many of
them who manage the affairs of Trade and Commerce, when their concerns are
drawn unto a head, and a readiness for their last exchange, that there should
be so of those that do dispose and prepare things also, to bring them unto that
condition, is impossible. It cannot then be, but that the continuance of so
great fears and discouragements upon men, as those which their dissent from the
established way of worship does at present cast upon them, must of necessity
weaken the Nation, in that part of it wherein its principle strength does lie.
Neither are they a few only who will be found to be concerned in this matter,
which is not to be despised. Pliny, a wise Counselor, writing to Trajan, a
wise and renowned Emperor, about Christians, who were then the objects of the
public hatred of the world, desires his advice upon the account of their
Numbers, not that they were to be feared, but unmeet to be punished; unless he
intended to lay the Empire waste. Visa enim est mihi res digna consultatione,
maxim propter periclitantium numerum; multi enim omnis aetatis, omnis ordinis
utriusque sexus, etiam vocantur in periculum and vocabuntur; neque enim
Civitates tantum, sed vicos etiam atque agros superstitionis istius contagio
pervagata est.

So then they termed Christian Religion; for the multitude would still keep the
name of Truth and Religion to themselves: the oppressed, the lesser number,
must bear the name or title, which they consent or conspire to cast upon them.
But the thing it self, as to the persons at present dissenting from the
established form, is not unduly expressed. And as it will be an act of Royal
Clemency, and like to the work of God himself, to free at once so great
multitudes of all ages, sexes and conditions, from the fears and dangers of
those evils, which they are fully satisfied they do not deserve, so any other
way of quitting the Governors of this Nation from those uneasy thoughts,
which an apprehension of such an effect of their Rule upon multitudes of
subjects must needs produce, will be very difficult, if not impossible. Shall
the course begun in severity against them, be pursued? what generous spirits
employed in the execution of it, can but be weary at last with undoing and
ruining families, of those persons, whom they find to live peaceably in
subjection to the Government of the Nation, and usefully amongst their
Neighbors, merely because they dare not sin against God, in transgressing
against that persuasion concerning his Will and Worship, which he has given
unto them? for they cannot but at last consider, that no man erreth willingly,
or believes any thing against his light, or has other thoughts of God and his
Worship, than what he apprehends to be from himself, or that any duty is
accepted of God, which springs from compulsion. How much more Noble and
Honorable will they discern the work of relieving men sober and peaceable in
distress, to be, than to have the complaints, and tears, and ruin of Innocent
men and their families, continually reflecting themselves on their minds. Nor
is there any probability of success in this procedure; for as Time has always
made for Rule, and encouragements which are solely in the power of Rulers, have
effected great compliance even in things religious, so force and violent
prosecution in such cases have been always fruitless. For it is known how much
they are disadvantaged as to success, in that the righteousness and equity of
their pretended causes are always dubious to unconcerned persons, which makes
them think that the true reason of them, is other than what is pretended. When
they see men whom they apprehend as innocent and guiltless as themselves, as to
all the concernments of mankind in this world, pursued with penalties equal
unto those that are notoriosly Criminal, they are greatly inclined unto
commiseration toward them; especially if at the interposition of the name and
worship of God in the cause, they judge for ought appears to them, they fear
God and endeavor to please him, at least as well as those by whom they are
molested.

And when they further understand, that those whom they see to suffer such
things as they account grievous, and are really ruinous to them and their
families, do it for their conscience sake, it strongly induces them to believe
that it must needs be something good and honest that men choose so to suffer
for them, rather than to forego. For all suffering for Religion, they know to
be in the power and will of them that suffer; and not of those that inflict
penalties upon them: for their Religion is their choice, which they may part
withal, if they esteem it not worth the hazard wherewith it is attended.

Thus the Roman Historian tells us, in the first sufferings of the Christians
at Rome. Quanquam adversus sontes, and Novissima exempla meritos (for so he
thought) Miseratio Oriebatur, tanquam non utilitate publica, sed in sevitiam
aliquorum absumerentur.

Nor is it a probable way of dealing with the consciences of men, especially of
Multitudes who are able to give mutual testimony, and encouragement to one
another, yea in such a state of things, dangers of times delight men, and they
find a satisfaction, if not an honor in their miseries; as having sufficient
assurance, that it is a glorious and a blessed thing to suffer things hard and
dreadful in the world, when they are conscious to themselves of no guilt or
evil. And therefore as severity has hitherto got no ground on the minds of men
in this matter, no more is it like to do for the future. And if it be proceeded
in, it cannot be avoided but that it must be perpetuated from one generation to
another, and a sad experiment be made, who will first be wearied, those that
inflict penalties, or those that undergo them. And what in the mean time will
become of that composure of the spirits of men, that mutual trust, confidence
and assurance between all sorts of persons, which is the abiding foundation of
public peace and prosperity.

Also what advantages have been made by some neighbor Nations, what at present
they further hope for, from that great anxiety which the minds of men are cast
into, merely and solely on the account of what they feel or fear, from their
dissent unto the public worship, which to themselves is utterly unavoidable,
is known to all.

But we have done! and what are we that we should complain of any whom God is
pleased to stir up and use for our exercise and trial? We desire in patience
and silence, to bear his indignation against whom we have sinned; and for what
concerns those ways and truths of his, for whose profession we may yet suffer
in this world, to approve our consciences unto him, and to leave the event of
all unto him, who will one day judge the world in righteousness. We know that
we are poor sinful worms of the earth, in our selves meet for nothing but to be
trodden down under the feet of men; but his ways and the purity of his Worship
are dear unto him, which he will preserve and vindicate from all opposition. In
the mean time as it is our duty to live peaceably with all men in a
conscientious subjection unto that Authority which he has set over us, we
shall endeavor so to behave our selves, in the pursuit and observance of it,
as that whereas we may be evil spoken of, as evil doers, Men may be ashamed,
beholding our good Conversation in Christ, and give Glory to God in the day of
Visitation.

Whatever is ours, whatever is in our Power, whatever God has entrusted us
with the disposal of, we willingly resign and give up to the Will and Commands
of our Superiors; but as to our Minds and Consciences in the things of his
Worship and Service, he has reserved the Sovereignty of them unto himself, to
him must we give an account of them at the great Day; nor can we forego the
care of preserving them entire for him, and loyal unto him, without a
renunciation of all hopes of acceptance with him, and so render our selves of
all men the most miserable. May we be suffered herein to be faithful unto him,
and the everlasting Concernments of our own Souls, we shall always labor to
manifest, that there is no way or means of Peace and Reconciliation among those
who profesting Faith in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, yet differ in their
Apprehensions about sundry things some way or other belonging thereunto, that
is appointed by him, and may expect a Blessing from him, but we will readily
embrace, and according as we are called, improve to the utmost.

And if herein also our Endeavors meet with nothing but Contempt and Reproach,
yet none can hinder us but that we may pour out our Souls unto God, for the
accomplishment of his blessed and glorious Promises concerning that Truth,
Peace, and Liberty, which he will give unto his Church in his appointed time.
For we know, That when He shall rise up to the Prey, and devour the whole earth
with the fire of his Jealousy, He will turn to the people a pure language,
that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one
consent, that the Earth being filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea, his glory shall be revealed, so that all flesh shall see
it together, and then shall all his people receive from him one heart, and one
way, that they may fear him for ever, for the good of them and their children
after them, by virtue of the everlasting Covenant. And for our own parts,
whatever our Outward Condition be, we know he will perfect that which concerns
us, and he will not forsake the work of his own hands, because his mercy
endures for ever.

FINIS.

