New England Freemen Warned and Warmed, To be Free indeed, having an Eye to God
in their ELECTIONS: (...) a Sermon Preached before the Court of ELECTION At
Boston, on the ^ast Day of May, 1671.

J. O. Pastor of the first Church in Boston.

Published by Order of the General Court.

Printed in the Year. 1673.

Christian Reader,
I Was invited by the House of Deputies to Preach at the time and (...) the
occasion mentioned in the Title page, and that work (though very mean) sound
that acceptance, that Captain Savage the Speaker with Captain Clark came in the
name of that House to give me thanks: Since which the Deputies, with the
concurrence of the Magistrates ordered the Printing of this poor piece; It was
once in my thoughts here to have prefaced an Explication of some particulars,
which it seems did not sound well in the ears of two or three persons whom I
honor; but my second thoughts did contradict, telling me my Order was only for
the Printing of the Sermon, and that the explication and defense thereof (if a
tincture of prejudice (did remain) might as well be mistaken as the Sermon, and
so occasion inconvenient alteration; wherefore I forbear being conscious to my
self of no other scope nor meaning then what will be agreeable to all faithful
Pa(...) and true lovers of this Country, with when(...) before I am willing to
leave this Testimony before I dye; and that it may appear that I aim at what
was in the heart of some long before me in time and worth; take some passages
which have had unquestioned allowance in this Land:

Mr. Shepard in his first part of the Parable of the Virgins, page 166. Who
sees not (that observes the Lords dealing) that some sorrows are toward,
unless the Lord awaken, some sudden blasting blow. If any wind be stirring,
men on the tops of the mountains will feel it, and its folly to think to flee
from the cross unless we flee from Christ. It Is part of the portion he does
owe us here, if he love us.

I do fear there is at this day as deep mischief plotting against New England
as ever the Sun saw: Enemies will first deal subtly before cruelly, but
subtly that they may deal cruelly; When Pharaoh deals wisely, he means to
kill:

Being come hither for public help and means and all ordinances, Oh do not
betray your liberties, but lose your blood before you lose them, and the Lord
in them; bear the Ark still on your shoulders that the Lord may, dwell with you.

Idem 2d. part, page 16. If ever this Country receive a blovv it will be by
appearances, if ever any shall come under an appearance of piety and promise of
protection, safety, liberty, only your Government must be a little altered,
slumber here and you shall sleep in your enemies arms.

Idem page 198. An Objection is made, What power have Churches to keep out them
that be Baptized?

The Answer: The Apostle is punctual to it, 2 Timothy 3. 5. speaking of the last
days, having a form of godliness, turn away from such, he says not, let them
in and turn to them, and if they prove evil members cut them off and turn them
from you, but turn away from them; he says not if they be profane or not
baptized and cannot say I was humbled and now I believe, but which is more
if they have a form Ezekiel. 44.8, 9. you have set keepers of my charge in my
Sanctuary for your selves: thus says the Lord God, no stranger uncircumcized
in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh shall enter into my Sanctuary, Heb. 12.15.
looking diligently least any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, he
does not say it is no matter what roots you set in Christ's Garden, only when
they spring up and begin to feed and infect others, then have a care of them
The Lord that forbids me to suffer Weeds to grow forbids my carelessness in
sowing what seed, I please.

Idem page 199. Paul may fear with a godly jealcusie some of the Corinthian
Church, 2 Cor. 12. yet he calls them all Saints, and dares not mince his
speeches with such notions of probabillity; a morral certainty, a man may and
should have of all Church Members, a certainty of faith conditional, but not
absolute.

Idem page 200. Let all Gods people, Watchmen on Gods Walls, still be watchful
and careful, there be temptations enough to make men fill and pester Gods House
with Swine; one has his Friend, and his affection leed him; another, he is a
man of estate and his Money is in the mouth of his Sack; another thinks there
is one bad enough, but we shall do well enough with them.

Hosea 8.4. They have set up Kings but not by me, they have made Princes and I
knew it not.


MEn, Fathers and Brethren, whatsoever you expect or suspect of me, I would
neither expect nor suspect of you the representative body of a high professing
People, that you should take up this solemn worship of God as a bare ceremony
to attend the Granduer of the day, but would hope you come to look up to the
great God, that he may give us some meat in this season. Psalm. 145.15. But then
look we to him with a single eye, for if we come resolved to him, and not to be
resolved by him; we dissemble in our hearts, as they, Jer. 42.10. They ask
counsel but take it not, Come not I pray you to enquire with an Idol in your
heart, Ezekiel. 14.7. If there be here any of you with an Idol of prejudice, not
to do what you hear; or a fixed purpose to do whatsoever you had a mind to
before, be it right or wrong; let such an Idol fall down before the Living
God, but whatsoever go will do, the Lord tells me what I must do, Ezekiel. 2.9.
Thou shall spe^k my words, whether they (...) or whether they will f^rbear, and
the words he has at this time put into my mouth are these, They have set up
Kings:

Whose coherence is this in the first verse, the Prophet has order from the
Lord of Hosts to sound an Alarm with the greatest earnestness, with a Trumpet
from the roof of his mouth against secure Hypocrites, and so to signify the
aproach of a swift and ravenous enemy, as an Eagle against the ten Tribes; and
this notwithstanding any pretense to their Church estate, or being a house of
God, and professing themselves to own, know and acknowledge him: ver. 2. they
will cry (...) God we know thee, now the reason of Gods severe proceeding
against them is, because they have broke the substance of their Covenant with
God in the main Articles of it, transgr^ssed my Covenant, and trespassed
against any Law, and cast off the thing what his good, which is, that which the
Covenant and Law require, and in this 4th. ver. is a proof of their thus
breaking with God in their civil and religious administration the former is our
present concern; They have set up Kings:

Explic. They have set up Kings but not by me, the 70 (...) they have Kinged it
to themselves and not to me, so the Syriack and vulgar Latin, but the Arabic
varies a little, they have reigned of themselves and not from me, They have
made Princes and I knew it not; the Greek Syriack, vulgar Latin, Arabic, they
were Princes and told me not, but the Hebrew verbes in the Text being in
hiphil, and so of transitive signification does avouch our Translation, and so
the Chalde paraphraseth they made to rule, and not from my mind and will; yet
often the 70 as quoted in the N. T. enlarges the next and express sense of the
Hebrew, and so it may here be allowed and the matter will bear it well; For
those civil Governors that are of a corrupt constitution are not likely to
carry on a godly administration, what power is ill laid in, will be ill laid
out, Mich. 17. what is gathered of an Harlot will return to the hire of an
harlot, what is from the flew will bring forth corruption, and so in case of
the Text it proved, of all the Kings of the ten Tribes, we find not one godly
King: But for further concerning the sense of the Text I would speak to two
Questions.

Quest. 1. How may we understand their setting up Kings and Princes and not by
the Lord and his Knowledge?

Answ. They did it not by his direction and approbation, they did never enquire
and prosecute the mind of God in that business, nor did the Lord know and
approve their way and procedure as he does the way of the righteous, Psalm. 1.
ult.

Quest. 2. How did they set up Kings and Princes without Gods approbation?

Answ. not merely (as I conceive) in setting up the Kingly Government, for that
was revealed to be his will eventually, Deuteronomy. 17.14. but their sin in first
taking to this Government was their lusting after it out of season and measure;
this itching humor in the Israelites was partly from their distrusting their
God, and partly for Gentilizing or conforming to the Gentiles, and it broke
forth in Gideons time, Judge. 8.22, 23. they would have a Regal Hereditary
Government, but Gideon suppresseth the motion, and oppo^eth the making a King
in other time a manner then God appointed, to be a rejecting of Gods
Government; they say, rule thou over us, thou, and thy Son, and thy Sons Son,
and Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my Son rule
over you; but who then? the Lord shall rule over you: But this lust in that
people did afterward rise, Judge. 9. toward his Bastard Son Abime^e^h, who had
not that honest spirit to check it as his Father did; the same lust was
stirring in the Israe^ites demand of a King, 1 Samuel 8.5.7. and this the Lord
counts the rejecting of his Government, by which formerly a fit instrument was
designed by the Lord in every extremity, and thus far the ten Tribes did act
with the other, in setting up Kings without Gods approbation; afterward I find
this sinful proceeding to reign chiefly in the ten Tribes, for they knew the
will of God, for the succession of David the Type of Christ, 2 Samuel 5.2 yet
they first set up Ishbosheth, and afterward Absalom, and then inclined to
Sheba, in all which they neither sought nor had the approbation of God, and by
this lust were the ten Tribes acted in setting up Jeroboam; for though it was
by Gods providence ordering all events, yet neither did the people, nor
Jeroboam enquire of God about it, but the people in discontent rebelled against
the house of Dav d, and Jeroboam in his ambition did snatch at the offer of the
seditious Israelites; thus did not Dav^d, for though we was anointed King, yet
neither in Saul's time would he put forth a hand to the Crown, nor after Saul's
death had made the Throne vacant, would David step one foot toward possession
of it, till he enquired after, and received Gods approbation, 2 Samuel 2.1. David
enquired of the Lord, shall I go up to any of the Cities of Judah? but Jeroboam
did neither take nor wear the Crown according to Gods counsel and rearms; And
so it was with the Kings that succeeded him, and for the people that set up
their Kings at their own pleasure; so did they destroy them, Hos. 7.7. Being
hot as an oven in their own passions and factions, they devour their Judges,
their Kings are fallen, there is none that calls upon me, and pulled down their
Kings without Gods counsel or help, so that in two hundred years they had
twenty Kings of ten several families; in the same time there were but eleven in
Judah, and all of David's house: Now this their setting up Kings and Princes
according to their own lusts was the more criminal, because they in word owned
God to be their God in Covenant, my God we know thee; and for them to order
their Government without taking notice of God, was a ^reat disloyalty. From the
words so depend^ng and explained, I offer this Doctrine:

Doct. It is expected of a People professing themselves the people of God, that
they should have regard to him in the constitution and administration of their
Magistracy:

This appears by,

1. God reproving of the Israelites, in the Text the Israelites are charged
with an omission, not doing according to God in their Magistracy, which implies
a rule and duty so to do, sins of omission import a duty omitted.

2. By Gods approving those that have this regard to him as well as his
reproving them that have it not, Hos. 11. ult. Ephraim compasses me about with
lies, and the house of Israel with deceit; but Judah yet rules with God, and
is faithful with the Saints: the ten Tribes retaining some profession of God,
but having no sincere respect to him in their civil or religious matters, do
but keep a customary round of lies and hypocrisy in their profession of God;
but Judah in their Government, keeping to the house of David according to Gods
command, and holding with their Godly Ancestors and their faithful remnant are
approved by their God.

The Reasons to gain the assent of your understandings, and so to fetch in the
consent of your wills are these:

Reas. 1. The eternal God does expect of them that acknowledge him for their
God, and themselves for his people, that they should be his universally and
unchangeably, and that his right to them should not be limited to any place or
case, but should reach to their whole course, Pro. 3.6 In all thy ways
acknowledge him and he shall direct thy paths: Ye must acknowledge him in
better and greater matters, as in other days so in this solemn day, if therein
you expect he shall set you to rights, ye must not play fast and loose;
sometimes retain to God, and other times to Mammon, Mat. 6.24. Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon, for they are so far two Masters as never to be one, to that if
ye hold to one ye will despise the other; If the interest of God and the
public interest in this Land call you to make one choice, and some worldly
interest call you to another, if ye hold to the worldly, ye despise God in
this, however in other occasions ye pretend to retain to him, your choice will
discover whose indeed you are; your choice of a calling, your choice of a
companion, yours (especially in Marriage for your self or yours) and your
choice of a Magistrates and others in Authority (when it is in your power) will
show whether ye are resolved to serve God in your Generation or not; what say
ye now ye Freemen of New England? is the Lord your God or no? if he be, then as
one man ye must say, Exodus 15.2. He is my God, I will prepare him an
Habitation: I will endeavor such a frame of things as he may delight to dwell
amongst us, He is my Fathers God and I will exalt him; he has wonderfully
owned and exalted you and your Fathers, therefore ye must own and exalt him;
and believe it Brethren, if ye talk of God and his Covenant, and walk not in
the main concerns of your public or private standing with a chief regard to
him; ye go about to mock him that will not be mocked.

Reas. 2. Magistracy and Government is mercifully ordered and maintained by
God, and therefore as it falls into the hands of men, should be ordered
according to him, what is of him, and through him should also be to him: that
there should be Government among men, it is an order that God has set, Romans
13.1. The Powers that be, are ordained of God.

Government is not on^y by general providence ordered and governed by him (as
are all Wars, Pestilence and Famine) but ordained, God gives out a command and
a confinement (or bound) to it: All Nations by instinct of nature do desire a
power and authority for Rule, and commission is given, as Genesis 7. God appointed
a power awong men for revenge of Murder, and this when all Nations were
contracted into one Family, but God did more expressly enjoin his own people to
set up Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 16.18. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in
all thy Gates which the Lord gives thee; It is not arbitrary whether they will
have Judges, Pharaoh calls Government' (...) a sacred thing, and it is a mercy,
and so made over to men through Christ, Prove. 8.15. By me Kings reign, Mat.
28.15. All power is given to me in Heaven and Earth, Christ dispenses it for
carrying on the welfare of men, therefore the enjoyment of Government according
to him is matter of praise, Psalm. 122.4. Whether the Tribes go up to give
thanks to the name of the Lord, for there are set Thrones of Judgment: The
setting up of Government is a mercy thankfully to be owned, as the want is a
judgment and desolation, and the portion of bloody Esau, Isa. 34.12. They
shall call the Nobles thereof to the Kingdom but none shall be there, and all
her Princes shall be nothing, and this is sorely lamented, Hab. 1.14. and
make men as the fishes of the Sea, as creeping things that have not ruler
over them; now God being the merciful founder of Magistracy, it is meet in the
manage thereof we should look to him, as Isai. 22.11. when they used skill and
diligence in fortifying of Jerusalem, there was one neglect that threatens the
frustrating of all, that is, not having the principal eye and regard to the
Lord that founded Jerusalem as the seat of the Kingdom, and his most solemn
worship: It may be as usually is objected against this reason, from 1 Pet.
2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man? Ans It is for the Lords
sake, who has ordered there should be Government, and so it is of the Lord;
but in this and that particular form, it is of man as to the Commonwealth,
though in the Churches even the form we conceive is fixed by the Lord; Civil
Government is also called Humane, because its end is the good of man, in
outward nextly and the matter it is conversant about, is (properly and
immediately) humane not divine; In divine the Magistrate has not power
according to his mind to put or appoint any Worship upon God which never came
into his mind, Jer. 9.5. Which I commanded not, nor speak it, neither came it
into my mind, and what came not into Gods mind to appoint, may not come into
the Magistrates mind to enjoin. It is the liberty and honor of a Magistrate
to protect and promote what Christ has appointed in his house, and in this the
Christian Magistrate has not more power, though more light to manage that
power; the help of the Magistrate is not of absolute necessity to the being of
Christ's true Religion (for he did bring forth and maintain it when the edge of
the Magistrate was sharp against it for 300 years the purer age) but this
support is necessary for the false, Ier. 10.5. an Image which is created by
man, cannot subsist without his providence, the Idol must needs be borne it
cannot go, and Babylon, whether East or West (the way of Arius, Mahomet or the
Pope) must have a Beast to carry her, Rev. 17.7. (...) says Meade but that
this is the abuse of civil power will appear in the Doctrines third Reason.

Reas. 3. Magistratical Power makes a man Gods near and special Servant and
Deputy in the World, therefore it is fit that in the giving and using this
power, there should be a respect had to God, Job. 10.34, 35. I said ye are
Gods, if he called them Gods to whom the Word of God came; Gods saying and
Commission purteth them in his stead, and by his impresse upon the Magistracy,
and by that only one man is able to rule so great numbers; when ye choose a
Magistrate or Deputy, ye put such a man upon God, and therefore should consider
what will please him, Romans 13.4 the Magistrate is called Gods (...) and (...)
his Deacon (as we may say) his Minister, so 2 Chronicles. 9 8. Blessed be the Lord
(says heba's Queen to Solomon) which delight^d in thee to set thee upon his
Throne, to be King for the Lord God: It is the Lords Throne, and for the Lord,
and so inferior Magistrates, 2 Chro. 19.6. ^e judge for the Lord, Rev. 12.5.
Constantin^ is said to be caught up to Gods Throne, now God uses men in
Government not out of necessity but bounty, for Ps;^l. 89.18. He is the Shield
of his people, yet he has the shields of his people, P^al 47. ult. the
Magistrate represents Christ the Judge of all the Earth, and we may not put
upon him a man that manifestly bears the Image of the Devil, neither may any
dare in Gods Livery to do the Devils work; nay who of you dares to take in any
to Gods service, but to do Gods work, and not to serve your own particular turn.

Application. Let the Authority of this Doctrine fall and fix upon your hearts
this day, remembering Psalm. 81.2. that God stands, which is a posture of
greater attention, and he attends in order to his judging of you, therefore
have your eye upon God as his is upon you; Be in the fear of the Lord all this
day, Prove. 23.17. So acknowledge God in giving and taking Magistracy, that he
may approve your proceeding, and let every heart lift up a cry to the Lord
almost in Moses words, Numb. 27.16. Let the Lord the God of the spirits of all
flesh, set a man and men over the Congregation, which may go out before them,
and which may go in before them, and which may lead them, and which may bring
them in, that the Congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no
Shepherd.

Motive. 1. It concerns as to be owned in the proceedings of this day, else the
business of the day will not be for our safety, Ier. 5.10. Go ye up upon her
Walls, and destroy and take away her battlements, for they are not the Lords.
If our Magistrates set up for our Protection, be not owned by the Lord, they
will not be any protection; any enemy, heathen or called christian, has a
dormant Commission to come upon you and destroy you, though not with utter
destruction.

Motive 2. Magistraticall Power is of great weight and worth, especially among
Gods people; therefore with great consideration to be made over and managed by
them that have it. Psalm. 113.8. That he may set him with Princes, even with the
Princes of his people. This very much heightens their honor; and so God tells
David, 2 Samuel 7.8. I took thee from the sheep coat, to be Ruler over my
people, over Israel. Pericles, being often chosen Praetor of Athens, every year
when he put on his Robe, would bespeak himself; remember thou rulest over
Freemen, thou rulest over Athenians, yet Christ bespeaks you that rule here,
have a care what you do, for ye rule over my Children, Ioh. 19 8. When Pilate
heard that saying, viz. that Christ was the Son of God, he was the more afraid,
he was the more awed, and they that are in Authority here had as much need as
any where to hearken to that, Psalm. 2.10. Serve the Lord with fear, rejoice
with trembling; It is spoken to Magistrates, ye may willingly and cheerfully
serve the Lord i^ that capacity of doing good to his people, but tremble lest
ye miscarry; if ye do them any wrong ye are sure to hear of it, Psalm. 105.14,
15. He ^uffered no man to do them wrong, yea, he reproved Kings for their sake,
saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: If you touch his
people harmfully, or put power into the hands of such as will so touch them you
touch the apple of Gods eye, Z^ch. 2. he will not bear that wrong to them that
he will upon another people, no not although it be sl^ly and by way of fraud,
and not by way of open violence, for that was the cause of Midian, against whom
the Lord gives that charge, Numb. 31.3. Let them go against the Midianites and
avenge the Lord of Midian.

Motive 3. All your Administrations must come ere long under judgment, ye that
are Freemen must shortly be free among the dead, and that then your work and
secret d^sign whether good or bad must come to judgment, Eccl. 12. ult. and ye
that shall be chosen, Psalm. 82.6.7. Though you be all of you Children of the
m^st ^^^h, or Angels as Chalde renders it, yet ye must dye like Adam. Socrates
writes to Dyonisius, thou art yet clothed with a mortal skin, and if ye dye
then follows the Judgment; act ye therefore so this day as ye may answer it
boldly in that. It was the honor of Marcellus, that he went from the Tribunal
to the Bar; and it is the Law of necessity upon you all, if not here yet else
where, to give an account of your Administration; now if any of you upon these
Motives are willing in your giving or taking Magistratical power, to do it
according to Gods will, offer you some means so to do.

Means 1. Mind the reallizing of your-profession of God, and take heed of
Apostasy; in the two verses before the Text, we have Isreal's boasting and
breaking of their Covenant with God, Israel shall cry unto me, my God we know
thee, but this is no better then to compass God with lies, Hos. 11. ult. For
Israel has cast off the thing that is good, the Enemy shall pursue him; If we
do thus lie to God in N. E. we go against the interest of N. E. as has been
faithfully declaredon such a day as this: Mr. Stoughton
If you cast off good, you cannot so cast off evil; evil will follow you if you
follow not that which is good, when your Religion is but a pretense, a lie, it
will never last, a lie is never long-lived howsoever you sawn upon God or his
people, ye can never really love either by outward fleshly. circumcision alone,
when ye are only (as the same Messenger said) custom born, Deuteronomy. 30.6. there is
need of the Lords own circumcizing your hearts and the hearts of your seed, as
he is really your God in Covenant, that you may love him and his interest with
all your heart: If ye have this heart circumcision, heart-baptisme, then you
will cleave to him and his people, whether ye be choosing or chosen into power,
otherwise not, Prove. 24. ult. the upright is an abomination unto the wicked His
natural Fore skin, the enmity of his carnal mind will upon any ripening
temptation break out; he that has but the form, not the power of godliness,
will not like to have godliness in power, they that are not indeed Freemen
(though so called) are servants, 2 Pet. 2.19. to corruption, and must serve
such purposes which was owned by some Philosophers, Cic. 5. Paradox
who laid down this Paradox (so that many would think it) all wise men are
Freemen, and all fools are Servants, such then having a liberty to choose, will
in the use of it serve corrupt men and not the holy God, neither will unsound
Professors serve the Lord in the manner of that Authority they get, and
therefore Job 17.8. The innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite,
and God intending mercy to a people will help such opposition, Job 34.30. That
the Hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared; such will lay secret and
subtle snares for the people whom God in pity will deliver therefrom.

As for you in N. E. to backslide and to fashion your selves to the flaunting
mode of England in worship or walking, you undertake a vain thing, for you can
but limp after them, and you will forget (as was told you the last year by that
Reverend Elder) your errand of Planting this Wilderness, Mr Danforth.
and if you have a mind to turn your Churches into Parishes, and your
Ministers into Priests and Prelates, I cannot think the Lord will ever endure
it, as Ezekiel. 20.32. That which comes into your mind shall not be at all, that
ye say, we will be as the Families of the Countries: The Lord that has so
marvelously separated and distinguished this people for himself, will not so
lose his propriety here, and know ye that your backsliding will not only be
vanity but vexation, also for this ye will lose the good ye have had, Hos. 4.7.
As they were increased so they sinned against me, therefore will I change their
glory into shame. If ye grow more provoking as more populous; that which has
been the glory of N. E. (Magistracy and Ministry) will be its shame: If ye
rebel and vex his holy Spirit, acting in them that anointing will be gone,
Isai. 63.10, 11. Where is he that brought them up out of the Sea with the
shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy spirit within them? Ye
will have Magistrates and Ministers of a meaner alloy, yea happily, for your
Hypocrisy and Apostasy, being false to Christ as was Judas, you will have that
plague, Psalm. 109.6. A wicked man set over you, and an adversary shall stand at
your right hand: Evil will certainly befall you, as Josh. 6.26. Joshua laid the
builders of accursed destroyed Jericho under a curse, so will our Jesus bring a
Curse upon those that shall go about to build Jericho the City of the Moon (so
it signifies) the Kingdom of the Beast, which being an earthly, worldly
Religion: Lunenburge is reckoned by the Moon, Rev. 11. But blessed are they
that resist and crush the least beginnings and breed of Babylon, (be they
will worship, persecution or confusion:) Blessed I say are those that will dash
their brats against the Rock, even Christ the sure and tried Stone.

Yea, in case ye backslide from the God of your Fathers, ye will be as it were
outlawed, and expo ed as a free spoil to every enemy, Ier. 50.7. All that
found them have devoured them, and their adversaries said, we offend not
because they have sinned against the Lord the habitation of justice, even the
Lord the hope of their Fathers; and from such will ye be most likely to have
your scourge from whom you have your apostasy; as Israel returning to the Idols
of Mesopotamia, from whence their Ancestors Abraham and Jacob had separated,
were first put into the hand of the King of Mesopotamia, Judge. 3.8. and think
not what I say is impertinent to the Doctrine or the day, for in the civil
Government.

The first worthy Planters they professed to erect and administer according to
God, and if you that succeed will do according to your lust it will go ill with
you: the gallant Gideon says, Iud. 8.20. I will not rule over you neither
shall my Son rule over you, but the Lord shall rule over you: this did that
worthy Father promise, but the Bastard Son will needs break to the ruin of
himself and his partakers: If a degenerate and spurious Generation will not
stand by the intendments and engagements of their faithful Ancestors, but in
their giving and exercising rule neglect the Lord, he will ruin them and their
helpers.

Means 2. Mind faith fully and diligently your liberties, that ye may be free
to act for and according to God in the constitution and manage of your
Magistracy: quit once your liberties and ye mu t have such a Magistracy and
manage of it as will please not God nor your selves, but other men will be your
masters, for servants yea, slaves must you be to some body when ye have let go
your liberties, now to fix you in maintaining your liberties, I crave liberty
to propound some Motives.

Motive 1. It is a trust and favor of God that ye have such liberties, Psa.
118.14. This is the day that the Lord has made or exalted: This your day of
free Election is preforable before all your own days if we mar it not and
(for ought we know) there is no such day in other Colonies abroad, and we may
say as follows, we will rejoice and be glad in it, and the more we are engaged
for such a day, because we have not deserved it, but as Saul, after his
wickedness to David, and David's kindness to him in spring him when he had
advantage, 1 San. 24.19. This day thou have made me as the Hebrew says, your
liberty then being the gift of such a band, even of the Lord, let no hand be
against it, but let every hand hold it, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with the
yoke of bondage. The Lord Jesus has given you such a standing, keep your
standing, whosoever shall push at you, let none doubt that ever shall push at
you, let none doubt that even our outward liberties in spirituals and temporals
are from our Redeemer; precious Cotton so, All Church privileges and
Commonwealth privileges has the Lord purchased by his blood: So a faithful
Brother among us, on such a day as this, our liberties and privileges are
ransomed mercies: Mr. St.
Christ has given a price, and by his power, and by his spirit acting in the
prayers and pains of his Servants, has gotten and kept them.

This liberty of choosing their own Magistrates the Lord gave to his own people,
Deuteronomy. 1.13.15. Give ye (so the Hebrew, and our Margent) wise men, and
understanding, and known among your Tribes and I will make them Rulers over
you: and such as ye people gave, Moses took, yea, this people of Israel were
still free to choose when scarce any were free to be chosen, Isai. 3.6. A man
shall take hold of his Brother, and of the house of his Father, saying, thou
have clothing be thou a ruler: And all faithful ones are with Abraham, the
proper heirs of the World, Romans 4 13. and that without wrong to just propriety,
and it seems all shall (as we) have the yoke broken because of the anointing,
Isai. 10.27. Now shall not we hold the Lands and Liberties which our God has
given us, as Judge. 11.24. that valliant Iephthe told the Arronite, and indeed
for your just bounds it will be great weakness to shorten them, for a near
Enemy is the worst, as Sparta found by the Athe^ians, seizing on Pysus a near
and rejected Island.

Motive 2. Your trust by and for men bespeaks your care and vigilance about
your Liberties. This Honorable Assembly consists of the Trustees of all the
Freemen of the ^^nd: If Freemen indeed, they choose that they may so continue;
we should have cause to complain of any that is chosen if he should use this
trust our Liberties, as the Eagle in the Greek Epigram lamented that it was
slain with an Arrow winged with its own Feathers: Ye are also trusted for men,
for many, all Inhabitants have their Liberties, Women, Children, Servants, yea,
and Strangers too, let me beseech this Honorable Assembly, in the name of all
the Freemen (who am also a Freeman) not to part with any of our Liberties by
force or fraud, these are our Crowns and Jewels which we commit to your care
and charge.

Motive. 3. Your expressing agreement binds you; no man can choose or be chosen,
but he has taken the Oath for our Liberties, take heed you be not charged as
those Hypocritical Professors, Isai. 48.1. nominal Christians, Swearing by the
Lord, making mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth nor in
righteousness, you have every one sweared by the Great Name of the Everliving
God, truly to endeavor to maintain and preserve the liberties and privilege
of this Commonwealth and Government: and this is more then is sworn for the
Laws, to which only a subjection is undertaken; now if ye truly endeavor to
maintain all the liberties as ye promise by Oath, then ye should be willing to
know and make them known: there should be as I conceive, a distinct knowledge
of them as there is a distinct obligation to them; I have seen the Liberties
written by the then Governor, and subscribed by him, and others, and there I
saw the preface and the three last Liberties to be too solemn to be concealed,
one is for the perpetual observation of the liberties, another is to give them
the force of Laws, and then giving of relief to any that are abridged in them.
Methinks men should know what they are sworn, for Ignorantia juris, Ignorance
of the Law does not excuse a breach of it, wherefore watch and be diligent in
keeping your liberties, that they may not be insensibly lost, Prove. 12.24. The
hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the slothful shall be under tribute.
If you be dull and sleepy, and keep not your hold when others are active and
pull hard, you must needs let go, unless I mistake, the 60 liberty and the 74.
are infringed by inadvertency, I would hope it were no worse; but if ye shall
break down the hedge of your Churches and Commonwealth, you will lay the field
open to such as watch to make spoil of you: are there any that back-slide or
warpe among you, they will cooperate with workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.5.
and ye will want no such Instruments, if ye admit of a carnal party into the
privileges due here to visible Saints, they will be likely to eat out the
heart of liberty and religion; as in a Syllogism, the conclusion follows the
worser part, and godly men have something in them that inclines them to that
which is not good, and if such comply with a carnal interest, Prove. 25.26. A
righteous man falling down before the wicked, is as a troubled Fountain and
corrupt spring, earthly, muddy, and not fit to be taken in as before; be ye
therefore diligent and courageous, and not like Issachar, Genesis 49.14. A strong
Ass couching down betwixt two burdens: you civil and your religious liberties
are so coupled here, that if one be lost the other cannot be kept; if being
free ye will put your selves into bands, ye will be as the slothful under
tribute, you will be shorn, 2 King. 10.12. the shearing house is as the Hebrew
there, and your Margent, the house of shepheras binding, when you are so
sheepish to be bound, your fleece will be shorn, and may be your skin flayed
and flesh will be devoured, and if any say, its good sleeping in a whole skin,
I would tell such that sleeping is not the way to keep the skin whole; observe
those Neuters, Judge. 8.6, ^. who refused to owe any relief to their Brethren in
a needful time, but (till they saw which would be the stronger side) would not
meddle so they might sleep in a whole skin; those wary Princes of Succoth could
not compass it, but the contrary was written on their skin by the thorns of the
wilderness and if this our wilderness bread any such luke warm Politicians in a
needful time, it is to be hoped that it will also bring forth thorns enough to
teach them, you have beautiful and precious liberties beyond other Colonies,
but Prove. 11.20. as a jewel of gold in a Swines snout, so is a fair woman
without discretion, or that departs from discretion, or least no Judgment to
put it to clean and honorable but dirty uses, if you so root in your present
and particular profits and interests, as to neglect your golden liberties, what
will England? what will all the world say of you, that you are not new English,
but no English men; therefore give me leave to beseech and entreat the aged to
follow the aged Caleb that hearty man as he followed the Lord and fulfilled
after him, Iush. 14.8, 11, 13. Be ye now as hearty for your true and just
liberties as ye were 40. year since, and so will your Joshua, your Jesus bless
you, and ye shall be able to prevail against the tallest opposers, even the
Anakims.

Let me also bespeak the young men amongst you, that you would not be prodigal
of those liberties you never knew the getting of, use you not the fork since ye
never knew the rake.

Obj. 1. Does any say that the Patent or Charter-right is questioned by some?

I An^wer, Such men do not appear so good friends either to the Crown or
Country, for the question cutteth off the true and proper ligament between
them, neither may it be reasonably said, that upon, or other circumstantial
failer the Pattent cease; for on the great consideration, for the Grant is
paid and cannot be re-landed; for the lives and estates of many worthy men have
been laid down here to plant and subdue this Land, and subdued it is.

Obj. 2. If it be said, there may be just reason to quit some of the Liberties?

I Answer, I grant so much on condition, ye will also grant that the same
deliberation should be used in the getting any of them, as there was in
constituting of them: The liberties were probationers for three years, and in
all the General Courts for that time, they were passed by all the Freemen, and
it seems equal that all the Freemen should have as sufficient time to consider
of the change and abrogation of them, and sure it is not fit that any one
General Court should have such an unlimited Arbitrary, power that nothing
should be fixed and unmovable, no property, use and estate should be secured,
and I think you will grant, that in the year 1641. when those liberties were in
such degree enacted and settled; there were men civil and ecclesiastical (who
managed that matter) of such weight and worth as none of us now filling their
place can, and if wise and humble will pretend to weigh them down, though
experience may add to former knowledge in particular cases.

Obj. 3. But if that many give up we cannot help it?

I Answer, Yes, for by your 75. liberty, you have power to enter your dissent
and protestation, which will save your own souls from the guilt, and ye have
encouragement to help your selves and the whole, because as yet the promise is
made good to you Ier. 30.2 Your Nobles are of your selves, and your Governor
proceeds from the midst of you, so that none can be in power to hurt or hazard
you, but it must be by your selves, and this being your glory ye may expect
that the Lord will create a cloud when no visible help does appear, Isai. 4, 5.
upon all the glory shall be a defense, and the same presence of God will be
offensive to all unrighteous encroachers or disturbers, Eccl. 10.8, 9. He that
diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and whosoever breaks an bedge a Serpent shall
bite him, whosoever remoreth stones shall be hurt therewith, and he that cleaves
wood shall be endangered thereby: none that shall be removing your peculiar and
distinguishing privileges and ancient bounds, and for that end will be making
parties shall prosper; nay, take that encouraging word more, Ezra 6.11.
Whosoever shall alter this word (of privileges and provision for the Temple)
let the Timber be pulled down from his house, and being set up, let him be
destroyed thereon, and let his house be made a Dunghill, and the God that has
caused his name to dwell there destroy all Kings and People that shall put to
their hand to alter and destroy this House of God.

Means 3. Of your constituting and administering Magistracy according to God, is
to give good heed to your Election, that it may proceed with clearness, so that
there may be no fraud nor doubt in giving your votes against which you way may
seem to some not so sure as elsewhere; and surely what is indirectly gotten, is
of and for the evil one; ye should come to this solemn action with a care, and
not as Children to see the fashion and leave things at a venture, but as there
is some care to be used for the manner of your Election, so much more for the
Object whom you choose or refuse, Exodus 18. Thou shall provide, Chasub is to
look about, to be circumspect, ye must weigh and consider, Deuteronomy. 1.13. ye must
pitch upon known men, excuse not, saying, thou know not whether men are fit
or unfit, Prove. 24.12. If thou say, behold we knew it not; does not he that
pondereth the heart consider it, and he that keeps thy soul, does not he know
it, and shall not he render to every man according to his works? The Lord
knows what thou think or know, and his Deputy Conscience knows; see
therefore with thine own eye, implicit faith is indeed more easy but less
safe, you do in your Conscience and experience make some judgment of men,
whether friends to civil or religious liberties, to justice piety and virtue,
whether Enemies to Vice, Oppression, Extortion, and biting Usury; and thus you
do know whom to choose, whom to refuse, whom you choose you justify as a man
qualified according to Gods counsel, Prove. 24.24. He that says unto the
wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, and the Nations shall
abhor; take heed therefore to your selves this day or any day of Election,
least ye bare false witness for or against any whom ye choose or refuse, give
good heed to your choice that you may not miscarry in it.

Arg. 1. Because your choice will show what respect you have to Christ; It is a
high charge you have from the Lord, Isai. 65.12. They chose the things wherein
I delighted not, your choice shows who is your Master, and whom you would
please, this shows what is deepest in your soul; holy Bolton in his discourse
of happiness, page 131 shows, that the Hypocrite has quite other ends in his
choice, (even himself) but a sincere Christians thoughts run and are exercised
about his faithfulness; If says he, by my default, a false man be chosen, I
shall be guilty before the high Judge of all, the mischiefs that follow thot
unhappy choice: Nothing can undo this Country but unwariness and unfaithfulness
but the mis-making or mis-acting of Freemen; choice of men to power and trust
gives the true picture or character of them that choose; if Idols are set up in
power and trust instead of men, really discharging their trust, Psalm. 115.8.
they that make them are like unto them.

Arg. 2. If you miss in your choice ye provide not well for your selves or
neighbors whom ye choose, Magistrates or Deputies you trust with your lives,
liberties and estates; Plato says, good Magistra es are better then good Laws:
If on by respects you set up such as will be scourges to your selves or
Brethren, you deserve to be whipped, Judge. 9. the Shechamites for selfish
respects chose a Bramble (Abimelech) and by him are they scratched, and even
ruined.

Arg. 3. W^^^ you miss in choice, you do not well for the chosen nor the place,
Ec. 8 9. There is a time when one man rules over others to his hurt, for so he
acts more sin and gathers more wrath, Pro. 26.18. As he that binds a stone
in a string, so is he that gives honor to a fool, such a man is not in his
proper place, (as that stone, the stones proper place is the ground) neither
can he well continue in it, and however it is better, where it is safe that men
should not always continue in it, but there should be a change of some where it
is safe, as it is said, Eccl. 3.18. By Magistracy and power God does manifest
men; if after trial of men you come free, according to the trial to choose or
refuse, and so make some change, you will make men more modest and mindful in
their place; howsoever by some s^^^ change, you will try other men, and ^^^p
possession of your liberty to choose, and none may take their place for an
Inheritance to use it as they list.

Means 4. Of acting according to God in the making and manage of Magistracy, is
to attend to Gods particular Rules in the matter, they are in Exodus 18.21. Thou
shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth,
ha^ing covetousness, here are Rules that make out the true manage of
Magistracy, and so give aim to the chusers, to provide those that may so manage
their place.

1. Able men, Chasil speaks, ability of estate: Isai. 3.7. In my house is
neither bread nor clothing, make me not a Ruler over the People; he should of
his own have necessary subsistence.

2. Ability of Wisdom, Psalm. 2.10. Be wise O ye Kings, be instructed O ye
Judges of the Earth: they should themselves be wise, or at least guided by them
that are so, the want of which is noted as a cause of all public disorders
Psalm. 8.2, 5. They know not themselves, neither will they understand from
others, they walk on in darkness, the foundations of the Earth are out of
course.

3. Ability of spirit or courage, else they will not be a terror to
evil-works, but bear the sword in vain, Romans ^^.4. and this Ability is
especially to be min^^^ when Drunkenness, Gaming, Unright^^^^ness and
Uncleanness grow bold; the Rule^ ^ad need be furnished (...) with boldness to
encounter and defeat them, and I would here in particular cast in a word
against the first, Exo. 21.33. what pits you open or dig with your license, ye
had need to cover them to keep the tippling beast from falling therein, at least
the tiplers of your own Towns.

2. God-fearing men; those that want the fear of God will not regard men justly
and conscientiously, Luke 18.2. The Judge that feared not God, neither regarded
he men. This is N. Englands Crown that you have or may have in the Magistracy,
such as fear God and hold fast, and use what you have that no man take your
Crown, Rev. 3.11.

3. Men of Truth, sincere faithful men: (1) Encouraging the good. (2) Being
just men. (3) And of public spirits.

1. Encouraging and succouring them that are favored of God, and st^dy
conformity to him, this must be the aim of Rulers, who Pet. 1.2, 14. are sent
forth for the praise of them that do well, and this will be their advantage,
Zach. 12.5. The Governors of Judah shall say in their heart, the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of Hos^^ their God; those that
have God to frie^^ are surest friends to Magistracy, theref^^^ Magistracy
should be friendly to such, and consider that God puts out his Children to them
to nurse, Numb. 11.12. as a nursi^g Father bears the suck^ng child: It is
true, the Nurse may not suffer the child to feed on poison, and it is as true,
that the Nurse must not starve and pinch the child, nor be impatient toward it
in a froward fit; some are severe to conscientious people (being supposed
pious, peaceable and useful) if they conform not to their apprehensions, and
these eagerly drive on to a uniformity, and urge that some errors have
dangerous and heretical consequences; for such as among us do in Conscience
press this, I dare not judge them in their persuasion, but would crave leave
to remember what Chamier says, in Answer to the Papists charging Protestants
with grievous Heresies drawn from their opinion, Nemo fit Hereticus per
cons^quentiam, and as for the uniformity so cruelly urged by Papists and
Prelates, I would hope that only convincing light for the means and
compassionate love for the manner will be taken up, and till this course
prevail, I wish forbearance may be exercised to all sober people, so it be not
against piety or peace; and if we here in the time of our peace and ease, use
violence to pious people here with us, we may ere we are aware, help for ward
the affliction of those in other parts, Zach. 1.15. which is the way of the
Heathen, very displeasing to God.

2. Being just men is a second part of the Rulers truth, he should be one that
will seek and hasten justice: seek justice, Job 29.16. The cause which I knew
not I searched out, this requires a diligent and wakeful attendance: It is
absurd if at any time true, that they which judge in a cause should sleep at
the hearing; he that in such a case is cast, may well (as he) appeal from
sleeping to waking Phillip; more vigilance is required in a cause which may
sometime be covered with many blind^, and the strong current of a party, in
which ease just men will not therefore bear down any in his cause, Job 3^.21.
If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw my help in the
Gate: he should hasten justice, it is the honor of Christ in his Kingdom,
Isai. 16.5. He shall sit upon bis Throne in truth, judging and seeking
Judgment, and hasting righteousness.

Your second liberty is, that all have justice without partiality or delay, and
they go well together, for warping in a cause makes delay, for a right li^^ is
the shortest; it is a great sin in the Magistrate and wrath on the people, when
Isai. 59.14. Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off,
for truth is fallen in the street (when upon motion) and equity cannot enter.

But when the current of Justice in the hand and heart of just men shall run
too strong for all opposition, it is more pleasing to God then the best melody
of instituted Worship, Amos 5.23, 24. Take thou away from me the noise of thy
Songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy Viols, but let Judgment roll down
as waters, and Righteousness as a mighty stream; when you are upon the seat of
Judgment Christ must be nearest a kin unto you, Prove. 7.4. Say unto Wisdom,
that is unto Christ, thou art my Sister, and call understanding thy Kinswoman,
that they may keep thee from the strange woman.

The nearer the will and interest of Christ, the more strange will, all by
ways of injustice and partiality be to us; Kindred will be no Kindred: Zelucus
when engaged to put out his Sons eyes for Adultery, would rather make a breach
upon himself in the loss of one eye, then on the just Law to favor him.

3. Such as are of a public spirit to prosecute the general good are such men
of truth as are fit for Magistracy; every Magistrate should be as Nehemiah, A
man come to seek the welfare of the Sons of Israel, Neh. 2.10. for be is of God
set in that work and place for that end to every one, Romans 13.4. he is a
Minister of God to thee for good, Africanus had that wholesome counsel, never to
rise from the Court till he had done good to one or other, now the public
good, the good of all may be promoted by the Magistrate in point of defense,
diligence, ingenuity and peace.

1. Defense, Hos. 4.18. Her shields are translated Rulers, whence in the East
Sultan (which signifies a Shield) is the usual name of their Princes, upon
which a learned Protestant wishes that some were not rather Scutica then
Scuta, a Scourge rather then a Shield.

2. Diligence, that the people may live industruously and not idly, for honesty
of life is under the Magistrates care, 1 Timothy 2.2. Thus our Ancient, holy ones
Elton and Dod on the Commandments express this care of honest labor and
calling to be the Magistrates duty, and this some wise Rulers have thought
necessary for the public quiet.

3. Ingenuity, for the drawing forth of this here in this Land, see the best
Argument Psalm. 122.9. Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy
good, because the good and maintenance of so many Churches does depend upon
some wise consideration of the gifts of men here, and the commodities of the
Land; therefore it is not enough only to take up that good which is obvious,
but search for that which is not, and well were it as seems to me, if we had a
standing Committee to relieve and weigh such propositions tending to the better
subsisting of the people. I find in the fifth liberty an allowance of a
Monopoly on the producing a commodity now in the Land, and I perceive
Magistrates and Ministers, and most of the Husbandmen will find the want of
some stable commodity, which may command supplies from abroad.

4. Peace is the last thing I will name conducing to the public good, which is
proper for the Magistrate to promote, 1 Timothy 2.2. we are to pray for, and
therefore endeavor that Magistrates may maintain Peace, and the Rulers Office
is under the notion of an Healer, or binder up. Isa. 3.7. Chebesh, he is a
Surgeon, to bind up the wounds of the Country, Isa. 1.6. There is closing
and crushing out the corrupt matter, and then binding up for the uniting of the
parts; and then there is mollifying or suppling, for the removing of the
swelling and hardness. Now for this blessed work, the Magistrate needs an
Eagles eye, and Lions heart, and yet a Ladies soft and gentle hand.

Fathers and Brethren, ye are now to assemble, being clothed with the chief
Magistratical power of this poor Country; let me beseech you in the Name of the
Lord, to attend healing work, and to act as those that are united as one man
for the common good, that the people may be so; meddle not with any thing that
may divide you in so dubious a time, remember that Genesis 13.7. the strife
between Abraham and Lot was very unreasonable, because the Cananite was then in
the Land, and therefore Abraham to allay and end the strife, does deny himself,
and wave his right; ye know my Brethren, what new neighbors we have their
busy Locusts will know and improve al your strife and other snares for you are
boasted of, therefore now is your season for self-denial: If you have any of
you a thirst and longing to make any change in Church or Commonwealth, and may
be you see your help in the gate, and have it in your power, yet let me entreat
you in this joint of time, not to follow but forbear your own desires, because
they cannot be pursued without public hazard; if any of you long for the
waters of your Native land, yet forbear to drink them as David, 1 Chro. 11.17.

Pardon me I pray you, if from what appears above-board I cannot see how men
here can find any occasion of division, if they do not on some secret cause
unseasonably seek it; what if some Brethren have departed from a particular
Church, irregularly say some, regularly say others? but why should this make
any noise, heat and breach in the Land, since it is not held out as an ordinary
case; the like may not be seen in an age, neither is this I hope, to be a
President, nor is it upon any different Principles, though some differing
application of Principles, for it is expressly owned on all hands that the major
part of a Church must issue their matters, where the rule does not contradict,
neither can I understand why the question about adult Children of the Church
should make any estrangement, since all godly men have the same scope to fetch
in to Christ the young Generation: Some by giving those privileges which
others deny to awaken them to look out for the true and inward foundation of
privileges.

If upon such grounds as these we admit of strife, it will carker and sour our
spirits, and will take up so much of our heat and heart as to leave us faint
and feeble for converting work.

The appearance of disagreement among the Elders, will hinder the order of
Churches, which we would assert, and hinder the convertion of Youth which we
would promote, and promote profaneness, superstition and popery, which we would
hinder; hinder did I say? nay, which we would with all our might hinder and
watch against, for Satan's great Attaque upon the Churches seems to ly that way,
and may be Satan and his instruments will blow up either real division amongst
us, or the repute or report of it, that there may be a pretense of a necessity
to set up a Courtier for your Governor in the Common wealth, and a Prelate or
something like it in the Churches; and when Taxes and Tithes, and all kind of
vexation are upon you in your labors, and heavy burdens upon your Consciences,
then you will (may be cry and not be heard, because of your wilful drawing such
things upon your selves, 1 Samuel 8.18. then will you wish, Oh that we had
hearkened to God and his servants and had agreed, but were it not (my honored
Fathers and dear Brethren) better to work in hope for that agreement now, which
we would wish for in vain.

Now therefore, let all New Englands friends for their comfort, and Enemies for
their disappointment know, that (bating some Exentricks) we are all general^y
agreed in the Principles of purity and power of the Churches, and the liberty
and safety of this people against all that ly^ in wait against us, whether
nearer or further off.

Bear with me I beseech you, that I have been so large in a matter which lay
upon my heart with so great weight; I shall now hasten to a conclusion when I
have only touched upon:

4. Qualification of them that should be set up in Magistratical power, hating
Coveteousness; this Coveteousness which does incapacitate a man for Magistracy,
is an earnest intentiveness upon wealth and increase of estate: A coveteous
Magist^ate, Deputy or Commissioner, will be so busy upon particular advantage,
that for want of that he will think much of time and pains for public good,
and will be indulging (...) vice if he can gain by it, the Creek (...) could
say (...) (love of (...) is the rust of the soul, and that it is Sacrilege to
get wealth from the public, and gives even a divine rule that Magistracy is
not (...) but (...) not a trading and merchandise but a Ministry, be that
dispiseth the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands from holding of
bribes, Isai. 33.14.15 shall hold up his head when all the world is on fire,
and such a fire seems kindling now, and happy are they who will shake off such
gain, as a spark of hell, or a viper lighting upon them, as Paul did Act. 28.5.
But now it is time to conclude, least while I should help I should hinder the
work of the day, and (...) conclusion I would add two words.

1. If you have had and shall have respect to God, in constituting and
administering of Magistracy, then we must be thankful to the Lord for such
Magistrates that we have liberty to choose such, and that we have such to choose:
Else where their Magistrates and Officers, Governor and Major General, their
Secretary, yea, their Marshal is from abroad, and the Colony have no judgment
of their fitness permitted to them; yea, we must be thankful, not only for, but
to such ^^gistrates and Deputies th^^ accept and (...) their trust, for indeed
we are beholden to them for so mean a (...) is allowed, that they will put the
(...)ders under so great a burden in totter^^^ and troublesome times, let all
the Inhabitants encourage them in their work, for all your mirth and prosperity
will cease when such Rulers do, Lam. 5.14. The Elders have ceased from the
Gate, the Young men from their Music.

If your choice and administration be not to the mind of God; exercise
experience for your unworthiness; your weakness in Faith, Prayer, Watching and
Working, for God would have you work ^^t all your salvations, Eccl. 10.18. By
much slothfulness the building decays, and through idleness of the hands the
house droppeth through, Prove. 12.24. The hand of the diligent shall bear rule,
but the slothful shall be under tribute, all the decays of the fair building
of Government here, all thralldome, and all your destructions must needs be of
your selves, and your own default especially the Freemen.

2. Exercise Faith, if ye seek the Lord, he ^ill not cast you off, he has
expressed him^^lf so in promise, 1 Samuel 12.22. The Lord will not forsake his
people for his great names sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make you
his people; therefore howsoever mat^^^ (...) aside from following the Lord,
(...) Lord with all your heart, for the (...) will not forsake, and so has the
Lord (...)pressed himself in performance to you hitherto, Isa. 26.3. ye are
born by him from the belly, and are carried from the womb^, and let this be our
comfort, the Lord Jesus will put an end to all the disorders of Government,
and the more disorders of that (...) and the foundations are out of cours^; the
more are we forced to cry, Psalm. ^^. (...) rise O Lord, judge the Earth, (...)
Nations: This may awaken our (...) to the Lord Jesus, Come Lord Jesus (...)
quickly, even so, AMEN.

FINIS.

