TRUTH AND INNOCENCE VINDICATED: IN A SURVEY OF A DISCOURSE Concerning
Ecclesiastical Polity; And the Authority of the Civil Magistrate over the
Consciences of Subjects in Matters of Religion.

Non Partum studiis agimur; sed sumsimus arma,
Consiliis innimica tuis, Discordia Vaecors.
(...)

Clemens Alexand. London, Printed. 1669.

REVIEW OF THE PREFACE.
AMong the many Disadvantages, which those who plead in any sense for Liberty
of Conscience are exposed unto, it is not the least, that in their arguings and
Pleas they are enforced to admit a Supposition, That those whom they plead for,
are indeed really mistaken in their Apprehensions about the matters concerning
which they yet desire to be indulged in their practice. For unless they will
give place to such a supposition, or if they will rigidly contend that what
they plead in the behalf of, is absolutely the Truth, and that obedience
thereunto, is the direct Will and Command of God, there remains no proper field
for the Debate about Indulgence to be managed in. For things acknowledged to
be such, are not capable of an Indulgence properly so called; because the
utmost Liberty that is necessary unto them, is their Right and Due in strict
Justice and Law. Men therefore in such Discourses, speak not to the nature of
the things themselves, but to the Apprehensions of them with whom they have to
do. But yet against this Disadvantage every Party which plead for themselves,
are relieved by that secret reserve that they have in the persuasion of the
Truth and Goodness of what they profess, and desire to be indulged in the
practice of. And this also, as occasion does offer it self, and in the defense
of themselves from the charge of their Adversaries, they openly contend and
avow. Neither was it judged formerly, that there was any way to deprive them of
this Reserve and Relief, but by a direct and particular Debate of the matters
specially in difference, carried on unto their Conviction by evidence of Truth,
managed from the Common Principles of it. But after Trial made, this way to
convince men of their errors and mistakes, who stand in need of Indulgence with
respect unto the outward Administration of the powers that they are under, is
found, as it should seem, tedious, unreasonable, and ineffectual. A new way
therefore to this purpose is fixed on, and it is earnestly pleaded, That there
needs no other Argument or Medium to prove men to be mistaken in their
Apprehensions, and to miscarry in their practice of Religious duties, than that
at any time, or in any place they stand in need of Indulgence. To Dissent, at
all adventures, is a crime; and he whom others persecute, tacitly at least,
confesses himself guilty. For it is said, That the Law of the Magistrate being
the sole Rule of Obedience in Religious Worship, their Non-complyance with any
Law by him established, evidencing it self in their desire of Exemption, is a
sufficient conviction, yea a self-acknowledgement not only of their Errors and
Mistakes in what they apprehend of their Duty in these things, and of their
Miscarriages in what they practice, but also that themselves are persons
Turbulent and Seditious in withdrawing Obedience from the Laws which are justly
imposed on them. With what Restrictions and Limitations, or whether with any or
no, these Assertions are maintained, we shall afterward enquire.

The Management of this Plea, (if I greatly mistake him not) is one of the
principal Designs of the Author of that Discourse, a brief Survey whereof is
here proposed, The Principle which he proceeds herein upon, himself it seems
knew to be Novel and Uncouth, and therefore thought it incumbent on him, that
both the manner of its handling, and the other Principles that he judged meet
to associate with it, or annex unto it, should be of the same kind and
complexion. This Design has at length produced us this Discourse; which of
what use it may prove to the Church of God, what tendency it may have to
retrive or promote Love and Peace among Christians, I know not. This I know,
that it has filled many persons of all sorts with manifold surprizals, and
some with amazement. I have therefore on sundry Considerations, prevailed with
my self much against my inclinations, for the sake of Truth and Peace, to spend
a few hours in the examination of the principal parts and seeming pillars of
the whole Fabric. And this I was in my own mind the more easily indueed unto,
because there is no concernment either of the Church or State in the things
here under debate, unless it be, that they should be vindicated from having any
concern in the things and opinions here pleaded and argued. For as to the
present Church, if the Principles and reasonings here maintained and managed,
are agreeable unto her Sentiments, and allowed by her; yet there can be no
offense given in their Examination, because she has no where yet declared them
so to be. And the truth is, if they are once owned and espoused by her, to the
ends for which they are asserted, as the Christians of old triumphed in the
thoughts of him, who first engaged in ways of violence against them among the
Nations in the world, so the Non-Conformists will have no small relief to their
minds in their sufferings, when they understand these to be the avowed
Principles and Grounds, on which they are to be persecuted and destroyed. And
for the power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction belonging to the Kings of this
Nation, as it has been claimed and exercised by them in all ages since the
establishment of Christian Religion among us, as it is declared in the Laws,
Statutes, and Customs of the Kingdom, and prescribed unto an Acknowledgement in
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, it (...) and steddiness of expression,
which we shall be farther accustomed unto. But in what here he avers of
himself, he seems to have the advantage of our Lord Jesus Christ, who upon less
provocations than he has undertaken the consideration of ( for the Pharisees
with whom he had to deal, were Gentlemen be tells us, unto those with whom
himself has to do) as he says, fell into an hot fit of Zeal, yea, into an
height of Impatience, which made him act with a seeming fury, and transport of
passion, page 7. And if that be indeed his temper which he commends in himself,
he seems to me to be obliged for it unto his Constitution and Complexion, as he
speaks, and not to his Age; seeing his juvenile expressions and confidence,
will not allow us to think that he suffers under any defervescency of spirit by
his years. The Philosopher tells us, that old men in matters dubious and
weighty, are not over-forward to be Positive, but ready to cry, (...), perhaps,
and it may be so, and this (...), because they have experience of the
uncertainty of things in this world. As indeed those who know what
entanglements all humane Affairs are attended withal, what appearing Causes and
probable Reasons are to be considered and examined about them, and how all
rational determinations are guided and influenced by unforeseen emergencies and
occasions, will not be over-forward to pronounce absolutely and peremptorily
about the disposal of important affairs. But as the same Author informs us,
(...); Young men suppose that they know all things, and are vehement in their
Asseverations; from which frame proceed all those Dogmatical Assertions of what
is Politic, and Impolitick in Princes, of what will establish or ruin
Governments, with the contempt of the Conceptions of others about things
conducing to public peace and tranquillity, which so frequently occur in our
Author. This makes him smile at as serious Consultations for the furtherance of
the welfare and prosperity of this Nation, as it may be in any age, or juncture
of time have been upon the Wheel, Preface p. 48. These Considerations made it
seem to me, that in an ordinary course, he has time enough before him to
improve the notions he has here blessed the World with a discovery of; if upon
second thoughts he be equally enamoured of them unto what now he seems to be.

I could indeed have desired, that he had given us a more clear account of that
Religion which in his judgment he does most approve. His commendation of the
Church of England, sufficiently manifests his interest to lie therein; and
that in pursuit of his own principles he does outwardly observe the
Institutions and prescriptions of it. But the Scheme he has given us of
Religion, or Religious duties, wherein there is mention neither of Sin, nor a
Redeemer, without which no man can entertain any one true notion of Christian
Religion, would rather bespeak him a Philosopher, than a Christian. It is not
unlikely, but that he will pretend he was treating of Religion, as Religion in
general, without an Application of it to this or that in particular; but to
speak of Religion as it is among men in this world, or ever was since the fall
of Adam, without a supposition of sin, and the way of a relief from the Event
of it mentioned, is to talk of Chimaera's, things that neither are, ever were,
or will be. On the other hand the profit and advantage of his Design falls
clearly on the Papal Interest. For whereas it is framed and contrived for the
advantage, security, and unquestionableness of absolute Complyers with the
present Possessors of Power, it is evident, that in the States of Europe, the
advantage lies incomparably on that hand. But these things are not our
Concernment. The design which he manageth in his Discourse, the subject matter
of it, the manner how he treats those with whom he has to do, and deports
himself therein, are by himself exposed to the judgment of all, and are here
to be taken into some Examination. Now because we have in his Preface a perfect
Representation of the things last mentioned throughout the whole, I shall in
the first place take a general view and Prospect of it.

And here I must have regard to the Judgment of others. I confess for my own
part I do not find my self at all concerned in those Invectives, tart and
upbraiding Expressions, those sharp and twinging Satyrs against his
Adversaries, which he avoweth or rather boasts himself to have used. If this
unparalleld heap of Revilings, Scoffings, despightful Reproaches, Sarcasms,
Scornful contemptuous Expressions, false Criminations, with frequent
Intimations of Sanguinary affections toward them, do please his Fancy, and
express his Morality to his own Satisfaction, I shall never complain that he
has used his Liberty; and do presume that he judges it not meet that it
should be restrained. It is far from my purpose to return him any Answer in the
like manner to these things; to do it -- opus est Mangone perito
Qui Smithfieldenst polleat Eloquio:


Yet some Instances of Prodigious excesses in this Kind, will in our Process be
reflected on. And it may be the Repetition of them may make an appearance unto
some less considerate Readers, of a little Harshness in some passages of this
return. But as nothing of that nature in the least is intended, nothing that
might provoke the Author in his own spirit, were he capable of any hot
impressions, nothing to disadvantage him in his Reputation or esteem, so what
is spoken being duly weighed, will be found to have nothing sharp or unpleasant
in it, but what is unavoidably infused into it from the discourse it self, in
its approach unto it to make a representation of it.

It is of more Concernment to consider with what frame and temper of Spirit he
manageth his whole Cause and Debate; and this is such as that a man who knows
nothing of him, but what he learns from this Discourse, would suppose that he
has been some great Commander, In Campis Gurgustidoniis
Vbi Bombamachides Cluninstaridys archides
Erat Imperator Summus; Neptuni nepos,


Associate unto him, who with his breath blew away and scattered all the
Legions of his Enemies, as the wind does leaves in Autumn.

Such Confidence in himself and his own strength, such contempt of all his
Adversaries, as persons Silly, Ignorant, Illiterate, such boastings of his
Atchievments, with such a face and appearance of scorning all that shall rise
up against him; such expressions animi gladiatorii does he march withal, as no
man sure will be willing to stand in his way, unless he think himself to have
lived, at least quietly, long enough. Only some things there are, which I
cannot but admire in his undertaking and management of it; as first, that such
a Man of Arms and Art as he is, should harness himself with so much
preparation, and enter the Lists with so much pomp and glory, to combat such
pitiful poor baffled Ignoramus's as he has chosen to contend withal;
especially con^idering that he knew he had them bound hand and foot, and cast
under his strokes at his pleasure. Methinks it had more become him, to have
sought out some Giant in Reason and Learning, that might have given him at
least par animo periculum, as Alexander said in his conflict with Porus, a
danger big enough to exercise his Courage, though through mistake it should in
the issue have proved but a Windmill. Again! I know not whence it is, nor by
what Rules of Errantry it may be warranted, that being to conflict such
pitiful trifles, he should before he come near to touch them, thunder out such
terrible words, and load them with so many reproaches and contemptuous
Revilings, as if he designed to scare them out of the Lists, that there might
be no trial of his strength, nor exercise of his skill.

But leaving him to his own choice and liberty in these matters, I am yet
persuaded that if he knew how little his Adversaries esteem themselves
concerned in, or worsted by his Revilings, how small advantage he has brought
unto the cause managed by him, with what severity of Censures, that I say not
Indignation, his proceedings herein are reflected on by persons Sober and
Learned, who have any respect to modesty or sobriety, or any reverence for the
things of God, as debated among men, he would abate somewhat of that
self-delight and satisfaction which he seems to take in his Achievement.

Neither is it in the matter of Dissent alone from the established Forms of
Worship, that this Author, and some others, endeavor by their Revilings and
Scoffings to expose Non-Conformists to scorn and violence; but a semblance at
least is made of the like Reflections on their whole Profession of the Gospel,
and their Worship of God; Yea these are the special subjects of those swelling
words of contempt, those farcastical invidious Representations of what they
oppose, which they seem to place their confidence of success in; But what do
they think to effect by this Course of proceedure? do they suppose that by
crying out canting, phrases, silly, nonsense, Metaphors, they shall shame the
Non-Conformists out of the Profession of the Gospel, or make them foregoe the
course of their Ministry, or alienate one soul from the Truth taught and
professed amongst them? They know how their Predecessors in the faith thereof,
have been formerly entertained in the World: St. Paul himself falling among the
Gentlemen Philosophers of those days was termed by them (...), a Babbler, or
one that Canted; his Doctrine despised as silly and foolish, and his Phrase's
pretended to be Unintelligible. These things move not the Non-Conformists,
unless it be to a Compassion for them whom they fee to press their Wits and
Parts to so wretched an employment. If they have any thing to charge on them
with respect to Gospel Truths, as that they own, teach, preach, or publish any
Doctrines, or Opinions that are not agreeable thereunto, and Doctrine of the
Ancient, and late (Reformed) Churches, let them come forth, if they are men of
Learning, Reading, and Ingenuity, and in ways used and approved from the
beginning of Christianity for such ends and Purposes, endeavor their
Confutation and Conviction; let them I say with the Skill and Confidence of
Men, and according to all rules of Method and Art, state the matters in
difference between themselves and their Adversaries, confirm their own
judgments with such Reasons and Arguments as they think pleadable in their
behalf, and oppose the Opinions they condemn with testimonies and reasons
suited to their Eversion. The course at present steered and engaged in, to
carpe at phrases, expressions, manners of the Declaration of men's conceptions,
collected from, or falsely fathered upon particular persons, thence intimated to
be common to the whole party of Non-Conformists (the greatest guilt of some
whereof, it may be is only their too near approach to the expressions used in
the Scripture to the same purpose, and the evidence of their being educed from
thence) is unmanly, unbecoming persons of any philosophic generosity, much
more Christians and Ministers; nay some of the things or sayings reflected on,
and carped at by a late Author, are such, as those who have used or asserted
them, dare modestly challenge him in their defense to make good his charge in a
personal conference, provided it may be Scholastical, or Logical, not Dramatick
or Romantic. And surely were it not for their Confidence in that Tame and
Patient Humor, which this Author so tramples upon, p. 15. they could not but
fear that some or other by these disingenuous proceedings might be provoked to
a Recrimination, and to give in a Charge against the cursed Oaths,
Debaucheries, Profaneness, various Immoralities, and sottish Ignorance, that
are openly and notoriously known to have taken up their residence among some of
those persons, whom the Railleries of this and some other Authors are designed
to countenance and secure.

Because we may not concern our selves again in things of this nature, let us
take an Instance or two of the manner of the dealing of our Author with
Non-conformists, and those as to their Preaching and Praying, which of all
things they are principally maligned about; For their Preaching he thus sets it
out, p. 75. Whoever among them can Invent any new Language presently sets up
for a Man of new Discoveries, and he that lights upon the prettyest nonsense,
is thought by the Ignorant Rabble to unfold new Gospel Mysteries, and thus is
the Nation shattered into infinite factions with senseless and fantastic
phrases; and the most fatal miscarriage of them all lies in abusing Scripture
expressions, not only without, but in contradiction to their sense; so that had
we but an Act of Parliament to abridge Preachers the use of fulsome and
luscious Metaphors, it might perhaps be an effectual cure of all our present
Distempers. Let not the Reader smile at the Oddness of the proposal; for were
men obliged to speak sense as well as Truth, all the swelling mysteries of
Phanaticism would then sink into flat and empty nonsense; and they would be
ashamed of such jejune and ridioulous stuff as their admired and most profound
nations would appear to be. Certainly there are few who read these expressions
that can retain themselves from smiling at the pitiful fantastic souls that
are here characterized; or from loathing their way of Preaching here
represented. But yet if any should by a surprizal indulge themselves herein,
and one should seriously enquire what it is that stirred those humors in them,
it may be they could scarce return a rational account of their Commotions: For
when they have done their utmost to countenance themselves in their scorn and
derision, they have nothing but the bare Assertions of this Author for the
proof of what is here charged on those whom they deride; And how if these
things are most of them, if not all of them absolutely false? how if he be not
able to prove any of them by any considerable avowed instance? How if all the
things intended whether they be so or no as here represented, depend merely on
the judgment and fancy of this Author, and it should prove in the issue that
they are no such rules, measures, or standards of men's rational expressions of
their Conceptions, but that they may be justly appealed from? and how if sundry
things so odiously here expressed, be proved to have been sober Truths declared
in words of Wisdom and Sobriety? What if the things condemned as fulsome
Metaphors prove to be Scriptural expressions of Gospel Mysteries? What if the
principal Doctrines of the Gospel about the grace of God, the Mediation of
Christ, of Faith, Justification, Gospel-obedience, Communion with God, and
Union with Christ, are esteemed and stigmatized by some as swelling Mysteries
of Fanaticism; and the whole work of our Redemption by the blood of Christ as
expressed in the Scripture, be deemed Metaphorical? In brief, What if all this
Discourse concerning the Preachings of Non-Conformists be, as unto the sense of
the words here used, false, and the Crimes in them injuriously charged upon
them? What if the Metaphors they are charged with, are no other but their
expression of Gospel Mysteries not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but
which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with Spiritual? As
these things may and will be made evident when particulars shall be instanced
in. When I say these things are discovered and laid open, there will be a
composure possibly of those affections and disdainful thoughts, which these
swelling words may have moved in weak and unexperienced minds. It may be also
it will appear that upon a due consideration, there will be little subject
matter remaining to be Enacted in that Law or Act of Parliament which he moves
for; unless it be from that uncouth motion that men may be obliged to speak
sense as well as truth; seeing hitherto it has been supposed that every
Proposition that is either true or false, has a proper and determinate sense;
and if sense it have not, it can be neither. I shall only crave leave to say,
that as to the Doctrine which they Preach, and the manner of their Preaching,
or the way of expressing those Doctrines or Truths which they believe and
teach, the Non-Conformists appeal from the rash, false, and invidious charge of
this Author, to the judgment of all learned, judicious and pious men in the
world; and are ready to defend them against himself, and whosoever he shall
take to be his Patrons or his Associates, before any equal, competent, and
impartial Tribunal under Heaven. It is far from me to undertake the absolute
defense of any party of men, or of any man because he is of any party whatever;
much less shall I do so of all the individual persons of any party, and least
of all, as to all their Expressions, private Opinions, and peculiar ways of
declaring them, which too much abound among persons of all sorts. I know there
is no party, but have weak men belonging to it; nor any men amongst them but
have their weaknesses, failings and mistakes. And if there are none such in the
Churcb of England, I mean those that universally comply with all the
Observances at present used therein, I am sure enough that there are so amongst
all other parties that dissent from it. But such as these are not principally
intended in these aspersio^s: nor would their Adversaries much rejoice to have
them known to be, and esteemed of all what they are. But it is others whom they
aim to expose unto contempt; and in the behalf of them, not the mistakes,
misapprehensions, or undue expressions of any private persons, these things are
pleaded.

But let us see, if their Prayers meet with any better entertainment; an
Account of his thoughts about them he gives us, p. 19. It is the most solemn
strain of their devotion to vilify themselves with large Confessions of the
hainousest and most aggravated sins: They will freely acknowledge their
Offenses against all the Commands, and that with the foulest and most enhancing
circumstances; they can rake together, and confess their injustice, uncleanness
and extortion, and all the Publican and Harlot sins in the world; In brief, in
all their Confessions, they stick not to charge themselves with such large
Catalogues of sin, and to amass together such as heap of Impieties, as would
make up the compleatest character of lewdness and villainy; and if their
Consciences do really arraign them of all those crimes whereof they so
familiarly indite themselves, there are no such guilty and unpardonable
Wretches as they: So that their Confessions are either true or false; if false,
then they fool and trifle with the Almighty; if true, then I could easily tell
them the fittest place to say their prayers in.

I confess this passage at its first perusal surprised me with some amazement.
It was unexpected to me, that he who designed all along to charge his
Adversaries with Pharisaism, and to render them like unto them, should instance
in their Confession of Sin in their prayers, when it is even a Characteristical
note of the Pharisees, that in their prayers they made no confession of sin at
all. But it was far more strange to me, that any man durst undertake the
reproaching of poor sinners with the deepest acknowledgement of their sins
before the holy God, that they are capable to conceive or utter. Is this,
thought I, the Spirit of the men with whom the Non-Conformists do contend, and
upon whose Instance alone they suffer? Are these their Apprehensions concerning
God, sin, themselves and others? Is this the Spirit wherewith the Children of
the Church are acted? Are these things suited to the principles, Doctrines,
practices of the Church of England? Such reproaches and reflections indeed,
might have been justly expected from those poor deluded souls, who dream
themselves perfect and free from sin; but to meet with such a Treaty from them
who say or sing, O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon us miserable
sinners, at least three times a Week, was some surprizal. However I am sure,
the Non-Conformists need return no other answer to them who reproach them for
vilifying themselves in their Confessions to God, but that of David to Michal,
It is before the Lord, and we will yet be more vile than thus, and will be base
in our own sight. Our Author makes no small stir with the pretended censures of
some whom he opposes; namely, that they should esteem themselves and their
Party to be the Elect of God, all others to be reprobates, themselves and
theirs to be godly, and all others ungodly; wherein I am satisfied, that he
unduely charge those whom he intends to reflect upon: However I am none of
them; I do not judge any Party to be All the Elect of God, or all the Elect of
God to be confined unto any Party; I judge no man living to be a Reprobate,
though I doubt not but that there are living men in that condition; I confine
not holiness or godliness to any Party; not to the Church of England, nor to
any of those who dissent from it; but am persuaded that in all Societies of
Christians that are under Heaven that hold the head, there are some really
fearing God, working righteousness, and accepted with him. But yet neither my
own judgment, nor the Reflections of this Author, can restrain me from
professing that I fear that he who can thus trample upon men, scoff at and
deride them for the deepest Confessions of their sins before God, which they
are capable of making, is scarce either well acquainted with the holiness of
God, the evil of sin, or the deceitfulness of his own heart, or did not in his
so doing, take them into sufficient consideration. The Church of England it
self requires its Children to acknowledge their manifold sins and wickednesses,
which from time to time they have grievously committed by thought, word and
deed, against the Divine Majesty; and what in general, others can confess more,
I know not. If men that are through the light of Gods Spirit and Grace, brought
to an acquaintance with the deceitful workings of sin in their own hearts, and
the hearts of others, considering aright the terror of the Lord, and the
manifold aggravations wherewith all their sins are attended, do more
particularly express these things before, and to the Lord, when indeed nor
they, nor any other can declare the thousandth part of the vileness and
unworthiness of sin and sinners on the account thereof, shall they be now
despised for it, and judged to be men meet to be hanged? If this Author had but
seriously perused the Confessions of Austin, and considered how he traces his
sin from his nature in the womb, through the Cradle, into the whole course of
his life, with his mavelous and truly ingenious acknowledgements and
aggravations of it, perhaps the Reverence of so great a name might have caused
him to suspend this rash, and I fear, impious Discourse.

For the particular instances wherewith he would countenance his Sentiments and
Censures in this Matter, there is no difficulty in their removal. Our Lord
Jesus Christ has taught us, to call the most secret workings of sin in the
heart, though resisted, though controlled, and never suffered to bring forth,
by the names of those sins which they lie in a tendency unto; and men in their
Confessions respect more the pravity of their natures, and the inward working
and actings of sin, than the outward perpetrations of it, wherein perhaps they
may have little concernment in the world; as Job who pleaded his uprightness,
integrity, and righteousness against the charge of all his friends, yet when he
came to deal with God, he could take that prospect of his Nature and heart, as
to vilify himself before him, yea to abhor himself in dust and ashes.

Again, Ministers who are the Mouths of the Congregation to God, may, and ought
to acknowledge, not only the sins whereof themselves are personally guilty, but
those also which they judge may be upon any of the Congregation. This assuming
of the persons of them to whom they speak, or in whose name they speak, is
usual even to the Sacred Writers themselves. So speaks the Apostle Peter, 1
Epist. 4. 3. For the time past of our lives may suffice us, to have wrought the
will of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquetings and abominable idolatries. He puts himself amongst
them, although the time past of his life in particular was remote enough from
being spent in the manner there described: And so it may be with Ministers when
they confess the sins of the whole Congregation. And the Dilemma of this Author
about the truth or falsehood of these Confessions, will fall as heavy on St.
Paul as on any Nonconformist in the world. For besides the acknowledgement
that he makes of the former sins of his life when he was injurious, a
Blasphemer, and Persecutor, (which sins I pray God deliver others from) and the
secret working of in-dwelling sin, which he cries out in his present condition
to be freed from; he also when an Apostle professes himself the chiefest of
sinners; Now this was either true, or it was not; if it was not true, God was
mocked; if it were, our Author could have directed him to the fittest place to
have made his acknowledgements in. What thinks he of the Confessions of Ezra,
of Daniel and others in the name of the whole people of God? Of David
concerning himself, whose self-abasements before the Lord, acknowledgements of
the guilt of sin in all its Aggravations and Effects, far exceed any thing that
Non-Conformists are able to express.

As to his Instances of the Confession of injustice, uncleanness, and
extortion, it may be as to the first and last, he would be put to it to make it
good by express particulars; and I wish it be not found that some have need to
confess them, who cry at present, they are not as these Publicans. Uncleanness
seems to bear the worst sound, and to lead the mind to the worst apprehensions
of all the rest; but it is God with whom men have to do in their Confessions;
and before him, What is man that he should be clean, and he that is born of a
woman, that he should be righteous? Behold he puts no trust in his Saints,
and the Heavens are not clean in his sight, and how much more abominable and
filthy is man, who drinks in iniquity like water, Job. 15. and the whole
Church of God in their Confession cry out, We are all as an unclean thing, and
all our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 54. There is a Pollution of
Flesh and Spirit, which we are still to be cleansing our selves from whilst we
are in this world.

But to what purpose is it to contend about these things? I look upon this
Discourse of our Author as a signal instance of the power of prejudice and
passions over the minds of men. For setting aside the consideration of a
present influence from them, I cannot believe that any one that professes the
Religion taught by Jesus Christ, and contained in the Scripture, can be so
ignorant of the terror of the Lord, so unaccustomed to thoughts of his infinite
Purity, Severity and Holiness, such a stranger to the Accuracy, Spirituality,
and Universality of the Law, so unacquainted with the sin of Nature, and the
hidden deceitful workings of it in the hearts, minds and affections of men, so
senseless of the great guilt of the least sin, and the manifold inexpressible
aggravations wherewith it is attended, so unexercised to that self-abasement
and abhorrency which becomes poor sinners in their approaches to the holy God,
when they consider what they are in themselves, so disrespective of the price
of Redemption that was paid for our sins, and the mysterious way of cleansing
our souls from them by the blood of the Son of God, as to revile, despise and
scoff at men for the deepest humblings of their souls before God, in the most
searching and expressive acknowledgements of their sins, that they do or can
make at any time.

The like Account may be given of all the charges that this Author man^ageth
against the men of his indignation; but I shall return at present to the
Preface under consideration.

In the entrance of his Discourse, being as it seems conscious to himself of a
strange and wild intemperance of speech in reviling his Adversaries, which he
had either used, or intended so to do, he pleads sundry things in his excuse or
for his justification. Hereof the first is, his zeal for the Reformation of the
Church of England, and the settlement thereof with its Forms and Institutions;
these he says are countenanced by the best and purest times of Christianity,
and established by the Fundamental Laws of this Land; (which yet as to the
things in contest between him and Non Conformists I greatly doubt of, as not
believing any fundamental Law of this Land to be of so late a date,) to see
this opposed by a Wild and Fanatic rabble, rifled by Folly and Ignorance, on
slender and frivolous pretenses so often and so shamefully baffled, yet again
revived by the pride and ignorance of a few peevish, ignorant and malepert
Preachers, brainsick people, (all which gentle and peaceable expressions are
crowded together in the compass of a few lines) is that which has chased him
into this heat and briskness; If this be not to deal with gainsayers in a
spirit of meekness, if herein there be not an observation of the rules of
speaking evil of no man, despising no man, of not saying Racha to our Brother,
or calling of him Fool; if here be not a discovery how remote he is from
self-conceit, elation of mind, and the like Immoralities, we must make enquiry
after such things elsewhere; for in this whole ensuing Treatise we shall scarce
meet with any thing more tending to our satisfaction. For the Plea it self made
use of, those whom he so tramples on, do highly honor the Reformation of the
Church of England, and bless God for it continually, as that which has had a
signal tendency unto his glory, and usefulness to the souls of men. That as to
the outward Rites of Worship and Discipline contested about, it was in all
things conformed unto the great Rule of them, our Author does not pretend; nor
can he procure it in those things, whatever he says, any countenance from the
best and purest times of Christianity: That it was every way perfect in its
first Edition, I suppose, will not be affirmed; nor considering the posture of
affairs at the time of its framing both in other Nations and in our own, was it
like it should so be. We may rather admire that so much was then done according
to the Will of God, than that there was no more. Whatever is wanting in it, the
fault is not to be cast on the first Reformers, who went as far as well in
those days could be expected from them. Whether others who have succeeded in
their place and room, have since discharged their duty in perfecting what was
so happily begun, is sub judice, and there will abide, after this Author and I
have done writing. That as to the things mentioned, it never had an absolute
quiet possession or admittance in this Nation, that a constant and no
inconsiderable Suffrage has from first to last been given in against it,
cannot be denied; and for any savage worrying or rifling of it at present, no
man is so barbarous as to give the least countenance to any such thing. That
which is intended in these exclamations, is only a desire that those who cannot
comply with it as now established in the matters of Discipline and Worship
before mentioned, may not merely for that cause be worried and destroyed, as
many have already been.

Again, the chief glory of the English Reformation consisted in the purity of
its Doctrine, then first restored to the Nation. This, as it is expressed in
the Articles of Religion, and in the publicly authorized Writings of the
Bishops and chief Divines of the Church of England, is, as was said, the glory
of the English Reformation. And it is somewhat strange to me, that whilst one
writes against Original Sin, another preaches up Justification by Works, and
scoffs at the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ to them that believe;
yea whilst some can openly dispute against the Doctrine of the Trinity, the
Deity of Christ, and the Holy Ghost; whilst Instances may be collected of some
men's impeaching all the Articles almost throughout, there should be no
Reflection in the least on these things; only those who dissent from some
outward Methods of Worship must be made the Object of all this wrath and
indignation.

Quis tulerit Gracehos de seditione querentes? Some men's guilt in this Nature,
might rather mind them of pulling out the be am out of their own eyes, than to
act with such fury to pull out the Eyes of others, for the Motes which they
think they espy in them. But hence is occasion given to pour out such a storm
of fury, conveyed by words of as great reproach and Scorn, as the invention of
any man I think could suggest, as is not lightly to be met withal: Might our
Author be prevailed with to mind the old rule, Mitte male loqui, dic rem ipsam,
these things might certainly be debated with less scandal, less mutual offenses
and provocations.

Anothor account of the Reasons of his intemperance in these reproaches,
supplying him with an opportunity to increase them in number and weight, he
gives us page 6. and 7. of his Preface, which because it may well be esteemed a
summary representation of his way and manner of arguing in his whole Discourse,
I shall transcribe.

I know, says he, but one single Instance in which zeal or a high indignation
is just and warrantable: and that is when it vents it self against the
Arrogance of haughty peevish and sullen Religionists, that under higher
pretenses of godliness supplant all principles of Civility and good Nature;
that strip Religion of its outside to make it a covering for spite and malice;
that adorn their peevishness with a mark of piety, and shroud their ill nature
under the demure pretenses of godly zeal, and stroke and applaud themselves as
the only Darlings and Favorites of Heaven; and with a scornful pride
disdained all the residue of mankind as a rout of worthless and unregenerate
Reprobates. Thus the only hot fit of zeal we find our Savior in, was kindled
by an indignation against the pride and insolence of the Jews, when he whipped
the Buyers and Sellers out of the outward Court of the Temple; for though they
bore a blind and superstitious reverence toward that part of it that was
peculiar to their own worship, yet as for the outward Court, the place where
the Gentiles and Proselytes worshipped, that was so unelean and unhallowed,
that they thought it could not be profaned by being turned into an Exchange of
Usury: Now this insolent contempt of the Gentiles, and impudent conceit of
their own holiness, provoked the mild Spirit of our blessed Savior to such an
height of impatience and indignation, as made him with a seeming fury and
transport of Passion whip the Tradesmen thence, and overthrew their Tables.

What Truth, Candor, or Conscience has been attended unto in the insolent
Reproaches here heaped up against his Adversaries, is left to the Judgment of
God and all impartial men; yea let judgment be made, and sentence be past
according to the ways, course of life, conversation, usefulness amongst men,
readiness to serve the common concerns of mankind, in exercising lovingkindness
in the earth, of those who are thus injuriously traduced, compared with any in
the approbation and commendation of whom they are covered with these
reproaches, and there lives not that person who may not be admitted to
pronounce concerning the equity and righteousness or iniquity of these
intemperances. However it is nothing with them with whom he has to do to be
judged by man's day; they stand at the judgment seat of Christ, and have not so
learned him as to relieve themselves by false or fierce Recriminations. The
measure of the covering provided for all these excesses of unbridled passion,
is that alone which is now to be taken. The Case expressed it seems is the only
single instance in which zeal is just and warrantable. How our Author came to
be assured thereof I know not; sure I am that it does neither comprize in it,
nor has any aspect on, the ground, occasion, or nature of the zeal of
Phinehas, or of Nehemiah, or of David, or of Joshuah, and least of all of our
Savior as we shall see. He must needs be thought to be overintent upon his
present occasion, when he forgot not one, or two, but indeed all instances of
just and warrantable zeal that are given us in the only sacred repository of
them.

For what concerns the example of our blessed Savior particularly insisted on,
I wish he had ossended one way only in the report he makes of it. For let any
sober man judge in the first place, whether those expressions he uses of the
hot fit of zeal, that He was in, of the Height of impatience that he was
provoked unto, the seeming Fury and Transport of Passion that he acted withal,
do become that Reverence and Adoration of the Son of God which ought to possess
the hearts, and guide the Tongues and Writings of men that profess his Name.
But whatever other men's apprehensions may be, as it is not improbable but that
some will exercise severity in their Reflections on these Expressions; for my
part; I shall entertain no other thoughts but that our Author being engaged in
the Composition of an Invective Declamation, and aiming at a Gradeur of Words,
yea to fill it up with Tragical expressions, could not restrain his pen from
some extravagant excess, when the Lord Christ Himself came in his way to be
spoken of.

However it will be said the Instance is pertinently alleged, and the occasion
of the Exercise of the zeal of our Blessed Savior is duly represented. It may
be some will think so, but the truth is, there are scarce more lines than
mistakes in the whole discourse to this purpose. What Court it was of the
Temple wherein the Action remembered was performed, is not here particularly
determined; only it is said to be the Outward Court wherein the Gentiles and
Proselytes worshipped in opposition to that which was peculiar to the worship
of the Jews. Now of old from the first Erection of the Temple there were two
Courts belonging unto it and no more; the inward Court, wherein were the Brazen
Altar with all those Utensils of worship which the Priests made use of in their
sacred Offices; and the outward Court whither the people assembled, as for
other Devotions, so to behold the Priests exercising their Function, and to be
in a readiness to bring in their own especial sacrifices, upon which account
they were admitted to the Altar it self. Into this outward Court which was a
dedicate part of the Temple, all Gentiles who were Proselytes of Righteousness,
that is who being circumeised had taken upon them the Observation of the Law of
Moses, and thereby joined themselves to the people of God, were admitted, as
all the Jewish Writers agrree. And these were all the Courts that were at first
Sanctified, and were in use when the words were spoken by the Prophet, which
are applied to the Action of our Savior; namely, My house shall be called a
House of Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves; Afterward in the days
of the Herodians another Court was added by the immuring of the remainder of
the Hill, whereunto a promiscuous entrance was granted unto all people. It was
therefore the ancient Outward Court whereinto the Jews thought that Paul had
brought Trophimus the Ephesian, whom they knew to be Uncircumcised. I confess
some Expositors think that it was this latter Area from whence the Lord Christ
east out the Buyers and Sellers; but their Conjecture seems to be altogether
groundless; for neither was that Court ever absolutely called the Temple, nor
was it esteemed Sacred, but common or Profane; nor was it in being when the
Prophet used the words mentioned concerning the Temple. It was therefore the
other ancient outward Court common to the Jews and Proselytes of the Gentiles
that is intended; for as there the Salt and Wood were stored, that were daily
used in their Sacrifices, so the Covetous Priests knowing that many who came up
to offer, were wont to buy the beasts they sacrificed at Jerusalem to prevent
the charge and labor of bringing them from far; to further as they pretended
their Accommodation, they appropriated a Market to themselves in this Court,
and added a Trade in money, relating it may be thereunto, and other things for
their Advantage. Hence the Lord Christ twice drove them; once at the Beginning,
and once at the End of his Ministry in the flesh; not with a seeming Transport
of Fury, but with that evidence of the presence of God with Him, and Majesty of
God upon Him, that it is usually reckoned amongst one of the Miracles that he
wrought, considering the state of all things at that time amongst the Jews. And
the reason why He did this, and the occasion of the exercise of his Zeal, is so
express in the Scripture, as I cannot but admire at the Invention of our
Author, who could find out another Reason and Occasion of it. For it is said
directly, that he did it because of their wicked profanation of the house of
God, contrary to his express Institution and Command; Of a regard to the Jews
contempt of the Gentiles there is not one word, not the least Intimation; nor
was there in this matter the least occasion of any such thing.

These things are not pleaded in the least, to give countenance to Any, in
their proud supercillious Censures and Contempt of others, wherein if any
person living have outdone our Author, or shall endeavor so to do, he will
not fail I think to carry away the prize in this unworthy Contest. Nor is it to
Apologize for them whom he charges with extravagances and excesses in this
kind. I have no more to say in their behalf, but that as far as I know, they
are falsely accused and calumniated, though I will not be accountable for the
expessions of every weak and impertinent person. Where men indeed sin openly in
all manner of Transgressions against the Law and Gospel, where a spirit of
enmity to holiness and obedience unto God discovers and acts it self constantly
on all occasions; in a word, where men wear Sin's Livery, some are not afraid
to think them Sin's Servants. But as to that Elation of mind in self-conceit
wherewith they are charged, their contempt of other men upon the account of
Party which he imputes unto them, I must expect other proofs than the bare
assertion of this Author before, I shall join with him in the management of his
Accusation. And no other Answer shall I return to the ensuing Leaves, fraught
with bitter Reproaches, Invectives, Sarcasms, far enough distant from Truth and
all Sobriety. Nor shall I though in their just and necessary vindication, make
mention of any of those things which might represent them persons of another
Complexion. If this Author will give those whom he probably most aims to load
with these Aspersions, leave to confess themselves poor and miserable sinners
in the sight of God, willing to bear his indignation against whom they have
finned, and to undergo quietly the severest Rebukes and Revilings of men, in
that they know not but that they have a Providential permissive Commission from
God so to deal with them, and add thereunto, that they yet hope to be saved by
Jesus Christ, and in that hope endeavor to give up themselves in Obedience to
all his Commands, it contains that Description of them which they shall
always, and in all conditions endeavor to answer. But I have only given these
Remarks upon the preceding Discourse, to discover upon what feeble grounds our
Author builds for his own justification in his present Engagement.

Page 13. of his Preface, He declares his Original Design in writing this
Discourse, which was to represent to the World the lamentable folly and
silliness of those men's Religion with whom he had to do, which he farther
expresses and pursues with such a Lurry of virulent reproaches as I think is
not to be paralleled in any leaves, but some others of the same hand; and in
the close thereof he supposes he has evinced that in comparison of them, the
most Insolent of the Pharisees were Gentlemen, and the most savage of the
Americans Philosophers. I must confess my self an utter stranger unto that
generous disposition and Philosophic nobleness of mind, which vent themselves
in such revengefull scornful wrath, expressed in such rude and barbarous
railings against any sort of men whatever, as that here manifested in, and
those here used by this Author. If this be a just delineation and character of
the Spirit of a Gentleman, a due portraicture of the Mind and Affections of a
Philosopher, I know not who will be ambitious to be esteemed either the one or
the other. But what measures men now make of Gentility I know not; truly noble
Generosity of Spirit was heretofore esteemed to consist in nothing more, than
remoteness from such pedantick severities against, and contemptuous reproaches
of persons under all manner of disadvantages, yea impossibilities to manage
their own just Vindication, as are here exercised and expressed in this
Discourse. And the principal pretended Attainment of the old Philosophy, was a
sedateness of mind, and a freedom from turbulent Passions and Affections under
the greatest Provocations; which if they are here manifested by our Author,
they will give the greater countenance unto the Character which he gives of
others; the judgment and determination whereof is left unto all impatial
Readers.

But in this main design he professes himself prevented by the late Learned
and Ingenious Discourse, The Friendly Debate; which to manifest, it may be,
that his Rhetorical faculty is not confined to Invectives, he spends some
pages in the splendid Encomiums of. There is no doubt, I suppose but that the
Author of that Discourse, will on the next occasion require his Panegyric, and
return him his Commendations for his own Achievements with Advantage; they are
like enough to agree like those of the Poet, Discedo Alcaeus puncto Illius,
Ille meo quis?
Quis nist Callimachus?


For the present his Account of the excellencies and successes of that
Discourse minds me of the Dialogue between Pyrgopolynices and Artotrogus:

Pyrg. Ecquid meministi?

Art. Memini;
Centum in Cilicia,
Et quinquaginta Centum Sycolatronidae,
Triginta Sardi, Sexaginta Macedones,
Sunt homines Tu quos occidisti uno die,

Pyrg. Quanta isthaec Hominum summa est?

Art. Septem millia.

Pyrg. Tantum esse oportet; recte rationem tenes.

Art. At nullos habeo scriptos, sic memini tamen.

Although the particular instances he gives of the man's successes, are
prodigiously ridiculous, yet the casting up of the sum Total to the
completing of his Victory, sinks them all out of Consideration: And such is
the Account we have here of the Friendly Debate. This and that it has
effected, which though unduly asserted as to the particular Instances, yet
altogether comes short of that absolute Victory and Triumph which are ascribed
unto it. But I suppose that upon due consideration, men's glorying in those
Discourses, will be but as the Crackling of thorns in the fire, noise and smoke
without any real and solid use or satisfaction. The great design of the Author,
asis apparent unto all, was to render the Sentiments and Expressions of his
Adversaries ridiculous, and thereby to expose their persons to contempt and
scorn, Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla!

And to this end his way of writing by Dialogues is exceedingly suited and
accommodated: For although Ingenious and Learned men, such as Plato and Cicero,
have handled matters of the greatest Importance in that way of writing,
candidly-proposing the Opinions and Arguments of Adverse parties in the persons
of the Dialogists, and sometimes used that method to make their design of
Instruction more easy and perspicuous, yet it cannot be denied that advantages
may be taken from this way of Writing to represent both Persons, Opinions, and
Practices, invidiously and contemptuously, above any other way; and therefore
it has been principally used by men who have had that Design. And I know
nothing in the skillful Contrivance of Dialogues, which is boasted of here with
respect unto the Friendly Debate, as also by the Author of it in his Preface to
one of his worthy Volumes, that should free the way of writing it self, from
being supposed to be peculiarly accommodated to the ends mentioned. Nor will
these Authors charge them with want of skill and art in composing of their
Dialogues, who have designed nothing in them but to render Things uncouth, and
Persons ridiculous, with whom themselves were in Worth and Honesty no way to be
compared.

An Instance hereof we have in the case of Socrates. Sundry in the City being
weary of him for his Uprightness, Integrity, and continual pressing of them to
courses of the like nature; some also being in an especial manner incensed at
him, and provoked by him; amongst them they contrived his ruin. That they
might effect this design, they procured Aristophanes to write a Dialogue, his
Comoedy which he entitled (...), the Clouds; wherein Socrates is introduced
and personated, talking at as contemptible and ridiculous a rate, as any one
can represent the Non-Conformists to do; and yet withal to commend himself as
the only man considerable amongst them. Without some such preparation of the
peoples minds, his enemies thought it impossible to obtain his Persecution and
Destruction; and they failed not in their Projection. Aristophanes being poor,
witty, and as is supposed hired to this work, lays out the utmost of his
endeavors so to frame and order his Dialogues, with such Elegancy of words,
and Composure of his verses, with such a semblance of relating the words and
expressing the manner of Socrates, as might leave an impression on the minds of
the people. And the success of it was no way inferior to that of the Friendly
Debate; for though at first the people were somewhat surprised with seeing such
a person so traduced, yet they were after a while so pleased and tickled with
the ridiculous Representation of him and his Philosophy, wherein there was much
of Appearance and nothing of Truth, that they could make no end of applauding
the Author of the Dialogues. And though this were the known design of that
Poet, yet that his Dialogues were absurd and inartificial, I suppose will not
be affirmed; seeing few were ever more skilfully contrived. Having got this
advantage of exposing him to public contempt, his provoked malicious
Adversaries began openly to manage their Accusation against him. The principal
Crime laid to his charge was Nonconformity, or that he did not comply with the
Religion which the Supreme Magistrate had enacted; or as they then phrased it,
he esteemed not them to be Gods whom the City so esteemed. By these means, and
through these advantages, they ceased not until they had destroyed the best and
wisest person, that ever that City bred in its Heathen condition, and whereof
they quickly repented themselves. The Reader may see the whole story exactly
related in Aelian. lib. 2. Var. Histor. cap. 13. Much of it also may be
collected from the Apologies of Xenophon and Plato in behalf of Socrates, as
also Plutarch's Discourse concerning his Genius. To this purpose have Dialogues
very artificially written been used and are absolutely the most accommodate of
all sorts of writing unto such a design. Hence Lucian who aimed particularly to
render the things which he disliked Ridiculous and Contemptible, used no other
kind of writing; and I think his Dialogues will be allowed to be Artificial,
though sundry of them have no other design but to cast contempt on persons and
Opinions better than himself and his own. And his way of dealing with
Adversaries in points of Faith, Opinion and Judgment, has hitherto been
esteemed fitter for the Stage, than a serious disquisition after Truth, or
Confutation of Error: Did those who admire their own Achievements in this way
of Process, but consider how easy a thing it is for any one, deposing that
respect to Truth, Modesty, Sobriety, and Christianity which ought to accompany
us in all that we do, to expose the persons and opinions of men by false,
partial, undue Representations to scorn and contempt, they would perhaps cease
to glory in their fancied success. It is a facile thing to take the wisest man
living, and after he is limetwigg'd with Ink and Paper, and gagged with a
Quill, so that he can neither move nor speak, to clap a Fools Coat on his back,
and turn him out to be laughed at in the Streets. The Stoics were not the most
contemptible sort of Philosophers of old, nor will not be thought so by those,
who profess their Religion to consist in Morality only. And yet the Roman
Orator in his pleading for Muraena, finding it his present Interest to cast
some disreputation upon Cato his Adversary in that cause, who was addicted to
that Sect, so represented their Dogmes, that he put the whole Assembly into a
fit of laughter; whereunto Cato only replied, That he made others laugh, but
was himself Ridiculous; and it may be some will find it to fall out not much
otherwise with themselves by that time the whole account of their undertaking
is well cast up.

Besides, do these men not know, that if others would employ themselves in a
work of the like kind by way of Retortion and Recrimination, that they would
find real matter amongst some whom they would have esteemed sacred, for an
ordinary Ingenuity to exercise it self upon unto their disadvantage? But what
would be the issue of such proceedings? Who would be gainers by it? Every thing
that is professed among them that own Religion, all ways and means of their
Profession, being by their mutual Reflections of this kind, rendered
riciculous, what remains but that men fly to the Sanctuary of Atheism to
preserve themselves from being scoffed at and despised as fools. On this
account alone I would advise the Author of our late Debates to surcease
proceeding in the same kind, lest a provocation unto a Retaliation should
befall any of those who are so foully aspersed.

But, as I said, what will be the end of these things, namely of mutual
virulent reflections upon one another? Shall this Sword devour for ever? And
will it not be bitterness in the latter end? For, as he said of old of persons
contending with revilings; (...)
(...):
(...)
(...)
(...)
Great store there are of such words and expressions on every hand, and every
provoked person, if he will not bind his passion to a Rule of Sobriety and
Temperance, may at his pleasure take out and use what he supposes for his
turn. And let not men please themselves with imagining that it is not as easy,
though perhaps not so safe, for others to use toward themselves, haughty and
contemptuous expressions, as it is for them to use them toward others. But
shall this wrath never be allayed? Is this the way to restore peace, quietness
and satisfaction to the minds of men? Is it meet to use her Language in this
Nation concerning the present Differences about Religion, Nullus Amor populis,
nec foedera sunto;
Imprecor Arma Armis, pugnent ipsique Nepotes?
Is agreement in all other things, all Love and Forbearance, unless there be a
centering in the same Opinions absolutely, become criminal, yea detestable?
Will this way of proceeding compose and satisfy the minds of men? If there be
no other way for a Coalescence in love and unity in the bond of Peace; but
either that the Non-conformists do depose and change in a moment, as it were,
their thoughts, apprehensions and Judgments about the things in difference
amongst us, which they cannot, which is not in their power to do; or that in
the presence, and with a peculiar respect unto the eye and regard of God, they
will act contrary unto them, which they ought not, which they dare not, no not
upon the present instruction, the state of these things is somewhat deplorable.

That alone which in the Discourses mentioned seems to me of any
consideration, if it have any thing of truth to give it countenance, is that
the Non-Conformists under pretense of preaching Mysteries and Grace, do neglect
the pressing of Moral Duties, which are of near and indispensable concernment
unto men in all their Relations and Actions; and without which, Religion is but
a pretense and covering for vice and sin. A crime this is unquestionably of the
highest nature if true, and such as might justly render the whole Profession of
those who are guilty of it suspected. And this is again renewed by our Author,
who to charge home upon the Non-Conformists reports the saying of Fl^ius
Ilyricus a Lutheran who dyed an hundred ye^rs ago; namely that bona opera sunt
pernitiosa ad salutem, though I do not remember that any such thing was
maintained by Illyricus, though it was so by Amsdorsius against Georgius Major.
But is it not strange, how any man can assume to himself, and swallow so much
confidence as is needful to the mannagement of this charge? The Books and
Treatises published by men of the persuasion traduced, their daily preaching
witnessed unto by multitudes of all sorts of people, the open avowing of their
duty in this matter, their principles concerning sin, duty, holiness, virtue,
righteousness and honesty, do all of them proclaim the blackness of this
calumny, and sink it with those who have taken, or are able to take any sober
cognizance of these things, utterly beneath all Consideration; Moral duties
they do esteem, commend, count as necessary in Religion as any men that live
under Heaven; It is true they say that on a supposition of that performance
whereof they are capable without the assistance of the Grace and Spirit of God,
though they may be good in their own nature, and useful to mankind, yet they
are not available unto the salvation of the souls of men; and herein they can
prove, that they have the concurrent suffrage of all known Churches in the
world, both those of old, and these at present: They say moreover, that for men
to rest upon their performances of these moral duties for their Justification
before God, is but to set up their own Righteousness through an Ignorance of
the Righteousness of God; for we are justified freely by his Grace; neither yet
are they sensible of any opposition to this Assertion.

For their own discharge of the Work of the Ministry, they endeavor to take
their rule, pattern and instruction from the precepts, directions, and examples
of them who were first commissionated unto that work, even the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ, recorded in the Scripture, that they might be used and
improved unto that end. By them are they taught, to endeavor the declaring
unto men all the Counsel of God concerning his Grace, their Obedience and
Salvation; and having the word of Reconciliation committed unto them, they do
pray their hearers in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God; to this end do
they declare the unsearchable riches of Christ, and comparatively determine to
know nothing in this world but Christ and him crufied, whereby their preaching
becomes principally the word or Doctrine of the Cross, which by experience
they find to be a stumbling block unto some, and foolishness unto others; by
all means endeavoring to make known what is the riches of the glory of the
mystery of God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself; praying withal
for their Hearers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory,
would give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of
him, that the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, they may learn to
know what is the hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his
inheritance in the Saints; and in these things are they not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God unto salvation.

By this Dispensation of the Gospel, do they endeavor to ingenerate in the
hearts and souls of men, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ. To prepare them also hereunto, they cease not by the preaching of the
Law, to make known to men the Terror of the Lord, to convince them of the
nature of sin, of their own lost and ruined condition by reason of it, through
its guilt as both Original in their Natures, and Actual in their lives, that
they may be stirred up to fly from the wrath to come, and to lay hold on
eternal life; and thus as God is pleased to succeed them, do they endeavor to
lay the great Foundation Jesus Christ, in the hearts of their Hearers, and to
bring them to an interest in him by believing. In the farther pursuit of the
work committed unto them, they endeavor more and more to declare unto, and
instruct their Hearers in all the Mysteries and saving Truths of the Gospel, to
the end that by the knowledge of them, they may be wrought unto Obedience, and
brought to Conformity to Christ, which is the end of their Declaration; and in
the pursuit of their duty, there is nothing more that they insist upon, as far
as ever I could observe, than an endeavor to convince men, that that Faith or
Profession that does not manifest it self, which is not justified by works,
which does not purify the heart within, that is not fruitful in universal
Obedience to all the Commands of God, is vain and unprofitable; letting them
know that though we are saved by Grace, yet we are the workmanship of God
created in Christ Jesus to good works, which he has ordained for us to walk in
them; a neglect whereof does uncontrollably evict men of Hypocrisy and
falseness in their Profession; that therefore these things in those that are
Adult, are indispensably necessary to salvation. Hence do they esteem it their
Duty, continually to press upon their Hearers the constant observance and doing
of whatsover things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are comely, whatsoever things are of good report;
letting them know that those who are called to a participation of the Grace of
the Gospel, have more, higher, stronger obligations upon them to Righteousness,
Integrity, Honesty, usefulness amongst men, in all moral duties, throughout all
Relations, Conditions and Capacities, than any others whatever.

For any man to pretend, to write, plead that this they do not, but indeed do
discountenance Morality and the Duties of it, is to take a liberty of saying
what he pleases for his own purpose, when thousands are ready from the highest
experience to contradict him. And if this false supposition should prove the
soul that animates any Discourses, let men never so passionately admire them,
and expatiate in the commendation of them, I know some that will not be their
Rivals in their Ecstasies. For the other things which those Books are mostly
filled withal, setting aside frivolous trifling exceptions about Modes of
Carriage, and common phrases of speech, altogether unworthy the review or
perusal of a serious Person, they consist of such exceptions against
expressions, sayings, occasional reflections on Texts of Scripture, Invectives,
and impertinent calling over of things past and bygone, as the merit of the
Cause under contest is no way concerned in. And if any one would engage in so
unhandsome an employment, as to collect such fond speeches, futilous
expressions, ridiculous expositions of Scripture, smutty passages, weak and
impertinent Discourses, yea profane scurrilities, which some others whom for
their Honors sake, and other Reasons I shall not name, have in their Sermons
and Discourses about sacred things been guilty of, he might provide matter
enough for a score of such Dialogues as the Friendly Debates, are composed of.

But to return, That the Advantages mentioned are somewhat peculiar unto
Dialogues, we have a sufficient evidence in this, that our Author having
another special design, he chose another way of writing suited thereunto. He
professes, that he has neither hope, nor expectation to convince his
Adversaries of their Crimes or Mistakes, nor does endeavor any such thing. Nor
did he merely project to render them contemptible and ridiculous; which to have
effected, the writing of Dialogues in his mannagement would have been most
accommodate. But his purpose was to expose them to persecution, or to the
severity of Penal Laws from the Magistrate, and if possible, it may be, to
popular Rage and Fury. The voice of his whole Discourse is the same with that
of the Jews concerning St. Paul, Away with such fellows from the earth, for it
is not meet they should live. Such an account of his thoughts he gives us; page
253. says he, The only cause of all our Troubles and Disturbances (which what
they are he knows not, nor can declare) is the inflexible perverfeness of about
an hundred proud, ignorant, and seditious Preachers, against whom if the
severity of the Laws were particularly levelled how easy would it be, etc.

Macte nova virtute puer, sic itur ad astra. But I hope it will appear before
the close of this Discourse, that our Author is far from deserving the
reputation of Infallible in his Politics, whatever he may be thought to do in
his Divinity. It is sufficiently known how he is mistaken in his Calculation of
the numbers of those whom he designs to brand with the blackest marks of
Infamy, and whom he exposes in his Desires to the severities of Law for their
Ruin. I am sure, it is probable, that there are more than an hundred of those
whom he intends, who may say unto him, as Gregory of Nazianzen introduces his
Father speaking to himself, Nondum tot sunt anni tui, quot jam in sacris Nobis
sunt peracti victimis,

Who have been longer in the Ministry than He in the World, But suppose there
were but an hundred of them, he knows, or may know, when there was such a
disparity in the numbers of them that contested about Religion, that it was
said of them, All the World against Athanasius, and Athanasius against the
World; who yet was in the right against them all, as they must acknowledge who
frequently say or sing, his Quicunque vult.

But how came he so well acquainted with them all and every one, as to
pronounce of them that they are Proud, Ignorant, and seditious; allow him the
Liberty, which I see he will take whether we allow it him or no, to call whom
he pleases Seditious upon the account of real or supposed principles not
complyant with his thoughts and apprehensions; yet that men are Proud, and
Ignorant how he can prove but by particular Instances from his own acquaintance
with them, I know not; And if he should be allowed to be a competent judge of
Knowledge and Ignorance in the whole compass of Wisdom and Science, which it
may be some will except against, yet unless he had personally conversed with
them all, or were able to give sufficient instances of their ignorance from
Actings, Writings, or Expressions of their own, he would scarce be able to give
a Tolerable account of the Honesty of this his p^remptory censure; And surely
this must needs be looked on, as a lovely, gentle, and Philosophic Humor, to
judge all men Proud and Ignorant, who are not of our minds in all things, and
on that ground alone.

But yet let them be as ignorant as can be fancied, this will not determine the
Difference between them and their Adversaries. One unlearned Paphnutius in the
Council of Nice stopped all the learned Fathers when they were precipitately
casting the Church into a snare; And others as unlearned as He, may Honestly
attempt the same at any time. And for our Authors Projection for the obtaining
of Quiet by severe dealings with these men in an especial manner, one of the
same nature failed in the instance mentioned. For when Athanasius stood almost
by himself in the Eastern Empire for a Profession in Religion, which the
supreme Magistrate and the generality of the Clergy condemned, it was thought
the Levelling of severity in particular against Him, would bring all to a
Composure. To this purpose after they had again and again charged him to be
Proud and Seditious, they vigorously engaged in his Prosecution, according to
the Projection here proposed, and sought him near all the World over, but to no
purpose at all, as the event discovered. For the Truth which he professed
having left its root in the hearts of multitudes of the people, on the first
opportunity they returned again to the open avowing of it.

But to return from this Digression! this being the Design of our Author, not
so much to expose his Adversaries to common Contempt and Laughter, as to Ruin
and Destruction, he diverted from the beaten path of Dialogues, and betook
himself unto that of Rhetorical Invective Declamations, which is peculiarly
suited to carry on and promote such a Design. I shall therefore here leave him
for the present, following the Triumphant Chariot of his Friend; singing io
triumph! and casting Reflections upon the Captives that he draggs after him at
his chariot wheels, which will doubtless supply his Imagination with a pleasing
entertainment, until he shall awake out of his dream, and find all the
Pageantry that his Fancy has erected round about him, to vanish and disappear.

His next attempt is upon Atheists, wherein I have no concern, nor his
principal Adversaries the Non-Conformists; For my part I have had this
Advantage by my own Obscurity and small Consideration in the World, as never to
converse with any persons that did, or durst Question the Being or Providence
of God, either really or in pretense. By common reports, and published
discourses, I find that there are not a few in these days, who either out of
pride and ostentation, or in a real compliance with their own darkness and
Ignorance, do boldly venture to dispute the things which we adore; and if I am
not greatly misinformed, a charge of this prodigious Licentiousness and
Impiety, may from pregnant instances, be brought near the doors of some who on
other occasions declaim against it. For Practical Atheism the matter seems to
be unquestionable; many live as though they believed neither God nor Devil in
the world, but Themselves; With neither sort am I concerned to treat at
present, nor shall I examine the Invectives of our Author against them; though
I greatly doubt, whether ever such a kind of Defense of the Being of God was
written by any man before him. If a man would make a judgment upon the genius
and way of his Discourse, he might possibly be tempted to fear, that it is
persons, rather than Things that are the object of his Indignation; and it may
be the fate of some, to suffer under the Infamy of Atheism, as it is thought
Diagoras did of old, not for denying the Deity, nor for any absurd conceptions
of mind concerning it, but for deriding and contemning them, who without any
interest in, or sense of Religion, did foolishly, in Idoliatrous Instances make
a pretense of it in the world. But whatever wickedness or miscarriages of this
nature our Author has observed, his zeal against them were greatly to be
commended, but that it is not in that only Instance wherein he allows of the
exercise of that virtue, Let it then be his Anger or Indignation, or what he
pleases, that he may not miss of his due praises and commendation. Only I must
say, that I question whether to charge persons inclined to Atheism with
profaning Johnson and Fletcher as well as the Holy Scriptures, be a way of
proceeding probably suited to their Conviction or Reduction.

It seems also that those who are here chastised do vent their Atheism in
Scossing and Drollery, jesting, and such like contemptible efforts of Wit, that
may take for a while amongst little and unlearned people, and immediately
evaporate. I am afraid more of those who under pretenses of sober Reason do
vent and maintain opinions and principles that have a direct tendency to give
an open admission unto Atheism in the minds of men, than of such fooleries.
When others fury and raving cruelties succeeded not, he alone prevailed, qui
solus accessit sobrius ad perdendam Remp. One principle contended for as
Rational and true, which if admitted will insensibly seduce the mind unto, and
justify a practice ending in Atheism, is more to be feared, than ten thousand
jests and scoffs against Religion, which methinks, amongst men of any tolerable
Sobriety should easily be buried under Contempt and Scorn. And our Author may
do well to consider whether he has not, unwittingly I presume, in some
instances, so expressed and demeaned himself, as to give no small Advantage to
those corrupt Inclinations unto Atheism, which abound in the hearts of men; Are
not men taught here to keep the Liberty of their Minds and Judgments to
themselves, whilst they practice that which they approve not, nor can do so;
which is directly to act against the light and conviction of Conscience? And
yet an associate of his in his present design, in a modest and free Conference,
tells us, that there is not awider step to Atheism than to do any thing against
Conscience, and enforms his Friend, that Dissent out of grounds that appear to
any founded on the will of God, is Conscience; but against such a Conscience,
the Light, Judgment and Conviction of it, are men here taught to practice; and
thereby in the judgment of that Author, are instructed unto Atheism. And
indeed if once men find themselves at Liberty to practice contrary to what is
prescribed unto them in the name and authority of God, as all things are which
Conscience requires, it is not long that they will retain any regard of him, or
Reverence unto Him. It has hitherto been the Judgment of all, who have
enquired into these things, that the great concern of the Glory of God in the
world, the interest of Kings and Rulers, of all Governments whatever, the good
and welfare of private persons, lies in nothing more, than in preserving
Conscience from being debauched in the conducting principles of it; and in
keeping up its due Respect to the immediate Sovereignty of God over it in all
things. Neither ever was there a more horrid attempt upon the Truth of the
Gospel, all common Morality, and the good of Mankind, than that which some of
late years or Ages have been engaged in, by suggesting in their Casuistical
Writings such principles for the guidance of the Consciences of men, as in
sundry particular instances might set them free, as to practice, from the
direct and immedsately influencing Authority of God in his Word. And yet I
doubt not, but it may be made evident, that all their principle^ in conjunction
are scarce of so pernicious a tendency as this one general Theorem, That men
may lawfully act in the Worship of God, or otherwise, against the Light,
Dictates, or Convictions of their own Consciences. Exempt Conscience from an
absolute, immediate, entire, universal dependence on the Authority, Will, and
Judgment of God, according to what Conceptions it has of them, and you
disturb the whole harmony of divine Providence in the Government of the World;
and break the first link of that great chain whereon all Religion and
Government in the world do depend. Teach men to be like Naaman the Syrian to
believe only in the God of Israel, and to Worship Him according to his
Appointment by his own Choice, and from a sense of duty, yet also to bow in the
house of Rimmon contrary to his Light and Conviction out of Compliance with his
Master; or with the men of Samaria to fear the Lord, but to worship their
Idols, and they will not fail at one time or other, rather to seek after Rest
in restless Atheism, than to live in a perpetual conflict with themselves, or
to cherish an everlasting Sedition in their own bosoms.

I shall not much reflect upon those Expressions which our Author is pleased to
vent his Indignation by; such as Religious rage, and fury, Religious villainy,
religious lunacies, serious and Conscientious Villainies, wildness of godly
madness, men lead by the Spirit of God to disturb the public peace, the world
filled with a buzze and noise of the divine Spirit, sanctified fury, sanctified
barbarism, pious villainies, godly disobedience, sullen and cross-grained
godliness, with innumerable others of the like kind; which although perhaps he
may countenance himself in the use of, from the tacit respect that he has to
the persons whom he intends to vilify and reproach; yet in themselves, and to
others, who have not the same apprehensions of their occasion, they tend to
nothing but to beget a scorn and derision of all Religion, and the profession
of it; an humor which will not find where to rest or fix it self, until it
comes to be swallowed up in the Abyss of Atheism.

We are at length arrived at the last Act of this Tragical Preface; and as in
our progress we have rather heard a great Noise and Bluster, than really
encountered either true difficulty or danger; so now I confess that Weariness of
conversing with so many various sounds of the same signification, the sum of
all being Knaves, Villains, Fools, will carry me through the remainder of it,
with some more than ordinary precipitation, as grudging an Addition in this
kind of employment to those few minutes wherein the preceding Remarques were
written or dictated.

There are two or three heads which the remainders of this Prefatory Discourse
may be reduced unto. First, a magnificent Proclamation of his own Achievements;
what he has proved, what he has done, especially in representing the
Inconsistence of Liberty of Conscience with the first and Fundamental Laws of
Government; and I am content that he please himself with his own Apprehensions,
like him who admired at the marvelous feats performed in an empty Theater. For
it may be that upon examination it will be found, that there is scarce in his
whole Discourse any one Argument offered at, that has the least seeming
cogency toward such an end; Whether you take Liberty of Conscience, for
Liberty of Judgment, which himself confesses uncontroleable, or Liberty of
Practice upon Indulgence which he seems to oppose, an impartial Reader will I
doubt be so far from finding the Conclusion mentioned to be evinced, as he will
scarcely be able to satisfy himself that there are any Premises that have a
tendency thereunto. But I suppose he must extremely want an Employment who will
design himself a business, in endeavoring to dispossess him of his
self-pleasing Imagination. Yea he seems not to have pleaded his own cause
absurdly at Athens, who giving the City the news of a Victory when they had
received a Fatal Defeat, affirmed that public thanks were due to him, for
affording them two days of Mirth and Jollity, before the tidings came of their
ill success; which was more than they were ever like to see again in their
lives. And there being as much satisfaction in a fancied, as a real success,
though useless and failing, we shall leave our Author in the highest
contentment that thoughts of this nature can afford him. However it may not be
amiss to mind him of that old good Counsel, Let not him that girdeth on his
Armor, boast like him that puts it off.

Another part of his Oration is to decry the folly of that brutish
Apprehension that men can possibly live peaceably and quietly if they enjoy the
Liberty of their Consciences; where he fears not to affirm, that it is more
elegible to tolerate the highest Debauchertes, than liberty for men to worship
God according to what they apprehend he requires; whence some severe persons
would be too apt it may be to make a conjecture of his own Inclinations; for it
is evident that he is not absolutely insensible of self-interest in what he
does or writes. But the contrary to what he asserts, being a truth at this day
written with the beams of the Sun in many Nations of Europe, let Envy, Malice,
Fear, and Revenge suggest what they please otherwise, and the Nature of the
Thing it self denied being built upon the best, greatest, and surest
Foundations and Warranty that mankind has to build on, or trust unto for their
peace and security, I know not why it is denial was here ventured at, unless it
were to embrace an opportunity once more to give vent to the remainders of his
Indignation, by Revilings and Reproaches, which I had hoped had been now
exhausted.

But these things are but Collateral to his principal Design in this close of
his Declamation; and this is the Removal of an Objection, that Liberty of
Conscience would conduce much to the Improvement of Trade in the Nation. It is
known that many persons of great Wisdom and Experience, and who, as it is
probable, have had more time to consider the State and proper Interest of this
Nation, and have spent more pains in the weighing of all things conducing
thereunto than our Author has done, are of this mind and judgment. But he at
once strikes them and their Reasons dumb, by drawing out his Gorgon's head,
that he has proved it inconsistent with Government, and so it must needs be a
foolish and silly thing to talk of its usefulness to Trade. Verum, ad populum
phalera; if great blustering words, dogmatical Assertions, uncouth, unproved
principles, accompanied with a pretense of Contempt and scorn of all exceptions
and oppositions to what is said, with the persons of them that make them, may
be esteemed proofs, our Author can prove what he pleases, and he is to be
thought to have proved whatever he affirms himself so to have done. If sober
Reason, Experience, Arguments derived from common acknowledged Principles of
Truth, If a Confirmation of Deductions from such principles, by confessed and
commonly approved Instances are necessary to make up convincing proofs in
matters of this Nature and Importance, we are yet to seek for them,
notwithstanding any thing that has been offered by this Author, or as far as I
can conjecture is likely so to be. In the mean time I acknowledge many parts of
his Discourse to be singularly remarkable. His Insinuation That the Affairs of
the Kingdom are not in a fixed and established condition, that we are
distracted amongst our selves with a strange variety of Jealous^es and
Annimosities, and such like expressions, as if divulged in a Book printed
without License, would and that justly, be looked on as Seditious, are the
Foundations that he proceeds upon. Now as I am confident that there is very
little ground, or none at all for these Insinuations, so the public disposing
of the minds of men to fears, suspicious, and apprehensions of unseen dangers
by such means, becomes them only, who care not what disadvantage they cast
others, nay their Rulers under, so they may compass and secure their own
private ends and concerns.

But yet not content to have expressed his own real or pretended apprehensions,
he proceeds to manifest his scorn of those, or his smiling at them, who with
mighty projects labor for the improvement of Trade, which the Council
appointed, as I take it, by His Majesty thence denominated, is more concerned
in than the Non-conformists, and may do well upon this Information finding
themselves liable to scorn, to desist from such an useless and contemptible
employment. They may now know, that to erect and encourage trading
Combinations, is only to build so many Nests of Faction and Sedition; for he
says, there is not any sort of people so inclinable to seditious practices as
the trading part of a Nation; and that their Pride and Arrogance naturally
increase with the improvement of their stock. Besides the Fanatic party, as he
says, live in these greater Societies, and it is a very odd and preposterous
folly, to design the enriching of that sort of people; for wealth does but only
pamper and encourage their presumption; and he is a very silly man, and
understands nothing of the follies, passions and inclinations of humane nature,
who sees not that there is no creature so ungovernable as a wealthy Fanatic.

It cannot be denied, but that this Modern Policy, runs contrary to the
principles and experience of former Ages. To preserve industrious men in a
peaceable way of emproving their own Interests, whereby they might partake in
their own and family concerns, of the good and advantages of Government, has
been by the weak and silly men of former Generations, esteemed the most
rational way of inducing their minds unto peaceable thoughts and resolutions.
For as the wealth of men increases, so do their desires and endeavors after
all things and ways whereby it may be secured; that so they may not have spent
their labor and the vigor of their spirits with reference unto their own good
and that of their posterity in vain. Yea, most men are found to be of
Issachar's temper, who when he saw, that Rest was good, and the Land pleasant,
wherein his own advantages lay, bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a
servant unto Tribute; Fortes and Miseri, have heretofore been only feared, and
not such as found satisfaction to their desires in the increases and successes
of their endeavors. And as Caesar said, he feared not those fat and corpulent
persons Anthony and Dolabella, but those pale and lean discontented ones,
Brutus and Cassius; So men have been thought to be far less dangerous, or to be
suspected in Government, who are well clothed with their own wealth and
concerns, than such as have nothing but themselves to lose, and by reason of
their straights and distresses, do scarce judge them worth the keeping.

And has this Gentleman really considered what the meaning of that word Trade
is, and what is the concernment of this Nation in it? or is he so fond of his
own Nations and Apprehensions, as to judge it meet that the Vital Spirits and
Blood of the Kingdom should be offered in Sacrifice unto them? Solomon tells
us, that the profit of the Earth is for all, and the King himself is served by
the field; and we may truly in England say the same of Trade; all men know what
respect unto it there is in the Revenues of the Crown, and how much they are
concerned in its growth and promotion; the Rents of all from the highest to the
lowest that have an interest in the soil, are regulated by it, and rise and
fall with it; nor is there any possibility to keep them up to their present
proportion and standard, much less to advance them, without the continuance of
Trade in its present condition at least, may without a steady endeavor for its
increase, furtherance and promotion. Noblemen and Gentlemen must be contented
to eat their own Bief and Mutton at home, if Trade decay; to keep up their
ancient and present Splendor, they will find no way or means. Corporations are
known to be the most considerable and significant Bodies of the Common people,
and herein lies their Being and Bread; to diminish or discountenance their
Trade, is to starve them, and discourage all honest Industry in the world. It
was a sad desolation that not long since befell the great City by Fire; yet
through the good Providence of God, under the peaceable Government of his
Majesty, it is rising out of its ashes, with a new signal Beauty and Luster.
But that Consumption and Devastation of it, which the pursuit of this Council
will inevitably produce, would prove Fatal and Irreparable. And as the Interest
of all the several parts of the Commonwealth do depend on the Trade of the
people amongst our selves, so the honor, power and security of the whole in
reference unto foreign Nations, are resolved also into the same Principles;
for as our soil is but small in comparison of some of our Neighbors, and the
numbers of our people no ways to be compared with theirs, so if we should
forego the advantages of Trade for which we have opportunities, and unto which
the people of this Nation have Inclinations, above any Country on Nation in
the world, we should quickly find how unequal the Competition between them and
us would be: for even our Naval Force, which is the honor of the King, the
security of his Kingdoms, the Terror of his Enemies, owes its rise and
continuance unto that preparation of persons employed therein, which is made by
the Trade of the Nation. And if the Council of this Author should be followed,
to suspend all thoughts of the supportment, encouragement, and furtherance of
Trade, until all men by the severity of Penalties should be induced to an
Uniformity in Religion; I doubt not but our envious Neighbors would as readily
discern the concernment of their malice and ill will therein, as Hannibal did
his, in the Action of the Roman General, who at the Battle of Cannae, according
to their usual Discipline, (but fatally at that time misapplyed) caused in the
great distress of the Army, his Horsemen to alight and fight on foot, not
considering the Advantage of his great and politic enemy, as things then
stood, who immediately said, I had rather he had delivered them all bound unto
me, though he knew there was enough done to secure his Victory.

A SURVEY OF THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THE Author of this Discourse, seems in this First Chapter to design the
stating of the Controversy, which he intends to pursue and handle, (as he
expresses himself page II.) as also to lay down the Main Foundations of his
ensuing Superstructure. Nothing could be more regularly projected, nor more
suited to the satisfaction of ingenious Inquirers into the matters under
debate; For those, who have any design in reading, beyond a present
divertisement of their Minds, or entertainment of their Fancies, desire nothing
more than to have the subject matter which they exercise their thoughts about,
clearly and distinctly proposed, that a true judgment may be made concerning
what men say, and whereof they do affirm. But I fear our Author has fallen
under the misadventure of a failure in these projections; at least as unto that
certainty, clearness, and perspicuity in the declaration of his Conceptions,
and expression of his Assertions and Principles; without which all other
Ornaments of Speech in matters of moment, are of no use or consideration. His
Language is good and proper, his Periods of Speech labored, full, and even;
his expressions poynant toward his Adversaries, and singly taken, appearing to
be very significative and expressive of his mind. But I know not how it is come
to pass, that what either through his own defect, as to a due comprehension of
the notions whose mannagement he has undertaken, or out of a design to cloud
and obscure his sentiments, and to take the advantage of loose declamatory
expressions, it is very hard, if possible, to gather from what he has written,
either what is the true state of the Controversy proposed to discussion, or
what is the precise determinate sense of of those words wherein he proposes
the Principles that he proceeds upon. Thus in the Title of the Book he asserts
the Power of the Magistrate over the Consciences of men; elsewhere confines the
whole work and duty of Conscience to the inward thoughts and persuasions of the
mind, over which the Magistrate has no power at all. Conscience it self he
sometimes says is every man's Opinion; sometimes he calls it an Imperious
Faculty, which surely are not the same; sometimes he pleads for the
uncontrollable power of Magistrates over Religion and the Consciences of men;
sometimes asserts their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as the same thing, and
seemingly all that he intends; whereas I suppose, no man ever yet defined
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to be, an uncontrollable power over Religion and
the Consciences of Men. The Magistrates power over Religion he asserts
frequently, and denies outward Worship to be any part of Religion, and at last
pleads upon the matter only for his power over outward Worship. Every
particular Virtue he affirms to be such, because it is a Resemblance and
Imitation of some of the Divine Attributes; yet also teaches that there may be
more virtues, or new ones that were not so, and that to be Virtue in one place
which is not so in another: Sometimes he pleads that the Magistrate has power
to impose any Religion on the Consciences of his subjects, that does not
countenance Vice, or disgrace the Deity; and then anon pleads for it in
indifferent things, and circumstances of outward Worship only. Also that the
Magistrate may oblige his Subjects Consciences to the performance of Moral
Duties, and other Duties in Religious Worship under penalties, and yet
punishes none for their Crime and Guilt, but for the example of others. And
many other Instances of the like Nature may be given. Now, whatever dress of
words these things may be set off withal, they savor rankly of crude and
undigested Notions, not reduced unto such a Consistency in his mind, as to
suffer him to speak evenly, steadily, and constantly to them. Upon the whole
matter, it may not be unmeetly said of his Discourse, what Tally said of Rullus
his Oration about the Agrarian Law; Concionem advocari jubet; summa cum
expectatione concurritur; Explicat Orationem sane longam and verbis valde
bonis; Vnum erat quod mihi vitiosum videbatur; quod tanta ex frequentia nemo
inveniri potuit qui intelligere posset quid diceret. Hoc ille utrum ins^diarum
caus^ fecerit, an hac genere Eloquentia delectetur, nescio; tamen siqui
acutiores in concione steterant, de Lege Agrairia nescio quid voluisse eum
dicere suspicabantur. Many good words it is composed of, many sharp Reflections
are made on others, a great Appearance there is of Reason; but besides that, it
is plain that he treats of the Nonconformists and the Magistrates power, and
would have this latter exercised about the punishment or destruction of the
former, (which almost every Page expresses) it is very, hard to gather what is
the Case he speaks unto, or what are principles he proceeds upon.

The entrance of his Discourse is designed to give an account of the great
Difficulty which he intends to assoyl, of the Controversy that he will handle
and debate, and of the Difference which he will compose. Here, if any where,
Accuracy, Perspicuity, and a clear distinct direction of the minds of the
Readers unto a certain just Apprehension of the matter in question and
difference, ought to be expected. For if the foundation of Discourses of this
nature, be laid in terms general, ambiguous, loose, rhetorical, and
flourishing, giving no particular determinate sense of the Controversy, (for
so this is called by our Author) all. that ensues in the pursuit of what is so
laid down, must needs be of the same complexion. And such appears to be the
declamatory entrance of this Chapter. For instead of laying a solid Foundation
to erect his superstructure upon, the Author seems in it only to have built a
Castle in the Air, that makes a goodly appearance and show, but is of no
validity or use. Can he suppose that any man is the wiser, or the more
intelligent in the difference about Liberty of Conscience, the power and duty
of Magistrates in granting or denying an Indulgence unto the exercise of it, by
reading an elegant parabolical Discourse of two Supreme Powers, the Magistrate
and Conscience, contesting for Sovereignty, in and about no man knows what?
What Conscience is; what Liberty of Conscience; what it is pleaded for to
extend unto, who are concerned in it; whether its Plea be resolved absolutely
into its own Nature and Constitution, or into that respect which it has to
another common Rule of the minds and conceptions of men in and about the
Worship of God, is not declared; nor is it easily discernable, what he allows
and approves of in his own Discourse, and what he introduces to reflect upon,
and so reject. Page 5. he tells us, that Conscience is subject and accountable
to God alone, that it owns no Superior but the Lord of Consciences. And page
7. That those who make it accountable to none but God lone, do in effect usurp
their Princes Crown, defy his Authority, and acknowledge no Governor but
themselves. If it be pleaded that in the first place, not what is, but what is
unduly pretended is declared, his words may be as well so expounded in all his
Ascriptions unto Magistrates also; namely, that it is not with them as he
asserts; but only' it is unduly pretended so to be, as to any thing that appears
in the Discourse. The distinct consideration of the Principles of Conscience,
and the outward exercise of it, can alone here give any show of Relief. But as
no Distinction of that nature does as yet appear, and if rested on, ought to
have been produced by any one who understood himself, and intended not to
deceive or entangle others, so when it is brought on the Stage, its
inconsistency to serve the end designed shall be evinced. But that a plea for
the Consciences of private men, (submitting themselves freely and willingly to
the Supreme Power and Government of Magistrates in all things belonging to
public peace and tranquillity,) to have liberty to express their Obedience unto
God in the exercise of his outward Worship, should receive such a Tragical
description of a Rival Supreme Power set up against the Magistrate to the
usurpation of his Crown and Dignity, is a new way of stating Controversies
whether in Divinity or Policy, which this Author judges conducing to his
design and purpose. And I shall say no more but that those who delight in such
a way of writing, and do receive light and satisfaction thereby, do seem to be
exercised in a Logic that I was never acquainted withal, and which I shall not
now enquire after.

What seems to be of real Difficulty in this matter which is so rhetorically
exaggerated, our Blessed Savior has stated and determined in one word; Give,
says he, unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that
are Gods; and this he did, when he gave his Disciples command not only to
think, judge and believe according to what he should propose and reveal unto
them, but also to observe and do in outward practices what ever he should
command them. As he requires all subjection unto the Magistrate in things of
his proper Cognizance, that is all things necessary to public Peace and
Tranquillity in this world the great end of His Authority: So he asserts also
that there are things of God which are to be observed and practiced, even all
and every one of his own commands; in a neglect whereof on any pretense or
account, we give not unto God that which is His. And he doubted not, but that
these things, these distinct respects to God and man, were exceedingly well
consistent, and together directive to the same end of public good. Wherefore
passing through the flourishes of this Frontispiece with the highest
inconcernment, we may enter the Fabric it self, where possibly we may find him
declaring directly what it is that he asserts in this matter, and contendeth
for; and this he does page 10. And therefore it is the design of this Discourse
by a fair and impartial Debate to compose all these differences and adjust all
these quarrels and contentions, and settle things upon their true and proper
foundations; first by proving it to be absolutely necessary to the peace and
Government of the World, that the Supreme Magistrate of every Commonwealth
should be vested with a power to govern and conduct the Consciences of Subjects
in Affairs of Religion.

I am sure our Author will not be surprised, if after he has reported the
whole Party whom he opposes, as a Company of silly, foolish, illiterate
Persons, one of them should so far acknowledge his own stupidity, as to profess
that after the Consideration of this Declaration of his Intention and mind, he
is yet to seek for the Direct and determinate sense of his Words, and for the
Principle that he designs the Confirmation of. I doubt not but that the
Magistrate has all that power which is absolutely necessary for the
preservation of public Peace and Tranquillity in the world. But if men may be
allowed to fancy what they please to be necessary unto that end, and thence to
make their own measures of that power which is to be ascribed unto Him, no man
knows what bounds will be fixed unto that Ocean wherein the Leviathans they
have framed in their Imagination may sport themselves. Some will perhaps think
it necessary to this purpose that the Magistrate should have power to declare,
and determine whether there be a God or no; whether if there be, it be
necessary He should be worshipped or no; whether any Religion be needful in, or
useful to the World; and if there be, then to determine what all subjects
shall believe, and practice from first to last in the whole of it. And our
Author hopes that some are of this mind. Others may confine it to lesser
things, according as their own Interest does call upon them so to do; though
they are not able to assign a clear distinction between what is subjected unto
Him, and what may plead an exemption from his Authority. He indeed who is the
Fountain and Original of all Power, has both assigned its proper end, and
fully suited it to the attainment thereof. And if the noise of men's Lusts,
Passions, and Interests, were but a little silenced, we should quickly hear the
harmonious consenting voice of Humane nature it self, declaring the just
proportion that is between the Grant of power and its end; and undeniably
express it in all the instances of it. For as the Principle of Rule and
Subjection, is natural to us, concreated with us, and indispensably necessary
to Humane Society in all the distinctions it is capable of, and Relations
whence those Distinctions arise; so Nature it self duly attended unto, will not
fail by the Reason of things, to direct us unto all that is essential unto it,
and necessary unto its end. Arbitrary Fictions of Ends of Government, and what
is necessary thereunto, influenced by present Interest, and arising from
circumstances confined to one Place, Time, or Nation, are not to be imposed on
the Nature of Government it self; which has nothing belonging unto it but what
inseparably accompanies mankind as Sociable.

But to let this pass; The Authority here particularly asserted, is a Power in
the supreme Magistrate to govern and guide the Consciences of his Subjects in
affairs of Religion. Let any man duly consider these expressions, and if he be
satisfied by them as to the sense of the Controversy under debate, I shall
acknowledge that he is wiser than I, which is very easy for any one to be.
What are the Affairs of Religion here intended, all or some? Whether in
Religion, or about it; what are the Consciences of men, and how exercised about
these things; what it is to govern and conduct them; with what power, by what
means this may be done; I am at a loss for ought that yet is here declared.
There is a Guidance, Conduct, yea Government of the Consciences of men, by
Instructions and Directions in a due proposal of rational and spiritual motives
for those ends; such as is that which is vested in, and exercised by the Guides
of the Church; and that in subjection to, and dependence on Christ alone, as
has been hitherto apprehended; though some now seem to have a mind to change
their Master, and to take up praesente Numine who may be of more Advantage to
them. That the Magistrate has also power so to govern and conduct the
Consciences of his Subjects in his way of Administration, that is by ordering
them to be taught, instructed, and guided in their duty, I know none that does
deny. So did Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 17, 7, 8, 9. But it seems to be a Government
and Guidance of another nature that is here intended. To deliver our selves
therefore from the Deceit and Intanglement of these general expressions, and
that we may know what to speak unto, we must seek for a Declaration of their
sense and Importance from what is elsewhere in their pursuit affirmed and
explained by their Author.

His general Assertion is (as was observed) that the Magistrate has power over
the Consciences of his Subjects in Religion, as appears in the Title of his
Book; Here p. 10. that power, is said to be, to govern and conduct their
Consciences in Religious Affairs; page 13. that Religion is subject to his
dominion as well as all other affairs of State, page 27. it is a Sovereignty
over men's Consciences in matters of Religion, and this Universal, Absolute, and
Uncontrollable; Matters of Religion are as uncontrollably subject to the
supreme power, as all other Civil Concerns; He may if he please reserve the
Exercise of the Priesthood to Himself, p. 32. that is, what now in Religion
corresponds unto the ancient Priesthood, as the Ordering Bishops and Priests,
Administering Sacraments and the like; as the Papists in Q. Elizabeth 's time
did commonly report, in their usual manner, that it was done by a Woman amongst
us, by a fiction of such principles as begin it seems now to be owned. That if
this power of the Government of Religion be not Universal and Unlimited it is
useless, p. 35. that this power is not derived from Christ, nor any grant of
his, but is antecedent to his coming, or any power given unto Him or granted by
Him, page 40. Magistrates have a power to make that a particular of the Divine
Law, which God had not made so, p. 80. and to introduce new duties in the most
important parts of Religion. So that there is a public conscience which men
are in things of a public concern (relating to the Worship of God) to attend
unto and not to their own. And if there be any sin in the command, he that
imposed it, shall answer for it, and not I whose whole duty it is to obey, p.
308. Hence the command of Authority will warrant obedience, and obedience will
hallow my actions, and excuse me from sin, ibid. Hence it follows, that
whatever the Magistrate commands in Religion, his Authority does so immediately
affect the Consciences of men, that they are bound to observe it on the pain of
the greatest sin and punishment; And he may appoint and command whatever he
pleases in Religion, that does not either countenance Vice, or disgrace the
Deity, p. 85. And many other expressions are there of the general Assertion
before laid down.

This therefore seems to me, and to the most impartial Considerations of this
Discourse that I could bring unto it, to be the Doctrine or Opinion proposed
and advanced for the quieting and composing of the great tumults described in
its entrance; namely, That the supreme Magistrate in every Nation has power to
order and appoint what Religion his Subjects shall profess and observe, or what
he pleases in Religion, as to the worship of God required in it, provided that
he enjoyneth nothing that countenanceth Vice, or disgraceth the Deity; and
thereby binds their Consciences to profess and observe that which is by him so
appointed (and nothing else are they to observe) making it their duty in
Conscience so to do; and the highest Crime or Sin to do any thing to the
contrary; and that whatever the precise Truth in these matters be, or whatever
be the apprehensions of their own Consciences concerning them. Now if our
Author can produce any Law, Usage, or Custom of this Kingdom, any Statute or
Act of Parliament, any authentic Record, any Acts or Declarations of our
Kings, any publicly authorized writing, before or since the Reformation,
declaring, asserting, or otherwise approving the Power and Authority described,
to belong unto, to be claimed or exercised by the Kings of this Nation, I will
faithfully promise him never to write one word against it, although I am sure I
shall never be of that mind. And if I mistake not in a transient Reflection on
these Principles, compared with those which the Church of England has formerly
pleaded against them who opposed her Constitutions, they are utterly by them
cast out of all consideration; and this one notion is advanced in the room of
all the Foundations, which for so many years her Defenders, (as wife and as
Learned as this Author) have been building upon. But this is not my concernment
to examine; I shall leave it unto them whose it is, and whose it will be made
appear to be, if we are again necessitated to engage in this dispute.

For the present; be it granted, that it is the duty, and in the power of every
supreme Magistrate, to Order, and Determine what Religion, what Way, what Modes
in Religion shall be allowed, publicly owned, and countenanced, and by public
revenue maintained in his Dominions. That is, this is allowed with respect to
all pretensions of other Sovereigns, or of his own Subjects; with respect unto
God, it is his Truth alone, the Religion by him revealed, and the Worship by
him appointed that he can so allow or establish. The Rule that holds in private
persons with respect to the public Magistrate, holds in him with respect unto
God. Illud possumus quod jure possumus. It is also agreed, that no men, no
individual Person, no Order, or Society of men, are either in their persons or
any of their outward concerns, exempted, or may be so on the account of
Religion, from His Power and Jurisdiction; nor any Causes that are liable unto
a legal, political disposal and determination; It is also freely acknowledged
that whatever such a Magistrate does determi^^ about the Observances of
Religion. under what penalties soever, His Subjects are bound to observe what
He does so command and appoint, unless by general or especial Rules, their
Consciences are obliged to a Dissent, or contrary Observation by the Authority
of God and His Word; In this case they are to keep their Souls entire in their
spiritual subjection unto God, and quietly and peaceably to bear the troubles,
and inconveniences which on the account thereof may befall them, without the
least withdrawing of their Obedience from the Magistrate. And in this state of
things as there is no Necessity or appearance of it, that any man should be
brought into such a condition, as wherein Sin on the one hand, or the other,
cannot be avoided; so that state of things will probably occurr in the world,
as it has done in all Ages hitherto, that men may be necessitated to Sin, or
Suffer.

To wind up the state of this Controversy; we say that antecedent to the
Consideration of the power of the Magistrate, and all the Influence that it
has upon men or their Consciences, there is a superior determination of what
is true, what false in Religion, what right and what wrong in the Worship of
God, wherein the Guidance of the Consciences of men does principally depend,
and whereinto it is ultimately resolved. This gives an Obligation, or Liberty
unto them, antecedent unto the imposition of the Magistrate, of whose command
and our actual Obedience unto them in these things, it is the Rule and Measure.
And I think there is no Principle, no common presumption of Nature, nor dictate
of Reason more evident, known, or confessed, than this, that whatever God
commands Us in his Worship or otherwise, that we are to do; and whatever he
forbids us, that we are not to do, be the things themselves in our eye great,
or small.

Neither is there any difference in these things with respect unto the Way or
manner of the declaration of the Will of God; Whether it be by innate common
light, or by Revelation, all is one; The Authority and Will of God in all is to
be observed. Yea a Command of God made known by Revelation, (the way which is
most contended about) may suspend as to any particular Instance, the greatest
command that we are obliged unto by the Law of Nature in reference unto one
another; as it did in the precept given to Abraham for the Sacrificing of his
Son. And we shall find our Author himself setting up the Supremacy of
Conscience in opposition unto, and competition with that of the Magistrate,
(though with no great self-consistency) ascribing the pre-eminence and
prevalency in obligation unto that of Conscience, and that in the principal and
most important duties of Religion and humane life. Such are all those moral
Virtues, which have in their Nature a resemblance of the divine perfections,
wherein he places the Substance of Religion; With respect unto these, he so
sets up the Throne of Conscience, as to affirm that if any thing be
commanded by the Magistrate against them, to disobey Him is no Sin, but a Duty;
and we shall find the Case to be the same in matters of mere Revelation. For
what God commands that he commands, by what way soever that commnad be made
known to us. And there is no consideration that can add any thing to the
obligatory power and efficacy of infinite Authority. So that where the Will of
God is the formal Reason of our Obedience, it is all one how or by what means
it is discovered unto us, Whatever we are instructed in by innate Reason, or by
(...)* the Reason why we are (...) by it, is neither the one nor the other, but
the Authority of God in both.

But we must return unto the Consideration of the Sentiments of our Author in
this matter as before laid down. The Authority ascribed to the Civil Magistrate
being as has been expressed; it will be very hard for any one to distinguish
between it and the Sovereignty that the Lord Christ himself has in and over
his Church; yea if there be any Advantage on either side, or a comparative
pre-eminence, it will be found to be cast upon that of the Magistrate. Is the
Lord Christ the Lord of the Souls and Consciences of men? Has he dominion over
them to rule them in the things of the Worship of God? It is so with the
Magistrate also; He has an universal power over the Consciences of his
Subjects. Does the Lord Christ require his Disciples to do and observe in the
Worship of God what ever he commanded them? So also may the Magistrate, the
Rule and Conduct of Conscience in these matters belonging unto him; provided
that he command nothing that may countenance Vice, or disgrace the Deity;
which, with Reverence be it spoken, our Lord Jesus Christ himself, not only on
the Account of the Per^ection and rectitude of his own Nature, but also of his
Commission from the Father, could not do. Is the Authority of Christ the formal
Reason making Obedience necessary to his Commands and Precepts? So is the
Authority of the Magistrate in reference unto what he requires. Do men
therefore sin if they neglect the observance of the commands of Christ in the
Worship of God, because of his immediate Authority so to command them binding
their Consciences? So do men sin if they omit or neglect to do what the
Magistrate requires in the Worship of God because of his Authority, without any
farther respect. Has the Lord Christ instituted two Sacraments in the Worship
of God, that is outward visible signs, or Symbols, of inward invisible or
spiritual Grace? the Magistrate if he please may institute and appoint twenty
under the names of significant Ceremonies; that is outward visible signs of
inward spiritual grace, which alone is the significancy contended about. Has
the Magistrate this his Authority in and over Religion and the consciences of
men from Jesus Christ? no more then Christ has his Authority from the
Magistrate; for he holds it by the Law of Nature antecedent to the promise and
coming of Christ? Might Christ in his own Person administer the Holy Things of
the Church of God? not in the Church of the Jews, for he sprang of the Tribe of
Judah, concerning which nothing was spoken as to the Priesthood; only he might
in that of the Gospel, but has judged meet to commit the Actual Administration
of them to others? So is it with the Magistrate also. Thus far then Christ and
the Magistrate seem to stand on even or equal terms; But there are two things
remaining that absolutely turn the scale and cast the advantage on the
Magistrates side. For First, Men may do and practice many things in the Worship
of God which the Lord Christ has no where, nor by any means required; yea to
think that his Word or the Revelation of his Mind and Will therein, is the sole
and adequate Rule of Religious Worship, is reported as an Opinion foolish,
absurd, impious and destructive of all Government. If this be not supposed not
only the whole Design of our Author in this Book is defeated, but our whole
Controversy also is composed and at an end. But on the other hand, no man must
do or practice any thing in that way, but what is prescribed, appointed and
commanded by the Magistrate, upon pain of Sin, Schism, Rebellion and all that
follows thereon. To leave this unasserted is all that the Non-Conformists would
desire in order unto peace. Comprehension and Indulgence would ensue thereon.
Here I think the Magistrate has the advantage. But that which follows will
make it yet more evident; for Secondly, Suppose the Magistrate require any
thing to be done and observed in the Worship of God, and the Lord Christ
require the quite contrary in a man's own apprehension, so that he is as well
satisfied in his apprehension of his mind as he can be of any thing that is
proposed to his faith and Conscience in the Word of God; in this case he is to
obey Magistrate, and not Christ, as far as I can learn; unless all Confusion
and Disorder be admitted an entrance into the world. Yea, but this seems
directly contrary to that Rule of the Apostles, which has such an evidence and
power of rational conviction attending it, that they refer it to the judgment
of their Adversaries, and those persons of as perverse corrupt minds and
prejudicate engagements against them and their cause, as ever lived in the
world; namely, Whether it be meet to obey God or man, judge ye. But we are
told, that this holds only in greater matters; the Logic (by the way) of which
distinction, is as strange as its Divinity. For if the formal Reason of the
difference intimated, arise from the comparison between the Authority of God
and man, it holds equally as to all things small or great that they may be
oppositely concerned in. Besides who shall judge what is small, or what is
great in things of this Nature? Cave ne titubes. Grant but the least judgment
to private men themselves in this matter, and the whole Fabric tumbles; If the
Magistrate be Judge of what is great and of what is little, we are still where
we were without hopes of delivery. And this to me is a notable instance of the
pre-eminence of the Magistrate above Christ in this matter. Some of the Old
Irish have a Proverbial Speech amongst them, That if christ had not been Christ
when he was Christ, Patrick had been Christ; but it seems now that taking it
for granted that he was Christ, yet we have another that is so also; that is
Lord over the Souls and Consciences of men; and what can be said more of him,
who sits in the Temple of God, and shows himself to be God.

As we formerly said Non-Conformists who are unacquainted with the Mysteries of
things of this Nature, must needs desire to know whether these be the avowed
Principles of the Church of England, or whether they are only Inventions to
serve a present Turn of the pursuit of some men's designs. Are all the old Pleas
of the Jus Divinum of Episcopacy, of Example and Direction Apostolical, of a
Parity of reason between the Condition of the Church whilst under extraordinary
Officers, and whilst under ordinary; of the power of the Church to appoint
Ceremonies for Decency and Order, of the Consistency of Christian Liberty with
the necessary practice of indifferent things, of the pattern of the Churches of
old, which (whether, duly or otherwise we do not now determine) have been
insisted on in this cause, swallowed all up in this Abyss of Magistratical
Omnipotency, which plainly renders them useless and unprofitable? How unhappy
has it been that the Christian World was not sooner blessed with this great
Discovery of the only way and means of putting a final end, unto all Religious
contests? That he should not until now appear, Qui genus humanum ingenio
Superavit, and omnes
Praestrinxit stellas, exortus at aetherius sol.
But every Age produces not a Columbus. Many indeed have been the Disputes of
Learned men about the power of Magistrates in and concerning Religion. With us
it is stated in the recorded Actings of our Sovereign Princes, in the Oath of
Supremacy, and the Acts of Parliament concerning it, with other Authentic
Writings explanatory thereof. Some have denied him any concern herein; our
Author is none of them? but rather like the Phrenetick Gentleman who when he
was accused in former days, for denying the Corporal presence of Christ in the
Sacrament: replied in his own defense, that he believed him to be present
booted and spurred as he rode to Capernaum. He has brought him in booted and
spurred, yea armed cap-a-pie into the Church of God, and given all power into
his hands to dispose of the Worship of God according to his own will and
pleasure. And that not with respect unto outward Order only, but with direct
obligation upon the Consciences of men.

But doubtless it is the Wisdom of Sovereign Princes to beware of this sort of
Enemies; Persons who to promote their own Interest make Ascriptions of such
things unto them, as they cannot accept of, without the utmost hazard of the
displeasure of God. Is it meet that to satisfy the desires of any, they should
invade the Prerogative of God, or set themselves down at his right Hand in the
Throne of his only begotten Son? I confess they are no way concerned in what
others for their advantage sake, as they suppose, will ascribe unto them, which
they may sufficiently disown by scorn and silence. Nor can their sin involve
them in any guilt. It was not the vain Acclamation of the multitude unto Herod,
the voice of God and not of man, but his own arrogant satisfaction in that
blasphemous Assignation of divine glory to him, that exposed him to the
judgments and vengeance of God. When the Princes of Israel found by the Answer
of the Reubenites that they had not transgressed against the Law of Gods
Worship, in adding unto it or altering of it, which they knew would have been a
provocation not to have been passed over without a recompense of Revenge; They
replied unto them, Now have you delivered the Children of Israel out of the
hand of the Lord; and it is to be desired that all the Princes of the Israel of
God in the world, all Christian Potentates, would diligently watch against
giving admission unto any such Insinuations, as would deliver them into the
hand of the Lord.

For my own part, such is my Ignorance, that I know not, that any Magistrate
from the foundation of the world, unless it were Nebuchadnezzar, Cai^s
Caligula, Domitian and Persons like to them, ever claimed or pretended to
exercise the power here assigned unto them. The Instances of the Laws and
Edicts of Constantine in the matters of Religion and the Worship of God, of
Theodosius and Gratian, Arcadius, Martian and other Emperors of the East
remaining in the Code and Novels; the Capitular of the Western Emperors, and
Laws of Gothish Kings, the Right of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction inherent in the
Imperial Crown of this Nation, and occasionally exercised in all Ages are of no
concernment in this matter. For no man denies but that it is the duty of the
Supreme Magistrate to protect and further the true Religion, and right Worship
of God, by all ways and means suited and appointed of God thereunto. To
encourage the Professors thereof, to protect them from wrong and violence, to
secure them in the performance of their duties, is doubtless incumbent on them.
Whatever under pretense of Religion brings actual disturbance unto the peace of
mankind, they may coerce and restrain. When Religion as established in any
Nation by Law, does or may interest the Professors of it, or Guides in it, in
any Privileges, Advantages, or Secular Emoluments, which are subject and
liable, as all humane concerns, to doubts, controversies, and litigious
contests in their security and disposal, all these things depend merely and
solely on the power of the Magistrate, by whose Authority they are originally
grantted, and by whose Jurisdictive Power both the Persons vested with them,
and themselves are disposable. But for an Absolute Power over the Consciences
of men to bind or oblige them formally thereby, to do whatever they shall
require in the Worship of God, so as to make it their sin deserving eternal
damnation not so to do, without any consideration whether the things are true
or false, according to the mind of God or otherwise, yea though they are
apprehended by them who are so obliged to practice them, to be contrary to the
Will of God, that this has hitherto been claimed by any Magistrate, unless
such as those before mentioned, I am yet to seek. And the case is the same with
respect unto them who are not satis^ied that what is so prescribed unto them
will be accepted with God. For whereas in all that men do in the Worship of
God, they ought to be fully persuaded of its acceptableness to God in their own
minds, seeing whatever is not of faith is sin, he that doubts is in a very
little better Capacity to serve God on such injunctions, then he who
apprehends them to be directly contrary to his mind.

If an Edict were drawn up for the settlement of Religion and Religious Worship
in any Christian Nation, according to the Principles and Directions before laid
down, it may be there would be no great strife in the world by whom it should
be first owned and espoused. For it must be of this Importance.

Whereas We have an Universal and Absolute Power over the Consciences of all
our Subjects in things appertaining to the Worship of God; so that if We please
We can introduce new duties, (never yet heard of,) in the most important parts
of Religion ( page 80.) and may impose on them in the practice of Religion and
Divine Worship what We please; so that in our Judgment it does not countenance
Vice, nor disgrace the Deity, ( Page 85.) and whereas this Power is naturally
inherent in us, not given or granted unto us by Jesus Christ, but belonged to
us, or our Predecessors before ever he was born, nor is expressed in the
Scripture, but rather supposed; and this being such as that We our selves if We
would, (whether We be Man or Woman) ( here France must be excepted by virtue of
the Salique Law, though the whole project be principally calculated for that
Meridian) might exercise the special Offices and Duties of Religion in Our own
Person, especially that of the Priesthood, though me are pleased to transfer
the Exercise of it unto others; and whereas all our Prescriptions, Impositions,
and Injunctions, in these things, do immediately affect and bind the
Consciences of our Subjects because they are Ours, whether they be right or
wrong, true or false, so long as in our judgment they neither ( as was said)
countenance Vice nor disgrace the Deity, We do Enact and Ordain as follows.

( Here, if you please, you may intersert the Scheme of Religion given us by
our Author in his second Chapter, and add unto it; that because Sacrifices were
a way found out by honest men of old, to express their gratitude unto God
thereby, so great and necessary a part of our Religious duty; it be enjoined
that the use of them be again revived; seeing there is nothing in them that
offends against the bounds prescribed to the power to be expressed; and that
men in all places do offer up Bulls and Goats, Sheep, and Fowls, to God, with
as many other Institutions of the like Nature, as shall be thought meet;)
Hereunto add,

Now our express Will and Pleasure is, that every man may, and do think and
judge what he pleases concerning the things enjoined and enacted by Us; for
what have We to do with their thoughts and judgments? they are under the
Empire and Dominion of Conscience, which We cannot invade if We would; they may
if they please judge them inconvenient, foolish, absurd, yea contrary to the
Mind, Will, and Law of God: Our only Intention, Will and Pleasure is, to bind
them to the constant Observation and Practice of them, and that under the
Penalties of Hanging and Damnation.

I know not any Expression in such an Impious and futilous Edict, that may not
be warranted out of the Principles of this Discourse; the main parts of it
being composed out of the Words and Phrases of it, and those used, to the best
of my understanding, in the sense fixed to them by our Author.

Now, as was said before, I suppose Christian Princes will not be earnest in
their Contests, who shall first own the Authority intimated, and express it in
a suitable exercise. And if any one of them should put forth his hand unto it,
he will find that -- Furiarum Maxima juxta
Accubat, and manibus prohibet contingere mensas.
There is one who lays an Antecedent Claim to a Sole Interest in this Power,
and that bottomed on other manner of Pretensions than any as yet have been
pleaded in their behalf. For the Power and Authority here ascribed unto
Princes, is none other but that which is claimed by the Pope of Rome, (with
some few Enlargements) and appropriated unto him by his Canonists and
Courtiers. Only here the old Gentleman, (as he is called by our Author) has
the advantage; that beside the Precedence of his claim, it being entered on
Record at least six or seven hundred years before any Proctor or Advocate
appeared in the behalf of Princes, he has forestalled them all in the pretense
of Infallibility; which doubtless is a matter of singular use in the exercise
of the power contended about. For some men are so peevish as to think that thus
to deal with Religion and the Consciences of men, belongs to none but him, who
is Absolutely, yea essentially so, that is Infallible. For as we have now often
said (as contrary to their design men in haste oftentimes speak the same things
over and over) as to all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over persons and causes
Ecclesiastical, and the Sovereign disposal of all the Civil and Political
concernments of Religion which is vested in the Imperial Crown of this Nation,
and by sundry Acts of Parliament is declared so to be, I shall be always ready
to plead the Right of our Kings, and all Christian Kings whatever, against the
absurd Pleas and Pretenses of the Pope; so as to this Controversy between him
and such Princes as shall think meet to contend with him about it, concerning
the power over the Consciences of men before described, I shall not interpose
my self in the scuffle; as being fully satisfied they are contending about that
which belongs to neither of them.

But what Reason is there, why this Power should not be extended unto the
inward thoughts and apprehensions of men about the Worship of God, as well as
to the expression of them in pure Spiritual Acts of that Worship. The Power
asserted I presume will be acknowledged to be from God; though I can scarce
meet with the Communication and derivation of it from him in this Discourse.
But whereas, it is granted on all hands, that the Powers that be are of God,
and that none can have Authority over an other, unless it be originally given
him from above; I desire to be informed why the other part of the Power
mentioned, namely over the Thoughts, Judgments, and Apprehensions of men in
the things of the Worship of God, should not be invested in the Magistrate
also; that so he having declared what is to be believed, thought, and judged in
such things, all men should be obliged so to believe, think, and judge; for
this power God can give; and has given it unto Jesus Christ. I presume, it
will be said, that this was no way needful for the preservation of Peace in
Humane Society, which is the end for which all this Power is vested in the
Magistrate. For let men believe, think, and judge what they please, so long as
their outward Actings are, or may be overruled, there is no danger of any
public disturbance. But this seems to be a mighty uneasy condition for
mankind; namely to live continually in a contradiction between their Judgments
and their Practices, which in this case is allowed to be incident unto them.
Constantly to judge one way best and most according to the mind of God in his
Worship, and constantly to practice another, will, it is to be feared, prove
like the conflicting of vehement vapors with their contrary qualities, that at
one time or other will produce an Earthquake. How then if men weary of this
perplexing distorting condition of things in their minds, should be provoked to
run to excesses and inordinate courses for their freedom and Rest, such as our
Author excellently displayes in all their hideous colors and appearances, and
which are really pernicious to Humane Policy and Society? Were it not much
better that all these inconveniences had been prevented in the first Instance,
by taking care that the Faith, Thoughts, Persuasions, and Judgments of all
Subjects about the things of God, should be absolutely bound up unto the
declared conceptions of their Rulers in these matters? Let it not be pretended,
that this is impossible, and contrary to the natural liberty of the minds of
men, as rational creatures guiding and determining themselves according to
their own reason of things and understandings. For do but fix the declared Will
of the Ruler, in the room and place of Divine Revelation, (which is no hard
matter to do, which some actually do universally, and our Author as to a great
share and proportion) and the obligation sought after to prevent all
Inconvencies in Government, falls as full and directly upon the minds,
thoughts, and judgments of men, as upon any of their outward Actions. And
this, for the substance of it, is now pleaded for; seeing it is pretended that
in all things dubious, where men cannot satisfy themselves that it is the Will
of God that they should do a thing, or no, the Declaration of the Magistrate
determines not only their Practice, but their Judgment also, and gives them
that full persuasion of their minds which is indispensably required unto their
acting in such things; and that faith which frees them from sin; For he that
doubts, is damned if he eat.

But it will be said, that there will be no need hereof; For let men think and
judge what they please, whilst they are convinced and satisfied that it is
their duty not to practice any thing outwardly in Religion, but what is
prescribed by their Rulers, it is not possible that any public evil should
ensue upon their mental conceptions only. We observed before that the condition
described is exceedingly uneasy; which I suppose will not be denied by men who
have seriously considered, what it is either to judge or practice any thing
that lies before them with reference unto the judgment of God. And that which
should tie men up to rest perpetually in such a restless state, is as it seems
a mere conviction of their duty. They ought to be, and are supposed to be
convinced that it is their duty to maintain the liberty of their minds and
judgments, but to submit in their outward practice universally to the Laws of
men that are over them. And this sense and conviction of duty, is a sufficient
security unto public tranquillity, in all that contrariety and opposition of
Sentiments unto Established Religion and Forms of Worship that may be imagined;
But if this be so; why will not the same conviction and sense of duty restrain
them, who do peaceably exercise the Worship of God according to the Light and
Dictates of their Consciences, from any actings whatever that may tend to the
disturbance of the Public Peace? Duty, nakedly considered, is even as such,
the greatest obligation on the minds of men; and the great security of others
in their Actings arises from the^c^. (...) more it is influenced and
advantaged by outward considerations, the less it is assaulted and opposed by
things grievous and perplexing in the way of the Discharge of it, the more
efficacious will be its operations on the minds of men, and the firmer will be
the security unto others that thence arises. Now these Advantages lie
absolutely on the part of them who practice, or are allowed so to do, according
to their own Light and Persuasion in the Worship of God, wherein they are at
rest and full satisfaction of mind; and not on theirs who all their days are
bound up to a perverse distorted posture of mind and soul, in judging one thing
to be best and most pleasing unto God, and practicing of the contrary. Such an
one, is the man that of all others, Rulers have need I think to be most jealous
of. For what security can be had of him, who has inured himself unto a
continual contradiction between his Faith and his practice? For my part I
should either expect no other measure from him in any other thing, nor ever
judge that his profession and ways of Actings are any sufficient Indications
of his mind, (which takes away all security from mankind) or fear that his
Convictions of Light and Knowledge, (as he apprehends) would at one time or
other precipitate him into attempts of Irregularity and violence for his own
relief.

-- Hic nig^r est, hunc tu Roman caveto. It will be said, perhaps, that we
need not look farther for the Disturbance of public peace, from them who
practice outwardly any thing in the Worship of God but what is prescribed,
established, and enjoined; seeing that every such practice is such a
disturbance it self. I say this pretense is miserably ridiculous and
contemptible, and contrary to the common experience of mankind. If this were
so, the whole World for 300 years, lived in one continual disturbance and
tumult upon the account of Christian Religion, whose Professors constantly
practiced and performed that in the Worship of God, which was so far from being
established or approved by Public Authority, that it was proscribed and
condemned under penalties of all sorts, pecuniary, corporal, and sanguinary or
capital. But we see no such matter ensued, nor the least disquietment unto the
World, but what was given unto it by the rage of bloody persecutors, that
introduced the first Convulsions into the Roman Empire, which were never well
quieted, but ended in its dissolution. The experience also of the present and
next preceding Ages, casts this frivolous exception out of consideration. And
as such a practice, even against Legal Prohibitions, though it be by the
transgression of a penal Law, is yet in it self and just consequence remote
enough from any disturbance of Government, (unless we should suppose that every
Non-observance of a penal Statute invalidates the Government of a Nation, which
were to fix it upon such a Foundation, as will not afford it the steddiness of
a Weathercok;) so being allowed by way of exemption, it contains no invasion
upon, or intrusion into the rights of others; but being accompanied with the
Abridgement of the privileges of none, or the neglect of any duty required to
the good of the Commonwealth, it is as consistent with, and may be as
conducing to public good and Tranquillity, as any order of Religious things in
the World, as shall be elsewhere demonstrated.

It remains therefore that the only answer to this consideration is, that men
who plead for Indulgence and Liberty of Conscience in the Worship God according
to his Word, and the Light which He has given them therein, have indeed no
conscience at all, and so are not to be believed as to what they profess
against sinister and evil Practices. This Flaile I know no fence against, but
this only; that they have as good and better grounds to suspect him to have no
conscience at all, who upon unjust surmises shall so injuriously charge them,
as finding him in a direct transgression of the principal Rules that Conscience
is to be guided and directed by, than he has to pronounce such a judgment
concerning them and their sincerity in what they prosess. And whether such
mutual censures tend not to the utter overthrow of all peace, love, and
security amongst mankind is easy to determine. Certainly it is the worst game
in the World for the Public, to have men bandying suspicions one against
another; and thereon managing mutual charges of all that they do surmise, or
what else they please to give the countenance of surmise unto.

I acknowledge the notion insisted on, namely, that mhilest men reserve to
themselves the freedom and liberty of judging what they please, or what seems
good unto them in matters of Religion and the Worship of God, they ought to
esteem it their duty to practice in all things according to the prescription of
their Rulers, though every may contrary unto, and inconsistent with their own
judgments and persuasions, unless it be in things that countenance Vice, or
disgrace the Deity (where of yet it may be, it will not be thought meet that
they themselves should judge for themselves and their own practice, seeing they
may extend their conceptions about what does so unto such minute Instances as
would frustrate the whole design) is exceedingly accommodated to the corrupt
lusts and affections of men, and suited to make provision for their security in
this world, by an exemption from the indispensable command of professing the
truth communicated and known unto them; a sense of the obligation where of,
has hitherto exposed innumerable persons in all Ages to great difficulties,
dangers, and sufferings, yea to death the height and sum of all. For whereas
men have been persuaded that with the heart man believes unto Righteousness,
and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation; the latter clause is in
many cases hereby sufficiently superseded; and the troublesome duty seeming to
be required in it, is removed out of the way. It will not, it may be, be so
easy to prove that in the Religion of the Mahumetans there is any thing
enjoined in practice, that will directly fall under the limitations assigned
unto the compliance with the commands of Supeperiours contended for. And
therefore let a man but retain his own apprehensions concerning Jesus Christ
and the Gospel, it may be lawful for him, yea be his duty to observe the
worship enjoined by the Law of Mahomet, if his lot fall to live under the power
of the Grand Seignior, or any Sovereign Prince of the same persuasion. But the
case is clear in the Religion of the Papists, which is under the protection of
the greatest number of supreme Magistrates in Europe. It will not be pretended,
I suppose by our Author, that there is any thing in the confession of the
Church of Rome, or imposed by it on the practices of men, that directly gives
countenance unto any Immorality, especially as the sense of that term is by him
stated; and it is no easy matter for ordinary men to prove and satisfy
themselves, that there is ought in their Modes of Worship of such a tendency,
as to cast disgrace upon the Deity; especially considering with how much
learning and diligence the charge of any such miscarriage is endeavored to be
answered and removed; all which pleas ought to be satisfied, before a man can
make sedately a determinate judgment of the contrary. Let then men's
judgments be what they will in the matters of difference between Protestants
and Papists, it is on this Hypothesis, the duty of all that live under the
Dominion of Sovereign Popish Princes, outwardly to comply with and practice
that Religious Worship that is commanded by them and enjoined. The case is the
same also as to the Religion of the Jews. Now as this casts a Reflection of
incredible folly and unexpiable guilt upon all Protestant Martyrs, in casting
away their own lives, and disobeying the Commands of their lawful Sovereigns?
so it exposes all the Protestants in the World who are still in the same
condition of subjection, to the severe censures of Impiety and Rebellion; and
must needs exasperate their Rulers to pursue them to destruction, under
pretense of unwarrantable obstinacy in them. For if we wholly take off the
protection of Conscience in this matter, and its subjection to the Authority of
God alone, there is no plea left to excuse dissenting Protestants from the
guilt of such crimes, as may make men justly cry out against them as the Jews
did against St. Paul, Away with them, away with them, it is not meet that such
Fellows should live; or, Frotestantes ad Leones, according to the old cry of
the Pagans against the Primitive Christians. But if this should prove to be a
way of teaching and justifying the grossest Hypocrisy and Dissimulation that
the nature of man is capable of, a means to cast off all regard unto the
Authority of God over the ways and lives of men, all the Rhetoric in the
World shall never persuade me that God has so molded and framed the order and
state of humane affairs, that it should be any way needful to the preservation
of public peace and tranquillity. Openness, plainness of heart, Sincerity in
our Actions and Professions, Generous honesty, and an universal respect in all
things to the supreme Rector of all, the great Possessour of Heaven and Earth,
with an endeavor to comply with His present revealed mind, and future
judgment, are far better Foundations for, and ligaments of public peace and
quietness. To make this the Foundation of our Political Superstructure, that
Divisum Imperium Cum Jove Caesar habet, God has immediate and sole power over
the minds and inward thoughts of men; but the Magistrate over the Exercise of
those thoughts in things especially belonging to the Worship of God, and in the
same Instances, seems not to prognosticate a stable or durable building. The
Prophet was not of that mind of old, who in the name of God blamed the people
for willingly walking after the Commandment of their Ruler, in concerns of
Worship not warranted by Divine appointment; nor was Daniel so, who
notwithstanding the severe prohibition made against his praying in his house,
continued to do so three times a day.

But besides all this! I do not see how this Hypothesis is necessarily
subservient to the principal design of the Author, but it may be as well
improved to quite distant, yea contrary ends and purposes. His design plainly
is, to have one Fabric of Religion erected, one Form of External Worship
enacted and prescribed, which all men should be compelled by penalties to the
outward profession and observance of; these penalties he would have to be such
as should not fail of their end; namely, of taking away all professed Dissent
from his Religious establishment; which if it cannot be effected without the
destruction and death of multitudes, they also are not to be forborne. Now how
this ensues from the forementioned Principle I know not. For a supreme
Magistrate, finding that the minds of very many of his Subjects are in their
judgments and persuasions engaged in a dissent unto the Religion established
by Him, or somewhat in it, or some part of it, especially in things of
practical worship; though he should be persuaded that he has so far a power
over their Consciences, as to command them to practice contrary to their
judgment, yet knowing their minds and Persuasions to be out of his reach and
exempted from his Jurisdiction, why may he not think it meet and conducing to
public tranquillity and all the ends of his government, even the good of the
whole Community committed to his charge, rather to indulge them in the quiet
and peaceable exercise of the Worship of God according to their own light, than
always to bind them unto that unavoidable disquietment which will ensue upon
the conflict in their minds between their judgments and their practices, if he
should oblige them as is desired. Certainly, as in truth and reality, so
according to this Principle, he has power so to do. For to fancy him such a
power over the Religion and Consciences of his Subjects, as that he should be
inevitably bound on all occurrences and in all conditions of affairs, to impose
upon them the necessary observation of one form of Worship, is that which would
quickly expose him to inextricable troubles. And Instances of all sorts might
be multiplied to show the ridiculous folly of such a Conception. Nay it implies
a perfect contradiction to what is disputed before. For if he be obliged to
settle and impose such a form on all, it must be because there was a necessity
of somewhat antecedent to his imposition, whence his obligation to impose it
did arise. And on such a supposisition it is in vain to enquire after his
Liberty or his power in these things, seeing by his duty he is absolutely
determined, and whatever that be which does so determine him and put an
obligation upon him, it does indispensably do the same on his Subjects also;
which as it is known utterly excludes the Authority pleaded for.

This Principle therefore indeed asserts his liberty to do what he judges meet
in these matters, but contains nothing in it to oblige him to judge, that it
may not be meet and most conducing unto all the ends of his Government to
indulge unto the Consciences of men peaceable, (especially if complying with
him in all the Fundamentals of the Religion which himself professes) the
liberty of Worshipping God according to what they apprehend of his own mind and
Will. And let an application of this Principle be made to the present state of
this Nation, wherein there are so great multitudes of persons peaceable and not
unuseful unto public good, who dissent from the present establishment of
outward Worship, and have it not in their power either to change their
judgments or to practice contrary unto them; and as it is in the power of the
supreme Magistrate to indulge them in their own way, so it will prove to be his
Interest as he is the spring and center of of public Peace and Prosperity.

Neither does it appear that in this discourse our Author has had any regard
either to the real principles of the power of the Magistrate as stated in this
Nation, or to his own which are fictitious; but yet such as ought to be
obligatory to himself; His principal Assertion is, that the Supreme Magistrate
has power to bind the Consciences of men in matters of Religion, that is by
Laws and Edicts to that purpose; Now the highest and most obligatory way of the
Supreme Magistrates speaking in England, is by Acts of Parliament; It is
therefore supposed that what is so declared in or about matters of Religion,
should be obligatory to the Conscience of this Author; but yet quite otherwise,
p. 59. He sets himself to oppose and condemn a public Law of the Land, on no
other ground than because it stood in his way, and seemed incompliant with his
principles. For whereas the Law of 2 and 3 Ed. 6. which appointed two weekly
days for Abstinence from flesh, had been amongst other Reasons Prefaced with
this, That the Kings Subjects having now a more clear Light of the Gospel
through the Infinite mercy of God (such canting Language was then therein used)
and thereby the Kings Majesty perceiving that one meat of it self was not more
holy than another, etc. yet considering that due Abstinence, was a means to
virtue, and to subdue men's bodies to their souls and spirits, etc. And it being
after found (it should seem by a farther degree of Light) that those
Expressions meeting with the inveterate Opinions of some, newly brought out of
Popery, had given countenance to them to teach or declare, that something of
Religion was placed therein; thereon by the Law made 5 Elizab. adding another
weekly day to be kept with the former for the same purpose, the former clause
was omitted, and mention only made therein of the Civil and Politic Reasons
inducing the Legislators thereunto; and withal a Penalty of inflicting
punishment on those who should affirm and maintain that there was any
concernment of Conscience and Religion in that matter. This provision has so
distasted our Author, that forgetting it seems his own Design, he reproaches it
with the Title of Jejunium Cecilianum; and thinks it so far from obliging his
Conscience to acquiess in the Determination therein made, that he will not
allow it to give Law to his tongue or pen; But ( vexet censura columbas) it
seems they are the Phanaticks only that are thus to be restrained.

Moreover on occasion hereof we might manifest how some other Laws of this Land
do seem carefully to avoid that imposition on Conscience, which against Law and
Reason he pleads for; For Instance in that of 21 Jacob. touching Usury, and
the Restraint of it unto the sum therein established, it was provided, that no
words in this Act contained shall be construed or expounded to allow the
practice of Usury in point of Religion and Conscience. And why did not the
supreme Magistrate in that Law determine and bind the Consciences of men, by a
declaration of their duty in a point of Religion; seeing whether way soever the
determination had been made, neither would immorality have been countenunced,
nor the Deity disgraced? But plainly it is rather declared, that he has not
Cogni^^^ce of such things with reference to the Consciences of men to oblige
them, or set them at liberty, but only power to determine what may be practiced
in order to public profit and peace. And therefore the Law would neither bind,
nor set at liberty the Consciences of men in such cases, which is a work for
the supreme Lawgiver only.

Neither, as it has been before observed, do the Principles here asserted and
contended for, either express or represent the supremacy of the Kings of this
Nation in matters Ecclesiastical as it is stated and determined by themselves
in Parliament; but rather so, as to give great offense and scandal to the
Religion here professed and advantage to the Adversaries thereof; for after
there appeared some ambiguity in those words of the Oath enacted 1 Eliz. of
testifying the Queen to be supreme Governor as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or Causes, as in Temporal; and many doubts and scruples
ensued thereon, as though there were assigned to her a power over the
Consciences of her Subjects in spiritual things, or that she had a power Her
self to order and administer spiritual things; In quinto Elizab. it is enacted
by way of Explanation, that the Oaths aforesaid shall be expounded in such form
as is set forth in the Admonition annexed to the Queens Injunctions, published
in the first year of Her Reign, where disclaiming the power of the Ministry of
divine offices in the Church, or the power of the Priesthood here by our Author
affixed to the supreme Magistrate, her power and Authority is declared to be a
Sovereignty over all manner of persons born within this Realm, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, so that no foraign power has, or ought to have any
superiority over them; And so is this supremacy stated in the Articles Anno
1562. namely an Autho^ity to Rule all Estates and Degrees committed to the
charge of the supreme Magistrate by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and to restrain the stubborn or evildoers. Of the things contended
for by our Author; the Authority of the Priesthood, and power over the
Consciences of men in matters of Religion there is not one word in our Laws,
but rather they are both of them rejected and condemned.

I have yet laid the least part of that Load upon this Principle, which if it
be farther pressed it must expect to be burdened withal, and that from the
Common Suffrage of Christians in all Ages. But yet that I may not transgress
against the design of this short and hasty Discourse, I shall proceed no
farther in the pursuit of it; but take a little Survey of what is here pleaded
in its defense. Now this is undertaken and pursued in the first Chapter, with
the two next ensuing, where an end is put to this Plea. For if I understand any
thing of his words and expressions, our Author in the beginning of his fourth
Chapter, cuts down all those Gourds and Wild Vines that he had been planting in
the three preceding; for he not only grants but disputes also for an obligation
on the Consciences of men antecedent and superior unto all humane Laws and
their obligation; his words are as follows, page 115. It is not because
Subjects are in any thing free from the Authority of the Supreme Power on
earth, but because they are subject to a Superior in Heaven; and they are only
then excused from the duty of Obedience to their Sovereign when they cannot
give it without Rebellion against God; So that it is not originally any Right
of their own that exempts them from a subjection to the Sovereign Power in all
things; but it is purely Gods right of Governing his own Creatures that
Magistrates then invade when they make Edicts to violate or control his Laws;
and those who will take off from the Consciences of men, all obligations
antecedent to those of Humane Laws, instead of making the Power of Princes,
Supreme, absolute, and uncontrollable, they utterly enervate all their
Authority, and set their Subjects at perfect Liberty from all their Commands.

I know no men that pretend to Exemption from the Obligation of Humane Laws,
but only on this Plea, that God by his Law requires them to do otherwise; and
if this be so, the Authority of such Laws as to the Consciences of men, is
superseded by the confession of this Author. Allow therefore but the Principles
here expressed, namely, that men have a Superior Power over them in Heaven,
whose Laws, and the Revelation of whose Will concerning them, is the Supreme
Rule of their duty, whence an Obligation is laid upon their Consciences of
doing whatever is commanded, or not doing what is forbidden by him, which is
superior unto, and actually supersedes all Humane Commands and Laws that
interfere therewith, and I see neither use of, nor place for that Power of
Magistrates over the Consciences of men, which is so earnestly contended for.
And our Author also in his ensuing Discourse in that Chapter, places all the
security of Government in the Respect that the Consciences of men have to the
Will and Command of God; and which they profess to have; which in all these
Chapters he pleads to be a Principle of all Confusion. But it is the first
Chapter which alone we are now taking a view of.

The only Argument therein insisted on to to make good the Ascription unto the
Magistrate of the power over Religion and the Consciences of men before
described, is the absolute and indispensable necessity of it, unto public
Tranquillity, which is the principal, and most important End of Government. In
the pursuit of this Argument, sometimes yea often, such expressions are used
concerning the Magistrates power, as in a tolerable Construction declare it to
be what no man denies nor will contend about. But it is necessary that they be
interpreted according to the Genius and tenor of the Opinion contended for, and
accordingly we will consider them. This alone I say is that which is here
pleaded, or is given in as the subject of the ensuing Discourse. But after all,
I think that he who shall set himself seriously to find out how any thing here
spoken, has a direct and rational cogency toward the establishment of the
conclusion before laid down, will find himself engaged in no easy an
undertakeing. We were told I confess at the entrance (so as that we may not
complain of a surprizal) that we must expect to have Invectives twisted with
Arguments, and some such thing seems here to be aimed at; but if a Logical
Chemist come, and make a separation of the Elements, of this Composition, he
will find, if I mistake not, an heap of the drossy Invective, and scarce the
least appearance of any argument Ore. Instead of sober rational arguing, --
crimina rasis
Librat in Antithetis; --
great Aggravations of men's miscarriages in the pursuit of the Dictates of
their Consciences, either real or feigned, edged against, and fiercely
reflected upon those whom he makes his Adversaries, and these the same for
substance, repeated over and over in a great variety of well placed words, take
up the greatest part of his Plea in this Chapter; especially the beginning of
it, wherein alone the Controversy as by himself stated is concerned.

But if the Power and Authority over Religion and the Consciences of men here
ascribed unto Supreme Magistrates, be so indispensably necessary to the
preservation of public Tranquillity, as is pretended, a man cannot but wonder
how the world has been in any Age past, kept in any tolerable peace and
quietness; and how it is any where blessed with those ends of Government at
this day. For it will not be an easy task for our Author, or any one else to
demonstrate that the Power mentioned, has ever been either claimed or
exercised by any Supreme Magistrate in Christendom, or that it is so at this
day. The Experience of past and present Ages, is therefore abundantly
sufficient to defeat this pretense, which is sufficiently asserted, without the
least appearance of proof or Argument to give it countenance or confirmation;
or they must be very charitable to him, or ignorant in themselves, who will
mistake Invectives for Arguments. The remembrance indeed of these Severities I
would willingly lay aside; especially because the very mention of them seems to
express an higher sense of and regret concerning them, then I am in the least
subject unto, or something that looks like a design of Retaliation; but as
these things are far from my mind, so the continual returns that almost in
every Page I meet with, of high and contemptuous Reproaches, will not allow
that they be always passed by without any notice or remark.

It is indeed indispensably necessary that public Peace and Tranquillity be
preserved; but that there is any thing in point of Government necessary
hereunto, but that God have all spiritual power over the Consciences of men,
and Rulers Political power over their Actings wherein public Peace and
Tranquillity are concerned, the World has not hitherto esteemed, nor do I
expect to find it proved by this Author. If these things will not preserve the
public peace, it will not be kept if one should rise from the dead to persuade
men unto their duty. The Power of God over the Consciences of men, I suppose is
acknowledged by all who own any such thing as Conscience or believe there is a
God over all. That also in the exercise of this Authority, he requires of men
all that obedience unto Rulers that is any way needful or expedient unto the
preservation of the ends of their Rule, is a Truth standing firm on the same
Foundation of Universal consent, derived from the Law of Creation; and his
positive Commands to that purpose, have an evidence of his Will in this matter
not liable to exception or control. This Conscience unto God our Author
confesses (as we have observed, in his fourth Chapter, to be the great
preservation and security of Government and Governors, with respect unto the
ends mentioned. And if so, what becomes of all the pretenses of disorder and
confusion that will ensue, unless this power over men's Consciences be given to
the Magistrate and taken as it were out of the hands of God? Nor is it to be
supposed that men will be more true to their Consciences supposing the
Reiglement of them in the hand of men, than when they are granted to be in the
hand and power of God; for both at present are supposed to require the same
things. Certainly where Conscience respects Authority, as it always does, the
more Absolute and Sovereign it apprehends the Authority by which it is obliged,
the greater and more firm will be the impressions of the obligation upon it.
And in that Capacity of pre-eminence, it must look upon the Authority of God
compared with the Authority of man. Here then lies the security of public
peace and tranquillity, as it is backed by the Authority of the Magistrate, to
see that all outward Actions are suitable unto what Conscience toward God does
in this matter openly and unquestionably require.

The pretense indeed is that the placing of this Authority over the Consciences
of men in the Supreme Ruler, does obviate and take away all grounds and
occasions of any such Actings on the Account of Religion, as may tend unto
public disturbance. For suppose Conscience in things concerning Religion and
the Worship of God subject to God alone, and the Magistrate require such things
to be observed in the one or the other as God has not required, at least in
the Judgments and Consciences of them of whom the things prescribed are
required, and to forbid the things that God requires to be observed and done;
in this case it is said they cannot or will not comply in Active Obedience with
the Commands of the Magistrate. But what if it so fall out? Does it thence
follow that such persons must needs Rebel and be Seditious and disturb the
public peace, of the Society whereof they are Members? Wherefore is it that
they do not do or observe what is required of them by the Magistrate in
Religion or the Worship of God, or that they do what he forbids? Is it not
because of the Authority of God over their minds and Consciences in these
things? And why should it be supposed that men will answer the Obligations laid
by God on their Consciences in one thing, and not in another; in the things of
his Worship and not of obedience unto Civil Power, concerning which his
Commands are as express and evident, as they can be pretended to be in the
things which they avow their obligation unto.

Experience is pretended to the contrary. It is said again and again, that men
under pretense of their Consciences unto God in Religion, have raised Wars and
Tumults, and brought all things into confusion, in this Kingdom and Nation
especially; and what will words avail against the evidence of so open an
experience to the contrary? But what if this also should prove a false and
futilous pretense? Fierce and long Wars have been in this Nation of old, upon
the various Titles of persons pleading their Right unto Supreme Government in
the Kingdom, against one another; so also have there been about the Civil
Rights and the Privileges of the Subjects, in the Confusions commonly called
the Barons Wars. The late Troubles, Disorders, and Wars amongst us must bear
the weight of this whole charge. But if any one will take the pains to review
the public Writings, Declarations, Treaties whereby those Tumults and Wars
were begun and carried on, he will easily discern that Liberty of Conscience in
practice, or the exemption of it from the power of the Magistrate as to the
Rule and Conduct of it now ascribed unto him, in the latitude by sober persons
defended or pleaded for, had neither place in, nor influence into the
Beginnings of those troubles. And when such confusions are begun, no man can
give assurance or conjecture where they shall end.

Authority, Laws, Privileges, and I know not what things wherein private men
of whom alone we treat* have no pretense of Interest, were pleaded in those
Affairs. He that would judge aright of these things, must set aside all other
Considerations, and give his instance of the Tumults and Seditions that have
ensued on the account of menskeeping their Consciences entire for God alone,
without any just Plea, or false pretense of Authority, and the interest of men
in the Civil concerns of Nations.

However it cannot be pretended that Liberty of Conscience gave the least
occasion unto any disorders in those days. For indeed there was none, but only
that of Opinion and Judgment, which our Author places out of the Magistrates
cognizance and dispose; and supposes it is as a thing wherein the public
peace neither is nor can be concerned. It is well if it prove so; but this
Liberty of Judgment constantly pressed with a practice contrary to its own
determinations, will I fear prove the most dangerous posture of the minds of
men in reference to public tranquillity, that they can be well disposed into.
However we may take a little nearer view of the certain Remedy provided for all
these evils by our Author, and satisfy our selves in some Enquiries about it.
Shall then according to this Expedient the Supreme Magistrate govern, rule, and
oblige unto obedience the consciences of his Subjects universally in all things
in Religion and the Worship of God, so that appoint what he please, forbid what
he please, Subjects are bound in Concience to observe them and yield obedience
accordingly? His answer as far as I can gather his meaning is, that he may and
must do so in all things, taking care that what he commands shall neither
countenance Vice, nor disgrace the Deity, and then the Subjects are obliged
according to the Enquiry. But yet there seems another limitation to be given to
this power p. 37. where he affirms, that the Lord Christ has given severe
Injunctions to secure the obedience of men to all lawful Superiors, except
where they run directly cross to the interest of the Gospel; and elsewhere he
seems to give the same privilege of Exemption, where a Religion is introduced
that is Idolatrous or Superstitious. I would then a little farther enquire, who
shall judge whether the things commanded in Religion and the Worship of God be
Idolatrous or Superstitious? Whether they cross directly the Interest of the
Gospel? Whether they countenance Vice, and disgrace the Deity, or no. To say
that the Magistrate is to judge and determine hereof, is the highest foppery
imaginable. For no Magistrate, unless he be distracted, will enjoin such a
Religion to observance, as he judges himself to fall under the qualifications
mentioned; and when he has done declare that so they do, and yet require
obedience unto them. Besides, if this Judgment be solely committed unto him,
indeed in the issue there neither is, nor can be any Question for a Judgment
to be passed upon in this matter. For his Injunction does quite render useless
all disquisitions to that purpose. The judgment and determination hereof
therefore is necessary to be left unto the Subjects, from whom obedience is
required. So it lies in the letter of the Proposal, they must obey in all
things but such; and therefore surely must judge what is such and what is not.
Now who shall fix bounds to what they will judge to fall under one or other of
these limitations? if they determine according to the best light they have that
the Religious Observances enjoined by the Magistrate do directly cross the
Interest of the Gospel, they are absolved by our Author from any obligation in
Conscience to their observation. And so we are just as before; and this great
Engine for public Tranquillity vanishes into Air and Smoke.

Thus this Author himself in way of objection supposes a case of a Magistrate
enjoining, as was said, a Religion Superstitious and Idolatrous; this he
acknowledgeeth to be an Inconvenience; yet such as is far beneath the Mischiefs
the ensue upon the Exemption of the Consciences of men in Religion from the
power of the the Magistrate, which I confess I cannot but admire at, and can
give Reasons why I do so admire it; which also may be given in due season. But
what then is to be done in this Case? he answers, It is to be born: True, but
how? Is it to be so born as to practice and observe the things so enjoined
though Superstitious and Idolatrous? though his words are dubious, yet I
suppose he will not plainly say so; not can he unless he will teach men to cast
off all respect unto the Authority of God, and open such a door to Atheism, as
his rhetorical Prefatory Invective will not be able to shut. The bearing then
intended must be by patient suffering in a refusal to practice what is so
commanded, and observing the contrary Commands of God. But why in this Case
ought they to suffer quietly for refusing a compliance with what is commanded,
and for their observance of the contrary Precepts of the Gospel? Why, they must
do so because of the command of God, obliging their Consciences unto Obedience
to the Magistrate in all things wherein the public peace is concerned, and so
that is absolutely secured. Is it not evident to him that has but half an eye
that we are come about again where we were before? Let this be applied to all
the concernments of Religion and Religious Worship, and there will arise with
respect unto them, the same security which in this case is deemed sufficient,
and all that Humane Affairs are capable of. For if in greater matters men may
refuse to act according to the Magistrates Command, out of a sense of the
Authority of God obliging them to the contrary, and yet their Civil
Peaceableness and Obedience be absolutely secured from the respect of their
Consciences to the Command of God requiring it; why should it not be admitted
that they may and will have the same respect to that Command, when they dissent
from the Magistrates Constitution in lesser things, on the same account of the
Authority of God requiring the contrary of them? Shall we suppose that they
will cast off the Authority of God requiring their Obedience, on the account of
their dissatisfaction in lesser things of the Magistrates appointment, when
they will not do so for all the violences that may be offered unto them in
things of greater and higher importance? The Principle therefore asserted is as
useless as it is false, and partakes sufficiently of both those properties to
render it inconsiderable and contemptible. And he that can reconcile these
things among themselves, or make them useful to the Authors design, will
atchieve what I dare not aspire unto.

I know not any thing that remains in this first Chapter deserving our farther
consideration; What seems to be of real importance, or to have any aspect
toward the cause in hand, may undergo some brief Remarques, and so leave us
at liberty to a farther progress. In general a supposition is laid down, and it
is so vehemently asserted as is evident that it is accompanied with a desire
that it should be taken for granted; namely, that if the Consciences of men be
not regulated in the choice and practice of Religion by the Authority of the
Magistrate over them, they will undoubtedly run into Principles and practices
inconsistent with the safety of Humane Society, and such as will lead them to
Seditions and Tumults; And hence, (if I understand him, a matter I am
continually jealous about from the looseness of his expressions, though I am
satisfied I constantly take his words in the words in the sense which is
received of them by most intelligent persons) he educeth all his reasonings,
and not from a mere dissent from the Magistrates Injuctions, without the
entertainment of such Principles, or an engagement into such practices. I
cannot I say, find the Arguments that arise from a mere supposition that men in
some things relating to the worship of God, will or do practice otherwise than
the Magistrate commands, which are used to prove the inconsistency of such a
posture of things with public Tranquillity, which yet alone was the Province
our Author ought to have managed. But there is another supposition added, that
where Conscience is in any thing left unto its own liberty to choose or refuse
in the Worship of God, there it will embrace, sure enough, such wicked
debauched and seditious principles, as shall dispose men unto commotions,
rebellions, and all such evils as will actually evert all rule, order and
policy amongst men. But now this supposition will not be granted him, in
reference unto them who profess to take up all their Profession of Religion
from the command of God, or the Revelation of his Will in the Scripture,
wherein all such Principles and Practices as those mentioned are utterly
condemned; and the whole Profession of Christianity being left for 300 years
without the Rule, Guidance, and conduct of Conscience now contended for, did
not once give the least disturbance unto the Civil Governments of the World.
Disturbances indeed there were, and dreadful Revolutions of Government in those
days and places, when and where the Professors of it lived; but no concerns of
Religion being then involved in or with the Civil Rights and Interests of men,
as the Professors of it had no Engagements in them, so from those Alterations
and Troubles no reflection could be made on their profession. And the like
Peace, the like Innocence of Religion, the like freedom from all possibility of
such imputations as are now cast upon it, occasioned merely by its intertexture
with the Affairs, Rights, and Laws of the Nations, and the Interests of its
professors as such therein, will ensue, when it shall be separated from that
Relation wherein it stands to this world, and left as the pure naked tendency
of the souls of men to another, and not before.

But what, says our Author, If for the present the minds of men happen to be
tainted with such furious and boisterous conceptions of Religion as incline
them to stubbornness and sedition, and make them unmanageable to the laws of
Government, shall not a Prince be allowed to give check to such unruly and
dangerous persuasions? I answer; That such Principles which being professed and
avowed, are in their own Nature and just Consequence destructive to public
peace and humane Society, are all of them directly opposite to the Light of
humane nature, that common Reason and consent of Mankind wherein and whereon
all Government is founded, with the prime Fundamental Laws and dictates of the
Scripture, and so may and ought to be restrained in the practices of the
persons that profess them; and with reference unto them the Magistrate bears
not the sword in Vain -- For humane Society being inseparably consequent unto,
and and an effect of the Law of our Nature, or concreated principles of it,
which has subdued the whole race of Mankind in all times and places unto its
observance, Opinions, persuasions, principles, opposite unto it or destructive
of it, manifesting themselves by any sufficient evidence, or in overt Acts,
ought to be no more allowed than such as profess an Enmity to the Being and
Providence of God himself. For men's Inclinations indeed, as in themselves
considered, there is no competent Judge of them amongst the Sons of men; but as
to all outward Actions that are of the tendency described, they are under
public Inspection to be dealt withal according to their Demerit.

I shall only add that the Mormo here made use of, is not now first composed or
erected; it has for the substance of it been flourished by the Papists ever
since the beginning of the Reformation. Neither did they use to please
themselves more in, or to dance more merrily about any thing than this Calf;
Let private men have their Consciences exempted from a necessary obedience to
the Prescriptions of the Church, and they will quickly run into all pernicious
fancies and persuasions. It is known how this Scarecrow has been cast to the
ground, and this Calf stamped to powder by Divines of the Church of England. It
is no pleasant thing I confess to see this plea revived now with respect to the
Magistrates Authority, and not the Popes; for I fear that when it shall be
manifested, and that by the consent of all parties, that there is no pleadable
Argument to botom this pretension for the power of the Magistrate upon, some
rather then forego it, will not be unwilling to recur to the fountain from
whence it first sprang, and admit the Popes plea as meet to be revived in this
case. And indeed if we must come at length for the security of public peace,
to deprive all private persons of the Liberty of judging what is Right and
Wrong in Religion in reference to their own practice, or what is their duty
toward God about his Worship and what is not, there are innumerable advantages
attending the design of devolving the absolute determination of these things
upon the Pope, above that of committing it to each supreme Magistrate in his
own Dominions. For besides the plea of at least better security in his
determinations than in that of any Magistrates, if not his Infallibility which
he has so long talked of, and so sturdily defended as to get it a great
reputation in the world, the delivering up of the Faith and Consciences of all
men unto him, will produce a seeming agreement, at least of incomparably a
larger extent, then the remitting of all things of this nature to the pleasure
of every supreme Magistrate, which may probably establish as many different
Religions in the World, as there are different Nations Kingdoms or
Commonwealths.

That which alone remains seeming to give countenance to the Assertions before
laid down, is our Authors assignation of the Priesthood by natural Right unto
the supreme Magistrate, which in no alteration of Religion he can be divested
of, but by virtue of some positive Law of God, as it was for a season in the
Mosaical Institution and Government. But these things seem to be of no force.
For it never belonged to the Priesthood, to govern or to rule the Consciences
of men with an absolute uncontrollable power; but only in their name, and for
them, to administer the holy things, which by common consent were admitted, and
received amongst them. Besides, our Author by his Discourse seems not to be
much acquainted with the rise of the office of the Priesthood amongst men, as
shall be demonstrated, if farther occasion be given thereunto. However by the
way we may observe what is his judgment in this matter. The Magistrate we are
told has not his Ecclesiastical Authority from Christ; and yet this is such as
that the power of the Priesthood is included therein; the exercise whereof as
he is pleased to transfer to others, so he may, if he please, reserve it to
himself, p. 32. whence it follows, not only that it cannot be given by Christ
unto any other, for it is part of the Magistrates power* which he has not
limited, nor confined by any subsequent Law, nor can there be (...) Coordinate
Subject of the same power of several kinds; so that all the Interest or Right
any man, or men, have in or unto the exercise of it, is but transferred to them
by the Magistrate; and therefore they act therein, in his name, and by his
Authority only; and hence the Bishops, as such, are said to be Ministers of
State, p. 49. Neither can it be pretended that this was indeed in the power of
the Magistrate before the coming of Christ, but not since. For he has as we
are told, all that he ever had, unless there be a Restraint put upon Him by
some express prohibition of our Savior, p. 41. which will hardly be found in
this matter. I cannot therefore see how in the exercise of the Christian
Priesthood there is (on these principles) any the least respect unto Jesus
Christ, or his Authority; for men have only the exercise of it transferred to
them by the Magistrate, by virtue of a power inherent in him antecedent unto
any concessions of Christ; and therefore in his name and Authority they must
act in all the sacred offices of their Functions. It is well if men be so far
awake as to consider the tendency of these things.

At length Scripture proofs for the confirmation of these opinions are
produced, p. 35, 36. And the first pleaded, is that promise, that Kings shall
be nursings Fathers unto the Church. It is true this is promised, and God
accomplish it more and more; But yet we do not desire such Nurses, as beget the
Children they nurse; The proposing, prescribing, commanding, binding Religion
on the Consciences of men, is rather the begetting of it than its nursing. To
take care of the Church and Religion, that it receive no detriment, by all the
ways and means appointed by God, and useful thereunto, is the duty of
Magistrates; but it is so also antecedently to their actings unto this purpose,
to discern aright which is the Church whereunto this promise is made, without
which they cannot duly discharge their Trust, nor fulfill the Promise it self;
The very Words, by the rules of the Metaphor, do imply, that the Church, and
its Religion, and the worship of God observed therein, is constituted, fixed,
and regulated by God himself, antecedently unto the Magistrates duty and power
about it. They are to Nurse that which is committed to them, and not what
Themselves have framed, or begotten. And we contend for no more but a Rule
concerning Religion, and the Worship of God antecedent unto the Magistrates
interposing about it, whereby both his Actings in his place, and those of
Subjects in theirs, are to be regulated Mistakes herein have engaged many
Sovereign Princes in pursuit of their Trust as Nursing Fathers to the Church,
to lay out their strength and power for the utter ruin of it; as may be
evidenced in instances too many of those, who in a subserviency to, and by the
direction of the Papal Interest, have endeavored to extirpate true Religion
out of the World. Such a Nursing Mother we had sometimes in England, who in
pursuit of her care burned so many Bishops and other Holy men to Ashes.

He asks farther, what does the Scripture mean when it styles our Savior the
King of Kings, and makes Princes his Vicegerents here on earth? I confess,
according to this Gentleman's principles, I know not what it means in so doing:
Kings, he tells us, have not their Authority in and over Religion, and the
Consciences of men from him, and therefore in the exercise of it cannot be his
Vicegerents; for none is the Vicegerent of another in the exercise of any power
or Authority, if he have not received that power and Authority from him.
Otherwise the words have a proper sense, but nothing to our Authors purpose. It
is his power over them, and not theirs over the Consciences of their Subjects,
that is intended in the words. Of no more use in this controversy is the
direction of the Apostle, that we should pray for Kings, that under them we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life; for no more is intended therein, but that,
under their peaceable and righteous administration of humane Affairs, we may
live in that Godliness, and honesty, which is required of us. Wherefore then
are these weak attempts made to confirm and prove what is not? Those, or the
most of them, whom our Author in this Discourse treats with so much severity,
do plead that it is the duty of all supreme Magistrates to find out, receive,
embrace, promote the Truths of the Gospel, with the Worship of God appointed
therein, confirming, protecting, and desending them, and those that embrace
them, by their Power and Authority. And in the discharge of this duty, they are
to use the liberty of their own judgments, informed by the ways that God has
appointed, independently on the dictates and determinations of any other
persons whatever; They affirm also, that to this end they are entrusted with
supreme power over all persons in their respective Dominions, who on no
pretense can be exempted from the exercise of that power, as occasion in their
judgments shall require it to be exercised; as also that all causes, wherein
the profession of Religion in their Dominions is concerned, which are
determinable in foro Civili by coercive Vmpirage or Authority, are subject unto
their cognizance and power. The Sovereign power over the Consciences of men to
institute, appoint, and prescribe Religion, and the Worship of God, they affirm
to belong unto him alone, who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who is
the head over all things to the Church. The Administration of things merely
Spiritual in the Worship of God is, they judge, derived immediately from him to
the Ministers, and Administrators of the Gospel, possessed of their Offices by
his Command, and according to his institution; as to the external practice of
Religion, and Religious Worship as such, it is, they say, in the power of the
Magistrate to regulate all the outward civil concernments of it, with reference
unto the preservation of public peace, and Tranquillity, and the prosperity of
his subjects; And herein also they judge that such respect is to be had to the
Consciences of men, as the Scripture, the Nature of the thing it self, and the
right of the L. Christ to introduce his spiritual Kingdom into all Nations, do
require.

That which seems to have imposed on the mind of this Author is, that if the
Magistrate may make Laws for the regulating of the outward profession of
Religion, so as public peace and tranquillity may be kept, added to what is
his Duty to do in the behalf of the Truth; then he must have the power over
Religion, and the Consciences of men by him ascribed unto him; But there is no
privity of Interest between these things; the Laws, which he makes to this
purpose, are to be regulated by the Word of God, and the good of the Community,
over which in the name of God he does preside; and whence he will take his
Warranty to forbid men the exercise of their Consciences in the duties of
spiritual Worship, whilst the Principles they profess, are suited to the light
of nature, and the fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel, with the peace of
mankind, and their practices absolutely confistent with public welfare, I am
yet to seek; and so, as far as I can yet perceive, is the Author of the
Discourse under Consideration. It will not arise from a Parity of Reason from
the power that he has to restrain cursed Swearing, and Blasphemies by penal
Coercions. For these things are no less against the Light of Nature, and no
less condemned by the common suffrage of mankind (and the persons that contract
the guilt of them may be no less effectually brought to judge and condemn
themselves) than are the greatest outrages that may be committed in and against
humane Society; That the Gospel will give no countenance hereunto, he seems to
acknowledge, in his assignation of several reasons why the use of the power,
and exercise of it in the way of compulsion by penalties, pleaded for by him,
is not mentioned therein; that Christ and his Apostles behaved themselves as
Subjects; that he neither took nor exercised any Sovereign power; that He gave
his Laws to Private men as such, and not to the Magistrate, that the Power that
then was, was in bad hands, are pleaded as excuses for the silence of the
Gospel in this matter. But lest this should prove father prejudicial to his
present occasion, he adds p. 42. the only reason why the Lord Christ bound not
the precepts of the Gospel upon men's Consciences by any secular compulsories,
was not because Compulsion was an improper way to put his Laws in execution;
for then He had never established them with more enforcing Sanctions, but only
because himself was not vested with any secular power, and so could not use
those methods of Government which are proper to its jurisdiction; this in plain
English is, that if Christ had had power, he would have ordered the Gospel to
have been propagated as Mahomet has done his Alcoran; an Assertion untrue and
impious, contrary to the whole spirit and Genius of the Gospel, and of the
Author of it, and the Commands and Precepts of it. And it is fondly supposed
that the Lord Christ suited all the Management of the affairs of the Gospel,
unto that state and condition in this world, wherein he emptied Himself, and
took upon Him the form of a Servant, making Himself of no reputation, that He
might be obedient unto Death, the death of the Cross; He lays the Foundation
of the promulgation and propagation of it in the world, in the grant of all
power unto him in Heaven and Earth. All power, says he to his Apostles, is
given unto me in heaven and earth, go ye therefore, and Baptize all Nations,
teaching them to observe all things whatever I have commanded you, Matthew. 28.
19, 20. He is confidered in the dispensation of the Gospel, as He who is head
over all things to the Church, the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, whom our
Author acknowledges to be his Vicegerents; On this account the Gospel with all
the Worship instituted therein, and required thereby, is accompanied with a
Right to enter into any of the Kingdoms of the Earth, and spiritually to make
the Inhabitants of them subject to Jesus Christ; and so to translate them out
of the power of darkness into the Kingdom of the Son of God; And this Right is
Antecedent and paramount to the Right of all earthly Kings and Princes
whatever, who have no power or Authority to exclude the Gospel out of their
Dominions; and what they exercise of that kind, is done at their peril.

The penalties that he has annexed to the final rejection of the Gospel, and
disobedience thereunto, are pleaded by our Author, to justify the Magistrates
power of binding men to the Observation of his Commands in Religion on temporal
penalties to be by him inflicted on them; unto that is the Discourse of this
chapter arrived which was designed unto another end. I see neither the order,
method, nor projection of this procedure; nor know, Amphora cum cepit institui,
cur Vrceus exit; However the pretense it self is weak, and impertinent. Man was
originally made under a Law and constitution of Eternal Bliss, or Woe; This
state, with regard to his necessary dependence on God, and respect to his
utmost end, was absolutely unavoidable unto him. All possibility of attaining
eternal happiness by himself he lost by Sirr, and became inevitably obnoxious
to eternal Misery, and the wrath to come. In this condition the Lord Jesus
Christ, the supreme Lord of the souls and Consciences of men, interposeth his
law of Relief, Redemption, and Salvation, the great means of man's Recovery,
together with the profession of the way, and law hereof. He lets them know,
that those by whom it is refused, shall perish under that Wrath of God, which
before they were obnoxious unto, with a new Aggravation of their Sin and
Condemnation, from the contempt of the Relief provided for them, and tendered
to them. This He applies to the Souls and Consciences of men, and to all the
inward secret actings of them, in the first place, such as are exempted not
only from the Judicature of men, but from the cognizance of Angels. This he
does by spiritual means in a spiritual manner, with regard to the subjection of
the souls of men unto God, and with reference unto their bringing to Him, and
enjoyment of Him, or their being eternally rejected by Him. Hence to collect,
and conclude that Earthly Princes, who, (whatever is pretended) are not the
Sovereign Lords of the Souls and Consciences of men, nor do any of them, that I
know of, plead themselves so to be; who cannot interpose any thing by their
absolute Authority, that should have a necessary respect unto men's Eternal
condition; who have no knowledge of, no acquaintance with, nor can judge of the
principal things whereon it does depend, from whose temporal jurisdiction, and
punishment the things of the Gospel, and the Worship of God as purely such, are
(by the nature of them, being spiritual and not of this World, though exercised
in it, having their respect only unto Eternity, and by their being taken into
the sole disposal of the Sovereign Lord of Consciences, who has accompanied
His Commands concerning them with His own Promises, and Threatenings,) plainly
exempted; should have power over the Consciences of men, so to lay their
Commands upon them in these spiritual things, as to back them with Temporal,
Corporal Restraints and Punishments, is a way of Arguing that will not be
confined unto any of those Rules of reasoning, which hitherto we have been
instructed in. When the Magistrate has an Arm like God, and can Thunder with a
Voice like Him, when he judges not after the sight of his eyes, nor reproves
after the hearing of his ears, when he can smile the Earth with the Rod of his
Mouth, and slay the Wicked with the breath of his Lips, when he is constituted
a judge of the Faith, Repentance, and Obedience of men, and of their Efficacy
in their Tendency unto the pleasing of God here, and the Enjoyment of Him
hereafter, when Spiritual Things in order to their Eternal Issues and Effects
are made subject unto Him; in brief, when he is Christ, let him act as Christ,
or rather most unlike Him, and guide the Consciences of men by Rods, Axes, and
Halters (whereunto alone his power can reach) who in the mean time have an
express command from the Lord Christ Himself, not to have their Consciences
influenced in the least by the consideration of these things.

Of the like Complexion is the ensuing Discourse, wherein our Author, p. 43.
having spoken contemptuously of the Spiritual Institutions of the Gospel, as
altogether insufficient for the Accomplishment of the Ends, whereunto they are
designed, forgeting that they respect only the Consciences of men, and are his
Institutions who is the Lord of their Consciences, and who will give them
power, and efficacy to attain their Ends, when administered in his name, and
according to his mind, and that because they are His; would prove the necessity
of Temporal coercions, and penalties in things Spiritual, from the
Extraordinary Effects of Excommunication in the primitive times, in the
Vexation and punishment of persons Excommunicate by the Devil. This work the
Devil now ceasing to attend unto, he would have the Magistrate to take upon him
to supply his place, and Office, by punishments of his own Appointment, and
Infliction; and so at last, to be sure of giving him full measure, he has
ascribed two Extremes unto him about Religion, namely, to act the part of God,
and the Devil. But as this Inference is built upon a very uncertain conjecture,
namely, that upon the giving up of persons to Satan in Excommunication, there
did any visible, or Corporal Vexation of them by his power ensue, or any other
effects but what may yet be justly expected from an Influence of his Terror on
the minds of men, who are duly and regularly cast out of the visible Kingdom of
Christ by that censure; and whereas, if there be any truth in it, it was
confined unto the days of the Apostles, and is to be reckoned amongst the
miraculous Operations granted to them for the first confirmation of the Gospel;
and the continuance of it, all the time the Church wanted the Assistance of the
Civil Magistrate, is most unduly pretended without any color of Proof, or
Instance, beyond such as may be evidenced to continue at this day; supposing it
to be true, the Inference made from it, as to its consequence on this
concession, is exceeding weak, and feeble. For the Argument here amounts to
no more but this; God was pleased, in the days of the Apostles, to confirm
their Spiritual Censures against Stuborn Sinners, Apostates, Blasphemers, and
such like heinous Offenders, with extraordinary spiritual Punishments, (so in
their own nature, or in the manner, or way of their Infliction) therefore the
Civil Magistrate has power to appoint things to be observed in the Worship of
God, and forbid other things, which the Light and Consciences of men, directed
by the Word of God, require the observation of, upon ordinary, standing,
corporal penalties to be inflicted on the outward man; quod erat demonstrandum.

To wind up this Debate; I shall commit the Vmpirage of it to the Church of
England, and receive her Determination in the words of one who may be supposed
to know her sense and Judgment, as well as any one who lived in his days, or
since. And this is Doctor Bilson Bishop of Winchester, a Learned man, skilled
in the Laws of the Land, and a great Adversary unto all that dissented from
Church Constitutions. This man therefore treating, by way of Dialogue, in
answer to the Jesuits Apology and Defense, in the Third Part p. 293. thus
introduces Theophilus a Protestant Divine, arguing with Philander a Jesuit
about these matters. Theoph. As for the Supreme Head of the Church; it is
certain that Title was first transferred from the Pope to King Henry the
eighth, by the Bishops of your side, not of ours. And though the Pastors in
King Edwards time might not well dislike, much less dissuade the style of the
Crown, by Reason the King was under years, and so remained until he dyed; yet
as soon as it pleased God to place her Majesty in her Fathers Throne, the
Nobles and Preachers perceiving the words, Head of the Church, (which is
Christ's proper and peculiar honor) to be offensive unto many that had
vehemently refelled the same in the Pope, besought her Highness the meaning of
that word which her Father had used, might be expressed in some plainer and
apter terms; And so was the Prince called Supreme Governor of the Realm; that
is Ruler and Bearer of the Sword, with lawful Authority to command and punish,
answerable to the Word of God, in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or
Causes, as well as in Temporal. And no Foreign Prince or Prelate, to have any
Jurisdiction, Superiority, Pre-eminence or Authority to establish, prohibit,
correct, and chastise with Public Laws, or Temporal Fains, any Crimes or
Causes Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within her Realm. Philand. Calvin says this
is Sacrilege and Blasphemy. Look you therefore with what Consciences you take
that Oath, which your own Master so mightily detesteth. Theoph. Nay look you
with what faces you allege Calvin, who makes that style to be sacrilegious
and blassphemous, as well in the Pope as in the Prince; reason therefore you
receive or refuse his Judgment in both. If it derogate from Christ in the
Prince, so it does in the Pope. Yet we grant the sense of the word Supreme, as
Calvin perceived it by Stephen Gardiners Answer and behavior, is very
blasphemous and injurious to Christ and his Word, whether it be Prince or Pope
that so shall use it. What this sense is, he declares in the words of Calvin,
which are as follows in his Translation of them. That Jugler, which after was
Chancellor, I mean the Bishop of Winchester, when he was at Rentzburge, neither
would stand to reason the matter, nor greatly cared for any testimonies of the
Scripture, but said it was at the Kings discretion to abrogate that which was
in use, and appoint new. He said the King might forbid Priests Marriage, the
King might bar the people from the Cup in the Lords Supper; the King might
determine this or that in his Kingdom: And why, forsooth the King had Supreme
Power. This Sacrilege has taken hold on us, whilst Princes think they cannot
reign, except they abolish all the Authority of the Church, and be themselves
supreme Judges as well in Doctrine as in all Spiritual Regiment. To which he
subjoyns; This was the sense which Calvin affirmed to be sacrilegious and
blasphemous; for Princes to profess themselves to be Supreme Judges of Doctrine
and Discipline; and indeed it is the blasphemy which all godly hearts reject
and abomine, in the Bishop of Rome. Neither did King Henry take any such thing
on him for ought that we can learn; but this was Gardiners Stratagem, to convey
the reproach and shame of the Six Articles from himself and his fellows that
were the Authors of them, and to cast it on the Kings Supreme Power. Had Calvin
been told, that Supreme was first received to declare the Prince to be
Superior to the Prelates, (which exempted themselves from the Kings Authority
by their Church Liberties and Immunities) as well as to the Lay men of this
Realm, and not to be subject to the Pope, the Word would never have offended
him. Thus far he; and if these Controversies be any farther disputed, it is
probable the next defense of what is here pleaded, will be in the express words
of the Principal Prelates of this Realm since the Reformation, until their
Authority be peremptorily rejected.

Upon my first design to take a brief Survey of this Discourse, I had not the
least intention to undertake the examination of any particular Assertions, or
Reasonings, that might fall under Controversy; but merely to examine the
general Principles whereon it does proceed. But passing through these things
Currente calamo, I find my self engaged beyond my thoughts and resolutions; I
shall therefore here put an end to the consideration of this Chapter, although
I see sundry things as yet remaining in it, that might immediately be discussed
with case, and advantage, as shall be manifest, if we are called again to a
review of them. I have neither desire, nor design Serram reciprocare, or to
engage in any Controversial Discourses with this Author. And I presume himself
will not take it amiss, that I do at present examine those Principles, whose
Novelty justifies a Disquisition into them; and whose Tendency, as applied by
him, is pernicious, and destructive to so many quiet and peaceable persons, who
dissent from him. And yet I will not deny, but that I have that Valuation and
esteem for that sparkling of Wit, Eloquence, and sundry other Abilities of
mind, which appear in his Writing, that if he would lay aside the manner of his
treating those from whom he dissents, with Revilings, contemptuous Reproaches,
personal Reflections, Sarcasms, and Satirical expressions, and would heartily,
and perspicuously state any matter in difference; I should think that what he
has to offer, may deserve the consideration of them who have leisure for such
a purpose. If he be otherwise minded, and resolve to proceed in the way, and
after the manner here engaged in, as I shall in the close of this Discourse
absolutely give him my Salve aeternumque vale, so I hope he will never meet
with any one who shall be willing to deal with him at his own weapons.

A Survey of the Second Chapter.
THE Summary of this Chapter must needs give the Reader a great expectation,
and the Chapter it self no less of satisfaction, if what is in the one briefly
proposed, be in the other as firmly established. For amongst other things a
Scheme of Religion is promised, reducing all its branches either to Moral
Virtues, or Instruments of Morality; which being spoken of Christian Religion,
is, as far as I know, an undertaking new and peculiar unto this Author, in
whose mannagement all that read him must needs weigh and consider, how
dexterously he has acquitted himself. For as all men grant that Morality has a
great place in Religion, so that all Religion is nothing but Morality, many are
now to learn. The Villainy of those Men's Religion that are wont to distinguish
between Grace and Virtue (that is Moral Virtue) is nextly traduced and
inveighed against. I had rather I confess that he had affixed the term of
Villainy to the men themselves whom he intended to reflect on than to their
Religion; because as yet it seems to me that it will fall on Christianity, and
no other Real or pretended Religion that is, or ever was in the world. For if
the Prosessors of it, have in all Ages according to its avowed Principles,
never before contradicted, made a distinction between Moral Virtues (since
these terms were known in the Church) and Evangelical Graces, if they do so at
this day, what Religion else can be here branded with this Infamous and
horrible reproach, I know not. A farther enquiry into the Chapter it self may
possibly give us farther satisfaction; wherein we shall deal as impartially as
we are able, with a diligent watchfulness against all prejudicate Affections,
that we may discover what there is of Sense and Truth in the Discourse, being
ready to receive what ever shall be manifested to have an interest in them. The
Civil Magistrate, we are also here informed, amongst many other things that he
may do, may command any thing in the Worship of God that does not tend to
debauch Men's practices, or to disgrace the Deity. And that all subordinate
Duties both of Morality and Religious Worship (such as elsewhere we are told
the Sacraments are) are equally subject to the determination of Humane
Authority. These things and sundry others represented in this Summary, being
new, yea some of them, as far as I know, unheard of amongst Christians until
within a few years last past, any Reader may justify himself in the
expectation of full and demonstrative Arguments to be produced in their proof
and confirmation. What the issue will be, some discovery may be made by the
ensuing enquiry, as was said, into the body of the Chapter it self.

The design of this Chapter in general is, to confirm the power of the
Magistrate over Religion, and the Consciences of men ascribed unto him in the
former, and to add unto it some enlargements not therein insisted on. The
Argument used to this purpose, is taken from the power of the Magistrate over
the Consciences of men in matters of morality, or with respect unto moral
Virtue; whence it is supposed the conclusion is so evident unto his power over
their Consciences in matters of Religious Worship, that it strikes our Author
with wonder and amazement that it should not be received an acknowledged.
Wherefore to further the conviction of all men in this matter, h^ proceeds to
discourse of Moral Virtue, o^ Grace, and of Religious Worship, with hi^ wonted
reflections upon, and reproache of Non-conformists, for their ignorance about
and villainous misrepresentation of these things, which seem more to be aimed
at^ than the Argument it self.

I must here with again that our Author had more perspicuously stated the
things which he proposes to debate for the subject of his Disputation. But I
find an excess of Art is as troublesome sometimes as the greatest defect
therein. From thence I presume it is, that things are so handled in this
Discourse, that an ordinary man can seldom discern satisfactorily, what it is
that directly and determinately he does intend, beyond reviling of
Non-conformists. For in this Proposition, which is the best and most
intelligible that I can reduce the present Discourse unto, the Supreme Civil
Magistrate has power over the Consciences of men in morality, or with respect
unto moral virtue; excepting only the subject of it, there is not one term in
it that may not have various significations; and those such as have countenance
given unto them in the ensuing Disputation it self. But, contenti sumus hoc
Catone, and make the best we can of what lies before us.

I do suppose that in the medium made use of in this Argument there is, or I am
sure there may be, a Controversy of much more importance than that principally
under consideration. It therefore shall be stated and cleared in the first
place, and then the concernment of the Argument it self in what is discoursed
thereupon, shall be manifested. It is about Moral Virtue and Grace, their
coincidence, or distinction, that we are in the first place to enquire. For
without a due stating of the conception of these things, nothing of this
Argument, nor what belongs unto it, can be rightly understood. We shall
therefore be necessitated to premise a brief Explanation of these terms
themselves, to remove as far as may be all ambiguity from our Discourse.

First then, the very name of Virtue, in the sense wherein it is commonly used
and received, comes from the Schools of Philosophy, and not from the Scripture.
In the Old Testament we have Vprightness, Integrity, Righteousness, doing Good
and eschewing Evil, Fearing, Trusting, Obeying, Believing in God, Holiness and
the like; but the name of Virtue does not occur therein. It is true we have
translated (...) a virtuous Woman; and once or twice the same word virtuously,
Ruth. 3. 11. Prove. 12. 4. Chap^ 31. 10, 39. But that word signifies as (...)
used, strenuous, industrious, diligent, and has no such signification as that
we now express by virtue. Nor is it any where rendered (...) by the LXX.
although it may have some respect unto it, as (...) may be derived from (...),
and peculiarly denote the exercise of industrious strength, such as men use in
Battle. For (...) is vis, robur, potentia, or exercitus also. But in the
common acceptance of it, and as it is used by Philosophers, there is no word
in the Hebrew nor Syriack properly to express it. The Rabbis do it by (...)
which signifies properly a measure. For studying the Philosophy of Aristotle,
and translating his Ethics into Hebrew, which was done by Rabbi Meir, and
finding his virtue placed in mediocrity, they applied (...) to express it. So
they call Aristotle's Ethics (...) the Book of Measures, that is of virtues.
And (...) are boni mores. Such a stranger is this very word unto the Old
Testament. In the New Testament (...) occurs four times; but it should not seem
any where to be taken in the sense now generally admitted. In some of the
places it rather denotes the excellency and praises that do attend Virtue, than
Virtue it self. So we render (...) praises; 1 Pet. 2. 9. as the Syriack does
also (...), praises; and the same Translation, Phil. 4. 9. renders (...), If
there be any virtue, by (...), works glorious, or praise worthy. 2 Pet. 1. 9.
It is a peculiar gracious disposition, operation of mind, distinguished from
Faith, Temperance, Patience, Brotherly kindness, Godliness, Charity, etc. and
so cannot have the common sense of the word there put upon it.

The word Moral is yet far more exotic to the Church and Scripture. We are
beholding for it, if there be any advantage in its use, merely to the Schools
of the Philosophers, especially of Aristotle. His Doctrine (...), commonly
called his (...) or Moralia, his Morals, has begotten this name for our use.
The whole is expressed in Isocrates to Demonicus by (...), the virtue of
manners. If then the signification of the words be respected as usually taken,
it is virtue in men's manners that is intended. The Schoolmen brought this
expression with all its concerns, as they did the rest of Aristotle's
Philosophy, into the Church and Divinity. And I cannot but think it had been
well if they had never done it; as all will grant they might have omitted some
other things without the least disadvantage to Learning or Religion. However
this expression of Moral Virtue having absolutely possessed it self of the
Fancies and Discourses of all, and it may be of the Understanding of some,
though with very little satisfaction when all things are considered, I shall
not endeavor to dispossess it, or eliminate it from the Confines of Christian
Theology. Only I am sure had we been left unto the Scripture expressions, of
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, of the fear of
God, of Holiness, Righteousness, living unto God, walking with God, and before
him, we might have been free from many vain wordy perplexities; and the whole
wrangle of this Chapter in particular, had been utterly prevented. For let but
the Scripture express what it is to be Religious, and there will be no
contesting about the difference or no difference between Grace and Moral
Virtue. It is said, that some judge those who have Moral Virtue to want Grace,
not to be Gracious. But say, that men are born of God, and do not commit sin,
that they walk before God and are upright, that they cleave unto God with full
purpose of heart, that they are sanctified in Christ Jesus and the like, and no
man will say that they have not Grace, or are not Gracious, if they receive
your Testimony. But having, as was said, made its entrance amongst us, we must
deal with it as well as we can, and satisfy our selves about its common
Acceptance and Use.

Generally, moral Virtues are esteemed to be the Duties of the second Table.
For although those who handle these matters more accurately, do not so straiten
or confine them, yet it is certain that in vulgar and common Acceptance,
(which strikes no small stroke, in the regulating of the conceptions of the
wisest Men, about the signification of words) nothing else is intended by Moral
virtues or Duties of Morality, but the observation of the Precepts of the
second Table. Nor is any thing else designed by those Divines, who in their
writings so frequently declare, that it is not morality alone that will render
men acceptable to God. Others do extend these things further, and fix the
denomination of moral, firstly upon the Law or Rule of all those Habits of the
Mind, and its Operations, which afterward thence they call moral. Now this
Moral Law is nothing but the Law of Nature, or the Law of our Creation; which
the Apostle affirms to lie equally obligatory on all men, even all the Gentiles
themselves, Romans 2. 14, 15. and whereof the Decalogue is summarily expressive.
This Moral Law is therefore the Law written in the hearts of all men by Nature,
which is resolved partly into the Nature of God himself, which cannot but
require most of the things of it from Rational Creatures; partly into that
state and condition of the nature of things and their mutual Relations, wherein
God was pleased to create and set them. These things might be easily instanced
and exemplified, but that we must not too much divert from our present
occasion. And herein lies the largest sense and Acceptance of the Law Moral,
and consequently of Moral Virtues, which have their Form and Being from their
Relation and conformity thereunto. Let it be then, that Moral Virtues consist
in the universal observance of the requisites and Precepts of the law of our
Creation and dependence on God thereby. And this description, as we shall see
for the substance of it, is allowed by our Author.

Now these Virtues, or this conformity of our minds and actions unto the Law of
our Creation, may be in the light and reason of Christian Religion, considered
two ways. First, as with respect unto the substance or Essence of the Duties
themselves, they may be performed by men in their own strength, under the
conduct of their own Reason, without any special assistance from the Spirit, or
Sanctifying Grace of Christ. In this sense, they still bare the name of
Virtues, and for the substance of them deserve so to do. Good they are in
themselves, useful to Mankind, and seldom in the Providence of God go without
their reward in this World. I grant I say, that they may be obtained and acted
without special assistance of Grace Evangelical; though the wiser Heathens
acknowledged something Divine in the communication of them to Men. Papinius
speaks to that purpose, Diva Jovis solio juxta comes; undeper Orbem
Rara dari, Terrisque solet contingere virtus.
Seu Pater Omnipotens tribuit, sive ipsa capaces
Elegit penetrare Viros. --


But old Homer put it absolutely in the will of his God.

(...)
(...).
Thus we grant moral virtue to have been in the Heathen of old. For this is
that alone whereby they were distinguished amongst themselves. And he that
would exclude them all from any interest in moral virtue, takes away all
difference between Cato and Nero, Aristides and Tiberius, Titus and Domitian;
and overthrows all natural difference between good and evil; which besides
other abominations that it would plentifully spawn in the World, would
inevitably destroy all humane Society. But now these moral virtues thus
performed, whatever our Author thinks, are distinct from Grace, may be without
it, and in their present description, which is not imaginary but real, are
supposed so to be. And if he pleases he may exercise himself in the longsome
disputes of Bellarmin, Gregory de Valentia, and others to this purpose
innumerable; not to mention Reformed Divines lest they should be scornfully
rejected as Systematical. And this is enough I am sure to free their Religion
from Villainy, who make a distinction between Moral Virtue and Grace. And if our
Author is otherwise minded, and both believe that there is Grace Evangelical,
^^^^ever there is Moral Virtue, or, that Moral Virtues may be so obtained and
exercised without the special assistance of Grace, as to become a part of our
Religion, and accepted with God, and will maintain his Opinion in Writing, I
will promise him if I live to return him an answer, on one only condition,
which is, that he will first answer what Augustine has written against the
Pelagians on this Subject.

Again these moral Virtues, this observance of the Precepts of the Law of our
Creation, in a consonancy whereunto originally the Image of God in us did
consist, may now under the Gospel be considered, as men are principled,
assisted, and enabled to and in their performance by the Grace of God, and as
they are directed unto the especial end of living unto him in and by Jesus
Christ. What is particularly required hereunto, shall be afterward declared.
Now in this sense no man living ever distinguished between Grace and Virtue,
any otherwise than the cause and the effect are to be, or may be distinguished;
much less was any Person ever so Brutish as to fancy an inconsistency between
them, For take Grace in one sense, and it is the efficient cause of this
Virtue, or of these Virtues which are the effects of it; and in another they
are all Graces themselves. For that which is wrought in us by Grace is Grace;
as that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.

To this purpose something may be spoken concerning Grace also, the other term,
whose ambiguity renders the Discourse under consideration somewhat intricate
and perplexed. Now as the former term of Moral Virtue owed its Original to the
Schools of Philosophy, and its use was borrowed from them; So this of Grace is
purely Scriptural and Evangelical. The World knows nothing of it but what is
declared in the Word of God, especially in the Gospel, for the Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. All the Books of the Ancient
Philosophers, will not give us the least light into that notion of Grace, which
the Scripture declares unto us. As then we allowed the sense of the former term
given unto it by its first coyners and users, so we cannot but think it equal,
that men be precisely tied up in their conceptions about Grace, unto what is
delivered in the Scripture concerning it; as having no other Rule either to
frame them, or judge of them. And this We shall attend unto. Not that I here
design to treat of the nature of Gospel Grace in general; but whereas all the
Divines that ever I have read on these things, whether Ancient or Modern (and I
have not troubled my self to consider whether they were Systematical ones only
or otherwise qualified) allow some distinctions of this term to be necessary,
for the right understanding of those passages of Scripture wherein it is made
use of. I shall mention that or those only, which are so unto the right
apprehension of what is at present under Debate.

First therefore, Grace in the Scripture is taken for the free Grace, or favor
of God toward sinners by Jesus Christ. By this he freely pardons them their,
sins, Justifies, and accepts them, or makes them accepted in the Beloved.
This certainly is distinct from Moral Virtue. Secondly, It is taken for the
effectual working of the Spirit of God, in and upon the minds and souls of
Believers, thereby quickening them when they were dead in trespasses and sins,
Regenerating of them, Creating a new heart in them, implanting his Image upon
them: neither I presume will this be called Moral Virtue. Thirdly, For the
actual supplies of Assistance and Ability given to Believers, so to enable them
unto every Duty in particular, which in the Gospel is required of them; for he
works in them both to Will and to Do of his own good pleasure. As yet the
former distinction will appear necessary. Fourthly, For the effects wrought and
produced by this Operation of God and his Grace, in the hearts and minds of
them that believe; which are either habitual in the spiritual disposition of
their minds, or actual in their operations; all which are called Grace. It may
be our Author will be apt to think that I Cant, use Phrases, or fulsome
Metaphors. But besides that I can confirm these distinctions, and the necessity
of them, and the words wherein they are expressed, from the Scriptures and
Ancient Fathers, I can give them him for the substance of them out of very
Learned Divines, whether Systematical or no I know not, but this I know they
were not long since Bishops of the Church of England.

We are now in the next place to inquire into the mind of our Author in these
things; for from his apprehensions about them he frames a mighty difference
between himself and those whom he opposes, and from thence takes occasion and
advantage afresh to revile and reproach them.

First, Therefore he declares his judgment, that the Moral Virtues which he
treats of do consist in Men's observance of the Law of Nature, of the Dictates
of Reason, and Precepts thereof.

Secondly, That the Substance, yea the whole of Religion consists in these
Virtues, or Duties; So that by the observation of them Men may attain
Everlasting Happiness.

Thirdly, That there is no actual concurrence of present Grace, enabling Men to
perform these Duties, or to exercise these Virtues, but they are called Grace
on another account.

Fourthly, That his Adversaries are so far from making Virtue and Grace to be
the same that they make them inconsistent. And these things shall we take into
a brief examination according as indeed they do deserve.

The first of them, he plainly and more than once affirms; nor shall I contend
with him about it. So he speaks page 68. The practice of Virtue consists in
living suitably to the dictates of Reason and nature, and this is the substance
and main design of all the Laws of Religion, to oblige mankind to behave
themselves in all their actions as becomes creatures endowed with Reason and
understanding, and in ways suitable to Rational beings, to prepare and
qualify themselves for the State of Glory and immortality. This is a plain
description both of the Rule of moral Virtues, and of the nature of them. The
Law of Reason and nature is the Rule; and their own nature (as acting, or
acted) consists in a suitableness unto Rational Beings; acting, to prepare
themselves for the state of immortality and Glory. The first end of all virtue
no doubt. We need not therefore make any farther inquiry into this matter,
wherein we are agreed.

Secondly, That the Substance, yea the whole of Religion consists in these
Moral Virtues he fully also declares, page 69. Moral Virtue having the
strongest and most necessary influence upon the, end of all Religion viz. man's
Happiness, it is not only its most material and useful part, but the ultimate
end of all its other Duties; (though I know not, how the practice of Virtue in
this life can be the Vltimate End of other Duties) and all true Religion can
consist in nothing else but either the practice of Virtue it self, or the use
of those means and instruments that contribute unto it. So also p. 70. All
Duties of Devotion excepting only our returns of Gratitude are not essential
parts of Religion, but are only in order to it, as they tend to the practice of
Virtue and Moral Goodness; and their goodness is derived upon them from the
Moral Virtues to which they contribute; and in the same proportion they are
conducive to the ends of Virtue, they are to be valued among the Ministeries of
Religion. So then the whole Duty of Man consists in being virtuous, and all
that is enjoined him beside, is in order thereunto. Hence We are told
elsewhere, that outward Worship is no part of Religion; again page 76. All
Religion must of necessity be resolved into Enthusiasm or Morality; the former
is mere imposture, and therefore all that is true must be reduced to the
latter. But we need not insist on particulars, seeing he promoteth this to
confirmation by the best of Demonstrations, i. e. an induction of all
particulars; which he calls a Scheme of Religion; wherein yet if any thing
necessary be left out or omitted, this best of Demonstrations is quickly turned
into one of the worst of Sophismes. Therefore we have here (no doubt) a just
and full Representation of all that belongs to Christian Religion; and it is as
follows; page 69. The whole Duty of Man referrs either to his Creator, or his
Neighbor, or Himself. All that concerns the two last, is confessedly of a
moral nature; and all that concerns the first, consists either in Praising of
God or Praying to him; The former is a branch of the Virtue of Gratitude, and
is nothing but a thankful and Humble temper of mind, arising from a sense of
Gods greatness in Himself, and his Goodness to us. So that this part of
Devotion issues from the same virtuous quality, that is the Principle of all
other resentments and expressions of Gratitude; only those acts of it that are
terminated on God as their Object are styled Religious; and therefore Gratitude
and Devotion are not diverse things, but only differing names of the same thing;
Devotion being nothing else but the Virtue of Gratitude toward God. The
latter, viz. Prayer is either put up in our own or other men's behalf; if for
others it is an act of that Virtue we call kindness or Charity; if for our
selves, the things we pray for, unless they be the comforts and enjoyments of
this life, are some or other virtuous qualities; and therefore the proper and
direct use of Prayer is to be instrumental to the Virtues of Morality. It is of
Christian Religion that this Author treats, as is manifest from his ensuing
Discourse, and the Reason he gives why Moral Virtues are styled Graces. Now I
must needs say that I look on this of our Author as the rudest, most imperfect,
and weakest Scheme of Christian Religion that ever yet I saw; so far from
comprising an induction of all particulars belonging to it, that there is
nothing in it that is constitutive of Christian Religion as such at all. I wish
he had given us a summary of the Credenda of it, as he has done of its Agenda,
that we might have had a prospect of the body of his Divinity. The ten
Commandments would in my mind have done twice as well on this present occasion,
with the addition of the Explication of them given us in the Church Cateehism.
But I am afraid that very Catechism may ere long be esteemed Phanatical also.
One I confess I have read of before, who was of this Opinion, that all Religion
consisted in Morality alone. But withal he was so Ingenious as to follow the
conduct of his Judgment in this matter, unto a full Renunciation of the
Gospel, which is certainly inconsistent with it. This was one Martin Sidelius a
Seilesian, who gave the ensuing account of his Faith unto Faustus Socinus and
his Society at Cracovia.

Caeterum ut sciatis cujus sim religionis, quamvis id scripto meo quod habetis,
ostenderim, tamen hic breviter repetam. Et primum quidem doctrina de Messia,
seu Rege illo promisso, ad meam religionem nihil pertinet: nam Rex elle tantum
Judaeis promissus erat, sicut and bona illa Canaan. Sic etiam circumcisio
sacrificia, and reliquae cerimoniae Mosis ad me non pertinent, sed tantum
populo Judaico promissa data and mandata sunt. Neque ista fuerunt cultus Dei
apud Judaeos, sed inserviebant cultui divino, and ad cultum deducebant Judaeos.
Verus autem cultus Dei quem meam religionem appello, est Decalogus: qui est
aeterna Dei voluntas, qui Decalogus ideo ad me pertinet, quia etiam mihi a Deo
datus est, non quidem per vocems sonantem de coelo, sicut populo Judaico, at
per creationem insita est menti meae; quia autem insitus Decalogus, per
corruptionem naturae humanae, and pravis consuetudinibus, aliqua ex part
obscuratus est, ideo ad illustrandum cum, adhibeo vocalem Decalogum, qui
vocalis Decalogus, ideo etiam ad me, ad omnes populos pertinet, quia cum insito
nobis Decalogo consentit, imo idem ille Decalogus est. Haec est mea sententia
de Messia seu rege illo promisso, and haec est mea religio, quam coram vobis
ingenue profiteor. Martin Seidelius Olavensis Silesius.

That is. But that you may know of what Religion I am, although it is expressed
in that Writing which you have already, yet I will here briefly repeat it. And
first of all, the Doctrine of the Messiah, or King that was promised does not
belong to my Religion; for that King was promised to the Jews only; as was the
good Land of C^n^an. So in like manner circumcision, Sacrifices and the rest of
the Ceremonies of Moses belong not to me, but were promised, given, and granted
unto the people of the Jews alone. Neither were they the Worship of God among
the Jews, but were only subservient unto Divine Worship, and lead the Jews unto
it ( the same Opinion is maintained by our Author concerning all exterior
Worship:) but the true Worship which I call my Religion, is the Decalogue which
is the Eternal and immutable Will of God; ( And here also he has the consent
and concurrence of our Author) which Decalogue does therefore belong unto me
because it is given by God to me also; not indeed by a voice sounding from
Heaven as he gave it to the people of the Jews, but it is implanted in my mind
by nature. But because this implanted Decalogue by reason of the corruption of
humane nature, and through depraved Customs, is in some measure obscured, for
the illustration of it I make use of the vocal Decalogue, which therefore also
belongs unto me and all people; because it consents with the Decalogue
written in our hearts; yea is the same Law with it. This is my opinion
concerning the Messiah, or the promised King; and this is my Religion which I
freely acknowledge before ye. So he, This is plain dealing. He saw clearly,
that if all Religion and the Worship of God consisted in Morality only, there
was neither need nor use of Christ, nor the Gospel. And accordingly having no
outward advantage by them, discarded them. But setting aside his bold
renunciation of Christ as promised, I see not any material difference between
the Religion of this man and that now contended for. The poor deluded souls
among our selves, who leaving the Scripture, pretend that they are guided by
the Light within them, are upon the matter of the same Religion. For that light
being nothing but the Dictates of Reason and a natural Conscience, it extends
not it self beyond Morality; which some of them understanding, we know what
thoughts and apprehensions they have had of Christ and of his Gospel and the
Worship of God instituted therein. For hence it is, (and not as our Author
pretends, with a strange incogitancy concerning them and the Gnostics, that
they assert the Scripture to be the only Rule of Religious Worship) that they
are fallen into these fond imaginations. And these are the effects which this
Principle does naturally lead unto. I confess then that I do not agree with our
Author in and about this Scheme of Christian Religion; which I shall therefore
first briefly put in my exceptions unto, and then offer him another in lieu of
it.

First, Then this Scheme seems to represent Religion unto us as suited to the
state of Innocence, and that very imperfectly also. For it is composed to
answer the former assertions of confining Religion to Moral Virtues, which are
granted to consist in our conformity unto and expression of the Dictates of
Reason and the Law of Nature. Again the whole duty of man is said to refer
either to his Creator, or his Neighbor, or himself. Had it been said to God
absolutely, another interpretation might have been put upon the words. But
being restrained unto him as our Creator, all Duties referring to our Redeemer
are excluded, or not included, which certainly have some place in Christian
Religion. Our Obedience therein is the Obedience of Faith, and must answer the
special objects of it. And we are taught in the Church Catechism to believe in
God the Father who made us and all the world, and in God the Son who redeemed
us and all Mankind; and in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies us and all the
Elect people of God. Now these distinct acts of Faith, have distinct acts of
Obedience attending them; whereas none here are admitted, or at least required,
but those which fall under the first head. It is also very imperfect as a
description of natural Religion, or the Duties of the Law of Nature. For the
principal Duties of it, such as fear, love, trust, affiance of and in God, are
wholly omitted; nor will they be reduced unto either of the heads which all
Religion is here distributed unto. For Gratitude unto God has respect formally
and directly to the benefits we our selves are made partakers of. But these
Duties are eternally necessary on the consideration of the nature of God
himself, antecedent unto the consideration of his communicating of himself unto
us by his benefits. Prayer proceeds from them; and it is an odd Method to
reduce the Cause under the head of its effect. And Prayer it self is made at
length not to be so much a Moral Virtue, as somewhat instrumental to the
virtues of Morality.

Secondly, I cannot think we have here a complete Representation of Christian
Religion, nor an induction of all its particulars, because we have neither
Supposition nor Assertion of Sin, or a Redeemer, or of any Duty with respect
unto them. Gratitude and Prayer I confess are two heads, whereunto sundry
Duties of Natural Religion without respect unto these things may be reduced.
But since the fall of Adam, there was never any Religion in the world accepted
with God, that was not built and founded on the supposition of them, and whose
principal Duties toward God did not respect them. To prescribe now unto us a
Religion as it respects God, without those Duties which arise from the
consideration of sin, and a Redeemer, is to persuade us to throw away our
Bibles. Sin, and the condition of all men on the account thereof, their Duty in
that condition, what God requires of them with reference thereunto, the way
that God has found out, proposed, and requires of us to make use of, that we
may be delivered from that condition, with the duties necessary to that end, do
even constitute and make up that Religion which the Scripture teaches us, and
which, as it summarily expresses it self, consists in Repentance toward God,
and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; neither of which, nor scarce any thing that
belongs unto them, appears in this Scheme; so that

Thirdly, The most important duties of Christian Religion are here not only
omitted, but excluded. Where shall we find any place here to introduce
Repentance; and as belonging thereunto Conviction of Sin, Humiliation, Godly
Sorrow, Conversion it self to God? For my part I will never be of that Religion
where these duties toward God have no place. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
with all that is necessary to it, preparatory for it, included in it, and
consequentiall on it, are in like manner cast out of the verge of Religious
duties here schematized. An endeavor to fly from the wrath to come, to receive
Jesus Christ, to accept of the atonement, to seek after the forgiveness of
sins by him (that we may cant a little) and to give up our souls in universal
Obedience to all his commands, belong also to the duties of that Religion
toward God which the Scripture prescribes unto us; but here they appear not
in the least intimation of them. No more do the duties which though generally
included in the Law of loving God above all, yet are prescribed and determined
in the Gospel alone. Such are selfdenyal, readiness to take up the Cross, and
the like. Besides all the duties wherein our Christian conflict against our
Spiritual Adversaries does consist, and in especial the whole of our duty
toward God in the mortification of sin, can be of no consideration there,
where no supposition of sin is made or allowed. But there would be no end if
all exceptions of this nature, that readily offer themselves, might here have
admittance. If this be the Religion of our Adversaries in these things, if this
be a perfect Scheme of its Duties toward God, and induction of all its
particulars; let our Author insult over, and reproach them whilst he pleases,
who blame it as insufficient without Grace and Godliness: I would not be in the
condition of them who trust their eternal concernments to mere Observance of
it; as knowing that there is no name under Heaven given unto men whereby they
may be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ. It will be in vain pretended,
that it is not a description of Christian Religion, but of Religion, as
Religion in general, that is here attempted. For besides that, it is Christian
Religion, and that as used and practiced by Christians, which is alone under
consideration; and an Introduction of Religion here under any other notion
would be grievously inconsistent and incoherent with the whole Discourse. It is
acknowledged by our Author in the progress of his Disputation as was before
observed, when he gives a Reason why Moral Virtue is styled Grace, which is
peculiar and appropriate to Christian Religion alone. Besides, to talk now of a
Religion in the World, which either has been, or may be, since the fall of
Adam without respect unto sin, is to build Castles in the air. All the Religion
that God now requires, prescribes, accepts, that is or can be, is the Religion
of Sinners, or of those who are such, and of them as such, though also under
other qualifications. On many accounts therefore this scheme of Religion or
Religious Duties toward God, is exceedingly insufficient and imperfect. To lay
it therefore as a Foundation whereon to stand, and revile them who plead for a
superaddition unto it of Grace and Godliness, is an undertaking from whence no
great success is to be expected.

I can easily supply another Scheme of Religion in the room of this, which
though it have not any such contexture of method, nor is set out with such
gaudy words as those which our Author has at his disposal, yet I am confident
in the confession of all Christians shall give a better account than what is
here offered unto us both of the Religion we profess, and of the Duties that
God requires therein; and this taken out of one Epistle of St. Paul; namely,
that to the Romans. And I shall do it as things come to mind in the haste
wherein I am writing. He then gives us his Scheme to this purpose. As First,
That all Men sinned in Adam, came short of the Glory of God, and rendered
themselves liable to death and the whole curse of the Law. Then, that they do
all, as left to themselves accumulate their Original Sin and Transgression,
with a world of actual sins, and provocations of God. That against Men in this
condition, God testifies his wrath and displeasure, both in his works and by
his word. Hence it necessarily follows, that the first Duty of Man toward God
is to be sensible of this condition, of the guilt of sin, with a fear of the
wrath and judgment due to them. Then he informs us, that neither the Jews by
the Law, nor the Gentiles by the light of Nature, could disentangle themselves
from this state, or do that which is pleasing unto God, so as they might obtain
forgiveness of Sin and acceptance with him. This bespeaks unto all the great
Duty toward God, of their acknowledgement unto him, of their miserable and
helpless condition, with all those Affections and subordinate Duties, wherewith
it is attended. In this state he declares, that God himself in his Infinite
Wisdom, Goodness and Grace, provided a Remedy, a way of relief; on which he
has put such an impression of his Glorious Excellencies as may stir up the
hearts of his Creatures, to endeavor a return unto him from their Apostasy;
and that this remedy consists in his setting forth Jesus Christ to be a
propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
forgiveness of Sin; which he proposes unto Men for their receiving and
acceptance. This renders it the greatest duty of mankind toward God, to
believe in the Son of God so set forth, to seek after an Interest in him, or
being made partaker of him; for this is the great work that God requires,
namely that we believe on him whom he has sent. Again, he declares that God
justifies them who so believe, pardoning their sins, and imputing
Righteousness unto them; whereon innumerable Duties do depend, even all the
Obedience that Christ requires of us; seeing in our believing in him, we accept
him to be our King to rule, govern and conduct our souls to God. And all these
are Religious duties toward God. He declares moreover, that whereas Men are by
Nature dead in trespasses and sins, and stand in need of a new spiritual life,
to be born again, that they may live unto God; that God in Jesus Christ does by
his spirit quicken them, and regenerate them, and work in them a new principle
of spiritual life; whence it is their great Duty toward God (in this Religion
of St. Paul) to comply with, and to yield obedience, unto all the ways and
methods that God is pleased to use in the accomplishment of this work upon
them, the especial Duties whereof are too many to be instanced in. But he
further manifests, that notwithstanding the Regeneration of Men by the Spirit,
and their Conversion to God, there yet continues in them a remainder of the
Principle of corrupted nature, which he calls the flesh, and Indwelling Sin,
that is of it self wholly enmity against God, and as far it abides in any,
inclines the heart and mind unto sin, which is to be watched against and
opposed. And on this head, he introduces the great Religious Duty toward God
of our spiritual conflict against sin, and of the mortification of it, wherein
those that believe are to be exercised all the days of their lives, and
wherein their principal duty toward God does consist, and without which they
can perform no other in a due manner. Moreover he farther adds the great
Gospel-Priviledge of the Communication of the Spirit of Christ unto Believers,
for their Sanctification, Consolation, and Edification; with the Duties of
Thankfulness toward God, Joy and Rejoicing in him, Cheerfulness under Trials,
Afflictions, and Persecutions, and sundry others that on that account are
required of us, all Religious Duties toward God, in the Religion by him
proposed unto us. Having laid these foundations, and manifested how they all
proceed from the Eternal Counsel and free Grace of God, in which it is our Duty
to admire, adore, and praise him, he declares how hereby and on the account of
these things, we are bound unto all Holiness, Righteousness, Godliness,
Honesty, and Usefulness in this world, in all Relations and Conditions
whatsoever; declaring our Duties in Churches, according to our especial
interest in them, toward Believers; and toward all Men in the World in our
several Relations; in Obedience to Magistrates; and all superiors; in a word in
universal observance of the whole will and all the commands of God. Now whither
any one will call this a Scheme or no, or allow it to have any thing of Method
in it or no, I neither know nor care; but am persuaded that it makes a better,
more plain, and intelligible Representation of the Religious Duties toward God
which Christian Religion, requires of us, unto all that suppose this whole
Religion to depend on Divine Revelation, than that of our Author. But I find my
self in a digression; the end of this Discourse was only to manifest the
Sentiments of our Author, on the second head before laid down, which I think
are sufficiently evinced.

The third is, That there is no actual work of present Grace, either to sit the
Persons, of whom these Duties of Moral Virtues are required, unto the
performance of them, or to work and effect them in them. For although they are
called Graces, and the Graces of the Spirit, in the Scripture, yet that is upon
another account; as he declares himself, page 72. All that the Scripture
intends by the Graces of the Spirit, are only Virtuous qualities of the Soul
that are therefore styled Graces, because they are derived purely from God's
Free Grace and Goodness, in that in the first Ages of Christianity, he was
pleased out of his infinite concern for its propagation, in a miraculous manner
to inspire its Converts with all sorts of Virtue. Virtuous Qualities of the
soul, is a very ambigious expression. Take these Virtuous Qualities, for a new
principle of Spiritual life, consisting in the habitual Disposition,
Inclination, and Ability of mind unto the things required of us in the will of
God, or unto the Acts of Religious Obedience, and it may express the Graces of
the Spirit; which yet are far enough from being so called upon the account here
mentioned. But these Virtuous Qualities, are to be interpreted according to the
tenor of the preceding Discourses, that have already passed under Examination.
Let now our Author produce any one Writer of the Church of God, from first to
last, of any repute or Acceptance, from the day that the name of Christian was
known in the World, unto this wherein we live, giving us this account why the
fruits of the Spirit, the Virtuous or Gracious qualities of the minds of
Believers, are called Graces that here he gives, and I will give him my thanks
publicly for his discovery. For if this be the only Reason why any thing in
Believers is called Grace, why Virtues are Graces, namely because God was
pleased in the first Ages of Christianity miraculously to inspire its Converts
with all sorts of Virtue, then there is ^o Communication of Grace unto any, no
work of Grace in and upon any, in an ordinary way, through the Ministry of the
Gospel, in these latter Ages. The whole Being, and efficacy of Grace, according
to this notion, is to be confined unto the miraculous Operations of God in
Gospel concernments, in the first Ages, whence a denomination in the Scripture
is cast upon our Virtues, when obtained and exercised by and in our own
strength. Now this plainly overthrows the whole Gospel, and contains a
Pelagianisme that Pelagius himself never did, nor durst avow.

Are these things then so indeed? that God did from his free Grace and
Goodness, miraculously inspire the first Converts of Christianity with all
sorts of Virtues, but that He does not still continue to put forth in any,
actually, the Efficacy of his Grace, to make them Gracious, Holy, Believing,
Obedient to himself, and to work in them all suitable actings toward himself
and others? Then farewell Scripture, the Covenant of Grace, the Intercession of
Christ, yea all the Ancient Fathers, Counsels, Schoolmen, and most of the
Jesuits themselves. Many have been the disputes amongst Christians about the
Nature of Grace, the Rule of its Dispensation, the manner and way of its
Operation, its Efficacy, Concurrence, and Cooperation in the Wills of men; but
that there is no dispensation of it, no operation but what was miraculous in
the first Converts of the Gospel, was I think until now undiscovered. Nor can
it be here pretended, that although the Virtuous qualities of our minds and
their Exercise, by which is intended all the Obedience that God requires of
us, in Principle and Practice, that we may please him, and come to the
enjoyment of him, are not said to be called Graces, only, on the account
mentioned; For as in respect of us, they are not so termed at all, so if the
term only be not understood, the whole discourse is impertinent and ridiculous.
For those other Reasons and Accounts that may be taken in, will render that
given utterly useless unto our Authors intention, and indeed are altogether
inconsistent with it. And he has given us no reason to suppose, that he talks
after such a weak and preposterous a rate. This then is that which is here
asserted, the Qualities of our minds and their Exercise wherein the Virtues
pleaded about, and affirmed to contain the whole Substance of Religion, do
consist, are not wrought in us by the Grace or Spirit of God through the
Preaching of the Gospel, but are only called Graces, as before. Now though here
be a plain contradiction to what is delivered but two pages before, namely,
that we pray for some or other Virtuous qualities, that is doubtless to be
wrought in us by the Grace of God; yet this present discourse is capable of no
other interpretation but that given unto it. And indeed it seems to be the
design of some men, to confine all real Gifts and Graces of the Spirit of God,
to the first Ages of the Gospel, and the miraculous operations in it; which is
to overthrow the whole Gospel, the Church, and the Ministry of it, as to their
use and efficacy, leaving Men only the Book of the Bible to Philosophize upon,
as shall be elsewhere demonstrated, Our Author indeed tells us, that on the
occasion of some men's writings in Theology, there has been a buzz and a noise
of the Spirit of God in the World. His expressions are exceedingly suited to
pour contempt on what he does not approve; not so to express what he does
himself intend. But I desire that he and others would speak plain, and openly
in this matter, that neither others may be deceived nor themselves have
occasion to complain that they are misrepresented; a pretense whereof would
probably give them a dispensation to deal very roughly, if not despightfully
with them with whom they shall have to do. Does he therefore think or believe,
that there are not now any real Gracious Operations of the Spirit of God, upon
the hearts and minds of men in the world? that the dispensation of the Spirit
is ceased, as well unto ordinary Ministerial Gifts, with its sanctifying,
renewing, assisting Grace, as unto Gifts miraculous and extraordinary? that
there is no work at all of God upon the hearts of Sinners, but that which is
purely moral, and persuasive by the word? that what is asserted by some
concerning the Efficacy of the Grace of the Spirit, and concerning his gifts,
is no more but a buzz and a noise? I wish he would explain himself directly and
positively in these things; for they are of great importance. And the loose
expressions which we meet with, do give great Offense unto some, who are apt to
think, that as pernicious an Heresy as ever infested the Church of God, may be
covered and clocked by them.

But to return; In the sense that Moral Virtue is here taken, I dare boldly
pronounce, that there is no Villainy in the Religion of those men, who
distinguish between Virtue and Grace; that is, there not in their so doing;
this being the known and avowed Religion of Christianity. It is granted; that
wherever Grace is, there is Virtue. For Grace will produce and effect all
Virtues in the Soul whatever. But Virtue on the other side may be where there
is no Grace, which is sufficient to confirm a distinction between them. It was
so in fundry of the Heathen of old; though now it be pretended that Grace is
nothing but an occasional denomination of Virtue, not that it is the cause or
principle of it. But the proofs produced by our Author are exceedingly
incompetent unto the end whereunto they are applied. For that place of the
Apostle, Gal. 5. v. 22, 23. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace,
long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, meekness, Temperance; Though our
Author should be allowed to turn Joy into cheerfulness, peace into
peaceableness, Faith into Faithfulness, as he has done, corruptly enough, to
accommodate it to his purpose, yet it will no way reach his end, nor satisfy
his intention. For does it follow that because the Spirit effects all these
Moral virtues in a new and gracious manner, and with a direction to a new and
special end in Believers, either that these things are nothing but mere Moral
Virtues, not wrought in us by the grace of God, (the contrary whereof is
plainly asserted in calling them fruits of the Spirit) or that wherever there
is Moral Virtue, though not so wrought by the Spirit, that there is Grace also,
because Virtue and Grace are the same? If these are the Expositions of
Scripture which we may expect from them, who make such outcries against other
men's, perverting and corrupting of it, the matter is not like to be much mended
with us, for ought I can see, upon their taking of that work into their own
hands. And indeed his Quotation of this place is pretty odd. He does not in the
Print express the words as he uses, and as he does those of another Scripture
immediately, in a different character, as the direct words of the Apostle, that
no man may charge him with a false Allegation of the Text. Yet he repeats all
the words of it which he intends to use to his purpose, somewhat altering the
expressions. But he has had, I fear, some unhappiness in his Explanations. By
Joy he would have Cheerfulness intended. But what is meant by cheerfulness is
much more uncertain than what is intended by Joy. Mirth it may be in
Conversation is aimed at, or somewhat of that nature. But how remote this is
from that Spiritual Joy, which is recommended unto us in the Scripture, and is
affirmed to be unspeakable and full of glory, he that knows not, is scarce meet
to Paraphrase upon St. Paul's Epistles. Neither is that Peace with God through
Jesus Christ, which is rought in the Hearts of Believers by the Holy Ghost, who
creates the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, unto them, a matter of any more
affinity with a Moral peaceableness of mind and Affections. Our Faith also in
God, and our Faithfulness in our Duties, Trusts, Offices and Employments, are
sufficiently distinct. So palpably must the Scripture be corrupted and wrested
to be made serviceable to this presumption. He yet adds another proof to the
same purpose, if any man know distinctly what that purpose is; namely, Titus 2.
11. Where he tells us that the same Apostle make the Grace of God, to consist
in Gratitude toward God, Temperance toward our Selves, and Justice toward
our Neighbors. But these things are not so. For the Apostle does not say that
the Grace of God does consist in these things, but that the Grace of God
teaches us these things. Neither is the Grace here intended, any Subjective or
inherent Grace, or to speak with our Author any Virtuous Quality or Virtue, but
the Love and Grace of God himself, in sending Jesus Christ as declared in the
Gospel, was is manifest in the words and context beyond contradiction. And I
cannot but wonder, how our Author desirous to prove that the whole of our
Religion consists in Moral Virtues, and these only called Graces because of the
Miraculous Operations of God from his own Grace in the first Gospel converts,
should endeavor to do it by these two testimonies; the first whereof expressly
assigns the Duties of Morality as in Believers, to the operation of the Spirit,
and the latter in his judgment makes them to proceed from Grace.

Our last inquiry is into what he ascribes unto his Adversaries in this matter,
and how he deals with them thereupon. This therefore he informs us page 71. It
is not enough say they to be completely virtuous, unless ye have grace too. I
can scarce believe that ever he heard any one of them say so, or ever read it
in any of their writings. For there is nothing that they are more positive in,
than that men cannot in any sense be completely virtuous unless they have
grace; and so cannot suppose them to be so, who have it not. They say indeed,
that moral virtues, as before described, so far as they are attainable by, or
may be exercised in the strength of Men's own wills and natural faculties, are
not enough to please God and to make men accepted with him. So that virtue as
it may be without Grace, and some virtues may be so for the substance of them,
is not available unto salvation. And I had almost said that he is no Christian
that is of another mind. In a word, Virtue is, or may be without Grace, in all
or any of the Acceptations of it before laid down. Where it is without the
Favor of God and the Pardon of sin, where it is without the renewing of our
natures, and the endowment of our Persons with a Principle of spiritual life,
where it is not wrought in us by present efficacious Grace, it is not enough;
nor will serve any man's turn with respect unto the everlasting concernments of
his Soul.

But he gives in his Exceptions, page 71. But when, says he, we have set aside
all manner of virtue, let them tell me what remains to be called Grace, and
give me any notion of it distinct from all morality, that consists in the right
order and government of our actions in all our Relations, and so comprehends
all our Duty; and therefore if Grace be not included in it, it is but a
phantasme and an imaginary thing. I say first; where Grace is, we cannot set
aside virtue, because it will and does produce and effect it in the minds of
men. But Virtue may be, where Grace is not, in the sense so often declared.
Secondly, Take moral virtue in the notion of it here received and explained by
our Author, and I have given sundry Instances before, of Gracious Duties, that
come not within the verge or compass of the Scheme given us of it. Thirdly, The
whole aimed at, lies in this, that virtue that governs our actions in all our
Duties may be considered either as the Duty we owe to the Law of nature, for
the ends of it, to be performed in the strength of nature, and by the direction
of it, or it may be considered as it is an especial effect of the grace of God
in us, which gives it a new principle, and a new end, and a new respect unto
the Covenant of Grace Wherein we walk with God, the consideration where of
frustrates the intention of our Author in this discourse.

But he renews his charge, page 73. So destructive of all true and real
goodness is the very Religion of those men, that are wont to set grace at odds
with virtue; and are so far from making them the same, that they make them
inconsistent; and though a man be exact in all the duties of moral goodness,
yet if he be a graceless person (i. e. void of I know not what imaginary
Godliness) he is but in a cleaner way to Hell; and his conversion is more
hopeless than the vilest and most notorious sinners, and the morally Righteous
man is at a greater distance from grace, than the profane; and better be lend
and debanched than live an honest and virtuous life, if you are not of the
Godly Party; with much more to this purpose. For the men that are wont to set
grace at odds with virtue, and are so far from making them the same, that they
make them inconsistent; I wish our Author would discover them, that he might
take us along with him in his detestation of them. It is not unlikely, if all
be true that is told of them, but that the Gnostics might have some principles
not unlike this; but beside them I never heard of any that were of this mind in
the world. And in truth the liberty that is taken in these discourses, is a
great instance of the morality under consideration. But the following words
will direct us where these things are charged. For some say, that if a man be
exact in all the Duties of moral Goodness, yet if he be a Graceless Person,
void of I know not what imaginary Godliness, he is but in a cleaner way to
Hell. I think I know both what, and who are intended, and that both are dealt
withal with that candor we have been now accustomed unto. But First, you will
scarce find those you intend over forward in granting that men may be exact in
all the Duties of Moral goodness, and yet be graceless persons. For taking
Moral virtues to comprehend, as you do, their duties toward God, they will tell
you such Persons cannot perform one of them aright, much less all of them
exactly. For they can neither trust in God, no believe him, nor fear him, nor
glorify him in a due manner. Take the Duties of moral Goodness, for the duties
of the Law between man and man, and the observation of the outward Duties of
Gods worship, and they say indeed, that they may be so performed as that in
respect of them, men may be blameless, and yet be Graceless. For that account
if they mistake not the Apostle Paul gives of himself. Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8. They
do say therefore that many of these Duties, so as to be useful in the world,
and blameless before men, they may perform who are yet Graceless. Thirdly, This
Gracelessness is said to consist in being void of I know not what imaginary
Godliness. No, no; It is to be void of the Spirit of God, of the Grace of
Christ, not to be born again, not to have a new spiritual life in Christ, not
to be united to him, or ingrafted in him, not to be accepted and made an heir
of God, and enabled to a due Spiritual Evangelical performance of all Duties of
Obedience, according to the tenor of the Covenant; these are the things
intended. And as many with their moral Duties may come short of them and be
Graceless; so those to whom they are imaginary, must reject the whole Gospel of
Christ as an imagination. And I must say, to give matter of a new charge, that
to the best Observation that I have been able to make in the world, none have
been, nor are more negligent in the principal Duties of morality, than those
who are aptest to exalt them above the Gospel, and the whole Mystery of it;
unless morality do consist in such a course of life and Conversation, as I will
not at present charactarize.

It is farther added, that the conversion of such a one, is more hopeless than
the vilest and most notorious Sinners; and the morally Righteous man, etc.
Setting aside the inviduous expression of what is here reflected upon, and
there is nothing more openly taught in the Gospel. The Pharisees were a People
morally Righteous, whereon they trusted to themselves that they were Righteous;
and yet our Lord Jesus Christ told them, that Publicans and Harlots, the vilest
and most notorious of Sinners, entered before them into the Kingdom of God. And
where Men trust to their own Righteousness, their own Duties, be they moral or
what they will, there are no Men farther from the way of the Gospel than they.
Nay our Savior lets us know, that as such, the Gospel is not concerned in
them, not they in it. He came not, he says, to call the Righteous, but Sinners
to Repentance; not Men justifying, or lifting up themselves in a conceit of
their moral Duties, but those who are burdened and laden with a sense of their
sins. And so in like manner, that the whole have no need of the Physician but
the sick; and St. Paul declares what Enemies they were to the Righteousness of
God, who went about to set up their own Righteousness; Romans 10. Now because
moral Duties are incumbent on all Persons, at all times, they are continually
to be pressed upon all, from a sense of the Authority, and command of God,
indispensibly requiring all Men's attendance unto them. Yet such is the
deceitfulness of the heart of Man, and the power of unbelief, that oftentimes
Persons who through their Education, or following convictions, have been
brought to some observance of them, and being not enlightened in their minds to
discern their insufficiency unto the great end of salvation, in and of
themselves, are apt to take up with them, and to rest in them without ever
coming to sincere Repentance toward God, or faith in our Lord Jesus Christ;
Whereas others, the guilt of whose sins does unavoidably press upon them, as it
did on the Publicans and Sinners of old, are often times more ready to look out
after relief. And those who question these things, do nothing but manifest
their ignorance in the Scripture, and want of experience in the work of the
Ministry. But yet upon the account of the charge mentioned, so unduly framed,
and impotently managed, our Author makes an excursion into such an extravagancy
of reproaches, as is scaree exceeded in his whole Book: Part of it I have
considered before in our view of his Preface; and I am now so used to the noise
and bluster wherewith he pours out the storm of his Indignation, that I am
altogether inconcerned in it, and cannot prevail with my self to give it any
further consideration.

These things though not direct to the Argument in hand, and which on that
account might have been neglected; yet supposing that the Author placed as much
of his design in them, as in any part of his Discourse, I could not wholly omit
the consideration of; not so much out of a desire for their vindication who are
unduly traduced in them, as to plead for the Gospel it self, and to lay a
foundation of a further defense of the Truths of it, if ocasiou shall so
require. And we have also here an insight into the Judgment of our Author, or
his mistake in this matter. He tells us that it is better to tolerate
debaucheries and immoralities, than liberty of conscience, for men to worship
God according to their light and persuasion. Now all Religion according to him,
consisting in morality, to tolerate immoralities and debauckeries in
conversation, is plainly to tolerate Atheism; which it seems is more eligible
than to grant liberty of conscience, unto them who differ from the present
establishment, only as to some things belonging to the outward worship of God.

These things being premised, the Argument it self pleaded in this Chap. is
capable of a speedy dispatch. It is to this purpose. The Magistrate has power
over the consciences of men in reference to Morals, or Moral Virtues, which are
the principal things in Religion, and therefore much more has so in reference
to the Worship of God, which is of less importance. We have complained before
of the ambiguity of these general terms, but it is to no purpose to do so any
more, seeing we are not like to be relieved in this discourse. Let us then take
things as we find them, and satisfy our selves in the intention of the Author,
by that Declaration which he makes of it up and down the Chap. But yet here we
are at a loss also. When he speaks, or seems to speak to this purpose, whether
in the confirmation of the Proposition, or the Inference, whereof his Argument
consists, what he says is cast into such an inter-texture with invectives and
reproaches, and expressed in such a loose declamatory manner, as it is hard to
discover or find out what it is that he intends. Suppose therefore in the first
place, that a Man should call his consequent into question; namely that because
the Magistrate has power over the Consciences of his subjects in morals, that
therefore he has so also in matters of Instituted Worship? how will he confirm
and vindicate it? Two things are all I can observe that are offered in the
confirmation of it. First, That these things of morality, moral Virtues, are of
more importance in Religion than the outward worship of God, which the
amplitude of power before asserted, is now reducing to a respect unto.
Secondly, That there is much more danger of his erring and mistaking in things
of morality, than in things of outward Worship, because of their great weight
and importance. These things are pleaded, p. 28. And elsewhere up and down.
That any thing else is offered, in the confirmation of this consequent I find
not. And it may be some will think these proofs to be very weak and feeble,
unable to sustain the weight that is laid upon them. For it is certain that the
first Rule, that he that has power over the Greater, has so over the Lesser,
does not hold unless it be in things of the same nature and kind; and it is no
less certain and evident, that there is an especial and formal difference
between these things, namely moral Virtues, and Instituted Worship; the one
depending as to their Being and discovery on the light of Nature, and the
dictates of that Reason which is common to all, and speaks the same language
in the Consciences of all mankind; the other on pure Revelation, which may be,
and is variously apprehended. Hence it is, that whereas there is no difference
in the world about what is Virtue and what is not, there is no Agreement about
what belongs to divine Worship and what does not.

Again; lesser things may be exempted from that Power and Authority by especial
privilege or Law, which has the disposal of greater committed into it, and
entrusted with it. As the Magistrate amongst us, may take away the life of a
Man, which is the greatest of his concernments, the name of his all, for
felony, but cannot take away his Estate or Inheritance of Land, which is a far
less concernment unto him, if it be antecedently settled by Law to other uses
than his own. And if it cannot be proved that the disposal of the Worship of
God, as to what does really and truly belong unto it, and all the parts of it,
is exempted from all humane Power by special Law and Privilege, let it be
disposed of as who so will, shall judge meet.

Nor is the latter consideration suggested to enforce this consequent of any
more validity; namely, that there is more danger of the Magistrates erring or
mistakes about Moral Virtue, than about Rites of Worship; because that is of
most concernment in Religion. For it is true, that suppose a Man to walk on the
top of an high house or Tower, on a plain floor with battlements or Walls round
about him, there will be more danger of breaking his neck, if he should fall
from thence, than if he should fall from the top of a narrow wall that had not
the fourth part of the height of the house. But there would not be so much
danger of falling. For from the top of the house as circumstantiated, he cannot
fall, unless he will wilfully and violently cast himself down headlong; and on
the top of the Wall, it may be, he cannot stand, with the utmost of his heed
and endeavors. The Magistrate cannot mistake about Moral Virtues unless he
will do it wilfully. They have their station fixed in the world, on the same
ground and evidence with Magistracy it self. The same evidence, the same common
consent and suffrage of mankind is given unto Moral Virtues, as is to any
Government in the World. And to suppose a supreme Magistrate, a Lawgiver, to
mistake in these things, in judging whether Justice, and Temperance, or
Fortitude, be Virtues or no, and that in their Legislative capacity, is
ridiculous. Neither Nero nor Caligula were ever in danger of any such
mis-adventure. All the Magistrates in the World at this day, are agreed about
these things. But as to what concerns the Worship of God, they are all at
variance. There is no such Evidence in these things, no such common suffrage
about them, as to free any absolutely from failings and mistakes; so that in
respect of them, and not of the other, lies the principal danger of
miscarrying, as to their determination and administration. Supposing therefore
the Premises our Author lays down to be true, his Inference from them is
feeble, and obnoxious to various impeachments, whereof I have given some few
Instances only, which shall be increased if occasion require.

But the Assertion it self which is the foundation of these consequences, is
utterly remote from Accuracy and Truth. It is said that the Magistrate has
power over the Consciences of Men in reference unto Moral Duties, which are the
principal parts of Religion. Our first and most difficult inquiry, is after the
meaning of this Proposition, the later after its truth. I ask then, first
whether he has power over the Consciences of men with respect unto Moral
Virtue, and over Moral Virtue it self, as Virtue, and as a part of Religion, or
on some other account; If his power respect Virtue as a part of Religion, then
it equally extends it self to all that is so, by Virtue of a Rule which will
not be easily everted. But it does not appear that it so extends it self as to
plead an obliging Authority in reference unto all Duties. For let but the
Scheme of Moral Duties, especially those whose Object is God, given us by our
Author be considered, and it will quickly be discerned how many of them are
exempted from all humane cognizance and Authority; and that from and by their
nature as well as their use in the World. And it is in vain to ascribe an
authority to Magistrates which they have no power to exert, or take cognizance
whether it be obeyed or no. And what can they do therein with respect unto
Gratitude to God, which holds the first place in the Scheme of Moral Virtues
here given in unto us. We are told also, p. 83. That in matters both of Moral
Virtue, and Divine Worship, there are some rules of Good and Evil that are of
an Eternal and unchangeable obligation, and these can never be prejudiced or
altered by any humane power, because the reason of their Obligation arises from
a necessity and constitution of nature, and therefore must be (...) perpetual
as that; but then there are other rules of Duty that are alterable according to
the various accidents changes and conditions of humane life, and depend chiefly
upon contracts and positive Laws of Kingdoms. It would not be unworthy our
inquiry to consider what rules of Moral Duty they are, which are alterable and
depend on accidents and contracts. But we might easily find work enough, should
we call all such fond Assertions to a just examination. Neither does the
distinction here given us between various Rules of Moral Virtue, very well
answer what we are told, p. 69. namely, that every particular Virtue is
therefore such, because it is are semblance and imitation of some of the Divine
Attributes, which I suppose they are not, whose Rules and forms are alterable
upon accidents and occasions. And we are taught also, page 68. that the
practice of Virtue consists in living suitable to the dictates of Reason and
Nature; which are Rules not variable and Changeable. There must be some new
distinction to reconcile these things, which I cannot at present think of. That
which I would enquire from hence is, whether the Magistrates have power over
the Consciences of men in reference unto those things in Morality, whose Rules
of good and evil are of an Eternal obligation. That he has not is evidently
employed in this place. And I shall not enter into the confusion of the ensuing
Discourse, where the latter sort of Rules for Virtue, the other member of the
distinction, are turned into various Methods of executing Laws about outward
acts of Virtue or Vice; and the Virtues themselves into outward expressions and
significations of Duty; for I have at present no contest with this Author about
his manner of writing, nor do intend to have. It is enough that here at once
all the principal and most important Virtues are vindicated to their own
unalterable Rules as such, and the Consciences of Men in reference unto them
put under another jurisdiction. And what then becomes of this Argument, That
the Magistrate must have power over the Consciences of Men in matters of Divine
Worship, because he has so in things Moral which are of greater importance,
when what is so of importance, is exempted from his power.

Hence it sufficiently, appears that the Authority of the Magistrate over men,
with reference unto Moral Virtue and Duty, does not respect Virtue as Virtue,
but has some other consideration. Now what this is, is evident unto all. How
Moral Virtues do belong unto Religion and are parts of it, has been before
declared. But God who has ordered all things in weight and measure, has
foredesigned them also to another end and purpose. For preparing mankind for
Political Society in the world among themselves for a time, as well as for
Religious Obedience unto himself, he inlayed his nature and composition with
principles suited to both those ends, and appointed them to be acted with
different respects unto them. Hence Moral Virtues notwithstanding their
peculiar tendency unto him, are appointed to be the instrument and ligament of
humane Society also. As the Law of Moses had in it a typical end, use, and
signification, with respect to Christ and the Gospel, and a political use as
the instrument of the Government of the Nation of the Jews. Now the Power of
the Magistrate in respect of Moral Virtues, is in their latter use; namely, as
they relate to humane policy, which is concerned in the outward actings of
them. This therefore is granted; and we shall enquire farther whether any more
be proved, namely, that the Magistrate has power over the outward actings of
Virtue and Vice, so far as humane Society or public Tranquillity is concerned
in them, and on that account.

Secondly, It may be enquired what is the Power and Authority over Moral
Virtues, which is here ascribed unto the Civil Magistrate, and over the
Consciences of men, with respect unto them. Is it such as to make that to be
Virtue which was not Virtue before, or which was Vice, and oblige men in
Conscience to practice it as Virtue? This would go a great way indeed, and
answer somewhat of what is, or as it is said, may be done in the Worship of
God, when that is made a part of it which was not so before. But what name
shall these new Virtues be called by? A new Virtue both as to its Acts and
Objects, will as much fly the imaginations of men, as a sixth sense does. It
may be our Author will satisfy us as to this enquiry; for he tells us, page
80. That he has power to make that a particular of the Divine Law, that God
has not made so. I wish he had declared himself how, and wherein; for I am
afraid this expression as here it lies, is offensive. The Divine Law is Divine,
and so is every particular of it^; and how a man can make a thing Divine, that
is not so of it self, nor by Divine Institution, is hard to find out. It may be
that only the subject matter of the Law, and not the Law it self formally is
intended; and to make a thing a particular of the Divine Law, is no more but to
make the Divine Law require, that in particular of a man which it did not
require of him before. But this Particular, referrs to the Nature, Essence and
Being of the thing, or to the acting, and occasion of it in particular. And if
it be taken in the latter sense, here is no more ascribed unto the Magistrate,
than is common with him to every man in the World. For every one that puts
himself into new circumstances, or new Relations, does so make that unto him to
be a particular of the Divine Law, which was not so before; for he is bound and
obliged unto the actual performance of many Duties, which as so
circumstantiated, he was not bo^^^ unto before.

But somewhat else seems to be intend^^ from the ensuing discourse; they are
fully empowred to declare new instances of Virtue and Vice, and to introduce
new duties in the most important parts of Religion. And y^^ I am still at the
same loss. For by his declaring new Instances of Virtue and Vice, suppose he
intends an Authoritative declaration, such as that they have no other
foundation, nor need none to make them what they are. They are new Instances of
Virtue and Vice, because so declared. And this suits unto the introducing of
new Duties in the most important parts of Religion, made Duties by that
introduction. I wish I could yet learn what these new Instances of Virtue and
Vice are, or mean. Whether they are new as Virtues and Vices, or as Instances.
For the first, would I could see a new practice of old Virtues; but to tell you
the truth, I care not for any of the new Virtues, that I have lately observed
in the World; nor do I hope ever to see any better new ones.

If it be the Instances that are new, I wish again I knew what were more in
them, than the actual and occasional exercise of old Duties. Page 79, 80.
conduce most to extricate us out of these ambiguities. There we are informed,
that the Laws of every Nation do distinguish and settle men's rights, and
properties, and that distinctly with respect whereunto, Justice, that prime
Natural Virtue, is in particular Instances to be exercised. And page 84. It is
further declared, that in the administration of Justice, there may be great
difference in the constitution of penalties and execution of men. This it seems
is that which is aimed at; the Magistrate by his Laws determines, whteher
Titius have set his hedge upon Caius's ground; and whether Sempronius has
rightly conveyed his Land or House, to his Son, or Neighbor, whereby what is
just and lawful in it self, is accommodated to the use of political Society.
He determines also how Persons guilty of death shall be executed, and by whom,
and in what manner; whence it must needs follow that he has power to assign
new particulars of the Divine Law, to declare new bounds, or hedges, of right
and wrong, which the Law of God neither does, nor can limit, or has power over
the Consciences of men with respect to Moral Virtues; which was to be
demonstrated. Let us lay aside these swelling expressions, and we shall find
that all that can be ascribed unto the Civil Magistrate in this matter, is no
more, than to preserve Property and Peace, by that Rule and power over the
outward Actions of men, which is necessary thereunto.

Having made some enquiry into the terms of Moral Virtue and the Magistrates
power, it remains only that we consider what respect this case has unto the
Consciences of men, with reference unto them. And I desire to know whether all
mankind, be not obliged in Conscience to the Observation of all Moral Virtue,
antecedently to the command or Authority of the Magistrate, who does only
inspect their observation of them as to the concerns of public peace and
tranquillity. Certainly if all Moral Virtue consists in living suitable to the
dictates of Reason, as we are told, and in a sense rightly, if the Rule of them
all and every one, which gives them their formal Nature, be the Law of our
Creation, which all mankind enter the World under an indispensable obligation
unto, it cannot be denied but that there is such an antecedent obligation on
the Consciences of Men, as that inquired after. But the things mentioned are
granted by our Author; nor can by any be denied, without offering the highest
outrage to Scripture, Reason, and the common consent of Mankind. Now if this
Obligation be thus on all Men, unto all Virtue as Virtue, and this absolutely
from the Authority of God over them and their Consciences, how comes an
inferior Authority to interpose it self between that of God and their
Consciences, so immediately to oblige them. It is granted that when the
Magistrate commands and requires the exercise of any Moral Duty, in a way
suited unto public good and tranquillity, he is to be obeyed for Conscience
sake; because he who is the Lord of Conscience does require Men to be obedient
unto him, whereon they are obliged in Conscience so to be. But if the things
required of them be in themselves Moral Duties, as they are such, their
Consciences are obliged to observe and exercise them, from the command of God,
and other obligation unto them as such, they neither have nor can have. But the
direction and command for the exercise of them, in these and those
circumstances, for the ends of public. Good whereunto they are directed,
belongs unto the Magistrate, who is to be obeyed. For as in things merely
Civil, and which have nothing originally of morality in them, but secondarily
only, as they tend to the preservation and welfare of humane Society, which is
a thing Morally good, the Magistrate is to be obeyed for Conscience sake, and
the things themselves as far as they partake of Morality, come directly under
the command of God which affects the Conscience; so in things that have an
inherent and inseparable Morality, and so respect God in the first place, when
they come to have a civil Sanction in reference to their exercise unto public
political Good, that Sanction is to be obeyed out of Conscience; but the
antecedent obligation that was upon the Conscience unto a due exercise of those
Duties, when made necessary by circumstances, is not superseded, nor any new
one added thereunto.

I know what is said, but I find not as yet what is proved from these things,
concerning the uncontroleable and absolute power of the supreme Magistrate,
over Religion and the consciences of men. Some things are added indeed here up
and down, about circumstances of Divine Worship, and the power of ordering them
by the Magistrate, which though there may be some different conceptions about,
yet they no way reach the cause under debate. But as they are expressed by our
Author, I know not of any one Writer in and of the Church of England, that
hitherto has so stated them, as they are by him. For he tells us page 85. That
all Rituals, Ceremonies, Postures and Manners of performing the outward
expressions of Devotion, that are not chargeable with countenancing Vice or
disgracing the Deity, are capable of being adopted into the Ministeries of
Divine Service, and are not exempted from being Subject to the determinations
of humane power. Whether they are so or no, the Magistrate I presume is to
judge; or all this flourish of words and concessions of power, vanish into
smoke. His command of them binds the Consciences of men to observe them,
according to the principle under consideration. Hence it must be absolutely in
the power of every supreme Magistrate to impose on the Christian Subjects, a
greater number of Ceremonious observances in the Worship of God, and those of
greater weight than ever were laid upon the Jews. For who knows not that under
the names of Rituals, Ceremonies, Postures, manners of Performing all Divine
Service, what a butrdensome heap of things are imposed in the Roman Church;
whereunto as far as I know a thousand more may be added, not chargeable in
themselves with either of the crimes, which alone are allowed to be put in, in
Bar or Plea against them. And whether this be the Liberty whereunto Jesus
Christ has vindicated his Disciples and Church, is left unto the judgment of
sober men. Outward Religious Worship we know is to be performed by natural
actions; these have their circumstances, and those oft-times because of the
public concernments of the exercise of Religion, of great importance. These
may be ordered by the power, and according to the Wisdom of those in
Authority. But that they should make so many things, as this assertion allows
them to make to belong unto, and to be Parts of the Worship of God, whereof not
one is enjoined or required by him, and the Consciences of men be thereby
obliged unto their observance; I do not believe, nor is it here at all proved.

To close this Discourse about the power of obliging the consciences of men; I
think our Author grants that Conscience is immediately obliged to the
Observation of all things that are Good in themselves, from the Law of our
Creation. Such things as either the nature of God, or our own require from us,
our Consciences surely are obliged immediately by the Authority of God to
observe. Nor can we have any dispensation for the nonperformance of our Duty,
from the interposition of the commands and Authority of any of the sons of Men.
For this would be openly and directly to set up men against God, and to advance
them or their Authority above him or his. Things evidently deduced, and
necessarily following the first Principles and Dictates of Nature, are of the
same kind with themselves, and have the Authority of God no less enstamped on
them than the other; and in respect unto them, Conscience cannot by Virtue of
inferior commands, plead an exemption. Things of mere Revelation do remain;
and concerning them I desire to know, whether we are not bound to observe and
do, whatever God in his revealed Will commands us to observe and do, and to
abstain from whatever he forbids, and this indispensably? If this be denied I
will prove it with the same Arguments whereby I can prove that there is a God,
and that we are his Creatures made to serve him; For the Reason of these things
is inseparable from the very Being of God. Let this be granted, and ascribe
what ye will, or please, or can, to the Supreme Magistrate, and you shall not
from me have the least contradiction.

A Survey of the Third Chapter.
THe third Chapter entertains us with a Magnificent Grant of Liberty of
Conscience. The very first Paragraph asserts, a Liberty of Conscience in
Mankind over all their Actions whether Moral, or Strictly Religious. But lest
this should prove a Bedlam Concession that might mischief the whole design in
hand, it is delivered to the power of a Keeper, who yet upon examination is no
less wild and extravagant, than it self is esteemed absolutely to be. This is,
That they have it as far as concerns their judgments, but not their practice;
That is; They have Liberty of Conscience over their Actions, but not their
practices; or over their Practices, but not over their pratices. For upon Trial
their Actions and Practices will prove to be the same. And I do not as yet well
understand, what is this Liberty of Conscience over men's Actions, Is it to do,
or not to do, as their Consciences dictate to them? This is absolutely denied,
and opposed in the chap. it self. Is it to judge of their Actions as done,
whether they be good or evil? This Conscience is at no liberty in. For it is
determined to a judgment in that kind Naturally, and Necessarily, and must be
so whilst it has the Light of Nature, and Word of God to regard, So far as a
Rule is capable of giving a measure and Determination to things to be regulated
by it; That is; its moral actings, are morally determined. What then this
Liberty of Conscience over men's actions should be, where they can neither Act
freely according to their Consciences what they are to do, nor abstain from
what they are not to do, nor are at liberty to judge what they have done to be
good or bad, I cannot divine.

Let us search after an Explication of these things in the Paragraph it self,
whose Contents are represented in the words mentioned. Here we are told, that
this Liberty consists in men's thinking of things according to their own
persuasion, and therein asserting the freedom of their judgments. I would be
loath to think that this Liberty of men's Consciences over all their moral
Actions, should at first dash dwindle into a Liberty in Speculations; That men
may Think what they will, opine as they please, in, and about things that are
not to be brought into practice; but yet as far as I can perceive, I must think
so, or matters will come to a worse issue.

But these things must be a little farther examined, and that very briefly.
Here is mention of Liberty of Conscience; but what Conscience is, or what that
Liberty is, is not declared. For Conscience it is called sometimes the Mind,
sometimes the Understanding, sometimes Opinion, sometimes described by the
Liberty of Thinking, sometimes termed an Imperious Faculty, which things
without much discourse, and more words, than I can now afford to use, are not
reconcilable amongst themselves. Besides, Liberty is no proper^Affection of the
Mind, or Understanding. Though I acknowledge the mind, and its Actings to be
naturally free from outward Compulsion, or Coaction; yet it is capable of such
a Determination from the things proposed unto it, and the manner of their
proposal, as to make necessary the Elicitation of its Acts. It cannot but judge
that two and three make five. It is the will that is the proper seat of
Liberty; and what some suppose to be the ultimate determination of the
practical understanding, is indeed an Act of the Will. It is so if you speak of
Liberty naturally and morally, and not of state and condition, which are here
confounded. But suppose what you will to be Conscience, it is Moral Actions or
Duties that are here supposed to be the Object of its actings. Now what are, or
can be the thoughts, or actings of the Mind of Man about moral Actions, but
about their Virtue, or their Vice, their moral good or evil? nor is a
conclusion of what is a man's own duty in reference to the practice of them,
possibly to be separated from them. That then which is here asserted is, That a
man may think, judge, or conceive such or such a thing to be his Duty, and yet
have thereby no Obligation put upon him to perform it; for Conscience, we are
informed, has nothing to do beyond the inward thoughts of men's minds.

To state this matter a little more clearly; let us take Conscience in the most
usual Acceptance of it, and that which answers the experience of every man
that ever looks into the Affairs and Concerns within; and so it is, The
practical judgment that men make of themselves, and of their Actions, or what
they are to do, and what they are not to do, what they have done, or what they
have omitted, with reference unto the Judgment of God, at present declared in
their own hearts, and in his word, and to be fully executed at the last day.
For we speak of Conscience as it is amongst Christians, who acknowledge the
Word of God, and that for a double end; First, as the Rule of Conscience it
self; Secondly, as the Declaration of the Will of God, as to his Approbation,
or Rejecting of what we do, or omit. Suppose then, that a man make a judgment
in his Conscience, regulated by the Word of God, and with respect unto the
judgment of God concerning him, that such and such a thing is a duty, and
whose performance is required of him; I desire to know, whether any obligation
be upon him from thence to act accordingly? It is answered that the Territory
of Conscience is confined unto men's thoughts, judgments and persuasions, and
these are free, yea, no doubt; but for outward actions there is no remedy, but
they must be subject to the Cognizance of humane Laws, page 9. Who ever doubted
of it? He that would have men so have Liberty from outward Actions, as not to
have those Actions cognoscible by the civil power, as to the end of public
Tranquillity, but to have their whole station firmed absolutely in the world
upon the plea of Conscience, would no doubt lay a foundation for confusion in
all government. But what is this to the present enquiry, whether Conscience lay
an Obligation on men, as regulated by the word of God, and respecting Him, to
practice according to its dictates? It is true enough; that if any of its
practices do not please, or satisfy the Magistrate, their Authors must for
ought I know, stand to what will follow, or ensue on them to their prejudice;
but this frees them not, from the Obligation that is upon them in Conscience
unto what is their duty. This is that, which must be here proved, if any thing
be intended unto the purpose of this Author; namely that notwithstanding the
judgment of Conscience concerning any duty, by the interposition of the
Authority of the Magistrate to the contrary, there is no Obligation ensues for
the performance of that duty. This is the Answer that ought plainly to be
returned, and not a suggestion that outward Actions must fall under the
Cognizance of the Magistrate; which none ever doubted of, and which is nothing
to the present purpose; unless he would have them to fall under the Magistrates
Cognizance, as that his will should be the supreme Rule of them; which I think
he cannot prove. But what sense the Magistrate will have of the outward
Actions, wherein the discharge of man's duty does consist, is of another
consideration.

This therefore is the state of the present case applied unto Religious
Worship. Suppose the Magistrate command such things in Religion, as a man in
his Conscience guided by the Word, and respecting God, does look upon as
Unlawful, and such as are Evil, and Sin unto him, if he should perform them;
and forbid such things in the Worship of God, as he esteems himself obliged in
Conscience to observe as commands of Christ; If he may practice the things so
commanded, and omit the things so forbidden, I fear he will find himself within
doors continually at confession, saying with trouble enough; I have done those
things, which I ought not to have done, and I have left undone those things,
which I ought to have done, and there is no health in me; unless this Author
can prove that the Commands of God respect only the minds of men; but not their
outward actions which are left unto the Authority of the Magistrate alone. If
no more be here intended, but that whatever Conscience may require of any, it
will not secure them, but that when they come to act outwardly according to it,
the Civil Magistrate may, and will consider their Actions, and allow them, or
forbid them according to his own judgment, it were surely a madness to deny
it, as great, as to say the Sun shines not at noon day. If Conscience to God
be confined to Thoughts, and Opinions, and Speculations about the general
Notions, and Notices of things, about True and False, and unto a liberty of
judging, and determining upon them what they are, whether they are so or no
(...) the whole nature and being of Conscience, and that to the Reason, sense,
and experience of every man, is utterly overthrown. If Conscience be allowed to
make its judgment of what is good or evil, what is Duty or sin, and no
obligation be allowed to ensue from thence unto a suitable practice, a wide
door is opened unto Atheism, and thereby the subversion of all Religion and
Government in the world.

This therefore is the sum of what is asserted in this matter; Conscience
according to that Apprehension, which it has of the will of God about His
worship, (whereunto we confine our discourse) obliges men to act, or forbear
accordingly; if their Apprehensions are right and true, just and equal, what
the Scripture, the great Rule of Conscience does declare and require, I hope
none upon second thoughts will deny, but that such things are attended with a
right unto a Liberty to be practiced, whilst the Lord Jesus Christ is esteemed
the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and is thought to have power to command
the observance of his own Institutions. Suppose these Apprehensions to be such
as may in some things, be they more or less, be judged not to correspond
exactly with the great Rule of Conscience, yet supposing them also to contain
nothing inconsistent with, or of a disturbing nature to civil Society, and
public Tranquillity, nothing that gives countenance to any Vice, or Evil, or
is opposite to the principal Truths and main Duties of Religion, wherein the
minds of men in a Nation do coalesce, nor carry any politic entangle^ments
along with them; and add thereunto the peaceableness of the persons posses^
with those Apprehensions, and the impossibility they are under to divest
themselves of them, and I say Natural Right, Justice, Equity, Religion,
Conscience, God himself in all, and His Voice in the hearts of all unprejudiced
persons, do require that neither the persons themselves, on the account of
their Consciences, have violence offered unto them, nor their practices in
pursuit of their Apprehensions, be restrained by severe prohibitions and
penalties. But whereas the Magistrate is allowed to judge, and dispose of all
outward Actions in reference to public tranquillity, if any shall assert
Principles, as of Conscience, tending, or obliging unto the practice of Vice,
Immorality, or Sin, or to the disturbance of public society, such principles
being all notoriously judged by Scripture, Nature, the common consent of
Mankind, and inconsistent with the fundamental principles of Humane Polity, may
be in all instances of their discovery and practice, coerced, and restrained.
But plainly, as to the commands of Conscience, they are of the same extent with
the commands of God: If these respect only the inward man, or the mind,
Conscience does no more; if they respect outward Actions, Conscience does so
also.

From the Liberty of Conscience, a Proceed is made to Christian Liberty, which
is said to be a Duty, or privilege founded upon the (chimaerical) Liberty of
Conscience before granted. But these things stand not in the Relation imagined;
Liberty of Conscience is of natural Right, Christian Liberty is a
Gospel-priviledge, though both may be pleaded in bar of unwarrantable
Impositions on Conscience. But these things are so described by our Author, as
to be confounded. For the Christian Liberty described in this Paragraph, is
either restrained to matters of pure Speculation, wherein the mind of man is
left entirely free to judge of the Truth, and falsehood of things; or as it
regards things that fall under Laws and Impositions, wherein men are left
entirely free to judge of them, as they are objects of mere Opinion. Now how
this differs from the Liberty of Conscience granted before, I know not. And
that there is some mistake in this description of Christian Liberty, need no
other Consideration to evince but this; namely that Christian Liberty, as our
Author tells us, is a Privilege, but this is not so, being that which is
equally common unto all mankind. This Liberty is necessary unto Humane Nature,
nor can it be divested of it, and so it is not a Privilege that includes a
specialty in it. Every man cannot but think what he thinks, and judge what he
judges, and that when he does so, whether he will or no; for every thing when
it is, and as it is, is necessary. In the use of what means they please, to
guide, direct, and determine their thoughts, their Liberty does consist; This
is equal in all, and natural unto all. Now this inward freedom of our
Judgments is, it seems, our Christian Liberty, consistent with any impositions
upon men in the exercise of the Worship of God, with an Obligation on
Conscience, unto their use and practice; A Liberty indeed of no value, but a
mere Aggravation of bondage; And these things are further discoursed, Sect. 3.
page 95. wherein we are told, That this prerogative of our Christian Liberty,
is not so much any new favor granted in the Gospel, as the Restoration of the
mind of man to its natural privilege, by exempting us from the yoke of the
Ceremonial Lam, whereby things in themselves indifferent were tied upon the
Conscience with as indispensable an obligation, as the Rule of Essential
Goodness, and Equitys during the whole period of Mosaic Dispensation; which
being corrected by the Gospel, those indifferent things, that have been made
necessary by a Divine positive command, returned to their own nature to be
used, or omitted, only as occasion should direct.

It is true, that a good part of our Christian Liberty, consists in our
deliverance from the yoke of Mosaical Institutions; but that this is not so
much a new favor granted in the Gospel, as the Restoration of the mind of man
to its natural privilege, is an insertion that runs parallel with many others
in this discourse. This Privilege, as all others of the Gospel are, is
spiritual, and its outward concerns, and exercise, are of no value, where the
mind is not spiritually made free by Christ. And it is uncertain what is meant
by the Restoration of the mind to its natural privilege; If the privilege of
the mind in its condition of natural purity is intended, as it was before the
entrance of sin, it is false; If any privilege, the mind of man in its corrupt
depraved condition is capable of, be designed, it is no less untrue. In things
of this nature, the mind in that condition is in bondage, and not capable of
any Liberty; for it is a thing ridiculous, to confound the mere natural Liberty
of our wills, which is an affection inseparable from that faculty, with a
moral, or spiritual Liberty of mind, relating unto God and his Worship. But
this whole Paragraph runs upon no small mistake; namely that the yoke of
Mosaical Institutions, consisted in their Imposition on the minds, and
judgments of men, with an opinion of the antecedent necessity of them. For
although the words recited, things in themselves indifferent, were tied upon
the Conscience with as indispensable an obligation as the rules of essential
goodness and equity, may be restrained to their use, exercise, and observation;
yet the Conclusion of it, that whatever our Superiors impose upon us, whether
in matters of Religious Worship, or any other Duties of morality, there neither
is, nor can be any intrenchment upon our Christian Liberty, provided it be not
imposed with an Opinion of Antecedent necessity of the thing it self, with the
whole scope of the Argument insisted on, makes it evident to be the sense
intended. But this is wide enough from the mark; the Jews were never obliged,
to judge the whole Systeme of their Legal institutions, to be any way
necessary, antecedent unto their Institution and Appointment; nor were they
obliged to judge their intrincsik nature changed by their institution, only
they knew they were obliged to their constant, and indispensable practice, as
parts of the Worship of God, instituted and commanded by him, who has the
supreme Authority over their Souls and Consciences. There was indeed a bondage
frame of Spirit upon them in all things, especially in their whole Worship of
God, as the Apostle Paul several times declares. But this is a thing of another
Nature, though our delivery from it, be also a part of Christian Liberty. This
was no part of their inward, no more than their outward bondage, that they
should think, believe, judge or esteem the things themselves enjoined them, to
be absolutely of any other nature, than they were; Had they been obliged unto
any such judgment of things, they had been obliged to deceive themselves, or
to be deceived; But by the absolute Authority of God, they were indispensibly
bound in Conscience to the actual observance, and continual use of such a
number of Ceremonies, Carnal Ordinances, and outward Observances, as being
things in themselves low, and mean, called by the Apostle Beggarly Elements,
and enjoined with so great strictness, and under so severe penalties, many of
them, of Excision, or Extermination from among the people, as became an
intolerable, and insupportable yoke unto them. Neither does the Apostle Peter
dispute about a judgment of their nature, but the necessity of their
Observation, when he calls them a yoke, which neither they, nor their Fathers
were able to bear, Acts 15. 10. And when St. Paul gives a charge to Believers,
to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made them fres, it is with
respect unto the outward Observation of Mosaical Rites, as by him instituted,
and not as to any inward judgment of their minds concerning their Nature,
antecedent unto that institution. His whole disputation on that subject,
respects only men's practice, with regard unto an Authoritative Obligation
thereunto, which he pleaded to be now expired, and removed. And if this
Christian Liberty, which he built and proceeded upon, be of force to free, not
our minds from the judgment that they had before of things in themselves, but
our persons from the necessary practice, and observance of things instituted of
God, however antecedently indifferent in themselves; I think it is, at least,
of equal efficacy, to exempt us from the necessary practice of things imposed
on us in the Worship of God, by men. For, setting aside the Inequality of the
Imposing Authority, which casts the Advantage on the other side, (for these
Legal Institutions were imposed on the Church by God himself, those now
intended are such matters, as our Superiors of themselves impose on us in
Religious Worship) the case is absolutely the same; for as God did not give the
Law of Commandment's contained in Ordinances unto the Jews, from the Goodness
of things required therein, antecedent to His Command, which should make them
necessary to be practiced by them for their Good; but did it of His own
Sovereign Arbitrary Will and Pleasure; so He obliged not the people themselves
unto any other judgment of them, but that they were necessarily to be
observed; and setting aside the consideration of his Command, they were things
in their own nature altogether indifferent; so is it in the present case; It is
pleaded that there is no Imposition on the Minds, Consciences, or judgments of
men, to think or judge otherwise of what is imposed on them, than as their
nature is, and does require; only they are obliged unto their Usage,
Observance, and Practice; which is to put us into a thousand times worse
condition than the Jews, if Instances of them should be multiplied, as they may
lawfully (...) every year; seeing it much more quiet^ the mind; to be able to
resolve its thought^ immediately into the Authority of Go^ under its Yoke, than
into that of man. I^ therefore we are freed from the one by our Christian
Liberty, we are so much more from the other; so, as that being made free by
Christ, we should not be the servants of men, in things belonging to his
Service and Worship.

From this discovery here made of the nature of Christian Liberty, our Author
makes some deductions, p. 98, 99. concerning the nature of Religious Worship,
wherein he tells us, that the whole substance of Religious Worship is
transacted within the mind of man, and dwells in the heart, and thoughts, the
soul being its proper Seat, and Temple, where men may Worship their God as they
please, without offending their Prince; and that External Worship is no part of
Religion it self. I wish he had more clearly, and distinctly expressed his mind
in this matter; for his Assertions, in the sense the words seem to bear, are
prodigiously false, and such as will open a door to Atheism with all Villainy
and Confusion in the World. For who would not think this to be his intention;
Let men keep their minds and inward thoughts, and apprehensious right for God,
and then they may practice outwardly in Religion what they please; one thing
one day, another another; be Papists and Protestants, Arians and Homousians;
yea Mahometans and Christians; any thing, every thing, after the manner of the
Country, and Laws of the Prince, where they are, and live; the Rule that
Ecebolius walked by of old? I think there is no man, that owns the Scripture,
but will confess that this is, at least, if not a direct, yet an interpretative
rejection of the whole Authority of God. And may not this Rule be quickly
extended unto Oaths themselves, the bonds and Ligaments of humane Society? For
whereas in their own formal nature they belong to the Worship of God, why may
not men pretend to keep up their Reverence unto God, in the internal part of
them, or their esteem of Him in their Invocation of His Name, but as to the
outward part, accommodate it unto what by their Interest is required of them;
so swearing with their Tongues, but keeping their Mind at Liberty? If the
Principles laid down be capable of any other more tolerable sense, and such as
may be exclusive of these Inferences, I shall gladly admit it; at present what
is here deduced from them, seems to be evidently included in them.

It is true indeed, that Natural, Moral, or Internal Worship, consisting in
Faith, Love, Fear, Thankfulness, Submission, Dependence, and the like, has its
constant Seat, and Residence in the Souls, and Minds of men; but that the ways
whereby these Principles of it are to be outwardly exercised, and expressed, by
Gods Command and Appointment, are not also indispensably necessary unto us, and
parts of his Worship, is utterly false. That which principally in the
Scripture, comes under the notion of the Worship of God, is the due observance
of his outward Institutions; which Divines have upon unquestionable grounds,
contended to be commanded and appointed in general in the second Commandment of
the Decalogue, whence all particular Institutions in the several seasons of the
Church, are educed, and resolved into the Authority of God therein expressed.
And that account which we have here given us of outward Worship, namely, that
it is no part of Religion it self, but only an Instrument to express the inward
Veneration of the mind, by some outward action or posture of the body, as it is
very difficultly to be accommodated unto the sacrifices of old, or the present
Sacraments of the Church, which were, and are parts of outward Worship, and, as
I take it, of Religion; so the being an instrument unto the purpose mentioned,
does not exclude any thing from being also a part of Religion, and Worship it
self, if it be commanded by God to be performed in His Service, unto His Glory.
It is pretended that all Outward Worship is only an exterior signification of
Honor; but yet all the parts of it in their performance, are Acts of Obedience
unto God, and are the proper Actings of Faith, Love, and Submission of Soul
unto God, which if they are not His Worship, and parts of Religion, I know not
what may be so esteemed. Let then Outward Worship, stand In what Relation it
will to Inward Spiritual Honor, where God requires it, and commands it, it is
no less necessary and in dispensably to be performed, than any part of Inward
Worship it self, and is a no less important duty of Religion. For any thing
comes to be a part of Religious Worship outwardly to be performed, not from its
own nature, but from its respect unto the command of God; and the End whereunto
it is by him designed. So the Apostle tells us that with the heart man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made un^
Salvation, Romans 10. Confession is but the exterior signification of the Faith,
that is i^ our hearts; but yet it is no less necessary to Salvation, than Faith
it self is to Righteousness. And those, who regulate their Obedience, and
Religious Worship by the Commands of God, knowing that which way ever they are
signified, by inbred Light, or superadded Revelation, it is they which give
their Obedience its formal nature, making it Religious, will not allow that
place and use of the outward Worship required by God Himself, which should
exclude it from being Religious, or a part of their Religion.

But upon the whole matter our Author affirms, that in all Ages of the World,
God has left the Management of His Outward Worship unto the Discretion of Men,
unless when to determine some particulars has been useful to some other
purpose, page 100. The management of Outward Worship, may signify no more but
the due performance of it; and so I acknowledge that though it be not left unto
men's discretion to observe, or not observe it, yet it is too their Duty and
Obedience, which are their Discretion and their Wisdom. But the management here
understood, is opposed to Gods own determination of particular Forms, that is,
His especial Institutions; and hereof I shall make bold to say, that it was
never in any Age so left to the Discretion of men. To prove this Assertion,
Sacrifices are singled out as an Instance; It is known, and granted, that these
were the most solemn part of the Outward Worship of God for many Ages; and that
there was a general consent of Mankind unto the use of them; so that however
the greatest part of the World apostatized from the true, only, and proper
object of all Religious Worship, Worship, yet they retained this Mode and
Medium of it. These Sacrifices we are told, p. 101. did not owe their Original
unto any Divine Institution, but were made choice of by good men as a fit way
of imitating the grateful resentments of their minds. The Argument alone, as
far as I can find, fixed on to firm this Assertion is, that those who teach the
contrary, and say that this Mode of Worship was commanded, do say so without
proof, or evidence. Our Author, for the most part, sets off his Assertions at
no less rate than as such, without whose admittance, all Order, and Government,
and almost every thing that is Good amongst mankind, would be ruined and
destroyed. But he has the unhappiness to found them ordinarily not only on
Principles, and O^^nions dubious, and uncertain; but on su^^ Paradoxes, as have
been by sober and lear^^ed men generally decried. Such is this (...) the
Original of Sacrifices here insisted o^ The Divines of the Church of Rome, do
g^^nerally contend that Religion and Sacrific^ are so related, that the one
cannot be with^out the other. Hence they teach Go^ would have required
Sacri^ices in the St^ of Innocence, had mankind continued therein. And though
the Instance be ill laid and not proved, yet the general Rule applied unto the
Religion of Sinners, is no^ easily to be evicted. For as in Christian Religion
we have a Sacrifice that (...), as to its Efficacy, always newly offered, and
living; so before the Personal Offering of it in the body of Chirst, there was
no season or Age, without a due Representation of it in Sacrifices Typical, and
of Mystical signification. And although there be no express mention in the
Scripture of their Institution, (for these are ancient things) yet there is as
good warrant for it, as for Offering, and burning Incense only with Sacred fire
taken from the Altar, which was of an Heavenly traduction; for a neglect
whereof the Priests were consumed with fire from before the Lord; that is,
though an express command be not recorded for their Institution and
Observation, yet enough may be collected from the Scripture that they were of a
Divine Extract, and Original. And if they were arbitrary Inventions of some
men, I desire to have a rational account given me of their Catholicism in the
World; and one Instance more of any thing not Natural, or Divine, that ever
prevailed to such an absolute universal acceptance amongst Mankind. It is not
so safe, I suppose, to assign an arbitrary Original, unto any thing that has
obtained an universal Consent and Suffrage; lest men be thought to set their
own houses on fire, on purpose to consume their Neighbors.

Besides, no tolerable color can be given to the Assertion, that they were the
invention of good men. The first notice we have of them, is, in those of Cain
and Abel, whereof one was a bad man, and of the Evil One, and yet must be
looked on as the principal Inventor of Sacrifices, if this fiction be allowed.
Some of the Ancients indeed thought, that Adam Sacrificed the Beasts to God,
whose Skins his first Garments were made of; and if so, he was very pregnant
and sudden in his invention, if he had no direction from God. But more than all
this, bloody Sacrifices were Types of Christ from the Foundation of the World;
and Socinus himself, who, and his followers are the principal Assertors of this
paradox, grants that Christ is called the Lamb of God, with respect unto the
Sacrifices of old, even before the Law; As He is termed A Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World, not only with respect unto the Efficacy of his
Sacrifice but to the Typical Representation of it. And he that shall deny, that
the Patriarchs in their Sacrifices had respect unto the promised Seed, will
endeavor the shaking of a Pillar of the Churches Creed. Now I desire to know
how men, by their own Invention, or Authority, could assign such an end unto
their Sacrifices, if they were not of Divine Prescription, if not designed of
God thereunto.

Again; the Apostle tells us, Abel offered his Sacrifice by Faith, Heb. 11. 4.
And Faith has respect unto the Testimony or God, revealing, commanding, and
promising to accept our duty. Wherever any thing is done in Faith, there an
Assent is included to this, that God is True, Joh. 3. 33. And what it does, is
thereby distinguished from Will Worship, that is resolved into the
Commandments, and Doctrines of men, which whosoever rest on, make void the
Commandment of God, Matthew. 15. 3, 6. And the Faith of Abel as to its general
Nature was the Evidence of things not seen, and the Substance of things hoped
for, Heb. 11. 1. which in this matter it could not be, if it had neither Divine
Command, nor Promise to rest upon. It is evident therefore that Sacrifices were
of a divine Original; and the Instance in them to prove, that the Outward
Worship of God has in all Ages been left unto the Prudence, and Management of
men, is feeble, and such as will give no countenance unto what it is produced
in the Justification of; And herewith the whole Discourse of our Author on this
Subject falls to the ground, where I shall at present let it lie, though it
might in sundry Particulars be easily crumbled into useless Asseverations, and
some express Contradictions.

In the close of this Chapter, an Application is made, of what has been before
argued, or rather dictated, unto a particular Controversy about significant
Ceremonies. I am not willing to engage in any Contests of that Nature; seeing,
to the due handling of them, a greater length of Discourse would be necessary,
than I think meet at present to draw forth this Survey unto. Only seeing a very
few words, may serve to manifest the looseness of what is here Discoursed, to
that purpose, I shall venture on the Patience of the Reader wit^ an addition of
them. We have therefore in the first place, a Reflection on the prodigious
Impertinency of the clamor against the Institution of significant Ceremonies,
when i^ is the only use of Ceremonies, as all other outward Expressions of
Religion, to be Significan^. I do somewhat admire at the Temper of this Author,
who cannot express his disser^^ from others, in Controverted Points of the
Meanest and Lowest concernment, but with crying out Prodigies, Clamours,
Impertinencies, and the like Expressions of Astonishment in himself, and
Contempt of others. He might reserve some of these great Words for more
important occasions. But yet I join with him thus fa^ in what he pleads; that
Ceremonies instituted in the Worship of God, that art not significant, are
things very insignificant; and such as deserve not the least contention about
them. He truly also in the next words tells us, that all outward Worship is a
sign of inward Honor. It is so; both in Civil things, and Sacred. All our
Questionis, How these instituted Ceremonies come to be significant, and what it
is they signify, and whether it be lawful to assign a significancy to them in
the Worship of God, when indeed they have none, of the kind intended? To free
us from any danger herein he informs us, p. 108. That all the Magistrates power
of instituting significant Ceremonies, amounts to no more, than a power of
determining what shall, or what shall not, be visible signs of honor, and this
can be no Usurpation upon the Consciences of men. This is new Language, and
such as we have not formerly been used unto in the Church of England; namely,
That of the Magistrates Instituting Significant Ceremonies; It was of old, the
Churches appointing Ceremonies for decency and Order. But all the Terms of that
Assertion are now metamorphosed; The Church into the Magistrates; Appointing,
which respects exercise, into Institution, which respects the nature of the
thing, and has a singular use and sense in this matter (or let them pass for
the same) and Order and decency, into Ceremonies significant. These things were
indeed employed before, but not so fully and plainly expressed or avowed. But
the honor here intended in this matter, is the honor, which is given to God
in his Worship. This is the honor of Faith, Love, Fear, Obedience spiritual,
and holy, in Jesus Christ. To say that the Magistrate has power to institute
visible signs of this honor, to be observed in the outward Worship of God, is
upon the matter to say that he has power to institute new Sacraments; for so
such things would be. And to say what neither is, nor can be proved, nor is
here either Logically, or any way regularly, attempted so to be.

The Compiring of the Ceremonies and their signification, with words and their
signification, will not relieve our Author in this matter. Some things are
naturally significant of one another; so Effects are of Causes; so is Smoke of
Fire; and such were the Signs of the Weather mentioned by our Savior, Matthew.
16. 2, 3. Thus I suppose Ceremonies are not significant; they do not Naturally
signify the things whereunto they are applied; for if they did, there would be
no need of their institution. And they are here said to be instituted by the
Magistrate. Again; there are Customary Signs, some it may be Catholic, many
Topical, that have prevailed by Custom, and Usage, to signify such things, as
they have no absolute Natural Coherence with, or Relation unto; such are
putting off the Hat in sign of Reverence, with others innumerable. And both
these sorts of Signs, may have some use about the Service, and Worship of God,
as might be manifested in Instances. But the Signs we enquire after, are
voluntary, arbitrary and instituted as our Author confesses; for we do not
treat of appointing some Ceremonies for order and decency, which our Canons
take notice of, but of instituting Ceremonies for Signification, such as
neither naturally, nor merely by Custom and Usage, come to be significant, but
only by Virtue of their Institution. Now concerning these one Rule may be
observed; namely, that they cannot be of one kind, and signify things of
another, by virtue of any command, and consent of men, unless they have an
absolute Authority both over the sign, and thing signified, and can change
their Natures, or Create a new Relation between them. To take therefore things
Natural, that are Outward, and Visible, and appoint them to be Signs not
Natural, nor Civil, nor Customary, but Mystical of things Spiritual,
Supernatural, Inward, and Invisible, and, as such, to have them observed in the
Church, or Worship of God, is a thing which is not as yet proved to be Lawful;
signify thus naturally they never can, seeing there is no natural Relation
between them; Civilly, or by Consent they do not so; for they are things
Sacred, which they are supposed to signify; and are so far from signifying by
consent, that those, who plead for their Signification, do not agree wherein it
does consist. They must therefore signify so Mystically, and Spiritually; and
Signa, cum ad res Divinas pertinent, sunt Sacramenta, says Austin; these
things are Sacraments; And when men can give Mystical, and Spiritual Efficacy
to any of their own Institutions; when they can make a Relation between such
Signs, and the things signified by them; when they can make that teaching, and
instructing in spiritual things, and the Worship of God, which he has not made
so, nor appointed, blessed, or consecrated to that end; when they can bind Gods
Promises of Assistance, and Acceptance to their own Inventions; when they can
advance what they will into the same rank, and Series of things in the Worship
of God, with the Sacrifices of old, or other parts of instituted Worship
introduced into the Church by Gods Command, and attended with his promise of
gracious Acceptance, then and not before may they institute the significant
Ceremonies here contended for. Words, it is true, are Signs of things; and
those of a mixed Nature; partly Natural, partly by Consent. But they are not of
one kind, and signi^ie things of another; for, say the Schoolmen, where words
are Signs of Sacred things, they are Signs of them as Things, but not as Sacred.

A Survey of the Fourth Chapter.
IN the fourth Chapter we have no concern; The Hypothesis whose Confutation he
has undertaken, as it is in it self false, so it is rather suited to promote
what he aims at, than what he opposes; And the principles which himself
proceeds on, do seem to some to border on, if not to be borrowed from his,
and those which are here confuted. And thence it is that the foundations, which
he lays down in the entrance of this discourse, are as destructive of his own
pretensions, as of those, against which they are by himself improved. For it is
granted, and asserted by him, that there are Actions, and Duties in, and about
which, the Consciences of men are not to be obliged by humane Authority, but
have an antecedent Obligation on them from the Authority of God himself; So
that disobedience unto the contrary commands of humane Authority is no sin, but
an indispensible Duty; And although he seems at first to restrain things of
this nature, unto things natural, and of an essential Rectitude; that is, the
prime dictates of the Law of Nature; yet he expressly extends it i^ Instances,
unto the belief of the truth of the Gospel, which is a matter of mere and purr
Revelation: And hereon he adds, The formal, and adequate reason of this
exemption of Conscience from humane Authority, and i^ obligation unto duty,
before its consideration without it, and against it, which is, not because
Subjects are in any thing free from the Authority of the Supreme power on
earth, but because they are Subject to a Superior i^ Heaven, and they are then
only excused from the Duty of obedience to their Sovereign, when they cannot
give it without rebellion against God; so that it is not originally any right
of their own, that exempts them from a Subjection to the Sovereign power in all
things, but it is purely Gods right of governing his own Creatures, that
Magistrates then invade, when they make Edicts to violate, or control His Laws.

It is about Religion, and the Worship of God that we are discoursing; Now in
these things no man ever thought that it was originally a right of Subjects, as
Subjects, abstracting from the Consideration of the Authority of God, that
should exempt them from a subjection to the Sovereign Power. For though some of
the Ancients discourse at large, that it is of natural Right and Equity, that
every one should Worship God as he would himself, yet they founded this Equity
in the nature of God, and the Authority of his Commands. This Exemption then
arises merely, as our Author observes, because they are subject to a Superior
Power in Heaven, which excuses them from the Duty of Obedience to their
Superiors on Earth, when they cannot give it without Rebellion against God;
whence it undeniably follows that that Supreme Power in Heaven has exempted
these things from all inferior Powers on earth. Extend this now unto all
things wherein men have, and ought to have a regard unto that Superior Power
in Heaven, as it must be extended, or the whole is ridiculous, (for that
heavenly Supremacy is made the formal reason of the exemption here granted,)
and all that our Author has been so earnestly contending for in the preceding
Chapters, falls to the ground. For no man pleads exemption from subjection
unto, yea from giving active obedience unto the Authority, and Commands of the
Magistrate, even in things Religious, but merely on the account of his
subjection to the Authority of God Heaven; and, where this is so, he is set^
Liberty by our Author from all contra^ commands of men. This is Bellarmine's
(...) tissimum est, which, as King James obse^ved, overthrows all, that he had
contened for in his five Books de Justificatione.

A Survey of the Fifth Chapter.
THe fifth Chapter is at such variance with it self, and what is elsewhere
dictated in the Treatise, that it would require no small labor, to make any
tolerable composition of things between them. This I shall not engage in, as
not being of my present concernment. What seems to tend unto the carrying on of
the design of the whole, may be called unto some account. In the beginning of
it, he tells us that a belief of the indifferency or rather imposture of all
Religions; is made the most effectual, not to say the most fashionable argument
for liberty of Conscience. For my part, I never read, I never heard of this
pretense or Argument, to be used to that purpose. It wants no such defense. Nay
the principle it self, seems to me, to be suited directly to oppose and
overthrow it. For if there be no such thing in reality as Religion in the
World, it is certainly a very foolish thing, to have differences perpetuated
amongst men upon the account of Conscience, which without a supposition of
Religion, is nothing but a vain and empty name: But hence our Author takes
occasion, to discourse of the use of Religion and Conscience in the Government
of Affairs in the World; and proves in many words, that Conscience unto God,
with a regard to future eternal rewards or punishments, is the great ligament
of humane Society, the security of Government, the strongest bond of Laws, and
only support of Rule, without which every man would first and last, be guided
by mere self Interest, which would reduce all power and Authority to mere force
and violence. To this purpose does he discourse at large in one section of this
Chapter; And in another, with no less earnestness and Elegancy of Words, and
Repetition of various Expressions of the same signification, that the use and
exercise of conscience, will certainly overthrow all Government, and fill the
world with confusion. In like manner, whereas we have been hither^ thoroughly
instructed, as I thought, tha^ men may think what they will in the matters of
Religion, and be of what perswai^^ they please, no man can or ought to control^
them therein; here we are told, that (...) power, nor policy, can keep men
peaceable, until some persuasions are rooted out of their minds by severity of
Laws and Penalties, pag^ 145. And whereas heretofore, we were informed, that
men might believe what the^ would, Princes were concerned only i^ their outward
practice; now are we assured, that above all things, it concerns Princes to
look to the Doctrines and Articles of men^ belief, p. 147. But these things, as
was before intimated, are not of our concern.

Nor can I find much of that Importance^ in the third and fourth paragraphs of
this Declamatory Invective. It is evident whom he regards and reflects upon,
and with what false, unmanly, unchristian revilings, he endeavors to traduce
them. He would have the world believe, that there is a Generation of men, whose
principles of Religion teach them to be proud, peevish, malicious, spightful,
envious, turbulent, boisterous, seditious, and what ever is evil in the world;
when others are all for candor, moderation and ingenuity; amongst whom no
doubt he reckons himself for one, and gives in this Discourse in evidence
thereof. But what are these Doctrines and Articles of men's belief, which
dispose them inevitably to all the villainies that our Author could find names
for. A catalogue of them he gives us, page 147, 148. Says he, what if they
believe that Princes are but the Executioners of the decrces of the presbitery;
and that in case of disobedience to their Spiritual Governors, they may be
excommunicated, and by consequence deposed? What if they believe that dominion
is founded in Grace, and therefore all wicked Kings forfeit their Crowns, and
that it is in the power of the People of God to bestow them where they please?
And what if others believe that to pursue their successes in Villainy and
Rebellion is to follow Providence? All the World knows what it is, that has
given him the Advantage of providing a covering, for these monstrous fictions;
and an account thereof has been given elsewhere. And what now if those
intended do not believe these things, nor any one of them? What if they do
openly disavow every one of them, as for ought I ever heard or know they do,
and as I do my self? What if some of them, are ridiculously framed into
Articles of faith, from the supposed practices of some individual Persons? And
what if men be of never so vile^ opinions about the pursuit of their successes,
so they have none to countenance them i^ any unlawful Enterprises, which I
think must go before successes? What if only the Papists be concerned in these
Articles of faith; and they only in one of them about the Excommunication and
Deposition of Princes, and that only some of them; and not one of those have
any concern in them, whom he intends to reproach? I say if these things are so,
we need look no farther for the principles of that Religion, which has
furnished him with all this candor, moderation and ingenuity, and has wrought
him to such a quiet and peaceable temper, by teaching him that Humility,
Charity and Meekness, which here bewray themselves

Let it be granted, as it must and ought to be, that all Principles of the
minds of men, pretended to be from Apprehensions of Religion, that are in
themselves inconsistent with any Lawful Government, in any place what ever,
ought to be coerced, and restrained. For our Lord Jesus Christ, sending his
Gospel to be preached and published in all Nations and Kingdoms of the World,
then, and at all times, under various sorts of Governments, all for the same
end of public Tranquillity and Prosperity, did propose nothing in it, but what
a Submission and Obedience unto, might be consistent with the Government it
self, of what sort soever it were. He came, as they used to sing of old, to
give men an Heavenly Kingdom, and not to deprive them, or take from them their
earthly temporal dominions. There is therefore nothing more certain, than that
there is no principle of the Religion taught by Jesus Christ, which either in
it self, or in the practice of it, is inconsistent with any Righteous
Government on the Earth. And if any opinions can truly and really be manifested
so to be, I will be no Advocate for them, nor their Abettors. But such as
these, our Author shall never be able justly to affix on them whom he opposes;
nor the least umbrage of them; if he do but allow the Gospel, and the power of
Christ to institute those Spiritual Ordinances, and requiring their
Administration, which do not, which cannot extend unto any thing wherein a
Magistrate as such, has the least concernment in point of prejudice. For if on
a false, or undue practice of them, any thing should be done, that is not
purely spiritual, or that being done, should be esteemed to operate upon any of
outward Concerns, Relations, Interest^ Occasions of men, they may be restrain
by the power of him who presides o^ public good.

But besides these pretenses, our A^thor I know not how, charge also the
^^mours, inclinations and passions of some me^ as inconsistent with Government,
and a^wayes disposing men to Phanaticisme and ^^dition; and on occasion thereof
falls out to an excess of intemperance in reproa^^ing them whom he opposet^,
such as (...) have not above once or twice before (...) with the like. And in
particular he ra^ about that Zeal, as he calls it, for the G^^ry of God, which
has turned whole Nation into Shambles, filled the World with Bute^ries and
Massacres, and fleshed it self wi^^ slaughters of miriads of mankind. No^
omitting all other Controversies, I sha^^ undertake to maintain this against
any m^^ in the World, that the effects here so tr^gically expressed, have been
produced (...) the Leal our Author pleads for, in co^pelling all unto the same
sentiments and pr^^ctices in Religion, incomparably abo^ what has ensued upon
any other pretenc^ in or about Religion, what ever. This neel require, I shall
evince with such In^stances, from the entering of Christianity into the World to
this very day, as will admit of no Competition with all those together, which
on any account or pretense have produced the like effects. This it was, and is,
that has soaked the Earth with blood, depopulated Nations, ruined Families,
Countries, Kingdoms, and at length made innumerable Christians rejoice in the
yoke of Turkish Tyranny, to free themselves from their perpetual persecutions,
on the account of their dissent from the Worship publicly established in the
places of their Nativity. And as for the Humors, Inclinations, and passions of
men, when our Author will give such Rules and directions, as whereby the
Magistrate may know how to make a true and legal judgment, of who are fit on
their account, to live in his Territories, and who are not, I suppose there
will not be any contest about them; until then, we may leave them as here
displayed and set up by our Author, for every one to cast a cudgel at them,
that has a mind thereunto.

For to what purpose is it to consider the frequent Occasions he takes, to
diseourse about the ill tempers and humors of men, or of enveighing against
them for being morose, and ungentile, unsociable, peevish, censorious, with
many other terms of reproach, that do not at present occur to my memory, nor
are doubtless worth the searching after. Suppose he has the Advantage of a
better natural temper, have more sedate affections, a more complyant humor, be
more remote from giving or receiving provocations, and have learned the ways
of Courtly deportment, only was pleased to vail them all and every one, in the
writing of this Discourse; is it meet that they should be persecuted and
destroyed, be esteemed Seditious and I know not what, because they are of a
natural temper not so disposed to Affability and sweetness of Conversation as
some others are? For my part, I dislike the humor and temper of mind
characterised by our Author, it may be as much as he; I am sure, I think, as
much as I ought. But to make it a matter of such huge importance, as solemnly
to introduce it into a Discourse about Religion, and public Tranquillity, will
not it may be, on second thoughts, be esteemed over considerately done. And it
is not unlikely, but that our Author seems of as untoward a Composition, and
peevish an Humor to them whom he reflects upon, as they do to him, and that
they satisfy themselves as much in their disposition and deportment, as he
does himself in his.

Nimirum idem omnes fallimur, neque est quisquam
Quem non in aliqua re, videre Suffenum
Possis --
Sect. 5. page 155, 156. He inveighs against the Events that attend the
permission of different Sects of Religion in a Commonwealth. And it is not
denied, but that some inconveniences may ensue thereon. But as himself has
well observed in another place, we do not in these things enquire what is
absolutely best, and what has no inconvenience attending it; but what is the
best which in our present condition we can attain unto; and what in that state
answers the Duty that God requires of us. Questionless, it were best that we
should be all of one mind in these things of God; and it is no doubt also our
Duty on all hands to endeavor so to be. But seeing de facto, this is not so,
nor is it in the power of men, when and how they will to depose those
persuasions of their minds, and dictates of their Consciences, from whence it
is not so, on the one part or the other; (although in some parts of our
differences, some may do so and will not, namely in things acknowledged to be
of no necessity antecedent to their imposition; and some would do so and
cannot,) It is now enquired, what is the best way to be steered in, for the
Accomplishment of the desired end of peace and Tranquillity for the future; and
maintaining love, quietness and mutual usefulness at present amongst men. Two
ways are proposed to this purpose; the one is to exercise mutual forbearance to
each other, whilst we are inevitably under the power of different persuasions
in these things, producing no practices that are either injurious unto private
men in their rights, or hurtful unto the State, as to public Peace;
endeavoring in the mean time, by the evidence of Truth, and a conversation
suited unto it, to win upon each other to a consent and Agreement in the things
wherein we differ. The other is, by Severe Laws, Penalties, outward force, as
Imprisonments, Mulcts, Fines, Banishments, or Capital punishments, to compel
all men out of hand, to an uniformity of practice, whatever their judgments be
to the contrary. Now as the state of things is amongst us, which of these ways
is most suitable to the Law of our Being and Creation, the best Principles of
the nature of man, and those which have the most evident Resemblance of Divine
Perfections, the Gospel, the Spirit and Letter of it, with the mind of its
Author our Lord Jesus Christ, which is most conducing to attain the end aimed
at, in ways of a natural and genuine compliance with the things themselves of
Religion, Conscience, and Divine Worship, is left unto the judgment of God,
and all good men.

In the mean time, if men will make Declamations upon their own surmises,
jealousies, and suspicions of things which are either so indeed, that is really
surmized, or pretended to be so for some private interests or advantages of
their own, which no man can answer or remove; if they may fancy at their
pleasure Ghosts, Goblins, Fiends, walking Sprights, Seditions, Drums, Trumpets,
Armies, Bears, and Tigers; Every difference in Religion, be it never so small,
be the agreement amongst them that differ, never so great, be it the visible,
known, open interest of them that dissent from what is established, to live
quietly and peaceably, and to promote the good of the Commonwealth wherein they
live; do they profess that it is their duty, their Principle, their Faith, and
Doctrine, to obey constantly their Rulers and Governors in all things, not
contrary to the mind of God, and pretend no such commands of his, as should
interfere in the least with their power in order to public tranquillity; do
they offer all the security of their Adherence to such declared Principles, as
mankind is necessitated to be contented and satisfied with, in things of their
highest concernment; do they avow an especial sense of the Obligation that is
put upon them by their Rulers, when they are protected in peace; have they no
concernment in any such Political Societies, Combinations, Interests, as might
alone give countenance unto any such disturbance; all is one, every different
Opinion is Press-money, and every Sect is an Army, although they be all and
every one of them Protestants, of whom alone we do discourse. Other answer
therefore I shall not return unto this part of our Authors arguing, than what
he gave of old.

Ne admittam culpam, ego meo sum promus pectori.
Suspicio est in pectore alieno sita.
Nam nunc ego te si surripuisse suspicer,
Jovi coronam de capite e capitolio,
Quod in culmine astat summo, st non id feceris;
Atque id tamen mihi lubeat suspicarier;
Qui tu id prohibere me potes, ne suspicer.
Only, I may add, that sundry of the Instances our Author makes use of, are
false, and unduly alleged. For what is here charged on differences in and
about Religion, in reference unto public Tranquillity, might have been, yea and
was charged on Christian Religion for three hundred years, and is so by many
still on Protestancy as such; and that it were a very easy and facile task, to
set out the pernicious evils of a compelled Agreement in the practice of
Religion, and those not fancied only or feigned, but such as do follow it, have
followed it, and will follow it in the world.

An enquiry in this Invective, tending to evince its reasonableness is offered,
in page 158. namely, Where there are divided Interests in Religion in the same
Kingdom, it is asked how shall the Prince behave himself toward them. The
answer thereunto is not I confess easy, because it is not easy to be
understood, what is intended by divided Interests in Religion. We will
therefore lay that aside, and consider what really is amongst us, or may be
according to what we understand by these expressions. Suppose then, that in the
same profession of Protestant Religion, some different way and Observances in
the outward Worship of God should be allowed, and the Persons concerned herein
have no other, cannot be proved to have any other interest with respect unto
Religion, but to fear God and honor the King; it is a very easy thing to
return an Answer to this enquiry. For not entering into the profound Political
Speculation of our Author, about ballancing of Parties, or siding with this or
that Party, where the differences themselves constitute no distinct Parties, in
reference to Civil Government and public Tranquillity; let the Prince openly
avow by the declaration of his judgment, his constant practice, his
establishing of Legal Rights, disposing of public favors in places and
preferments, that way of Religion which himself owns and approves; and let him
indulge and protect others of the same Religion, for the substance of it with
what himself professes, in the quiet and peaceable exercise of their
Consciences in the Worship of God, keeping all Dissenters within the bounds
allotted to them, that none transgress them to the invasion of the Rights of
others; and he may have both the Reality, and Glory of Religion, Righteousness,
Justice, and all other Royal Virtues which will render him like to him whose
Vicegerent he is; and will undoubtedly reap the blessed fruits of them, in the
industry, peaceableness, and Loyalty of all his Subjects whatever.

There are sundry things in the close of this Chapter objected against such a
course of proceedure; but those such, as are all of them resolved into a
supposition, that they who in any place or part of the world, desire Liberty of
Conscience for the Worship of God, have indeed no Conscience at all. For it is
thereon supposed without further evidence, that they will thence fall into all
wicked and unconscientious practices. I shall make, as I said, no reply to such
surmises. Christianity suffered under them for many Ages. Protestancy has done
so in sundry places for many years. And those who now may do so, must as they
did, bear the effects of them as well as they are able. Only I shall say,
First, Whatever is of real inconvenience in this pretension, on the supposition
of Liberty of Conscience, is no way removed by taking away all different
practices, unless ye could also obliterate all different persuasions out of the
minds of men; which although in one place, tells us ought to be done by severe
pe^ties, yet in another, he acknowledges the the Magistrate has no cognizance
of (...) such things; who yet alone is the inflicts^ of all penalties. Nay
where different A^ prehensions are, the absolute prohibition of different
answerable practices, does thousand times more dispose the minds (...) men to
unquietness, than where they (...) allowed both together, as has been before
declared. And he that can oblitera^ out of, and take away all different
Apprehensions and Persuasions about the Worship of God, from the minds and
Consciences of men, bringing them to center (...) the same thoughts and
judgments absolutely, in all particulars about them, Dicendum est -- Deus ille
fuit, Deus incly^ Mem^^^
Qui Princeps vitae rationem invenit eam; --
He is God and not Man.

Secondly, It is granted, that the Magistrate may, and ought to restrain all
Principles and outward practices, that have any natural tendency unto the
disturbance of the peace; which being granted, and all obligations upon
dissenting Parties being alone put upon them, by the Supreme Legislative and
Executive power of the Kingdoms and Nations of the world, public Tranquillity
is, and will be as well secured on that respect, as such things are capable of
security in this world. All the longsome Discourse therefore which here ensues,
wherein all the evils that have been in this Nation, are charged on Liberty of
Conscience, from whence not one of them did proceed, seeing there was no such
thing granted, until upon other Civil and Political accounts, the Floodgates
were set open unto the following Calamities and Confusions, is of no use, nor
unto any purpose at all. For until it can be demonstratively proved, that those
who do actually suffer, and are freely willing so to do, (as far as the
foregoing, otherwise lawful advantages, open unto them as well as others, may
be so called) and resolved to undergo what may farther to their detriment, yea
to their ruin be inflicted on them, to preserve their Consciences entire unto
some commands of God, have no respect unto others of as great evidence and
light to be his, (as are those which concern their Obedience unto Magistrates,
compared with those which they avow about the Worship of God;) and that private
men, uninterested in, (...) incapable of any pretense unto Publi^ Authority of
any sort, do always this themselves warranted to do such things^^ others have
done, pleading Right and Authority for their warranty; and (...) be made
manifest also, that they have (...) other or greater Interest, than to enjoy
the particular conditions and Estates in peace and to exercise themselves in
the Worship of God according as they apprehend (...) mind to be, these
Declamations are altogether vain, and as to any solid wor^ lighter than a
Feather.

And I could desire that if these Controversies must be farther debated, that
(...) Author would omit the pursuit of the things, which are really (...) and
according to the ancient custom ^^tend (...), without Rhetori^^ Prefaces, or
unreasonable Passions, unto the merit of the Cause. To this purpose, (...)
suppose it might not be amiss for him, consider a few Sheets of Paper lately
published, under the Title of A Case stated, and wherein he will find the main
Controversy reduced to its proper heads, and a mode Provocation unto an Answer
to what proposed about it.

-- illum aspice contra
Qui vocat.
A Survey of the Sixth Chapter.
THE sixth Chapter in this Discourse, which is the last that at the present I
shall call to any account, (as being now utterly wearied with the frequent
occurrence of the same things in various dresses;) is designed to the
confutation of a Principle, which is termed the Foundation of all Puritanism,
and that wherein the Mystery of it consists. Now this is, that nothing ought
to be established in the Worship of God, but what is authorized by some Precept
or Example in the Word of God, which is the complete and adequate Rule of
Worship. Be it so, that this Principle is by some allowed, yea contended for.
It will not be easy to affix a guilt upon them, on the account of its being
so; For, lay aside prejudics, corrupt interests, and passions, and I am
persuaded that at the first view, it will not seem to be foreign, unto what is
in an hundred places declared and taught in the Scripture. And certainly a man
must be Master of extraordinary projections, who can foresee (...) the evil,
confusion and desolation in the World, which our Author has found out, as
inevitable consequents of its admi^ tance. It has, I confess, been former
disputed with colorable Arguments, Pr^ tences and Instances, on the one side
and the other; and variously stated among^^ Learned men, by, and on various
distinction^ and with diverse limitations. But the manner of our Author is,
that whatever is contrary to his Apprehensions, must present^^ overthrow all
Government, and bring in (...) confusion into the World. Such huge weight has
he wonted himself to lay o^ the smallest different conceptions of the minds of
men, where his own are not (...) throned. Particularly it is contended that
there can be no Peace in any Churche^ or States, whilst this Principle is
admitted: when it is easily demonstrable, tha^ without the admittance of it, as
to its substance and principal End, all peace and agreement among Churches are
utterly impossible. The like also may be said of States, which indeed are not
at all concerned in it, any farther, than as it is a principal means of their
Peace and Security, where it is embraced; and that which would reduce Rulers to
a Stability of mind in these things, after they have been tossed up and down
with the various suggestions of men, striving every one to exalt their own
Imaginations. But seeing it is pretended and granted to be of so much
importance, I shall, without much regard to the Exclamations of this Author,
and the reproachful contemptuous expressions, which without stint or measure he
poures out upon the Assertors of it, consider both what is the concern of his
present Adversaries in it, and what is to be thought of the Principle it self;
so submiting the whole to the judgment of the candid Reader. Only I must add
one thing to the Position, without which it is not maintained by any of those,
with whom he has to do; which may deliver him from combating the air in his
next Assault of it; and this is, That nothing ought to be established in the
Worship of God, as a part of that Worship, or made constantly necessary in its
Observance, without the warranty beforementioned; for this is expressly
contended for by them, who maintain it; and who reject nothing upon the
Authority of it, but what they can prove to be a pretended part of Religious
Worship as such. And, as thus laid down, I shall give some further account both
of the Principle it self, and of the interest of the Non-Conformists in it;
because both it and they are together here reproached.

What then I say is the true sense and importance of that which our Author
design^ to oppose, according to the mind of them who assert it; how impotent
his attempts against it are for its removal, shall briefly* be declared. In the
mean time I cannot but, in the first place, tell him, that if by any means this
Principle truly stated, as to the Expression wherein it is before laid down,
and the formal Terms whereof it consists, should be shaken, or rendered
dubious, yet that the way will not be much the plainer, or clearer, for the
Introduction of his pretensions. There are yet other general maxims, which
Non-Conformists adhere unto, and suppose not justly questionable, which they
can firmly stand and build upon in the management of their Plea, as to all
differences between him and them. And because, it may be, he is unacquainted
with them, I shall reckon over some of them for his Information. And they are
these that follow.

1. That whatever the Scripture has indeed prescribed, and appointed to be
done, and observed in the Worship or God, and the government of the Church,
that is indeed to be done and observed. This, they suppose, will not be
opposed: at least they do not yet know, notwithstanding any thing spoken or
disputed in this Discourse, any pretenses, on which it may honestly so be. It
is also, as I think, secured, Matthew. 28. 20.

2. That nothing in Conjunction with, nothing as an Addition or Supplement unto
what is so appointed, ought to be admitted, if it be contrary either to the
General Rules, or particular preceptive Instructions of the Scripture. And this
also, I suppose, will be granted: and if it be not freely, some are ready by
Arguments to extort the confession of it from them that shall deny it.

3. That nothing ought to be joined with, or added unto, what in the Scripture
is prescribed and appointed in these things, without some Cogent Reason, making
such Conjunction: or Addition necessary. Of what necessity may accrue unto the
observation of such things, by their prescription, we do not now dispute: but
at present only desire to see the necessity of: their prescription. And this
can be nothing, but some defect in Substance or Circumstance, matter or manner,
kind or form, in the Institutions mentioned in the Scripture, as to their
proper ends. Now when this is discovered, I will not, for my part much dispute
by whom the supplement to be made. In the mean time I do judg^ it reasonable,
that there be some previou^ Reasons assigned unto any Additional prescriptions
in the Worship of God unto what is revealed in the Scripture, rendering the
matter of those prescriptions antecedently necessary and reasonable.

4. That if any thing or things in this kind, shall be found necessary, to be
added and prescribed, then that and those alone be so, which are most consonant
unto the general Rules of the Scripture, given as for our Guidance in the
Worship of God, and the nature of those Institutions themselves, wherewith they
are conjoined, or whereunto they are added. And this also I suppose to be a
reasonable Request, and such as will be granted by all men, who dare not
advance their own Wills and Wisdom above or against the Will and Wisdom of God.

5. Now if, as was said, the general Principle beforementioned, should by any
means be duly removed, or could be so; if entangled or rendered dubious; yet as
far as I can learn, the Non-Conformists will be very far from supposing the
matters in contest between them and their Adversaries, to be concluded. But as
they look upon their concernments to be absolutely secured in the Principles
now mentioned, all which they know to be true, and hope to be unquestionable:
so the truth is, there is by this Author very small occasion administered unto
any thoughts of quitting the former more general Thesis as rightly stated; but
rather, if his Ability be a competent measure of the merit of his cause, there
is a strong confirmation given unto it in the minds of considering men, from
the Impotency and Succeslesness of the attempt made upon it. And that this may
appear to the indifferent Readers Satisfaction, I shall so far divert in this
place from the pursuit of my first design, as to State the Principle aright,
and briefly to call the present Opposition of it, unto a new account.

The sum in general, of what this Author opposes with so much clamor is,
That Divine Revelation is the sole Rule of Divine Religious Worship; an
Assertion, that in its latitude of expression, has been acknowledged in, and
by, all Nations and People. The very Heathen admitted it of old, as shall be
manifested, if need require, by instances sufficient. For though they framed
many Gods in their foolish darkened imaginations, yet they thought, that every
one of them would be Worshipped according to his own mind, direction and
prescription. So did, and, think do, Christians generally believe: only some
have a mind to pare this generally avowed Principle, to curb it, and order it
so by distinctions and restrictions, that it may serve their turn, and consist
with their interest. For an opposition unto it nakedly, directly and expressly,
few have had the confidence yet to make. And the Non-Conformists need not go
one step farther, in the expression of their Judgments and Principles in this
matter. For who shall compel them to take their Adversaries distinctions,
(which have been invented and used by the most Learned of them) of, substantial
and accidental; proper and reductive; primitive and accessory; direct and
consequential; intrinsic and circumstantial Worship, and the like, for the
most part unintelligible terms in their application, into the state of the
question? If men have a mind, let them oppose this Thesis as laid down, if not,
let them let it alone: and they, who shall undertake the confirmation of it,
will, no doubt, carry it through the briets of those unscriptural distinctions.
And that this Author may be the better instructed in his future work, I shall
give him a little farther account of the terms of the Assertion laid down.

Revelation is either (...) or (...) and contains every discovery or
declaration, that God has made of himself, or of his mind and will, unto men.
Thus it is comprehensive of that concreated Light, which is in all men,
concerning him and his Will. For although we say, that this is natural; and is
commonly contra-distinguished to Revelation properly so called, which for
perspicuity sake we call Revelation supernatural; yet whereas it does not so
necessarily accompany humane nature, but that it may be separated from it; not
is it educed out of our natural faculties by their own native or primigenial
Virtue; but is, or was distinctly implanted in them by God himself; I place it
under the general head of Revelation. Hence whatever is certainly from God, by
the Light of Nature and Instinct thereof declared so to be, is no less a
certain Rule of Worship and Obedience, so far forth as it is from him, and
concerns those things, than any thing that comes from him by express vocal
Revelation. And this casts out of consideration a vain exception, wherewith
some men please themselves; as though the men of this Opinion, denied the
Admittance of what is from God, and by the Light of Nature discovered to be his
mind and will. Let them once prove any thing in contest between them and their
Adversaries to be required, prescribed, exacted or made necessary by the Light
of Nature, as the Will of God revealed therein, and I will assure them, that as
to my concern, there shall be an end of all difference about it. But yet th^^ I
may add a little farther light into the sense of the Non-Conformists in this
matter; I say,

1. That this inbred Light of Reason guides unto nothing at all in or about the
Worship of God, but what is more fully, clearly and directly taught and
declared in the Scripture. And this may easily be evinced, as from the untoward
mixture of darkness and Corruption, that is befallen our primigenial i^bred
Principles of Light and Wisdom, by the entrance of sin; so also from the end of
the Scripture it self; which was to restore that knowledge of God and his mind,
which was lost by sin; and which might be as useful to man in his lapsed
condition, as the other was in his pure and uncorrupted estate. At present
therefore, I shall leave this Assertion, in expectation of some instance, in
matters great or small, to the contrary, before I suppose it be obnoxious to
question or dispute.

2. As there can be no Opposition, nor contradiction, between the Light of
Nature, and inspired Vocal or Scriptural Revelation, because they are both from
God: So if in any instance, there should appear any such thing unto us, neither
Faith nor Reason can rest in that which is pretended to be natural Light, but
must betake themselves for their resolution unto express Revelation. And the
reason hereof is evident; because nothing is natural light, but what is common
to all men; and where it is denied, it is frustrated as to its ruling Efficacy.
Again, it is mixed, as we said before; and it is not every man's work to
separate the Chafe from the Wheat; or what God has implanted in the mind of
man when he made him upright, and what is since soaked into the Principles of
his Nature, from his own inventions. But this case may possibly very rarely
fall out, and so shall not much be insisted on.

3. Our enquiry in our present contest, is solely about Instituted Worship,
which we believe to depend on supernatural Revelation; the light of Nature can
no way relieve or guide us in it or about it, because it refers universally to
things above, and beyond that light: but only with reference unto those Moral,
Natural Circumstances, which appertain unto those actings or actions of men,
whereby it is performed; which we willingly submit unto its guidance and
direction.

Again, Vocal Revelation has come under two considerations: First, As it was
occasional. Secondly, As it became stated.

First, As it was occasional. For a long time God was pleased to guide his
Church in many concerns of his Worship, by fresh occasional Revelations; even
from the giving of the first promise unto Adam, unto the solemn giving of the
Law by Moses. For although men had in process of time many stated Revelations,
that were preserved by Tradition among them; as the first Promise; the
Institution of Sacrifices, and the like: yet as to sundry emergencies of his
Worship, and parts of it, God guided them by new Occasional Revelations. Now
those Revelations being not recorded in the Scripture, as being only for
present or emergent use; we have no way to know them, but by what those, to
whom God was pleased so to reveal himself, did practice; and which, on good
testimony found acceptance with him. Whatever they so did, they had especial
Warranty from God for; which is the case of the great Institution of Sacrifices
it self. It is a sufficient Argument that they were Divinely instituted,
because they were graciously accepted.

Secondly, Vocal Revelation as the Rule of Worship, became stated and
invariable, in and by the giving and writing of the Law. From thence, with the
allowances before mentioned, we confine it to the Scripture, and so unto all
succeeding generations. I confess many of our company, who kept to us hitherto
in granting Divine Revelation to be the sole Principle and Rule of Religious
Worship, now leave us, and betake themselves to paths of their own. The
Postmisnicall Jews, after many attempts made that way by their Predecessors,
both before and after the Conversation of our Lord Christ in the flesh, at
length took up a resolution, that all obligatory Divine Revelation was not
contained in the Scripture; but was partly preserved by Orall Tradition. For
although they added a multitude of Observances, unto what were prescribed unto
their Fathers by Moses: yet they would never plainly forego that Principle, nor
do to this day; that Divine Revelation is the Rule of Divine Worship. Wherefore
to secure their Principle and practice, and to reconcile them together, (which
are indeed at an unspeakable variance) they have fancied their Oral Law; which
they assert to be of no less certain and Divine Original, than the Law that is
written. On this pretense they plead, that they keep themselves unto the
forementioned Principle, under the Superstition of a multitude of
self-invented observances. The Papists also here leave us; but still with a
semblance of adhering to that Principle, which carries so great and
uncontrollable an evidence with it, as that there are very few as was said, who
have hitherto risen up in a direct and open opposition unto it. For whereas
they have advanced a double Principle for the Rule of Religious Worship,
besides the Scripture; namely Tradition, and the present Determinations of
their Church, from thence educed; they assert the first to be Divine or
Apostolical, which is all one; and the latter to be accompanied with
Infallibility, which is the formal Reason of our adherence and submission unto
Divine Revelations. So that they still adhere in general unto the
forementioned Principle; however they have debauched it by their advancement
of those other Guides. But herein also, we must do them right; that they do not
absolutely turn loose those two rude creatures of their own; Traditions, and
present Church determinations, upon the whole face of Religion, to act therein
at their pleasure; but they secure them from whatever is determined in the
written word; affirming them to take place only in those things, that are not
contrary to the Word, or not condemned in it. For in such, they con^ess, they
ought not, nor can take place. Which I doubt whether our Author will allow of
or no, in reference to the power by him asserted.

By Religious Worship, in the Thesis above, we understand, as was said before,
instituted Worship only, and not that which is purely Moral and Natural; which,
in many instances of it, has a great coincidence with the light of Nature, as
was before discoursed.

We understand also the Solemn or stated Worship of the Church of God. That
Worship, I say, which is solemn and stated, for the Church, the whole Church,
at all times and seasons, according to the rules of his appointment, is that
which we enquire after. Hence in this matter, we have no concernment in the
fact of this or that particular person, which might be ^^casionally influenced
by necessity; as vids eating of the Shewbread was; (...) which, how far it may
excuse or just (...) the persons that act thereon, or regu^^ their actions,
directly, I know not, nor any way engaged to enquire.

This is the state of our Question in ha^^ the mind of the Assertion, which is
h^^ so hideously disguised, and represent in its pretended consequences.
Neit^^^ do I think there is any thing needful f^^ther to be added unto it. But
yet for (...) clearing of it from mistakes, somethi^^ may be discoursed which
relates unto We say then;

First, That there are sundry things be used in, about, and with those Actio^
whereby the Worship of God is perfor^^ed, which yet are not Sacred, nor do
(...) long unto the Worship of God as su^^ though that Worship cannot be
perform without them. The very Breath that (...) breathe, and the light whereby
they s^ are necessary to them in the Worship^^ God; and yet are not made
Sacred^ Religious thereby. Constantine said of o^ that he was a Bishop, but
without the Church not a Sacred Officer, but one that too^ care, and had a
supervisorship of thir^ ^ecessarily belonging to the performance of Gods
Worship, yet no Parts or Adjuncts (...) it as such. For it was all still
without. Now all those things in or about the Worship of God, that belonged
unto Constantines Episcopacy, that is the ordering and disposal of things
without the Church, but about it; without Worship, but about it; we acknowledge
to be left unto common prudence, guided by the general Rules of Scripture, by
which the Church is to walk and compose its actings. And this wholly supersedes
the Discourse of our Author concerning the great variety of circumstances,
wherewith all humane actions are attended. For in one word, all such
circumstances as necessarily* attend humane actions as such, neither are
Sacred, nor can be made so without an express Institution of God, and are,
disposable by humane Authority. So that the long contest of our Author on that
Head, is altogether vain. So then,

Secondly, By all the concernments of Religious Worship, which any affirm, that
they must be directed by Divine Revelation, or regulated by the Scripture; they
intend all that is Religious, or whatever belongs to the Worship of God, as it
is Divine Worship: and not what belongs unto the actions, wherein and when by
it is performed, as they are actions.

Thirdly, That when any part of Worship is instituted in special, and general
Rule are given for the practice of it hic ^ nunc: there the Warranty is
sufficient for its practice at its due seasons; and for those seasons the
nature of the thing it self, with what it has respect unto, and the ligh^ of
the general Scripture Rules, will give them an acceptable determination.

And these few Observations will abundantly manifest, the impertinency of those
who think it incumbent on any, by virtue of the Principle before laid down, to
produce express Warranty in words of Scripture, for every Circumstance that
does attend and belong unto the Actions, whereby the Worship of God is
performed: which as they require not; so no such thing is included in the
Principle as duly stated. For particular circumstances, that have respect to
good order, decency, and external regulation of Divine Worship, they are all of
them either circumstances of the Actions themselves, whereby Divine Worship is
performed and exercised* and so in general they are natural and necessary;
which in particular, or actu exercito, depend on Moral Prudence; or Religious
Rites themselves, added in and to the whole, or any parts of Divine Service,
which alone in this question come under enquiry.

I know there are usually sundry Exceptions put into this Thesis, as before
stated and asserted: and instances to the contrary are pretended; some whereof
are touched upon by our Author, page 181. which are not now particularly, and
at large to be considered. But yet because I am, beyond expectation, engaged in
the Explication of this Principle, I shall set it so far forth right and
straight unto further examination, as to give in such general Observations, as,
being consistent with it, and explanatory of it, will serve to obviate the most
of the exceptions that are laid against it. As,

1. Where ever in the Scripture we meet with any Religious duty, that had a
preceding Institution, although we find not expressly a consequent Approbation,
we take it for granted that it was approved; and so on the contrary, where an
Approbation appears, and Institution is concealed.

2. The Question being only about Religious Duties, or things pertaining to, or
required in or about the Worship of God; no exception against the general
thesis ca^^ take place, but such as consists in things directly of that nature.
Instances in and about things civil, and belonging merely to humane
conversation, or things natural, as signs and memorials one of another are in
this matter of no consideration.

3. Things extraordinary in their performance, and which, for ought we know may
have been so in their warranty (...) rule, have no place in our debate. For we
are inquiring only after such things as may warrant a suitable practice in us^
without any further Authority, which is the end, for which instances against
this principle are produced; this actions extr^ordinary will not do.

4. Singular and occasional Actions which may be variously influenced and
regulated by present circumstances, are n^ Rule to guide the ordinary stated
Worship of the Church. David's eating of the shewbread, wherein yet he was
justifie^ because of his hunger and necessity, was not to be drawn into Example
of giving the shewbread promiscuously to the people. And sundry instances to
the same purpose are given by our Savior himself.

5. There is nothing of any dangerous or had consequence in this whole
controversy, but what lies in the imposition on men's practices of the
Observation of uncommanded Rites, making them necessary unto them in their
observation. The things themselves are said in their own nature, antecedent to
their injunction for practice, to be indifferent, and indifferent as unto
practice. What hurt would it be to leave them so? They cannot, say some, be
omitted for such and such Reasons. Are there then Reasons: for their
observation besides their Injuction, and such as on the account whereof they
are enjoined? Then are they indeed necessary in some degree before their
Injunction. For all Reason for them must be taken from themselves. And things
wholly indifferent have nothing in themselves one more than another, why one
should be taken, and another left. For if one have the advantage of another in
the Reasons for its practice, it is no more indifferent: at least it is not
comparatively so. Granting therefore, things enjoined to be antecedently to
their injunction, equally indifferent in their own nature, with all other
things of the same or the like kind, which yet are rejected or not enjoined;
and then to give reasons taken from themselves, their decency, their
conducingness to edification, their tendency to the increase of devotion, their
significancy of this or that; is to speak daggers and contradictions; and to
say, a thing is indifferent before the injuction of its practice; but yet if we
had thought so, we would never have enjoined it; seeing we do so upon reasons.
And without doubt this making necessary the practice of things in the worship
of God, proclaimed to be indifferent in themselves, and no way called for by
any antecedent Reason, is an act of power.

6. Where things are instituted of God, and he himself makes an Alteration in,
or of his own Institutions, those Institutions may be lawfully practiced and
observed, until the mind of God for their Alteration and Abolition be
sufficiently revealed, proposed, and con^irmed unto them that are concerned in
them. For as the making of a Law does not oblige, until, and without the
promulgation of it, so as that any should offend in not yielding obedience unto
it; so upon the Abrogation of a Law, Obedience may be conscienciously and
without sin yielded unto that Law, until the Abrogation, by what act soever it
was made, be notified and confirmed. An instance hereof we have in the
observation of Mosaical Rites, in the forbearance of God, after the Law of
their institution was enervated, and the Obligation of it unto obedience really
dissolved; at least the foundation of it laid; for the actual dissolution of it
depended on the declaration of the fact, wherein it was founded.

7. There may be a coincidence of things performed by sundry persons, at the
same time and in the same place; whereof some may have respect unto Religious
Worishp directly, and so belong unto it; and others only occasionally, and so
not at all belong thereunto. As if when the Athenians had been worshipping of
their Altars, St. Paul had come, and reading the inscription of one of them,
and thence taking occasion and advantage to preach the unknown God unto them;
their Act was a part of Religious Veneration, his presence and observation of
them, and laying hold of that occasion for his own purpose, was not so.

8. Many things, which are mere natural Circumstances, requisite unto the
performance of all Actions in communities whatever, and so to be ordered by
prudence according unto general rules of the word of God, may seem to be
Adjuncts of Worship, unless they are followed to their Original, which will
discover them to be of another nature.

9. Civil usages and customs observed (...) a religious manner, as they are
all to be by them that believe, and directed by them unto moral ends, may have
a show and appearance of Religious Worship; and so, according to the principle
before stated, require express institution. But although they belong unto our
living unto God is general; as do all things that we do, seeing whether we eat
or drink, we are to do a^ to the glory of God; and therefore are to be done in
faith; yet they are or may be no part of instituted worship, but such Actions
of life as in our whole course, we are to regulate by the rules of the
Scripture, so far as they afford us guidance therein.

10. Many observances in and about the Worship of God, are recorded in the
Scripture, without especial reflecting any blame or crime on them, by whom they
were performed; (as many great sins are historically only related, and left to
be judged by the Rule of the world in other places, without the least remark of
displeasure on the persons guilty of them,) and that by such whose Persons were
accepted of God; yea it may be in that very service, wherein less or more they
failed in their observation, God being merciful to them though not in all
things prepared according to the prepartion of the sanctuary; and yet the
things themselves not to be approved nor justified, but condemned of God. Such
was the fact of Judas Maccabeus in his offering sacrifices for the sin of them
that were dead; adn that of instituting an Aniversary feast in commemoration of
the dedication of the Altar.

This little search have I made into this great mystery, as it is called, of
Puritanism, after which so mighty an outcry is raised by this Author; And if it
might be here further pursued, it would as stated by us in these general Rules
and Explications, be fully manifested to be a principle in general admitted,
until of late, by all sorts of men: Some few only having been forced sometimes
to corrupt it for the security of some especial interest of their own. And it
were an easy thing to confirm this Assertion by the testimonies of the most
learned Protestant writers, that have served the Church in the last ages. But I
know how with many amongst us they are regarded; and that the citation of some
of the most reverend names among them, is not unlikely to prejudice and
disadvantage the cause, wherein their witness is produced. I shall not
therefore expose them to the contempt of those, now they are dead, who would
have been unwilling to have entered the lists with them in any kind of learning,
when they were alive. There is, in my apprehension, the substance of this
Assertion still retained among the Papists. Bellarmine himself lays it down as
the foundtion of all his controversies; and endeavors to prove, Propheticos
and Apostolicos libros verum esse verbum Dei, and certam and stabilem regulam
fidei. De verbo Dei. lib. 1. cap. 1. That the Prophetical and Apostoiclal
books, ^are the true word of God, a certain and stable rule of faith, will go a
great way in this matter. For all our Obedience in the Worship of God is the
obedience of faith: and if the scripture be the Rule of Faith, our faith is not
in any of its concerns, to be extended beyond it; nor more than the thing
regulated is to be beyond the Rule.

Neither is this opinion of so late a date, as our Author and others would
persuade their ceredulous followers. The full sense of it was spoken out roudly
of old. So speaks the great Constantine (that an Emperor may lead the way) in
his Oration to the renowned Fathers assembled at Nice. (...). i. e. The
Evangelical and Apostolical Books, and the Oracles of the Ancient Prophets, do
plainly instruct us, what we are to think of Divine things. Laying aside
therefore all hostile discord, let us resolve the things brought into Question,
by the Testimonies of the writings given by divine inspiration. We have here
the full substance of what is pleaded for; and might the Advice of this Noble
Emperor be admitted, we should have a readier way to expedite all our present
Differences, than as yet seems to be provided for us. The great Basil speaks
yet more expressly than Constantine the great lib. de confess. fid. (...). i. e.
It has the manifest guilt of infidelity and pride, to reject any thing that is
written, or to add or introduce any thing that is not written; which is the
sum of all that in this matter is contended for. To the same purpose he
discourses Epist. 80. ad Eustath: where moreover he rejects all pretenses of
Customs and usages of any sorts of men, and will have all differences to be
brought for their Determination to the Scripture. Christstome in his Homily on
Psalm 95. speaks the same sense, says he; (...). Who is it that promises
these things? Paul. For we are not to say any thing without Testimony, nor upon
our mere Reasonings. For if any thing be spoken without Scripture (Testimony)
the mind of the hearers fluctuates, now assenting, anon hesitating, sometimes
rejecting what is spoken as frivolous, sometimes receiving it as probable. But
where the Testimonies of the Divine Voice comes forth from the Scripture, it
confirms the word of the Speaker, and the mind of the Hearer. It is even so;
whilst things relating to Religion and the Worship of God, are debated and
disputed by the reasonings of men, or on any other principles besides the
express Authority of the Scriptures, no certainty or full persuasion of mind
can be attained about them. Men under such actings are as Lucian in his
Menippus, says He was between the Disputations of the Philosophers; sometimes
he nodded one way, sometimes another, and seemed to give his assent backwards
and forwards to express contradiction. It is in the Testimony of the Scripture
alone, about the things of God, that the Consciences of those that fear him can
acquiesce and find satisfaction. The same Author as in many other places, so in
his 13 Homily on the 2 Epist. to the Corinth. expressly sends us to the
Scripture to enquire after all things, as that which is the exact Canon,
balance, and Rule of Religion. (...). Among the Latins Tertullian is express
to the same purpose. In his Book against Hermogenes, Adoro (said he)
plenitudinem Scripturum quae mihi factorem manifestat and facta -- again,
Scriptum esse hoc doceat Hermogenis officina, aut timeat, rae illud,
adjicientibus, aut detrahentibus destinatum. I Adore the fullness of the
Scripture; -- And let Hermogenes prove what he says, to be written, or fear
the Woe denounced against them, who add to, or take from, the Word. And again
in his Book de Carne Christi; Non recipio quod extra Scriptuream de tuo infers.
I do not receive, what you bring of your own without Scripture. So also in his
Book, de Praescriptionibus. Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio indulgere licet; sed
nec eligere quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit Apostoles Domini habemus
authors, qui nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod inducerent elegerunt, sed
acceptam a Christo disciplain any, deliter Nationibus assignaverunt. It is ^
lawful for us (in these things) to ind^^ unto our own choice; nor to choose
what ^ one brings in of his choosing. We have Apostles of our Lord for our
Examp^^ who brought in nothing of their own min^ or choice; But having received
the Discipl^ (of Christian Religion) from Chrsit, t^^ faithfully communicated
it to the Nation. ^ Hierome is plain to the same purpose i^ sundry places. So
Comment. in 23 Matt^ Quod de Scripturis authoritatem non habet, ea^dem
facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur. Th^^ which has not Authority from the
Scripture^ is as easily despised as asserted. Comm. i^ Hagg. cap. 1. Sed and
alia quae absque autho^^ritate and testimoniis scripturarum, quasi traditione
Apostolica sponte reperiunt atque confingunt, percutit gladius Dei; But those
other things which without Authority or Testimony of the Scriptures, they find
out or faign of their own accord, as of Apostolical. Tradition; the sword of
God smites through. It were easy to produce twenty other Testimonies out of
the Ancient Writers of the church, giving sufficient countenance to the
Assertion contended about. What account our Author gives of this Principle is
now, very briefly, to be considered. First therefore, page 174, 175. he re^es
it as a pretense wild and humoursome, ^ich men must be absurd if they believe;
^ impudent if they do not; seeing it has ^t the least shadow or foundation
either ^m Scripture or Reason: though it be ex^^esly asserted either in its own
terms, or ^onfirmed by direct deductions, in and ^om above forty places of
Scripture. and so much for that part of the as^ault.

The next charge it with infinite follies and mischiefs in those which allow
it. And it is said, that there can never be an end of alterations and
disturbances in the Church, whilst it is maintained. The contrary whereof is
true, confirmed by Experience and Evidence of the thing it self. The admittance
of it would put an End to all disturbances. For let any man judge, whether, if
there be matters in difference, as in all these things there are and ever were;
the bringing them to an issue and a settled stability, be not likelier to be
effected by all mean consenting unto one common Rule, whereby they may be tried
and examined, than that every party should be left at liberty, to indulge to
their own* Affections and Imaginations about them. And yet we are told, p. 178.
that all the pious Villainies, that ever have disturbed the Christian World,
have sheltered themselves in this grand Maxim; that Jesus Christ is the only
Lawmakers to his Church. I confess, I could heartily desire, that such
expressions might be forborne. For let what pretense men please be given to
them, and color put upon them; they are full of scandal to Christian Religion.
The Mixime it self, here traduced, is as true as any part of the Gospel. And it
cannot be pretended, that it is not the Maxim it self, but the abuse of it,
(as all the Principles of the Gospel, through the Blindness and Lusts of men,
have been abused;) that is reflected on: seeing the design of the whole
Discourse is to evert the Maxim it self. Now whatever Apprehensions our Author
may have of his own Abilities, I am satisfied, that they are no way competent
to disprove this Principle of the Gospel; as will be evident on the first
attempt he shall make to that purpose; let him begin the trial as soon as he
pleases.

In the third Section, we have an heap of instances raked together to confront
the Principle, in its proper sense before declared and vindicated, in no one
whereof it is at all concerned. For the Reason of things, in matters Civil and
Religious, are not the same. All political Government in theWorld consists in
the exercise of Principles of natural Right, and their just Application to
Times, Ages, People, Occasions and Occurences. Whilst this is done, Government
is acted regularly to its proper end: where this is missed, it fails. There
things God has left unto the prudence of men, and their consent; wherein they
cannot, for the most part, fail, unless they are absolutely given up unto
unbridled lusts; and the things, wherein they may fail, are always convenient
or inconvenient; good and useful, or hurrful and destructive; not always, yea
very seldom directly and in themselves morally Good or Evil. In such things
men's ease and pofit not their Consciences, are concerned. In the Worship of God
things are quite otherwise. It is not Convenience or Inconvenience, Advantage
or disadvantage, as to the things of this life, but merely Good or Evil, in
reference to the pleasing of God, and to Ternity, that is in question.
Particular Applications to the manners, customs, usages of places, times,
Countries, which is the proper field of humane Authority, Liberty, and prudence
in Civil things, (because their due, useful, and regular Administration
d^^pends upon them;) have here no plac^^ For the things of the Worship of God
b^^ing Spiritual, are capable of no variatio^ from temporal earthly varieties
amon^ men; have no respect to Climate^ Customs, Forms of Civil Governmen^ or
any thing of that Nature. But con^sidering men quite under other notions
namely, of Sinners and Believers; with respect utterly unto other ends, namely
their living spiritually unto God here, and the eternal enjoyment of him
hereafter are not subject to such prudential Accommodations or Applications.
The Worship of God is or ought to be, the same at all times, in all places, and
amongst all People, in all Nations; and the order of it is fixed and determined
in all particulars, that belong unto it. And let not men pretend the contrary,
until they can give an instance of any such defect in the Institutions of
Christ, as that the Worship of God cannot be carried on, nor his Church Ruled
and Edified, without an addition of something of their own for the supply
thereof; which therefore should and would be necessary to that end antecedent
unto its addition; and when they have so done, I will subscribe unto whatsoever
they shall be pleased to add of that, or indeed any other kind. ^ustomes of
Churches, and Rules of Decency, which our Author here casts under the
Magistrates power, are ambiguous terms, and in no sense express the Hypothesis
he ^ath undertaken the defense of. In the proper signification of the words,
the things intended may fall under those natural Circumstances, wherein
Religious Actions in the Worship of the Church may have their concern, as they
are Actions, and are disposable by humane Authority. But he will not, I
presume, so soon desert his fundamental Principle, of the Magistrates
appointing things in, and parts of Religious Worship, no where described or
determined in the Word of God; which alone we have undertaken to oppose. The
instances he also gives us about Actions, in their own nature and use
indifferent; as going to Law, or taking Physic; are not, in the least, to his
purpose. And yet if I should say, that none of these Actions are indeed
indifferent in actu exercito, as they speak, and in their individual
performance, but have a Moral good or evil, as an inseparable Adjunct,
attending them, arising out of respect to some Rule, general or particular, of
Divine Revelation, I know he cannot dis^prove it; and much more is not plead
concerning Religious Worship.

But this Principle is further charge with mischief equal to its folly; which
i^^proved by instances in sundry uninstituted Observances, both in the Jewish,
an^ primitive Christian Churches; as also i^ Protestant Churches abroad. I
answer that if this Author will consent to Um^pire these differences by either
the Old or New Testament, or by any Protestant Church in the World; we shall be
nearer an end of them, than, as far as I can see, yet otherwise we are. If he
will not be bound, neither to the Example of the Church of the Jews; nor of the
Churches of the New Testament; nor of the present Protestant Churches; it must
he confessed, that their names are here made use of, only for a pretense and an
Advantage. Under the Old Testament we find, that all that God required of his
Church, was, that they should observe the Law of Moses his Servant, which he
commanded to him in Horeb, for all Israel, with his Statutes and Judgments,
Mal. 4. 4. And when God had given out his Institutions, and the whole Order of
his Worship, it being fixed in the Church accordingly; it is added eight or ten
times ^n one Chapter, that this was done, as ^he Lord commanded Moses, even so
did he, Exodus 40. After this God gives them many strict prohibitions, from
adding any thing to what he had so commanded; as Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and Chap. 12. 32
Prove. 30. 6. And as he had in the Decalogue rejected any Worship not of his own
appointment as such, Exodus 20. 4, 5. so he made it afterward the Rule of his
acceptance of that People and what they did, or his refusal of them and it;
whether it was by him commanded or no. So in Particular, he expressly rejects
that which was so added, as to days, and times, and places, though of the
nearest Affinity and Cognation to what was appointed by himself, because it was
invented by man; yea by a King, 1 Kings 12. 33. And when in process of time,
many things of an uncertain original were crept into the observance of the
Church, and had firmed themselves with the notion of Traditions; they were all
at once rejected in that word of the blessed Holy One; in ^ain do ye Worship
me, teaching for doctrines (that is, what is in my Worship to be observed,) the
traditions of men. For the Churches of the New Testament, the foundation of
them is laid i^ that command of our Savior, Matt 28. 20. go and Teach all
Nations; teac^^ing them to observe and do all whatsoever command you, and so I
am with you to the end of the world. That they should b^ taught to do or
observe any thing, bu^ what he commanded; that his presenc^ should accompany
them in the teaching o^ observation of any superadditions of their own; we no
where find written, intimated, or exemplified by any practice of theirs. Nor,
however, in that juncture of time, the like whereunto did never occurt before,
nor ever shall do again, during the expiration and taking down of Mosaical
Institutions, before they became absolutely unlawful to be observed, the
Apostles, according to the liberty given them by our Lord Jesus Christ, and
direction of the Holy Ghost, did practice some things complyant with both
Churchstates, did they, in any one instance, impose any thing on the practice
of the Churches in the Worship of God, to be necessarily and for a continuance
observed among them, but what they had express Warrant, and Authority and
command of our Lord Christ for. Counsel they gave in particular cases, that
depended upon present emergencies; Directions for the regular and due
observation of Institutions, and the Application of general Rules in particular
practice; They also taught a due and sanctified use of Civil customs; and the
proper use of Moral or Natural Symbols. But to impose any Religious Rites on
the constant practice of the Church in the Worship of God, making them
necessary to be always observed by that imposition, they did not once attempt
to do, or assume power for it to themselves. Yea, when upon an important
difficulty, and to prevent a ruining scandal, they were enforced to declare
their judgment to the Churches in some points, wherein they were to abridge
the practice of their Christian liberty for a season; they would do it only in
things made necessary by the state of things then among the Churches, (in
reference to the great end of edification, whereby all practices are to be
regulated) before the declaration of their judgment, for the restriction
mentioned, Acts 15. So remote were they from assuming unto themselves a
Dominion over the Religion, Consciences or faith of the Disciples of Christ; or
requiring any thing in the constant Worship of the Church, but what was
according to the Will, Appointment and Command of their Lord and Master, Little
countenance therefore is our Author like to obtain unto his sentiments, from
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; or the Example either of the Jews
or Christians mentioned in them.

The Instances he gives from the Church of the Jews, or that may be given, are
either Civil Observances, as the feast of Purim; or Moral conveniences
directed by general Rules, as the building of Synagogues; or customary signs
suited to the nature of things, as wearing of Sackcloth; or such as have no
proof of their being approved, As the feast of Dedication, and some monthly
Fasts taken up in the Captivity, from none of which any objection can be taken
against the position before laid down. Those from the Church of the new
Testament had either a perpetual binding institution from the Authority of
Christ, as the Lords day Sabbath; or contain only a direction to use Civil
Customs and Observances in an holy and sanctified manner, as the Love Feasts
and Kiss of Charity; or such as were never heard of in the New Testament at
all, as the observation of Lent and Easter. He that out of these instances can
draw a warranty for the power of the Civil Magistrate over Religion and the
Consciences of men, to institnte new duties in Religion when he pleases, so
these do not countenance Vice, nor disgrace the Deity; which all his Christian
Subjects shall be bound in conscience to observe; or otherwise make good any of
those particulat conclusions, that therefore Christ is not the ouly Law giver
to his Church; or that Divine Revelation is not the adequate rule of Divine
Worship; or that men may add any thing to the Worship of God, to be observed in
it, constantly and indispensiely, by the whole Church; will manifest himself to
have an Excellency in Argumentation, beyond what I have ever yet met withal.

A removal of the Argument taken from the perfection of the Scripture, and its
sufficiency to instruct us in the whole Counsel and Will of God, concerning his
Worship and our Obedience unto him, is nextly attempted: but with no Engines,
but what have been discovered to be insufficient to that purpose an hundred
times. It is alleged, That what the Scripture commands in the Worship of God,
is to be observed; that what it forbids, is to be avoided, Which if really
acknowledged, and a concernment of the Consciences of men be granted therein,
is sufficiently destructive of the principal Design of our Author. But moreover
I say, that it commands and fo^^bids things by general Rules, as well by
particular Precepts and Inhibition and that, if what is so commanded be
d^served, and what is so forbidden be avoided, there is a direct-Rule remaining
in for the whole worship of God.

But this is said here to be of substan^^ duties, but not of external
circumstance and if it be so even of substantial dut^^ it perfectly overthrows
all that our Autho^ has been pleading in the three first Cha^ters of his
Discourse. For external circumstances; of what nature those are wh^^ are
disposable by humane Authority an^ Prudence, has been now often declare and
needs not here to be repeated.

The sum of his Apprehensions in the matter, about the perfection and
suffici^ency of the Scripture in reference to the Worship of God, our Author
gives us page 189. Anything, says he, is lawful (th^^ is, in the Worship of
God) that is no^ made unlawful by some prohibition: for things become evil, not
upon the scors of there being not commanded; but upon that of their being
forbidden, And what the Scripture forbids not, it allows; and what it allows,
is not unlawful; and what is not unlawful, may lawfully be done. This tale, I
confess, we have been told many and many a time: but it has been as often
answered, that the whole of It, as to any thing of reasoning, is captious and
sophistical.

Once more therefore; what is commanded in the Worship of God, is lawful; yea
is our duty to observe. All particular Instances of this sort, that are to have
actual place in the Worship of God, were easily enumerated, and so expressly
commanded. And why among sundry things that might equally belong thereunto one
should be commanded, and another left at liberty without any Institution, no
man can divine. Of particular things not to be observed there is not the same
reason. It is morally impossible, that all instances of men's Inventions, all
that they can find out to introduce into the Worship of God, at any time, in
any Age, and please themselves therein, should be before hand enumerated, and
prohibited in their particular instances. And if because they are not so
forbidden, they may lawfully be introduced into Divine Worship, and imposed
upon the practices of men; ten thousand things may be made lawful, and be so
imposed. But the truth is, although a particular prohibition be needful to
render a thing evil in it self; a general prohibition is enough to render any
thing unlawful in the Worship of God. So we grant, that what is not forbidden
is lawful: but withal say, that every thing is forbidden, that should be
esteemed as any part of Divine Worship, that is not commanded; and if it were
not, yet for want of such a command, or Divine Institution, it can have neither
use nor efficacy, with respect to the end of all Religious Worship.

Our Author speaks with his wonted confidence in this matter; yea it seems to
rise to its highest pitch: as also does his contempt of his Adversaries, or
whatever is, or may be offered by them in the justification of this principle.
Infinite certainty on his own part, page 193. baffled and intolerable
impertinencies; weak and puny Arguments; Cavils of a few hotheaded and
brainsick people, with other opprobrious expressions of the like nature,
filling up a great part of his leaves, are what he can afford unto those whom
he opposes. But yet I am not, for all this bluster, well satisfied, much less
infinitely certain, that he does in any competent measure understand aright the
Controversy, about which he treats with all this wrath and confidence. For the
sum of all, that here he pleads, is no more but this; that the Circumstances
of Actions in particular are various, and as they are not, so they cannot be
determined by the Word of God; and therefore must be ordered by humane Prudence
and Authority: which if he suppose that any men deny, I shall the less wonder
at his severe Reflections upon them; though I shall never judge them necessary
or excusable in any case whatever. Page 198. He imposes it on others that lie
under the power of this persuasion, That they are obliged in conscience to act
contrary to whatever their Superiors command them in the Worship of God: which
further sufficiehtly evidenceth, that either be understands not the
Controversy under debate, or that he believes not himself in what he says:
which, because the harsher imputation, I shall avoid the owning of in the least
surmise.

Section 6. From the Concession, that the Magistrate may take care, that the
Laws of Christ be executed; that is, command and require his Subjects to
observe the commands of Christ, in that way, and by such means, as those
commands, from the nature of the things themselves, and according to the Rule
of the Gospel, may be commanded and required; he infers, that he has himself
power of making Laws in Rel^^gion. But why so? And how does thi^ follow? Why,
says he, It is apparently im^plyed, because whoever has a power to see the
Laws be executed, cannot be without a pow^^ to command their execution. Very
good but the conclusion should have been; he cannot be without a power to make
Laws is the matter, about which he looks to the execution: which would be good
Doctrine for Justices of the Peace to follow. But what is here laid down is
nothing but repeating of the same thing in words a little varied; as if it had
been said; He that has power to see the Laws executed, or a power to command
their execution, he has power to see the Laws executed, or a power to command
their execution; which is very true. And this we acknowledge the Magistrate
has, in the way before declared. But that because he may do this, he may also
make Laws of his own in Religion, it does not at all follow from hence, whether
it be true or no. But this is further confirmed from the nature of the Laws of
Christ, which have only declared the substance and morality of Religious
Worship: and therefore must needs have left the ordering of its circumstances
to the power and wisdom of lawful Authority. The Laws of Christ, which are
intended, are those, which he has given concerning the Worship of God. That
these have determined the morality of Religious Worship, I know not how he can
well allow, who makes the Law of Nature to be the measure of Morality, and all
Moral Religious Worship. And for the substance of Religious Worship, I wish it
were well declared what is intended by it. For my part I think, that whatever
is commanded by Christ, the Observation of it, is of the substance of Religious
Worship; else I am sure the Sacraments are not so. Now do but give men leave,
as rational creatures, to observe those commands of Christ in such a way and
manner, as the nature of them requires them to be observed; as he has himself
in general Rules prescribed; as the concurrent actions of many in society make
necessary; and all this Controversy will be at an end. When a duty, as to the
kind of it, is commanded in particular, or instituted by Christ in the Worship
of God, he has given general Rules to guide us in the individual performance
of it, as to the circumstances that the actions whereby it is performed, will
be attended withal. For the disposal of those circumstances according to those
Rules, prudence is to take place and to be used. For men, who are obliged to
act as men in all other things, are not to be looked on as Brutes in what is
required of them in the Worship of God.

But to institute Mystical Rites, and fixed forms of Sacred Administrations,
whereof nothing in the like kind does necessarily attend the acting of
instituted Worship, it not to determine circumstances, but to ordain new parts
of Divine Worship: and such Injunctions are here confessed by our Author, page
191. to be new and distinct commands by themselves, and to enjoin something
that the Scripture no where commands: which when he produceeth a Warranty for,
he will have made a great progress toward the determining of the present
Controversy.

Page 192. He answers an Objection, consisting of two branches, as by him
proposed: whereof the first is; that it cannot stand with the love and wisdom
of God not to take order himself for all things, that immediately concern his
own Worship and Kingdom. Now though I doubt not at all, but that God has so
done; yet I do not remember at present, that I have read any imposing the
necessity hereof upon him, in answer to his Love and Wisdom. I confess
Valerianus Magnus, a famous Writer of the Church of Rome, tells us, that never
any one did so foolishly institute or order a Commonwealth, as Jesus Christ
must be thought to have done; if he have not left one Supreme Judge to
determine the faith and Consciences of men in matters of Religion and Divine
Worship. And our Author seems not to be remote from that kind of reasoning,
who, without an assignment of a power to that purpose, contendeth that all
things among men will run into confusion; of so little concernment do the
Scriptures and the Authority of God in them, to some seem to be. We do indeed
thankfully acknowledge, that God out of his Love and Wisdom has ordered all
things belonging to his Worship and Spiritual Kingdom in the world. And we do
suppose, we need no other Argument to evince this Assertion, but to challenge
all men, who are otherwise minded, to give an instance of any defect in his
Institutions to that purpose. And this we are the more confirmed in, because
those things, which men think good to add unto them, they dare not contend that
they are parts of his Worship; or that they are added to supply any defect
therein. Neither did ever any man yet say, that there is a defect in the divine
Institutions of Worship, which must be supplied by a Ministers wearing
Surplice. All then that is intended in this consideration, though not urged, as
is here pretended, is; that God in his Goodness, Love and Care toward his
Church, has determined all things that are needful i^ or to his Worship: and
about what is not needful, men, if they please, may contend; but it will be to
no great purpose.

The other part of the Objection, which he proposes to himself, is laid down
by him in these words; If Jesus Christ has not determined all particular Rites
and Circumstances of Religion, he has discharged his Office with less wisdom
and fidelity than Moses; who ordered every thing appertaining to the Worship of
God, even as far as the pint or nails of the Tabernacle. And hereunto in
particular he returns in answer, not one word: but only ranks it amongst idle
and impertinent reasonings. And I dare say, he wants not reasons for his
silence: whether they be pertinent or no, I know not. For setting aside the
advantage, that, it is possible, he aimed to make in the manner and terms of
the proposal of this Objection to his Sentiments; and it will appear, that he
has not much to offer for its removal. We dispute not about the Rites and
Circumstances of Religion, which are terms ambiguous, and, as has been
declared, may be variously interpreted; no more than we do about the nails of
the Tabernacle, wherein there were none at all. But it is about the Worship of
God and what is necessary thereunto. The ordering hereof, that is, of the House
of God and all things belonging thereunto, was committed to Jesus Christ, as a
Son over his own house, Heb. 3. 3, 4, 5. In the discharge of his trust herein,
he was faithful as was Moses; who received that testimony from God, that he was
faithful in all his house, upon his ordering all things in the Worship of God
as he commanded him, without adding any thing of his own thereunto, or leaving
any thing uninstituted or undetermined, which was to be of use therein. From
the faithfulness of Christ, therefore, in and over the house of God, as it is
compared with the faithfulness of Moses, it may be concluded, I think; that he
ordered all things for the Worship of God in the Churches of the New Testament,
as far as Moses did in and for the Church of the old; and more is not contended
for. And it will be made appear, that his Commission in this matter was as
extensive, as that of Moses at the least; or he could not, in that trust and
the discharge of it, have that pre-eminence above him, which in the place is
ascribed unto him.

Section 7. An account is given of the great variety of circumstances, which do
a^tend all humane actions: whence it is in possible that they should be all
determine by Divine Prescription. The same we sa^ also; but add withal, that if
men would leave these circumstance free under t^^ conduct of common prudence in
the in^stituted Worship of God, as they are com^pelled so to do in the
performance of Mo^ral Duties, and as he himself has le^^ them free; it would
be as convenient for the Reasons and Consciences of men, an attempt to the
contrary. Thus we have an instance given us by our Author in the Moral Duty of
Charity; which is command^ed us of God himself; but the times, sea^sons,
manner, objects, measures of it are le^^ free, to be determined by humane
pru^dence, upon emergencies and occasions* It may be now enquired, whether the
Magistrate, or any other, can determine those circumstances by a Law? and
whether they are not, as by God, so by al^ wise men, left free, under the
conduct of their Reason and Conscience, who are obliged to the duty it self by
the command of God? And why may not the same Rule and Order be observed with
respect to the circumstances that attend the performance of the duties of
instituted Worship? Besides, there are general circumstances that are capable
of a determination: such are time and place as naturally considered, without
such Adjuncts as might give them a moral consideration, or render them good or
evil; these the Magistrate may determine. But for particular circumstances
attending individual actions, they will hardly be regulated by a standing Law.
But none of these things have the least interest in our debate. To add things
necessarily to be observed in the Worship of God, no way naturally related unto
the actions wherewith prescribed Worship is to be performed, and then to call
them circumstances thereof, erects a notion of things which nothing but
interest can digest and concoct.

His eighth Section is unanswerable. It contains such a strenuous reviling of
the Puritans, and contemptuous reproaches of their Writings, with such
Encomi^ms of their Adversaries, as there is no dealing with it. And so I leave
it. And so likewise I do his ninth, wherein, as he says, he upbraids the men
of his contest with their shameful overthrows: and dares them to look those
enemies in the face, that have so lamentably cowed them, by so many absolute
triumphs and victories. Which kind of juvenile exultations on feigned
suppositions, will, I suppose, in due time receive an allay from his own more
advised thoughts and considerations. The instance, wherewith he countenaunceth
himself in his triumphant Acclamations unto the victory of his party, is the
Book of Mr. Hooker and its being unanswered. Concerning which I shall only say;
that, as I wish the same moderation, ingenuity and learning unto all, that
engage in the same cause with him in these days; so if this Author will mind
us of any one Argument in his longsome Discourse, not already frequently
answered, and that in Print, long ago, that it shall have its due
consideration. But this kind of Discourses, it may be, on second thoughts will
be esteemed not so comely. And I can mind him of those, who boast as highly of
some Champions of their own against all Protestants, as he can do of any Patron
of those Opinions, which he contendeth for. But it does not always fall out,
that those who have the most outward advantages, and greatest leisure, have the
best cause, and abilities to manage it.

The next Sections treat concerning Superstition, Will Worship and Popery;
which, as he faith, having been charged by some on the Church unduly, he
retorts the crime of them upon the Authors of that charge. I love not to
strive, nor will I contend about words that may have various significations
fixed on them. It is about things that we differ. That which is evil, is so,
however you call it, and whether you can give it any special name or no. That
which is good, will still be so, call it what and how men please. The giving of
a bad or odious name to any thing, does not make it self to be bad or odious.
The managing therefore of those Appellations, either as to their charge or
recharge, I am no way concerned in. When it is proved, that men believe, teach
or practice otherwise, than in duty to God they ought to do; then they do evil:
and when they obey his mind and will in all things, then they do well; and in
the end will have the praise thereof. In particular, I confess Superstition, as
the Word is commonly used, denotes a vicious habit of mind with respect unto
God and his Worship; and so is not a proper denomination for the Worship it
self, or of any evil or crime in it. But yet, if it were worth contending
about, I could easily manifest, that according to the use of the word by good
Authors in all Ages, men have been charged with that crime, from the kind and
nature of the Worship it self observed by them. And when St. Paul charged the
Athenians with an excess in Superstition, it was from the multiplication of
their Gods, and thronging them together, right or wrong, in the dedication of
their Altars. But these things belong not at all to our present design. Let
them, who enjoin things unto an indispensible necessary Observation in the
Worship of God, which are not by him prescribed therein, take care of their own
minds, that they be free from the Vice of Superstition; and they shall never be
judged, or charged by me therewith. Though I must say, that a multiplication of
Instances in this kind, as to their own observation, is the principle, if not
the only way whereby men who own the true and proper object of Religious
Worship, do or may manifest themselves to be influenced by that corrupt habit
of mind; so that they may relate unto Superstition, as the Effect to its Cause.
But the Recrimination here insisted on, with respect unto them, who refuse
admittance unto, or observance of things so enjoined, is such as ought to be
expected from provocations, and a desire of Retortion. Such things usually
taste of the Cask; and are sufficiently weak and impertinent. For it is a
mistake, that those charged do make, as it is here expressed, any thing
necessary not to be done; or put any Religion in the not doing of any thing, or
the non-observance of any Rites, Orders, or Ceremonies; any other, than every
one puts in his abstinence from what God forbids; which is a part of our Moral
Obedience.

And the whole Question, in this matter, is not, whether, as it is here
phrased, God has tied up his creatures to nice and pettish Laws; laying a
greater stress upon a doubtful or indifferent Ceremony, than upon the great
duty of obedience. But merely, whether men are to observe in the Worship of
God, what they apprehend he has enjoined them; and to abstain from what he
does forbid; according to all the light that they have into his mind and will;
Which enquiry, as I suppose, may be satisfied; that they are so to practice,
and so to abstain, without being liable to the charge of Superstition. No man
can answer for the minds of other men; nor know what depraved vicious habits
and inclinations, they are subject unto. Outward actions are all, that we are
in any case allowed to pass judgment upon; and of men's minds, as those Actions
are Indications of them. Let men therefore, observe and do in the Worship of
God whatever the Lord Christ has commanded them; and abstain from what he has
forbidden, whether in particular instances, or by general directive precepts
and Rules, by which means alone many things are capable of falling under a
prohibition; without the least thought of placing any Worship of God in their
abstinence from this or that thing in particular; and I think, they need not
much concern themselves in the charge of superstition, given in, or out, by any
against them.

For what is discoursed Section 11. about will worship, I cannot so far agree
with our Author, as I could in what passed before about superstition; and that
partly because I cannot discern him to be herein at any good Agreement with
himself. For superstition, he tells us, consists in the Apprehensions of men,
when their minds are possessed with weak and uncomly conceits of God, page 201.
here, that will worship is one sort of superstition; and yet this willworship
consists in nothing else, than in men's making their own phancys and inventions
necessary parts of Religion, which outward actings are not coincident with the
inward frame and habit of mind before described. And I do heartily wish, that
some men could well free themselves from the charge of will worship, as it is
here described by our Author; though cautelously expressed, to secure the
concernments of his own Interest from it. For although I will not call the
things, they contend to impose on others in the worship of God, their phancys;
yet themselves acknowledge them to be their Inventions: and when they make them
necessary to be observed in the whole Worship of God, as public and stated;
and forbid the celebration of that Worship without them; when they declare
their Usefulness, and spiritual or mystical significancy in that Worship or
service, designed to Honor God in or by their use; setting up some of them to
an Exclusion of what Christ has commanded; if I cannot understand, but that
they make them necessary parts of Gods Worship, as to the actual observance of
it, I hope they will not be angry with me: since I know the worst they can
possibly with truth charge upon me in this matter, is, that I am not so wise,
nor of so quick an understanding as themselves. Neither does our Author well
remove his charge from those whose defense he has undertaken: for (...) does
it only by this consideration; tha^ they do not make the things, by them
introduced in the Worship of God, to be parts of Religion. They are not so, he
says, nor are made so by then. For this hinders not, but that they may be
looked on as parts of Divine Worship; seeing we are taught by the same hand,
that external Worship is no part of Religion at all. And let him abide by what
he closes this section withal; namely, that they make not any Additions to
the Worship of God, but only provide, that what God has required, be performed
in an orderly and decent manner, and as to my concern, there shall be an end of
this part of our controversy.

The ensuing paragraphs about Christian Liberly; adding to the commands of God;
and Pope^y; are of the same nature with those preceding about superstition and
Will Worship. There is nothing new in them, but words; and they may be briefly
passed through. For the charge of Popery, on the one side or other, I know
nothing in it; but that, when any thing is enjoined or imposed on men's practice
in the Worship of God, which is known to have been invented in and by the Papal
Church during the time of its confessed Aposta^y, it must needs beget
prejudices against it in the minds of them, who consider the ways, means, and
ends of the fatal de^ection of that Church; and are jealous of a sinful
compliance with it in any of those things. The Recharge on those, who are said
to set up a Pope in every man's conscience, whilst they vest it with a power of
countermanding the decrees of Princes; if no more be intended, by
countermanding, but a refusal to observe their decrees, and yield Obedience to
them in things against their Consciences, which is all can be pretended; if it
fall not on this Author himself, as in some cases it does; and which by the
certain conduct of right reason, must be extended to all, wherein the
Consciences of m^n are affected with the Authority of God; yet it does on all
Christians in the World, that I know of, besides himself. For adding to the Law
of God, it is not charged on any, that they add to his commands; as though they
made their own divine, or part of his word and law: but only that they add in
his Worship to the things commanded by him, which being forbidden in the
Scripture, when they can free themselves from it, I shall rejoice; but as yet
see not how they can so do. Nor are there any, that I ko^^ of, who set up any
prohibitions of their ow^ in or about the Worship of God, or as thing thereunto
pertaining, as is unduly and unrighteously pretended. There (...) be indeed
some things enjoined by me^ which they do and must abstain from, (...) they
would do from any other sin whateve^ But their consciences are regulated by ^
prohibitions, but those of God himsel^^ And things are prohibited and made
sinf^^ unto them, not only when in particular and by a specification of their
instances they are forbidden; but also when ther^ lie general prohibitions
against them ^ any account whatever. Some men indee^ think, that if a
particular prohibition of any thing might be produced, they would a^ quiesce in
it; whilst they plead an ex^emption of sundry things from being in^cluded in
general prohibitions; althoug^ they have the direct formal Reason attending
them, on which those prohibition^ are founded. But it is to be feared, tha^
this also is but a pretense. For let any thing be particularly forbidden, yet
i^ men's interest and superstition induce them to observe or retain it; they
will find out distinctions to evade the prohibition and retain the practice.
What can be more directly forbidden, than the making or use^^g of graven
Images, in or about Religious Worship? and yet we know how little ^ome men do
acquiesce in that prohibi^^on. And it was the Observation of a ^earned Prelate
of this Nation, in his re^ection of the distinctions whereby they ^ndeavoured
to countenance themselves in their Idolatry; that the particular instances of
things forbidden in the second Commandment, are not principally intended; ^ut
the general Rule, of not adding any thing in the Worship of God without his
Institution. Non imago, says he, non simulachrum prohibetur; sed non facies
tibi. What way, therefore, any thing becomes a sin unto any, be it by a
particular or general prohibition; be it from the scandal that may attend its
practice; unto him it is a sin. And it is a wild notion, that when any persons
abstain from the practice of that in the Worship of God, which to them is
sinful as so practiced, they add prohibitions of their own to the commands of
God.

The same is to be said concerning Christian Liberty. No man, that I know of,
makes things indifferent to be sinful, as is pretended; nor can any man in his
right wits do so. For none can entertain contradictory notions of the same
things, at the same time: as those are, that the fa^^ things are indifferent,
that is, not sin^^^ and sinful. But this some say; that this in their own
nature indifferent, that (...) absolutely so, may be yet relatively (...)
lawful; because with respect unto that ^^^^lation forbidden of God. To set up
Altar of old for a Civil memorial in a place, was a thing indifferent: but to
(...) up an Altar to offer Sacrifices on, who the Tabernacle was not, was a
sin. It^ indifferent for a man that understands the Language, to read the
Scripture in La^^^ or in English: but to read it in Latin u^ a Congregation
that understands it (...) as a part of Gods Worship, would be (...) Nor does
our Christian Liberty consist al^^ in our judgment of the indifferency things
in their own nature, made nec^^^sary to practice by commands, as has b^
showed. And if it does so, the Jews h^ that privilege as much as Christians.
A^ they are easily offended, who complain^ that their Christian Liberty, in the
P^^ctice of what they think meet in the W^^ship of God, is entrenched on, by
such, leaving them to their pleasure, because their Apprehension of the will of
God the contrary, cannot comply with them their practice.

The close of this Chapter is designed to the removal of an Objection,
pretended to be weighty and difficult; but indeed made so merely by the Novel
Opinions advanced by this Author. For laying aside all respect unto some
uncouth Principles broached in this Discourse, there is scarce a Christian
Child of ten years old, but can resolve the difficulty pretended, and that
according to the mind of God. For it is supposed, that the Magistrate may
establish a Worship that is Idolatrous and Superstitious: and an enquiry is
made thereon, what the subject shall do in that case? why? where lies the
difficulty? why, says he, in this case they must be either Rebels, or
Idolaters. If they obey, they sin against God: if they disobey, they sin
against their Sovereign. According to the Principles hither to received in
Christian Religion, any one would Reply, and say, no: for it is certain, that
men must obey God, and not contract the guilt of such horrible sins, as
Idolatry and Superstition; but in so doing they are neither Rebels against
their Ruler, nor do sin against him. It is true, they must quieily and
patiently submit to what they may suffer from him: but they are in so doing
guilty of no Rebellion nor sin against him. Did ever any Christian yet so much
as call it into question, whether the Primitive Christians were Rebels, and
sinned against their Rulers because they would not obey those Edicts, whereby
they established Idolatrous Worship? or did any one ever think, that they had a
difficult case of Conscience to resolve in that matter? They were indeed
accused by the Pagans as Rebels against the Emperors; but no Christian every
yet thought their case to have been doubtful. But all this difficulty arises
from the making of two Gods, where there ought to be but one. And this renders
the case so perplexed, that, for my part, I cannot see directly, how it is
determined by our Author. Sometimes he speaks, as though it were the duty of
Subjects to comply with the establishment of Idolatry supposed, as page 214,
215. for with respect, as I suppose it is, to the case as by him stated, that
he says; men must not withdraw their obedience: and better submit unto the
unreasonable impositions of Nero or Caligula, than to hazard the dissolution of
the State. Sometimes he seems not to oblige them in Conscience to practice
according to the public prescription; but only pleads, that the Magistrate may
punish them, if they do not; and sain would have it thought, that he may do so
justly. But these things are certain unto us in this matter, and are so many
(...) in Christian Religion; that if the supreme Magistrate command any thing
in the Worship of God that is Idolatrous, we are not to practice it
accordingly; because we must obey God rather than men. Nextly, that in our
refusal of compliance with the Magistrates commands, we do neither rebel nor
sin against him. For God has not, does not at any time, shut us up in any
condition unto a necessity of sinning. Thirdly, that in case the Magistrate
shall think meet, through his own mistakes and misapprehensions, to punish,
destroy and burn them alive, who shall not comply with his Edicts, as did
Nebuchadnezzar; or as they did in England in times of Popery; after all honest
and Lawful private ways of self-preservation used, which we are obliged unto;
we are quietly and patiently to submit to the Will of God in our sufferings,
without opposing or resisting by force, or stirring up seditions or tumults, to
the disturbance of public peace. But our Author has elsewhere provided a full
Solution of this difficulty, Chap. 8. p. 308. Where he tells us, that in cases
and disputes of a public concern, Private men are not properly sui juris; they
have no power over thi^ actions; they are not to be directed by their own
judgments, or determined by their ou^ wills; but by the commands and
determina^^ons of the public Conscience. And if the^ be any sin in the
command, he that imposed i^ shall answer for it, and not I whose Duty it i^ to
obey. The commands of Authority will warrant my Obedience, my Obedience will
hall^^ or at least excuse my action; and so secure (...) from sin if not from
error, because I folle^ the best guide and most probable direction, (...) am
capable of; and though I may mistake, my integrity shall preserve my innocence;
and in all doubtful and disputable cases it is better to err with Authority,
than to be in the right against it. When he shall produce any o^^ Divine
Writer, Any of the Ancient Fathers, any sober Schoolmen, or Casuists, any
Learned modern Divines, speaking at this rate, or giving countenance unto this
direction given to men, for the regulating of their moral actions, it shall be
farther attended unto. I know some such thing is muttered amongst the pleaders
for blind Obedience upon Vows voluntarily engaged into, for that purpose. But
as it is acknowledged by themselves, that by those Vows, they deprive
themselves of that Right and Liberty which naturally belongs unto them, as unto
all other men, wherein they place much of the merit of them; so by others those
Vows themselves, with all the pretended brutish Obedience that proceeds from
them, are sufficiently evidenced to be an horrible Abomination, and such as
make a ready way for the perpetration of all villainies in the world, to which
purpose that kind of Obedience has been principally made use of. But these
things are extremely fond; and not only, as applied unto the Worship of God,
repugnant to the Gospel, but also in themselves to the Law of our Creation, and
that Moral dependence on God, which is indispensible unto all individuals of
mankind. We are told in the Gospel, that every one is to be fully persuaded in
his own mind; that whatever is not of faith is sin; that we are not to be (in
such things) the Servants of men; that other men's leading of us amiss, whoever
they are, will not excuse us; for if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall
into the ditch; and he that follows, is as sure to perish as he that leads.
The next Guids of the souls and Consciences of men, are doubtless those who
speak unto them in the name of God, or Preachers of the Gospel. Yet are all the
Disciples of Christ, frequently warned to take heed that they be not deceived
by any, under that pretense, but diligently examining what is proposed unto
them, they discern in themselves what is good and evil. Nor does the great
Apostle himself require us to be followers of him, any further than he was a
follower of Christ. They will find small relief, who at the last day shall
charge their sins on the commands of others, whatever hope to the contrary they
are put into by our Author. Neither will it be any excuse that we have done
according to the Precepts of men, if we have done contrary to those of God.
Ephraim, of old, was broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the
commandment, Hos. 5. 14 But would not his Obedience hallow, or at least excuse
his action? And would not the Authority of the King warrant his Obedience? Or
must Ephraim now answer for the sin, and not be only that imposed the command?
But it seems that when Jeroboam sinned, who at that time had this goodly
Creature of the public Conscience in keeping, he made Israel sin also, who
obeyed him. It is moreover a brave attempt to assert that Private men with
respect to any of their Moral Actions, are not properly sui juris, have no
power over their actions, are not to be directed by their own judgments, or
determined by their own wills. This is Circes Rod, one stroke whereof turned
men into Hoggs. For to what purpose serve their Understandings, their
Judgments, their Wills, if not to guide and determine them in their Actions? I
think he would find hard work, that should go about to persuade men to put out
their own eyes, or blind themselves, that they might see all by one public
Eye. And I am sure it is no less unreasonable, to desire them to reject their
own Wills, Understandings, and Judgments, to be lead and determined by a
public Conscience; considering especially that that public Conscience it self
is a mere Tragelaphus, which never had Existence in Rerum natura. Besides,
suppose men should be willing to accept of this condition of renouncing their
own Understandings and Judgments, from being their Guides as to their Moral
actions; I fear it will be found that indeed they are not able so to do. Men's
Understandings, and their Consciences, are placed in them by him who made them,
to rule in them and over their actions in his name, and with respect unto their
dependence on him. And let men endeavor it whilst they please, they shall
never be able utterly to cast of this Yoke of God, and destroy this order of
things, which by him inlaid in the Principles of all Rational Beings. Men,
whilst they are me^ in things that have a Moral Good or E^^ in them or
adhering to them, must be guided and determined by their own Understandings
whether they will or no. A^ if by any means, they stisle the actings (...) them
at present, they will not avoid the Judgment, which according to them, shi^
pass upon them at the last day. But the^ things may elsewhere be farther
pursue. In the mean time the Reader may take thi^ Case as it is determined by
the Learned P^^late before mentioned, in his Dialogue about Subjection and
Obedience against the P^pists, whose words are as follow. Par. 3 page 297.
Philand. If the Prince establish any Religion, whatever it be, you must by you^
oath obey it. Theoph. We must not rebel^ and take arms against the Prince; but
will Reverence and Humility serve God before the Prince, and that is nothing
against our Oath. Philand. Then is not the Prince Supreme. Theoph. Why so.
Philand. Your selves are superior, when you serve whom you list. Theoph. As
thought to serve God according to his will, were to serve whom we list, and not
whom Princes and all others ought to serve. Philand. But you will be Judges,
when God is well served, and when not. Theoph. If you can excuse us before God
when you mistead us, we will serve him as you shall appoint us; otherwise if
every man shall answer for himself, good reason he be Master of his own
Conscience, in that which touches him so near, and no man shall excuse him
for. Philand. This is to make every man Supreme Judge of Religion. Theoph. The
poorest wretch that is, may be Supreme Governor of his own heart; Princes rule
the public and external actions of their Countries, but not the Consciences
of men. This in his days was the Doctrine of the Church of England; and as was
observed before, no Person who then lived in it, knew better what was so.

The sole enquiry remaining is, whether the Magistrate, having established such
a Religion, as is Idolatrous or Superstitious, may justly and lawfully punish
and destroy his Subjects, for their non-complyance therewithal? This is that,
which, if I understand him, our Author would give countenance unto; contrary to
the common sense of all Christians, yea of common sense it self. For wherereas
he interweaves his Discourse with suppositions, that men may mistake in
Religion, and abuse it; all such Interpositions are purely sophistical, seeing
the Case proposed to Resolution, which ought in the whole to be precisely
attended unto, is about the refusal to observe and practice a Religion
Idolatrous or Superstitious. Of the like nature is that Argument, which alone
he makes use of here and elsewhere, to justify his Principles; namely, the
necessity of Government; and how much better the worst Government is, and the
most depraved in its administration, than Anarchy or Confusion. For as this by
all mankind is unquestioned; so I do not think there is any one among them, who
can tell how to use this concession to our Authors purpose. Does it follow,
that because Magistrates cannot justly nor Righteously prescribe an Idolatrous
Religion, and compel their Subjects to the Profession and Obedience of it; and
because the Subjects cannot, nor ought to yield Obedience therein, because of
the antecedent and superior power of God over them; that therefore Anarchy or
Confusion must be preferred before such an Administration of Government? Let
the Magistrate command what he will in Religion, yet whilst he attends unto
the ends of all Civil Government, that Government must needs be every way
better than none; and is by private Christians to be born with, and submitted
unto, until God in his Providence shall provide relief. The primitive
Christians lived some Ages in the condition described; refusing to observe the
Religion required by Law; and exercising themselves in the Worship of God,
which was strictly forbidden. And yet neither Anarchy, nor Confusion, nor any
disturbance of public Tranquillity did ensue thereon. So did the Protestants
here in England in the days of Queen Mary, and sometime before. The Argument,
which he endeavors in these Discourses to give an Answer unto, is only of this
importance. If the supreme Magistrate may command what Religion he pleases,
and enact the observation of it under destructive penalties; whereas the
greatest part of Magistrates in the World will and do prescribe such Religions
and ways of Divine Worship, as are Idolatrous or Superstitious, which their
Subjects are indispensibly bound in Conscience not to comply withal; then is
the Magistrate justified in the punishing of men for their serving of God as
they ought; and they may suffer as evil doers, in what they suffer as
Christians. This, all the World over, will justify them that are uppermost,
and have power in their hands, (on no other ground, but because they are so,
and have so,) in this Oppressions and destructions of them, the being under
them in Civil respects, d^ dissent from them in things Religious, No^ whether
this be according to the mind (...) God or no, is left unto the judgment (...)
all indifferent men. We have, I confes^^ I know not how many expressions
inte^posed in this Discourse, as was observed about sedition, troubling of
public peace men being turbulent against prescribe Rules of Worship, whereof
if he pretend that every peaceable dissenter and dissent from what is publicly
established in Religious Worship, are guilty, he is a pleasa^^^ man in a
disputation; and, if he do any thing, he determines his case proposed o^ the
part of compliance with Idolatro^ and Superstitious Worship. If he do not so;
the mention of them in this place it very importune and unseasonable. All men
acknowledge, that such miscarriages and practices may be justly coerced and
punished. But what is this to a bare refusal to comply in any Idolatrous
Worship, and peacable Practice of what God does require, as that which he will
accept and own?

But our Author proceeds to find out many pretenses, on the account whereof,
Persons whom he acknowledges to be innocent and guiltless, may be punished.
And though their Apprehensions in Religion be not, as he says, so much their
crime, as their infelicity, yet there is no remedy, but it must expose them to
the public Rods and Axes, page 219. I have heard of some wise and Righteous
Princes, who have affirmed, that they had rather let twenty nocent persons go
free, than punish or destroy one that is innocent. This seems to render them
more like him, whose Vicegerents they are; than to seek out colorable reasons
for the punishment of them, whom they know to be innocent; which course is here
suggested unto them. Such advice might be welcome to him, whom men called
(...), Clay mingled and leavened with blood; others no doubt will abhor it, and
detest it. But what spirit of meekness and mercy our Author is acted by, he
discovers in the close of this Chapter, page 223. for, says he, it is easily
imaginable how an honest and well-meaning man may, through mere ignorance, fall
into such errors, which, though God will pardon, yet governors must punish.
His integrity may expiate the crime, but cannot prevent the mischief of his
error. Nay so easy is it for men to deserve to be punished for their
Consciences, that there is no Nation in the World, in which, (were government
rightly understood and duty managed,) mistakes and abuses of Religion would not
supply the galleys with vastly greater numbers, than Villainy. There is no
doubt, but that if Phaeton get into the Chariot of the Sun, the world will be
sufficiently fired. And if every Absalom who thinks he understands government
and the due management of it, better than its present possessours, were
enthroned, there would be havoc enough made among mankind. But blessed be God,
who in many places, has disposed it into such hands, as under whom, those who
desire to fear and serve him according to his Will, may yet enjoy a more
tolerable condition than such Adversaries are pleased withal. That honest and
well-meaning men, falling into errors about the Worship of God, through their
ownignorance, wherein their integrity may expiate their crime; must be
punished, must not be pardoned; looks, methinks, with an appearance of more
severity, than it is the Will of God, that the World should be Governed by;
seeing one end of his instituting and appointing Government among men, is, to
represent himself in his Power, Goodness and Wisdom unto them. And he that
shall conjoyn another assertion of our Author, namely, that it is better and
more eligible to tolerate debaucheries and immoralities in conversation, than
liberty of conscience for men to worship God according to those apprehensions
which they have of his will; with the close of this Chapter, that it is so
easy for men to deserve to be punished for their consciences, that there is no
Nation in the world, in which, were Government rightly understood, and duly
managed, mistakes and abuses of Religion would not supply the Galleys with
vastly greater numbers, than Villainy; will easily judge with what Spirit, from
what principles, and with what design, this whole Discourse was composed.

But I find my self, utterly besides and beyond my intention, engaged in
particular controversies: and finding by the prospect I have taken of what
remains in the Treatise under consideration; that it is of the same nature and
importance, with what is past and a full continuation of those opprobrious
reproaches of them whom he opposes; and open discoveries of earnest desires
after their trouble and ruin, which we have now sufficiently been inured unto;
I shall choose rather here to break off this Discourse, than further to pursue
the ventilation of those differences, wherein I shall not willingly, or of
choice, at any time engage. Besides, what is in the whole Discourse of especial
and particular controversy, may be better handled apart by it self: as
probably ere long it will be; if this new Representation of old pretenses,
quickened by invectives, and improved beyond all bounds and measures formerly
fixed or given unto them, be judged to deserve a particular consideration. In
the mean time this Author is more concerned than I, to consider, whether those
bold incursions, that he has made upon the ancient boundaries and rules of
Religion, and the consciences of men; those contemptuous revilings of his
Adversaries, which he has almost filled the Pages of his Book withal; those
discoveries he has made of the want of a due sense of the weaknesses and
infirmities of men, which himself wants not; and of fierce, implacable,
sanguinary thoughts against them, who appeal to the Judgment Seat of God, that
they do not in any thing dissent from him or others, but out of a Reverence of
the Authority of God, and for fear of provoking his holy Majesty; his
incompassionate insulting overmen in distresses and sufferings, will add to the
comfort of that account, which he must shortly make before his Lord and ours.

To close up this Discourse; The principal design of the Treatise thus far
surveyed, is to persuade or seduce Sovereign Princes, or Supreme Magistrates
unto two evils, that are indeed inseparable, and equally pernicious to
themselves and others. The one of these is, to invade or usurp the Throne of
God; and the other, to behave themselves therein unlike him. And where the one
leads the way, the other will assuredly follow. The Empire over Religion, the
souls and consciences of men in the Worship of God, has hitherto been esteemed
to belong unto God alone, to be a peculiar Jewel in his glorious Diadem.
Neither can it spring from any other fountain but absolute and infinite
Supremacy, such as belongs to him, as he has alone, who is the first cause and
last end of all. All attempts to educe it from, or to resolve it into any other
principle, are vain and will prove abortive. But here the Sons of men are
enticed to say with him of old; We will ascend into Heaven; we will exalt our
Throne above the Stars of God; we will sit upon the Mount of the Congregation,
in the sides of the North; we will ascend above the heights of the clouds; we
will be like the Most High. For wherein can this be effected? What Ladders have
men to climb personally into Heaven? and who shall attend them in their
attempt? It is an assuming of a dominion over the souls and consciences of men
in the Worship of God, wherein and whereby this may be pretended, and therein
alone. And all this description of the invasion of the Throne of God, whence
he, who did so, is compared to Lucifer, who sought Supremacy in Heaven; is but
the setting up of his power in and over the Church in its Worship, which was
performed in the Temple, the Mount of the Congregation, and in Sion, on the
North of the City of Jerusalem, Isaiah 14. This now Princes are persuaded unto:
and can scarce escape without reproaches, where they refuse or omit the
attempting of it. Suppose they be prevailed with, to run the hazard and
adventure of such an undertaking; what is it that they are thereon persuaded
unto? How are they directed to behave themselves, after they have assumed a
likeness unto the Most High, and exalted themselves to his Throne? Plainly that
which is now expected from them, is nothing but wrath, fury, indignation,
persecution, destructions, banishments, ruin of the persons, and families of
men innocent, peaceable, fearing God, and useful in their several stations, to
satisfy their own wills, or to serve the interests of other men. Is this to
act like God, whose power and authority they have assumed, or like to his
greatest Adversary? Does God deal thus in this world, in his Rule over the
souls of men? or is not this that, which is set out in the Fable of Phaeton,
that he, who takes the Chariot of the Sun, will cast the whole world into a
combustion? So he, who of old is supposed to have affected the Throne of God,
has ever since acted that cruelty to his power, which manifests what was his
design therein, and what would have been the end of his coveted Sovereignty.
And whoever at any time shall take to himself that power, that is peculiar to
God, will find himself left in the exercise of it, to act utterly unlike him,
yea contrary unto him. Power, they say, is a liquor, that let it be put into
what vessel you will, it is ready to overflow: and as useful as it is, as
nothing is more to mankind in this world, yet when it is not accompanied with a
due proportion of Wisdom and Goodness, it is troublesome if not pernicious to
them concerned in it. The power of God is infinite, and his Sovereignty
absolute: but the whole exercise of those glorious dreadful Properties of his
nature, is regulated by Wisdom and Goodness no less infinite than themselves.
And as he has all power over the souls and consciences of men; so he exercises
it with that Goodness, Grace, Clemency, Patience and Forbearance, which I hope
we are all sensible of. If there be any like him, equal unto him in these
things, I will readily submit the whole of my Religion and conscience unto him,
without the least hesitation. And if God, in his Dominion and Rule over the
souls and consciences of men, do exercise all Patience, Benignity,
Long-suffering and Mercy; for it is his compassion that we are not consumed;
does he not declare, that none is meet to be entrusted with that Power and
Rule, but they, who have those things like himself: at least, that in what they
are or may be concerned in it, they express, and endeavor to answer his
example. Indeed Sovereign Princes and Supreme Magistrates are Gods
Vicegerents, and are called Gods on the earth; to represent his Power and
Authority unto men in Government, within the bounds prefixed by himself unto
them, which are the most extensive that the nature of things is capable of; and
in so doing, to conform themselves and their actings to him and his, as he is
the great Monarch, the Proto-type of all Rule and the exercise of it, in
Justice, Goodness, Clemency and Benignity; that so the whole of what they do
may tend to the relief, comfort, refreshment and satisfaction of mankind,
walking in ways of peace and innocence, in answer unto the ends of their Rule,
is their Duty, their Honor and their Safety. And to this end, does God usually
and ordinarily furnish them with a due proportion of Wisdom and understanding:
for they also are of God; He gives them an understanding suited and
commensurate to their work; that what they have to do, shall not ordinarily be
too hard for them: nor shall they be tempted to mistakes and miscarriages from
the work they are employed about, which he has made to be their own. But if
any of them shall once begin to exceed their bounds, to invade his Throne, and
to take to themselves the Rule of any Province, belonging peculiarly and solely
to the Kingdom of Heaven; therein a conformity unto God in their actings is not
to be expected. For be they never so amply furnished with all Abilities of mind
and soul for the work, and those duties which are their own, which are proper
unto them: yet they are not capable of any such stores of Wisdom and Goodness,
as should fit them for the work of God, that which peculiarly belongs to his
Authority and Power. His Power is infinite; his Authority is absolute; so are
his Wisdom, Goodness and Patience. Thus he rules Religion, the souls and
consciences of men. And when Princes partake in these things, infinite Power,
infinite Wisdom, and infinite Goodness, they may assume the same Rule and act
like him. But to pretend an interest in the one, and not in the other, will set
them in the greatest Opposition to him. Those therefore, who can prevail with
Magistrates to take the power of God over Religion and the souls of me^ in
their observance of it, need never fea^ that when they have so done, they will
imitate him in his Patience, Clemency, Meekness, Forbearance and Benignity; for
they are no way capable of these things in a due proportion to that Power which
is not their own; however they may be eminently furnished for that which is so.
Thus have we known Princes, (such as Trajan, Adrian, Julian of old) whilst they
kept themselves to their proper Sphere, ordering and disposing the affairs of
this world, and all things belonging to public Peace, Tranquillity and Welfare,
to have been renowned for their Righteousness, Moderation and Clemency, and
thereby made dear to mankind: who, when they have fallen into the excess of
assuming Divine power over the consciences of men and the Worship of God, have
left behind them such footsteps and remembrances of Rage, Cruelty and Blood in
the World, as make them justly abhorred to all Generations. This alone is the
seat and posture, wherein the Powers of the Earth, are delighted with the sighs
and groans of innocent persons, with the fears and dread of them, that are and
would be at peace; with the punishment of their Obedient Subjects; and the
binding of those hands of industry, which would willingly employ themselves for
the public good and welfare. Take this occasion out of the way, and there is
nothing that should provoke Sovereign Magistrates, to any thing that is
grievous, irksome or troublesome to men peaceable and innocent; nothing that
should hinder their Subjects from seeing the presence of God with them in their
Rule, and his Image upon them in their Authority, causing them to delight in
the thoughts of them, and to pray continually for their continuance and
prosperity. It may be some may be pleased for a season with s^^^rities against
Dissenters, such as concerning whom we discourse; who falsely suppose their
interest to lie therein. It may be they may think meet, rather to have all
debaucheries of life and conversation tolerated, than liberty for peaceable
men to Worship God, according to their light and persuasion of his mind and
will; as the multitude was pleased of old with the cry of, Release Barrabas,
and let Jesus be crucified; Magistrates themselves will at length perceive, how
little they are beholding to any, who importunately suggest unto them fierce
and sanguinary connsels in these matters. It is a saying of Maximilian the
Emperor celebrated in many Authors; Nullum, said he, enormins peccatum dari
potest, quam in conscientias imperium exercere velle. Qui enim conscientiis
imperare volunt, ii arcem caeli invadunt, and plerumque terrae possessionem
perdunt. Magistrates need not fear, but that the open wickedness and bloody
crimes of men, will supply them with objects to be Examples and Testimonies of
their Justice and severity. And methinks it should not be judged an unequal
Petition by them, who Rule in the stead and fear of God, that those who are
innocent in their lives, useful in their callings and occasions, peaceable in
the Land, might not be exposed to trouble, only because they design and
endeavor, according to their light, which they are invincibly persuaded to be
from God himself, to take care, that they perish not eternally. However I know,
I can mind them of Advice, which is ten thousand times more their interest to
attend unto, than to any that is tendered in the Treatise we have had under
consideration, and it is that given by a King, unto those that should partake
of the like Royal Authority with himself; Psalm 2. 10, 11, 12. Be wise now
therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed, ye Judges of the earth. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, left he be angry, and ye
perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little; blessed are all
they that put their trust in him. And he who can inform me, how they can render
themselves more like unto God, more acceptable unto him, and more the Concern
and Delight of mankind, than by relieving peaceable and innocent persons from
their Fears, Cares, and Solicitousness about undeserved evils, or from the
suffering of such things, which no mortal man can convince them, that they have
merited to undergo or suffer; he shall have my thanks for his discovery.

And what is it, that we treat about? What is it, that a little Truce and Peace
is desired unto, and pleaded for? What are the concerns of public good
therein? Let a little sedate consideration be exercised about these things, and
the causelesness of all the Wrath we have been conversing withal, will quickly
appear. That there is a sad degeneracy of Christianity in the world, amongst
the Professors of Christian Religion, from the Rule, Spirit, Worship and
Conversation of the first Christians, who in all things observed and expressed
the Nature, Virtue, and Power of the Gospel, all must acknowledge, and many do
complain. Whatever of this kind comes to pass, and by what means soever, it is
the interest and design of them, who are present gainers by it in the world, to
keep all things in the posture, that yields them their advantage. Hence upon
every Appearance of an Alteration, or Apprehension that any will desert the
Ways of Worship, wherein they have been engaged, they are cast into a storm of
passion and outrage, like Demetrius and the rest of the Silver-smiths,
pretending divisions, present settlement, ancient veneration, and the like;
when their gain and advantage, whether known or unknown to themselves, is that,
which both influenceth them with such a frame of Spirit, and animates them to
actings suitable thereunto. Thus in the Ages past there was so great and
universal an Apostasy, long before foretold, overspreading Christianity, that
by innumerable sober persons it was judged intolerable: and that, if men had
any regard to the Gospel of Christ, their own freedom in the world, or
everlasting blessedness, there was a necessity of a Reformation, and the
reduction of the profession of Christian Religion unto some nearer conformity
to the Primitive times and pattern. Into this design sundry Kings, Princes, and
whole Nations engaged themselves, namely what lay in them, and according to the
sentiments of Truth they had received, to reduce Religion unto its pristine
Glory. What Wrath, Clamours, Fury, Indignation, Revenge, Malice, this
occasioned in them whose Subsistence, Wealth, Advantages, Honor and
Reputation, all lay in preserving things in their state of defection and
Apostasy, is known to all the world, Hence therefore arose bloody persecutions
in all, and fierce Wars in many Nations, where this thing was attempted;
stirred up by the craft and cruelty of them, who had mastered and managed the
former declensions of Religion to their own use and advantage. The guilt of
which mischiefs and miseries unto mankind, is by a late Writer amongst our
selves, contrary to all the monuments of times past, and confessions of the
Adversaries themselves, endeavored to be cast on the Reformers. However a work
of Reformation was carried on in the world, and succeeded in many places: in
none more eminently, than in this Nation wherein we live. That the end aimed
at, which was professedly the Reduction of Religion to its ancient Beauty and
Glory in Truth and Worship, is attained amongst us, some perhaps do judge, and
absolutely acquiesce therein: and for my part I wish we had more did so. For,
be it spoken, as I hope, without offense on the part of others, so without fear
of giving it, or having it taken, on my own; there are among many, such evident
Declensions from the first established Reformation, toward the old or a new,
and it may be worse Apostasy; such an apparent weariness of the principal
Doctrines and practices, which enlivened the Reformation; as I cannot but be
troubled at, and wherewith many are offended. For although I do own a dissent
from some present establishments in the Church of England, yet I have that
honor for the first Reformers of it, and Reformation it self; that love to the
Truth declared and established in it; that respect to the Work and Grace of
God, in the conversion of the souls of thousands by the Ministry of the word in
these Nations; that I cannot but grieve continually to see the acknowledged
Doctrines of it deserted, its ancient principles and practices derided, its
pristine zeal despised by some, who make advantage of its outward constitution;
inheriting the profits, emoluments and wealth, which the bounty of our Kings
have endowed it withal; but not its Spirit, its Love, its stedfastness in
owning the Protestant Truth and Cause. But to return; for these things may
better elsewhere be complained of, seeing they relate only to particular
persons. That what is done in Reformation be established; that any farther
public work of the same nature be attempted; or the retrivement of what is
done to its original condition and estate, belongs to the determination of the
Supreme Magistrate, and to that alone. Private persons have no Call, no Warrant
to attempt any thing unto those purposes. However many there are, who dislike
some Ecclestastical Constitutions and Modes of outward Worship, which have been
the matter of great contests from the first Reformation: but much more dislike
the degeneracy from the Spirit, way and principles of the first Reformers
before mentioned, which in some at present, they apprehend, And therefore
though many seem to be at a great distance from the present established Forms
of the Church of England; yet certainly all who are humble and peaceable, when
they shall see the Ministry of the Church, as in former days in some measure,
acted rightly and zealously toward the known ends of it, and such as are
undeniably by all acknowledged, namely, the Conviction of the World, the
Conversion of Souls, and Edification of them that do believe; and the
discipline of it exercised, in a conformily at least to the Rule of the
Discipline of the secular powers of the earth, not to be a terror to the good,
but to them that do evil; and in these things a demonstration of the Meekness,
Humility, Patience, forbearance, condescension to the weakness, mistakes,
errings and wanderings of others, which the Gospel does as plainly and evidently
require of us, as it does, that we should believe in Jesus Christ; will
continually pray for its prosperity, though they cannot themselves join with it
in sundry of its practices and ways. In the mean time, I say, such persons as
these, in themselves and for their own concerns, do think it their duty, not
absolutely to take up in what has been attained amongst us; much less in what
many are degenerated into; but to endeavor the Reduction of their practice in
the Worship of God, to what was first appointed by Jesus Christ; as being
persuaded, that he requires it of them; and being convinced, that in the
unspeakable variety that is in humane constitutions, Rest unto their Souls and
Consciences is not otherwise to be obtained. And if at the same time they
endeavor not to reduce the Manner and Course of their Conversation to the same
Rule and Example, by which they would have their Worship of God regulated; they
are hypocrites. Short enough, no doubt, they come in both of perfection; but
both they profess to aim equally at. And herein alone can their Consciences
find rest and peace. In the doctrine of faith, consented on in the first
Reformation, and declared in the allowed Writings of the Church of England,
they agree with others; and wish with all their hearts they had more to agree
withal. Only they cannot come up to the practice of some things in the Worship
of God; which being confessedly of humane prescription, their Obedience in them
would lie in a perfect contradiction to their principal design before
mentioned. For those things, being chosen out from a great multitude of things
of the same nature, invented by those, whose Authority was rejected in the
first Reformation, or Reduction of Religion from its Catholic Apostasy; they
suppose, cannot justly be imposed on them; they are sure, cannot be honestly
received by them, whilst they design to reduce themselves unto the primitive
Rules and Examples of Obedience, In this design they profess themselves ready
to be ruled by, and to yield subjection unto any Truth or Direction, that can
or may be given them from the Word of God, or any Principles lawfully from
thence educed. How their conviction is at present attempted, let the Book under
consideration, and some late unparalled and illegal Acts of Violence,
conformable to the spirit of it, be a Testimony. But in the management of their
design, they proceed on no other Principles, than those of the Libetty of
judgment (of di^eretion or discerning they call it,) for the determining of
themselves and their own practices, in what they believe and prosess about
Religion, and the liberty of their Consciences from all humane impositions,
than were owned, pleaded and contended for by the first Reformers, and the most
learned defenders of the Church of England, in their disputations against the
Papists; those they will stand to, and abide by: yea than what are warranted by
the Principles of our nature and constitution; for no man practices any thing,
nor can practice it, but according to his own will and choice.

Now in these things, in their Principle, or in their management of it, it may
be they are mistaken; it may be they are in an error; or under many mistakes
and errors. But from their integrity they know themselves innocent, even in
their mistakes. And it is in the nature of men to think strange of sedate
violences, that befall them without their demerit, and of suffering by Law
without any Guilt. Their design of reducing themselves in Worship and
Conversation to the primitive pattern, they openly avow: nor dare any directly
condemn that design; nor can they be convinced of insincerity in what they
profess. And shall they they be destroyed, if they miss it in some matters of
smaller concernment? which, whatever some may boast of, is not hitherto
tolerably proved. Shall now their dissent in Religious Observances on this
occasion, and those, and that about things mostly and chiefly, if not only,
that appear neither name nor thing in the Scripture, be judged a crime not to
be expiated, but by their ruin? Are immoralities or vicious debaucheries
rather to be tolerated, or exempted from punishment, than such a dissent? What
place of Scripture in the Old or New Testament, which of the ancient Fathers of
the Church, do speak at this rate? Opinions inconsistent with public
Tranquillity, with the general Rules of Moral Duties in all Relations and
Conditians; practices of any tendency in themselves to political disturbances,
are by none pleaded for. Mere dissent it self, with different Observances in
the Outward Worship of God, is by some pretended indeed to be a Civil
disturbance. It has always been so by some, even by those, whose own
established ways have been Superstitious and Idolatrous. But wise men begin to
smile, when they hear private interest pleaded as public good, and the
affections which it begets, as the common Reason of things. And these pretenses
have been by all parties, at one time or another, refuted and discarded. Let
the merit of the cause be stated and considered, which is truly as above
proposed, and no other: set aside Prejudices, Animosities, Advantages from
things past and bygone in political disorders and tumults, wherein it has no
concern; and it will quickly appear how little it is, how much, if possible,
less than nothing, that is or can be pleaded for the countenancing of external
severity in this case. Does it suite the Spirit of the Gospel, or his commands,
to destroy good Wheat, for standing, as is supposed, a little out of order, who
would not have men pluck up the tares, but to let them stand quietly in the
field until Harvest? Does it answer his mind to destroy his Disciples, who
profess to love and obey him, from the Earth; who blamed his Disciples of old
for desiring to destroy the Samaritans, his Enemies, with fire from Heaven? We
are told, that he, who was born after the flesh, persecuted him, who was born
after the promise: and a work becoming him it was. And if men are sincere
Disciples of Christ, though they may fall into some mistakes and errors, the
outward persecuting of them on that account, will be found to be of the works
of the flesh. It is certain, that for those in particular, who take upon them,
in any place or degree, to be Ministers of the Gospel, there are commands for
meekness, patience and forbearance, given unto them. And it is one of the
greatest duties incumbent on them, to express the Lord Jesus Christ, in the
frame of his mind and Spirit unto men; and that eminently in his meekness and
lowliness, which he calls us all in an especial manner to learn of him. A
peculiar conformity also to the Gospel, to the holy Law of Love, self-denial
and condescension, is required of them; that they may not in their spirits,
ways and actings, make a false representation of him, and that which they
profess.

I know not therefore whence it is come to pass, that this sort of men do
principally, if not only stir up Magistrates and Rulers to Laws, Seventies,
Penalties, Coercions, Imprisonments, and the like outward means of fierce and
carnal power, against those, who in any thing dissent from them in Religion.
Generally abroad throughout Christendom, those, in whose hands the Civil
Powers are, and who may be supposed to have inclinations unto the severe
exercise of that power which is their own, such as they think possibly may
become them as men and Governors, would be inclineable to moderation toward
dissenters, were they not excited, provoked and wearied by them, who pretend to
represent Jesus Christ to the world; as if any earthly Potentate had more
patience, mercy and compassion, than he Look on those Lutheran Countries where
they persecute the Calvinists; it is commonly declared and proved, that the
Migistrates, for the most part, would willingly bear with those dissenters,
were they not stirred up continually to severities by them, whose duty it were
to persuade them to clemency and moderation, if in themselves they were
otherwise inclined. And this has ruined the interest of the Protestant
Religion in Germany, in a great measure. Do men, who destroy no more than they
can, nor punish more than they are able, and cry out for Assistence where their
own arm fails them, render themselves hereby like to their heavenly Father? Is
this Spirit from above? Does that, which is so, teach men to harrase the
consciences of persons, their brethren and fellow servants, on every little
difference in judgment and practice about religious things? Whom will such men
fulfill the commands of patience, forbearance, waiting, meekness,
condescension, that the Gospel abounds with, toward? Is it only toward them,
who are of the same mind with themselves? They stand in no need of them: they
stand upon the same terms of advantage with themselves. And for those that
dissent, arise, kill, and eat, seems to be the only command to be observed
toward them. And why all this fierceness and severity? Let men talk what they
please, those aimed at, are peaceable in the Land; and resolve to be so,
whatever may befall them. They despise all contrary insinuations. That they
are, in their stations severally, useful to the Commonwealth, and collectively
in their industry and trading, of great consideration to public welfare, is
now apparent unto all indifferent men. It is or must be, if it be for any
thing, (as surely no men delight in troubling others for trouble sake;) for
their Errors and Mistakes, in and about the Worship of God. All other Pleass
are mere pretenses of passion and interest. But who judges them to be so
guilty of errors? Why those, that stir up others to their hurt and
disquietment. But is their Judgment infallible? How if they should be mistaken
themselves in their judgment? If they are, they do not only err, but persecute
others for the Truth. And this has been the general issue of this matter in
the world. Error has persecuted Truth ten times, for Truths once persecuting
of Error. But suppose the worst; suppose them in errors and under mistakes; let
it be proved, that God has appointed, that all men who so err, should be so
punished, as they would have Non-conformists, and though I should believe them
in the truth, I would never more plead their cause. And would these men be
willingly thus dealt withal, by those who judge, or may judge them to err? It
may be some would; because they have a good security, that none shall ever
judge them so to do, who has power to punish them: for they will be of his
mind. But sure none can be so absolutely confined unto themselves, nor so
universally in all their affections and desires unto their own personal
concerns, as not to have a compassion for some or other, who in one place or
other are judged to err by them, who have power over them to affix what guilt
they please unto that, which is not their crime. And will they justify all
their oppressors? All men have an equal right in this matter, nothing is
required, but being uppermost, to make a difference. This is that, which has
turned Christendom into a Shambles; whilst every prevailing Party, has
judged it their duty and interest, to destroy them that do dissent from them.

Once more; what name of sin or wickedness will they find to affix to these
errors? Nullum criminis nomen, nist nominis crimen. No man errs willingly, nor
ought to be thought to tempt or seduce his own will, when his error is to his
disadvantage. And he is innocent whose will is not guilty. Moreover, those
pretended errors in our case, are not in matters of faith; nor for the most
part, in or about the Worship of God, or that which is acknowledged so to be:
but in or about those things, which some think it convenient to add unto it, or
conjoyn with it. And what quietness, what peace is there like to be in the
world, whilst the sword of vengeance must be continually drawn about these
things? Counsels of peace, patience, and forbearance, would certainly better
become Professors of the Gospel, and Preachers of everlasting peace than such
passionate and furious enterprises for severity, as we meet withal.

And I no way doubt, but that all generous noble and heroic spirits, such as
are not concerned in the impaleed peculiar interest and advantages of some, and
do scorn the pedantick humors of mean and emulous souls; when once a few more
clouds of prejudices are scattered, will be willing to give up to God the Glory
of his Sovereignty over the consciences of men; and despise the thoughts of
giving them disquietments for such things, as they can no way remedy; and which
hinder them not from being servants of God, good Subjects to the King, and
useful in their respective lots and conditions.

And now instead of those words of Pilate, What I have written, I have written,
which though uttered by him maliciously and despightfully, as was also the
Prophecy of Caiaphas, were by the Holy Wise Providence of God, turned into a
Testimony to the Truth; I shall shut up this Discourse, with those of our
Savior, which are unspeakably more our concernment to consider, Matthew. 24. 45,
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant, whom his Lord
has made Ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season; blessed is
that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. Verily I say
unto you, he shall make him Ruler over all his goods. But and if that evil
servant shall say in his heart, my Lord deferreth his coming; And shall begin
to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink with the dru^ken; The Lord
of that servant shall come in a day that he looks not for him, and in an hour
that he is not aware of; and shall cu^ him assunder, and appoint him his
portion with the Hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

FINIS.

