A TREATISE OF THE DOMINION OF Sin and Grace,

Wherein Sin's Reign is discovered, in whom it is, and in whom it is not: How
the Law supports it: How Grace delivers from it, by setting up its Dominion in
the Heart.

Romans vi. 14. For Sin shall not have Dominion over you, for ye are not under
the Law but under Grace. By the late Pious and Learned Minister of the Gospel
John Owen, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for William Marshal, at the Bible in Newgate-street,
1688.

TO THE SERIOUS READER.
ONE of the great Gospel Enquiries that a Christian ought to be most critical
and curious in resolving to himself, upon the most impartial Examination of his
own Heart, concerning his spiritual State, and standing in Grace, is, Whether
he be in the Faith or no? which doubt can be resolved but Two ways, either by
Faith it self, closing with its true Objects as offered in the Gospel in its
direct act; and so it evidenceth it self, being the Evidence of things not
seen, as all the natural Senses Evidence themselves by their own Acts upon
their proper Objects: For he that sees the Sun, has Argument enough to
himself, That he is not blind, but has a seeing Eye, and Faith, therefore is
frequently represented to us by seeing as John vi. 40. and elsewhere; which
Evidence is according to the degrees of Faith, weaker or stronger, and hence
carries lesser or greater assurances with it; but such as are of the highest
and best nature, giving the greatest Glory to the Grace and Truth of God, and
the firmest stay to the Soul in the greatest Storms of Temptation, being as an
Anchor fastened within the Vail sure and steadfast. Or else additionally, that
our joy may be full; and, for further confirmation, especially in such Cases
wherein our Faith seems to fail us, and we are like Thomas, God has out of his
abundant Grace in the Gospel provided Arguments for us to raise from spiritual
sense, to judge of our State and Standing by. But this requires the teachings
of the Spirit, and thence a Spirit of discerning, Experience of, and insight
into our own Hearts and ways, with senses exercised by reason of use, that
these Grounds and Arguments may be matter of Comfort and Establishment unto us.

I call these latter Evidences, subordinate ones, and additional to that of
Faith, of great use by way of Establishment and Confirmation unto Believers,
provided they be not abused to sole resting and reliance upon them, to the
great prejudice of our Life, of Faith, for we live by Faith (so must all
repenting Sinners when they have attained to the highest pitch of Holiness in
this Life) and not by Sense, no not spiritual Sense; it is a good Handmaid to
Faith, but no good Mistress to it.

MOREOVER Trials of this nature are often of a mavelous awakening, and
convincing nature unto poor secure Sinners, formal and hypocritical Professors,
for many of them hold true with great demonstration in the Negative, 1 John
iij. 14. He that loves not his Brother, abides in Death. And v. 10. In this
the Children of God and the Children of the Devil are manifest, whosoever does
not Righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. Now
these Tests come upon an unregenerate Man, as clear and strong Convictions of
his undone Estate, when by Gospel Light shining into his dark Heart, it
Evidently appears, that there is a Total Absence of such eminent Graces, that
are inseparable from a Child of God; but when a poor brokenhearted,
self-condemning Sinner comes to try himself by these Tests, especially under
great Temptation, he charge all that he finds in himself for Hypocrisy,
Formality and Sin, sits altogether in darkness in respect of those sparks of
internal Light, and is fain at last when he has broken all his Flints, and
worn out all his Steel, in compassing himself about with sparks of his own
kindling, to turn unto Christ by Faith, as a Prisoner of Hope, believing in
Hope against Hope; and from him to fetch by a direct act of Faith, as from the
Sun of Righteousness, all his Light of Life and Comfort, and then he will be
able to light all his small Tapers, yea all inferior Arguments of his good
Estate will, flow in with much enlargement, and increase of Consolation. As
Streams of living Water flowing forth of the Fountain, set open for Sin and for
Uncleanness, into the Belly of the true Believing Sinner, receiving by Faith of
the fullness of Christ through the Spirit, abundantly supplying him with Rivers
of true substantial living Graces and Consolations, being filled with the
Fruits of Righteousness, to the Praise and Glory of Christ.

NOW among disquisitions of this latter Nature and Use, this is none of the
least, Whether we are under the Dominion of Sin or no? Either we are or are
not; if we are, our State is most certainly dangerous; for such are under the
Law, and the Law has concluded all under Wrath. If we are not under Sin's
Dominion, we are in a blessed and happy Estate, being under Grace; for these
two Dominions divide the World, and every Son and Daughter of Adam is under one
or the other, and none can be under both at the same time. Now our being under
Grace can be no way better Evidenced than by our being in Christ by Faith, for
he that is so is a new Creature, is passed from Death to Life, will still be
mortifying Sin, the strong Man in Sin's Dominion being cast out, and therefore
Faith is said to be our Victory, through the supply of all Grace received from
Jesus Christ. Indeed it calls for no small spiritual Skill and Understanding to
pass aright judgment in these Matters: Undoubtedly many are deceived in taking
wrong Measures to search out these deep things of God, taking them to belong to
the mere Faculties and Endowments of a natural Man, not considering that they
are of the Spirits Revelation only: And hence it is that many poor Creatures in
a Bondage State under the Law, and therefore under Sin's Dominion, do work like
Slaves in the Dunghill of their own Hearts, to find out some natural Religion or
moral Goodness in themselves, to recommend them unto God; but such
recommendation must be under the Law, it cannot be under Grace; and therefore
such are under the Dominion of Sin infallibly as the Israelites were, which
followed after the Law of Righteousness but attained not unto the Law of
Righteousness. Wherefore, because they sought it not by Faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law, for they stumbled at that stumbling Stone, Romans ix.
32. And it is greatly to be bewailed, that many Professors that sit under the
means of Grace, are so tender of their secure and palliated Consciences, that
they cannot endure that the Rays of true Gospel Light should shine directly
into their Hearts, being contented with a name only, that they do live; they
are loath to come to any narrow search or trial, least they should be found out
and appear to themselves in their ugly shapes, whilst they are willing that all
the World should have a good Opinion of them, under which they cannot admit of
any inward disturbances, but desire to sleep in a whole Skin.

OTHERS there are, sincere, brokenhearted Believers, scared at the Rock of
Presumption, on which they see so many Professors wracked daily, are apt to
fall upon the other Extreme, and too wrongfully, to free Grace, condemn
themselves, as being under the Dominion of Sin, and therefore censure
themselves to be under the Law and Wrath, notwithstanding all their seeming
Faith and Holiness, calling that Presumption and this Hypocrisy: Hence
returning to a kind of Spirit of Bondage again to fear, their Faith is shaken
by prevailing Unbelief, their Peace is broken, and all Gospel Ordinances
rendered ineffectual, as to their true Ends of profit, Edification and Comfort.
Hence, though they are truly under Grace, they do not know, or rather through
Temptation, will not acknowledge it, but go mourning all the day long, because
of the Oppressor, and the Enemy: But I beseech such a poor Soul to consider a
little, and not to receive the Grace of God in vain, do thou groan under the
Usurpation and Oppression of remaining Sin, and is this the Dominion of it? Is
there no difference between Sin's Dominion, and Sin's Tyranny and Usurpation?
Dominion is upon account of right of Conquest, or subjection, there is upon
both that Sin reigns in, carnal and unregenerate Men, who yield up their
Members as instruments of Unrighteousness unto Sin, but you reckon your selves
dead unto Sin, having no joy in its prevalency but grief, being planted in this
respect, in the likeness of Christ's Death, who died unto Sin once, but dies
no more. Sin shall have no more Dominion over him; likewise reckon ye also your
selves dead indeed unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
i. e. To be under Grace, to put your self freely and joyfully under the Conduct
and Dominion of Jesus Christ, and to keep up a continual fight and opposition
against the prevailing Power of Sin. Indeed Sin will often, as an Out-lying
watchful Enemy, make its assaults and incursions on the best of God's Children,
as it did on David, Hezekiah, Peter, and though it may make breaches upon them,
Sin shall not have a Dominion, and set up a Throne of Inquity in their Hearts.
Grace will beat out Sin's Throne; for, indeed, the words of this Text, that is,
the subject of the ensuing Treatise, carry the force of a promise to the
Saints, to animate and encourage them to fight against Sin under the Banner of
our Lord Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation made perfect through Sufferings;
For Sin shall not have Dominion, etc.

IN treating of which Text, this late Learned and Reverend Author has acted
the part of a good Work Man, that rightly divided the Word of God (as in all
his other Writings of the like nature) giving every one their portion, as it
belongs to them, with so much perspicuity and demonstration, that if (Christian
Reader) thou will afford a little time and pains to read, meditate, dilate and
digest well the Truths here laid before thee, through the blessing of the God
of all Grace, thou will find much satisfaction, and real spiritual advantage
unto thy Soul, either to awaken and recover thee from under the Dominion of Sin
(the dangerous and palpable Symptoms thereof, being here plainly made manifest)
or else to discover thy happy estate in being taken from under the Law, and
brought under the Dominion of Grace, whereby thou may assume great
Encouragement to thy self, to proceed more cheerfully in running the Race set
before thee.

IT IS enough to say, that the Author has left his Encomium firmly rooted in
the minds of all Pious and Learned Men, that are acquainted with his Writings,
Polemick or Practical: Yea, his Renown will always be great in after
Generations among the Churches of Christ, and all true Lovers of the great
Truths of the Gospel. And that he is the Author of this small Tract is
sufficient to recommend it to thy most serious Perusal, taking this assurance,
that it was left (among other Writings of great value) thus perfected for the
Press by his own hand, and is now by his worthy Relict published for the
Benefit of others besides her self. I doubt not but thou will say, that it will
answer the several Lines that has been drawn in thy Heart, by Sin or Grace, as
Face answers Face in a Glass, and that this may be the effect of thy Perusal
thereof, in order to thy spiritual and eternal Welfare, is the hearty desire
and prayer of

Thy unfeigned Well-wisher, J. C.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. WHAT Sin is consistent with the State of Grace, and what not. Sin's
great Design in all, to obtain Dominion: It has it in Unbelievers, and
contends for it in Believers. The ways by which it acts. Page 1 CHAP. II. The
Enquiries for understanding the Text proposed; the first spoken to: viz. What
is the Dominion of Sin, which we are freed from, and discharged of by Grace.
Page 9 CHAP. III. The Second Enquiry spoken to; Whether Sin has Dominion in us
or no? In answer to which it is showed, That some wear Sin's Livery, and they
are the professed Servants thereof. There are many in which the Case is
dubious, where Sin's service is not so discernable. Several Exceptions are put
in against its Dominion, where it seems to prevail. Some certain Signs of its
Dominion. Graces and Duties to be exercised for its Mortification. Page 32
CHAP. IV. Hardness of Heart spoken to, as an eminent sign of Sin's Dominion,
and is showed, that it ought to be considered as total or partial. Page 72
CHAP. V. The Third Enquiry handled, viz. What is the assurance given us, and
what are the Grounds thereof, that Sin shall not have Dominion over us?

The Ground of this assurance is, That we are not under the Law but Grace. The
Force of this Reason showed, viz. How the Law does not destroy the Dominion of
Sin, and how Grace dethrones Sin and gives Dominion over it. Page 92

CHAP. VI. The Practical Observations drawn from, and Application made of, the
whole Text. -- Page 100.
A TREATISE OF THE DOMINION OF Sin and Grace,
Romans vi. 14. For Sin shall not have Dominion over you, for ye are not under
the Law but under Grace.
CHAP. I.
What Sin is consistent with the State of Grace, and what not. Sins great
design in all, to obtain Dominion: It has it in Unbelievers, and contends for
it in Believers. The ways by which it acts.

THE Psalmist treating with God in Prayer about Sin, acknowledges, that there
are in all men unsearchable Errors of Life, beyond all humane understanding or
comprehension; with such daily sins of Infirmity, as stand in need of continual
cleansing and Pardon, Psalm. xix. 12. Who can understand his Errors? cleanse
thou me from secret faults. But yet he supposes that these things are
consistent with a state of Grace, and acceptance with God. He had no thought
of any absolute Perfection in this Life; of any such condition as should not
stand in need of continual cleansing and pardon. Wherefore there are or may be
such sins in Believers, yea many of them, which yet under a due Application
unto God, for purifying and pardoning Grace, shall neither deprive us of Peace
here, nor endanger our Salvation hereafter.

BUT he speaks immediately of another sort of sins, which partly from their
Nature, or what they are in themselves; and partly from their Operation and
Power, will certainly prove destructive unto the Souls of men wherever they
are. V. 13. Keep back thy Servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not
have dominion over me, then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from
the great Transgression.

THIS is the Hinge whereon the whole Cause and State of my Soul does turn.
Although I am subject to many sins of various sorts, yet under them all I can
and do maintain my Integrity and Covenant Vprightness in walking with God; and
where I fail am kept within the reach of cleansing and pardoning mercy
continually administered unto my Soul by Jesus Christ. But there is a state of
Life in this World wherein Sin has dominion over the Soul; acting it self
presumptuously, wherewith Integrity and Freedom from condemning guilt are
inconsistent.

THIS state therefore, which is eternally ruinous unto the souls of men, he
deprecates with all earnestness, praying to be kept and preserved from it.

WHAT he there so earnestly prays for, the Apostle in the Words of the Text
promises unto all Believers, by virtue of the Grace of Christ Jesus
administered in the Gospel. Both the Prayer of the Prophet for himself, and the
Promise of the Apostle in the name of God unto us, do manifest of how great
importance this Matter is, as we shall declare it to be immediately.

THERE are some things supposed or included in these words of the Apostle.
These we must first a little enquire into, without which we cannot well
understand the Truth it self proposed in them. As,

IT is supposed, that Sin does still abide in and dwell with Believers. For so
is the meaning of the words. That sin which is in you shall not have Dominion
over you; that is, none of them who are not sensible of it, who groan not to be
delivered from it, as the Apostle does, Romans vij. 24. Those who are otherwise
minded, know neither themselves, nor what is sin, nor wherein the Grace of the
Gospel does consist. There is the Flesh remaining in every one which lusts
against the Spirit, Gal. v. 17. And it adheres unto all the faculties of our
souls; whence it is called the old Man, Romans 6. 6. Ephesians. 4. 22. in opposition
unto the Renovation of our minds, and all the faculties of them called the New
Man, or New Creature in us. And there is (...), Romans xiij. 14. a continual
working and Provision to fulfill its own Lusts: So that it abides in us in the
way of a dying, decaying Habit, weakened and impaired; but acting its self in
Inclinations, Motions and Desires, suitable unto its Nature.

AS Scripture and Experience concur herein, so a supposition of it is the only
ground of the whole Doctrine of Evangelical Mortification. That this is a Duty,
a Duty incumbent on Believers all the days of their lives, such a Duty as
without which they can never perform any other in a due manner; will not be
denied by any, but either such as are wholly under the Power of Atheistical
Blindness, or such as, by the fever of spiritual Pride, have lost the
Understanding of their own miserable Condition; and so lie dreaming about
absolute Perfection. With neither sort are we at present concerned. Now the
first proper Object of this Mortification is this sin that dwells in us. It is
the Flesh which is to be mortified, the old Man which is to be crucified, the
Lusts of the Flesh with all their corrupt Inclinations, Actings, and Motions
that are to be destroyed, Romans vi. 6. Gal. v. 24. Col. iij. 1. Unless this be
well fixed in the mind, we cannot understand the greatness of the Grace and
Privilege here expressed.

2. IT is supposed that this Sin which in the remainders of it, so abides in
Believers, in various degrees, may put forth its Power in them, to obtain
Victory and Dominion over them. It is first supposed, that it has this
Dominion in some, that it does bear Rule over all Unbelievers, all that are
under the Law; and then that it will strive to do the same in them that
believe, and are under Grace. For affirming that it shall not have Dominion
over us, he grants that it may or does contend for it, only it shall not have
success, it shall not prevail. Hence it is said to fight and war in us, Romans
vij. 23. and to fight against our Souls, 1 Pet. ij. 12. Now it thus fights and
wars and contends in us for Dominion; for that is the end of all War: Whatever
fights, it does it for Power and Rule.

THIS therefore is the general design of Sin in all its Actings. These Actings
are various, according to the variety of Lusts in the minds of men; but its
general design in them all, is Dominion. Where any one is tempted and seduced
of his own Lusts, as the Apostle James speaks, be it in a matter never so small
or so unusual, or the Temptations thereunto may never occurr again; the design
of sin lies not in the particular Temptation, but to make it a means to obtain
Dominion over the Soul. And the consideration hereof should keep Believers
always on their guard against all the motions of Sin; though the matter of them
seem but small, and the occasions of them such as are not like to return. For
the aim and tendancy of every one of them is Dominion and Death, which they
will compass, if not stopped in their Progress, as the Apostle there decalres,
James i. 14, 15. Believe not its flatteries, is it not a little one? this is
the first or shall be the last time: It requires only a little place in the
Mind and Affections, it shall go no farther: Give not place to its urgency and
solicitations; admit of none of its excuses or promises; it is power over your
Souls unto their Ruin that it aims at in all.

3. THERE are two ways in general whereby sin acts its Power, and aims at the
obtaining this Dominion, and they are the two only ways whereby any may design
or attain an unjust Dominion; and they are Deceit and Force; both of which I
have fully described in another Discourse. With respect whereunto it is
promised, that the Lord Christ shall deliver the Souls of the Poor that cry
unto him, from Deceit and Violence, Psalm. lxxii. 14.

THESE are the two only ways of obtaining an unjust Dominion; and where they
are in conjunction, they must have a mighty prevalency, and such as will render
the Contest hazardous. There are few Believers but have found it so, at least
in their own apprehensions; they have been ready to say at one time or another,
we shall one day fall by the hand of this Enemy; and have been forced to cry
out unto Jesus Christ for help and succor with no less vehemence than the
Disciples did at Sea, when the Ship was covered with Waves, Lord save us, we
perish, Matthew. viij. 24, 25. And so they would do, did he not come in
seasonably to their succor, Heb. ij. 18. And herein the Soul has frequently
no less Experience of the Power of Christ in his Grace, than the Disciples on
their Outcry had of his sovereign Authority, when he rebuked the Winds and the
Seas, and there was a great Calm.

THIS Dominion of Sin is that which we have here security given us against:
Though it will abide in us, though it will contend for Rule by Deceit and
Force, yet it shall not prevail, it shall not have the Dominion.

AND this is a Case of the highest Importance unto us. Our Souls are and must
be under the Rule of some Principle or Law. And from this Rule, our State is
determined and denominated. We are either Servants of Sin unto Death, or of
Obedience unto Righteousness, Romans vi. 16. This is the Substance of the
Discourse of the Apostle in that whole Chapter; namely, that the state of the
Soul, as unto life and death eternal, follows the Conduct and Rule that we are
under. If Sin have the Dominion, we are lost for ever. If it be dethrown'd, we
are safe. It may tempt, seduced and entice, it may fight, war, perplex and
disquiet, it may surprise into actual Sin; yet if it have not the Dominion in
us, we are in a state of Grace and Acceptance with God.

CHAP. II.
The Enquiries for understanding the Text proposed; the first spoken to: viz.
What is the dominion of Sin, which we are freed from, and discharged of by
Grace.

WE shall enquire into Three Things from the Words of this Text.

I. What is that Dominion of Sin, which we are freed from, and discharged of by
Grace. II. How we may know whether Sin has the Dominion in us or no. III. What
is the Reason and Evidence of the Assurance here given us, That Sin shall not
have Dominion over us; namely, because we are not under the Law, but under
Grace.
1. AS unto the first of these, I shall only recount some such Properties of
it, as will discover its Nature in general; the particulars wherein it does
consist, will be considered afterward.

1. THE Dominion of Sin is perverse and evil, and that on both the Accounts
which render any Rule or Dominion so to be. For,

1. IT is Usurped. Sin has no Right to rule in the Souls of Men. Men have no
power to give Sin a Right to rule over them. They may voluntarily enslave
themselves unto it; but this gives Sin no Right or Title. All men have
originally another Lord, unto whom they owe all Obedience; nor can any thing
discharge them from their Allegiance thereunto: And this is the Law of God. The
Apostle says indeed, that unto whom Men yield themselves servants to obey, his
Servants they are to whom they obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience
unto Righteousness, v. 19. And so it is, men are thereby the proper Servants of
Sin; they become so by their own voluntary Subjection unto it: But this gives
Sin no Title against the Law of God, whose Right alone it is to bear sway in
the souls of men. For all that give up themselves to the service of Sin, do
live in actual Rebellion against their natural Liege Lord. Hence sundry things
do follow:

First. THE great Aggravation of the evil of a state of Sin. Men who live
therein, do voluntarily wrest themselves, what lies in them, from under the
Rule of the Law of God, and give up themselves to be slaves unto this Tyrant.
Could it lay any claim to this Dominion, had it any Title to plead, it were
some Alleviation of Guilt in them that give up themselves unto it. But men
yield up themselves to the slavery of sin, as the Apostle speaks; they reject
the Rule of God's Law, and choose this foreign yoke, which cannot but be an
aggravation of their sin and misery. Yet so it is, that the greatest part of
men do visibly and openly profess themselves the servants and slaves of Sin.
They wear its Livery, and do all its Drudgery; yea they boast themselves in
their Bondage, and never think themselves so Brave and Gallant, as when by
profane Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Covetousness, and Scoffing at
Religion, they openly disavow the Lord whom they serve, the Master to whom they
do belong. But their Damnation sleeps not, whatever they may dream in the
mean time.

2. HENCE it follows that ordinarily all Men have a Right in themselves, to
cast off the Rule of Sin, and to vindicate themselves into liberty. They may
when they will, plead the Right and Title of the Law of God unto the Rule of
their Souls, to the utter Exclusion of all Pleas and Pretenses of Sin, for its
Power. They have Right to say unto it, Get thee hence, what have I to do any
more with Idols?

ALL Men, I say, have this Right in themselves, because of the natural
Allegiance they owe to the Law of God; but they have not Power of themselves to
execute this Right, and actually to cast off the yoke of sin; but this is the
work of Grace. Sin's Dominion is broke only by Grace.

BUT you will say then, Unto what end serves this Right, if they have not Power
in themselves to put it in Execution? And how can it be charged as an
Aggravation of their sin, that they do not use the Right which they have,
seeing they have no Power so to do? Will you blame a Man that has a Right to
an Estate if he do not recover it, when he has no means so to do?

I answer briefly Three Things.

1st. NO Man living neglects the use of this Right, to cast off the Yoke and
Dominion of Sin, because he cannot of himself make use of it; but merely
because he will not. He does voluntarily choose to continue under the Power of
Sin, and looks on every thing as his Enemy, that would deliver him. The carnal
Mind is Enmity against God, it is not subject unto his Law, nor can it be, Romans
viii. 7. When the Law comes at any time to claim its Right and Rule over the
Soul, a Man under the Power of Sin, looks on it as his Enemy that comes to
disturb his Peace, and fortifies his mind against it. And when the Gospel comes
and tenders the way and means for the Souls delivery, offering its aid and
assistance unto that end; this also is looked on as an Enemy, and is rejected,
and all its offers unto that end. See Prove. i. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and John
iii. 19. This then is the Condition of every one that abides under the Dominion
of Sin: He chooses so to do; he continues in that state by an act of his own
Will; he avows an Enmity unto every thing which would give him deliverance;
which will be a sore Aggravation of his Condemnation at the last day.

2ly. GOD may justly require that of any, which it is in the Power of the Grace
of the Gospel to enable them to perform and comply withal. For this is tendered
unto them in the Preaching of it every day. And although we know not the ways
and means of the effectual Communication of Grace unto the Souls of men; yet
this is certain, that Grace is so tendered in the preaching of the Gospel, that
none go without it, none are destitute of its aids and assistances, but those
alone, who by a free act of their own Wills, do refuse and reject it. This is
that which the whole Cause depends on; You will not come unto me, that you may
have Life. And this all Unbelievers have or may have Experience of in
themselves. They may know on a due Examination of themselves, that they do
voluntarily refuse the assistance of Grace, which is offered for their
deliverance. Therefore is their destruction of themselves. But,

3ly. THERE is a time, when Men lose even the Right also. He who gave up
himself to have his Ear bored, lost all his claim unto future Liberty; he was
not to go out at the year of Jubilee. So there is a Time when God judicially
gives up Men to the Rule of Sin, to abide under it for ever; so as that they
lose all Right unto Liberty. So he dealt with many of the Idolatrous Gentiles
of old, Romans i. 24, 26, 28. and so continues to deal with the like profligate
Sinners. So he acts toward the generality of the Antichristian World, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 11, 12. and with many despisers of the Gospel, Isa. vi. 9, 10. When
it is come to this, Men are cast at Law; and have lost all Right and Title unto
Liberty from the Dominion of Sin. They may repine sometimes at the Service of
Sin or the Consequence of it, in Shame and Pain, in the shameful Distempers
that will pursue many in their Uncleanness; yet God having given them up
judicially unto Sin, they have not so much as a Right to put up one Prayer or
Petition for deliverance; nor will they do so, but are bound in the fetters of
cursed Presumption or Despair. See their Work and Wages, Romans ii. 5, 6. This is
the most woeful state and condition of Sinners in this World; an unavoidable
entrance into the Chambers of Death. You that have lived long under the power
of Sin, beware least that come upon you which is spoken of in these Scriptures.
You have as yet a Right unto deliverance from that bondage and servitude
wherein you are, if you put in your Claim in the Court of Heaven. You know not
how soon you may be deprived of this also, by God's giving you up judicially
unto Sin and Satan. Then all Complaints will be too late, and all springs of
endeavors for Relief be utterly dried up. All your Reserves for a future
Repentance shall be cut off, and all your Cries shall be despised: Prove. i. 25,
26, 27, 28, 29. Whilst it is yet called to day harden not your hearts, least
God swear in his wrath, that you shall never enter into his Rest.

THAT you may be warned, take notice that the Signs or Symptoms of the approach
of such a season, of such an irrecoverable condition, are (1.) a long
continuance in the practice of any known sin. There are bounds of divine
Patience. The long suffering of God for a time waits for Repentance, 1 Pet.
iij. 20. 2 Pet. iij. 9. But there is a time, when it does only endure Vessels
of Wrath, fitted for Destruction, Romans ix. 22. which is commonly after a long
continuance in known sin. (2.) When Convictions have been digested, and
Warnings despised. God does not usually deal thus with Men, until they have
rejected the means of their Deliverance. There is a Generation indeed, who from
their youth up do live in a contempt of God; such are those proud sinners whom
the Psalmist describes, Psalm. x. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. There are seldom any
tokens of the going forth of the Decree against this sort of Men. The appearing
evidences of it, are their adding drunkenness unto thirst; one kind of sin unto
another, making a visible Progress in sinning, adding boasting and a profane
Contempt of all things Sacred, unto their Course in Sin. But ordinarily those
that are in danger of this judicial Hardness, have had warnings and
convictions, which made some impression on them; but are now left without any
Calls and Rebukes, or at least any sense of them. (3). When Men contract the
guilt of such Sins, as seem to entrench on the unpardonable sin against the
Holy Ghost. Such as proud, contemptuous, malicious Reproaches of the ways of
God, of Holiness, of the Spirit of Christ and his Gospel. This sort of Persons
are frequently marked in the Scripture, as those who at least are nigh unto a
final and fatal Rejection. (4.) A voluntary relinquishment of the means of
Grace, and Conversion unto God, which men have enjoyed. And this is commonly
accompanied with an hatred of the word, and those by whom it is dispensed. Such
Persons God frequently, and that visibly, gives up in an irrecoverable way unto
the dominion of Sin. He declares that he will have no more to do with them.
(5.) The resolved choice of wicked, profane, unclean scoffing Society. It is
very rare that any are recovered from that snare. And many other Signs there
are of the near approach of such an hardening Judgment, as shall give up men
everlastingly to the service of Sin. Oh that poor Sinners would awake, before
it be too late.

2. THIS Dominion of Sin is evil and perverse, not only because it is unjust
and usurped, but because it is always used and exercised unto ill Ends, unto
the Hurt and Ruin of them over whom it is. An Usurper may make use of his
Power and Rule for good Ends, for the good of them over whom he rules. But all
the ends of the Dominion of sin are evil unto sinners. Sin in its Rule will
pretend fair, offer sundry advantages and satisfactions unto their Minds. They
shall have Wages for their Work: Pleasure and Profit shall come in by it. Yea
on diverse pretenses it will promise them eternal Rest at the close of all; at
least that they shall not fail of it by any thing they do in its service: And
by such means it keeps them in security. But the whole real Design of it, that
which in all its Power it operates toward, is the eternal Ruin of their
Souls; and this Sinners will understand when it is too late, Jerem. ij. 13, 19.

2dly. THIS Dominion of sin is not a mere force against the Will and Endeavors
of them that are under it. Where all the Power and Interest of Sin consists in
putting a force on the mind and soul by its Temptations, there it has no
Dominion. It may perplex them, it does not rule over them: Where it has
Dominion, it has the force and power of a Law in the Wills and Minds of them
in whom it is. Hereby it requires Obedience of them, and they yield up
themselves Servants to obey it, Romans vi. 16.

WHEREFORE unto this Dominion of sin, there is required a Consent of the Will
in some measure and degree. The constant Reluctance and conquering Prevalency
of the Will against it, defeats its Title unto Rule and Dominion; as the
Apostle declares at large in the next Chapter. The Will is the sovereign
Faculty and Power of the Soul; whatever Principle acts in it, and determines
it, that has the Rule. Notwithstanding Light and Conviction, the determination
of the whole, as unto Duty and Sin, is in the power of the Will. If the will of
sinning be taken away, sin cannot have Dominion. Here is Wisdom. He that can
distinguish between the Impressions of Sin upon him, and the Rule of Sin in
him, is in the way of Peace. But this oft-times (as we shall farther see, with
the Reason of it) is not easily to be attained unto. Convictions on the one
hand, will make a great Pretense and Appearance of an Opposition in the Will
unto Sin, by their unavoidable Impressions on it, when it is not so. And
disturbed Affections under Temptations, will plead, that the Will it self is
given up unto the choice and service of sin, when it is not so. The Will in
this Matter is like the Thebans Shield, whilst that was safe they conceited
themselves victorious, even in death. However this Case is determinable by the
light of Scripture and Experience, and it is here proposed unto a Determination.

3dly. IT is required unto this dominion of sin, that the soul be not under any
other supreme Conduct; that is, of the Spirit of God, and of his Grace by the
Law. This is that which really has the sovereign Rule in all Believers: They
are led by the Spirit, guided by the Spirit, acted and ruled by him, and are
thereby under the Government of God and Christ, and no other. With this the
Rule of Sin is absolutely inconsistent. No Man can at once serve these two
Masters. Grace and Sin may be in the same Soul at the same time; but they
cannot bear Rule in the same Soul at the same time. The Throne is singular, and
will admit but of one Ruler. Every Evidence we have of being under the Rule of
Grace, is so, that we are not under the Dominion of Sin.

THIS therefore is the principal way and means which we have to secure our
Peace and Comfort against the Pretenses of Sin, unto the disquietment of our
Consciences. Let us endeavor to preserve an Experience of the Rule of Grace in
our Hearts, Col. iij. 15. Under a Conduct and Rule whence our state is
denominated, we are and must be. This is either of Sin or Grace. There is no
Composition nor Copartnership between them, as to Rule: As to Residence there
is, but not as unto Rule. If we can assure our selves of the one, we secure our
selves from the other. It is therefore our Wisdom, and lies at the foundation
of all our Comforts, that we get Evidences and Experience of our being under
the Rule of Grace; and it will evidence it self, if we are not wanting unto a
due Observation of its acting, and operation in us. And it will do it, among
others, these Two ways.

1. BY keeping up a Constancy of design in living to God, and after Conformity
unto Christ, notwithstanding the interposition of surprizals by Temptations,
and the most urgent solicitations of Sin: This is called, Cleaving unto God,
with purpose of Heart, Acts xi. 23. This will be, wherever Grace has the
Rule. As a Man that goes to Sea, designs some certain Place and Port, whither
he guides his Course; in his way he meets, it may be, with Storms and cross
Winds, that drive him out of his Course, and sometimes directly backward,
toward the Place where he set forth; but his design still holds, and in the
pursuit thereof, he applies his Skill and Industry, to retrieve and recover all
its losses and back-drivings; by cross Winds and Storms. So is it with a Soul
under the Conduct of Grace; its fixed design is to live unto God; but in its
Course it meets with Storms and cross Winds of Temptations, and various
Artifices of Sin. These disturb him, disorder him, drive him backwards
sometimes, as if it would take a contrary Course, and return unto the Coast of
Sin from whence it set out. But where Grace has the Rule and Conduct, it will
weather all these Oppositions and Obstructions; it will restore the Soul, bring
it again into order, recover it from the confusions and evil Frames that it was
drawn into. It will give a fresh predominancy unto its prevalent design of
living unto God in all things. It will do this constantly as often as the soul
meets with such ruffles from the Power of Sin; when there is a radical
firmitude and strength in a Cause or Design, it will work it self out, through
all changes and variations. But when the strength of any Cause is but Occasion,
the first opposition and disorder will ruin us. So, if Men's purposes of living
unto God, be only occasional from present Convictions, the first vigorous
Opposition or Temptation will disorder it, and overthrow it. But where this is
the radical Design of the Soul, from the Power of Grace, it will break through
all such Oppositions, and recover its Prevalency in the Mind and Affections.
Hereby does it evidence its Rule, and that the whole Interest of Sin in the
Soul is by Rebellion, and not by virtue of Dominion.

2. IT does so, by keeping up a constant Exercise of Grace in all religious
Duties; or, at least, a sincere endeavor, that so it may be. Where Sin has
the Dominion, it can allow the Soul to perform religious Duties, yea, in some
cases, to abound in them. But it will take care that divine Grace be not
exercised in them. Whatever there may be of delight in Duties or other motions
of Affection, which Light, and Gifts, and Afflictions, and Superstition will
occasion, there is no exercise of divine Faith and Love in them: This belongs
essentially and inseparably unto the Rule of Grace. Wherever that bears sway,
the Soul will endeavor the constant Exercise of Grace in all its Duties, and
never be satisfied in the Work done, without some sense of it. Where it fails
therein, it will judge it self, and watch against the like surprizals; yea,
unless it be in case of some great Temptation, the present sense of the guilt
of Sin, which is the highest Obstruction against that spiritual Boldness, which
is required unto the due exercise of Grace, that is of Faith and Love in holy
Duties, shall not hinder the Soul from endeavoring after it, or the use of it.

IF by these means, and the like inseparable Operations of Grace, we can have
an assuring Experience, that we are under the Rule and Conduct of it, we may be
free in our Minds from disturbing Apprehensions of the Dominion of Sin; for
both cannot bear sway in the same Soul.

4thly. IT is required hereunto, that sin makes the Soul sensible of its Power
and Rule, at least does that which may do so, unless Conscience be utterly
seared and hardened, and so past feeling. There is no Rule nor Dominion, but
they are or may be sensible of it, who are subject thereunto. And there are two
Ways whereby sin in its Dominion, will make them sensible of it in whom it
rules.

1. IN repressing and overcoming the efficacy of the Convictions of the Mind.
Those who are under the Dominion of Sin (as we shall see more immediately) may
have Light into, and Conviction of their Duty, in many things. And this Light
and Conviction they may follow ordinarily, notwithstanding the Dominion of Sin.
As a Tyrant will permit his slaves and subjects ordinarily to follow their own
Occasions; but if what they would do, comes either in matter or manner to
enterfere with or oppose his Interest, he will make them sensible of his Power.
So Sin, where it has the Dominion, if Men have Light and Conviction, it will
allow them ordinarily and in many things to comply therewithal. It will allow
them to pray, to hear the Word, to abstain from sundry sins, to perform many
duties, as is expressly affirmed in the Scripture, of many that were under the
power of Sin, and we see it in Experience. How much work do we see about
Religion and religious Duties? What constant observation of the Times and
Seasons of them? How many duties performed morally good in themselves and
useful, by them, who on many other Accounts, do proclaim themselves to be under
the Dominion of Sin? But if the Light and Conviction of this sort of Persons do
rise up in opposition unto the principal Interest of Sin, in those Lusts and
ways wherein it exercises its Rule, it will make them, in whom they are,
sensible of its Power. They that stifle, or shut their Eyes against, or cast
out of mind, or go directly contrary unto their Convictions; Light in such
cases will first repine, and them relieve it self with Resolutions for other
times and seasons; but Sin will carry the Cause by virtue of its Dominion.

HENCE Two Things do follow.

1. A Constant Repugnancy against Sin, from Light in the Mind and Conviction in
the Conscience, does not prove that those in whom it is, are not under the
Dominion of Sin. For until blindness and hardness do come on Men to the
uttermost, there will be in them a judging of what is Good and Evil, with a
self-judging with respect thereunto, as the Apostle declares, Romans ij. 15. And
herein many do satisfy themselves. When their Light condemns Sin, they suppose
they hate it; but they do not. When Convictions call for Duties, they suppose
they love them; but they do not. That which they look on as the Rule of Light
in them, in opposition unto Sin, is but the Rebellion of a natural enlightened
Conscience, against the Dominion of it in the Heart. In brief; Light may
condemn every known sin, keep from many, press for every known Duty, lead to
the performance of many; yet sin have a full dominion in the soul. And this it
will evidence when it comes to the trial, in those Instances where it exercises
its ruling Power.

2. THAT miserable is their Condition whose Minds are ground continually
between the Conduct of their Light, with the urgency of Conviction on the one
hand, and the Rule or Dominion of Sin on the other. Wherever Light is, it is
its due to have the Rule and Conduct. It is that Act whereby the Mind loads it
self. For Men to be forced by the Power of their Lusts, to act for the most
part against their Light, as they do where Sin has the Dominion, it is a sad
and deplorable condition. Such Persons are said to rebel against the Light, Job
xxiv. 13. because of its right to rule in them, where it is deposed by Sin.
This makes most Men but a troubled Sea that cannot rest, whose Waves cast up
mire and dirt.

2dly. Sin will make those in whom it has dominion sensible of its Power, by
its continual solicitations of the Mind and Affections, with respect unto that
sin, or those sins wherein it principally exercises its Rule. Having possessed
the Will and Inclinations of the Mind with the Affections, as it does
wherever its Dominion is absolute, it continually disposes, enclineth and
stirs up the Mind toward those sins. It will level the Bent of the whole
Soul toward such sins or the circumstances of them. Nor is there a more
pregnant discovery of the Rule of Sin in any than this, that it habitually
engages the Mind and Affections, unto a constant exercise of themselves about
this or that, some Sin, and evil Way or other.

BUT yet we must add, that notwithstanding these indications of the ruling
Power of Sin, they are but few in whom it has this Dominion, that are
convinced of their State and Condition. Many are so under the Power of
Darkness, of supine sloth and negligence, and are so desperately wicked, as
that they have no sense of this Rule of Sin. Such are those described by the
Apostle, Ephesians. iv. 18, 19. And whereas they are the vilest Slaves that live on
the Earth, they judge none to be free but themselves: They look on others as in
Bondage to foolish and superstitious fears, whilst they are at liberty to
Drink, Swear, Scoff at Religion, Whore, and Defile themselves without control.
This is their Liberty; and they may have that which is as good in Hell; a
Liberty to Curse and Blaspheme God, and to fly with revengeful Thoughts on
themselves, and the whole Creation. The Light in such Persons is Darkness it
self; so as that they have nothing to rise up in opposition unto the rule of
Sin, whence alone a sense of its Power does arise. Others (as we observed
before) living in some compliance with their Light and Convictions, abstaining
from many Sins, and performing many Duties, though they live in some known sin
or other, and allow themselves in it, yet will not allow that Sin has the
Dominion in them.

Wherefore there are Two Things hard and difficult in this Case.

1. TO convince those in whom Sin evidently has the Dominion, that such indeed
is their State and Condition; they will with their utmost endeavor keep of the
Conviction hereof. Some justify themselves, and some will make no Enquiry into
this matter. It is a rare thing, especially of late, to have any brought under
this Conviction by the Preaching of the Word; though it be the Case of
multitudes that attend unto it.

2. TO satisfy some, that Sin has not the Dominion over them, notwithstanding
its restless acting it self in them, and waring against their Souls; yet,
unless this can be done, it is impossible they should enjoy solid Peace and
Comfort in this Life. And the Concernment of the best of Believers, whilst they
are in this World, does lie herein. For as they grow in Light, Spirituality,
Experience, freedom of Mind and Humility, the more they love to know of the
Deceit, Activity and Power of the Remainders of Sin. And although it works not
at all, at least not sensibly in them, toward those Sins wherein it reigns
and rages in others; yet they are able to discern its more subtle, inward and
spiritual Actings in the Mind and Heart to the weakening of Grace, the
obstructing of its effectual Operations in holy Duties, with many
indispositions unto stability in the Life of God, which fills them with trouble.

CHAP. III.
The Second Enquiry spoken to; Whether Sin has Dominion in us or no? In answer
to which it is showed, That some wear Sin's Livery, and they are the professed
Servants thereof. There are many in which the Case is dubious, where Sin's
service is not so discernable. Several Exceptions are put in against its
Dominion, where it seems to prevail. Some certain Signs of its Dominion. Graces
and Duties to be exercised for its Mortification.

THESE things being thus premised in general, concerning the Nature of the
Dominion of Sin, we shall now proceed unto our principal Enquiry; namely,
Whether Sin have Dominion in us or no? whereby we may know, Whether we are
under the Law or under Grace, or what is the state of our Souls toward God. An
Enquiry this is, which is very necessary for some to make, and for all to have
rightly determined in their Minds, from Scripture and Experience. For on that
determination depends all our solid Peace. Sin will be in us; it will lust,
fight, and entice us; but the great Question, as unto our (...) and Comfort is,
whether it has Dominion over us or no?

1. WE do not enquire concerning them in whom the reign of Sin is absolute and
easily discernable, if not to themselves, yet to others. Such there are, who
visibly yield up their Members instruments of Unrighteousness to Sin, Romans vi.
13. Sin reigns in their mortal Bodies, and they openly obey it in the Lusts
thereof, v. 12. They are avowedly Servants of Sin unto Death, v. 16. and are
not ashamed of it. The show of their Countenance does witness against them;
they declare their Sin as Sodom; they hide it not, Isa. iij. 9. Such are those
described, Ephesians. iv. 18, 19. and such the World is filled withal. Such as being
under the Power of Darkness and Enmity against God, do act them in opposition
to all serious Godliness, and in the service of various Lusts. There is no
question concerning their state: They cannot themselves deny that it is so with
them. I speak not for the liberty of Censuring, but for the easiness of
Judging. Those who openly wear Sin's Livery, may well be esteemed to be Sin's
Servants; and they shall not fail to receive Sin's Wages. Let them at present
bear it never so high, and despise all manner of Convictions, they will find it
bitterness in the latter end, Isa. l. 11. Eccles. xi. 9.

2. BUT there are many in whom the case is dubious, and not easy to be
determined; for on the one hand, they may have sundry things in them, which
seem repugnant unto the reign of Sin, but indeed are not inconsistent with it.
All Arguments and Pleas from them in their vindication may fail them on a
trial. And on the other hand, there may be some in whom the effectual working
of sin may be so great and perplexing, as to argue that it has the dominion,
when indeed it has not, but is only a stubborn Rebel.

THE things of the first sort which seem destructive of, and inconsistent with
the Dominion of Sin, but indeed are not, may be referred to five Heads.

1. ILLVMINATION in Knowledge and spiritual Gifts, with Convictions of Good and
Evil, of all known Duties and Sins. This is that which some Men live in a
perpetual Rebellion against, in one instance or another.

2. A Change in the Affections, giving a temporary Delight in Religious Duties,
with some constancy in their Observations. This also is found in many who are
yet evidently under the Power of Sin, and spiritual Darkness.

3. A Performance of many Duties both Moral and Evangelical, for the substance
of them; and an Abstinence, out of Conscience, from many Sins. So was it with
the Young Man in the Gospel, who yet wanted what was necessary to free him from
the Dominion of Sin, Matthew. xix. 20, 21, 22, 23.

4. REPENTANCE for Sin committed. This is that which most secure themselves by;
and a blessed security it is, when it is Gracious, Evangelical, a fruit of
Faith, comprizing the Return of the whole Soul to God. But there is that which
is legal, partial, respecting particular Sins only; which is not pleadable in
this Case. Ahab was no less under the Dominion of Sin, when he had Repented
him, that he was before. And Judas Repented him before he hanged himself.

5. PROMISES and Resolutions against Sin for the future. But the Goodness of
many in these things, is like the morning Cloud, and as the early Dew it
passes away, as it is in the Prophet, Hos. vi. 4.

WHERE there is a Concurrence of these things in any, they have good hopes, at
least, that they are not under the Dominion of Sin; nor is it easy to convince
them, that they are: And they may so behave themselves herein, as that it is
not consistent with Christian Charity to pronounce them so to be. Howbeit, the
fallacy that is in these things, has been detected by many; and much more is
by all required to evidence the sincerity of Faith and Holiness. No Man
therefore can be acquitted by pleas taken from them, as unto their subjection
to the Reign of Sin.

THE things of the second sort, whence Arguments may be taken to prove the
Dominion of Sin in any Person, which yet will not certainly do it, are those
which we shall now examine. And we must observe.

1. THAT where Sin has the Dominion, it does indeed rule in the whole Soul,
and all the faculties of it. It is a vicious Habit in all of them, corrupting
them in their several Natures and Power; with that Corruption whereof they are
capable. So in the Mind, of Darkness and Vanity; the Will, of Spiritual Deceit
and Perverseness; the Heart, of Stubbornness and Sensuality. Sin in its Power
reaches unto, and affects them all. But,

2. IT does evidence its Dominion, and is to be tried by its acting in the
distinct Faculties of the Mind; in the frame of the Heart, and in the course of
the Life.

THESE are those which we shall examine; First, those which render the case
dubious; and then those that clearly determine it on the part of Sin.

I shall not therefore at present give positive Evidences of Men's Freedom from
the Dominion of Sin; but only consider the Arguments that lie against them, and
examine how far they are conclusive, or how they may be defeated. And,

1. WHEN Sin has in any instance possessed the Imagination, and thereby
engaged the cogitative Faculty in its Service, it is a dangerous symptom of its
Rule or Dominion. Sin may exercise its Rule in the Mind, Fancy, and
Imagination, where bodily strength or opportunity give no Advantage for its
outward Perpetration. In them the desires of Sin may be enlarged as Hell, and
the satisfaction of Lust taken in with greediness. Pride and Covetousness, and
Sensuality may reign and rage in the Mind, by corrupt Imaginations, when their
outward Exercise is shut up by circumstances of Life.

THE first way whereby Sin acts it self, or coins its Motions and Inclinations
into Acts, is by the Imagination, Genesis vi. 5. The continual evil Figments of
the Heart, are as the bubbling of corrupt Waters from a corrupted Fountain.

THE Imaginations intended are the fixing of the Mind on the Objects of Sin, or
sinful Objects by continual Thoughts, with delight and complacency. They are
the Minds purveying for the satisfaction of the Flesh in the Lusts thereof,
Romans xiij. 14. whereby Evil Thoughts come to lodge, to abide, to dwell in the
Heart, Jer. iv. 14.

THIS is the first and proper Effect of that Vanity of Mind whereby the Soul is
alienated from the Life of God. The Mind being turned off from its proper
Object with a dislike of it, applies its self by its Thoughts and Imaginations
unto the Pleasures and Advantages of Sin, seeking in vain to recover the Rest
and Satisfaction which they have forsaken in God himself. They follow after
lying Vanities, and forsake their own Mercies, Jonah ij. 8. And when they give
themselves up unto a constant internal converse with the desires of the Flesh,
the Pleasures and Advantages of Sin, with delight and approbation; Sin may
reign triumphantly in them, though no appearance be made of it in their outward
Conversation. Such are they who have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power
thereof; their hearts being filled with a Litter of ungodly Lusts, as the
Apostle declares, 2 Timothy iij. 5.

AND there are Three Evils, with respect whereunto, Sin does exercise its
reigning Power in the Imagination, in an especial manner.

1. PRIDE, Self-Elation, Desire of Power and Greatness. It is affirmed of the
Prince of Tyrus, that he said, He was a God, and sat in the Seat of God, Ezekiel.
xxviij. 3. And the like foolish Thoughts are ascribed unto the King of Babylon,
Isa. xiv. 13, 14. None of the Children of Men can attain so great Glory, Power
and Dominion in this World, but that in their Imaginations and Desires they can
infinitely exceed what they do enjoy; like him who wept, that he had not
another World to Conquer. They have no bounds but to be as God, yea, to be God;
which was the first design of Sin in the World. And there is none so poor and
low, but by his Imaginations, he can lift up and exalt himself almost into the
Place of God. This Vanity and Madness God reproves in his Discourse with Job,
Chap. xl. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And there is nothing more genuine and proper
unto the Original Depravation and Corruption of our Natures, than this
Self-Exaltation in foolish Thoughts and Imaginations; because it first came
upon us through a desire of being as God. Herein therefore may Sin exercise its
Dominion in the Minds of Men; yea, in the empty Mind and Vanity of these
Imaginations, with those that follow, consists the principal Part of the
Deceitful Ways of Sin. The Ways of Men cannot satisfy themselves with what
Sins they can actually commit; but in these Imaginations they rove endlessly,
finding satisfaction in their Renovation and Variety, Isa. lvij. 1.

2. SENSVALITY and Uncleanness of Life. It is said of some, That they have
their Eyes full of Adulteries, and that they cannot cease from Sin, 2 Pet. ij.
14. That is, their Imaginations are continually working about the Objects of
their unclean Lusts. These they think of Night and Day, immiring themselves in
all Filth continually. Jude calls them filthy Dreamers, defiling the Flesh, v.
8. They live as in a constant pleasing Dream by their vile Imaginations, even
when they cannot accomplish their lustful desires. For such Imaginations cannot
be better expressed than by Dreams; wherein Men satisfy themselves with a
supposed acting of what they do not. Hereby do many wallow in the mire of
Uncleanness all their Days; and for the most part are never wanting unto the
Effects of it, when they have Opportunity and Advantage. And by this means the
most cloystered Recluses may live in constant Adulteries, whereby multitudes of
them become actually the Sinks of Uncleanness. This is that, which in the Root
of it is severely condemned by our Savior, Matthew. v. 28.

3. UNBELIEF, Distrust and hard Thoughts of God, are of the same kind. These
will sometimes so possess the Imaginations of Men, as to keep them off from all
delight in God, to put them on contrivances of flying from him; which is a
peculiar Case, not here to be spoken unto.

IN these and the like ways may Sin exercise its Dominion in the Soul, by the
Mind and its Imagination. It may do so, when no demonstration is made of it in
the outward Conversation. For, by this means, the minds of men are defiled; and
then nothing is clean, all things are impure unto them, Tit. i. 15. Their minds
being thus defiled, do defile all things to them, their Enjoyments, their
Duties, all they have, and all that they do.

BUT yet all failing, and Sin in this kind does not prove absolutely, that sin
has not the Dominion in the Mind that it had before. Something of this Vice
and Evil, may be found in them that are freed from the reign of Sin. And there
will be so, until the Vanity of our Minds is perfectly cured and taken away,
which will not be in this World. Wherefore I shall name the Exceptions, that
may be put in against the Title of Sin, unto Dominion in the Soul;
notwithstanding the continuance in some measure of this work of the
Imagination, in coining Evil figments in the Heart. And,

1. THIS is no Evidence of the Dominion of Sin, where it is occasional arising
from the Prevalency of some present Temptation; take an Instance in the Case of
David. I no way doubt, but that in his Temptation with Bathsheba, his Mind was
possessed with defiling Imaginations. Wherefore on his Repentance, he not only
prays for the Forgiveness of his Sin, but cries out with all fervency, that God
would create a clean Heart in him, Psalm. li. 10. He was sensible not only of
the defilement of his Person by his actual Adultery; but of his Heart, by
impure Imaginations. So it may be in case of other Temptations. Whilst Men are
entangled with any Temptation, of what sort soever it be, it will multiply
Thoughts about it in the Mind: Yea its whole Power consists in a multiplication
of Evil Imaginations. By them it blinds the Mind, draws it off from the
consideration of its Duty, and enticeth it unto a full conception of Sin, Jam.
i. 14. Wherefore in this Case of a prevalent Temptation, which may befall a true
Believer, the corrupt working of the Imagination, does not prove the Dominion
of sin.

IF it be enquired, How the Mind may be freed and cleared of these perplexing,
defiling Imaginations, which arise from the urgency of some present Temptation,
suppose about earthly Affairs, or the like? I say, It will never be done by the
most strict Watch and Resolution against them; nor by the most resolute
Rejection of them. They will return with new Violence, and new Pretenses,
though the Soul has promised it self a Thousand times, that so they should not
do. There is but one way for the cure of this Distemper, and this is a thorough
Mortification of the Lust that feeds them, and is fed by them. It is to no
purpose to shake of the Fruit in this case, unless we dig up the Root. Every
Temptation designs the satisfaction of some Lusts of the Flesh or of the Mind.
These Evil Thoughts and Imaginations are the working of the Temptation in the
Mind. There is no riddance of them, no conquest to be obtained over them, but
by subduing the Temptation; and no subduing the Temptation, but by the
Mortification of the Lust, whose satisfaction it is designed unto. This Course
the Apostle directs unto, Col. iij. 3, 5. That which he enjoins is, that we
would not set our Minds on the things of the Earth, in opposition unto the
things above; that is, that we would not fill our Imaginations, and thereby our
Affections with them. But what is the way whereby we may be enabled so to do?
that is, says he, the universal Mortification of Sin, v. 5.

FOR want of the Wisdom and Knowledge hereof; or for want of its Practice,
thorough a secret unwillingness, to come up unto a full Mortification of Sin,
some are galled and perplexed, yea, and defiled with foolish and vain
Imaginations all their days. And although they prove not the Dominion of Sin,
yet they will deprive the Soul of that peace and comfort which otherwise it
might Enjoy.

BUT yet there is much spiritual Skill and Diligence required to discover, what
is the true Root and Spring of the foolish Imaginations that may at any time
possess the Mind. For they lie deep in the Heart; that Heart which is deep and
deceitful, and so are not easily discoverable. There are many other Pretenses
of them. They do not directly bespeak that Pride or unclean Lusts which they
proceed from; but they make many other Pretenses, and feign other Ends. But the
Soul that is watchful and diligent may trace them to their Original. And if
such Thoughts are strictly examined at any time, what is their design, whose
work they do, what makes them so busy in the Mind, they will confess the
Truth, both whence they came, and what it is they aim at. Then is the Mind
guided unto its Duty, which is the Extermination of the Lust, which they would
make Provision for.

2. SUCH Imaginations are no Evidence of the Dominion of Sin, in what degree
soever they are, where they are afflictive; where they are a burden unto the
Soul, which it groans under and would be delivered from. There is a full
account given by the Apostle, of the conflict between indwelling Sin and Grace,
Romans vij. And the things which he ascribes unto Sin, are not the first rising
or involuntary Motions of it, nor merely its Inclinati^ns and Disposition: For
the things ascribed unto it, as that it Fights, Rebels, Wars, leads Captive,
acts as a Law, cannot belong unto them; nor does he intend the outward acting
or perpetration of Sin, the doing, or accomplishing, or finishing of it: For
that cannot befall Believers, as the Apostle declares, 1 John iij. 9. But it is
the working of Sin by these Imaginations in the Mind, and the Engagement of the
Affections thereon, that he does intend. Now this he declares to be the great
burden of the Souls of Believers, that which makes them think their Condition
wretched and miserable in some sort, and which they earnestly cry out for
deliverance from, v. 24. This is the present Case. These Figments of the Heart,
these Imaginations will arise in the Minds of Men. They will do so sometimes to
an high degree. They will impose them on us with Deceit and Violence, leading
Captive unto the Law of them; where they are rejected, condemned, defied; they
will return again while there is any Vanity remaining in the Mind, or
Corruption in the Affections. But if the Soul be sensible of them, if it labor
under them, if it look on them as those that fight against its Purity, Holiness
and Peace, if it pray for deliverance from them, they are no Argument of the
Dominion of Sin. Yea, a great Evidence unto the contrary may be taken from that
firm Opposition unto them, which the Mind is constantly engaged in.

3. THEY are not a proof of the Dominion of Sin, when there is a prevalent
Detestation of the Lust from whence they proceed, and whose promotion they
design, maintained in the Heart and Mind. I confess, sometimes this cannot be
discovered; and all such various Imaginations are but mere Effects of the
incurable Vanity and Instability of our Minds. For these administer continual
occasion unto random Thoughts: But for the most part, (as we observed before)
they are employed in the service of some Lust, and tend unto the satisfaction
of it. They are that which is prohibited by the Apostle, Romans xiij. 14. Make no
provision, etc. And this may be discovered on strict Examination. Now when the
Mind is fixed in a constant detestation of that Sin, whereunto they lead, as it
is Sin against God, with a firm Resolution against it, in all circumstances
that may occur; no proof can be thence taken for the Dominion of Sin.

4. SOMETIMES evil Thoughts are the immediate Injections of Satan, they are on
many Accounts most terrible unto the Soul. Usually for the Matter of them, they
are dreadful, and oft-times blasphemous. And as unto the manner of their
Entrance into the Mind, it is, for the most part, surprising, furious and
invisible. From such Thoughts many have concluded themselves to be absolutely
under the Power of Sin and Satan. But they are by certain Rules and infallible
Signs, discoverable from whence they do proceed. And on that discovery all
pretenses unto the Dominion of Sin in them, must disappear. And this is the
first Case which renders the Question dubious, Whether Sin have the Dominion in
us or no?

2dly. IT is a sign of the Dominion of Sin, when in any Instance it has a
prevalency in our Affections: Yea, they are the Throne of Sin, where it acts
its Power. But this Case of the Affections, I have handled so at large in my
Discourse of spiritual Mindedness, as I shall here very briefly speak unto it,
so as to give one Rule only to make a Judgment by, concerning the Dominion of
Sin in them.

THIS is certain, that where Sin has the Prevalency and Predominancy in our
Affections, there it has the Dominion in the whole Soul. The Rule is given us
unto this purpose, 1 John ij. 15. We are obliged to love the Lord our God with
all our Hearts, and all our Souls. And therefore if there be in us a
predominant Love to any thing else, whereby it is preferred unto God, it must
be from the Prevalency of a Principle of Sin in us. And so it is with respect
unto all other Affections. If we love any thing more than God, as we do if we
will not part with it for his sake, be it as a Right Eye, or as a Right Hand
unto us, if we take more satisfaction and complacency in it, and cleave more
unto it in our Thoughts and Minds than unto God, as Men commonly do in their
Lusts, Interests, Enjoyments and Relations; if we trust more to it, as unto a
supply of our wants, than unto God, as most do to the World; if our Desires are
enlarged, and our Diligence heightened, in seeking after and attaining other
things, more than toward the Love and Favor of God; if we fear the Loss of
other things, or Danger from them more than we fear God; we are not under the
Rule of God or his Grace; but we are under the Dominion of Sin, which reigns in
our Affections.

IT were endless to give Instances of this Power of Sin in and over the
Affections of Men. Self-Love, Love of the World, Delight in things sensual, an
over-valuation of Relations and Enjoyments; with sundry other things of an
alike nature, will easily evidence it. And to resolve the Case under
Consideration, we may observe,

1. THAT the prevalency of Sin in the Affections, so far as to be a Symptom of
its Dominion, is discernable unto the least beam of spiritual Light, with a
diligent searching into, and Judgment of our selves. If it be so with any, and
they know it not, nor will be convinced of it, (as it is with many) I know not
what can free them from being under the Reign of Sin. And we see it so every
day. Men, all whose Ways and Actions proclaim, that they are acted in all
things, by an inordinate Love of the World and Self, yet find nothing amiss in
themselves; nothing that they do not approve of, unless it be that their
Desires are not satisfied according to their Expectations. All the Commands we
have in the Scripture for Self-Searching, Trial and Examination; all the Rules
that are given us unto that End, all the warnings we have of the Deceitfulness
of Sin, and of our own Hearts; they are given us to prevent this Evil of
shutting our Eyes against the prevalent Corruption and Disorder of our Affairs.
And the Issue of all our Endeavors in this kind, is in the Appeal of David to
God himself, Psalm. cxxxix. 23, 24.

2. WHEN Men have Convictions of the irregularity and disorder of their
Affections, yet are resolved to continue in the State wherein they are, without
the correction and amendment of them; because of some Advantages and
Satisfaction, which they receive in their present State; they seem to be under
the Dominion of Sin. So is it with those mentioned, Isa. vij. 10. upon the
Account of the present satisfaction, delight and pleasure, that their corrupt
Affections do take in cleaving inordinately unto their Objects, they will not
endeavor their Change and Alteration.

3. THIS then is the sole safe Rule in this Case. Whatever hold Sin may have
got in our Affections; whatever prevalency it may have in them, however it may
entangle and desile them; if we endeavor sincerely the discovery of this Evil,
and therein set our selves constantly unto the Mortification of our corrupt
Affections by all due means, there is not in their disorder any Argument to
prove the Dominion of Sin in us. Our Affections, as they are corrupt, are the
proper Objects of the great Duty of Mortification; which the Apostle therefore
calls our Members that are on the Earth, Col. iij. 5. This is a safe Anchor for
the Soul in this Storm. If it live in a sincere endeavor after the
Mortification of every discoverable Corruption, and Disorder in the Affections,
it is secure from the Dominion of Sin. But as for such, as are negligent in
searching after the State of their Souls, as unto the Inclinations and
Engagement of their Affections, who approve of themselves in their greatest
irregularities, resolvedly indulge themselves in every way of Sin to gratify
their sensual Affections, they must provide themselves of Pleas for their
Vindication; I know them not. But the meaning of our present Rule, will be
farther manifest in what ensues.

3dly. IT is a dangerous sign of the Dominion of Sin, when after a Conviction
of their necessity, it prevails unto a neglect of those ways and duties,
which are peculiarly suited, directed and ordained unto its Mortification and
Destruction. This may be cleared in some particulars.

1. MORTIFICATION of Sin, is the constant Duty of all Believers, of all who
would not have Sin have Dominion over them. Where Mortification is sincere,
there is no Dominion of Sin; and where there is no Mortification, there Sin
does reign.

2. THERE are some Graces and Duties that are peculiarly suited and ordained
unto this End, that by them and their Agency, the work of Mortification may be
carried on constantly in our Souls. What they are, or some of them, we shall
see immediately.

3. WHEN Sin puts forth its Power in any especial Lust, or in a strong
Inclination unto any actual Sin, then it is the duty of the Soul to make
diligent application of those Graces and Duties, which are specifical and
proper unto its Mortification.

4. WHEN men have had a Conviction of these Duties, and have attended unto them
according unto that Conviction; if Sin prevail in them to a neglect or
relinquishment of those Duties, as unto their performance, or as unto their
application unto the Mortification of Sin, it is a dangerous sign that Sin has
Dominion in them. And I distinguish between these things, namely, a neglect of
such Duties, as unto their performance and a neglect of the Application of them
unto the Mortification of Sin. For men may, on other Accounts, continue the
observance of them, or some of them, and yet not apply them unto this especial
End. And so all external Duties may be observed, when Sin reigns in Triumph,
2 Timothy iij. 5.

THE meaning of the Assertion being stated, I shall now name some of those
Graces and Duties, unto whose Omission and Neglect Sin may prevail, as unto an
Application of them unto the Mortification of any Sin.

THE First is, The daily exercise of Faith on Christ as Crucified. This is the
great Fundamental Means of the mortification of Sin in general, and which we
ought to apply unto every particular Instance of it. This the Apostle
Discourses at large, Romans vi. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Our Old Man, says
he, is crucified with Christ, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve Sin. Our Old Man, or the Body of Sin, is the
Power and Reign of Sin in us. These are to be destroyed; that is, so mortified,
that henceforth we should not serve Sin; that we should be delivered from the
Power and Rule of it. This, says the Apostle, is done in Christ: Crucified
with him. It is so meritoriously in his actual dying or being Crucified for us;
it is so virtually, because of the certain Provision that is made therein, for
the Mortification of all Sin. But it is so actually by the Exercise of Faith on
him as crucified, dead and buried, which is the means of the actual
Communication of the virtue of his Death unto us for that End. Herein are we
said to be dead and buried with him, whereof Baptism is the Pledge. So by the
Cross of Christ, the World is crucified unto us, and we are so to the World,
Gal. vi. 14. which is the substance of the Mortification of all Sin. There are
several Ways whereby the Exercise of Faith on Christ crucified, is effectual
unto this End.

1. LOOKING unto him as such, will beget holy Mourning in us, Zech. xij. 10.
They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn. It is a Promise of
Gospel Times and Gospel Grace. A view of Christ, as pierced, will cause
mourning in them that have received the Promise of the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication there mentioned. And this mourning is the Foundation of
Mortification. It is that godly Sorrow which works Repentance unto Salvation,
not to be repented of, 2 Cor. vij. 10. And Mortification of Sin is of the
Essence of Repentance. The more Believers are exercised in this View of Christ,
the more humble they are; the more they are kept in that mourning frame, which
is universally opposite unto all the Interest of Sin, and which keeps the Soul
watchful against all its Attempts. Sin never reigned in an humble mourning Soul.

2. IT is effectual unto the same end, by the way of a powerful Motive, as that
which calls and leads unto Conformity to him. This is pressed by the Apostle,
Romans vi. 8, 9, 10, 11. Our Conformity unto Christ, as crucified and dead,
consists in our being dead unto Sin, and thereby overthrowing the reign of it
in our mortal Bodies. This Conformity, says he, we ought to reckon on as our
Duty; reckon your selves dead unto Sin, that is, that you ought so to be, in
that Conformity, which you ought to aim at unto Christ crucified. Can any
spiritual Eye behold Christ dying for Sin, and continue to live in Sin? Shall
we keep that alive in us, which he died for, that it might not eternally
destroy us? Can we behold him bleeding for our Sins, and not endeavor to give
them their deaths Wound? The efficacy of the Exercise of Faith herein unto the
Mortification of Sin, is known unto all Believers in Experience.

3. FAITH herein gives us Communion with him in his Death, and unites the Soul
unto it, in its Efficacy. Hence we are said to be buried with him into Death,
and to be planted together in the likeness of his Death, Romans vi. 4, 5. Our Old
Man is crucified with him, v. 6. We have by Faith Communion with him in his
Death, unto the death of Sin.

THIS therefore is the first Grace and Duty which we ought to attend unto for
the Mortification of Sin. But where Sin has that Interest and Power in the
Mind, as to take it off from this Exercise of Faith, to prevent or obstruct it,
as it will do, so as that it will not, so as that it shall not dare to think or
meditate on Christ crucified, because of the inconsistency of such Thoughts,
with an Indulgence unto any Lust; it is to be feared, that Sin is in the Throne.

IF it be thus with any; if they have not yet made use of this way and means
for the Mortification of Sin; or if being convinced of it, they have been for
any season driven or withheld from the Exercise of Faith herein, I have nothing
to offer to free them from this Evidence of the reign of Sin, but only that
they would speedily and carefully address themselves unto their Duty herein.
And if they prevail on themselves unto it, it will bring in its own Evidence of
their freedom.

SOME, it may be, will say, That indeed they are unskilful in this Word of
Righteousness, as some are, Heb. v. 13. They know not how to make use of Christ
crucified unto this End; nor, how to set themselves about it. Other ways of
Mortification they can understand. The Discipline and Penances assigned by the
Papists unto this End, are sensible. So are our own Vows and Resolutions, with
other Duties that are prescribed; but as for this way of deriving Virtue from
the Death of Christ unto the Death of Sin, they can understand nothing of it.

I easily believe that some may say so, yea ought to say so, if they would
speak their Minds. For the spiritual Wisdom of Faith is required hereunto; but
all Men have not Faith. On the loss of this Wisdom, the Papists have invented
another way to supply the whole Exercise of Faith herein. They will make
Crucifixes, Images of Christ crucified, then they will adore, embrace, mourn
over, and expect great Verue from them. Without these Images they know no way
of addressing unto Christ, for the Communication of any Virtue from his Death
or Life. Others may be at the same loss. But they may do well to consider the
cause of it. For,

1. IS it not from Ignorance of the Mystery of the Gospel, and of the
Communication of supplies of spiritual things from Christ thereby, of the
Efficacy of his Life and Death unto our Sanctification and Mortification of
Sin? Or,

2. IS it not because indeed they have never been thoroughly distressed in their
Minds and Consciences by the Power of Sin; and so have never in good earnest
looked for relief? Light general Convictions either of the Guilt or Power of
Sin will drive none to Christ. When their Consciences are reduced unto real
Streights, and they know not what to do, they will learn better how to look
unto him whom they have pierced. Their Condition, whoever they are, is
dangerous, who find not a necessity every day of applying themselves by Faith
unto Christ, for help and succor. Or,

3. IS it not because they have other reliefs to betake themselves unto? Such
are there own Promises and Resolutions, which, for the most part, serve only to
cheat and quiet Conscience for an hour or a day, and then vanish into nothing.
But whatever be the Case of this Neglect, those in whom it is, will pine away
in their Sins. For nothing but the Death of Christ for us, will be the death of
Sin in us.

Secondly, Another Duty necessary unto this end, is continual Prayer, and this
to be considered as unto its Application, to the prevalency of any particular
Lust, wherein Sin does in a peculiar manner exert its Power. This is the great
Ordinance of God for its Mortification. For,

1. HEREBY we obtain spiritual Aids and Supplies of strength against it. We are
not more necessarily and fervently to pray that Sin may be pardoned, as to its
guilt, than we are that it may be subdued, as to its power. He who is negligent
in the latter, is never in good earnest in the former. The Pressures and
Troubles which we receive from the Power of Sin, are as pungent on the Mind, as
those from its Guilt are on the Conscience. Mere pardon of Sin will never give
Peace unto a Soul, though it can have none without it. It must be mortified
also, or we can have no spiritual Rest. Now this is the work of Prayer, namely,
to seek and obtain such supplies of mortifying, sanctifying Grace, as whereby
the Power of Sin may be broken, its Strength abated, its Root withered, its
Life destroyed, and so the whole Old Man crucified. That which was the Apostles
request for the Thessalonians, is the daily Prayer of all Believers for
themselves, 1 These. v. 23.

2. A constant Attendance unto this Duty in a due manner, will preserve the
Soul in such a frame, as wherein Sin cannot habitually prevail in it. He that
can live in sin, and abide in the ordinary duties of Prayer, does never once
Pray as he ought. Formality, or some secret Reserve or other, vitiates the
whole. A truly gracious praying Frame (wherein we pray always) is utterly
inconsistent with the love of, or reserve for any sin. To pray well, is to pray
always; that is, to keep the Heart always in that frame which is required in
Prayer: And where this is, sin can have no Rule, no, nor quiet Harbor in the
Soul.

3. IT is the Soul's immediate Conflict against the Power of sin. Sin, in it is
formally considered as the Soul's Enemy, which fights against it. In Prayer the
Soul sets it self to graple with it, to wound, kill and destroy. It is that
whereby it applies all its spiritual Engines unto its utter Ruin; herein it
exercises a gracious abhorrency of it, a clear self-condemnation on the
account of it, and engages Faith on all the Promises of God, for its Conquest
and Destruction.

IT is hence evident, that if Sin has prevailed in the Mind, unto a negligence
of this Duty, either in general, or, as unto the effectual Application of it,
unto any especial Case, where it exerts its Power, it is an ill Symptom of the
Dominion of Sin in the soul.

IT is certain, that unmortified sin, sin indulged unto, will gradually work
out all due regard unto this duty of Prayer, and alienate the mind from it,
either as unto the matter or manner of its performance. We see this exemplified
every day in Apostate Professors. They have had a Gift of Prayer, and were
constant in the Exercise of it; but the love of sin, and living in it has
devoured their Gifts, and wholly taken off their minds from the Duty it self,
which is the proper Character of Hypocrites; will he delight himself in the
Almighty? Will he always call upon God? Job xxvij. 10. He may do so for a
Season; but falling under the power of sin, he will not continue so to do.

NOW because sin uses great Deceit herein, in a gradual Progress for attaining
its End, and thereby securing its Dominion; we may in a way of warning or
caution, take notice of some of its steps, that the Entrances of it may be
opposed. For as the Entrance of God's Word gives Light, Psalm. cxix. 130. the
first puttings forth of its Power on the Soul, gives spiritual Light unto the
Mind, which is to be improved; so the Entrance of sin, the first actings of it
on the Mind, toward the neglect of this Duty, brings a deceiving darkness with
them, which is to be opposed.

1. It will produce in the mind an unreadiness unto this duty in its proper
Seasons. The heart should always rejoice in the approach of such seasons,
because of the delight in God, which it has in them. To rejoice and be glad in
all our approaches unto God, is every way required of us, and therefore with
the Thoughts of and in the approach of such seasons, we ought to groan in our
selves for such a preparedness of Mind, as may render us meet for that Converse
with God, which we are called unto. But where Sin begins to prevail, all things
will be unready and out of order. Strange Tergiversations will rise in the
mind, either as unto the duty it self, or as unto the manner of its
performance. Customariness and Formality are the Principles which act
themselves in this Case. The Body seems to carry the Mind to the Duty whether
it will or no, rather than the Mind to lead the Body in its part of it: And it
will employ it self in any thing, rather than in the Work and Duty that lies
before it.

HEREIN then lies a great part of our Wisdom, in obviating the power of sin in
us. Let us keep our hearts continually in a gracious Disposition and readiness
for this Duty, in all its proper seasons. If you lose this ground, you will yet
go more backwards continually. Know therefore, that there is no more effectual
preservative of the soul from the power of sin, than a gracious readiness for,
and disposition unto this duty in private and public, according to its proper
seasons.

2. IN its Progress, unto unreadiness it will add unwillingness; for the Mind
prepossessed by sin, finds it directly contrary unto its present Interest,
Disposition and Inclination. There is nothing in it but what troubles and
disquiets them; as he said of the Prophet, who was not willing to hear him any
more, it speaks not good but evil of them continually. Hence a secret
unwillingness prevails in the mind, and an aversation from a serious Engagement
in it. And the Attendance of such Persons to it, is as if they were under a
force, in a compliance with Custom and Convictions.

3. SIN will at length prevail unto a total neglect of this Duty: This is an
Observation confirmed by long Experience. If Prayer do not constantly endeavor
the ruin of Sin, sin will ruin Prayer; and utterly alienate the Soul from it.
This is the way of Backsliders in heart; as they grow in sin, they decay in
prayer, until they are weary of it, and utterly relinquish it. So they speak,
Mal. i. 13. Behold what a weariness it is, and ye have snuffed at it. They look
on it as a Task, as a Burden, and are weary in attending unto it.

NOW when I place this as an Effect of the prevalency of sin; namely, a
relinquishment of the Duty of Prayer; I do not intend that Persons do wholly
and absolutely, or as to all ways of it, public and private, and all seasons
or occasions of it, give it over utterly. Few arise to that profligacy in sin,
unto such desperate resolutions against God. It may be they will still attend
unto the stated seasons of Prayer, in Families or public Assemblies, at least
drawing near to God with their Lips; and they will on surprizals and dangers
personally cry unto God, as the Scripture every where testifies of them. But
this only I intend; namely, that they will no more sincerely, immediately, and
directly apply Prayer to the mortification and ruin of that Lust or
Corruption, wherein Sin puts forth its Power and Rule in them: And where it is
so, it seems to have the Dominion. Of such an one, says the Psalmist, He has
left off to be wise and to do good; he sets himself in a way that is not
good, he aborreth not Evil, Psalm. xxxvi. 3, 4.

BUT such a Relinquishment of this Duty, as unto the End mentioned, as is
habitual, and renders the Soul secure under it, is intended. For there may,
through the power of Temptation, be a prevalency of this Evil in Believers for
a season. So God complains of his People, Isa. xliij. 22. Thou have not called
upon me, O Jacob, but have been weary of me, O Israel; that is, comparatively,
as unto the fervency and sincerity of the duty required of them. Now, when it
is thus with Believers for a season, through the Power of Sin and Temptation;
(1.) They do not approve of themselves therein. They will ever and anon call
things to consideration, and say, It is not with us as it should be, or as it
was in former days; this thing is not good that we do; nor will it be Peace in
the latter End. (2.) They will have secret Resolutions of shaking themselves
out of the dust of this Evil State; they say in themselves, we will go and
return unto our first Husband; for, then it was better with us than now; as the
Church did, Hos. ij. 7. (3.) Every thing that peculiarly befalls them in a way
of Mercy or Affliction, they look on as Calls from God, to deliver and recover
them from their Backsliding frame. (4.) They will receive in the Warnings which
are given them by the Word preached, especially, if their particular Case be
touched on, or laid open. (5.) They will have no Quiet, Rest, nor
Self-approbation, until they come thoroughly off unto an healing and Recovery;
such as that described, Hos. xiv. 1, 2, 3, 4.

THUS it may be with some over whom Sin has not the Dominion; yet ought the
first Entrance of it to be diligently watched against, as that which tends unto
the danger and ruin of the Soul.

Thirdly, CONSTANT self-abasement, condemnation and abhorrency, is another duty
that is directly opposed unto the Interest and Rule of sin in the Soul. No
frame of Mind is a better Antidote against the Poison of sin; He that walks
humbly* walks surely. God has a continual regard unto Mourners, those that
are of a broken Heart and a contrite Spirit. It is the Soil where all Grace
will thrive and flourish. A constant due sense of sin as sin, of our Interest
therein by Nature, and in the Course of our Lives, with a continual afflictive
Remembrance of some such Instances of it, as have had peculiar Aggravations
issuing in a gracious Self-Abasement, is the Soul's best posture in watching
against all the Deceits and Incursions of Sin. And this is a duty which we
ought with all diligence to attend unto. To keep our Souls in a constant frame
of Mourning and Self-Abasement, is the most necessary part of our Wisdom, with
reference unto all the Ends of the Life of God: And it is so far from having
any inconsistency with those Consolations and Joys, which the Gospel tenders
unto us in Believing, as that it is the only way to let them into the Soul in a
due manner. It is such Mourners, and those alone, unto whom Evangelical
Comforts are administered, Isa. lvij. 18.

ONE of the first things that sin does when it aims at Dominion, is the
destruction of this frame of Mind; and when it actually has the Rule, it will
not suffer it to enter: It makes men careless and regardless of this matter,
yea, bold, presumptuous and fearless: It will obstruct all the entrances into
the mind of such Self-Reflections and Considerations, as lead unto this Frame:
It will represent them either as needless or unseasonable; or make the mind
afraid of them, as things which tend unto its disquietment and disturbance,
without any advantage. If it prevail herein, it makes way for the security of
its own Dominion. Nothing is more watched against than a proud, regardless,
senseless, secure frame of Heart, by them who are under the Rule of Grace.

Fourthly, A Reserve for any one known sin, against the Light and Efficacy of
Convictions, is an Argument of the Dominion of sin. So was it in the Case of
Naaman; he would do all other things, but put in an Exception for that, wherein
his Honor and Profit did depend. Where there is sincerity in Convictions, it
extends it self unto all sins: For it is of sin as sin, and so of every known
sin equally, that has the nature of sin in it. And to be true to Convictions
is the Life of sincerity. If men can make a choice of what they will except,
and reserve, notwithstanding, their being convinced of its Evil, it is from the
ruling Power of sin. Pleas in the Mind, in the behalf of any sin; that is, for
a continuance in it, prevalent thereunto, ruins all sincerity. It may be, the
pretense is, That it is but a little one, of no great moment, and that which
shall be compensated with other duties of Obedience; or, it shall be retained
only until a fitter season for its Relinquishment; or, men may be blinded after
Conviction to dispute again, whether what they would abide in be sinful or no,
as is the Case frequently with respect unto Covetousness, Pride and Conformity
to the World; it is a dreadful effect of the ruling Power of Sin. Whatever
impeacheth the Universality of Obedience in one thing, overthrows its sincerity
in all things.

Fifthly, HARDNESS of Heart, so frequently mentioned and complained of in the
Scripture, is another Evidence of the Dominion of Sin. But because there are
various degrees also hereof, they must be considered, that we may judge aright
what of it is an Evidence of that Dominion, and what may be consistent with the
Rule of Grace: For it is that mysterious Evil whereof the best men do most
complain; and whereof the worst have no sense at all.

CHAP. IV.
Hardness of Heart spoken to, as an eminent sign of Sin's Dominion, and is
showed, that it ought to be considered as total or partial.

HARDNESS of Heart, is either Total and Absolute; or, Partial and Comparative
only.

TOTAL Hardness, is either Natural and Universal; or, Judiciary in some
particular Individuals.

NATURAL Hardness, is the Blindness or Obstinacy of the Heart in Sin, by
Nature, which is not to be cured by the use or application of any outward
Means. Hardness and impenitent Heart, Romans ij. 5. This is that Heart of Stone,
which God promises in the Covenant to take away, by the Efficacy of his
Almighty Grace, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. Where this Hardness abides uncured, unremoved,
there Sin is absolutely in the Throne; this therefore we do not enquire about.

JUDICIARY Hardness, is either immediately from God; or, it is by the Devil,
through his Permission.

IN the first way, God is said frequently to harden the Hearts of Men in their
Sins, and unto their Ruin, as he did with Pharaoh; and he does it in general
Two ways, (1.) By withholding from them those supplies of Light, Wisdom and
Understanding, without which they cannot understand their Condition, see their
Danger, nor avoid their Ruin. (2.) By withholding the Efficacy of the means
which they enjoy for their Conviction and Repentance; yea, and giving them an
Efficacy unto their Obduration, Isa. vi. 9, 10. And concerning this divine
Induration, we may observe,

(1.) THAT it is the severest of divine Punishments in this World; (2.) That
therefore it is not executed, but toward those that are habitually wicked, and
so do, of choice, harden themselves in their Sins, Romans i. 26, 28. (3.) For the
most part it respects some especial Times and Seasons, wherein are the turning
points for Eternity. (4.) That the Condition of those so hardened is remediless,
and their Wounds uncurable.

WHERE any are thus hardened, there is no Question about the Dominion of Sin.
Such an Heart is its Throne, its proper Seat next to Hell.

THERE is a Judiciary Hardness, which Satan, through God's Permission, brings
on men, 2 Cor. iv. 4. And there are many ways whereby he does effect it, not
here to be insisted on.

BUT there is an Hardness of Heart, that is indeed but partial and comparative,
whatever appearance it may make of that which is total and absolute, where the
Enquiry arises, whether it be an Evidence of the Dominion of Sin or no.

THERE is an Hardness of Heart, which is known and lamented in them in whom it
is. Hereof the Church complains, Isa. lxiij. 17. O Lord, why have thou hardened
our Heart from thy Fear? or suffered it so to be; not healing, not recovering
our Hardness. And there are sundry things which concur in this kind of
Hardness of Heart. As,

1. WANT of readiness to receive divine Impressions from the Word of God. When
the Heart is soft and tender, it is also humble and contrite, and ready to
tremble at the word of God. So it is said of Josia, that his Heart was tender,
and he humbled himself before the Lord, when he heard his Word, 2 Kings xxij.
18, 19. This may be wanting in some in a great measure, and they may be
sensible of it. They may find in themselves a great unreadiness to comply with
divine Warnings, Reproofs, Calls. They are not affected with the Word preached,
but sometimes complain that they sit under it like Stocks and Stones. They have
not an experience of its Power, and are cast into the mould of it. Hereon they
apprehend that their Hearts are hardened from the fear of God, as the Church
complains. There is indeed no better frame of Heart to be attained in this
Life, then that, whereby it is to the Word, as the Wax to the Seal, fit and
ready to receive Impressions from it. A Frame that is tender to receive the
Communications of the Word in all their Variety, whether for Reproof,
Instruction or Consolation; and the want hereof, is a culpable Hardness of
Heart.

2. THERE belongs unto it an Affectedness with the guilt of Sin, as unto the
sorrow and Repentance that it does require. There is none in whom there is any
spark of saving Grace, but has a gracious sorrow for Sin, in some degree or
other; but there is a Proportion required between Sin and Sorrow. Great Sins
require great Sorrows; as Peter on his great sin, wept bitterly. And all,
especial Aggravations of Sin, require an especial sense of them. This the Soul
finds not in it self. It bears the Thoughts of Sin, and the Rebukes of
Conscience, without any great concussion or remorse. It can pass over the
charge of sin, without relenting, mourning, dissolving in Sighs and Tears; and
it cannot but say sometimes thereon, that its heart is like the Adamant or the
Flint in the Rock; this makes many fear, that they are under the Dominion of
Sin; and they fear it the more, because that fear does not affect and humble
them as it ought. And it must be granted, that all unaffectedness with sin, all
want of Humiliation and godly Sorrow upon it, is from an undue hardness of
Heart. And they, who are not affected with it, have great reason to be jealous
over themselves, as even unto their spiritual State and Condition.

3. OF the same kind in its measure, is unaffectedness with the Sins of others,
among whom we live, or in whom we are concerned. To mourn for the sins of
others, is a duty highly approved of God; Ezekiel. ix. It argues the effectual
working of many Graces, as Zeal for the Glory of God, Compassion for the Souls
of Men, Love to the Glory and Interest of Christ in the World. The want hereof
is from hardness of Heart, and it is that which abounds among us. Some find not
themselves at all concerned herein, some make pretenses why they need not so
be, or, that it is not their Duty; what is it unto them how wicked the World
is, it shall answer for its own Sins. Nor are they moved when it comes nearer
them. If their Children come to Losses, Ruin, Poverty, then they are affected
indeed. But so long as they flourish in the World, be they Apostates from
Profession, be they Enemies to Christ, do they avowedly belong unto the World,
and walk in the ways of it; they are not much concerned, especially if they are
not scandalously Profligate. But this also is from Hardness of Heart, which
will be bewailed, where Grace is vigilant and active.

4. WANT of a due sense of Indications of divine displeasure, is another
Instance of this Hardness of Heart. God does oft-times give signs and tokens
hereof; whether as unto the public State of the Church in the World, or, as
unto our own Persons, in Afflictions and Chastisements. In the seasons hereof,
he expects that our Hearts should be soft and tender, ready to receive
Impressions of his Anger, and pliable therein unto his Mind and Will. There are
none whom at such a time he does more abhor, than those who are stout-hearted,
little regarding him or the Operation of his Hands. This in some measure may be
in Believers; and they may be sensible of it, to their Sorrow and Humilition.

THESE things, and many more of the like nature, proceed from Hardness of
Heart, or the remainder of our hardness by nature, and are great promoters of
the Interest of Sin in us. But where any Persons are sensible of this Frame,
where they are humbled for it, where they mourn under and cry out for its
removal, it is so far from being an Evidence of the Dominion of Sin over them,
in whom it is, that it is an eminent sign of the contrary; namely, that the
ruling Power of Sin is certainly broken and destroyed in the Soul.

BUT there are other Instances of Hardness of Heart, which have much more
difficulty in them, and which are hardly reconcilable unto the Rule of Grace. I
shall mention some of them.

1. SECURITY and senseless under the guilt of great actual Sins. I do not say
this is or can at any time be absolute in any Believer. But such it may be, as
whereon men may go on at their old Pace of Duties and Profession, though
without any peculiar Humiliation, albeit they are under the provoking guilt of
some known sin, with its Aggravations. It will recurr upon their Minds and
Conscience, (unless it be seared) will treat with them about it. But they pass
it over, as that which they had rather forget, and wear out of their minds,
then bring things unto their proper Issue by particular Repentance. So it seems
to have been with David after his Sin with Bathsheba. I doubt not but that
before the message of God to him by Nathan, he had unpleasing Thoughts of what
he had done. But there is not the least Footsteps in the Story, or any of his
Prayers, that he laid it seriously to heart, and was humbled for it before.
This was a great Hardness of Heart, and we know how difficult his Recovery from
it was. He was saved but as through Fire. And where it is so with any one, that
has been overtaken with any great Sin, as Drunkenness or other Folly, that he
strives to wear it out, to pass it over, to forget it, or give himself
Countenance from any reasoning or consideration against the especial sense of
it, and humiliation for it; he can, during that State and Frame, have no solid
Evidence, that Sin has not the Dominion in him. And let such Sinners be
warned, who have so passed over former Sins, until they have utterly lost all
sense of them, or are under such a Frame at present; that they recall things to
another Account, and suffer no such Sin to pass without a peculiar Humiliation,
or whatever be the final Issue of things with them, they can have no solid
ground of spiritual Peace in this World.

2. THERE is such a dangerous Hardness of Heart, where the guilt of one Sin
makes not the Soul watchful against another of another sort. Wherever the
Heart is tender, upon a surprizal into Sin, it will not only watch against the
returns thereof, or relapses into it, but will be made diligent, heedful and
careful against all other Sins whatever. So is it with all that walk humbly
under a sense of sin. But when Men in such a state are careless, bold and
negligent, so as that if they repeat not the same sin, they are easily hurried
into others. Thus was it with Asa; he was wroth with the Prophet that came unto
him with a divine Message, and smote him, and cast him in Prison, for he was in
a Rage, 2 Chronicles. xvi. 10. A Man would think that when he was recovered out of
this Distemper, it might have made him humble and watchful against other Sins:
But it was not so; for, it is added, that he oppressed some of the People at
the same time; and he rested not there, but in his Disease he sought not to the
Lord, but unto Physicians; unto Persecution he added Oppression, and unto that
Unbelief. v. 12. yet notwithstanding all this, the Heart of Asa was perfect
with the Lord all his days, 1 Kings xv. 14. that is, he had a prevalent
Sincerity in him notwithstanding these Miscarriages. But he was doubtless under
the Power of great Hardness of Heart. So is it with others in the like Cases,
when one sin makes them not careful and watchful against another. As when men
have stained themselves with Intemperance of Life, they may fall into Excess of
Passion in their Families and Relations; or into a neglect of Duty, or take any
other crooked steps in their walk. This argues a great Prevalency of Sin in the
Soul, although as we see in the Example of Asa, it is not an infallible
Evidence of its Dominion; yet of that nature it is, wherewith divine Peace and
Consolation are inconsistent.

3. WHEN men fall into such unspiritual Frames, such deadness and decays, as
from which they are not recoverable by the ordinary means of Grace; it is a
certain Evidence of Hardness of Heart, and the Prevalency of Sin therein. It is
so, whether this be the fault of Churches or of particular Persons? The
Preaching of the Word, is the especial divine Ordinance for the healing and
recovery of Backsliders in Heart or Life. Where this will not effect it in any,
but they will go on frowardly in the ways of their own hearts, unless God take
some extraordinary course with them, they are on the brink of Ruin, and live
on sovereign Grace alone.

THUS was it with David. After his great Sin, there is no doubt but he attended
unto all Ordinances of divine Worship, which are the ordinary means of the
preservation and recovery of Sinners from their Backslidings. Howbeit they had
not this effect upon him; he lived impenitently in his Sin, until God was
pleased to use extraordinary means in the especial Message of Nathan, and the
Death of his Child, for his awakening and recovery.

AND thus God will deal sometimes with Churches and Persons. Where ordinary
means for their recovery will not effect it, he will by sovereign Grace, and it
may be by a concurrence of Extraordinary Providence, heal, revive and save
them. So he promises to do, Isa. lvij. 16, 17, 18, 19.

BUT where this is trusted unto, in the neglect of the ordinary means of
healing, seeing there is no direct Promise of it, but it is a Case reserved
unto absolute sovereignty, the End may be bitterness and sorrow.

AND let them take heed who are under this Frame: For although God may deliver
them, yet it will be by terrible things; as Psalm. lxv. 5. Such terrible things
as wherein he will take Vengeance of their Inventions, Psalm. xcix. 8. though he
do forgive them: So David affirms of himself, that God in his dealing with him,
had broken all his Bones, Psalm. li. 8.

I fear this is the present Case of many Churches and Professors at this day.
It is evident that they are fallen under many spiritual decays. Neither have
the ordinary means of Grace, Repentance and Humiliation, though backed with
various providential Warnings, been efficacious to their recovery. It is
greatly to be feared that God will use some severe Dispensation in terrible
things toward them for their awakning; or, which is more dreadful, withdraw
his Presence from them.

4. OF the same Nature it is, and argues no small Power of this Evil, when men
satisfy and please themselves in an unmortified, unfruitful Profession; a
severe Symptom of the Dominion of Sin. And there are Three things that manifest
the consistency of such a Profession, with Hardness of Heart; or, are fruits of
it therein.

1. A neglect of the principal duties of it. Such are mortification in
themselves, and usefulness or fruitfulness toward others. A Deficiency and
Neglect in these things, are evident amongst many that profess Religion. It
does not appear that in any thing they seriously endeavor the Mortification of
their Lusts, their Pride, their Passion, their Love of the World, their
inordinate Desires and sensual Appetites. They either indulge unto them all,
or, at least, they maintain not a constant Conflict against them. And, as unto
usefulness in the Fruits of Righteousness, which are to the Praise of God by
Jesus Christ, or those good Works, which are the Evidence of a living Faith,
they are openly barren in them. Now, whereas these are the principal Dictates
of that Religion which they do profess, their neglect of them, their deficiency
in them proceeds from an Hardness of Heart, over-powering their Light and
Convictions. And what shall long, in such a Case, stop Sins out of the Throne?
Self-pleasing and satisfaction in such a Profession, argues a very dangerous
State and Habit of Mind. Sin may have a full Dominion under such a Profession.

2. THE admission of an habitual Formality into the performance of religious
Duties, is of the same nature. In some the Power of Sin (as we observed before)
prevails unto the Neglect and Omission of such Duties. Others continue the
Observation, but are so formal and lifeless in them, so careless, as unto the
exerting or exercise of Grace in them, as gives an uncontrollable Evidence of
the Power of Sin, and a spiritual senselesness of Heart. There is nothing that
the Scripture does more frequently and severely condemn, nor give as a
Character of Hypocrites, than a diligent Attendance unto a multiplication of
Duties, whilst the Heart is not spiritually engaged in them. For this cause the
Lord Christ threatened the utter Rejection of the Lukewarm Church of Laodicea.
And God pronounces a most severe Sentence against all that are guilty of it,
Isa. xxix. 13, 14. Yet thus it may be with many, and that thus it has been
with them, many do manifest by their open Apostasy, which is the common Event
of this Frame and Course long continued in; for some in the daily performance
of religious Duties for a season, do exercise and preserve their Gifts, but
there being no exercise of Grace in them, after a while those Gifts also do
wither and decay. They are under the Power of the Evil whereof we treat,
namely, an hard and senseless Heart, that can approve of themselves in such a
lifeless, heartless Profession of Religion and performance of the Duties
thereof.

3. WHEN Men grow senseless under the Dispensation of the Word, and do not at
all profit by it. The general Ends for preaching the Word unto Believers are
(1.) The increase of spiritual Light, Knowledge and Understanding in them. (2.)
The growth of Grace enabling to Obedience. (3.) Holy Excitation of Grace by
Impressions of its Power in the Communication of the Mind, Will, Love and Grace
of God unto our Souls, which is attended with (4.) An Impression on the
Affections, renewing and making them more holy and heavenly continually; with
(5.) Direction and Administration of spiritual strength against Temptations and
Corruptions; and (6.) Fruitfulness in the Works and Duties of Obedience.

WHERE Men can abide under the Dispensation of the Word, without any of these
effects on their Minds, Consciences or Lives; they are greatly hardened by the
deceitfulness of Sin; as Heb. iij. 12, 13. this Case is stated. Now whether
this be,

1. FROM that carelessness and security which is grown on all sorts of Persons,
against which God does justly express his Indignation, by withholding the
Power and Efficacy of his Word, in its Administration from them: Or,

2. FROM an increase of an unsanctified Light and Gifts, which fill men with
high thoughts of themselves, and keep them off from that humble Frame which
alone is teachable: Or,

3. FROM a loss of all due Reverence unto the Ministry, as God's Ordinance for
all the ends of the Word, with a secret Fortification of Conscience by
Prejudices against its Power, from the Suggestions of Satan: Or,

4. FROM the love of Sin, which the Heart would shelter and secure from the
Efficacy of the Word; or from what other cause soever it be, it proceeds from a
dangerous hardness of Heart, from the Power of Sin.

WHERE this is the state of the Minds of Men, where this hardness is thus
prevalent in them, I do not, no Man can give them assurance that Sin has not
the Dominion in them. But because all these things are capable of various
degrees, it may not be concluded absolutely from any or all of them in any
degree, that so it is. But this we may safely conclude, (1.) That it is
impossible for any Man in whom this evil Frame is found in any degree, and not
sincerely endeavored against, to keep any true solid Peace with God, or in his
own Soul; What seems to be so in him is but a ruinous Security. (2.) That this
is the high road unto final Obduration and Impenitency; and therefore, (3.) it
is the present Duty of those who have any care of their Souls, to shake
themselves out of this Dust, and not to give themselves any rest, until they
are entered into the Paths of Recovery. The Calls of God for a Return unto such
Backsliders in Heart are multiplied, the Reasons for it and Motives unto it are
innumerable; this ought never to depart from their minds, that without it they
shall eternally Perish, and know not how soon they may be overtaken with that
Destruction.

THUS far have we proceeded in the enquiry, Whether Sin has the Dominion in us
or no? There are on the other side many Evidences of the Rule of Grace,
sufficient to discard the Pleas and Pretenses of Sin unto the Throne: But the
consideration of them is not my present Design; I have only examined the Pleas
of Sin, which render the Enquiry difficult and the Case dubious. And they arise
all from the actings of Sin in us, as it fights against the Soul, which is its
proper and constant work, 1 Pet. ij. 11, 12. It does so against the design of
the Law, which is to live to God; against the Order and Peace of it, which it
disturbs; and against its eternal Blessedness, which it would deprive it of.
The Examination of the Pretenses insisted on, may be of some use to them that
are sincere.

BUT on the other hand, there are uncontrollable Evidences of the Dominion of
Sin in Men, some whereof I shall mention, and only mention, because they need
neither Proof nor Illustration.

(1.) IT is so where Sin has possessed the Will. And it has possessed the
Will, when there are no restraints from sinning taken from its Nature but its
Consequents only. (2.) When Men proclaim their Sins, and hide them not; when
they boast in in them, and of them, as it is with multitudes; or, (3.) approve
of themselves in any known Sin, without renewed Repentance; as Drunkenness,
Uncleanness, Swearing and the like: Or, (4.) Live in the Neglect of religious
Duties in their Clossets and Families; whence all their public Attendance unto
them is but Hypocrisy: Or, (5.) Have an Enmity to true Holiness, and the Power
of Godliness: Or, (6.) Are visible Apostates from Profession, especially if
they add, as is usual, Persecution to their Apostasy: Or, (7.) Are ignorant of
the sanctifying Principles of the Gospel and Christian Religion: Or, (8.) Are
Dispisers of the means of Conversion: Or, (9.) Live in security under open
providential Warnings and Calls to Repentance: Or, (10.) Are Enemies in their
Minds unto the true Interest of Christ in the World. Where these things and the
like are found, there is no Question what it is that has Dominion, and bears
Rule in the Minds of Men. This all Men may easily know, as the Apostle
declares, Romans vi. 16.

CHAP. III.
The Third Enquiry handled, viz. What is the assurance given us, and what are
the Grounds thereof, that Sin shall not have Dominion over us?

The Ground of this assurance is, That we are not under the Law but Grace. The
Force of this Reason showed, viz. How the Law does not destroy the Dominion of
Sin, and how Grace dethrowns Sin and gives Dominion over it.

AND thus much has been spoken unto the Second thing proposed at the Entrance
of this Discourse; namely, an Enquiry, Whether Sin have the Dominion in any of
us or no? I proceed unto that which offers it self from the words in the Third
Place; What is the assurance given us, and what are the Grounds of it, that Sin
shall not have Dominion over us; which lies in this, That we are not under the
Law, but under Grace.

WHERE Men are engaged in a constant Conflict against Sin, where they look upon
it, and judge it their chiefest Enemy, which contends with them for their
Souls, and their eternal Ruin; where they have Experience of its Power and
Deceit, and, through the Efficacy of them, have been often shaken in their
Peace and Comfort; where they have been ready to despond, and say, They shall
One Day perish under their Powers: It is a Gospel Word, a Word of good Tidings
that gives them Assurance, that it shall never have Dominion over them.

THE Ground of this Assurance is, That Believers are not under the Law, but
under Grace. And the force of this Reason we may manifest in some few Instances.

1. THE Law gives no strength against Sin unto them that are under it; but
Grace does. Sin will neither be cast nor kept out of its Throne, but by a
spiritual Power, and strength in the Soul, to oppose, conquer and dethrown it.
Where it is not conquered it will reign; and conquered it will not be, without
a mighty prevailing Power: This the Law will not, cannot give.

THE Law is taken Two ways. (1.) For the whole Revelation of the Mind and Will
of God in the Old Testament. In this Sense it had Grace in it, and so did give
both Life, and (...), and strength against Sin, as the Psalmist declares, Psalm.
xix. 7, 8, 9. In that sense it contained not only the Law of Precepts, but the
Promise also, and the Covenant which was the means of conveying spiritual Life
and Strength unto the Church, in this sense it is not here spoken of; nor is
any where opposed unto Grace. (2.) For the Covenant Rule of perfect Obedience,
do this and live. In this sense men are said to be under it in opposition unto
being under Grace. They are under its Power, Rule, Conditions and Authority as
a Covenant. And in this sense all men are under it, who are not enstated in the
New Covenant through Faith in Christ Jesus, who sets up in them and over them
the Rule of Grace. For all Men must be one way or other under the Rule of God;
and he rules only by the Law, or by Grace: And none can be under both at the
same time.

IN this sense the Law was never ordained of God, to convey Grace or spiritual
Strength unto the Souls of Men: Had it been so, the Promise and the Gospel had
been needless. If there had been a Law given which could have given Life,
verily Righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. iij. 21. If it could
have given Life or Strength, it would have produced Righteousness, we should
have been justified by it. It discovers Sin and condemns it, but gives no
Strength to oppose it. It is not God's Ordinance for the dethrowning of Sin,
nor for the Destruction of its Dominion.

THIS Law falls under a double consideration; but in neither of them was
designed to give Power or Strength against Sin.

1. AS it was given unto Mankind in the state of Innocence. And it did then
absolutely and exactly declare the whole Duty of Man, whatever God in his
Wisdom and Holiness did require of us. It was God's Ruling of men according to
the Principle of the Righteousness wherein he was created. But it gave no new
aids against Sin; nor was there any need that so it should do. It was not the
Ordinance of God to administer new or more Grace unto Man, but to rule and
govern him according to what he had perceived. And this it continues to do for
ever. It claims and continues a Rule over all Men, according to what they had,
and what they have. But it never had power to bar the Entrance of Sin, or to
cast it out when it is once Enthroned.

2dly. AS it was renewed and enjoined unto the Church of Israel on Mount Sinai,
and with them unto all that would join themselves unto the Lord out of the
Nations of the World. Yet neither was it then, nor as such, designed unto any
such End, as to destroy or dethrone Sin, by an Administration of spiritual
Strength and Grace. It had some new Ends given then unto it, which it had not
in its original Constitution. The principal whereof was to drive men to the
Promise and Christ therein. And this it does by all the Acts and Powers of it
on the Souls of Men. As it discovers Sin, as it irritates and provokes it by
its severity, as it judges and condemns it, as it denounces a Curse on
Sinners, it drives unto this End. For this was added of Grace in the Renovation
of it; this new End was given unto it; in it self it has nothing to do with
Sinners, but to Judge, Curse, and Condemn them.

THERE is therefore no help to be expected against the Dominion of Sin from the
Law. It was never ordained of God unto that End; nor does it contain, nor is it
communicative of the Grace necessary unto that End, Romans viij. 3.

WHEREFORE those who are under the Law, are under the Dominion of Sin. The Law
is holy, but it cannot make them holy, who have made themselves unholy: It is
just, but it cannot make them so; it cannot justify them whom it does condemn:
It is good, but can do them no good, as unto their deliverance from the Power
of Sin; God has not appointed it unto that End. Sin will never be dethroned by
it; it will not give place unto the Law; neither in its Title, nor its Power.

THOSE who are under the Law; will at some seasons endeavor to shake off the
Yoke of Sin, and resolve to be no longer under its Power. As,

1. WHEN the Law presses on their Consciences, perplexing and disquieting of
them. The Commandment comes home unto them, Sin reviveth and they die, Rom,
vij. 9, 10. That is, it gives power to Sin to slay the hopes of the Sinner, and
to distress him with the Apprehension of Guilt and Death. For the strength of
Sin is the Law, 1 Cor. xv. 56. The Power it has to disquiet and condemn
Sinners, is in and by the Law. When it is thus with Sinners, when the Law
presses them with a sense of the Guilt of Sin, and deprives them of all Rest
and Peace in their minds; they will resolve to cast off the Yoke of Sin, to
relinquish its service, that they may be freed from the Urgency of the Law on
their Consciences. And they will endeavor it in some Instances of Duty, and
Abstinence from Sin.

2. THEY will do the same under surprizals with Sickness, Pain, Dangers, or
Death it self. Then they will cry, and pray, and promise to reform, and set
about it, as they suppose, in good earnest. This Case is fully exemplified,
Psalm. lxxviij. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. And it is manifest in daily Experience
amongst multitudes. There are few who are so seared and profligate, but at such
Seasons they will think of returning to God, of relinquishing the service of
Sin, and vindicating themselves from under its Dominion. And in some it works
a lasting Change, though no real Conversion does ensue. But with the most, this
Goodness is as the morning Cloud, and as the early Dew, so passes it away.

3. THE same Effect is produced in many by the preaching of the Word. Some
Arrow of Conviction is fastened in their Minds, whereon their former ways
displease them; and they judge it is better for them to change the Course of
their Lives, and to relinquish the service of Sin: These Resolutions for the
most part abide with them, according to the Society which they have or fall
into. Good Society may much help them in their Resolves for a time; when by
that which is evil and corrupt they are presently extinguished.

4. SOMETIMES merciful, endearing Providence will have the same effect on the
Minds of Men, not obdurate in Sin. Such are deliverances from imminent dangers,
sparing the lives of near Relations and the like.

IN such seasons Men under the Law will attend unto their Convictions, and
endeavor for a while to shake off the Yoke of Sin. They will attend unto what
the Law says, under whose Power they are, and endeavor a compliance
therewith; many duties shall be performed, and many Evils abstained from, in
order to the quitting themselves of Sin's Dominion. But alas the Law cannot
enable them hereunto: It cannot give them life and strength to go through with
what their Convictions press them unto; therefore, after a while, they begin to
faint and wax weary in their Progress, and at length give quite over. It may be
they may break off from some great Sins in particular; but shake off the Whole
Dominion ^f Sin they cannot.

IT is otherwise with them that are under Grace. Sin shall not have Dominion
over them; strength shall be administered unto them to dethrone it.

GRACE is a word of various Acceptations in the Scripture. As we are here said
to be under it, and as it is opposed unto the Law, it is used or taken for the
Gospel, as it is the Instrument of God for the Communication of himself, and
his Grace by Jesus Christ unto those that do believe, with that state of
Acceptance with himself, which they are brought into thereby, Romans v. 1, 2.
Wherefore to be under Grace, is to have an Interest in the Gospel Covenant and
State, with a Right unto all the Privileges and Benefits thereof, to be brought
under the Administration of Grace by Jesus Christ, to be a true Believer.

BUT the Enquiry hereon is, how it follows from hence, that Sin shall not have
Dominion over us; that Sin cannot extend its Territories and Rule into that
state; and in what sense this is affirmed?

1. IS it that there shall be no Sin in them any more? Even this is true in
some sense. Sin, as unto its condemning Power, has no place in this State,
Romans viij. 1. All the sins of them that believe are expiated or done away, as
to the guilt of them in the Blood of Christ, Heb. i. 2. 1 John i. 7. This
branch of the Dominion of Sin, which consists in its condemning Power, is
utterly cast out of this state. But Sin, as unto its Being and Operation does
still continue in Believers, whilst they are in this World: They are all
sensible of it. Those who deceive themselves with a contrary apprehension, are
most of all under the Power of it, 1 John i. 8. Wherefore to be freed from the
Dominion of Sin, is not to be freed absolutely from all Sin; so as that it
should in no sense abide in us any more. This is not to be under Grace, but to
be in Glory.

2. IS it that sin, though it abides, yet it shall not fight nor contend for
Dominion in us? That this is otherwise, we have before declared; Scripture and
the universal Experience of all that believe, do testify the contrary: So does
the assurance here given us, that it shall not obtain that Dominion. For if it
did not contend for it, there could be no Grace in this Promise. There is none
in Deliverance from that whereof we are in no danger.

BUT the Assurance here given is built on other Considerations; whereof the
First is, That the Gospel is the means ordained, and Instrument used by God for
the Communication of spiritual strength unto them that believe, for the
dethroning of Sin. It is the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans i. 16. that
whereby and wherein he puts forth his Power unto that end. And Sin must be
really dethroned by the powerful acting of Grace in us, and that in a way of
duty in our selves. We are absolved, quitted, freed from the Rule of Sin, as
unto its pretended Right and Title, by the Promise of the Gospel. For thereby
are we freed and discharged from the Rule of the Law, wherein all the Title of
Sin unto Dominion is founded. For the strength of Sin is the Law. But we are
freed from it, as unto its internal Power, and exercise of its Dominion, by
internal spiritual Grace and strength in its due exercise. Now this is
communicated by the Gospel; it gives Life and Power, with such continual
supplies of Grace, as are able to dethrone Sin, and for ever to prohibit its
return.

THIS then is the present Case supposed* and determined by the Apostle. You
that are Believers, are all of you conflicting with Sin. You find it always
restless and disquieting, sometimes strong and powerful. When it is in
conjunction with any urgent Temptation, you are afraid it will utterly prevail
over you to the ruin of your Souls. Hence you are wearied with it, groan under
it, and cry out for deliverance from it. All these things the Apostle at large
insists on in this and the next Chapter. But now, says he, be of good comfort.
Notwithstanding all these things, and all your Fears upon them, Sin shall not
prevail, it shall not have the Dominion, it shall never ruin your Souls. But
what Ground have we for this Hope? What Assurance of this Success? This you
have, says the Apostle, You are not under the Law, but under Grace; or, the
Rule of the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, administered in the Gospel. But how
does this give relief? Why it is the Ordinance, the Instrument of God which he
will use unto this End, namely the Communication of such supplies of Grace and
spiritual strength, as shall eternally defeat the Dominion of Sin.

THIS is one principal Difference between the Law and the Gospel, and was
everso esteemed in the Church of God, until all Communication of Efficacious
Grace began to be called in Question. The Law guides, directs, commands all
things that are against the Interest and Rule of Sin. It judges and condemns
both the things that promote it, and the Persons that do them: It frightens and
terrifies the Consciences of those who are under its Dominion. But if you shall
say unto it, what then shall we do? this Tyrant, this Enemy, is too hard for
us* what aid and assistance against it will it afford unto us? What power will
it communicate unto its destruction? Here the Law is utterly silent, or says,
that nothing of this nature is committed unto it of God. Nay, the strength it
has it gives unto sin for the Condemnation of the Sinner; the strength of Sin
is the Law.

BUT the Gospel, or the grace of it, is the means and Instrument of God, for
the Communication of internal spiritual Strength unto Believers. By it do they
receive supplies of the Spirit, or aids of Grace for the subduing of Sin, and
the destruction of its Dominion. By it they may say, they can do all things
through him that enables them. Hereon then depends in the first place the
Assurance of the Apostles Assertion, That Sin shall not have the Dominion over
us, because we are under Grace. We are in such a State, as wherein we have
supplies in readiness to defeat all the Attempts of Sin, for Rule and Dominion
in us.

BUT some may say hereon, They greatly fear they are not in this state; for
they do not find such supplies of spiritual Strength and Grace, as to give them
a conquest over sin. They are still perplexed with it, and it is ready to
invade the Throne in their Minds, if it be not already possessed of it.
Wherefore they fear least they are strangers from the Grace of the Gospel.

IN Answer hereunto, the Things ensuing are proposed.

1. REMEMBER what has been declared concerning the Dominion of Sin. If it be
not known what it is, and wherein it does consist, as some may please
themselves, whilst their condition is deplorable, as it is with the most; so
others may be perplexed in their Minds without just Cause. A clear destinction
between the Rebellion of Sin and the Dominion of Sin, is a great Advantage unto
spiritual Peace.

2. CONSIDER the Ends for which aids of Grace are granted and communicated by
the Gospel. Now this is not, That Sin may at once be utterly destroyed and
consumed in us, that it should have no Being, Motion, or Power in us any more.
This work is reserved for glory in the full Redemption of Body and Soul, which
we here do but groan after. But it is given unto us for this End, that sin may
be so crucified and mortified in us, that is, so gradually weakened and
destroyed, as that it shall not ruin spiritual Life in us, obstruct its
necessary acting in duties, and Prevalency against such Sins as would disannul
the Covenant Relation between God and our Souls. Whilst we have supplies of it
which are sufficient unto this End, although our Conflict with Sin does
continue, although we are perplexed by it, yet we are under Grace, and Sin
shall have no more Dominion over us. This is enough for us, that Sin shall be
gradually destroyed, and we shall have a sufficiency of Grace in all occasions
to prevent its ruling Prevalency.

3. LIVE in the Faith of this sacred Truth, and ever keep alive in your Souls
Expectation of supplies of Grace suitable thereunto. It is of the nature of
true and saving Faith, inseparable from it, to believe, that the Gospel is the
way of God's Administration of Grace for the ruin of Sin. He that believes it
not, believes not the Gospel it self, which is the Power of God unto Salvation,
Romans i. 16. If we live, and walk, and act as if we had nothing to trust unto
but our selves, our own Endeavors, our own Resolutions, and that in our
perplexities and surprizals, it is no wonder if we are not sensible of supplies
of divine Grace; most probably we are under the Law, and not under Grace. This
is the Fundamental Principle of the Gospel State, that we live in Expectation
of continual Communications of Life, Grace and Strength from Jesus Christ, who
is our Life, and from whose fullness we receive, and Grace for Grace. We may
therefore in this Case continually expostulate with our Souls, as David does;
Why go you mourning because of the Oppression of the Enemy? Why are you cast
down, and why are you disquieted within us? Still hope in God, he is the health
of my Countenance; we may be sensible of great Oppression from the Power of
this Enemy; this may cause us to go mourning all the day long, and in some
sense it ought so to do. Howbeit we ought not hence to despond, or to be cast
down from our Duty or our Comfort. Still me may trust in God through Christ,
and live in continual Expectation of such spiritual Reliefs, as shall assuredly
preserve us from the Dominion of Sin. This Faith, Hope, and Expectation we are
called unto by the Gospel. And when they are not cherished, when they are not
kept up unto a due Exercise, all things will go backward in our spiritual
Condition.

4. MAKE especial Application unto the Lord Christ, unto whom the
Administration of all spiritual supplies is committed, for the Communication of
them unto you, according unto all especial Occasions. Has sin got the
advantage of a powerful Temptation, so as that it seems to put hard for
Dominion in the Soul, as it was with Paul under the buffetings of Satan, when
he had that answer from God upon his reiterated Prayer, My Grace is sufficient
for thee, Sin shall not have Dominion over thee? Has it by its deceitfulness
brought the Soul into a lifeless, senseless frame, makes it forgetful of
Duties, negligent in them, or without spiritual delight in their performance?
Has it almost habituated the Soul unto careless and corrupt Inclinations unto
the love, of or conformity to the World? Does it take advantage from our
darkness and confusion under Troubles, Distresses or Temptations? On these and
the like Occasions it is required, that we make especial, fervent Application
unto the Lord Christ, for such supplies of Grace as may be sufficient and
efficacious to control the Power of sin in them all. This under the
consideration of his Office and Authority unto this End, his Grace and
readiness from especial Inducements, we are directed unto, Heb. iv. 14, 15, 16.

5. REMEMBER always the Way and Method of the Operations of divine Grace, and
spiritual Aids. It is true in our first Conversion to God, we are as it were
surprised by a mighty Act of sovereign Grace, changing our hearts, renewing our
minds, and quickening us with a principle of spiritual Life. Ordinarily many
things are required of us in a way of Duty in order thereunto. And many
previous Operations of Grace in our Minds in illumination, and the sense of sin
do materially and passively dispose us thereunto, as Wood when it is dried, is
disposed to Firing. But the work it self is performed by an immediate act of
divine power, without any active cooperation on our parts. But this is not the
Law or Rule of the Communication or Operation of actual Grace, for the subduing
of Sin. It is given in a way of concurrence with us in the discharge of our
Duties, and when we are sedulous in them, we may be sure we shall not fail of
divine assistance according to the established Rule of the administration of
Gospel Grace. If therefore we complain that we find not the Aids mentioned, if
at the same time we are not diligent in attendance unto all the Duties, whereby
Sin may be mortified in us, we are exceedingly injurious to the Grace of God.

WHEREFORE notwithstanding this Objection, the Truth stands firm, that Sin
shall not have Dominion over us, because we are not under the Law, but under
Grace; because of the spiritual Aids that are administered by Grace, for its
mortification and destruction.

Secondly, THE Law gives no Liberty of any kind; it gendreth unto Bondage, and
so cannot free us from any Dominion, not that of Sin. For this must be by
Liberty. But this we have also by the Gospel. There is a twofold Liberty; (1.)
Of State and Condition; (2.) Of intern^^ Operation. And we have both by the
Gospel. The first consists in our deliverance from the Law and its Curse, with
all things which claim a Right against us by Virtue thereof; that is, Satan,
Death and Hell. Out of this state from whence we can never be delivered by the
Law, we are translated by Grace into a state of glorious Liberty. For, by it
the Son makes us free, and we receive the Spirit of Christ. Now where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 1 Cor. iij. 17. This Liberty Christ
proclaims in the Gospel unto all that do believe, Isa. lxi. 1. Hereon they who
hear and receive the joyful sound, are discharged from all Debts, Bonds,
Accounts, Rights and Titles, and are brought into a state of perfect Freedom.
In this state sin can lay no Claim to Dominion over any one Soul. They are gone
over into the Kingdom of Christ, and out from the Power of Sin, Satan and
Darkness. Herein indeed lies the Foundation of our assured Freedom from the
Rule of Sin. It cannot make an Incursion on the Kingdom of Christ, so as to
carry away any of its Subjects into a state of Sin and Darkness again. And an
Interest in this state ought to be pleaded against all the Attempts of Sin,
Romans vi. 1, 2. There is nothing more to be detested, than that any One who is
Christ's Freeman, and dead to the Power of Sin, should give place again unto
any of its Pretenses to, or endeavors for Rule.

AGAIN, there is an internal Liberty, which is the Freedom of the mind, from
the inward powerful Chains of Sin, with an ability to act all ^^e Powers and
Faculties of the Soul in a gracious manner. Hereby is the power of Sin in the
Soul destroyed. And this also is given us in the Gospel. There is power
administered in it to live unto God, and to walk in all his Commandments. And
this also gives Evidence unto the Truth of the Apostles Assertion.

Thirdly, THE Law does not supply us with effectual Motives and Encouragements
to endeavor the Ruin of the Dominion of Sin in a way of Duty, which must be
done, or in the End it will prevail. It works only by fear and dread, with
threatenings and terrors of Destruction. For although it says also, Do this and
live, yet withal it discovers such an impossibility in our Nature, to comply
with its Commands in the way and manner wherein it enjoins them, that the very
promise of it becomes a matter of Terror, as including the contrary Sentence of
Death upon our Failure in its commands. Now these things enervate, weaken and
discourage the Soul in its Conflict against Sin: They give it no Life,
Activity, Cheerfulness or Courage in what they undertake. Hence those who
engage themselves into an Opposition unto Sin, or a Relinquishment of its
Service, merely on the Motives of the Law, do quickly faint and give over. We
see it so with many every Day. One Day they will forsake all sin, their beloved
sin, with the Company and Occasions enducing them thereunto. The Law has
frighted them with divine Vengeance. And sometimes they proceed so far in this
Resolution, they seem escaped the Pollution of the World; yet soon again they
return to their former Ways and Follies, 2 Pet. ij. 20, 21, 22. Their goodness
is as the morning Cloud, and as the early Dew so passes it away. Or if they do
not return to wallow in the same Mire of their former Pollutions, they betake
themselves to the shades of some superstitious Observances; as it is in the
Papacy. For they openly succeed into the Room of the Jews, who being ignorant
of the Righteousness of God, and not submitting thereunto, went about variously
to establish their own Righteousness, as the Apostle speaks, Romans x. 3, 4. For
in that Apostate Church where men are wrought on by the Terrors of the Law to
relinquish Sin, and set themselves in opposition unto its Power, finding
themselves altogether unable to do it by the works of the Law it self, which
must be perfectly holy; they betake themselves to a number of superstitious
Observances which they trust unto in the room of the Law, with its Commands and
Duties. But the Law makes nothing perfect, nor are the Motives it gives for the
ruin of the Interest of Sin in us, able to bear us out, and carry us through
that undertaking.

BUT the Motives and Encouragements given by Grace to endeavor the utter ruin
of sin in a way of Duty, are such as give Life, Cheerfulness, Courage and
Perseverance, they continually animate, relieve and revive the Soul in all its
Work and Duty, keeping it from fainting and despondency. For they are all taken
from the Love of God and of Christ, from the whole Work and End of his
Mediation, from the ready Assistances of the Holy Ghost, from all the Promises
of the Gospel, from their own with other Believers Experiences, all giving them
the highest Assurance of final Success and Victory. When the Soul is under the
Influences of these Motives, whatever difficulty and opposition it meets withal
from soliciting Temptations or Surprizals, it will renew its strength, it will
run and not be weary, it will walk and not faint, according to the Promise,
Isa. xl. 31.

Fourthly. CHRIST is not in the Law, he is not proposed in it, not communicated
by it, we are not made partakers of him thereby. This is the work of Grace, of
the Gospel. In it is Christ revealed, by it he is proposed and exhibited unto
us; thereby are we made partakers of him, and all the Benefits of his
Mediation. And he it is alone who came to, and can destroy this Work of the
Devil. The Dominion of Sin is the complement of the Works of the Devil, where
all his designs center. This the Son of God was manifest to destroy. He alone
ruins the Kingdom of Satan, whose power is acted in the Rule of Sin.
Wherefore, hereunto our Assurance of this comfortable Truth, is principally
resolved; and what Christ has done, and does for this End, is a great part of
the subject of Gospel Revelation.

THE like may be spoken of the Communication of the Holy Spirit, which is the
only principal efficient Cause of the ruin of the Dominion of Sin. For where
the Spirit of Christ is, there is liberty, and no where else. But we receive
this Spirit not by the works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith, Gal. iij.
2.

CHAP. VI.
The Practical Observations drawn from, and Application made of, the whole Text.

HAVING opened the Words, and made some Improvement of them; I shall now take
one or two Observations from the design of them, and issue the whole in a Word
of Application.

I. IT is an unspeakable Mercy and Privilege to be delivered from the Dominion
of Sin. As such it is here proposed by the Apostle, as such it is esteemed by
them that believe. Nothing is more sweet, precious and valuable unto a Soul
conflicting with Sin and Temptation, than to hear that Sin shall not have the
Dominion over them. Ah what would some give that it might be spoken unto them
with Power, so as that they might steadfastly believe it, and have the Comfort
of it. Fools make a mock of Sin, and some glory in the service of it, which is
their shame. But those who understand any thing aright, either of what is
present, or what is to come, do know that this freedom from its Dominion, is an
unvaluable Mercy. And we may consider the Grounds which Evidence it so to be.

1. IT appears so to be from the causes of it. It is that which no man can by
his own Power, and the utmost of his Endeavors attain unto. Men by them may
grow rich, or Wise, or Learned; but no Man by them can shake off the Yoke of
Sin. If a Man had all the Wealth of the World, he could not by it purchase this
Liberty; it would be despised. And when Sinners go hence to the place where the
Rich Man was tormented, and have nothing more to do with this World, they would
give it all if they had it, for an Interest in this Liberty.

IT is that which the Law and all the Duties of it cannot procure. The Law and
its Duties, as we have declared, can never destroy the Dominion of Sin. All Men
will find the Truth hereof, that ever come to fall under the Power of real
Conviction. When Sin presses on them, and they are afraid of its Consequents,
they will find, that the Law is weak, and the Flesh is weak, and their Duties
are weak, their Resolutions and Vows are weak; all insufficient to relieve
them. And if they think themselves freed one day, they shall find the next that
they are under Bondage; Sin for all this will rule over them with force and
rigor. And in this condition do some spend all their Days in this World. They
kindle sparks of their own, and walk in the Light of them, until they lie down
in darkness and sorrow. They Sin and promise amendment, and endeavor
Recompenses by some Duties, yet can never extricate themselves from the Yoke of
Sin. We may therefore learn the Excellency of this Privilege, first from its
Causes, whereof I shall mention some only.

1. THE meritorious procuring Cause of this Liberty, is the Death and Blood of
Jesus Christ. So is it declared, 1 Pet. i. 18, 19. 1 Cor. vi. 20. Chap. vij.
23. Nothing else could purchase this Freedom. Under the Power and Dominion of
Sin we were, and could not be delivered without a Ransom. Christ died and rose,
and lives again, that he might be our Lord, Romans xiv. 9. and so deliver us from
the Power of all other Lords whatever. It is true there was no Ransom due to
Sin or Satan, who was the Author of it. They were to be dethroned or destroyed
by an Act of Power. Both the Devil, and Sin, which is his work, are to be
destroyed not appeased, Heb. ij. 14. 1 John iij. 8. But the strength of Sin is
the Law, 1 Cor. xv. 56. that is, through the righteous Sentence of God, we were
held by the Law obnoxious unto the condemning Power of Sin. From that Law we
could not be delivered but by this Price and Ransom. Two Things hence follow:

1. THOSE who live in Sin, who willingly abide in the service of it, and endure
its Dominion, do cast the utmost contempt on the Wisdom, Love, and Grace of
Christ. They despise that which cost him so dear. They judge that he made a
very foolish purchase of this Liberty for us, with his dearest Blood. Whatever
it be, they prefer the present satisfaction of their Lusts before it. This is
the Poison of Unbelief. There is in it an high Contempt of the Wisdom and Love
of Christ. The Language of Men's Hearts that live in Sin, is, that the Liberty
which he purchased with his Blood, is not to be valued or esteemed. They
flatter him with their Lips in the outward performance of some duties; but in
their Hearts they despise him, and the whole work of his Mediation. But the
time is approaching wherein they will learn the difference between the slavery
of Sin, and the Liberty wherewith Christ makes Believers free. And this is that
which is now tendered unto Sinners in the Dispensation of the Gospel; Life and
Death are here set before you, choose Life that ye may live for ever.

2. LET those that are Believers in all their Conflicts with Sin, live in the
exercise of Faith, on this purchase of Liberty made by the Blood of Christ. For
two Things will hence ensue, (1.) That they will have a mighty Argument always
in readiness to oppose unto the Deceit and Violence of Sin. The Soul will
hereon say to its self, shall I forego and part with that which Christ
purchased for me at so dear a rate, by giving place to the solicitations of
Lust or Sin? Shall I despise his purchase? God forbid. See Romans vi. 2. By such
Arguings is the mind frequently preserved from closing with the Enticements and
Seductions of Sin. (2.) It is an effectual Argument for Faith to use in its
pleading for deliverance from the Power of Sin. We ask for nothing but what
Christ has purchased for us. And if this Plea be pursued it will be prevalent.

2dly. THE internal efficient cause of this Liberty, or that whereby the Power
and Rule of Sin is destroyed in us, is the Holy Spirit himself, which farther
evinceth the greatness of this Mercy. Every act for the Mortification of Sin,
is no less immediately from him, than those positive Graces are, whereby we are
sanctified. It is through the Spirit that we mortify the deeds of the Flesh,
Romans viij. 13. Where he is, there and there alone is Liberty. All attempts for
the Mortification of Sin without his especial aids and Operations, are
frustrate. And this manifests the Extent of the Dominion of Sin in the World.
He alone by whom it can be destroyed, and all those efficacious Operations of
his whereby it is so, are generally despised. And they must live and die slaves
unto Sin, by whom they are so. Wherefore a great part of our Wisdom for the
attaining and preserving this Liberty, consists in the acting of Faith on that
promise of our Savior, that our heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him of him. When Sin in any Instance, by any Temptation, urges
for Power and Rule in us, we are ready to turn into our selves and our own
Resolutions, which in their place are not to be neglected. But immediate cries
unto God for such supplies of his Spirit, as without which Sin will not be
subdued, we shall find our best Relief. Bear it in mind, try it on the next
Occasion, and God will bless it with success.

3dly. THE instrumental cause of this Freedom is the Duty of Believers
themselves, in and for the destruction of Sin. And this also manifests the
importance of this Privilege. This is one of the principal Ends of all our
religious Duties; of Prayer, of Fasting, of Meditation, of Watchfulness unto
all other Duties of Obedience; they are all designed to prevent and ruin the
Interest of Sin in us. We are called into a Theater to fight and contend, into
a Field to be tried in a Warfare. Our Enemy is this Sin, which strives and
contends for the Rule over us. This we are to resist even unto blood, that is,
our utmost in doing and suffering. And certainly that is in it self and unto us
of the highest Importance, which on divine Appointment and Command, is the
great End of the constant Endeavors of our whole lives.

Secondly, IT appears so to be from the consideration of the Bondage which we
are delivered from thereby. Bondage is that which humane nature is most averse
from, until it be debased and debauched by sensual Lusts. Men of ingenuous
Spirits have in all Ages chosen rather to die than to be made slaves. But there
is no such Bondage as that which is under the Dominion of Sin. To be under the
Power of base Lusts, as Covetousness, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Ambition, Pride
and the like, to make Provision to fulfill their Desires in the Wills of the
Mind and the Flesh, is the worst of slavery.

BUT we may say what we please on this subject; none think themselves so free,
none make such an Appearance of generous Freedom unto others, as those who are
avowed servants of Sin. If those are not Freemen, who do what they please, and
are for the most part approved in what they do, who puff at all their Enemies,
and scorn such as pusillanimous Slaves, who go not forth unto the same compass
of excess with them, who shall be esteemed free? They plead with the Pharisees
that they are the only Freemen, and were never in Bondage to any. The servile
restraints of Fear from divine Judgment and future Accounts they wholly
despise. See the Description, Psalm. lxxiij. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Who so free,
so joyous as such Persons; as for others, they are plagued all the day long,
and are chastened every morning, v. 14. Yea, they go heavily and mournfully
under the oppression of this Enemy, crying out continually for deliverance.

BUT the Truth insisted on is not at all impeached by this Observation. It is a
great part of the slavery of such Persons, that they know not themselves to be
Slaves, and boast that they are free. They are born in a state of Enmity
against God, and Bondage under Sin, and they like well of it, as all abject
Slaves do, under the worst of Tyrants; they know no better. But true Liberty
consists in inward Peace, Tranquillity of Mind, Designs for and Inclinations
unto the best things, the most noble Objects of our natural, rational Souls.
All these they are utter Strangers unto, who spend their lives in the service
of vile and base Lusts. Envy not their Gallantry, their glistering appearances,
their heaps of Wealth and Treasures, they are in the whole vile and
contemptible Slaves. The Apostle determines their Case, Romans vi. 17. It is a
matter of eternal thankfulness unto God, that we are delivered from being the
Servants of Sin.

YEA, it is an Evidence of Grace, of a good frame of Spirit, when a soul is
made really sensible of the excellency of this Freedom; when it so finds the
Power and Interest of Sin to be weakened, as that it can rejoice in it, and be
thankful to God for it, Romans vij. 25.

Thirdly, IT is so, with respect unto the End of this Bondage, or what it
brings Men unto. If after all the base drudgery which sinful Men are put unto
in the service of their Lusts, if after all the Conflicts which their
Consciences put them on with Fears and Terrors in the World, they could expect
any thing of a future reward hereafter, something might be spoke to alleviate
their present Misery. But the Wages of Sin is Death, eternal Death under the
wrath of the great God, is all they are to look for. The End of the Dominion of
Sin, is to give them up unto the Curse of the Law, and Power of the Devil for
evermore.

Fourthly. IT keeps Men off from the Participation of all real Good here and
hereafter. What Men under the Power of Sin do enjoy, will quickly appear to be
as a thing of naught. In the mean time, they have not the least taste of the
Love of God, which alone takes out the Poison of their Enjoyments. They have
not the least view of the Glory of Christ, without which they live in perpetual
darkness, like those who never behold the light nor Sun. They have no
Experience of the sweetness and excellency of the gracious Influences of Life,
and Strength, and Comfort from the Holy Ghost; nor of that satisfaction and
reward which is in holy Obedience; nor shall ever come to the Enjoyment of God.
All these things and sundry others of the like sort might be insisted on and
enlarged, to manifest the greatness of the Mercy and Privilege which is in a
Freedom from the Dominion of Sin, as it is here proposed by the Apostle. But
the principal design I intended is accomplished, and I do but touch on these
things.

I shall add One Observation more, and with it put a Close to this Discourse.

Ob. 2. IT is the great Interest of a Soul conflicting with the Power of Sin,
to secure it self against its Dominion; that it is not under its Dominion; not
to have the Cause hang dubious in the Mind. To clear the truth hereof, we may
observe the things that follow.

1. THE Conflict with Sin, making continual Repentance and Mortification
absolutely necessary will continue in us whilst we are in this World. Pretenses
of Perfection here, are contrary to the Scriptures, contrary to the universal
Experience of all Believers, and contrary to the Sense and Conscience of them
by whom they are pleaded, as they make it evident every day. We pray against
it, strive against it, groan for deliverance from it, and that, by the Grace of
Christ healing our Nature, not without success. Howbeit this success extends
not unto its absolute Abolition whilst we are in this World. It will abide in
us until the union of the Soul and Body wherein it has incorporated it self,
be dissolved. This is our Lot and Portion; this is the consequent of our
Apostasy from God, and the Depravation of our nature thereby.

YOU will say then, Whereto serves the Gospel, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ in this Case, if it be not able to give us deliverance herein? I answer,
it does give us a Fourfold Relief, which amounts virtually to a constant
deliverance, though Sin will abide in us whilst we are in this World.

1. IT is so ordered, that the continuance of Sin in us shall be the Ground,
Reason and Occasion of the exercise of all Grace, and putting a luster on our
Obedience. Some excellent Graces, as Repentance and Mortification could have no
exercise if it were otherwise. And whilst we are in this World, there is a
beauty in them, that is an over-balance for the Evil of the Remainders of Sin:
And the difficulty which is hereby put on our Obedience, calling continually
for the exercise and improvement of all Grace, renders it the more valuable.
Herein lies the Spring of Humility, and self-Resignation to the Will of God.
This makes us love and long for the Enjoyment of Christ, putting an excellency
on his Mediation; whence the Apostle on the consideration of it, falls into
that Ejaculation; I thank God through Jesus Christ my Lord, Romans vij. 25. This
sweetens unto us our future Rest and Reward. Wherefore the continuance of us in
this state and condition in this World, a state of spiritual Warfare, is best
for us, and highly suited unto divine Wisdom, considering the Office and Care
of our Lord Jesus Christ for our Relief. Let us not complain, or repine, or
faint, but go on with Christian Fortitude unto the End, and we shall have
success. For,

2. THERE are by the Grace of Christ, such supplies and aids of spiritual
Strength granted unto Believers, that Sin shall never proceed further in them
than is useful and needful for the exercise of their Graces. It shall never
have its Will upon them, nor Dominion over them, as we have before declared.

3. THERE is Mercy administered in and by the Gospel, for the Pardon of all that
is Evil in it self, or in any of its effects. There is no Condemnation unto
them that are in Christ Jesus. Pardoning Mercy, according to the Tenor of the
Covenant, does always disarm this Sin in Believers of its condemning Power. So
that notwithstanding the utmost endeavors of it, being justified by Faith,
they have Peace with God.

4. THERE is a season, when by the Grace of Christ it shall be utterly
abolished; namely, at Death, when the course of our Obedience is finished.
Wherefore to affirm that this Sin, and consequently a conflict with it, does
abide in Believers whilst they are in this World, is no disparagement unto the
Grace of Christ, which gives such a blessed deliverance from it.

Secondly, THERE is a double Conflict with and against Sin. The One is in those
that are unregenerate, consisting in the Rebellion of Light and Conscience
against the Rule of Sin, in many particular Instances. For although Sin be
enthroned in the Will and Affections, yet the knowledge of good and evil in the
Mind, excited by the hopes and fears of things eternal, will make head against
it, as unto the performance of sundry duties, and abstinence from Sin. This
conflict may be where Sin is in the Throne, and may deceive themselves,
supposing it may be from the Rule of Grace, when it is only from the Rebellion
of Light, and the charge of a Conscience yet unseared. But there is a conflict
with Sin where Grace has the Rule and is Enthroned. For although Grace have
the Sovereignty in the Mind and Heart, yet the remainders of Sin, especially in
the corrupt Affections, will be continually rebelling against it. Now this we
say is the Interest of all, namely, to enquire of what sort and kind that
conflict with Sin is, which is in them; if it be of the first sort, they may
yet be under the Dominion of Sin; if of the latter, they are freed from it.
Wherefore whilst the mind is dubious in this Case and undetermined, many evil
consequences it will be perplexed withal. I shall name some of them.

1. SUCH a soul can have no solid Peace, because it has not satisfaction what
state it does belong unto.

2. IT cannot receive refreshment by Gospel Consolations in any condition; for
its just fears of the Dominion of Sin, will defeat them all.

3. IT will be dead and formal in all its Duties, without spiritual Courage and
delight; which will at length make it weary of them. So,

4. ALL Grace, especially Faith, will be weakened and impaired under this Frame
continually.

5. FEAR of Death will hold the Soul in Bondage; wherefore it is highly
necessary to have this Case well stated and determined in our Minds; whereto if
the foregoing Discourses may contribute any thing, it is what was designed in
them.

THERE remains only to give some few Directions, how the prevalency of Sin unto
such a Degree, as to render the Case about its Rule dubious in the Mind, may be
obviated and prevented. Some few of the many that might be given, I shall
propose.

1. THE great Rule of preventing the increase and power of vicious Habits; is,
Watch against Beginnings. Sin does not attempt Dominion but in particular
Instances, by one especial Lust or another. Wherefore, if any Sin or corrupt
Lust begin as it were to set up for a peculiar Predominancy, or Interest in the
Mind and Affections; if it be not entertained with severe Mortification, it
will ruin the Peace, if not endanger the safety of the Soul. And when this is
so, it may easily be discovered by any one who keeps a diligent watch over
his Heart and Ways. For no Sin does so entirely advance it self in the Mind and
Affections, but it is promoted therein either by Men's natural Inclinations, or
by their circumstances in occasions of Life, or by some Temptation which they
have exposed themselves unto, or by some such neglect wherein the frequency of
Acts have strengthened vicious Inclinations. But these things may be easily
discerned by those who are in any measure awake unto their Soul's Concernments.

THE strict charge given us by our Lord Jesus Christ to watch, and that of the
Wise Man, above all keepings to keep our hearts, have especial regard unto
those beginnings of Sin's obtaining Power in us. So soon as a Discovery is made
of its coincidence or conjunction, with any of those ways of the promotion of
its Power, if it be not opposed with severe and diligent Mortification, it will
proceed in the method declared, James i. 14, 15.

THOSE who would be wise, must familiarize Wisdom unto their minds, by a
continual free Converse with it. They must say unto Wisdom, Thou art my Sister,
and call Understanding, thy Kinswoman, Prove. vij. 4. So will Wisdom have Power
in and over their Minds. And if we suffer Sin by any of the Advantages
mentioned, to familiarize it self into our minds; if we say not unto it, Get
thee hence upon the first appearance of its activity for Power in us, it will
put hard for the Thron*

2. CAREFULLY enquire and try whether such things which you may do or approve
of in your selves, do not promote the Power of Sin, and help on its Rule in
you. This Method David prescribes, Psalm. xix. 12. Secret Sins, such as are not
known to be Sins, it may be to our selves, make way for those that are
presumptuous. Thus Pride may seem to be nothing but a Frame of Mind belonging
unto our Wealth and Dignity, or our Parts and Abilities; sensuality may seem to
be but a lawful Participation of the good things of this Life; Passion and
Peevishness, but a due sense of the want of that respect which we suppose due
unto us; Covetousness a necessary care of our selves and our Families. If the
Seeds of Sin are covered with such Pretenses, they will in time spring up and
bear bitter Fruit in the Minds and lives of Men. And the beginnings of all
Apostasy both in Religion and Morality, lie in such Pretenses. Men plead they
can do so and so lawfully, until they can do things openly unlawful.

3. KEEP your Hearts always tender under the World. This is the true and only
state of inconsistency with, and repugnancy to the Rule of Sin. The loss
hereof, or a decay herein, is that which has opened the Floodgates of Sin
amongst us. Where this Frame is, a conscientious Fear of Sinning will always
prevail in the Soul; where it is lost, Men will be bold in all sorts of
Follies. And that this Frame may be preserved, it is required, (1.) That we
cast out all vicious Habits of Mind that are contrary unto it, James i. 21.
(2.) That we preserve an Experience of its Power and Efficacy on our Souls, 1
Pet. ij. 1, 2, 3. (3.) That we lay aside all Prejudices against those that
dispense it, Gal. iv. 16. (4.) To keep the Heart always humble, in which Frame
alone it is teachable, Psalm. xxv. Every thing in the preaching of the Word
comes cross and unpleasing to the Minds of Proud Men. (5.) Pray for a Blessing
on the Ministry, which is the best preparation for receiving benefit by it.

4. ABHOR that Peace of Mind which is consistent with any known Sin. Men may
have frequent* surprizals into known Sins; but if, whilst it is so with them,
they refuse all inward Peace, but what comes in by most fervent and sincere
desires of deliverance from them, and Repentance for them, they may be safe
from the Dominion of Sin. But if Men can on any Hopes, or Presumptions, or
Resolutions preserve a kind of Peace in their Minds, whilst they live in any
known Sin; they are nigh the Borders of that security, which is the Territory
wherein Sin does reign.

5. MAKE continual Applications unto the Lord Christ in all the Acts of his
Mediation for the Ruin of Sin, especially when it attempts a Dominion in us,
Heb. iv. 16. This is the Life and Soul of all Directions in this Case, which
needs not here to be enlarged on; it is frequently spoken unto.

Lastly, REMEMBER, that a due sense of Deliverance from the Dominion of Sin, is
the most effectual Motive unto universal Obedience and Holiness; as such it is
proposed and managed by the Apostle, Romans vi.

FINIS.

