THE TRUE NATURE OF A Gospel Church AND ITS GOVERNMENT: WHEREIN These following
particulars are distinctly handled.

I. The subject Matter of the Church. II. The formal Cause of a particular
Church. III. Of the Polity, Rule or Discipline of the Church in general. IV.
The Officers of the Church. V. The Duty of Pastors of Churches. VI. The Office
of Teachers in the Church. VII. Of the Rule of the Church, or of Ruling Elders.
VIII. The nature of Church Polity or Rule, with the Duty of Elders. IX. Of
Deacons. X. Of Excommunication. XI. Of the Communion of Churches.
The Publishing whereof was mentioned by the Author in his Answer to the
Unreasonableness of Separation.

By the late Pious and Learned Minister of the Gospel, JOHN OWEN,.D. D.

LICENSED, June 10. 1688.

LONDON, Printed for William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate street,
MDCLXXXIX.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Church of Christ, according as it is represented unto us, or described by
the holy Spirit of God, in the Old and New Testament, has but a twofold
Consideration, as Catholic and Mystical; or as Visible and Organized in
particular Congregations. The Catholic Church is the whole Mystical Body of
Christ, consisting of all the Elect which are purchased and redeemed by his
Blood, whether already called or uncalled, Militant or Triumphant; and this is
the Church that God gave him to be head unto, which is his Body and his
Fullness, and by union with him Christ Mystical, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and this is
that (...) (the only word most fully expressing the Catholic Church, used in
Scripture) the Church of the Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven,
Heb. 12.23. i. e. in the Lamb's Book of Life, and shall all appear one Day
gathered together to their Head, in the perfection and fullness of the New
Jerusalem-state; where they will make a glorious Church, not having Spot or
Wrincle or any such thing; but Holy and without Blemish. The day of Grace which
the Saints have passed in the respective Ages of the Church was but the days of
its Espousals, wherein the Bride has made her self ready; but then will be her
full married state unto Christ, then will be the perfection not only of every
particular Member of Christ, but of the whole Body of Christ, called a perfect
Man, and the measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, to which we are
called, Edifying and building up, by the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ,
whilst we are in Via, in our passage unto this Country, a City with a more
durable fixed Foundation which we seek.

In order therefore unto the completing this great and mystical Body, Christ
has his particular Visible Churches and Assemblies in this World, wherein he
has ordained Ordinances, and appointed Officers, for the glorious
forementioned Ends and Purposes.

There is no other sort of Visible Church of Christ Organized, the subject of
the aforesaid Institutions spoken of, but a particular Church or Congregation
(either in the Old or New Testament) where all the Members thereof do
ordinarily meet together in one place to hold Communion one with another, in
some one or more great Ordinances of Christ. The first Churches were Oeconomick
when the Worship of God was solemnly performed in the large Families of the
Antidiluvian and Postdiluvian Patriarchs, where, no doubt, all frequently
assembled to the Sacrifices as then offered, and other parts of Worship then in
use.

After the descent of a numerous Progeny from Abraham's Loins, God takes them
to himself in one Visible Body, a National but Congregational Church, to which
he forms them Four hundred and thirty Years after the Promise in the
Wilderness; and although all Abraham's Natural Posterity, according to the
External part of the Promise made to him, were taken into visible
Church Fellowship, so that it became a National Church; yet it was such a
National Church always, in the Wilderness, and in the Holy Land, as was
Congregational; for it was but one Congregation during the Tabernacle, or
Temple-state, first or second; they were always bound to assemble to the
Tabernacle, or Temple, thrice at least every Year; hence the Tabernacle was
still called the Tabernacle of the Congregation. They were to have but one
Altar for Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices; what others were at any time
elsewhere called High Places, were condemned by God as Sin.

Lastly, when Christ had Divorced this People, Abolished their Mosaical
Constitution, by breaking their Staff of Beauty and their Staff of Bonds, he
erects his Gospel Church, calls in Disciples by his Ministry, forms them into a
Body, furnishes them with Officers and Ordinances; and after he had suffered,
rose again, and continued here Forty days; in which time he frequently appeared
to them, and acquainted them with his Will, ascends unto his Father, sends his
Spirit in a plentiful manner at Pentecost, whereby most of them were furnished
with all necessary miraculous Gifts, to the promoting the Glory and Interest of
Christ among Jews and Gentiles.

Hence the whole Evangelical Ministry was first placed in the Church of
Jerusalem (so far as extraordinary, or such a part of it as was to descend to
Churches of after Ages) neither were they placed as abiding or standing
Officers in any other Church as we find. In this Church they acted as the
Elders thereof, and from this Church they were, it is very likely, solemnly sent
by Fasting and Prayer to the Exercise of their Apostolic Function, in
Preaching, Healing and working Miracles, gathering Churches, and settling
Officers in them; even so as Barnabas and Paul were sent forth by the Church of
Antioch.

Their distinguishing Apostolic Office and Charge (from which the Evangelist
differed but little) was to take care of all the Churches, not to sit down as
standing Pastors to all, or any particular Congregation, but at the first
planting, to gather, to direct, and confirm them, in practice of their
Doctrine, Fellowship, breaking Bread, and in Prayer. Wherefore, this Apostolic
Care committed to them proves nothing either of the Catholic Authority,
claimed by an Oecumenick Pastor; or that charge of many Congregations, claimed
by Diocesan Bishops.

Whence it is most evident, That all Church Officers, so far as they had any
Pastoral or Episcopal Office, was given to a particular Congregation, as the
(...). We read of no Pastors of many Congregations, nor of no Church made up of
many Congregations, to which Officers were annexed, nor of any representative
Church, as some would have.

That Apostolic Power did descend to Successors we utterly deny, it being not
derivable; for none after them could say, They had been Eye Witnesses of our
Lord, before or after his Resurrection; none since so qualified by an
extraordinary measure of the Spirit for Preaching and working Miracles; and
none but the Pope challenges such an extensive Care for, and Power over all
Churches. That which descends from them to the ordinary Ministry, is a
Commission to Preach and Baptize; and why not to Head, it being always in the
Commission that Christ gave, a Pastoral Relation, or Presbytership which was
included in their Apostleship, and Exercised toward the Church of Jerusalem.
Such Presbyter-ship John and Peter both had. Hence there remains no other
Successors jure to the Apostles, but ordinary Pastors and Teachers.

These are relative Officers, and are always in, and to some particular
Congregations; we know of no Catholic visible Church that any Pastors are
ordained to. 1. The Scripture speaks of no Church as Catholic visible. 2. The
thing it self is but a Chimaera of some Men's Brains; it is not in rerum natura;
for if a Catholic visible Church be all the Churches that I see at a time, I
am not capable of seeing much more than what can Assemble in one place. And if
it be meant of all the Churches actually in being, how are they visible to me?
where can they be seen in one place? I may as well call all the Cities and
Corporations in the World the Catholic visible City or Corporation; which all
rational Men would call Nonsense. Besides, if all Organized Churches could be
got together, it is not Catholic in respect of Saints Militant, much less of
Triumphant; for many are no Church Members that are Christ's Members, and many
visible Members are no true Members of Christ Jesus. Where is any such Church
capable of Communion in all Ordinances in one place? and the Scripture speaks
of no other Organized visible Church.

Again, to a Catholic visible Church constituted, should be a Catholic
visible Pastor or Pastors; for as the Church is, such is the Pastor and
Officers; to the Mystical Church Christ is the mystical Head and Pastor; he is
called the chief Bishop and Shepherd of our Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. hence the
uncalled are his Sheep, as John 10.16. but to all visible Churches Christ has
appointed a visible Pastor or Pastors; and where is the Pastor of the Catholic
visible Church? he is not to be found, unless it please us to take him from
Rome. To say that all individual Pastors are Pastors to the Catholic Church,
is either to say that they are invested with as much Pastoral Power and Charge
in one Church as in another, and then they are indefinite Pastors; and
therefore all Pastors have mutual Power in each others Churches; and so John
may come into Thomas his Church, and exercise all parts of Jurisdiction there,
and Thomas into John's; or a Minister to the Catholic Church has an universal
Catholic Power over the Catholic Church; if so, the Power and Charge which
every ordinary Pastor has, is Apostolic. Or, lastly, he is invested with an
Arbitrary Power, at least, as to the taking up a particular Charge where he
pleases, with a non obstante to the Suffrages of the People; for if he has an
Office whereby he is equally and indisputably related to all Churches, it is at
his liberty, by virtue of this Office, to take where he pleases.

But every Church Officer, under Christ, is a visible relate, and the correlate
must be such, whence the Church must be visible to which he is an Officer. It Is
absurd to say a Man is a visible Husband to an invisible Wife, the relate and
correlate must be ejusdem naturae. It Is true, Christ is related to the Church
as mystical Head, but it is in respect of the Church in its mystical Nature, for
Christ has substituted no mystical Officers in his Church.

There is a great deal of difference between the mystical and external visible
Church, though the latter is founded upon it, and for the sake of it. It Is
founded upon it as taking its true spiritual Original from it, deriving vital
Spirits from it by a mystical Union to, and Communion with Christ and his
Members; and it is for the Sake of it, all external visible Assemblies,
Ministers, Ordinances are for the sake of the mystical Body of Christ, for
calling in the Elect, and the Edifying of them to that full measure of Stature
they are designed unto.

But the different consideration lies in these Things,

1. That the mystical Church does never fail, neither is diminished by any
Shocks of Temptation or Suffering, that in their visible Profession any of them
undergo, whereas visible Churches are often broken, scattered, yea unchurched,
and many Members fail of the Grace of God by final Apostasy. Likewise Christ's
mystical Church is many times preserved in that State only, or mostly, when
Christ has not a visible organized Church according to Institution to be found
on the Face of the Earth, so it was with his Church often under the Old
Testament-Dispensation, as in Egypt, in the Days of the Judges when the Ark
was carried away by the Philistines, in the Days of Manasseh, and other wicked
Kings, and especially in Babylon. In such times the Faithful Ones were
preserved without the true Sacrifices, the teaching Priest, and the Law. So
has it been in the days of the New Testament, in diverse places; under the
Draconick Heathen Persecutions, and afterward in the Wilderness-state of the
Church, under the Antichristian Usurpations, and false Worship. Which mystical
State is the place prepared of God to hide the Seed of the Woman in, from the
Dragons Rage, for the space of One thousand two hundred and sixty Days.

Again, Unto this Mystical Church is only essentially necessary, a mystical
Union unto the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Gift of the Father, Acceptance, and
Covenant-undertaking of the Son, the powerful and efficacious Work of the
Spirit of the Father, and the Son, working true saving Faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and sincere Love to him and all his True Members. Whereby as they have
a firm and unshaken Union, so they have a spiritual Communion, though without
those desirable Enjoyments of external Church Privileges, and means of Grace,
which they are providentially often hindered from. Visible Churches being but
Christ's Tents and Tabernacles, which he sometimes sets up, and sometimes
takes down and removes at his Pleasure, as he sees best for his Glory in the
World.

But of these he has a special regard as to their Foundadation, Matter,
Constitution and Order, he gives forth an exact pattern from Mount Zion, as of
that Typical Tabernacle from Mount Sinai of Old.

The Foundation part of a visible Church is the credible Profession of Faith
and Holiness, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is the Corner Stone, Ephesians. ij.20.
Matthew. xvi.18. This Profession is the Foundation, but not the Church it self.
It Is not Articles of Faith, or Profession of them in particular individual
Persons that make an organized visible Church. We are the Household of Faith
built upon the Foundation, etc. 2. It Is Men and Women, not Doctrine, that are
the Matter of a Church; and these professing the Faith, and practicing
Holiness. The Members of Churches are always called in the New Testament
Saints, Faithful, Believers: They was such that were added to the Churches;
neither is every Believer so as such, but as a professing Believer, for a Man
must appear to be fit Matter of a visible Church before he can challenge Church
Privileges, or they can be allowed him. 3. It Is not many professing Believers
that make a particular Church. For though they are fit Matter for a Church, yet
they have not the Form of a Church, without a mutual Agreement and Combination
(explicit or at least, implicit) whereby they become, by virtue of Christ's
Charter, a spiritual Corporation, and are called a City, Household, House, being
united together by Joints and Bonds, not only by internal Bonds of the Spirit,
but external; the Bonds of Union must be visible as the House is, by profession.

This is a Society that Christ has given Power to, to choose a Pastor, and
other Officers of Christ's Institution, and enjoy all Ordinances: The words
Sacrament and Prayer as Christ has appointed.

Hence a visible Church must needs be a separate Congregation; Separation is a
proper and inseparable adjunct thereof; the Apostle speaks of Church
Membership, 2 Cor. vi.14. Be not unequally yoked together [(...), yoked with
those of another kind, the Plowing with an Ox and Ass together, being forbidden
under the Law] with Unbelievers, (...), i. e. Visible Unbelievers of any sort
or kind; for what participation, (...), has Righteousness with
Unrighteousness? what (...), Communion or Fellowship has Light with Darkness?
Verse. 13. (...), what harmony has Christ with Belial, Men of corrupt Lives and
Conversation, or what part, (...), has a Believer, i. e. a visible Believer
with an Unbeliever? it ought not to be rendered Infidel; but it was done by our
Translaters, to put a blind upon this place, as to its true intention, and to
countenance Parish Communion; for why did they not here, Verse. 14. and every
where else render, (...), an Infidel? Verse. 16. (...), what consistency has
the Temple of God ( i. e. the Gospel Church) with Idols? etc. I take this place
to be a full Proof of what is before spoken, That a Gospel Church is a Company
of Faithful professing People, walking together by mutual Consent, or
Confederation to the Lord Jesus Christ and one to another, in Subjection to and
Practice of all his Gospel-Precepts and Commands, whereby they are separate
from all Persons and Things manifestly contrary or disagreeing thereunto.

Hence* as it is separate from all such impurities that are without, so Christ
has furnished it with sufficient Power and means to keep it self Pure; and
therefore has provided Ordinances and Ministers for that end and purpose; for
the great end of Church-Edification cannot be obtained without Purity be also
maintained in Doctrine and Fellowship.

Purity cannot be maintained without Order; a disorderly Society will corrupt
within it self; for by Disorder it is divided, by divisions the joints and bands
are broken, not only of Love and Affection, but of visible Conjunction; so that
roots of bitterness, and sensual Separation arising, many are defiled.

It Is true, there may be a kind of Peace and Agreement in a Society that is a
stranger to Gospel Order, when Men agree together, to walk according to a false
Rule, or in a supine and negligent Observation of the True Rule. There may be a
common Connivance at each one to walk as he list, but this is not Order but
Disorder by Consent: Besides a Church may, for the most part, walk in Order,
when there is Breaches and Divisions. Some do agree to walk according to the
Rule, when others will deviate from it. It Is orderly to endeavor to reduce
those that walk not orderly; though such just Undertakings seem sometimes
grounds of Disturbance, and causes of Convulsion in the whole Body, threatening
even its breaking in pieces; but yet this must be done to preserve the whole.

The Word Translated Order, Colos. ij. 5. (...), is a Military Word; it is the
Order of Soldiers in a Band, keeping Rank and File, where every one keeps his
place, follows his Leader, observes the Word of Command, and his Right Hand
Man. Hence the Apostle joys to see their close Order, and Stedfastness in the
Faith, their Firmness, Valor, and Resolution in fighting the good Fight of
Faith, and the Order in so doing; not only in watching as single Professors,
but in Marching Orderly together as an Army with Banners. There is nothing more
comely than a Church walking in Order when every one keeps his place, knows and
practices his Duty according to the Rule, each submitting to the other in the
performance of Duty. When the Elders know their places, and the People theirs.
Christ has been more Faithful than Moses, and therefore has not left his
Churches without sufficient Rules to walk by.

That Order may be in a Church of Christ, the Rules of the Gospel must be
known, and that by Officers and People. They that are altogether Ignorant of
the Rule, or negligent in attending it, or doubtful, and therefore always
contending about it, will never walk according to it. Hence it is the great Duty
of Ministers to study Order well, and acquaint the People with it. It Is greatly
to be bewailed, that so few Divines bend their Studies that way. They content
themselves only with Studying and Preaching the Truths that concern Faith in
the Lord Jesus, and the mere Moral part of Holiness; but as to Gospel-Churches
or Instituted Worship, they generally in their Doctrine and Practice let it
alone, and administer Sacraments as indefinitely as they Preach; care not to
stand related to one People more than another, any further than Maintained by
them. Likewise many good People are as great Strangers to Gospel Churches and
Order, and as their Ministers have a great Adversness to both, and look upon it
as Schism and Faction; and this is the great reason of the readiness of both to
comply with Rules of Men for making Churches, Canons established by humane
Laws, being carried away (if they would speak the Truth) by corrupt Erastian
Principles, That Christ has left the Church to be altogether Guided and
Governed by Laws of Magistratick Sanction. Reformation from the gross
Idolatrous part of Antichristianism was engaged in with some Heroic Courage
and Resolution, but the coldness and indifference of Protestants to any further
progress, almost ever since is not a little to be lamented. Many think it
enough that the Foundation of the House is laid in Purity of Doctrine, (and
it is well if that were not rather written in the Books than preached in Pulpits
at this Day) but how little do they care to set their Hands to Building the
House. Sure a great matter is from that Spiritual Sloathfulness that many are
fallen under, as likewise being ready to sink under the great Discouragements
laid before them by the Adversaries of Judah, when they find the Children of
the Spiritual Captivity are about to Build a Gospel Church unto the Lord. And
how long has this great Work ceased? And will the Lord's Ministers and People
yet say, The Time is not come, the Time that the Lord's House should be Built?
Is it time to Build our own Houses, and not the House of the Lord? Surely it is
time to Build, for we understand by Books the number of Years whereof the Word
of the Lord came to Daniel the Prophet, and to John the beloved Disciple and
New Testament Prophet, that he would accomplish 1260. Years in the Desolation
of our Jerusalem, and the Court which is without the Temple, viz. The
generality of Visible Professors, and the external part of Worship, which has
been so long trod down by Gentilism; wherefore consider your Ways, Go up to the
Mountain, and bring Wood, build the House, says the Lord, and I will take
pleasure in it, (Hag. i.8.) and I will be glorified. Men, it may be, have
thought they have got, or, at least, saved by not troubling themselves with the
Care, Charge, and Trouble of gathering Churches, and walking in Gospel Order;
but God says, Ye looked for much and lo it came to little, and when ye brought
it Home I did blow upon it. Why, says the Lord, because of my House that is
waste, and ye run every Man to his own House. I doubt not but the time is nigh
at Hand that the Gospel-Temple must be built with greater Splendour and Glory
than ever Soloman's or Zerubbabel's was; and though it seems to be a great
Mountain of Difficulties, yet it shall become a Plain before him that is
exalted far above all Principalities and Powers, and as he has laid the
Foundation thereof in the Oppressed state of his People, so his Hands shall
finish it, and bring forth the Head-stone thereof with shouting in the New
Jerusalem-State, crying, now Grace, Grace, but then Glory, Glory to it.

This hastening Glory we should endeavor to meet, and fetch in by earnest
Prayers and faithful Endeavors, to promote the great Work of our Day. The
Pattern is of late Years given forth with much clearness, by Models, such as
God has set up in this latter Age in the Wilderness, and sheltered by Cloud
and Smoke by Day, and the shining of a flaming Fire by Night; for upon all its
Glory has been a Defense, yea, and it has been a Tabernacle for a Shadow in
the Day time from the Heat, and for a place of Refuge and Covert from the Storm
and from the Rain. Neither have we been left to Act by the Examples or
Traditions of Men, we have had a full Manifestation of the revealed Mind and
Will of Christ, with the greatest Evidence and Conviction; God having in these
latter Times raised up many most Eminent Instruments for Direction and
Encouragement unto his People, which he furnished accordingly with great
Qualifications to this End and Purpose, That the true Original, Nature,
Institution and Order of Evangelical Churches might be known, distinguished,
prized and adhered to, by all that know the Name of Christ, and would be
followers of him as his Disciples, in Obedience to all his revealed Mind and
Will. Amongst which faithful and renowned Servants of Christ, the late Author
of this most useful and practical Treatise, has approved himself to be one of
the chief. I need say nothing of his steadfast Piety, universal Learning,
indefatigable Labors in incessant Vindication of the Doctrines of the Gospel
(of greatest weight) against all Opposition made thereto, by Men of corrupt
Minds. His surviving Works will always be bespeaking his honorable
Remembrance, amongst all impartial Lovers of the Truth. They that were
acquainted with him, knew how much the state and standing of the Churches of
Christ, under the late Sufferings and Strugglings for Reformation, was laid to
heart by him. And therefore how he put forth his utmost strength to Assist,
Aid, Comfort and Support the sinking Spirits of the poor Saints and People of
God, even wearied out with long and repeated Persecutions. It is to be
observed, That this ensuing Treatise was occasioned by one of the last and most
vigorous Assaults made upon Separate and Congregational-Churches, by a Pen dipped
in the Gall of that persecuting Spirit, under which God's People groaned
throughout this Land. He then wrote an elaborate account of Evangelical
Churches, their Original, Institution, etc. with a Vindication of them from the
Charges laid in against them, by the Author of The Unreasonableness of
Separation* This he lived to Print, and promised to handle the Subject more
particularly, which is here performed. He lived to finish it under his great
bodily Infirmities; whereby he saw himself hastening to the end of his Race;
yet so great was his Love to Christ, that whilst he had Life and Breath he drew
not back his Hand from his Service. This Work he finished (with others) through
the gracious support and assistance of Divine Power, and Corrected the Copy
before his departure. So that, Reader, thou may be assured, That what thou
have here, was his, ( Errata's of the Press only excepted) and likewise that it
ought to be esteemed as his Legacy to the Church of Christ, being a great part
of his dying Labors; and therefore it is most uncharitable to suppose, That the
things here wrote, were penned with any other Design, than to advance the Glory
and Interest of Christ in the World; and that they were not matters of great
weight on his own Spirit. And upon the perusal that I have had of these Papers,
I cannot but recommend them to all diligent Enquirers after the true Nature,
Way, Order and Practice of Evangelical Churches, as a true and faithful
Account, according to what Understanding the Professors thereof, for the most
part have had and practiced. Who ever is otherwise Minded, he has the liberty
of his own Light and Conscience. Lastly, whereas many serious Professors of the
Faith of the Lord Jesus (it may be) well grounded in the main saving Truths of
the Gospel, are yet much to seek of these necessary Truths, for want of good
Information therein, and therefore walk not up to all the revealed Mind of
Christ, as they sincerely desire. Let such, with unprejudiced Minds, Read, and
Consider what is here offered to them, and receive nothing upon humane
Authority; follow no Man in Judgment or Practice any further than he is a
follower of Christ. And this is all the Request of him that is a lover of all
them that Love the Lord Jesus Christ.

J. C.

THere is lately Published, by the same Author, A Treatise of the Dominion of
Sin and Grace. Wherein Sin's Reign is discovered, in whom it is, and in whom it
is not: how the Law supports it, and how Grace delivers from it, by setting up
its Dominion in the Heart. Price bound 1 s.

The Author also ushered into the World, by his Preface, another very useful
Book, Entitled, The best Treasure: or, the way to be truly Rich. Being a
Discourse on Ephesians. iij.8. wherein is opened and commended to Saints and
Sinners, the personal and purchased Riches of Christ, as the best Treasure to
be preserved and ensured by all that would be Happy here and hereafter. By
Bartholomew Ashwood, late Minister of the Gospel. Price bound 2s. 6d.

Another Book of the same Authors, Entitled, The heavenly Trade; or the best
Merchandise, the only way to live well in impoverishing Times. A Discourse
occasioned from the decay of Earthly Trades, and visible waste of practical
Piety, in the Day we live in. Offering Arguments and Counsels to all, toward a
speedy revival of dying Godliness; and timely prevention of the dangerous
issues thereof hanging over us. Very necessary for all Families. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Some other Books Printed for and Sold by William Marshal.
CAryl's Exposition on the whole Book of Job. In Two Volumes in Folio.

Pool's Synopsis Criticorum. In V. Volumes. Latin.

-- 's Synopsis on the New Testament. In Two large Volumes, in Latin, with the
Index, are to be sold very cheap. In Quires both Volumes for 20 s, and both
Vol. well bound for 30 s.

Pool's Annotations in English. Two Volumes.

Index's to the Old and New Testament to be sold alone. Price 5 s.

Dr. Owen on the Hebrews. In Four Volumes.

Owen on the Spirit.

Clark's Martyrology.

Mellificium Chirurgiae, or the Marrow of Surgery. An Anatomical Treatise.
Institutions of Physic, with Hippocrates's Aphorisms largely Commented upon.
The Marrow of Physic, showing the Causes, Signs and Cures of most Diseases
incident to humane Bodies. Choice experienced Receipts for the Cure of several
Distempers. The Fourth Edition, enlarged withm any Additions, and purged from
many Faults that escaped in the former Impressions. Illustrated with Twelve
Copper Cuts. By James Cook of Warwick, Practitioner in Physic and Surgery.

There is also a very useful Book of the same Authors, for those That are
desirous of being their own Physicians, Entitled, Select Observations of
English Bodies, of Eminent Persons, in desperate Diseases. To which is now
added an Hundred rich Counsels and Advices for several honorable Persons. With
all the several Medicines and Methods by which the several Cures were effected.
With Directions about Drinking the Bath Water. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

Clarkson's Primitive Episcopacy. Octavo. Price bound, 1 s. 6 d. Owen of
Justification. -- 's Brief and Impartial Account of the Nature of the
Protestant Religion.

THE TRUE NATURE OF A Gospel Church AND ITS GOVERNMENT.
CHAP. I. The Subject Matter of the Church.
THE Church may be considered either as unto its Essence, Constitution and
Being; or as unto its Power and Order, when it is Organized. As unto its
Essence and Being, its constituent parts are its Matter and Form. These we must
enquire into.

By the Matter of the Church, we understand the persons whereof the Church does
consist, with their Qualifications: And by its Form, the reason, cause and way
of that kind of Relation among them, which gives them the Being of a Church,
and therewithal an Interest in all that belongs unto a Church, either
privilege, or power, as such.

Our first Enquiry being concerning what sort of Persons our Lord Jesus Christ
requires and admits to be the visible Subjects of his Kingdom, we are to be
regulated in our Determination by respect unto his Honor, Glory, and the
Holiness of his Rule. To reckon such persons to be Subjects of Christ, Members
of his Body, such as he requires and owns, (for others are not so) who would
not be tolerated, at least not approved, Psalm. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 24.3, 4.
Psalm. 93 5. 2 Cor. 8.23. Ephesians. 5.27.
in a well Governed Kingdom or Commonwealth of the World, is highly
dishonorable unto him. But it is so come to pass; that let Men be never so
notoriously and flagitiously wicked, until they become pests of the earth, yet
are they esteemed to belong to the Church of Christ. And not only so, but it is
thought little less than Schism to forbid them the Communion of the Church in
all its sacred Privileges. Howbeit, the Scripture does in general represent the
Kingdom or Church of Christ, to consist of persons called Saints, separated
from the World, with many other things of an alike nature, as we shall see
immediately. And if the Honor of Christ were of such weight with us as it
ought to be; if we understood aright the nature and ends of his Kingdom, and
that the peculiar Glory of it, above all the Kingdoms in the World, consists in
the Holiness of its Subjects, such an Holiness as the World in its wisdom
knows not, we would duly consider whom we avow to belong thereunto. Those who
know ought of these things, will not profess that persons openly profane,
vicious, sensual, wicked and ignorant, are approved and owned of Christ as the
Subjects of his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
or that it is his will that we should receive them into the Communion of the
Church. But an old opinion of the unlawfulness of separation from a Church, on
the account of the mixture of wicked men in it, is made a scarecrow to
frighten men from attempting the Reformation of the greatest Evils, and a
covert for the composing Churches of such Members only.

Some things therefore are to be premised unto what shall be offered unto the
right stating of this Enquiry: As,

1. That if there be no more required of any as unto Personal Qualifications in
a visible uncontrollable profession, to constitute them Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, Ezekiel. 22.26.
and Members of his Church, but what is required by the most righteous and
severe Laws of Men to constitute a good Subject or Citizen, the distinction
between his visible Kingdom and the Kingdoms of the World, as unto the
principal causes of it, is utterly lost. Now all negative Qualifications, as
that Men are not Oppressors, Drunkards, Revilers, Swearers, Adulterers, etc.
are required hereunto. But yet it is so fallen out, that generally more is
required to constitute such a Citizen as shall represent the righteous Laws he
lives under, than to constitute a Member of the Church of Christ.

2. That whereas Regeneration is expressly required in the Gospel, Joh. 3.3.
Tit. 3.3, 4, 5.
to give a Right and Privilege unto an entrance into the Church or Kingdom of
Christ, whereby that Kingdom of his is distinguished from all other Kingdoms in
and of the World, unto an Interest wherein never any such thing was required;
it must of necessity be something better, more excellent and sublime than any
thing the Laws and Polities of Men pretend unto or prescribe. Wherefore it
cannot consist in any outward Rites, easy to be observed by the worst and
vilest of Men; besides the Scripture gives us a description of it, in
opposition unto its consisting in any such Rite, 1 Pet. 3.21. And many things
required unto good Citizens, are far better than the mere observation of such a
Rite.

Of this Regeneration Baptism is the Symbol, the Sign, Joh. 3.5. Act. 2.38. 1
Pet. 3.21.
Expression and Representation. Wherefore unto those who are in a due manner
partakers of it, it gives all the external Rights and Privileges which belong
unto them that are Regenerate, until they come unto such Seasons, wherein the
personal performance of those Duties whereon the continuation of the estate of
visible Regeneration does depend, is required of them. Herein if they fail,
they lose all privilege and benefit by their Baptism.

So speaks the Apostle in the case of Circumcision under the Law, Romans 2.25.
For Circumcision verily profits, if thou keep the Law; but if thou be a
breaker of the Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision. It is so in the
case of Baptism. Verily it profits, if a Man stand unto the Terms of the
Covenant which is tendered therein between God and his Soul; for it will give
him Right unto all the outward Privileges of a Regenerate State; but if he do
not, as in the sight of God his Baptism is no Baptism, Phil. 3 18, 19. Tit.
1.15, 16.
as unto the real communication of Grace and acceptance with him; so in the
sight of the Church, it is no Baptism, as unto a participation of the external
Rights and Privileges of a Regenerate State.

Act. 15.8.
4. God alone is judge concerning this Regeneration, as unto its internal,
Revel. 2.23.
real principle and state in the Souls of Men, whereon the participation of all
the spiritual advantages of the Covenant of Grace does depend: The Church is
judge of its evidences and fruits in their external Demonstration, as unto a
participation of the outward Privileges of a Regenerate State, Act. 8.13.
and no farther. And we shall hereon briefly declare what belongs unto the
forming of a right judgment herein, and who are to be esteemed fit Members of
any Gospel Church State, or have a Right so to be.

1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Phil. 3.18, 19. 2 These. 3.6. 2 Timothy 3.5. Romans 9.6, 7. Tit.
1.16.
1. Such as from whom we are obliged to withdraw or withhold Communion, can be
no part of the matter constitu^ent of a Church, or are not meet Members for the
first constitution of it. But such are all Habitual Sinners; those who having
prevalent habits and inclinations unto Sins of any kind unmortified, do walk
according unto them. Such are profane Swearers, Drunkards, Fornicators,
Covetous, Oppressors, and the like, who shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Phil. 3.18, 19. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 2 Timothy 3.5. as a Man living and
dying in any known Sin, that is habitually, without Repentance cannot be saved;
so a Man known to live in Sin, cannot regularly be received into any Church. To
compose Churches of Habitual Sinners, and that either as unto Sins of
Commission, or Sins of Omission, is not to erect Temples of Christ, but Chapels
unto the Devil.

2. Such as being in the fellowship of the Church, are to be admonished of any
scandalous Sin, which if they repent not of, they are to be cast out of the
Church, Mat. 18.16, 17, 18.
are not meet Members for the Original Constitution of a Church. This is the
state of them who abide Obstinate in any known Sin, 1 Cor. 5.11.
whereby they have given offense unto others, without a professed Repentance
thereof, although they have not lived in it habitually.

3. They are to be such as visibly answer the Description given of Gospel
Churches in the Scripture, so as the Titles assigned therein unto the Members
of such Churches, may on good grounds be appropriated unto them. To compose
Churches of such persons as do not visibly answer the character given of what
they were of old, and what they were always to be by virtue of the Law of
Christ or Gospel-constitution, is not Church Edification but Destruction. And
those who look on the things spoken of all Church Members of old, as that they
were Saints by calling, lively stones in the house of God, justified and
sanctified, separate from the World, etc. as those which were in them, and did
indeed belong unto them, but even deride the necessity of the same things in
present Church Members, or the Application of them unto those who are so, are
themselves no small part of that woeful Degeneracy which Christian Religion is
fallen under. Let it then be considered what is spoken of the Church of the
Jews in their Dedication unto God, as unto their Typical Holiness, with the
Application of it unto Christian Churches in real Holiness, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. with
the Description given of them constantly in the Scripture, as Faithful, Holy,
Believing, as the House of God, as his Temple wherein he dwells by his Spirit,
as the Body of Christ united and compacted by the communication of the Spirit
unto them; as also what is said concerning their ways, walkings and duties; and
it will be uncontrolably evident of what sort our Church Members ought to be;
nor are those of any other sort able to discharge the Duties which are
incumbent on all Church Members, nor to use the Privileges they are entrusted
withal. Wherefore, I say, to suppose Churches regularly to consist of such
persons for the greater part of them, as no way answer the Description given of
Church Members in their Original Institution, nor capable to discharge the
Duties prescribed unto them, but giving evidence of Habits and actions
inconsistent therewithal, is not only to disturb all Church Order, but utterly
to overthrow the Ends and Being of Churches. Nor is there any thing more
scandalous unto Christian Religion, than what Bellarmine affirms to be the
judgment of the Papists in opposition unto all others; namely, that no internal
Virtue or Grace is required unto the Constitution of a Church in its Members.
Lib. 3. de Eccles. cap. 2.

Romans 10.10. 2 Cor. 8.5. Chap. 9.13. Matthew. 10.32, 33. Luke 9.16. 2 Timothy 2.12.
Romans 15.9. Joh. 12.42. 1 John 4.2, 3, 15.
4. They must be such as do make an open profession of the subjection of their
Souls and Consciences unto the Authority of Christ in the Gospel, and their
readiness to yield Obedience unto all his Commands. This I suppose will not be
denied; for not only does the Scripture make this Profession necessary unto the
participation of any benefit or privilege of the Gospel; but the nature of the
things themselves requires indispensably that so it should be. For nothing can
be more unreasonable than, that Men should be taken into the privileges
attending Obedience unto the Laws and Commands of Christ, without avowing or
professing that Obedience. Wherefore, our Enquiry is only what is required unto
such a Profession, as may render Men meet to be Members of a Church, and give
them a Right thereunto. For to suppose such a confession of Christian Religion
to be compliant with the Gospel, which is made by many who openly live in Sin,
being disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, is to renounce the
Gospel it self. Christ is not the High Priest of such a Profession. I shall
therefore declare briefly what is necessary unto this Profession, that all may
know what it is which is required unto the Entrance of any into our Churches,
wherein our Practice has been sufficiently traduced.

1. There is required unto it a competent knowledge of the Doctrines and
Mystery of the Gospel, especially concerning the Person and Offices of Christ.
The Confession hereof, was the ground whereon he granted the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, or all Church Power unto Believers, Matthew. 16.17, 18, 19.
The first Instruction which he gave unto his Apostles, was, That they should
teach Men by the Preaching of the Gospel, in the knowledge of the Truth
revealed by him. The knowledge required in the Members of the Judaical Church,
that they might be Translated into the Christian, was principally, if not
solely, that of his Person, and the acknowledgment of him to be the true
Messiah, the Son of God. For as on their unbelief thereof their Eternal ruin
did depend, as he told them, if you believe not that I am he, you shall die in
your sins; so the confession of him was sufficient on their part unto their
Admission into the Gospel Church State. And the Reasons of it are apparent.
With others, an Instruction in all the Mysteries of Religion, especially in
those that are fundamental, is necessary unto the Profession we enquire after.
So Justin Martyr tells us what pains they took in those Primitive Times, to
instruct those in the Mysteries of Religion, who upon a general Conviction of
its Truth, were willing to adhere unto the Profession of it. And what was their
judgment herein, is sufficiently known, from the keeping a multitude in the
state of Catechumens, before they would admit them into the Fellowship of the
Church. They are not therefore to be blamed, they do but discharge their Duty,
who refuse to receive into Church Communion such as are ignorant of the
fundamental Doctrines and Mysteries of the Gospel; or if they have learned any
thing of them from a form of words, yet really understand nothing of them. The
promiscuous driving of all sorts of persons who have been Baptized in their
Infancy, unto a participation of all Church privileges, is a profanation of the
holy Institutions of Christ. This knowledge therefore belonging unto profession
is it self to be professed.

2. There is required unto it a professed subjection of Soul and Conscience
unto the Authority of Christ in the Church. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. 2 Cor. 8.5.
This in general is performed by all that are Baptized when they are Adult, as
being by their own actual consent Baptized in the Name of Christ. And it is
required of all them who are Baptized in their Infancy, when they are able with
Faith and Understanding to profess their consent unto, and abiding in that
Covenant whereinto they were initiated.

3. An Instruction in, and consent unto the Doctrine of Self-denial and bearing
of the Cross, in a particular manner: Matthew. 10.37, 38, 39. Mar. 8.34, 38. Luke
9.23.
For this is made indispensably necessary by our Savior himself, unto all that
will be his Disciples. And it has been a great disadvantage unto the Glory of
Christian Religion, that Men have not been more and better instructed therein.
Phil. 3.18. Act. 4.10, 11, 20. Act. 24.14.
It is commonly thought, that who ever will, may be a Christian at an easy
rate, it will cost him nothing. But the Gospel gives us another account of
these things. For it not only warns us, that Reproaches, Hatred, Sufferings of
all sorts, oft-times to Death it self, are the common lot of all its
Professors, who will live Godly in Christ Jesus; but also requires, that at our
initiation into the Profession of it, we consider aright the dread of them all,
and engage cheerfully to undergo them. Hence, in the Primitive Times, whilst
all sorts of miseries were continually presented unto them who Embraced the
Christian Religion, their willing engagement to undergo them, who were
Converted, was a firm Evidence of the sincerity of their Faith, as it ought to
be unto us also in times of Difficulty and Persecution. Some may suppose that
the Faith and Confession of this Doctrine of Self-denial and readiness for the
Cross, is of use only in time of Persecution, and so does not belong unto them
who have continually the countenance and favor of public Authority. I say, it
is, at least as they judge, well for them; with others it is not so, whose
outward state makes the public avowing of this Duty indispensably necessary
unto them: And I may add it as my own thoughts, (though they are not my own
alone) That notwithstanding all the Countenance that is given unto any Church
by the public Magistracy, yet whilst we are in this World, those who will
faithfully discharge their Duty, as Ministers of the Gospel especially, shall
have need to be prepared for sufferings. To escape sufferings, and enjoy
worldly advantages by sinful compliances, or bearing with Men in their Sins, is
no Gospel Direction.

4. Conviction and Confession of Sin, with the way of deliverance by Jesus
Christ, is that answer of a good Conscience, that is required in the Baptism of
them that are Adult. 1 Pet. 3.

5. Unto this Profession is required the constant performance of all known
Duties of Religion, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
both of Piety in the public and private Worship of God, as also of Charity
with respect unto others. Show me thy Faith by thy Works.

6. A careful Abstinence from all known Sins, giving scandal or offense, either
unto the World, or unto the Church of God. And the Gospel requires, 1 Cor.
10.32. Phil. 1.10.
that this Confession be made ( with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation) against (1.) Fear, (2.) Shame, (3.) The Course of the World, (4.)
The Opposition of all Enemies whatever.

Hence it appears, that there are none excluded from an Entrance into the
Church State, but such as are either, (1.) grossly Ignorant, or, (2.)
Persecutors, or reproachers of those that are Good, or of the ways of God
wherein they walk; or, (3.) Idolaters; or, (4.) Men scandalous in their Lives
in the Commission of Sins, or Omission of Duties, through vicious Habits or
Inclinations; or, (5.) such as would partake of Gospel-Privileges and
Ordinances, yet openly avow that they will not submit unto the Law and Commands
of Christ in the Gospel, concerning whom, and the like, the Scripture Rule is
peremptory; From such turn away.

And herein we are remote from exceeding the example and care of the Primitive
Churches. Yea, there are but few, if any, that arrive unto it. Their endeavor
was to Preach unto all they could, and rejoiced in the multitudes that came to
hear the Word. But if any did essay to join themselves unto the Church, their
diligence in their Examination and Instruction, their severe Enquiries into
their Conversation, their disposing of them for a long time into a state of
Expectation for their Trial, before their Admittance, were remarkable. And some
of the Ancients complain, that their promiscuous Admittance of all sorts of
persons that would profess the Christian Religion, into Church Membership,
which took place afterward, ruined all the Beauty, Order and Discipline of the
Church.

The things ascribed unto those who are to be esteemed the proper Subject
Matter of a Visible Church, are such as in the judgment of Charity entitle them
unto all the Appellations of Saints; Called, Sanctified, that is Visibly and by
Profession, which are given unto the Members of all the Churches in the New
Testament, and which must be answered in those who are admitted into that
Privilege, if we do not wholly neglect our only Patterns. By these things,
although they should any of them not be real living Members of the Mystical
Body of Christ, unto whom he is an Head of spiritual and vital influence; yet
are they meet Members of that Body of Christ unto which he is an Head of Rule
and Government; as also meet to be esteemed Subjects of his Kingdom. And none
are excluded but such, as concerning whom Rules are given, either to withdraw
from them, or to cast them out of Church Society, or are expressly excluded by
God himself from any share in the Privileges of his Covenant, Psalm. 50.16, 17.

Divines, of all sorts, do dispute from the Scripture and the Testimonies of
the Ancients, that Hypocrites, and persons unregenerate may be true Members of
Visible Churches. And it is a matter very easy to be proved; nor do I know any
by whom it is denied. But the only Question is, That whereas undoubtedly,
Profession is necessary unto all Church Communion; whether, if Men do profess
themselves Hypocrites in State, and Unregenerate in Mind, that Profession do
sufficiently qualify them for Church Communion. And whereas there is a double
Profession, one by Words, the other by Works, as the Apostle declares, Tit.
1.16. Whether the latter be not as interpretative of the Mind and state of Men
as the former; other contest we have with none, in this matter.

Belarmine de Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 2. gives an account out of Augustine, and
that truly, from Brevec. Collat. Col. 3. of the state of the Church. It does,
says he, consist of a Soul and Body. The Soul is the internal Graces of the
Spirit; The Body is the Profession of them, with the Sacraments. All true
Believers making Profession, belong to the Soul and Body of the Church. Some,
(as believing Catechumens) belong to the Soul, but not to the Body: Others are
of the Body, but not of the Soul; namely, such as have no internal Grace or
true Faith; and they are like the Hair or the Nails, or evil Humors in the
Body. And thereunto adds, That his Definition of the Church comprizeth this
last sort only; which is all one, as if we should define a Man to be a Thing
constituted and made up of Hair, Nails, and ill Humors; and let others take
heed that they have not such Churches.

There is nothing more certain in matter of Fact, than that Evangelical
Churches at their first constitution, were made up, and did consist of such
Members as we have described, and no other. Nor is there one Word in the whole
Scripture intimating any Concession or Permission of Christ, to receive into
his Church those who are not so Qualified. Others have nothing to plead for
themselves but Possession; which being malae fidei, ill obtained, and ill
continued, will afford them no real advantage, when the time of trial shall
come. Wherefore, it is certain that such they ought to be. No Man, as I
suppose, is come unto that profligate sense of Spiritual things, as to deny,
That the Members of the Church ought to be visibly Holy. For if so, they may
affirm, that all the promises and privileges made and granted to the Church, do
belong unto them who visibly live and die in their Sins; which is to overthrow
the Gospel. And if they ought so to be, and were so at first, when they are not
so, openly and visibly, there is a declension from the Original Constitution of
Churches, and a Sinful Deviation in them from the Rule of Christ.

This Original Constitution of Churches, with respect unto their Members, was
for the substance of it, as we observed, preferred in the Primitive Times,
whilst Persecution from without, was continued, and Discipline preserved
within. I have in part declared before, what great care and circumspection the
Church then used in the Admission of any into their Fellowship and Order, and
what trial they were to undergo, before they were received; and it is known
also, with what severe Discipline they watched over the Faith, walking,
conversation and manners of all their Members. Indeed, such was their care and
diligence herein, that there is scarce left in some Churches, at present, the
least Resemblance or Appearance of what was their State and manner of Rule.
Wherefore, some think it meet to Ascend no higher in the imitation of the
Primitive Churches, than the times of the Christian Emperors, when all things
began to rush into the fatal Apostasy, which I shall here speak a little
farther unto: For,

Upon the Roman Emperors Embracing Christian Religion, whereby not only
outward Peace and Tranquillity was secured unto the Church, but the Profession
of Christian Religion was countenanced, encouraged, honored and rewarded; the
Rule, Care and Diligence of the Churches about the Admission of Members, were
in a great measure relinquished and forsaken. The Rulers of the Church began to
think, that the Glory of it consisted in its numbers; finding both their own
Power, Veneration and Revenue increased thereby. In a short time, the
Inhabitants of whole Cities and Provinces, upon a bare outward Profession, were
admitted into Churches. And then began the outward Court, that is, all that
which belongs unto the outward Worship and Order of the Church, to be trampled
on by the Gentiles, not kept any more to the measure of Scripture Rule, which
thenceforth was applied only to the Temple of God and them that Worshipped
therein: For this corruption of the Church, as to the matter of it, was the
occasion and means of introducing all that corruption in Doctrine, Worship,
Order and Rule which ensued, and ended in the great Apostasy. For whatever
belonged unto any of these things, especially these that consist in practice,
were accommodated unto the state of the Members of the Churches: And such they
were as stood in need of superstitious Rites to be mixed with their Worship, as
not understanding the Power and Glory of that which is Spiritual; such as no
interest in Church Order could be committed unto, seeing they were not
qualified to bear any share in it; such as stood in need of a Rule over them,
with Grandeur and Power, like unto that among the Gentiles. Wherefore, the
Accommodation of all Church concerns, unto the state and condition of such
corrupt Members as Churches were filled with, and at length made up of, proved
the Ruin of the Church in all its Order and Beauty.

But so it fell out, that in the Protestant Reformation of the Church, very
little regard was had thereunto. Those great and worthy Persons who were called
unto that Work, did set themselves principally, yea, solely for the most part,
against the false Doctrine and Idolatrous Worship of the Church of Rome; as
judging, that if they were removed and taken away, the people by the Efficacy
of Truth and Order of Worship, would be retrived from the evil of their ways,
and Primitive Holiness be again reduced among them. For they thought it was the
Doctrine and Worship of that Church, which had filled the people with Darkness
and corrupted their Conversations. Nor did they absolutely judge amiss therein:
For although they were themselves at first introduced in compliance with the
ignorance and wickedness of the people, yet they were suited to promote them,
as well as to countenance them; which they did effectually. Hence it came to
pass, that the Reformation of the Church as unto the matter of it, or the
Purity and Holiness of its Members, was not in the least attempted, until
Calvin set up his Discipline at Geneva, which has filled the World with
clamours against him from that day to this. In most other places, Churches, in
the matter of them, continued the same as they were in the Papacy, and in many
places as bad in their Lives as when they were Papists.

But this Method was designed in the Holy, Wise Providence of God, for the good
and advantage of the Church, in a progressive Reformation, as it had made a
gradual Progress into its decay. For had the Reformers in the first place, set
themselves to remove out of the Church such as were unmeet for its Communion,
or to have gathered out of them such as were meet Members of the Church
according to its Original Institution; it would through the paucity of the
number of those who could have complied with the Design, have greatly
obstructed, if not utterly defeated their endeavor for the Reformation of
Doctrine and Worship. This was that in the Preaching of the Gospel and the
Profession of it, which God has since made effectual, in these Nations
especially, and in other places, to turn Multitudes from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan unto Himself, translating them into the Kingdom of His
dear Son. Hereby* way is made for a necessary addition unto the work of
Reformation, if not to the closing of it, which could not at first be attained
unto, nor well attempted; namely the Reduction of Churches, as unto their
matter, or the Members of them unto their Primitive Institution.

The sum of what is designed in this Discourse, is this only. We desire no more
to constitute Church Members, and we can desire no less, than what in judgment
of Charity may comply with the Union that is between Christ the Head and the
Church; 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 2.22. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. 2 Cor. 11.1, 18. 1 Thessalonians.
1.1, 2, etc. that may in the same judgment answer the way of the beginning and
increase of the Church according unto the Will of God, who adds unto the Church
such as shall be saved, Act. 2.47. the Rule of our receiving of them, being
because he has received them, Romans 14.1, 2. that may answer that Profession of
Faith which was the Foundation of the Church, which was not what flesh and
blood, but what God himself revealed, Matthew. 16.16. and not such as have a form
of Godliness but deny the Power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. We acknowledge that many
Church Members are not what they ought to be, but that many Hypocrites may be
among them; that the judgment which is passed on the Confession and Profession
of them that are to be Admitted into Churches, is charitative, proceeding on
evidence of moral Probability, not determining the reality of the things
themselves; that there are sundry measures of Light, Knowledge, Experience, and
Abilities and Readiness of Mind in those that are to be Admitted, all whose
Circumstances are duly to be considered, with indulgence unto their weaknesses:
And if the Scripture will allow us any further Latitude, we are ready to
embrace it.

Our present Enquiry yet remaining on these considerations, is, What is our
Duty in point of Communion with such Churches as are made up or composed of
Members visibly unholy; or such as comply not with the Qualifications that are
by the Rules of the Gospel indispensably required, to give unto any a Regular
entrance into the Church, with a participation of its Privileges. For it is in
vain to expect, that such Churches will Reform themselves, by any Act, Duty or
Power of their own; seeing the generality of them are justly supposed averse
from, and enemies unto any such Work. I answer therefore,

1. It must be remembered, that Communion with particular Churches is to be
regulated absolutely by Edification. No Man is or can be obliged to abide in or
confine himself unto the Communion of any particular Church, any longer, than
it is for his Edification. And this liberty is allowed unto all persons by the
Church of England. For, allow a Man to be born in such a Parish, to be baptized
in it, and there educated; yet, if at any time he judge that the Ministry of
the Parish is not useful unto his Edification, he may withdraw from all
Communion in that Parish, by the removal of his Habitation, it may be to the
next door. Wherefore,

2. If the corruption of a Church, as to the matter of it, be such as that,

1. It is inconsistent with, and overthrows all that Communion that ought to
be among the Members of the same Church, in love without dissimulation, whereof
we shall treat afterward.

2. If the scandals and offenses which must of necessity abound in such
Churches, be really obstructive of Edification.

3. If the ways and walking of the generality of their Members, be
dishonorable unto the Gospel, and the Profession of it, giving no
Representation of the holiness of Christ or his Doctrine.

4. If such Churches do not, can not, will not Reform themselves: Then,

It is the Duty of every Man who takes care of his own present Edification, and
the future salvation of his Soul, peaceably to withdraw from the Communion of
such Churches, and to join in such others, where all the ends of Church
Societies may in some measure be obtained. Men may not only do so, because all
obligation unto the use of means for the attaining of such an end, does cease,
when the means are not suited thereunto, but obstructive of its attainment; but
also the giving of a Testimony hereby against the Declension from the Rule of
Christ in the Institution of Churches, and the dishonor that by this means is
reflected on the Gospel, is necessary unto all that desire to acquit themselves
as Loyal Subjects unto their Lord and King. And it cannot be questioned by any,
who understand the nature, use and end of Evangelical Churches, but that a
relinquishment of the Rule of the Gospel in any of them, as unto the practice
of Holiness, is as just a cause of withdrawing Communion from them, as their
forsaking the same Rule in Doctrine and Worship.

It may be some will judge that sundry inconveniences will ensue on this
Assertion, when any have a mind to practice according unto it. But when the
matter of Fact supposed, is such as is capable of an uncontrollable evidence,
no inconvenience can ensue on the practice directed unto, any way to be
compared unto the mischief of obliging Believers to abide always in such
Societies, to the ruin of their Souls.

Two things may be yet enquired into, that relate unto this part of the state
of Evangelical Churches: As,

1. Whether a Church may not, ought not, to take under its Conduct, Inspection
and Rule, such as are not yet meet to be received into full Communion; such as
are the Children and Servants of those who are complete Members of the Church.
Answ. No doubt the Church in its Officers, may and ought so to do; and it is a
great evil when it is neglected. For, (1.) They are to take care of Parents and
Masters as such, and as unto the discharge of their Duty in their Families;
which, without an inspection into the condition of their Children and Servants,
they cannot do. (2.) Households were constantly reckoned unto the Church, when
the Heads of the Families were entered into Covenant, Luke 19.9. Act. 16.15.
Romans 16.10, 11. 1 Cor. 1.16. 2 Timothy 4.19. (3.) Children to belong unto, and
have an Interest in their Parents Covenant; not only in the promise of it,
which gives them Right unto Baptism; but in the Profession of it in the Church
Covenant, which gives them a Right unto all the Privileges of the Church,
whereof they are capable, until they voluntarily relinquish their claim unto
them. (4.) Baptizing the Children of Church Members, giving them thereby an
Admission into the visible Catholic Church, puts an Obligation on the Officers
of the Church, to take care, what in them lies, that they may be kept and
preserved meet Members of it, by a due watch over them, and instruction of
them. (5.) Though neither the Church nor its Privileges be continued and
preserved as of old, by carnal generation; yet, because of the nature of the
Dispensation of Gods Covenant, wherein he has promised to be a God unto
Believers and their Seed; the advantage of the means of a gracious Education in
such Families, and of conversion and edification in the Ministry of the Church,
ordinarily the continuation of the Church, is to depend on the addition of
Members out of the Families already incorporated in it. The Church is not to be
like the Kingdom of the Mamalukes, wherein there was no regard unto natural
Successors; but it was continually made up of Strangers and Foreigners
incorporated into it: Nor like the beginning of the Roman Commonweal, which
consisting of Men only, was like to have been the matter of one Age alone.

The Duty of the Church toward this sort of persons, consists, (1.) In Prayer
for them. (2.) Catechetical Instruction of them, according unto their
Capacities. (3.) Advice to their Parents concerning them. (4.) Visiting of them
in the Families whereunto they do belong. (5.) Encouragement of them, or
Admonition according as there is occasion. (6.) Direction for a due preparation
unto the joining themselves unto the Church, in full Communion. (7.) Exclusion
of them from a claim unto the participation of the especial Privileges of the
Church, where they render themselves visibly unmeet for them, and unworthy of
them.

The neglect of this Duty brings unconceivable prejudice unto Churches, and if
continued in, will prove their Ruin. For they are not to be preserved,
propagated and continued, at the easy rate of a constant supply by the carnal
baptized posterity of those who do at any time justly or unjustly belong unto
them: But they are to prepare a meet supply of Members, by all the spiritual
means whose administration they are entrusted withal. And besides, one end of
Churches, is, to preserve the Covenant of God in the Families once graciously
taken thereinto. The neglect therefore herein, is carefully to be watched
against. And it does arise, (1.) From an ignorance of the Duty, in most that
are concerned in it. (2.) From the paucity of Officers in most Churches, both
Teaching and Ruling, who are to attend unto it. (3.) The want of a Teacher or
Catechist in every Church, who should attend only unto the instruction of this
sort of persons. (4.) Want of a sense of their Duty in Parents and Masters.
(1.) In not valuing aright the great privilege of having their Children and
Servants under the inspection, care and blessing of the Church. (2.) In not
instilling into them a sense of it, with the Duties that are expected from
them, on the account of their Relation unto the Church. (3.) In not bringing
them duly unto the Church Assemblies. (4.) In not preparing and disposing them
unto an actual entrance into full Communion with the Church. (5.) In not
advising with the Elders of the Church about them. And, (6.) Especially by an
indulgence unto that loose and careless kind of Education in Conformity unto
the World, which generally prevails. Hence it is, that most of them on various
accounts and occasions, drop off here and there from the Communion of the
Church, and all Relation thereunto, without the least respect unto them, or
enquiry after them; Churches being supplied by such as are occasionally
Converted in them.

Where Churches are complete in the kind and number of their Officers,
sufficient to attend unto all the Duties and occasions of them; where whole
Families, in the conjunction of the Heads of them unto the Church, are
Dedicated unto God, according unto the several capacities of those whereof they
do consist; where the Design of the Church is to provide for its own successive
continuation in the preservation of the Interest of Gods Covenant in the
Families taken thereinto; where Parents esteem themselves accountable unto God
and the Church, as unto the Relation of their Children thereunto, there is
provision for Church Order, Usefulness and Beauty, beyond what is usually to be
observed.

2. The especial Duty of the Church in Admission of Members in the time of
great Persecution, may be a little enquired into. And, (1.) It is evident, that
in the Apostolical and Primitive Times, the Churches were exceeding careful not
to admit into their society, such as by whom they might be betrayed unto the
rage of their Persecuting Adversaries. Yet, notwithstanding all their care,
they could seldom avoid it; but that when Persecution grew severe, some or
other would fall from them, either out of fear, with the power of Temptation,
or by a discovery of their latent hypocrisy and unbelief, unto their great
trial and distress. However, they were not so scrupulous herein, with respect
unto their own safety, as to exclude such as gave a tolerable account of their
sincerity; but in the discharge of their Duty, committed themselves unto the
care of Jesus Christ. And this is the Rule whereby we ought to walk on such
occasions. Wherefore, (2.) On supposition of the establishment of Idolatry, and
Persecution, there or in any place, as it was of old, under, first the Pagan,
and afterward the Antichristian Tyranny; the Church is obliged to receive into
its Care and Communion all such as, (1.) Flee from Idols, and are ready to
confirm their Testimony against them with suffering. (2.) Make profession of
the truth of the Gospel of the Doctrine of Christ, especially as unto his
Person and Offices; are, (3.) Free from scandalous Sins; and, (4.) Are willing
to give up themselves unto the Rule of Christ in the Church, and a subjection
unto all his Ordinances and Institutions therein. For in such a season, these
things are so full an indication of sincerity, as that in the judgment of
Charity, they render Men meet to be Members of the visible Church. And if any
of this sort of persons, through the severity of the Church in their non
Admission of them, should be cast on a conjunction in Superstitious and
Idolatrous Worship, or be otherwise exposed unto Temptations and
Discouragements prejudicial unto their Souls, I know not how such a Church can
answer the refusal of them unto the great and universal Pastor of the whole
Flock.

CHAP. II. Of the Formal Cause of a Particular Church.
THE way or means whereby such persons as are described in the foregoing
Chapter, may become a Church, or enter into a Church State, is by mutual
confederation, or solemn Agreement for the performance of all the Duties which
the Lord Christ has prescribed unto his Disciples in such Churches, and in
order to the exercise of the power wherewith they are entrusted, according unto
the Rule of the Word.

FOR the most part, the Churches that are in the World at present, know not how
they came so to be, continuing only in that state which they have received by
Tradition from their Fathers. Few there are, who think that any Act or Duty of
their own, is required to enstate them in Church Order and Relation. And it is
acknowledged, that there is a difference between the continuation of a Church,
and its first Erection. Yet, that that continuation may be regular, it is
required that its first Congregating (for the Church is a Congregation) was so;
as also, that the force and efficacy of it be still continued. Wherefore, the
causes of that first gathering, must be enquired into.

THE Churches mentioned in the New Testament, planted or gathered by the
Apostles, were Particular Churches, as has been proved. These Churches did
consist each of them of many Members, who were so Members of one of them, as
that they were not Members of another. The Saints of the Church of Corinth,
were not Members of the Church at Philippi. And the Enquiry is, How those
Believers in one place and the other became to be a Church, and that distinct
from all others? The Scripture affirms in general, that they gave up themselves
unto the Lord and unto the Apostles, who guided them in these Affairs, by the
will of God, 2 Cor. 8.5. and that other Believers were added unto the Church,
Act. 2.

THAT it is the Will and Command of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all his
Disciples should be joined in such Societies, for the Duties and Ends of them
prescribed and limited by himself, has been proved sufficiently before. All
that are Discipled by the Word, are to be taught to do and observe all his
Commands, Matthew. 28.20.

THIS could originally be no otherwise done, but by their own actual, express,
voluntary consent. There are sundry things which concur as remote causes, or
prerequisite conditions unto this conjunction of Believers in a Particular
Church, and without which it cannot be. Such are Baptism, Profession of the
Christian Faith, convenient Cohabitation, resorting to the Preaching of the
Word in the same place. But neither any of these distinctly or separately, nor
all of them in Conjunction, are or can be the constitutive Form of a Particular
Church. For it is evident that they may all be, and yet no such Church State
ensue. They cannot altogether engage unto those Duties, nor communicate those
Powers, which appertain unto this State.

WERE there no other Order in Particular Churches, no other Discipline to be
exercised in them, nor Rule over them, no other Duties, no other Ends assigned
unto them, but what are generally owned and practiced in Parochial Assemblies,
the Preaching of the Word within such a precinct of Cohabitation, determined by
Civil Authority, might constitute a Church. But if a Church be such a Society
as is entrusted in it self with sundry Powers and Privileges depending on
sundry Duties prescribed unto it, if it constitute new Relations between
Persons, that neither naturally nor morally were before so related, as Marriage
does between Husband and Wife; if it require new mutual Duties, and give new
mutual Rights among themselves, not required of them either as unto their
matter, or as unto their manner before; it is vain to imagine that this State
can arise from, or have any other Formal Cause, but the joint consent and
virtual confederation of those concerned, unto these ends: For there is none of
them can have any other Foundation; they are all of them resolved into the
Wills of Men, bringing themselves under an obligation unto them by their
voluntary consent. I say unto the Wills of Men, as their Formal Cause; the
supreme efficient cause of them all being the Will, Law and Constitution of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

THUS it is in all Societies, in all Relations that are not merely natural,
(such as between Parents and Children, wherein the necessity of Powers and
mutual Duties, is predetermined by a Superior Law, even that of Nature)
wherein, Powers, Privileges and mutual Duties are established, as belonging
unto that Society. Nor after its first institution, can any one be incorporated
into it, but by his own consent, and engagement to observe the Laws of it. Nor,
if the Nature and Duties of Churches were acknowledged, could there be any
contest in this matter; for the things ensuing are clear and evident.

1. THE Lord Christ, by his Authority, has appointed and instituted this
Church State, as that there should be such Churches, as we have proved before.

2. THAT by his Word or Law he has granted Powers and Privileges unto this
Church, and prescribed Duties unto all belonging unto it, wherein, they can
have no concernment who are not incorporated into such a Church.

3. THAT therefore, he does Require and Command all his Disciples to join
themselves in such Church Relations, as we have proved; warranting them so to
do, by his Word and Command: Wherefore,

4. THIS joining of themselves, whereon depends all their interest in Church
Powers and Privileges, all their obligation unto Church Duties, is a voluntary
Act of the obedience of Faith, unto the Authority of Christ, nor can it be any
thing else.

5. HEREIN do they give themselves unto the Lord, and to one another, by their
Officers, in a peculiar manner, according to the Will of God, 2 Cor. 8.5.

6. TO give our selves unto the Lord, that is unto the Lord Jesus Christ, is
expressly to engage to do and observe all that he has appointed and commanded
in the Church; as that Phrase every where signifies in the Scripture, as also
joining our selves unto God, which is the same.

7. THIS Resignation of our selves unto the Will, Power and Authority of
Christ, with an express engagement made unto him of doing and observing all his
Commands, has the nature of a Covenant on our part; and it has so on his, by
virtue of the promise of his especial presence annexed unto this engagement on
our part, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.

8. FOR, whereas there are three things required unto a Covenant between God
and Man. (1.) That it be of Gods appointment and institution. (2.) That upon a
prescription of Duties there be a solemn engagement unto their performance on
the part of Men. (3.) That there be especial promises of God annexed thereunto,
in which consists the matter of Confederation, whereof mutual express
Restipulation is the form; they all concur herein.

9. THIS Covenant which we intend, is not the Covenant of Grace absolutely
considered; nor are all the Duties belonging unto that Covenant prescribed in
it; but the principal of them, as Faith, Repentance, and the like, are
presupposed unto it; nor has annexed unto it all the promises and privileges
of the New Covenant absolutely considered; but it is that which is prescribed
as a Gospel Duty in the Covenant of Grace, whereunto do belong all the Duties
of Evangelical Worship, all the powers and privileges of the Church, by virtue
of the especial promise of the peculiar presence of Christ in such a Church.

10. WHEREAS therefore in the constitution of a Church, Believers do give up
themselves unto the Lord, and are bound solemnly to engage themselves to do and
observe all the things which Christ has commanded to be done and observed in
that state, whereon he has promised to be present with them and among them in
an especial manner, which presence of his, does interest them in all the
Rights, Powers and Privileges of the Church; their so doing, has the nature of
a Divine Covenant included in it, which is the Formal Cause of their Church
Sat and Being.

11. BESIDES, as we have proved before, there are many mutual Duties required
of all which join in Church Societies, and Powers to be exercised and submitted
unto, whereunto none can be obliged without their own consent. They must give
up themselves unto one another by the will of God. That is, they must agree,
consent and engage among themselves to observe all those mutual Duties, to use
all those Privileges, and to exercise all those Powers, which the Lord Christ
has prescribed and granted unto his Church. See Jerem. 50.4, 5.

12. THIS compleats the confederation intended, which is the Formal Cause of
the Church; and without which, either expressly or virtually performed, there
can be no Church State.

13. INDEED herein most Men deceive themselves, and think they do not that, nor
that it ought to be done, and dispute against it as unlawful or unnecessary,
which for the substance of it they do themselves, and would condemn themselves
in their own Consciences, if they did it not. For unto what end do they join
themselves unto Parochial Churches and Assemblies? To what end do they require
all Professors of the Protestant Religion so to do, declaring it to be their
Duty by penalties annexed unto its neglect? Is it not, that they might yield
obedience unto Christ in their so doing? Is it not to profess that they will do
and observe all whatsoever he commands them? Is it not to do it in that
Society, in those Assemblies whereunto they do belong? Is there not therein
virtually a mutual Agreement and Engagement among them unto all those ends? It
must be so with them, who do not in all things in Religion fight uncertainly as
Men beating the Air.

14. NOW, whereas these things are in themselves, and for the substance of
them, known Gospel Duties, which all Believers are indispensably obliged unto;
the more express our engagement is concerning them, the more do we glorify
Christ in our Profession, and the greater sense of our Duty will abide on our
Consciences, and greater encouragement be given unto the performance of mutual
Duties; as also the more evident will the warranty be, for the exercise of
Church Power. Yet do I not deny the Being of Churches unto those Societies,
wherein these things are virtually only observed; especially in Churches of
some continuance, wherein there is at least an implicit consent unto the first
Covenant-Constitution.

15. THE Lord Christ having instituted and appointed Officers, Rulers or
Leaders in his Church, (as we shall see in the next place) to look unto the
discharge of all Church Duties among the Members of it, to administer and
dispense all its Privileges, and to exercise all its Authority, the consent and
engagement insisted on, is expressly required unto the constitution of this
Order and the preservation of it. For without this, no Believer can be brought
into that Relation unto another as his Pastor, Guide, Over-seer, Ruler unto the
ends mentioned, wherein he must be subject unto him, partake of all Ordinances
of Divine Worship administered by him with Authority, in obedience unto the will
of Christ; They gave their own selves to us (says the Apostle) by the will of
God.

16. WHEREFORE, the Formal Cause of a Church consists in an Obediential Act
of Believers, in such numbers as may be useful unto the ends of Church
Edification, jointly giving up themselves unto the Lord Jesus Christ, to do and
observe all his Commands, resting on the promise of his especial presence
thereon; giving and communicating by his Law, all the Rights, Powers and
Privileges of his Church unto them; and in a mutual Agreement among themselves,
jointly to perform all the Duties required of them in that State, with an
especial subjection unto the Spiritual Authority of Rules and Rulers appointed
by Christ in that State.

17. THERE is nothing herein, which any Man who has a conscientious sense of
his Duty in a professed subjection unto the Gospel, can question for the
substance of it, whether it be according to the mind of Christ or no. And
whereas the nature and essential properties of a Divine Covenant are contained
in them, as such it is a Foundation of any Church State.

18. THUS under the Old Testament, when God would take the post^rity of Abraham
into a new peculiar Church State, he did it by a Solemn Covenant. Herein, as he
prescribed all the Duties of his Worship to them, and made them many blessed
promises of his presence, with powers and privileges innumerable; so the people
solemnly Covenanted and engaged with him, that they would do and observe all
that he had Commanded them; whereby they coalesced into that Church State,
which abode unto the time of Reformation. This Covenant is at large declared
Exodus 24. For the Covenant which God made there with the people, and they with
him, was not the Covenant of Grace under a legal dispensation; for that was
established unto the Seed of Abraham Four Hundred years before in the Promise,
with the Seal of Circumcision; nor was it the Covenant of Works under a Gospel
dispensation; for God never renewed that Covenant under any consideration
whatever: But it was a peculiar Covenant which God then made with them, and had
not made it with their Fathers, Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3. whereby they were raised and
erected into a Church State, wherein they were entrusted with all the
Privileges, and enjoined all the Duties which God had annexed thereunto. This
Covenant was the sole Formal Cause of their Church State, which they are
charged so often to have broken, and which they so often solemnly renewed unto
God.

19. THIS was that Covenant which was to be abolished, whereon the Church State
that was built thereon, was utterly taken away. For hereon the Hebrews ceased
to be the peculiar Church of God, because the Covenant whereby they were made
so, was abolished and taken away, as the Apostle disputes at large, Heb. 7, 8,
9. The Covenant of Grace in the promise, will
still continue unto the true Seed of Abraham, Act. 2.38, 39. But the Church
Covenant was utterly taken away.

20. UPON the removal therefore of this Covenant, and the Church State founded
thereon, all Duties of Worship and Church Privileges were also taken away; (the
things substituted in their room being totally of another kind. But the
Covenant of Grace, as made with Abraham, being continued and transferred unto
the Gospel Worshippers, the sign or token of it given unto him is changed; but
another substituted in the room thereof. But whereas the Privileges of this
Church Covenant were in themselves carnal only, and no way spiritual, but as
they were Typical; and the Duties prescribed in it were burdensome, yea, a yoke
intolerable; the Apostle declares in the same place, that the New Church State,
whereinto we are called by the Gospel, has no Duties belonging unto it, but
such as are spiritual and easy; but withal, has such holy and eminent
Privileges as the Church could no way enjoy by virtue of the first Church
Covenant; nor could be Believers made partakers of them, before that Covenant
was abolished: Wherefore,

21. THE same way for the Erection of a Church State for the participation of
the more excellent Privileges of the Gospel, and performance of the Duties of
it, for the substance of it must still be continued. For the constitution of
such a Society as a Church is, entrusted with Powers and Privileges, by a
Covenant or mutual consent, with an engagement unto the performance of the
Duties belonging unto it, has its foundation in the Light of Nature, so far as
it has any thing in common with other voluntary Relations and Societies; was
instituted by God himself, as the way and means of erecting the Church State of
the Old Testament; and consists in the performance of such Duties as are
expressly required of all Believers.

CHAP. III. Of the Polity, Rule, or Discipline of the Church in General.
1. THE things last treated of concern the Essence of the Church, or the
Essential Constituent Parts of it, according unto the appointment of Christ. It
remains in the next place, that we should treat of it as it is Organical, or a
Body Corporate; a spiritually Political Society, for the exercise of the Powers
wherewith it is entrusted by Christ, and the due performance of the Duties
which he requires. Now, whereas it is brought into this estate, by the setting,
fixing or placing Officers in it, Method would require that we should first
treat of them, their Nature, Names, Power, and the ways of coming unto their
Offices. But, whereas all things concerning them are founded in the grant of
Power unto the Church it self, and the Institution of Polity and Rule therein
by Jesus Christ, I shall first treat somewhat thereof in general.

THAT which we intend on various considerations and in diverse respects, is
called the Power or Authority, the Polity, the Rule, the Government and the
Discipline of the Church. The Formal Nature of it, is its Authority or Power.
Its Polity, is skill and wisdom to act that Power unto its proper ends. Its
Rule, is the actual exercise of that Power, according unto that skill and
wisdom. Its Government is the Exercise and Application of that Authority
according unto that skill, toward those that are its proper Objects. And it is
called its Discipline, principally with respect unto its end. Yet is it not
material whether these things are thus accurately distinguished; the same thing
is intended in them all, which I shall call the Rule of the Church.

2. THE Rule of the Church is in general The exercise of the Power or Authority
of Jesus Christ, given unto it according unto the Laws and Directions
prescribed by himself unto its Edification. This Power in Actu Primo, or
fundamentally, is in the Church it self; in Actu Secundo, or its exercise, in
them that are especially called thereunto. Whether that which is now called the
Rule of the Church by some, being a plain Secular Dominion, have any Affinity
hereunto, is justly doubted. That it is in it self the acting of the Authority
of Christ, wherein the power of Men is Ministerial only, is evident. For, (1.)
All this Authority in and over the Church is vested in him alone. (2.) It is
over the Souls and Consciences of Men only, which no Authority can reach but
his, and that as it is his; whereof we shall treat more afterward.

THE sole end of the Ministerial Exercise of this Power and Rule, by virtue
thereof unto the Church, is the Edification of it self, Romans 15.1, 2, 3. 2 Cor.
10.8. Chap. 13.10. Ephesians. 4.14, 15.

3. THIS is the especial nature and especial end of all Power granted by Jesus
Christ unto the Church; namely, a Ministry unto Edification, in opposition unto
all the ends whereunto it has been abused. For it has been so unto the
Usurpation of a Dominion over the Persons and Consciences of the Disciples of
Christ, accompanied with Secular Grandeur, Wealth and Power. The Lord Christ
never made a grant of any Authority, for any such ends; yea, they are expressly
forbidden by him, Luke 22.25. Matthew. 20.26, 27, 28. Jesus called his Disciples
unto him, and said, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion
over them, and they that are Great exercise Authority upon them: But it shall
not be so among you; but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
Minister; and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant; even
as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.

ALL the Pleas of the Romanists are utterly insufficient to secure their Papal
Domination from this Sword of the Mouth of the Lord Jesus. For, whereas their
utmost pretense and defense consists in this, That it is not Dominion and Power
absolutely that is forbidden, but the Unlawful, Tyrannical, Oppressive Exercise
of Power, such as was in use among the Princes of the Gentiles; never was there
any Dominion in the World, no not among the Gentiles, more Cruel, Oppressive
and Bloody, than that of the Pope's has been. But it is evident, that our Lord
Jesus Christ does not in the least reflect on the Rule or Government of the
Kings and Princes of the Gentiles, which was Good and Righteous: yea, he speaks
of them in an especial manner, whom their Subjects for their moderate and equal
Rule, with their usefulness unto their Countries, called (...) or Benefactors.
Their Rule, as unto the Kind and Administration of it in the Kingdoms of the
World, he approves of. And such a Power or Pre-eminence it was, namely good and
just in it self, not Tyrannical and Oppressive, that the Two Disciples desired
in his Kingdom, which gave occasion unto this declaration of the Nature of his
Kingdom, and the Rule thereof. For in this Power or Dominion two things may be
considered. (1.) The Exercise of it over the Persons, Goods and Lives of Men,
by Courts, Coercive Jurisdictions, Processes of Law, and External Force in
Punishments. (2.) The State, Grandeur, Pre-eminence, Wealth, Exaltation above
others, which are necessary unto the maintenance of their Authority and Power.
Both these in the least Participation of them, in the least Degree whatever,
are forbidden by our Savior to be admitted in his Kingdom, or to have any
place therein, on what pretense soever. He will have nothing of Lordship,
Domination, Pre-eminence in Lordly Power in his Church. No Courts, no Coercive
Jurisdictions, no Exercise of any Humane Authority does he allow therein; for
by these means do the Princes of the Gentiles, those that are the Benefactors
of their Countries, rule among them. And this is most evident from what in
opposition hereunto he prescribes unto his own Disciples, the greatest, the
best in Office, Grace and Gifts; namely a Ministry only, to be discharged in
the way of Service. How well this great Command and Direction of our Lord Jesus
Christ has been and is complied withal, by those who have taken on them to be
Rulers in the Church, is sufficiently known.

WHEREFORE there is no Rule of the Church, but what is Ministerial, consisting
in an Authoritative Declaration and Application of the Commands and Will of
Christ unto the Souls of Men, wherein, those who exercise it are Servants unto
the Church for its Edification, for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.

IT hence follows, that the introduction of Humane Authority into the Rule of
the Church of Christ in any kind, destroys the nature of it, and makes his
Kingdom to be of this World, and some of his Disciples to be in their measure
like the Princes of the Gentiles; nor is it oft-times from themselves, that
they are not more like them than they are. The Church is the House of Christ,
his Family, his Kingdom. To act any power in its Rule, which is not his, which
derives not from him, which is not communicated by his legal grant; or to act
any Power, by Ways, Processes, Rules and Laws not of his appointment, is an
invasion of his Right and Dominion. It can no otherwise be, if the Church be
his Family, his House, his Kingdom. For what Father would endure that any Power
should be exercised in his Family as to the disposal of his Children and
Estate, but his own? What Earthly Prince will bear with such an intrusion into
his Rights and Dominion? Foreign Papal Power is severely excluded here in
England, because it entrenches on the Rights of the Crown, by the exercise of
an Authority and Jurisdiction not derived from the King according unto the Law
of the Land. And we should do well to take care that at the same time we do not
encroach upon the Dominion of Christ, by the exercise of an Authority not
derived from him, or by Laws and Rules not Enacted by him, but more Foreign
unto his Kingdom, than the Canon Law or the Popes Rule is unto the Laws of this
Nation, lest we fall under the Statute of Praemunire, Matthew. 10.26, 27, 28. The
power of Rule in the Church, then, is nothing but a Right to yield Obedience
unto the Commands of Christ, in such a way, by such Rules, and for such ends,
as wherein and whereby his Authority is to be acted.

THE persons concerned in this Rule of the Church, both those that Rule and
those that are to be Ruled, as unto all their Civil and Political concerns in
this World, are subject unto the Civil Government of the Kingdoms and Places
wherein they inhabit. And there are sundry things which concern the outward
state and condition of the Church that are at the disposal of the Governors of
this World: But, whereas the Power to be exercised in the Church is merely
Spiritual as unto its objects, which are the Consciences of Men; and as unto
its ends, which are the tendency of their Souls unto God, their spiritual
obedience in Christ and Eternal Life, it is a Phrensy to dream of any other
Power or Authority in this Rule, but that of Christ alone.

TO sum up this Discourse; If the Rulers of the Church, the greatest of them,
have only a Ministerial Power committed unto them, and are precisely limited
thereunto; if in the exercise thereof they are Servants of the Church unto its
Edification; if all Lordly Domination in an exaltation above the Church or the
Members of it, in Dignity and Authority of this World, and the exercise of
Power by external Coercive Jurisdiction be forbidden unto them; if the whole
Power and Rule of the Church be Spiritual and not Carnal, mighty through God
and not through the Laws of Men; and be to be exercised by spiritual means for
spiritual ends only; it is apparent how it has been lost in, or cast out of
the World, for the introduction of a Lordly Domination, a Secular Coercive
Jurisdiction, with Laws and Powers no way derived from Christ, in the room
thereof. Neither is it possible for any Man alive to reconcile the present
Government of some Churches, either as unto the Officers who have the
Administration of that Rule, or the Rules and Laws whereby they act and
proceed, or Powers which they exercise, or the Jurisdiction which they claim,
or the manner of their proceeding in its Administration, unto any tolerable
consistency with the Principles, Rules and Laws of the Government of the Church
given by Christ himself. And this alone is a sufficient Reason why those who
endeavor to preserve their Loyalty entire* unto Jesus Christ, should in their
own practice seek after the Reduction of the Rule of the Church, unto his
Commands and Appointments; in the public disposals of Nations we have no
concernment.

4. WHEREAS therefore there is a Power and Authority for its Rule unto
Edification, given and committed by the Lord Christ unto his Church, I shall
proceed to enquire how
this Power is Communicated, what it is, and to whom it is granted, which shall
be declared in the ensuing Observations.

1. THERE was an extraordinary Church Power committed by the Lord Jesus Christ
unto his Apostles, who in their own persons were the first and only subject of
it. It was not granted unto the Church, by it to be communicated unto them
according unto any Rules prescribed thereunto. For their office as it was
Apostolical, was Antecedent unto the existence of any Gospel Church State
properly so called; neither had any Church the least concurrence or influence
into their call or mission. Howbeit, when there was a Church State, the
Churches being called and gathered by their Ministry, they were given unto the
Church, and placed in the Church for the exercise of all Office, with Power
unto their Edification according to the Rules and Laws of their constitution,
Act. 1.14, 15. Chap. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 3.22. Chap. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12,
13, 14.

2. THIS Power is ceased in the Church. It is so, not by virtue of any Law or
constitution of Christ; but by a cessation of those actings whence it did flow,
and whereon it did depend. For unto this Apostolical Office and Power there was
required, (1.) An immediate personal call from Christ himself. (2.) A
Commission equally extensive unto all Nations for their Conversion, and unto
all Churches equally for their Edification. (3.) An Authority in all Churches,
comprehensive of all that power which is in the ordinary constitution of them,
distributed among many. (4.) A Collation of extraordinary Gifts; as of
infallibility in Teaching, of working Miracles, speaking with Tongues, and the
like. Whereas therefore all these things do cease, and the Lord Christ does not
act in the same manner toward any, this Office and Power does absolutely
cease. For any to pretend themselves to be Successors unto these Apostles, as
some with a strange confidence and impertinency have done, is to plead that
they are personally and immediately called by Christ unto their Office, that
they have Authority with respect unto all Nations and all Churches, and are
endued with a spirit of Infallibility, and a power of working Miracles, whereof
outward pomp and ostentation are no sufficient evidences. And certainly, when
some of them consider one another, and talk of being the Apostles Successors,
it is but Aruspex Aruspicens.

3. LEAST of all in the ordinary state of the Church, and the continuation
thereof has the Lord Christ appointed a Vicar, or rather as is pretended a
Successor, with a plenitude of all Church Power, to be by him parcelled out
unto others. This is that which has overthrown all Church Rule and Order,
introducing Luciferian Pride and Antichristian Tyranny in their room. And
whereas the only way of Christ's acting his Authority over the Churches, and of
communicating Authority unto them, to be acted by them in his Name, is by his
Word and Spirit, which he has given to continue in his Church unto that end
unto the consummation of all things, the Pope of Rome placing himself in his
stead for these ends, does thereby sit in the Temple of God, and show himself
to be God. But this is sufficiently confuted among all sober Christians; and
those who embrace it, may be left to contend with the Mahometans, who affirm,
that Jesus left John the Baptist to be his Successor, as Haly succeeded unto
Mahomet.

5. ALL these, by whom the ordinary Rule of the Church is to be exercised unto
its Edification, are as unto their Office and Power given unto the Church, set
or placed in it, not as Lords of their Faith, but as helpers of their joy, 1
Cor. 2.2. Chap. 3.21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 1.24. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 5.1,
2. For the Church is the Spouse of Christ, the Lambs Wife; and by virtue of
that Relation the enfeoffment into this power is her Due and Dowry; all
particular Persons are but her Servants for Christ's sake. For though some of
them be Stewards, and set over all their fellow Servants, yet he has not given
them the trust of power to rule his Spouse at their own will, and to grant what
they please unto her.

6. BUT as this whole Church Power is committed unto the whole Church by
Christ; so all that are called unto the peculiar exercise of any part of it, by
virtue of Office-Authority, do receive that Authority from him by the only way
of the communication of it, namely, by his Word and Spirit through the Ministry
of the Church, whereof we shall treat afterward.

V. THESE things being thus premised in general concerning Church Power, we
must treat yet particularly of the communication of it from Christ, and of its
distribution as unto its Residence in the Church.

1. EVERY Individual Believer has Power or Right given unto him upon his
believing to become the Son of God, Joh. 1.12. Hereby, as such, he has a Right
and Title radically and originally unto, with an interest in all Church
Privileges, to be actually possessed and used according to the Rules by him
prescribed. For he that is a Son of God has a right unto all the privileges
and advantages of the Family of God, as well as he is obliged unto all the
Duties of it. Herein lies the foundation of all right unto Church Power, for
both it, and all that belongs unto it, is a part of the purchased Inheritance,
whereunto right is granted by Adoption; wherefore, the first original grant of
all Church Power and Privileges is made unto Believers as such. Theirs it is
with these Two Limitations; (1.) That as such only they cannot exercise any
Church Power, but upon their due observation of all Rules and Duties given unto
this end; such are Joint Confession and Confederation. (2.) That each
individual, do actually participate therein, according to the especial Rules of
the Church, which peculiarly respects Women that do believe.

2. Wherever there are two or three of these Believers, (the smallest number)
Right and Power is granted unto them, actually to meet together in the name of
Christ, for their mutual Edification, whereunto he has promised his presence
among them, Matthew. 18.19, 20. To meet and to do any thing in the name of
Christ; as to exhort, instruct and admonish one another, or to pray together,
as v. 19. there is an especial Right or Power required thereunto. This is
granted by Jesus Christ unto the least number of consenting Believers. And this
is a second preparation unto the communication of Church Power. Unto the
former, Faith only is required, unto this, Profession with mutual consent unto,
and agreement in the Evangelical Duties mentioned, are to be added.

3. WHERE the number of Believers is increased, so as that they are sufficient
as unto their number to observe and perform all Church Duties in the way and
manner prescribed for their performance, they have Right and Power granted unto
them, to make a joint solemn Confession of their Faith, especially as unto the
Person of Christ and his Mediation, Matthew. 16.16, 18. as also to give up
themselves unto him and to one another, in an holy Agreement or Confederation
to do and observe all things whatever that he has Commanded. Hereon, by virtue
of his Laws in his Institutions and Commands, he gives them power to do all
things in their Order which he grants unto his Church, and enstates them in all
the Rights and Privileges thereof. These Believers, I say, thus congregated
into a Church State, have immediately by virtue thereof, power to take care
that all things be done among them, as by the Lord Christ they are Commanded to
be done, in and by his Church.

THIS therefore is the Church Essential and Homogeneal, unto which the Lord
Christ has granted all that Church Power which we enquire after, made it the
Seat of all Ordinances of his Worship, and the Tabernacle wherein he will
dwell. Nor since the ceasing of extraordinary Officers, is there any other way
possible for the congregating of any Church, than what does virtually include
the things we have mentioned.

4. BUT yet this Church State is not complete; nor are the ends of its
institution attainable in this State. For the Lord Christ has appointed such
things in and unto it, which in this State it cannot observe. For he has given
Authority unto his Church to be exercised both in its Rule and in the
Administration of his solemn Ordinances of Worship. The things before
mentioned, are all of them acts of Right and Power, but not of Authority.

5. WHEREFORE the Lord Christ has ordained Offices, and appointed Officers to
be established in the Church, Ephesians. 4.13, 14. Unto these is all Church
Authority granted. For all Authority is an act of Office-Power, which is that
which gives unto what is performed by the Officers of the Church, the formal
nature of Authority.

6. THEREFORE unto the Church, in the State before described, Right and Power
is granted by Christ to call, choose, appoint and set apart persons made meet
for the work of the Offices appointed by him, in the ways and by the means
appointed by him. Nor is there any other way whereby ordinary Officers may be
fixed in the Church, as we have proved before, and shall farther confirm
afterward.

THAT which hereon we must enquire into, is, How or by what means, or by what
acts of his Sovereign Power, the Lord Christ does communicate Office-Power, and
therewith the Office it self unto any persons whereon their Authority is
directly from him; and what are the Acts or Duties of the Church in the
collation of this Authority.

THE Acts of Christ herein may be reduced unto these Heads.

1. HE has instituted and appointed the Offices themselves, and made a grant
of them unto the Church for its Edification. As also, he has determined and
limited the Powers and Duties of the Officers. It is not in the power of any or
of all the Churches in the World, to appoint any Office or Officer in the
Church, that Christ has not appointed. And where there are any such, they can
have no Church Authority properly so called; for that entirely rises from, and
is resolved into the institution of the Office by Christ himself. And hence, in
the first place all the Authority of Officers in the Church proceeds from the
Authority of Christ in the institution of the Office it self; for that which
gives being unto any thing, gives it also its essential properties.

2. BY virtue of his Relation unto the Church as its Head, of his Kingly Power
over it and care of it, whereon the continuation and edification of the Church
in this World do depend; where ever he has a Church called, he furnishes some
persons with such Gifts, Abilities and Endowments, as are necessary to the
discharge of such Offices, in the Powers, Works and Duties of them. For it is
most unquestionably evident, both in the nature of the thing it self, and in
his institution, that there are some especial Abilities and Qualifications
required to the discharge of every Church Office. Wherefore, where the Lord
Christ does not communicate of these Abilities in such a measure as by virtue
of them Church Order may be observed, Church Power exercised, and all Church
Ordinances administered according to his mind unto the Edification of the
Church, it is no more in the power of Men to constitute Officers, than to erect
or create an Office in the Church, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7,
8, etc. Romans 12.6.

THIS collation of spiritual Gifts and Abilities for Office by Jesus Christ
unto any, does not immediately constitute all those, or any of them, Officers
in the Church, on whom they are collated, without the observation of that
Method and Order which he has appointed in the Church for the communication of
Office-Power; yet is it so prerequisite thereunto, that no person not made
partaker of them in the measure before mentioned, can, by virtue of any outward
Rites, Order or Power, be really vested in the Ministry.

3. THIS communication of Office-Power on the part of Christ, consists in his
institution and appointment of the way and means, whereby persons gifted and
qualified by himself, ought to be actually admitted into their Offices, so as
to administer the Powers, and perform the Duties of them. For the way of their
Call and Ordination, whereof we shall speak afterward, is efficacious unto
this end of communicating Office-Power, merely from his institution and
appointment of it. And what is not so, can have no causal influence into the
communication of this Power. For although sundry things belonging hereunto are
directed by the light of Nature, as it is, that where one Man is set over
others in Power and Authority, which before he had no natural right unto, it
should be by their own consent and choice: And some things are of a moral
nature, as that especial prayer be used in and about affairs that need especial
divine assistance and favor; and there may be some circumstances of outward
actions herein, not to be determined but by the Rule of Reason on the present
posture of occasions; yet nothing has any causal influence into the
communication of Office-Power, but what is of the institution and appointment
of Christ. By virtue hereof, all that are called unto this Office, do derive
all their Power and Authority from him alone.

4. HE has hereon given Commands unto the whole Church to submit themselves
unto the Authority of these Officers in the discharge of their Office, who are
so appointed, so prepared or qualified, so called by himself, and to obey them
in all things, according unto the limitations which himself also has given
unto the Power and Authority of such Officers. For they who are called unto
Rule and Authority in the Church by virtue of their Office, are not thereon
admitted unto an unlimited Power to be exercised at their pleasure in a Lordly
or Despotical manner; but their Power is stated, bounded, limited and confined
as to the objects of it, its Acts, its manner of Administration, its Ends, and
as unto all things wherein it is concerned. The swelling over these Banks by
Ambition, the breaking up of these bounds by Pride and love of Domination, by
the introduction of a Power over the persons of Men in their outward concerns,
exercised in a Legal, Coercive, Lordly manner, are sufficient to make a
forfeiture of all Church Power in them who are guilty of them. But after that
some Men saw it fit to transgress the bounds of Power and Authority prescribed
and limited unto them by the Lord Christ; which was really exclusive of
Lordship, Dominion and all Elation above their Brethren, leaving them Servants
to the Church for Christ's sake, they began to prescribe bounds unto themselves,
such as were suited unto their Interest, which they called Rules or Canons, and
never left enlarging them at their pleasure, until they enstated the most
absolute Tyranny in and over the Church, that ever was in the World.

BY these ways and means does the Lord Christ communicate Office Power unto
them that are called thereunto, whereon they become not the Officers or
Ministers of Men, no, not of the Church, as unto the actings and exercise of
their Authority, but only as the good and edification of the Church is the end
of it; but the Officers and Ministers of Christ himself.

2. IT is hence evident, that in the communication of Church Power in Office
unto any persons called thereunto, the work and duty of the Church consists
formally in Acts of Obedience unto the Commands of Christ. Hence, it does not
give unto such Officers a Power or Authority that was formally and actually in
the Body of the Community, by virtue of any Grant or Law of Christ, so as that
they should receive and act the Power of the Church, by virtue of a Delegation
from them; but only they design, choose, set apart the individual persons, who
thereon are entrusted with Office-Power by Christ himself, according as was
before declared. This is the Power and Right given unto the Church essentially
considered with respect unto their Officers, namely to design, call, choose, and
set apart the persons by the ways of Christ's appointment unto those Offices,
whereunto by his Laws he has annexed Church Power and Authority.

WE need not therefore trouble our selves with the disputes about the first
subject of Church Power, or any part of it. For it is a certain Rule, That in
the performance of all Duties which the Lord Christ requires, either of the
whole Church, or of any in the Church, especially of the Officers, they are the
first subject of the Power needful unto such Duties, who are immediately called
unto them. Hereby, all things become to be done in the Name and Authority of
Christ. For the Power of the Church, is nothing but a right to perform Church
Duties in obedience unto the Commands of Christ, and according unto his mind.
Wherefore all Church Power is originally given unto the Church essentially
considered, which has a double exercise; First, in the call or choosing of
Officers; Secondly, in their voluntary acting with them and under them in all
Duties of Rule. (1.) All Authority in the Church is committed by Christ unto
the Officers or Rulers of it, as unto all Acts and Duties whereunto
Office-Power is required; and, (2.) Every individual person has the liberty of
his own judgment, as unto his own consent or dissent in what he is himself
concerned.

THAT this Power under the name of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven was
originally granted unto the whole professing Church of Believers, and that it
is utterly impossible it should reside in any other who is subject unto Death,
or if to be renewed upon any occasional intermission, is so fully proved by all
Protestant Writers against the Papists, that it needs not on this occasion be
again insisted on.

VI. THESE things have been spoken concerning the Polity of the Church in
General, as it is taken objectively for the constitution of its State, and the
laws of its Rule; we are in the next place to consider it subjectively, as it
is a power or faculty of the minds of Men, unto whom the Rule of the Church is
committed. And in this sense it is the wisdom or understanding of the Officers
of the Church, to exercise the Government in it appointed by Jesus Christ, or
to rule it according to his Laws and Constitutions: Or,

THIS Wisdom is a Spiritual Gift (1 Cor. 12.9.) whereby the Officers of the
Church are enabled to make a due application of all the Rules and Laws of
Christ, unto the Edification of the Church and all the Members of it.

UNTO the attaining of this Wisdom, are required, (1.) Fervent Prayer for it,
Jam. 1.5. (2.) Diligent study of the Scripture, to find out and understand the
Rules given by Christ unto this purpose, Ezra 7.6, 7, 9. 1 Timothy 2.14, 15. (3.)
Humble waiting on God for the Revelation of all that it is to be exercised
about, Ezekiel. 43.11. (4.) A conscientious exercise of the skill which they have
received. Talents traded with duly will increase. (5.) A continual sense of the
account which is to be given of the discharge of this great trust, being called
to rule in the House of God, Heb. 13.17.

HOW much this Wisdom has been neglected in Church Government; yea, how much
it is despised in the World, is evident unto all. It is skill in the Canon Law,
in the proceedings of vexatious Courts, with the Learning, Subtilty and Arts
which are required thereunto, that is looked on as the only skill to be
exercised in the Government of the Church. Without this a Man is esteemed no
way meet to be employed in any part of the Church Government. And according as
any do arrive unto a dexterity in this Polity, they are esteemed eminently
useful. But these things belong not at all unto the Government of the Church
appointed by Christ; nor can any sober Man think in his Conscience that so they
do. What is the use of this Art and Trade, as unto political ends, we enquired.
Nor is the true wisdom required unto this end, with the means of attaining of
it, more despised, more neglected by any sort of Men in the World, than by
those whose pretenses unto Ecclesiastical Rule and Authority would make it most
necessary unto them.

TWO things follow on the supposition laid down.

1. THAT the Wisdom intended is not promised unto all the Members of the Church
in General; nor are they required to seek for it by the ways and means of
attaining it before laid down; but respect is had herein only unto the Officers
of the Church. Hereon depends the equity of the obedience of the people unto
their Rulers. For Wisdom for Rule is peculiarly granted unto them, and their
Duty it is to seek after it in a peculiar manner. Wherefore, those who on every
occasion are ready to advance their own Wisdom and Understanding in the affairs
and proceedings of the Church, against the Wisdom of the Officers of it, are
proud and disorderly.

I speak not this to give any countenance unto the outcries of some, that all
sorts of Men will suppose themselves Wiser than their Rulers, and to know what
belongs unto the Government of the Church better than they; whereas, the
Government which they exercise belongs not at all unto the Rule of the Church,
determined and limited in the Scripture, as the meanest Christian can easily
discern; nor is it pretended by themselves so to do: For they say that the Lord
Christ has prescribed nothing herein, but left it unto the Will and Wisdom of
the Church to order all things as they see necessary, which Church they are.
Wherefore, if that will please them, it shall be granted, that in skill for the
management of Ecclesiastical Affairs according to the Canon Law, with such
other Rules of the same kind as they have framed, and in the legal proceedings
of Ecclesiastical Courts, as they are called, there are none of the people that
are equal unto them, or will contend with them.

2. IT hence also follows, that those who are called unto Rule in the Church of
Christ, should diligently endeavor the attaining of, and increasing in this
Wisdom, giving evidence thereof on all occasions, that the Church may safely
acquiesce in their Rule. But hereunto so many things do belong, as cannot in
this place be meetly treated of; somewhat that appertains to them shall
afterward be considered.

CHAP. IV. The Officers of the Church.
THE Church is considered either as it is Essential with respect unto its
Nature and Being; or as it is Organical with respect unto its Order.

THE constituent causes and parts of the Church as unto its Essence and Being,
are its Institution, Matter and Form; whereof we have treated.

ITS Order as it is Organical, is founded in that communication of Power unto
it from Christ, which was insisted on in the foregoing Chapter.

THE Organizing of a Church, is the placing or implanting in it those Officers
which the Lord Jesus Christ has appointed to act and exercise his Authority
therein.

FOR the Rule and Government of the Church, are the exertion of the Authority
of Christ in the hands of them unto whom it is committed, that is the Officers
of it; not that all Officers are called to Rule, but that none are called to
Rule that are not so.

THE Officers of the Church in General are of two sorts; Bishops and Deacons,
Phil. 1.1. And their Work is distributed into Prophecy and Ministry, Romans
12.6.7.

THE Bishops or Elders are of two sorts; (1.) Such as have Authority to Teach
and Administer the Sacraments, which is commonly called the power of Order, and
also of Ruling, which is called a Power of Jurisdiction corruptly: And some
have only Power for Rule; of which sort, there are some in all the Churches in
the World.

THOSE of the first sort are distinguished into Pastors and Teachers.

THE distinction between the Elders themselves, is not like that between Elders
and Deacons, which is as unto the whole kind or nature of the Office; but only
with respect unto Work and Order, whereof we shall treat distinctly.

THE first sort of Officers in the Church are Bishops or Elders; concerning
whom there have been mighty contentions in the late Ages of the Church. The
Principles we have hitherto proceeded on, discharge us from any especial
interest or concernment in this Controversy. For if there be no Church of
Divine or Apostolical constitution, none in Being in the Second or Third
Centuries, but only a particular Congregation, the foundation of that contest
which is about Pre-eminence and Power in the same Person over many Churches,
falls to the ground.

INDEED, strife about Power, Superiority, and Jurisdiction over one another,
amongst those who pretend to be Ministers of the Gospel, is full of scandal. It
started early in the Church; was extinguished by the Lord Christ in his
Apostles; Matthew. 18.1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 23.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Luke 22.24, 25, 26,
27. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2 John 9.10.
rebuked by the Apostles in all others; yet through the Pride, Ambition and
Avarice of Men, has grown to be the stain and shame of the Church in most
Ages. For neither the sense of the Authority of Christ forbidding such
ambitious designings, nor the proposal of his own example in this particular
case; nor the experience of their own insufficiency for the least part of the
work of the Gospel Ministry, have been able to restrain the minds of Men from
coveting after and contending for a prerogative in Church Power over others.
For though this Ambition, and all the fruits or rewards of it, are laid under a
severe interdict by our Lord Jesus Christ, yet when Men (like Achan) saw the
wedge of Gold, and the goodly Babylonish Garment, that they thought to be in
Power, Domination and Wealth, they coveted them, and took them, to the great
disturbance of the Church of God.

IF Men would but a little seriously consider, what there is in that care of
Souls, even of all them over whom they pretend Church Power, Rule or
Jurisdiction; and what it is to give an Account concerning them before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, it may be it would abate of their earnestness in
contending for the enlargement of their Cures.

THE claim of Episcopacy, as consisting in a rank of persons distinct from the
Office of Presbyters, is managed with great variety. It is not agreed whether
they are distinct in Order above them, or only as unto a certain degree among
them of the same Order. It is not determined, what does constitute that
pretended distinct Order, nor wherein that degree of pre-eminence in the same
Order, does consist, nor what Basis it stands upon. It is not agreed whether
this Order of Bishops, has any Church Power appropriated unto it, so as to be
acted singly by themselves alone, without the concurrence of the Presbyters; or
how far that concurrence is necessary in all Acts of Church Order or Power.
There are no Bounds or Limits of the Diocesses which they claim the Rule in and
over, as Churches whereunto they are peculiarly related, derived either from
Divine Institution, or Tradition, or general Rules of Reason respecting both or
either of them; or from the consideration of Gifts and Abilities, or any thing
else wherein Church Order or Edification is concerned. Those who plead for
Diocesan Episcopacy, will not proceed any farther, but only that there is and
ought to be a superiority in Bishops over Presbyters in Order or Degree. But
whether this must be over Presbyters in one Church only, or in many distinct
Churches; whether it must be such, as not only hinders them utterly from the
discharge of any of the Duties of the Pastoral Office, toward the most of them
whom they esteem their Flocks, and necessitates them unto a Rule by
unscriptural Church Officers, Laws and Power, they suppose does not belong unto
their Cause; whereas indeed the weight and moment of it, does lie in and depend
on these things. Innumerable other uncertainties, differences and variances
there are about this singular Episcopacy, which we are not at present concerned
to enquire into, nor shall I insist on any of those which have been already
mentioned.

BUT yet, because it is necessary unto the clearing of the Evangelical Pastoral
Office, which is now under consideration; unto what has been pleaded before
about the non institution of any Churches beyond particular Congregations,
which is utterly exclusive of all pretenses of the present Episcopacy, I shall
briefly, as in a diversion, add the Arguments which undeniably prove, That in
the whole New Testament, Bishops and Presbyters, or Elders, are every way the
same Persons, in the same Office, have the same Function, without distinction
in Order or Degree; which also, as unto the Scripture, the most learned
Advocates of Prelacy begin to grant.

1. THE Apostle describing what ought to be the Qualifications of Presbyters or
Elders, gives this Reason of it, because a Bishop must be so, Tit. 1.5, 6, 7.
Ordain Elders in every City, if any be blameless, etc. for a Bishop must be
blameless. He that would prove of what sort a Presbyter that is to be Ordained
so, ought to be, gives this Reason for it, That such a Bishop ought to be,
intends the same Person and Office by Presbyter and Bishop, or there is no
congruity of Speech, or consequence of Reason in what he asserts. To suppose
that the Apostle does not intend the same Persons, and the same Office by
Presbyters and Bishops in the same place, is to destroy his Argument, and
render the context of his discourse unintelligible. He that will say, that if
you make a Justice of Peace or a Constable, he must be magnanimous, liberal,
full of clemency and courage, for so a King ought to be, will not be thought to
argue very wisely. Yet such is the Argument here, if by Elders and Bishops,
distinct Orders and Offices are intended.

2. THERE were many Bishops in one City in one particular Church, Phil. 1.1. To
all the Saints that are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. That the
Church then at Philippi was one particular Church or Congregation was proved
before. But to have many Bishops in the same Church, whereas the nature of the
Episcopacy pleaded for, consists in the Superiority of one over the Presbyters
of many Churches, is absolutely inconsistent. Such Bishops, whereof there may
be many in the same Church, of the same Order, equal in Power and Dignity with
respect unto Office, will easily be granted; but then they are Presbyters as
well as Bishops. There will, I fear, be no end of this contest, because of the
prejudices and interests of some; but that the identity of Bishops and
Presbyters should be more plainly expressed, can neither be expected nor
desired.

3. THE Apostle being at Miletus, sent to Ephesus for the Elders of the Church
to come unto him, that is the Elders of the Church at Ephesus, as has been
elsewhere undeniably demonstrated, Act. 20.17, 18. unto these Elders he says,
Take heed unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God, ver. 28. If Elders and
Bishops be not the same Persons, having the same Office, the same Function and
the same Duties, and the same Names, it is impossible, so far as I understand,
how it should be expressed. For these Elders are they whom the Holy Ghost made
Bishops; they were many of them in the same Church; their Duty it was to attend
unto the Flock; and to feed the Church, which comprize all the Duties, the
whole Function of Elders and Bishops, which must therefore be the same. This
plain Testimony can no way be evaded by pretenses and conjectures unwritten and
uncertain; the only answer unto it, is, It was indeed so then, but it was
otherwise afterward; which some now betake themselves unto. But these Elders
were either Elders only and not Bishops; or Bishops only and not Elders; or the
same Persons were Elders and Bishops, as is plainly affirmed in the words. The
latter is that which we plead. If the first be asserted, then was there no
Bishop then at Ephesus; for these Elders had the whole oversight of the Flock:
If the Second, then were there no Elders at all, which is no good exposition of
those words, that Paul called unto him the Elders of the Church.

4. THE Apostle Peter writes unto the Elders of the Churches, that they should
feed the Flock, (...), taking the oversight, or exercising the Office and
Function of Bishops over them, and that not as Lords but as ensamples (of
Humility, Obedience and Holiness) to the whole Flock, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Those
on whom it is incumbent to feed the Flock, and to superintend over it, as those
who in the first place are accountable unto Jesus Christ, are Bishops; and such
as have no other Bishop over them, unto whom this charge should be principally
committed. But such, according unto this Apostle, are the Elders of the Church.
Wherefore, those Elders and Bishops are the same. And such were the (...), the
Guides of the Church at Jerusalem, whom the members of it were bound to obey,
as those that did watch for, and were to give an account of their Souls. Heb.
13.17.

5. THE substance of these and all other Instances or Testimonies of the same
kind, is this; Those whose names are the same equally common and applicable
unto them all, whose Function is the same, whose Qualifications and Characters
are the same, whose Duties, Account and Reward are the same, concerning whom
there is in no one place of Scripture the least mention of inequality,
disparity or preference in Office among them, they are essentially and every
way the same. That thus it is with the Elders and Bishops in the Scripture
cannot modestly be denied.

I do acknowledge that where a Church is greatly increased, so as that there is
a necessity of many Elders in it for its Instruction and Rule, that Decency and
Order do require, that one of them do in the management of all Church Affairs
preside, to guide and direct the way and manner thereof. So the Presbyters at
Alexandria did choose one from among themselves that should have the
pre-eminence of a President among them. Whether the Person that is so to
preside, be directed unto by being first Converted or first Ordained, or on the
account of Age, or of Gifts and Abilities, whether he continue for a Season
only, and then another be deputed unto the same Work, or for his Life, are
things in themselves indifferent, to be determined according unto the General
Rules of Reason and Order, with respect unto the Edification of the Church.

I shall never oppose this Order, but rather desire to see it in practice;
namely, that particular Churches were of such an extent, as necessarily to
require many Elders both Teaching and Ruling for their Instruction and
Government; for the better observation of Order and Decency in the public
Assemblies; the fuller Representation of the Authority committed by Jesus
Christ unto the Officers of his Church; the occasional instruction of the
Members in lesser Assemblies, which as unto some ends may be stated also, with
the due attendance unto all other means of Edification and Watching,
Inspecting, Warning, Admonishing, Exhorting, and the like; and that among these
Elders one should be chosen by themselves, with the consent of the Church, not
into a New Order, not into a degree of Authority above his Brethren, but only
unto his part of the common work in a peculiar manner, which requires some kind
of Precedence. Hereby no New Officer, no New Order of Officers, no New degree
of Power or Authority is constituted in the Church; only the Work and Duty of
it is cast into such an Order, as the very light of nature does require.

BUT there is not any intimation in the Scripture of the least imparity or
inequality, in Order, Degree or Authority, among Officers of the same sort,
whether extraordinary or ordinary. The Apostles were all equal; so were the
Evangelists, so were Elders or Bishops, and so were Deacons also. The Scripture
knows no more of an Archbishop, such as all Diocesan Bishops are, nor an
Archdeacon, than of an Arch-Apostle, or of an Arch-Evangelist, or an
Arch-Prophet. Howbeit, it is evident, that in all their Assemblies, they had
one who did preside in the manner before described, which seems among the
Apostles to have been the prerogative of Peter.

THE Brethren also of the Church may be so multiplied, as that the constant
meeting of them all in one place may not be absolutely best for their
Edification. Howbeit, that on all the solemn occasions of the Church whereunto
their consent is necessary, they did of old and ought still, to meet in the
same place for advise, consultation and consent, as was proved before. This is
so fully expressed and exemplified in the two great Churches of Jerusalem and
Antioch, Act. 15. that it cannot be gainsaid. When Paul and Barnabas, sent by
the Brethren or Church at Antioch ( v. 1, 3.) were come to Jerusalem, they were
received by the Church, as the Brethren are called in distinction from the
Apostles and Elders, v. 4. So when the Apostles and Elders assembled to
consider of the case proposed unto them, the whole multitude of the Church,
that is the Brethren assembled with them, v. 6, 12. neither were they mute
Persons, mere Auditors and Spectators in the Assembly, but they concurred both
in the debate and determination of the Question; insomuch as they are expressly
joined with the Apostles and Elders in the advice given, ver. 22, 23. And when
Paul and Barnabas returned unto Antioch, the multitude unto whom the Letter of
the Church at Jerusalem was directed, came together about it, ver. 23.30.
Unless this be observed the Primitive-Church-State is overthrown: But I shall
return from this Digression.

THE first Officer or Elder of the Church is the Pastor. A Pastor, is the Elder
that Feeds and Rules the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.2. that is, who is its Teacher and its
Bishop; (...), Feed, taking the oversight.

IT is not my present design nor work to give a full account of the
Qualifications required in Persons to be called unto this Office; nor of their
Duty and Work, with the Qualities or Virtues to be exercised therein. It would
require a large Discourse to handle them practically, and it has been done by
others. It were to be wished, that what is of this kind expressed in the Rule,
and which the nature of the Office does indispensably require, were more
exemplified in practice than it is. But some things relating unto this Officer
and his Office that are needful to be well stated, I shall treat concerning.

THE name of a Pastor or Shepherd is Metaphorical. It is a Denomination suited
unto his Work, denoting the same Office and Person with a Bishop or Elder,
spoken of absolutely without limitation unto either Teaching or Ruling. Act.
20.18, 29. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Cant. 1.7. Jerem. 13.17. Chap. 23.2. Ezekiel. 34.3. Genesis
49.24. Psalm. 23.1. Psalm. 80.1. Joh. 10.11, 14, 16. Heb. 13.20. 1 Pet. 2.25.
Chap. 5.4.
And it seems to be used or applied unto this Office, because it is more
comprehensive of, and instructive in all the Duties that belong unto it, than
any other Name whatever; nay, than all of them put together. The Grounds and
Reasons of this Metaphor, or whence the Church is called a Flock, and whence
God terms himself the Shepherd of the Flock; whence the Sheep of this Flock
are committed unto Christ, whereon he becomes the good Shepherd that lays down
his Life for the Sheep, and the Prince of Shepherds; what is the interest of
Men in a participation of this Office, and what their Duty thereon, are things
well worth the consideration of them who are called unto it. Hirelings, yea,
Wolves and dumb Dogs, do in many places take on themselves to be Shepherds of
the Flock, by whom it is devoured and destroyed.

WHEREAS therefore this Name or Appellation is taken from, and includes in it
Love, Care, Tenderness, Watchfulness in all the Duties of going before,
preserving, feeding, defending the Flock, the Sheep and the Lambs, the Strong,
the Weak and Diseased, with accountableness as Servants unto the chief
Shepherd, it was generally disused in the Church; and those of Bishops or
Overseers, Guides, Presidents, Elders which seem to include more of Honor and
Authority, were retained in common use; that though one of them, at last,
namely that of Bishops, with some elating compositions and adjuncts of power,
obtained the pre-eminence. Out of the Corruption of these Compositions and
Additions in Archbishops, Metropolitans, Patriarchs, and the like, brake forth
the Cockatrice of the Church, that is the Pope.

BUT this name is by the Holy Ghost appropriated unto the principal Ministers
of Christ in his Church, Ephesians. 4.11. And under that name they were promised
unto the Church of old, Jerem. 3.15. And the Work of these Pastors, is to feed
the Flock committed to their charge as it is constantly required of them, Act.
20.29. 1 Pet. 5.2.

OF Pastoral Feeding there are two parts. (1.) Teaching or Instruction. (2.)
Rule or Discipline. Unto these two Heads may all the Acts and Duties of a
Shepherd toward his Flock be reduced. And both are intended in the term of
feeding, 1 Chronicles. 11.2. Chap. 17.6. Jer. 23.2. Mic. 5.4. Chap. 7.14. Zech.
11.7. Act. 20.28. Joh. 21.14. 1 Pet. 5.2, etc. wherefore he who is the Pastor,
is the Bishop, the Elder, the Teacher of the Church.

THESE Works of Teaching and Ruling may be distinct in several Officers, namely
of Teachers and Rulers; but to divide them in the same Office of Pastors, that
some Pastors should feed by Teaching only, but have no right to Rule by Virtue
of their Office; and some should attend in exercise unto Rule only, not
esteeming themselves obliged to labor continually in feeding the Flock, is
almost to overthrow this Office of Christ's Designation, and to set up two in
the room of it, of Men's own projection.

OF the call of Men unto this Office, so many things have been spoken and
written by others at large, that I shall only insist, and that very briefly, on
some things which are either of the most important consideration, or have been
omitted by others: As,

1. UNTO the call of any person unto this Office of a Pastor in the Church,
there are certain Qualifications previously required in him, disposing and
making him fit for that Office. The outward call is an act of the Church, as we
shall show immediately. But therein is required an obediential acting of him
also who is called. Neither of these can be Regular, neither can the Church act
according to Rule and Order, nor the person called act in such a due Obedience,
unless there are in him some previous Indications of the mind of God, designing
the person to be called by such Qualifications, as may render him meet and able
for the discharge of his Office and Work. For ordinary vocation is not a
collation of Gracious Spiritual Abilities suiting and making Men meet for the
Pastoral Office: But it is the communication of Right and Power for the regular
use and exercise of Gifts and Abilities received antecedently unto that call,
unto the Edification of the Church, wherein the Office it self does consist.
And if we would know what these Qualifications and Endowments are for the
substance of them, we may learn them in their great example and pattern, our
Lord Jesus Christ himself. Our Lord Jesus Christ being the good Shepherd, whose
the Sheep are, the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls; the chief Shepherd, did
design in the undertaking and exercise of his Pastoral Office, to give a Type
and Example unto all those who are to be called unto the same Office under him.
And if there be not a conformity unto him herein, no Man can assure his own
Conscience or the Church of God, that he is or can be lawfully called unto this
Office.

THE Qualifications of Christ unto, and the gracious Qualities of his Mind and
Soul in the discharge of his Pastoral Office, may be referred unto Four Heads.

1. THAT furniture with spiritual Gifts and Abilities by the communication of
the Holy Ghost unto him, in an unmeasurable fullness, whereby he was fitted for
the discharge of his Office. This is expressed with respect unto his
undertaking of it, Isa. 11.2, 3. Chap. 61.1, 2, 3. Luke 4.14. Herein was he
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Heb. 1.9. But this unction
of the Spirit is in a certain measure required in all who are called, or to be
called unto the Pastoral Office, Ephesians. 4.1. That there are Spiritual Powers,
Gifts and Abilities required unto the Gospel Ministry, I have at large declared
in another Treatise, as also what they are. And where there are none of these
Spiritual Abilities which are necessary unto the Edification of the Church in
the Administration of Gospel Ordinances, as in Prayer, Preaching, and the like,
no outward Call or Order can constitute any Man an Evangelical Pastor. As unto
particular Persons I will not contend, as unto an absolute nullity in the
Office by reason of their deficiency in Spiritual Gifts, unless it be gross,
and such as renders them utterly useless unto the Edification of the Church. I
only say, that no Man can in an orderly way and manner be called or set apart
unto this Office, in whom there are not some Indications of Gods designation of
him thereunto by his furniture with Spiritual Gifts, of Knowledge, Wisdom,
Understanding and utterance for Prayer and Preaching, with other Ministerial
Duties, in some competent measure.

2. COMPASSION and love to the Flock, were gloriously eminent in this great
Shepherd of the Sheep. After other evidences hereof, he gave them that signal
confirmation in laying down his Life for them. This Testimony of his love he
insists upon himself, Joh. 10. And herein also his example ought to lie
continually before the eyes of them who are called unto the Pastoral Office.
Their entrance should be accompanied with love to the Souls of Men; and if the
discharge of their Office be not animated with love unto their Flocks, Wolves
or Hirelings, or Thieves they may be, but Shepherds they are not. Neither is
the glory of the Gospel Ministry more lost or defaced in any thing, or by any
means, than by the evidence that is given among the most, of an inconformity
unto Jesus Christ in their love unto the Flock. Alas! it is scarce once thought
of amongst the most of them, who in various degrees take upon them the Pastoral
Office; where are the fruits of it? what evidence is given of it in any kind?
It is well, if some instead of laying down their own lives for them, do not by
innumerable ways destroy their Souls.

3. THERE is and was in this great Shepherd a continual watchfulness over the
whole Flock to keep it, to preserve it, to feed, to lead and cherish it, to
purify and cleanse it, until it be presented unspotted unto God. He does never
slumber nor sleep; he waters his Vineyard every moment, keeps it Night and
Day that none may hurt it; loses nothing of what is committed to him; see Is.
40.11. I speak not distinctly of previous Qualifications unto an outward call
only, but with a mixture of those Qualities and Duties which are required in
the discharge of this Office. And herein also is the Lord Christ to be our
example. And hereunto do belong, (1) Constant Prayer for the Flock. (2.)
Diligence in the dispensation of the Word, with Wisdom as unto Times, Seasons,
the state of the Flock in general, their light Knowledge, Ways, Walking,
Ignorance, Temptations, Trials, Defections, Weaknesses of all sorts, Growth and
Decays, etc. (3.) Personal Admonition, Exhortation, Consolation, Instruction,
as their particular cases do require. (4.) All with a design to keep them from
evil; and to present them without blame before Christ Jesus at the great day.
But these and things of the like nature, presenting themselves with some
earnestness unto my mind, I shall at present discharge my self of the thoughts
of them, hoping a more convenient place and season to give them a larger Treat;
and somewhat yet farther shall be spoken of them in the next Chapter.

4. ZEAL for the Glory of God in his whole Ministry, and in all the ends of it,
had its continual residence in the holy Soul of the great Shepherd. Hence it is
declared in an expression intimating that it was inexpressible. The zeal of thy
House has eaten me up. This also must accompany the discharge of the Pastoral
Office, or it will find no acceptance with him. And the want of it, is one of
those things which has filled the World with a dead, faithless, fruitless
Ministry.

5. AS he was absolutely in himself Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separate from
Sinners; so a conformity unto him in these things, and that in some degree of
eminency above others, is required in them who are called unto this Office.

AGAIN, none can or may take this Office upon him, or discharge the Duties of
it, which are peculiarly its own, with Authority, but he who is called and set
apart thereunto according to the mind of Jesus Christ. The continuation of all
Church Order and Power, of the regular Administration of all sacred Ordinances,
yea, of the very Being of the Church as it is Organical, depends on this
Assertion. Some deny the continuation of the Office it self, and of those
Duties which are peculiar unto it, as the Administration of the Sacraments.
Some judge, that Persons neither called nor set apart unto this Office, may
discharge all the Duties and the whole Work of it; some, that a temporary
delegation of Power unto any by the Church, is all the warranty is necessary
for the undertaking and discharge of this Office. Many have been the contests
about these things, occasioned by the ignorance and disorderly affections of
some Persons. I shall briefly represent the Truth herein with the Grounds of
it; and proceed to the consideration of the call it self, which is so necessary.

1. CHRIST himself in his own Person, and by his own Authority, was the Author
of this Office. He gave it, appointed it, erected it in the Church, by virtue
of his Sovereign Power and Authority, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28. As he
gave, appointed, ordained an extraordinary Office of Apostleship; so he
ordained, appointed and gave the ordinary Office of Pastorship or Teaching.
They have both the same Divine Original.

2. HE appointed this Office for continuance, or to abide in the Church unto
the consummation of all things, Ephesians. 4.13. Matthew. 28.19. And therefore he
took order by his Apostles, that for the continuation of this Office, Pastors,
Elders or Bishops, should be called and ordained unto the care and discharge of
it in all Churches; which was done by them accordingly, Act. 14.22, 23. Chap.
20.28. 1 Timothy 3.1, 2. Tit. 1.5. Wherein he gave Rule unto all Churches unto the
end of the World, and prescribed them their Duty.

3. ON this Office, and the discharge of it, he has laid the whole weight of
the Order, Rule and Edification of his Church, in his Name and by virtue of his
Authority, Act. 20.28. Col. 4.17. 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Rev.
2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Hereon a double necessity of the continuation of this
Office does depend; First, that which arises from the precept or command of
it, which made it necessary to the Church, on the account of the obedience
which it owes to Christ; and Secondly of its being the principal ordinary means
of all the ends of Christ in and toward his Church. Wherefore, although he can
himself feed his Church in the Wilderness, where it is deprived of all outward
instituted means of Edification; yet where this Office fails through its
neglect, there is nothing but disorder, confusion and destruction, that will
ensue thereon; no promise of Feeding or Edification.

4. THE Lord Christ has given Commands unto the Church, for Obedience unto
those who enjoy and exercise this Office among them. Now all these Commands are
needless and superfluous, nor can any obedience be yielded unto the Lord Christ
in their observance, unless there be a continuation of this Office. And the
Church loses as much in Grace and privilege, as it loses in Commands. For in
obedience unto the Commands of Christ, does Grace in its exercise consist, 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.7, 17.

5. THIS Office is accompanied with Power and Authority, which none can take or
assume to themselves. All Power and Authority, whether in things Spiritual or
Temporal, which is not either founded in the law of Nature, or collated by
Divine Ordination, is Usurpation and Tyranny. No Man can of himself take either
Sword. To invade an Office which includes Power and Authority over others, is
to disturb all Right, Natural, Divine and Civil. That such an Authority is
included in this Office, is evident, (1.) From the names ascribed unto them in
whom it is vested; as Pastors, Bishops, Elders, Rulers, all of them requiring
of it. (2.) From the Work prescribed unto them, which is feeding by Rule and
Teaching. (3.) From the execution of Church Power in Discipline, or the
exercise of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven committed unto them. (4.) From
the Commands given for Obedience unto them which respect Authority. (5.) From
their appointment to be the means and instruments of exerting the Authority of
Christ in the Church, which can be done no other way.

6. CHRIST has appointed a standing Rule of the calling of Men unto this
Office, as we shall see immediately. But if Men may enter upon it, and
discharge it, without any such Call, that Rule, with the way of the Call
prescribed, are altogether in vain. And there can be no greater affront unto
the Authority of Christ in his Church, than to act in it, in neglect of, or
opposition unto the Rule that he has appointed for the exercise of Power in it.

7. THERE is an accountable Trust committed unto those who undertake this
Office. The whole Flock, the Ministry it self, the Truths of the Gospel as to
the preservation of them all, are committed to them, Col. 4.17. 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 2.2, 16, 23. Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Heb. 13.17. They who must
give an account. Nothing can be more wicked or foolish, than for a Man to
intrude himself into a Trust, which is not committed unto him. They are branded
as profligately wicked, who attempt any such thing among Men, which cannot be
done without impudent falsification: And what shall he be esteemed who intrudes
himself into the highest Trust that any Creature is capable off in the Name of
Christ, and take upon him to give an account of its discharge at the last day,
without any divine call or warranty?

8. THERE are unto the discharge of this Office especial promises granted and
annexed of present Assistances, and future eternal Rewards, Matthew. 28.19. 1
Pet. 5.4. Either these promises belong unto them who take this Office on
themselves without any Call, or they do not. If they do not, then have they
neither any especial assistance in their Work, nor can expect any Reward of
their Labors. If it be said they have an interest in them, then the worst of
Men may obtain the benefit of divine promises, without any divine designation.

9. THE general force of the Rule, Heb. 5.4. includes a prohibition of
undertaking any sacred Office without a divine Call; and so the instances of
such prohibitions under the Old Testament, as unto the Duties annexed unto an
Office, as in the case of Vzziah invading the Priesthood, or of taking a
Ministerial Office without Call or Mission, as Jerem. 27.9, 14, 15. having
respect unto the order of Gods Institutions, may be pleaded in this case.

10. WHOEVER therefore takes upon him the Pastoral Office without a lawful
outward Call, does take unto himself Power and Authority without any divine
Warranty, which is a foundation of all disorder and confusion; interests
himself in an accountable Trust, no way committed unto him; has no promise of
Assistance in, or Reward for his Work, but ingageth in that which is
destructive of all Church Order, and consequently of the very Being of the
Church it self.

11. YET there are three things that are to be annexed unto this Assertion by
way of Limitation: As, (1.) Many things performed by virtue of Office in a way
of Authority, may be performed by others not called to Office, in a way of
Charity. Such are the moral Duties of Exhorting, Admonishing, Comforting,
Instructing and Praying with, and for one another. (2.) Spiritual Gifts may be
exercised unto the Edification of others, without Office-Power, where order and
opportunity do require it. But the constant exercise of Spiritual Gifts in
Preaching, with a refusal of undertaking a Ministerial Office, or without
design so to do upon a lawful Call, cannot be approved. (3.) The Rules proposed
concern only ordinary cases, and the ordinary state of the Church;
extraordinary cases are accompanied with a warranty in themselves for
extraordinary Actings and Duties.

12. THE Call of Persons unto the Pastoral Office is an Act and Duty of the
Church. It is not an Act of the political Magistrate, not of the Pope, not of
any single Prelate, but of the whole Church, unto whom the Lord Christ has
committed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. And indeed, although there be
great differences about the nature and manner of the Call of Men unto this
Office, yet none who understand ought of these things, can deny, but that it is
an Act and Duty of the Church; which the Church alone is empowered by Christ to
put forth and exert. But this will more fully appear in the consideration of
the nature and manner of this Call of Men unto the Pastoral Office, and the
actings of the Church therein.

THE Call of persons unto the Pastoral Office in the Church consists of Two
Parts. (1.) Election, (2.) Ordination, as it is commonly called, or sacred
Separation by Fasting and Prayer. As unto the former, Four things must be
enquired into. (1.) What is previous unto it or preparatory for it. (2.)
Wherein it does consist. (3.) Its necessity, or the demonstration of its Truth
and Institution. (4.) What influence it has into the communication of
Pastoral-Office-Power unto a Pastor so chosen.

1. THAT which is previous unto it, is, the Meetness of the Person for his
Office and Work, that is to be chosen. It can never be the Duty of the Church
to call or choose an unmeet, an unqualified, an unprepared Person unto this
Office. No pretended necessity, no outward motives can enable or warrant it so
to do, nor can it by any outward act, whatever the Rule or Solemnity of it be,
communicate Ministerial Authority unto Persons utterly unqualified for, and
incapable of the discharge of the Pastoral Office according unto the Rule of
the Scripture. And this has been one great means of debasing the Ministry,
and almost ruining the Church it self; either by the neglect of those who
suppose themselves entrusted with the whole power of Ordination, or by
Impositions on them by Secular Power, and Patrons of Livings as they are
called, with the stated Regulation of their Proceedings herein, by a defective
Law, whence there has not been a due regard unto the antecedent preparatory
Qualifications of those who are called unto the Ministry.

TWO ways is the Meetness of any one made known and to be judged of. (1.) By an
evidence given of the Qualifications in him beforementioned. The Church is not
to call or choose any one to Office who is not known unto them; of whose frame
of spirit, and walking, they have not had some experience; not a Novice, or one
lately come unto them. He must be one who by his ways and walking has obtained
a good Report, even among them that are without, so far as he is known; unless
they be enemies or scoffers; and one that has in some good measure evidenced
his Faith, Love and Obedience unto Jesus Christ in the Church. This is the
chief Trust that the Lord Christ has committed unto his Churches; and if they
are negligent herein, or if at all-adventures they will impose an Officer in
his House upon him without satisfaction of his Meetness upon due enquiry, it is
a great dishonor unto him, and provocation of him. Herein principally are
Churches made the Overseers of their own Purity and Edification. To deny them
an Ability of a right judgment herein, or a liberty for the use and exercise of
it, is Error and Tyranny. But that Flock which Christ purchased and purified
with his own blood, is thought by some to be little better than an Herd of
brute Beasts. Where there is a defect of this personal knowledge for want of
opportunity, it may be supplied by Testimonies of unquestionable Authority.
(2.) By a trial of his Gifts for Edification. These are those Spiritual
Endowments which the Lord Christ grants, and the Holy Spirit Works in the Minds
of Men, for this very end that the Church may be profited by them, 1 Cor. 12.7.
And we must at present take it for granted, that every true Church of Christ,
that is so in the matter and form of it, is able to judge in some competent
measure what Gifts of Men are suited unto their own Edification. But yet in
making a judgment hereof, one Directive means is the Advice of other Elders and
Churches, which they are obliged to make use off by virtue of the Communion of
Churches, and the avoidance of offense in their walk in that Communion.

2. AS to the nature of this Election, Call or Choice of a Person known, tried,
and judged, meetly qualified for the Pastoral Office, it is an Act of the whole
Church, that is, of the Fraternity with their Elders, if they have any. For a
Pastor may be chosen unto a Church which has other Teachers, Elders, or
Officers already instated in it. In this case their concurrence in the choice
intended, is necessary by way of common suffrage, not of Authority or
Office-Power. For Election is not an Act of Authority, but of Liberty and
Power, wherein the whole Church in the Fraternity is equal. If there be no
Officers stated in the Church before, as it was with the Churches in the
Primitive Times, on the first Ordination of Elders among them, this Election
belongs unto the Fraternity.

3. THAT therefore which we have now to prove, is this; That it is the Mind and
Will of Jesus Christ, that meet Persons should be called unto the Pastoral
Office (or any other Office in the Church) by the Election and Choice of the
Church it self whereunto they are called, antecedently unto a sacred solemn
separation unto their respective Offices: For,

1. UNDER the Old Testament there were three ways whereby Men were called unto
Office in the Church. (1.) They were so extraordinarily and immediately by the
nomination and designation of God himself. So Aaron was called unto the
Priesthood, and others afterward, as Samuel, to be Prophets. (2.) By a law of
Carnal Generation; so all the Priests of the Posterity of Aaron succeeded into
the Office of the Priesthood, without any other call. (3.) By the choice of the
people, which was the call of all the ordinary Elders and Rulers of the Church,
Deuteronomy. 1.13. (...). Give to your selves. It was required of the people, that
they should in the first place, make a judgment on their Qualifications for the
Office whereunto they were called. Men known unto them for Wise, Understanding,
Righteous, walking in the Fear of God, they were to look out, and then to
present them unto Moses for their separation unto Office, which is Election. It
is true, that Exodus 13.15. It is said that Moses chose the Elders. But it is
frequent in the Scripture, that where any thing is done by many, where one is
chief, that is ascribed indifferently either to the many, or to the chief
Director. So is it said, Israel sent Messengers, Numbers, 21.21. Moses,
speaking of the same things, says, I sent Messengers, Deuteronomy. 2.26. So 1 Chronicles.
19.19. They made peace with David and served him; which is 2 Samuel 10.19. They
made peace with Israel and served them. See also 2 King. 11.12. with 2 Chronicles.
23.11. as also 1 Chronicles. 16.1. with 2 Samuel 6.17. and the same may be observed in
other places. Wherefore the people chose these Elders under the conduct and
guidance of Moses, which directs us unto the right interpretation of Act 14.23.
whereof we shall speak immediately.

THE First of these ways was repeated in the foundation of the Evangelical
Church. Christ himself was called unto his Office by the Father, through the
unction of the spirit, Isa. 60. Heb. 5. And he himself called the Apostles and
Evangelists, in whom that call ceased. The second ordinary way by the privilege
of natural Generation of the stock of the Priests, was utterly abolished. The
third way only remained, for the ordinary continuation of the Church; namely,
by the Choice and Election of the Church it self, with solemn Separation and
Dedication by Officers extraordinary or ordinary.

THE first instance of the Choice of a Church Officer had a mixture in it of
the first and later way, in the case of Matthias. As he was able to be a
Church Officer he had the choice and consent of the Church; as he was to be an
Apostle or an extraordinary Officer, there was an immediate divine disposition
of him into his Office; the latter to give him Apostolical Authority, the
former to make him a president of the future actings of the Church in the call
of their Officers.

I say this being the first example and pattern of the calling of any Person
unto Office in the Christian Church State, wherein there was an interposition
of the ordinary actings of Men, is established as a Rule and President not to
be changed, altered or departed from, in any Age of the Church whatever. It is
so, as unto what was of common Right and Equity, which belonged unto the whole
Church. And I cannot but wonder, how Men durst ever reject and disanul this
divine Example and Rule. It will not avail them to say, that it is only a
matter of Fact, and not a precept or institution that is recorded. For, (1.) It
is a Fact left on record in the holy Scripture for our Instruction and
Direction. (2.) It is an example of the Apostles and the whole Church proposed
unto us, which in all things, not otherwise determined, has the force of an
institution. (3.) If there was no more in it but this, that we have a matter of
common Right, determined and applied by the Wisdom of the Apostles, and the
entire Church of Believers at that time in the World, it were an impiety to
depart from it, unless in case of the utmost necessity.

WHEREAS, what is here recorded was in the call of an Apostle, it strengthens
the Argument which hence we plead. For if in the extraordinary call of an
Apostle, it was the mind of Christ, that the Fraternity or Multitude should
have the liberty of their suffrage, how much more is it certainly his mind,
that in the ordinary call of their own peculiar Officers, in whom, under him,
the concernment is their own only, that this Right should be continued unto
them?

THE order of the proceeding of the Church herein is distinctly declared. For,
(1.) The number of the Church at that time, that is of the Men, was about an
Hundred and Twenty, v. 15. (2.) They were assembled all together in one place,
so as that Peter stood up in the midst of them, v. 15. (3.) Peter in the name
of the rest of the Apostles, declares unto them the necessity of choosing one
to be substituted in the room of Judas, v. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. (4.) He limits
the choice of him unto the especial Qualification of being a meet witness of
the Resurrection of Christ, unto those who constantly accompanied him with
themselves from the Baptism of John, that is, his being Baptized by him,
whereon he began his public Ministry. (5.) Among these they were left at their
liberty to nominate any two, who were to be left unto the lot for a
determination whether of them God designed unto the Office. (6.) Hereon the
whole multitude (...), appointed Two; that is the (...), the Men and Brethren,
unto whom Peter spoke, v. 16. did so. (7.) The same Persons to promote the
work, prayed and gave forth their Lots, v. 24.26. (8) (...) Matthias was by the
common suffrage of the whole Church, reckoned unto the number of the Apostles.

I say not that these things were done by the Disciples in distinction from
Peter and the rest of the Apostles, but in conjunction with them. Peter did
nothing without them; nor did they any thing without him.

THE exception of Bellarmine and others, against this Testimony, is, that it
was a grant and a condescension in Peter, and not a declaration of the Right of
the Church; that it was an extraordinary case; that the determination of the
whole was by Lot; are of no validity. The pretended concession of Peter is a
figment; the case was so extraordinary, as to include in it all ordinary cases,
for the substance of them. And although the ultimate determination of the
Individual Person, which was necessary unto his Apostleship, was immediately
Divine by Lot; yet here is all granted unto the people, in their choosing and
appointing Two, in their Praying, in their casting Lots, in their voluntary
opprobatory Suffrage, that is desired.

THIS blessed Example given us by the Wisdom of the Apostles, yea, of the
spirit of God in them, being eminently suited unto the nature of the thing it
self, as we shall see immediately, compliant with all other directions, and
Apostolical examples in the like case, is rather to be followed, than the
practice of some degenerate Churches, who to cover the turpitude of acting in
deserting this Example and Rule, do make use of a mock-shew and pretense of
that which really they deny, reject and oppose.

THE Second Example we have of the practice of the Apostles in this case,
whereby the preceding Rule is confirmed, is given us, Act. 6. in the Election
of the Deacons. Had there ensued after the choice of Matthias an instance of a
diverse practice, by an exclusion of the consent of the people, the former
might have been evaded, as that which was absolutely extraordinary, and not
obliging unto the Church. But this was the very next instance of the call of
any Church Officer; and it was the first appointment of any ordinary Officers
in the Christian Church. For it falling out in the very year of Christ's
Ascension, there is no mention of any ordinary Elders distinct from the
Apostles, ordained in that Church. For all the Apostles themselves yet abiding
there for the most part of this time, making only some occasional Excursions
unto other places, were able to take care of the Rule of the Church, and the
Preaching of the Word. They are indeed mentioned as those who were well known
in the Church not long afterward, Chap. 11.30. But the first instance of the
Call or Ordinary Teaching-Elders or Pastors is not recorded. That of Deacons is
so by reason of the occasion of it. And we may observe concerning it unto our
purpose,

1. THAT the institution of the Office it self was of Apostolical Authority,
and that fullness of Church Power wherewith they were furnished by Jesus Christ.

2. THAT they did not exert that Authority but upon such Reasons of it, as were
satisfactory to the Church; which they declare, v. 2.

3. THAT the action is ascribed to the Twelve in general, without naming any
person who spoke for the rest; which renders the pretense of the Romanists from
the former place, where Peter is said to have spoken unto the Disciples,
whereon they would have the Actings of the Church which ensued thereon, to have
been by his concession and grant, not of their own right, altogether vain. For
the rest of the Apostles were as much interested and concerned in what was then
spoken by Peter, as they were at this time, when the whole is ascribed unto the
Twelve.

4. THAT the Church was greatly multiplied that time, on the account of the
Conversion unto the Faith recorded in the foregoing Chapter. It is probable
indeed, that many, yea, the most of them were returned unto their own
Habitations; for the next year there were Churches in all Judea, Galilee and
Samaria, Chap. 9.31. And Peter went about throughout all Quarters to visit the
Saints that dwelt in them, ver. 32. of whose Conversion we read nothing but
that which fell out at Jerusalem at Pentecost; but a great multitude they were,
v. 1, 2.

5. THIS whole multitude of the Church, that is the Brethren, v. 3. assembled
in one place, being congregated by the Apostles, v. 2. who would not ordain any
thing wherein they were concerned, without their own consent.

6. THEY judged on the whole matter proposed unto them, and gave their
approbation thereof, before they entered upon the practice of it, v. 5. The
saying pleased the whole Multitude.

7. THE Qualifications of the Persons to be chosen unto the Office intended,
are declared by the Apostles, v. 3. of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost
and Wisdom.

8. THESE Qualities the multitude were to judge upon, and so absolutely of the
meetness of any for this Office.

9. THE choice is wholly committed and left unto them by the Apostles, as that
which of Right did belong unto them; look you out among you; which they made
use off, choosing them unto the Office by their common suffrage, v. 5.

10. HAVING thus chosen them, they presented them as their chosen Officers unto
the Apostles, to be by them set apart unto the exercise of their Office by
Prayer and Imposition of hands, v. 6.

IT is impossible, there should be a more evident convincing instance and
example of the free choice of Ecclesiastical Officers by the multitude or
fraternity of the Church, than is given us herein. Nor was there any Ground or
Reason why this Order and Process should be observed, why the Apostles would
not themselves nominate and appoint Persons whom they saw and knew meet for
this Office, to receive it, but that it was the Right and Liberty of the
People, according to the mind of Christ, to choose their own Officers, which
they would not abridge, nor infringe.

SO was it then, (...), says Chrysostom on the place, and so it ought now to
be; but the usage began then to decline. It were well if some would consider
how the Apostles at that time treated that multitude of the people, which is so
much now despised, and utterly excluded from all concern in Church Affairs, but
what consist in servile subjection. But they have, in this pattern and
president for the future ordering of the calling of meet Persons to Office in
the Church, their Interest, Power, and Privilege secured unto them, so as that
they can never justly be deprived of it. And if there were nothing herein, but
only a Record of the Wisdom of the Apostles in managing Church Affairs, it is
mavelous to me, that any who would be thought to succeed them in any part of
their Trust and Office, should dare to depart from the example set before them
by the Holy Ghost in them, preferring their own ways and inventions above it. I
shall ever judge, that there is more safety, in a strict adherence unto this
Apostolical Practice and Example, than in a compliance with all the Canons of
Councils or Churches afterward.

THE only Objection usually insisted on, that is by Bellarmine and those that
follow him, is, That this being the Election of Deacons to manage the Alms of
the Church, that is somewhat of their Temporals, nothing can thence be
concluded unto the right or way of Calling Bishops, Pastors or Elders, who are
to take care of the Souls of the People. They may indeed be able to judge of
the fitness of them who are to be entrusted with their Purses, or what they are
willing to give out of them; but it does not thence follow, that they are able
to judge of the fitness of those who are to be their Spiritual Pastors, nor to
have the choice of them.

NOTHING can be weaker than this pretense or evasion. For, (1.) The Question is
concerning the Calling of Persons unto Office in the Church in general, whereof
we have here a Rule, whereunto no exception is any way entered. (2.) This cannot
be fairly pleaded by them who appoint Deacons to Preach, Baptize and Officiate
publicly in all holy things, excepting only the Administration of the
Eucharist. (3.) If the people are meet and able to judge of them who are of
honest report, and full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, which is here required of
them, they are able to judge who are meet to be their Pastors. (4.) The
Argument holds strongly on the other side; namely, that if it be right and
equal, if it be of divine appointment and Apostolical practice, that the people
should choose those who were to Collect and Distribute their Charitable
Benevolence because of their concernment therein, much more are they to enjoy
the same Liberty, Right and Privilege in the choice of their Pastors, unto whom
they commit the care of their Souls, and submit themselves unto their Authority
in the Lord.

3. ACCORDINGLY they did use the same liberty in the choice of their Elders,
Act. 14.23. (...): That is, say Erasmus, Vatablus, Beza, all our old English
Translations, appointing, ordaining, creating Elders by Election or the
suffrage of the Disciples, having prayed with Fastings. The whole Order of the
sacred separation of Persons qualified unto the Office of the Ministry, that
is, to be Bishops, Elders or Pastors, is here clearly represented. For, (1.)
They were chosen by the people; the Apostles who were present, namely Paul and
Barnabas presiding in the Action, directing of it and confirming that by their
consent with them. (2.) A time of Prayer and Fasting was appointed for the
Action, or discharge of the Duty of the Church herein. (3.) When they were so
chosen, the Apostles present solemnly prayed, whereby their Ordination was
complete. And those who would have the (...) here mentioned to be, (...), or an
Authoritative imposition of hands, wherein this Ordination did consist, do say
there is an (...) in the words; that is they feign a disorder in them, to serve
their own Hypothesis. For they suppose that their complete Ordination was
effected, before there was any Prayer with Fasting; for by imposition of Hands
in their judgment, Ordination is completed; so Bellarmine, A Lapide, on the
place, with those that follow them. But first to pervert the true signification
of the Word, and then to give countenance unto that wresting of it by assigning
a disorder unto the Words of the whole Sentence, and that such a disorder as
makes in their judgment a false Representation of the matter of Fact related,
is a way of the Interpretation of Scripture which will serve any turn. (4.)
This was done in every Church, or in every Congregation, as Tindal renders the
Word; namely, in all the particular Congregations that were gathered in those
parts; for that Collection and Constitution did always precede the Election and
Ordination of their Officers, as is plain in this place; as also Tit. 1.5. So
far is it from Truth, that the Being of Churches depends on the Successive
Ordination of their Officers, that the Church essentially considered, is always
antecedent unto their Being and Call.

BUT because it is some Men's interest to entangle things plain and clear enough
in themselves, I shall consider the Objections unto this rendition of the
Words. The whole of it lies against the signification, use and application of
(...). Now although we do not here argue merely from the signification of the
Word, but from the representation of the matter of Fact made in the context;
yet I shall observe some things sufficient for the removal of that Objection:
As,

1. THE native signification of (...), by virtue of its Composition, is, to
lift up, or stretch forth the hands, or an hand. And hereunto the LXX have
respect, Isa. 58.9. where they render (...), the putting forth of the finger,
which is used in an ill sense, by (...) is the same with (...), nor is it ever
used in any other signification.

2. THE first constant use of it in things Political or Civil, and so
consequently Ecclesiastical, is to Choose, Elect, Design or Create any Person
an Officer, Magistrate or Ruler, by Suffrage, or common consent of those
concerned. And this was usually done with making bare the hand and arm, with
lifting up, as Aristophanes witnesses. (...). He is a great stranger unto
these things, who knows not that among the Greeks, especially the Athenians,
from whom the use of this Word is borrowed or taken, (...) was an act (...) of
the whole Assembly of the people in the choice of their Officers and
Magistrates. (...) is by common Suffrage to decree and determine of any Thing,
Law, or Order; and when applied unto Persons, it signifies their Choice and
Designation to Office. So is it used in the first sense by Demosthenes, Orat.
in Timoch. (...) The people confirmed my sayings by their Suffrage: And in the
other, Philip. 1. (...); Neither the Senate, nor the People choosing him to his
Office. So is the Passive Verb used to be created by Suffrages. (...) was the
act of choosing, whose effect was (...), the determining Vote or Suffrage.
Porrexerunt manus, Psephisma notum est, says Cicero, speaking of the manner of
the Greeks. And when there was a division in choice, it was determined by the
greater Suffrage Thucid. Lib. 3. (...). As many instances of this nature may be
produced, as there are reports of calling Men unto Magistracy by Election in
the Greek Historians. And all the farther compositions of the Word do signify
to choose, confirm, or to abrogate by common Suffrages.

3. THE Word is but once more used in the New Testament, 2 Cor. 8.19. where it
plainly signifies Election and Choice of a Person to an Employment, (...): He
was chosen of the Churches to travel with us.

4. IT is acknowledged, that after this was the common use of the Word, it was
applied to signify the thing it self, and not the manner of doing it. Hence it
is used sometimes for the obtaining or collation of Authority, or Dignity or
Magistracy, any manner of way, though not by Election. To appoint, to create.
But this was by an abusive application of the Word, to express the thing it
self intended, without regard unto its signification and proper use. Why such a
use of it should be here admitted, no Reason can be given. For in all other
places on such occasions, the Apostles did admit and direct the Churches to use
their liberty in their choice. So the Apostles and Elders, with the whole
Church, sent chosen Men of their own Company to Antioch, such as they chose by
common Suffrage for that end; so again ver. 25. I will send whom you shall
approve, 1 Cor. 16.3. The Church chose them, the Apostle sent him who was
chosen by the Church to be our Companion, 2 Cor. 8.19. Look out from among your
selves, Act. 6. If on all these and the like occasions, the Apostles did guide
and direct the people in their right and use of their Liberty, as unto the
Election of Persons unto Offices and Employments, when the Churches themselves
are concerned, what reason is there to depart from the proper and usual
signification of the Word in this place, denoting nothing but what was the
common practice of the Apostles on the like occasions?

5. THAT which alone is objected hereunto by Bellarmine and others who follow
him, and borrow their whole in this case from him, namely that (...)
Grammatically agreeing with and regulated by Paul and Barnabas, denotes their
act, and not any act of the people, is of no force. For, (1.) Paul and Barnabas
did preside in the whole action, helping, ordering and disposing of the people
in the discharge of their Duty, as is meet to be done by some on all the like
occasions. And therefore it is truly said of them, that they appointed Elders
by the Suffrage of the people. (2.) I have showed instances before out of the
Scripture, that when a thing is done by the whole people, it is usual to
ascribe it unto him or them who were chief therein, as elsewhere the same thing
is ascribed unto the whole people.

THE same Authors contend that the liberty of choosing their own Officers or
Elders, such as it was, was granted unto them or permitted by way of
condescension for a Season; and not made use of by virtue of any right in them
thereunto. But this permission is a mere imagination. It was according to the
mind of Christ, that the Churches should choose their own Elders, or it was
not. If it were not, the Apostles would not have permitted it; and if it were,
they ought to ordain it, and practice according to it, as they did. Nor is such
a constant Apostolical Practice proposed for the direction of the Church in all
Ages, to be ascribed unto such an Original as Condescension and Permission. Yea
it is evident, that it arose from the most fundamental principles of the
constitution and nature of the Gospel Churches, and was only a regular pursuit
and practice of them: For,

1. THE Calling of Bishops, Pastors, Elders, is an Act of the power of the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven. But these Keys are originally and properly given unto
the whole Church, unto the Elders of it only Ministerially; and as unto
exercise Pastors are eyes to the Church: But God and Nature design in the first
place, sight to the whole Body, to the whole Person, thereunto it is granted
both subjectively and finally, but actually it is peculiarly seated in the eye.
So is it in the grant of Church Power, it is given to the whole Church, though
to be exercised only by its Elders.

THAT the grant of the Keys unto Peter was in the Person and as the
representative of the whole confessing Church, is the known judgment of Austin
and a multitude of Divines that follow him. So he fully expresses himself,
Tractat. 124. in Johan. Peter the Apostle bare in a general figure the person
of the Church. For as unto what belonged unto himself, he was by Nature one
Man, by Grace one Christian, and of special more abounding Grace, one and the
chief Apostle. But when it was said unto him, I will give unto thee the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. he signified the whole Church, etc. Again, the
Church which is founded in Christ, received from him in (the person of) Peter,
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the power of binding and loosing.

UNTO whom these Keys are granted, they according to their distinct interests
in that grant, have the Right and Power of Calling their Bishops, Pastors or
Elders; for in the exercise of that Trust and Power, it does consist. But this
is made unto the whole Church. And as there are in a Church already constituted
several sorts of persons, as some are Elders, others are of the people only,
this Right resideth in them, and is acted by them according to their respective
capacities, as limited by the light of nature and divine institution, which is,
that the Election of them should belong unto the body of the people, and their
Authoritative Designation or Ordination unto the Elders. And when in any place
the supreme Magistrate is a Member or Part of the Church, he has also his:
peculiar Right herein.

THAT the power of the Keys is thus granted originally and fundamentally unto
the whole Church, is undeniably confirmed by Two Arguments.

1. THE Church it self is the Wife, the Spouse, the Bride, the Queen of the
Husband and King of the Church Christ Jesus, Psalm. 45.10. John 3.29. Revel.
21.9. Chap. 22.17. Matthew. 25.1, 5, 6. Other Wife Christ has none, nor has the
Church any other Husband. Now to whom should the Keys of the House be committed
but unto the Bride? There is, I confess, another who claims the Keys to be his
own, but withal, he makes himself the Head and Husband of the Church,
proclaiming himself, not only to be an Adulterer with that Harlot which he
calls the Church, but a Tyrant also, in that pretending to be her Husband he
will not trust her with the Keys of his House, which Christ has done with his
Spouse. And whereas by the Canon Law every Bishop is the Husband or Spouse of
his Diocesan Church, for the most part they commit an open Rape upon the
people, taking them without their consent; at least are not chosen by them,
which yet is essential unto a lawful Marriage. And the Bride of Christ comes no
otherwise so to be, but by the voluntary choice of him to be her Husband.

FOR the Officers or Rulers of the Church, they do belong unto it as hers, 1
Cor. 3.21.22. And Stewards in the House, 1 Cor. 4.1. the Servants of the Church
for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4.5.

IF the Lord Christ have the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, of his own
House, Heb. 3. If the Church it self be the Spouse of Christ, the Mother of the
Family, Psalm. 68.13. the Bride, the Lambs Wife; and if all the Officers of the
Church be but Stewards and Servants in the House and unto the Family; if the
Lord Christ do make a grant of these Keys unto any, whereon the disposal of all
things in this House and Family does depend, the Question is, Whether he has
originally granted them unto his holy Spouse to dispose off according unto her
judgment and duty, or unto any Servants in the House, to dispose of her and all
her concernments, at their pleasure?

2. THE power of the Keys as unto binding and loosing, and consequently as unto
all other acts thence proceeding, is expressly granted unto the whole Church,
Matthew. 18.17, 18. If he shall neglect to hear them, tell the Church; but if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man and a
Publican; verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be
bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven. What Church it is that is here intended, we have proved before; and
that the Church is entrusted with the power of binding and loosing. And what is
the part of the Body of the people herein, the Apostle declares; 1 Cor. 5.4. 2
Cor. 2.6.

SECONDLY, This Right exemplified in Apostolical Practice, is comprehended in
the Commands given unto the Church, or Body of the People, with respect unto
Teachers and Rulers of all sorts; for unto them it is in a multitude of places
given in charge that they should discern and try false Prophets, fly from them;
try Spirits, or such as pretend Spiritual Gifts or Offices; reject them who
Preach false Doctrine, to give testimony unto them that are to be in Office;
with sundry other things of the like nature, which all of them do suppose, or
cannot be discharged without a Right in them to choose the worthy, and reject
the unworthy, as Cyprian speaks. See Matthew. 7.17. Joh. ^5.39. Gal. 11.9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20, 21. 1 John 4.1. 2 John 10.11.

WHAT is objected hereunto from the unfitness and disability of the people, to
make a right judgment concerning them who are to be their Pastors and Rulers,
labors with a threefold weakness. For, (1.) It reflects dishonor upon the
Wisdom of Christ in Commanding them the observance and discharge of such
Duties, as they are no way meet for. (2.) It proceeds upon a supposition of
that degenerate state of Churches in their Members, as to Light, Knowledge,
Wisdom and Holiness, which they are for the most part fallen into; which must
not be allowed to have the force of Argument in it; when it is to be lamented,
and ought to be reformed. (3.) It supposes that there is no supply of
Assistance provided for the people, in the discharge of their Duty to guide and
direct them therein; which is otherwise; seeing the Elders of the Church
wherein any such Election is made, and those of other Churches in Communion
with that Church, are by the common advice and declaration of their judgment,
to be Assistant unto them.

THIRDLY, The Church is a voluntary Society. Persons otherwise absolutely free,
as unto all the Rules, Laws and Ends of such a Society, do of their own Wills
and free Choice coalesce into it. This is the Original of all Churches, as has
been declared. They gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the Will
of God, 2 Cor. 8.5. Herein neither by Prescription, nor Tradition, nor
Succession, has any one more Power or Authority than another; but they are all
equal. It is gathered into this Society merely by the Authority of Christ; and
where it is so Collected, it has neither Right, Power, Privilege, Rules nor
Bonds as such, but what are given, prescribed and limited by the Institution
and Laws of Christ. Moreover, it abides and continues on the same Grounds and
Principles, as whereon it was Collected, namely, the Wills of the Members of it
subjected unto the Commands of Christ. This is as necessary unto its present
continuance in all its Members, as it was in its first Plantation. It is not
like the Political Societies of the World, which being first established by
force or consent, bring a necessity on all that are born in them and under
them, to comply with their Rule and Laws. For Men may, and in many cases ought
to submit unto the disposal of temporal things, in a way, it may be, not
convenient for them, which they judge not well off, and which in many things is
not unto their advantage. And this may be just and equal, because the special
good which every one would aim at, being not absolutely so, may be out-balanced
by a general good, nor alterable, but by the prejudice of that which is good in
particular. But with reference unto things Spiritual and Eternal it is not so.
No Man can by any previous Law be concluded as unto his interest in such
things; nor is there any General Good to be attained by the loss of any of
them. None therefore can coalesce in such a Society, or adhere unto it, or be
any way belonging unto it, but by his own free choice and consent. And it is
enquired, how it is possible that any Rule, Authority, Power or Office, should
arise or be erected in such a Society? We speak of that which is ordinary; for
he by whom this Church State is erected and appointed, may and did appoint in
it, and over it, extraordinary Officers for a season. And we do suppose, that
as he has by his Divine Authority instituted and appointed that such Societies
shall be, that he has made grant of Privileges and Powers to them proper and
sufficient for this end; as also that he has given Laws and Rules, by the
observance whereof, they may be made partakers of those Privileges and Powers,
with a Right unto their Exercise.

ON these suppositions in a Society absolutely voluntary, among those who in
their conjunction into it, by their own consent, are every way equal, There can
but three things be required unto the actual constitution of Rule and Office
among them. And the First is, That there be some among them that are fitted and
qualified for the Discharge of such an Office in a peculiar manner above
others. This is previous unto all Government, beyond that which is purely
natural and necessary. Principio rerum, gentium nationumque imperium penes
Reges erat; quos ad fastigium hujus Majestatis, non popularis Ambitio, sed
spectata inter bonos moderatio provehebat. Just. So it was in the World, so it
was in the Church. Praesident probati quique seniores, honorem istum non pretio
sed testimonio adepti. Tertull. This preparation and furniture of some Persons
with Abilities and meet Qualifications for Office and Work in the Church, the
Lord Christ has taken on himself, and does and will effect it in all
Generations. Without this there can be neither Office, nor Rule, nor Order in
the Church.

2. WHEREAS, there is a new Relation to be made or created between a Pastor,
Bishop or Elder, and the Church, which was not before between them, (a Bishop
and a Church, a Pastor and a Flock are Relata's) it must be introduced at the
same time by the mutual voluntary acts of one another, or of each party. For
one of the Relata can, as such, have no being or existence without the other.
Now this can no otherwise be, but by the consent and voluntary subjection of
the Church unto persons so antecedently qualified for Office, according to the
Law and Will of Christ. For it cannot be done by the Delegation of Power and
Authority from any other Superior or Equal unto them that do receive it.
Neither the nature of this Power, which is incapable of such a Delegation, nor
the Relation unto Christ of all those who are Pastors of the Church, will admit
of an Interposition of Authority by way of Delegation of Power from themselves
in other Men, which would make them their Ministers, and not Christ's; nor is it
consistent with the nature of such a voluntary Society. This therefore can no
way be done, but by free Choice, Election, Consent or Approbation. It cannot, I
say, be so regularly. How far an Irregularity herein may vitiate the whole Call
of a Minister, we do not now enquire.

NOW this Choice or Election does not communicate a Power from them that choose
unto them that are chosen, as though
such a Power as that whereunto they are called, should be formally inherent in
the choosers, antecedent unto such choice. For this would make those that are
chosen to be their Minister only; and to act all things in their Name, and by
virtue of Authority derived from them. It is only an Instrumental, Ministerial
means to enstate them in that Power and Authority which is given unto such
Officers by the Constitution and Laws of Christ, whose Ministers thereon they
are. These Gifts, Offices, and Officers, being granted by Christ unto the
Churches, Ephesians. 4.12. wherever there is a Church called according to his
Mind, they do in and by their Choice of them, submit themselves unto them in
the Lord, according unto all the Powers and Duties wherewith they are by him
entrusted, and whereunto they are called.

3. IT is required that Persons so chosen, so submitted unto, be so solemnly
separated, dedicated unto, and confirmed in their Office by Fasting and Prayer.
As this is consonant unto the Light of Nature, which directs unto a solemnity
in the susception of public Officers; whence proceeds the Coronation of Kings,
which gives them not their Title, but solemnly proclaims it, which on many
accounts is unto the advantage of Government; so it is prescribed unto the
Church in this case by especial Institution. But hereof I shall speak farther
immediately.

THIS Order of calling Men unto the Pastoral Office, namely by their previous
Qualifications for the Ministry, whereby a general designation of the Persons
to be called is made by Christ himself; the orderly Choice or Election of him
in a voluntary subjection unto him in the Lord, according to the Mind of
Christ, by the Church it self; followed with solemn Ordination, or setting
apart unto the Office and discharge of it by Prayer with Fasting, all in
obedience unto the Commands and Institution of Christ, whereunto the
communication of Office-Power and Privilege, is by Law-constitution annexed, is
suited unto the light of Reason, in all such cases, the nature of Gospel
Societies in Order or Churches; the ends of the Ministry, the Power committed
by Christ unto the Church, and confirmed by Apostolical Practice and Example.

HEREIN we rest, without any further dispute or limiting the Formal Cause of
the Communication of Office-Power unto any one Act or Duty of the Church, or of
the Bishops or Elders of it. All the three things mentioned are essential
thereunto; and when any of them are utterly neglected, where they are neither
formally nor virtually, there is no lawful regular Call unto the Ministry
according to the Mind of Christ.

THIS Order was a long time observed in the Ancient Church inviolate; and the
footsteps of it may be traced through all Ages of the Church; although it
first gradually decayed, then was perverted and corrupted, until it issued (as
in the Roman Church) in a Pageant and Show, instead of the Reality of the
things themselves: For the Trial and Approbation of spiritual Endowments
previously necessary unto the Call of any, was left unto the Pedantick
Examination of the Bishops Domestics, who knew nothing of them in themselves;
the Election and Approbation of the people was turned into a mock-shew in the
sight of God and Men, a Deacon calling out, That if any had Objections against
him who was to be Ordained, they should come forth and speak; Whereunto another
cries out of a corner by compact, He is learned and worthy; and Ordination was
esteemed to consist only in the outward sign of Imposition of Hands, with some
other Ceremonies annexed thereunto, whereby, without any other
consideration, there ensued a flux of Power from the Ordainers unto the
ordained.

BUT from the beginning it was not so. And some few Instances of the Right of
the people, and the exercise of it in the Choice of their own Pastors, may be
touched on in our Passage. Clem. Epist. ad Corinth. affirms, That the Apostles
themselves appointed approved Persons unto the Office of the Ministry, (...),
by or with the consent or choice of the whole Church. (...), is to enact by
common consent; which makes it somewhat strange, that a learned Man should
think that the Right of the People in Elections is excluded in this very place
by Clemens, from what is assigned unto the Apostles in Ordination.

IGNAT. Epist, ad Philadelph. (...), writing to the Fraternity of the Church,
It becomes you, as a Church of God, to Choose or Ordain a Bishop.

TERTVLL. APOL. Praesident probati quique Seniores, honorem istum non pretio,
sed Testimonio adepti. The Elders came unto their Honor or Office by the
Testimony of the people; that is by their suffrage in their Election.

ORIGIN, in the close of his last Book against Celsus, discoursing expressly of
the Calling and Constitution of Churches or Cities of God, speaking of the
Elders and Rulers of them, affirms, That they are (...), Chosen to their Office
by the Churches which they do Rule.

THE Testimony given by Cyprian in sundry places unto this Right of the People,
especially in Epist. 68. unto the Elders and People of some Churches in Spain,
is so known, so frequently urged and excepted against to so little purpose, as
that it is no way needful to insist again upon it. Some few things I shall only
observe concerning, and out of that Epistle: As,

1. IT was not a single Epistle of his own more ordinary occasions, but a
determination upon a weighty Question made by a Synod of Bishops or Elders, in
whose Name, as well as that of Cyprian, it was written and sent unto the
Churches who had craved their advice.

2. HE does not only assert the Right of the people to choose worthy persons to
be their Bishops, and reject those that are unworthy; but also industriously
proves it so to be their Right by Divine Institution and Appointment.

3. HE declares it to be the Sin of the People, if they neglect the use and
exercise of their Right and Power in rejecting and withdrawing themselves from
the Communion of Unworthy Pastors, and choosing others in their room.

4. HE affirms that this was the Practice, not only of the Churches of Africa,
but of those in most of the other Provinces of the Empire. Some passages in his
Discourse, wherein all these things are asserted, I shall transcribe in the
Order wherein they lie in the Epistle.

NEC sibi plebs blandiatur, quasi immunis esse a contagio delicti possit cum
sacerdote peccatore communicans, and ad injustum and illicitum Praepositi sui
Episcopatum consensum suum commodans. Propter quod plebs obsequens praeceptis
Dominicis and Deum metuens, a peccatore praeposito separare se debet; nec se ad
Sacrilegi Sacerdotis Sacrificia miscere; quando ipsa maxim habeat potestatem
vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi; quod and ipsum videmus
de Divina Authoritate descendere.

FOR this cause the people obedient to the Commands of our Lord, and fearing
God, ought to separate themselves from a wicked Bishop, nor mix themselves with
the Worship of a Sacrilegious Priest. For they principally have the power of
choosing the worthy Priests, and rejecting the unworthy; which comes from
Divine Authority or Appointment; as he proves from the Old and New Testament.
Nothing can be spoken more fully representing the Truth which we plead for. He
assigns unto the people a Right and Power of separating from unworthy Pastors,
of rejecting or deposing them, and that granted to them by Divine Authority.

AND this Power of Election in the people, he proves from the Apostolical
Practice before insisted on. Quod postea secundum Divina Magisteria observatur
in Actis Apostolorum, quando in Ordinando in locum Judae Episcopo, Petrus ad
plebem loquitur. Surrexit, inquit, Petrus in medio discentium, fuit autem turba
in uno. Nec hoc in Episcoporum tantum and Sacerdotum, sed in Diaconorum
Ordinationibus observasse Apostolos, de quo and ipso in Actis eorum Scriptum
est. Et convocarunt, inquit, duodecim, totam plebem Discipulorum, and dixerunt
eis, etc.

ACCORDING unto the Divine Commands the same course was observed in the Acts of
the Apostles, whereof he gives instances in the Election of Matthias, Act. 1.
and of the Deacons, Chap. 6.

AND afterward speaking of Ordination, De Vniversae Fraternitatis Suffragio,
by the Suffrage of the whole Brotherhood of the Church; he says, Diligenter de
traditione Divina, and Apostolica observatione servandum est and tenendum apud
nos quoque, ut fere per universas provincias tenetur: According to which Divine
Tradition and Apostolical Practice, this custom is to be preserved and kept
amongst us also, as it is almost through all the Provinces.

THOSE who are not moved with his Authority, yet, I think have reason to
believe him in a matter of Fact, of what was done every where, or almost every
where, in his own days; and they may take Time to answer his Reasons when they
can, which comprize the substance of all that we plead in this Case.

BUT the Testimonies in following Ages given unto this Right and Power of the
People in choosing their own Church Officers, Bishops and others, recorded in
the Decrees of Councils, the Writings of the learned Men in them, the Rescripts
of Popes, and Constitutions of Emperors, are so fully and faithfully Collected
by Blondellus in the Third Part of his Apology for the judgment of Hierom about
Episcopacy, as that nothing can be added unto his diligence, nor is there any
need of farther confirmation of the Truth in this behalf.

THE pretense also of Bellarmine, and others who follow him, and borrow* their
conceits from him, that this liberty of the people in choosing their own
Bishops and Pastors, was granted unto them at first by way of Indulgence or
Connivence; and that being abused by them, and turned into disorder, was
gradually taken from them, until it issued in that shameful mocking of God and
Man, which is in use in the Roman Church, when at the Ordination of a Bishop or
Priest one Deacon makes a demand, Whether the Person to be Ordained be approved
by the people, and another answers out of a corner That the people approve him,
have been so confuted by Protestant Writers of all sorts, that it is needless
to insist any longer on them.

INDEED, the Concessions that are made, that this Ancient Practice of the
Church, in the peoples choosing their own Officers (which to deny, is all one
as to deny that the Sun gives Light at Noonday) is, as unto its Right, by
various degrees transferred unto Popes, Patrons and Bishops, with a
Representation in a mere Pageantry, of the peoples liberty to make Objections
against them that are to be Ordained, are as fair a concession of the gradual
Apostasy of Churches from their Original Order and Constitution, as need be
desired.

THIS Power and Right which we assign unto the people, is not to act it self
only in a subsequent consent unto one that is Ordained, in the acceptance of
him to be their Bishop or Pastor. How far that may salve the defect and
disorder of the omission of previous Elections, and so preserve the Essence of
the Ministerial Call, I do not now enquire. But that which we plead for, is,
the Power and Right of Election to be exercised previously unto the solemn
Ordination or setting apart of any unto the Pastoral Office, communicative of
Office-Power in its own kind unto the person chosen.

THIS is part of that contest which for sundry Ages filled most Countries of
Europe with broils and disorders. Neither is there yet an end put unto it. But
in this present discourse we are not in the least concerned in these things.
For our Enquiry is what State and Order of Church Affairs is declared and
represented unto us in the Scripture. And therein there is not the least
intimation of any of those things from whence this Controversy did arise, and
whereon it does depend. Secular Endowments, Jurisdictions, Investiture, Rights
of Presentation, and the like, with respect unto the Evangelical Pastoral
Office, or its exercise in any place, which are the subject of these Contests,
are foreign unto all things that are directed in the Scriptures concerning
them, nor can be reduced unto any thing that belongs unto them. Wherefore,
whether this JVS PATRONATVS be consistent with Gospel-Institutions; whether it
may be continued with respect unto Lands, Tithes and Benefices; or how it may
be reconciled unto the Right of the People in the Choice of their own
Ecclesiastical Officers, from the different Acts, Objects and Ends required
unto the one and the other, are things not of our present consideration.

AND this we affirm to be agreeable unto natural Reason and Equity, to the
nature of Churches in their institution and ends, to all Authority and
Office-Power in the Church, necessary unto its Edification, with the security
of the Consciences of the Officers themselves, the preservation of due respect
and obedience unto them, constituted by the Institution of Christ himself in
his Apostles, and the practice of the Primitive Church. Wherefore, the utter
despoiling of the Church, of the Disciples, of those gathered in Church
Societies by his Authority and Command, of this Right and Liberty, may be
esteemed a Sacrilege of an higher nature, than sundry other things which are
reproached as criminal under that Name.

AND if any shall yet farther appear to justify this deprivation of the Right
laid claim unto, and the exclusion of the people from their Ancient Possession
with sobriety of Argument and Reason, the whole cause may be yet farther
debated from principles of natural Light and Equity, from maxims of Law and
Polity, from the necessity of the Ends of Church Order and Power, from the
moral impossibility of any other way of the conveyance of Ecclesiastical
Office-Power, as well as from Evangelical Institution and the practice of the
first Churches.

IT will be Objected, I know, that the Restoration of this Liberty unto the
people, will overthrow that jus Patronatus, or Right of presenting unto Livings
and Preferments, which is established by Law in this Nation, and so under a
pretense of restoring unto the people their Right in common, destroy other Men's
undoubted Rights in their own enclosures.

BUT this Election of the Church, does not actually and immediately instate the
persons chosen in the Office whereunto he is chosen; nor give actual Right unto
its Exercise. It is required moreover, that he be solemnly set apart unto his
Office in and by the Church with Fasting and Prayer. That there should be some
kind of peculiar Prayer in the dedication of any unto the Office of the
Ministry, is a notion that could never be obliterated in the minds of Men
concerned in these things, nor cast out of their Practice. Of what sort they
have been amongst many we do not now enquire. But there has been less regard
unto the other Duty, namely, that these Prayers should be accompanied with
Fasting. But this also is necessary by Virtue of Apostolical Example, Act.
14.23.

THE Conduct of this Work belongs unto the Elders or Officers of the Church,
wherein any one is to be so Ordained. It did belong unto extraordinary Officers
whilst they were continued in the Church. And upon the Cessation of their
Office, it is devolved on the ordinary stated Officers of the Church. It is so,
I say, in case there be any such Officer before fixed in the Church, whereunto
any one is to be only Ordained. And in case there be none, the Assistance of
Pastors or Elders of other Churches may and ought to be desired, unto the
Conduct and Regulation of the Duty.

IT is needless to enquire what is the Authoritative influence of this
Ordination, into the Communication of Office or Office-Power; whilst it is
acknowledged to be indispensably necessary and to belong essentially unto the
Call unto Office. For when sundry Duties, as these of Election and Ordination,
are required unto the same End, by Virtue of Divine Institution, it is not for
me to determine what is the peculiar efficacy of the one or the other, seeing
neither of them without the other, has any at all.

HEREUNTO is added, as an External Adjunct, imposition of hands significant of
the persons so called to Office, in and unto the Church. For although it will
be difficultly proved, that the use of this Ceremony was designed unto
continuance, after a Cessation of the Communication of the extraordinary Gifts
of the Holy Ghost, whereof it was the sign and outward means, in extraordinary
Officers; yet we do freely grant it unto the ordinary Officers of the Church;
provided that there be no apprehension of its being the sole Authoritative
Conveyance of a successive flux of Office-Power; which is destructive of the
whole nature of the institution.

AND this may at present suffice, as unto the Call of meet persons unto the
Pastoral Office, and consequently any other Office in the Church. The things
following are essentially necessary unto it, so as that Authority and Right to
Feed and Rule in the Church in the Name of Christ, as an Officer of his House,
that may be given unto any one thereby by virtue of his Law, and the Charter
granted by him unto the Church it self: The First is, That antecedently unto
any actings of the Church toward such a person, with respect unto Office, he
be furnished by the Lord Christ himself with Graces and Gifts, and Abilities,
for the discharge of the Office whereunto he is to be called. This Divine
Designation of the person to be called, rests on the Kingly Office and care of
Christ toward his Church. Where this is wholly wanting, it is not in the power
of any Church under Heaven, by virtue of any outward Order or Act, to
communicate Pastoral or Ministerial Power unto any person whatever. Secondly,
There is to be an Exploration or Trial of those Gifts and Abilities as unto
their Accommodation unto the Edification of that Church, whereunto any person
is to be Ordained a Pastor or Minister. But although the Right of judging
herein, belong unto and reside in the Church it self, (for who else is able to
judge for them, or is entrusted so to do?) yet is it their Wisdom and Duty to
desire the Assistance and Guidance of those who are approved in the discharge
of their Office in other Churches. Thirdly, The first act of Power committed
unto the Church by Jesus Christ for the constitution of Ordinary Officers in
it, is, that Election of a person qualified and tried, unto his Office, which
we have now vindicated. Fourthly, There is required hereunto the Solemn
Ordination, Inauguration, Dedication or setting apart of the persons so chosen
by the Presbytery of the Church with Fasting and Prayer, and the outward sign
of the Imposition of Hands.

THIS is that Order which the Rule of the Scripture, the Example of the First
Churches, and the nature of the things themselves, direct unto. And although I
will not say that a defect in any of these, especially if it be from
unavoidable hindrances, does disanull the Call of a person to the Pastoral
Office; yet I must say, that where they are not all duly attended unto, the
Institution of Christ is neglected, and the Order of the Church infringed:
Wherefore,

THE Plea of the communication of all Authority for Office, and of Office it
self, solely by a flux of Power from the first Ordainers, through the hands of
their pretended Successors in all Ages, under all the innumerable Miscarriages
whereunto they are subject, and have actually fallen into, without any respect
unto the consent or call of the Churches, by Rule, Laws and Orders, foreign to
the Scripture, is contrary to the whole nature of Evangelical Churches, and all
the ends of their Institution; as shall be manifested, if it be needful.

CHAP. V. The Especial Duty of Pastors of Churches.
WE have declared the way whereby Pastors are given unto, and instated in the
Church. That which should ensue, is an account of their Work and Duty in the
Discharge of their Office. But this has been the subject of many large
Discourses, both among the Ancient Writers of the Church, and of late. I shall
therefore only touch on some things that are of most necessary consideration.

1. THE First and Principal Duty of a Pastor, is to feed the flock by diligent
Preaching of the Word. It is a promise relating to the New Testament; that God
would give unto his Church Pastors according to his own heart, which should
feed them with Knowledge and Understanding, Jer. 3.15. This is by Teaching or
Preaching the Word, and no otherwise. This Feeding is of the Essence of the
Office of a Pastor, as unto the exercise of it; so that he who does not, or
cannot, or will not feed the Flock, is no Pastor, whatever outward call, or
work he may have in the Church. The care of Preaching the Gospel was committed
to Peter, and in him unto all true Pastors of the Church under the name of
Feeding, Joh. 21.15, 16. According to the example of the Apostles they are to
free themselves from all encumbrances, that they may give themselves wholly
unto the Word and Prayer, Act. 6. Their work is to labor in the Word and
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. and thereby to feed the Flock over which the Holy Ghost
has made them Overseers, Act. 20. And it is that, which is every where given
them in charge.

THIS Work and Duty, therefore, as was said, is essential unto the Office of a
Pastor. A Man is a Pastor unto them whom he feeds by Pastoral Teaching, and to
no more. And he that does not so feed, is no Pastor. Nor is it required only
that he Preach now and then at his leisure; but that he lay aside all other
Employments, though lawful, all other Duties in the Church, as unto such a
constant attendance on them, as would divert him from this work, that he give
himself unto it, that he be in these things laboring to the utmost of his
Ability. Without this, no Man will be able to give a comfortable account of the
Pastoral Office at the last day.

THERE is indeed no more required of any Man than God gives him Ability for.
Weakness, Sickness, Bodily Infirmities, may disenable Men from the actual
discharge of this Duty, in that assiduity and frequency which are required in
ordinary cases. And some may through Age or other incapacitating Distempers, be
utterly disabled for it, in which case it is their Duty to lay down and take a
dismission from their Office; or, if their disability be but partial, provide a
suitable supply, that the Edification of the Church be not prejudiced. But for
Men to pretend themselves Pastors of the Church, and to be unable for, or
negligent of this Work and Duty, is to live in open defiance of the Commands of
Christ.

WE have lived to see, or hear of reproachful scorn and contempt cast upon,
laborious Preaching, that is laboring in the Word and Doctrine; and all manner
of discouragements given unto it, with endeavors for its suppression in sundry
instances. Yea, some have proceeded so far, as to declare that the work of
Preaching is unnecessary in the Church, so to reduce all Religion to the
Reading and Rule of the Liturgy. The next attempt, so far as I know, may be to
exclude Christ himself out of their Religion, which the denial of a necessity
of Preaching the Gospel makes an entrance into, yea, a good Progress toward.

SUNDRY things are required unto this Work and Duty of Pastoral Preaching: As,
(1.) Spiritual Wisdom and Understanding in the Mysteries of the Gospel; that
they may declare unto the Church the whole counsel of God, and the unsearchable
Riches of Christ; see Act. 20.27. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 3.8, 9, 10, 11.
The generality of the Church, especially those who are grown in knowledge and
experience have a spiritual insight into these things. And the Apostle prays
that all Believers may have so, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19. And if those that instruct
them, or should so do, have not some degree of Eminency herein, they cannot be
useful to lead them on to perfection. And the little care hereof or concernment
herein, is that which in our days has rendered the Ministry of many fruitless
and useless. (2.) Experience of the power of the Truth which they Preach in and
upon their own Souls. Without this, they will themselves be lifeless and
heartless in their own work, and their labor for the most part unprofitable
toward others. It is to such Men, attended unto, as a task for their
advantage; or as that which carries some satisfaction in it from ostentation,
and supposed Reputation wherewith it is accompanied. But a Man Preaches that
Sermon only well unto others, which Preaches it self in his own Soul. And he
that does not feed on, and thrive in the Digestion of the Food which he
provides for others, will scarce make it savoury unto them. Yea, he knows not
but the food he has provided may be poison, unless he have really tasted of it
himself. If the Word does not dwell with power in us, it will not pass with
power from us. And no Man lives in a more woeful condition than those who
really believe not themselves what they persuade others to believe continually.
The want of this Experience of the power of Gospel Truth on their own Souls, is
that which gives us so many lifeless, sapless Orations, queint in Words, and
dead as to Power, instead of Preaching the Gospel in the Demonstration of the
Spirit. And let any say what they please, it is evident, that some Men's
Preaching as well as others not Preaching, has lost the credit of their
Ministry. (3.) Skill to divide the Word aright, 2 Timothy 2.15. And this consists
in a practical Wisdom upon a diligent attendance unto the Word of Truth, to
find out what is real, substantial and meet food for the Souls of the Hearers,
to give unto all sorts of persons in the Church that which is their proper
portion. And this requires, (4.) A prudent and diligent consideration of the
state of the Flock, over which any Man is set, as unto their strength or
weakness, their growth or defect in knowledge (the measure of their seize
requiring either Milk or strong Meat;) their Temptations and Duties, their
Spiritual Decays or Thrivings; and that not only in general, but as near as may
be with respect unto all the Individual Members of the Church. Without a due
regard unto these things, Men Preach at random, uncertainly fighting like those
that beat the Air. Preaching Sermons not designed for the advantage of them to
whom they are Preached; insisting on general Doctrines not levelled to the
condition of the Auditory; speaking what Men can, without consideration of what
they ought, are things that will make Men weary of Preaching, when their minds
are not influenced with outward advantages; as much as make others weary in
hearing of them. And, (5.) All these, in the whole discharge of their Duty are
to be constantly accompanied with the evidence of zeal for the glory of God,
and compassion for the Souls of Men. Where these are not in vigorous exercise,
in the Minds and Souls of them that Preach the Word, giving a Demonstration of
themselves unto the Consciences of them that hear, the quickening Form, the
Life and Soul of Preaching is lost.

ALL these things seem common, obvious and universally acknowledged: But the
ruin of the Ministry of the most for the want of them, or from notable
defects in them, is, or may be no less evidently known. And the very naming of
them, which is all at present which I design, is sufficient to evidence how
great a necessity there is incumbent on all Pastors of Churches, to give
themselves unto the Word and Prayer, to labor in the Word and Doctrine, to be
continually intent on this Work, to engage all the faculties of their Souls, to
stir up all their Graces and Gifts unto constant exercise, in the discharge of
their Duty. For who is sufficient for these things. And as the consideration of
them is sufficient to stir up all Ministers unto fervent Prayer for supplies of
Divine Aids and Assistance, for that Work which in their own strength they can
no way answer; so is it enough to warn them of the avoidance of all things that
would give them a Diversion or Avocation from the constant attendance unto the
discharge of it.

WHEN Men undertake the Pastoral Office, and either judge it not their Duty to
Preach, or are not able so to do, or attempt it only at some solemn Seasons, or
attend unto it as a task required of them without that Wisdom, Skill,
Diligence, Care, Prudence, Zeal and Compassion, which are required thereunto,
the Glory and Use of the Ministry will be utterly destroyed.

2. THE Second Duty of a Pastor toward his Flock, is, continual fervent Prayer
for them. Jam 5.16. Joh. 17.20. Exodus 32.11. Deuteronomy. 9.18. Levit. 16.24. 1 Samuel
12.23. 2 Cor. 13.7, 9. Ephesians. 1.15, 16, 17. Chapter 3.14. Phil. 1.4. Col. 1.3. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.
Give our selves unto the Word and Prayer. Without this, no Man can, or does
Preach to them as he ought, nor perform any other Duty of his Pastoral Office.
From hence may any Man take the best measure of the discharge of his Duty
toward his Flock. He that does constantly, diligently, fervently Pray for
them, will have a Testimony in himself of his own sincerity in the discharge of
all other Pastoral Duties; nor can he voluntarily omit or neglect any of them.
And as for those who are negligent herein, be their Pains, Labor and Travel in
other Duties, never so great, they may be influenced from other Reasons, and so
give no evidence of sincerity in the discharge of their Office. In this
constant Prayer for the Church, which is so incumbent on all Pastors, as that
whatever is done without it, is of no esteem in the sight of Jesus Christ:
Respect is to be had, (1.) Unto the Success of the Word, unto all the blessed
ends of it among them. These are no less than the improvement and strengthening
of all their Graces, the Direction of all their Duties, their Edification in
Faith and Love, with the entire conduct of their Souls in the life of God, unto
the enjoyment of him. To Preach the Word therefore, and not to follow it with
constant and fervent Prayer for its success, is to dis-believe its use, neglect
its end, and to cast away the Seed of the Gospel at random. (2.) Unto the
Temptations that the Church is generally exposed unto. These greatly vary,
according unto the outward circumstances of things. The Temptations in general
that accompany a State of outward Peace and Tranquillity, are of another nature,
than those that attend a time of Trouble, Persecution, Distress and Poverty.
And so it is as unto other Occasions and Circumstances. These the Pastors of
Churches ought diligently to consider, looking on them as the means and ways
whereby Churches have been ruined, and the Souls of many lost for ever. With
respect unto them therefore, ought their Prayers for the Church to be fervent.
(3.) Unto the especial State and condition of all the Members, so far as it is
known unto them. There may be of them, who are spiritually sick and diseased,
tempted, afflicted, bemisted, wandering out of the way, surprised in Sins and
Miscarriages, disconsolate and troubled in Spirit in a peculiar manner. The
remembrance of them all ought to abide with them, and to be continually called
over in their daily Pastoral Supplications. (4.) Unto the presence of Christ in
the Assemblies of the Church, with all the blessed Evidences and Testimonies of
it. This is that alone which gives Life and Power unto all Church Assemblies;
without which, all outward Order and Forms of Divine Worship in them, are but a
dead Carcass. Now this presence of Christ in the Assemblies of his Church, is
by his Spirit, accompanying all Ordinances of Worship with a gracious Divine
Efficacy, evidencing it self by blessed Operations on the Minds and Hearts of
the Congregation. This are Pastors of Churches continually to Pray for, and
they will do so, who understand that all the success of their labors, and all
the acceptance of the Church with God in their Duties, do depend hereon. (5.)
To their preservation in Faith, Love and Fruitfulness, with all the Duties that
belong unto them, etc.

IT were much to be desired, that all those who take upon them this Pastoral
Office, did well consider and understand how great and necessary a part of
their Work and Duty does consist in their continual fervent Prayer for their
Flocks. For besides that it is the only instituted way, whereby, they may by
virtue of their Office bless their Congregations, so will they find their
Hearts and Minds in and by the discharge of it, more and more filled with love,
and engaged with diligence, unto all other Duties of their Office, and excited
unto the Exercise of all Grace toward the whole Church on all occasions. And
where any are negligent herein, there is no Duty which they perform toward the
Church, but it is influenced with false considerations, and will not hold
weight in the balance of the Sanctuary.

3. THE Administration of the Seals of the Covenant is committed unto them as
the Stewards of the House of Christ. For unto them the Authoritative
Dispensation of the Word is committed, whereunto the Administration of the
Seals is annexed. For their principal end is, the peculiar Confirmation and
Application of the Word Preached. And herein there are three things that they
are to attend unto. (1.) The Times and Seasons of their Administration unto the
Churches Edification, especially that of the Lords Supper whose frequency is
enjoined. It is the Duty of Pastors to consider all the necessary Circumstances
of their Administration, as unto Time, Place, Frequency, Order and Decency.
(2.) To keep severely unto the Institution of Christ, as unto the way and
manner of their Administration. The gradual introduction of uninstituted Rites
and Ceremonies into the Church-Celebration of the Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, ended at length in the Idolatry of the Mass. Herein then, alone, and
not in bowing, cringing, and vestments, lies the Glory and Beauty of these
Administrations; namely, that they are compliant with, and expressive of the
Institution of Christ; nor is any thing done in them, but in express obedience
unto his Authority. I have received of the Lord, that which I delivered unto
you, says the Apostle in this case, 1 Cor. 11.23. (3.) To take care that these
holy things be administered only unto those who are meet and worthy, according
unto the Rule of the Gospel. Those who impose on Pastors the promiscuous
Administration of these Divine Ordinances, or the Application of the Seals unto
all without difference, do deprive them of one half of their Ministerial Office
and Duty.

BUT here it is enquired by some, Whether in case a Church have no Pastor at
present, or a Teaching Elder with Pastoral Power, whether it may not delegate
and appoint the Administration of these especial Ordinances, unto some Member
of the Church at this or that season, who is meetly qualified for the outward
Administration of them; which for the sake of some I shall examine.

1. NO Church is complete in Order without Teaching Officers; Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
1 Cor. 12.27, 28.

A CHURCH not complete in Order cannot be complete in Administrations; because
the Power of Administrations depends upon the Power of Order proportionably.
That is, the Power of the Church depends upon the Being of the Church. Hence
the first Duty of a Church without Officers, is to obtain them according to
Rule. And to endeavor to complete Administrations, without an antecedent
completing of Order, is contrary unto the Mind of Christ, Act. 14.23. Tit.
1.5. That thou should set in Order the things that are wanting, and Ordain
Elders in every Church. The practice therefore proposed is irregular and
contrary to the Mind of Christ.

THE Order of the Church is Two Fold; as Essential, as Organical. The Order of
the Church as Essential, and its Power thence arising, is, First for its
Preservation. Secondly for its Perfection. (1.) For its Preservation, in
Admission and Exclusion of Members. (2.) For its Perfection, in the Election of
Officers.

NO part of this Power which belongs to the Church as essentially considered,
can be delegated, but must be acted by the whole Church. They cannot delegate
Power to some to admit Members, so as it should not be an Act of the whole
Church. They cannot delegate Power to any to Elect Officers; nor any thing else
which belongs to them as a Church essentially. The Reason is; Things that
belong unto the essence of any thing, belong unto it formally as such, and so
cannot be transferred.

THE Church therefore cannot delegate the Power and Authority inquired after,
should it be supposed to belong to the Power of Order, as the Church is
essentially considered; which yet it does not.

IF the Church may delegate or substitute others for the discharge of all
Ordinances whatsoever, without Elders or Pastors, then it may perfect the
Saints, and complete the Work of the Ministry without them, which is contrary
to Ephesians. 4.11, 12. and Secondly, it would render the Ministry only convenient,
and not absolutely necessary to the Church; which is contrary to the
Institution of it.

A PARTICULAR Church, in Order, as Organical, is the adequate subject of all
Ordinances, and not as essential; because as essential it never does nor can
enjoy all Ordinances, namely the Ministry in particular, whereby it is
constituted Organical. Yet on this supposition the Church as essentially
considered, is the sole adequate subject of all Ordinances.

THOUGH the Church be the only Subject, it is not the only Object of Gospel
Ordinances; but that is various. For instance,

1. THE Preaching of the Word; its first Object is the World, for Conversion:
Its next, Professors, for Edification.

2. BAPTISM; Its only Object is neither the World nor the Members of a
Particular Church; but Professors, with those that are reckoned to them by Gods
Appointment; that is their Infant Seed.

3. THE Supper; Its Object is a Particular Church only, which is acknowledged;
and may be proved by the Institution, one special end of it, and the necessity
of Discipline thereon depending.

ORDINANCES whereof the Church is the only Subject and the only Object, cannot
be administered Authoritatively, but by Officers only. (1.) Because none but
Christ's Stewards have Authority in and toward his House as such, 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Timothy 3.15. Matthew. 24.25. (2.) Because it is an Act of Office-Authority to
represent Christ to the whole Church, and to feed the whole Flock thereby, Act.
20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.

THERE are no footsteps of any such practice among the Churches of God, who
walked in Order; neither in the Scripture, nor in all Antiquity.

BUT it is Objected by those who allow this Practice, That if the Church may
appoint or send a person forth to Preach, or appoint a Brother to Preach unto
themselves; then they may appoint him to Administer the Ordinance of the Supper.

Answ. HERE is a mistake in the Supposition. The Church, that is the Body of
it, cannot send out any Brother Authoritatively to Preach. Two things are
required thereunto; Collation of Gifts, and Communication of Office; neither of
which, the Church under that consideration can do to one that is sent forth.
But where God gives Gifts by his Spirit, and a Call by his Providence, the
Church only complies therewith; not in communicating Authority to the person,
but in praying for a Blessing upon his Work.

THE same is the case in desiring a Brother to Teach among them. The Duty is
moral in its own nature; the Gifts and Call are from God alone, the occasion of
his exercise is only administered by the Church.

IT is farther added by the same persons, that, If a Brother, or one who is a
Disciple, only may Baptize, then he may also Administer the Lords Supper, being
desired of the Church.

Answ. THE supposition is not granted nor proved, but there is yet a difference
between these Ordinances; the Object of one being Professors as such at large;
the Object of the other being Professors as Members of a Particular Church. But
to return:

4. IT is incumbent on them to preserve the Truth or Doctrine of the Gospel,
received and professed in the Church; and to defend it against all opposition.
This is one principal end of the Ministry, one principal means of the
preservation of the Faith once delivered unto the Saints. This is committed in
an especial manner unto the Pastors of the Churches, as the Apostle frequently
and emphatically repeats the charge of it unto Timothy, and in him unto all, to
whom the Dispensation of the Word is committed, 1 Epist. 1.1, 3, 4. Chap. 4.6,
7, 16. Chap. 6.20. 2 Epist. 1.14, 22. Chap. 3.14, 15, 16. The same he gives in
charge unto the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20.28, 29, 30. What he
says of himself, that the Glorious Gospel of the blessed God was committed unto
his Trust, 1 Timothy 1.11. is true of all Pastors of Churches according to their
measure and call; and they should all aim at the Account, which he gives of his
Ministry herein; I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have
kept the Faith, 2 Timothy 3.7. The Church is the Ground and Pillar of Truth; and
it is so principally in its Ministry: And the sinful neglect of this Duty, is
that which was the cause of most of the pernicious Heresies and Errors that
have infested and ruined the Church. Those whose Duty it was to preserve the
Doctrine of the Gospel entire in the public profession of it, have many of
them spoken perverse things to draw away Disciples after them. Bishops,
Presbyters, public Teachers, have been the ringleaders in Heresies. Wherefore
this Duty, especially at this time, when the fundamental Truths of the Gospel
are on all sides impugned from all sorts of Adversaries, is in an especial
manner to be attended unto.

SUNDRY things are required hereunto. As, (1.) A clear, sound comprehensive
knowledge of the entire Doctrine of the Gospel, attained by all means useful
and commonly prescribed unto that end, especially diligent study of the
Scripture, with fervent Prayer for Illumination and Understanding. Men cannot
preserve that for others, which they are ignorant of themselves. Truth may be
lost by weakness, as well as by wickedness. And the defect herein in many is
deplorable. (2.) Love of the Truth, which they have so learned and
comprehended. Unless we look on Truth as a Pearl, as that which is valued at
any rate, bought with any price, as that which is better than all the World, we
shall not endeavor its preservation with that diligence which is required.
Some are ready to part with Truth at an easy rate; or to grow indifferent
about it, whereof we have multitudes of examples in the days wherein we live.
It were easy to give instances of sundry important Evangelical Truths, which
our forefathers in the Faith contended for with all earnestness, and were
ready to seal with their Blood, which are now utterly disregarded and opposed
by some who pretend to succeed them in their Profession. If Ministers have not
a sense of that Power of Truth in their own Souls, and a taste of its Goodness,
the discharge of this Duty is not to be expected from them. (3.) A
conscientious care and fear of giving countenance or encouragement unto novel
Opinions, especially such as oppose any Truth, of whose Power and Efficacy,
Experience has been had among them that believe. Vain curiosity, boldness in
conjectures, and readiness to vent their own conceits, have caused no small
trouble and damage unto the Church. (4.) Learning and ability of Mind to
discern and disprove the oppositions of the Adversaries of the Truth, and
thereby to stop their Mouths, and convince gainsayers. (5.) The solid
confirmation of the most important Truths of the Gospel, and whereunto all
others are resolved in their* Teaching and Ministry. Men may, and do oft-times
prejudice, yea, betray the Truth, by the weakness of their Pleas for it. (6.) A
diligent watch over their own Flocks, against the crafts of Seducers from
without, or the springing up of any bitter root of error among themselves. (7.)
A concurrent Assistance with the Elders and Messengers of other Churches, with
whom they are in Communion, in the declaration of the Faith which they all
profess; whereof we must treat afterward more at large.

IT is evident what Learning, Labor, Study, Pains, Ability and Exercise of the
rational Faculties, are ordinarily required unto the right discharge of these
Duties. And where Men may be useful to the Church in other things, but are
defective in these, it becomes them to walk and act both circumspectly and
humbly, frequently desiring and adhering unto the Advice of them whom God has
entrusted with more Talents and greater Abilities.

5. IT belongs unto their Charge and Office, diligently to labor for the
Conversion of Souls unto God. The ordinary means of Conversion is left unto the
Church, and its Duty it is to attend unto it. Yea, one of the principal ends of
the Institution and Preservation of Churches, is the Conversion of Souls; and
where there are no more to be Converted, there shall be no more Church on the
Earth. To enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, to diffuse the Light and Savor of the
Gospel, to be subservient unto the Calling of the Elect, or gathering all the
Sheep of Christ into his Fold, are things that God designs by his Churches in
this World. Now the principal instrumental cause of all these, is the Preaching
of the Word; and this is committed unto the Pastors of the Churches. It is
true, Men may be, and often are Converted unto God by their occasional
dispensation of the Word who are not called unto Office; for it is the Gospel
it self that is the Power of God unto Salvation, by whomsoever it is
Administered, and it has been effectual unto that end, even in the necessary
occasional teaching of Women. But it is so frequently in the exercise of
Spiritual Gifts, by them who are not stated Officers of the Church, 1 Cor.
14.24, 25. Phil. 1.14, 15, 18. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. But yet this hinders not, but
that the Administration of the Glorious Gospel of the blessed God, as unto all
the ends of it, is committed unto the Pastors of the Church. And the First
Object of the Preaching of the Gospel, is the World, or the Men of it for their
Conversion. And it is so in the Preaching of all them unto whom that Work is
committed by Christ. The Work of the Apostles and Evangelists had this Order in
it. First, they were to make Disciples of Men, by the Preaching of the Gospel
unto Conversion, and this was their principal Work, as Paul testifies, 1 Cor.
1.17. And herein were they gloriously instrumental, in laying the foundation of
the Kingdom of Christ all the World over. The Second part of their Work, was,
to teach them that were Converted, or made Disciples, to do, and observe, all
that he did command them. In the pursuit of this part of their Commission, they
gathered the Disciples of Christ into Churches, under ordinary Officers of
their own. And although the Work of these Ordinary Officers, Pastors, and
Teachers, be of the same nature with theirs, yet the Method of it is changed in
them. For their first ordinary Work is to conduct and teach all the Disciples
of Christ to do and observe all things appointed by him; that is to Preach unto
and Watch over their particular Flocks, unto whom they do relate. But they are
not hereby discharged from an interest in the other part of the Work in
Preaching the Word unto the Conversion of Souls. They are not indeed bound unto
the Method of the Apostles and Evangelists; yea, they are by virtue of their
Office, ordinarily excluded from it. After a Man is called to be a Pastor of a
particular Church, it is not his Duty to leave that Church, and go up and down
to Preach for the Conversion of Strangers. It is not, I say, ordinarily so, for
many cases may fall out wherein the Edification of any particular Church is to
give way unto the glory of Christ, with respect unto the calling of all the
Members of the Church Catholic. But in the discharge of the Pastoral Office,
there are many occasions of Preaching the Word unto the Conversion of Souls.
As, (1.) When any that are Unconverted do come into the Assemblies of the
Church, and are there wrought upon by the Power of the Word, whereof we have
experience every day. To suppose that a Man at the same time, and in the same
place Preaching unto one Congregation, should Preach to some of them, namely
those that are of the Church whereunto he relates, as a Minister with
Ministerial Authority; and to others only by virtue of a Spiritual Gift, which
he has received, is that which no Man can distinguish in his own Conscience,
nor is there any color of Rule or Reason for it. For though Pastors, with
respect unto their whole Office, and all the Duties of it, whereof many can
have the Church only for their Object, are Ministers in Office unto the Church,
and so Ministers of the Church; yet are they Ministers of Christ also; and by
him it is, and not by the Church, that the Preaching of the Gospel is committed
unto them. And it is so committed, as that by virtue of their Office they are
to use it unto all its ends, in his way and method, whereof the Conversion of
Sinners is one. And for a Man to conceive of himself in a double capacity
whilst he is Preaching to the same Congregation, is that which no Man's
experience can reach unto. (2.) In occasional Preaching in other places,
whereunto a Pastor of a Church may be called and directed by Divine Providence.
For, although we have no concernment in the figment of an indelible Character
accompanying Sacred Orders; yet we do not think that the Pastoral Office is
such a thing as a Man must leave behind him every time he goes from home; or
that it is in his own power, or in the power of all Men in the World, to divest
him of it, unless he be dismissed or deposed from it by Christ himself, through
the Rule of his Word. Wherever a true Minister Preaches, he Preaches as a
Minister; for, as such the Administration of the Gospel is committed unto him,
as unto all the ends of it; whereof, the chief as was said, is the Conversion
of Souls. Yea, of such weight is it, that the Convenience and Edification of
particular Churches, ought to give place unto it. When therefore there are
great Opportunities, and providential Calls for the Preaching of the Gospel
unto the Conversion of Souls, and the Harvest being great there are not
Laborers sufficient for it; it is lawful, yea, it is the Duty of Pastors of
particular Churches, to leave their constant attendance on their Pastoral
Charge in those Churches, at least for a Season, to apply themselves unto the
more public Preaching of the Word unto the Conversion of the Souls of Men. Nor
will any particular Church be unwilling hereunto, which understands that even
the whole end of particular Churches is but the Edification of the Church
Catholic; and that their good and advantage is to give place unto that of the
Glory of Christ in the whole. The good Shepherd will leave the Ninety and Nine
Sheep, to seek after one that wanders; and we may certainly leave a few for a
season, to seek after a great multitude of wanderers, when we are called
thereunto by Divine Providence. And I could heartily wish that we might have a
trial of it at this time.

THE Ministers who have been most celebrated, and that deservedly in the last
Ages, in this and the neighbor Nations, have been such as whose Ministry God
made eminently successful unto the Conversion of Souls. To affirm that they did
not do their work as Ministers and by virtue of their Minsterial Office, is to
cast away the Crown, and destroy the principal glory of the Ministry. For my
own part, if I did not think my self bound to Preach as a Minister, and as a
Minister Authorized in all places, and on all occasions when I am called
thereunto, I think I should never Preach much more in this World. Nor do I know
at all what Rule they walk by, who continue public constant Preaching for many
years, and yet neither desire nor design to be called unto any Pastoral Office,
in the Church. But I must not here insist on the debate of these things.

6. IT belongs unto Men on the account of their Pastoral Office, to be ready,
willing, and able, to comfort, relieve and refresh those that are tempted,
tossed, wearied with fears and grounds of disconsolation in times of trial and
desertion. The Tongue of the Learned is required in them, that they should know
how to speak a word in Season unto him that is weary. One excellent
qualification of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Discharge of his Priestly Office
now in Heaven, is, That he is touched with a sense of our Infirmities, and
knows how to succor them that are tempted. His whole Flock in this World, are
a company of tempted ones. His own Life on the Earth, he calls the time of his
Temptation. And those who have the charge of his Flock under him, ought to have
a sense of their Infirmities, and endeavor in an especial manner to succor
them that are tempted. But amongst them, there are some always that are cast
under darkness and disconsolations in a peculiar manner; some at the entrance
of their Conversion unto God, whilst they have a deep sense of the terror of
the Lord, the sharpness of Conviction, and the uncertainty of their Condition.
Some are relapsed into Sin or omissions of Duties; some under great, sore and
lasting Afflictions; some upon pressing, urgent, particular Occasions; some on
Sovereign, Divine Desertions; some through the buffetings of Satan, and the
injections of blasphemous Thoughts into their Minds, with many other occasions
of an alike nature. Now the Troubles, Disconsolations, Dejections and Fears
that arise in the Minds of Persons in these Exercises and Temptations, are
various, oftentimes urged and fortified with subtle arguing, and fair
pretenses, perplexing the Souls of Men almost to Despair and Death. It belongs
unto the Office and Duty of Pastors.

1. TO be able rightly to understand the various cases that will occurr of this
kind, from such principles and grounds of Truth and Experience, as will bear a
just confidence in a prudent Application unto the Relief of them concerned. The
Tongue of the Learned to know how to speak a Word in Season to him that is
weary. It will not be done by a collection and determination of cases, which
yet is useful it its place. For hardly shall we meet with two cases of this
kind, that will exactly be determined by the same Rule; all manner of
Circumstances giving them variety. But a Skill, Understanding and Experience in
the whole nature of the Work of the Spirit of God on the Souls of Men; of the
Conflict that is between the Flesh and the Spirit; of the Methods and Wiles of
Satan, of the Wiles of Principalities and Powers or wicked Spirits in high
places; of the Nature, and Effects and Ends of Divine Desertions, with Wisdom
to make Application out of such Principles, of fit Medicines and Remedies unto
every Sore and Distemper, are required hereunto. These things are by some
despised, by some neglected, by some looked after only in stated cases of
Conscience; in which Work it is known that some have horribly debauched their
own Consciences and others, to the scandal and ruin of Religion, so far as
they have prevailed. But not to dispute how far such helps as Books written of
cases of Conscience, may be useful herein, which they may be greatly unto those
who know how to use them aright; the proper ways whereby Pastors and Teachers
must obtain this Skill and Understanding, is, by diligent study of the
Scriptures, Meditation thereon, fervent Prayer, Experience of Spiritual Things,
and Temptations in their own Souls, with a prudent observation of the manner of
Gods dealing with others, and the ways of the opposition made to the Work of
his Grace in them. Without these things all pretenses unto this Ability and
Duty of the Pastoral Office are vain; whence it is, that the whole Work of it
is much neglected.

2. TO be ready and willing to attend unto the especial cases that may be
brought unto them, and not to look on them as unnecessary Diversions; whereas a
due Application unto them, is a principal part of their Office and Duty. To
discountenance, to discourage any from seeking relief in perplexities of this
nature, to carry it toward them with a seeming moroseness and unconcernedness,
is to turn that which is Lame out of the way, to push the Diseased, and not at
all to express the care of Christ toward his Flock, Isa. 40.11. Yea, it is
their Duty to hearken after them who may be so exercised, to seek them out, to
give them their Counsel and Directions on all occasions.

3. TO bear patiently and tenderly with the weakness, ignorance, dullness,
slowness to believe and receive satisfaction, yea, it may be, Impertinencies in
them that are so tempted. These things will abound amongst them, partly from
their natural Infirmities, many being weak, and perhaps froward; but especially
from the nature of their Temptations, which are suited to disorder and disquiet
their Minds, to fill them with perplexed Thoughts, and to make them jealous of
every thing wherein they are spiritually concerned. And if much patience,
meekness and condescension, be not exercised toward them, they are quickly
turned out of the way.

IN the discharge of the whole Pastoral Office, there is not any Thing or Duty
that is of more importance, nor wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is more
concerned, nor more eminently suited unto the nature of the Office it self,
than this is. But, whereas it is a Work or Duty, which because of the Reasons
mentioned, must be accompanied with the exercise of Humility, Patience,
Self-denial and Spiritual Wisdom, with Experience, with wearisome Diversions
from other occasions; those who had got of old the conduct of the Souls of Men
into their management, turned this whole part of their Office and Duty into an
Engine they called Articular Confession, whereby they wrested the Consciences
of Christians to the promotion of their own Ease, Wealth, Authority, and
oft-times to worse ends.

7. A compassionate suffering, with all the Members of the Church in all their
trials and troubles, whether internal, or external, belongs unto them in the
discharge of their Office. Nor is there any thing that renders them more like
unto Jesus Christ, whom to represent unto the Church, is their principal Duty.
The view and consideration by Faith of the Glory of Christ in his compassion
with his suffering Members, is the principal spring of Consolation unto the
Church in all its Distresses. And the same Spirit, the same Mind herein, ought,
according to their measure, to be in all that have the Pastoral Office
committed unto them. So the Apostle expresses it in himself: Who is weak, and
I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11.29. And unless this
compassion and goodness do run through the discharge of their whole Office, Men
cannot be said to be Evangelical Shepherds, nor the Sheep said in any sense to
be their own. For those who pretend unto the Pastoral Office, to live, it may
be, in wealth and pleasure, regardless of the Sufferings and Temptations of
their Flock, or of the poor of it; or related unto such Churches, as wherein it
is impossible that they should so much as be acquainted with the state of the
greatest part of them, is not answerable unto the institution of their Office,
nor to the design of Christ therein.

8. CARE of the Poor, and visitation of the Sick, are parts of this Duty,
commonly known, though commonly neglected.

9. THE principal care of the Rule of the Church is incumbent on the Pastors of
it. This is the second general head of the Power and Duty of this Office,
whereunto many things in particular do belong. But because I shall treat
afterward of the Rule of the Church by it self distinctly, I shall not here
insist upon it.

10. THERE is a Communion to be observed among all the Churches of the same
Faith and Profession in any Nation. Wherein it does consist, and what is
required thereunto, shall be afterward declared. The principal care hereof,
unto the Edification of the Churches, is incumbent on the Pastors of them.
Whether it be exercised by Letters of mutual advice, of congratulation or
consolation, or in testimony of Communion with those who are called to Office
in them, or whether it be by convening in Synods for consultation of their
joint concernments, (which things made up a great part of the Primitive
Ecclesiastical Polity;) their Duty it is to attend unto it, and to take care of
it.

11. THAT wherewith I shall close these few instances of the Pastoral Charge
and Duty, is, that without which all the rest will neither be useful unto Men,
nor be accepted with the great Shepherd Christ Jesus. And that is an humble,
holy, exemplary conversation in all Godliness and Honesty. The Rules and
Precepts of the Scripture, the Examples of Christ and his Apostles, with that
of the Bishops or Pastors of the Primitive Churches, and the nature of the
thing it self, with the Religion which we do profess, do undeniably prove this
Duty to be necessary and indispensable in a Gospel Ministry. It were an easy
thing to fill up a Volume with ancient Examples unto this purpose; with
Testimonies of the Scripture and first Writers among Christians, with Examples
of public and private miscarriages herein, with evident demonstration, that
the ruin of Christian Religion in most Nations where it has been professed,
and so of the Nations themselves, has proceeded from the Ambition, Pride,
Luxury, Uncleanness, Profaneness, and otherways vicious Conversations of those
who have been called the Clergy. And in daily observation, it is a thing
written with the Beams of the Sun, that whatever else be done in Churches, if
the Pastors of them or those who are so esteemed, are not Exemplary in Gospel
Obedience and Holiness, Religion will not be carried on and improved among the
people, If Persons, light or profane in their Habits, Garbs and Converse,
corrupt in their Communication, Unsavory and Barren as unto Spiritual
Discourse; if such as are Covetous, Oppressive and Contentious; such as are
negligent in holy Duties in their own Families, and so cannot stir up others
unto diligence therein; much more, if such as are openly sensual, vicious and
debauched; are admitted into this Office, we may take our leave of all the
Glory and Power of Religion, among the people committed unto their charge.

TO handle this property or adjunct of the Pastoral Office, it were necessary
distinctly to consider and explain all the Qualifications assigned by the
Apostle as necessary unto Bishops and Elders, evidenced as previously necessary
unto the orderly Call of them unto this Office, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Tit.
2.6, 7, 8, 9. which is a Work not consistent with my present design to engage
in.

THESE are some Instances of the things wherein the Office-Duty of Pastors of
the Church does consist. They are but some of them, and those only proposed,
not pursued and pressed with the consideration of all those particular Duties,
with the manner of their performance, way of management, motives and
enforcements, defects and causes of them, which would require a large
Discourse. These may suffice unto our present purpose; and we may derive from
them the ensuing brief considerations.

1. A DUE meditation and view of these things, as proposed in the Scripture, is
enough to make the wisest, the best of Men, and the most diligent in the
discharge of the Pastoral Office, to cry out with the Apostle, and who is
sufficient for these things? This will make them look well to their Call and
Entrance into this Office, as that alone which will bear them out and justify
them in the susception of it. For no sense of insufficiency can utterly
discourage any in the undertaking of a Work, which he is assured that the Lord
Christ calls him unto. For where he calls to a Duty, he gives competent
strength for the performance of it. And when we say, Under a deep sense of our
own weakness, who is sufficient for these things; he does say, My Grace is
sufficient for you.

2. ALTHOUGH all the things mentioned, do plainly, evidently and undeniably
belong unto the discharge of the Pastoral Office, yet in point of Fact we find
by the Success, that they are very little considered by the most that seek
after it. And the present Ruin of Religion, as unto its Power, Beauty and
Glory in all places, arises principally from this cause, that Multitudes of
those who undertake this Office, are neither in any measure fit for it, nor do
either conscientiously attend unto, or diligently perform the Duties that
belong unto it. It ever was, and every will be true in general; like Priest,
like People.

3. WHEREAS the account which is to be given of this Office, and the discharge
of it at the last day unto Jesus Christ, the consideration whereof had a mighty
influence upon the Apostles themselves, and all the Primitive Pastors of the
Churches, is frequently proposed unto us, and many warnings given us thereon in
the Scripture; yet it is apparent they are but few who take it into due
consideration. In the great day of Christ's Visitation, he will proceed on such
Articles as those here laid down, and others expressed in the Scripture, and
not at all on those which are now enquired upon in our Episcopal Visitations.
And if they may be minded of their true interest and concern, whilst they
possess the places they hold in the Church, without offense, I would advise
them to conform their Enquiries in their Visitations, unto those, which they
cannot but know the Lord Christ will make in the great day of his Visitation,
which does approach: This I think but reasonable. In the mean time, for those
who desire to give up their account with joy and confidence, and not with grief
and confusion; it is their Wisdom and Duty continually to bear in Mind what it
is that the Lord Christ requires of them in the discharge of their Office. To
take Benefices, to perform legal*Duties by themselves or others, is not fully
compliant with what Pastors of Churches are called unto.

4. IT is manifest also from hence, how inconsistent it is with this Office,
and the due discharge of it, for any one Man to undertake the relation of a
Pastor unto more Churches than one, especially if far distant from one another.
An evil this is, like that of Mathematical Prognostications at Rome, always
condemned and always retained. But one view of the Duties incumbent on each
Pastor, and of whose diligent performance he is to give an account at the last
day, will discard this practice from all approbation in the Minds of them that
are sober. However, it is as good to have Ten Churches at once, as having but
one, never to discharge the Duty of a Pastor toward it.

5. ALL Churches may do well to consider the weight and burden that lies upon
their Pastors and Teachers, in the discharge of their Office, that they may be
constant in fervent Prayers and Supplications for them; as also to provide,
what lies in them, that they may be without trouble and cares about the things
of this Life.

6. THERE being so many Duties necessary unto the discharge of their Office,
and those of such various sorts and kinds, as to require various Gifts and
Abilities unto their due performance, it seems very difficult to find a
concurrence of them in any own person, in any considerable degree, so as that
it is hard to conceive how the Office it self should be duly discharged. I
answer, (1.) The end both of the Office, and of the discharge of it, is the due
Edification of the Church: This therefore gives them their measure. Where that
is attained, the Office is duly discharged, though the Gifts whereby Men are
enabled thereunto, be not eminent. (2.) Where a Man is called unto this Office,
and applies himself sincerely unto the due discharge of it, if he be evidently
defective with respect to any especial Duty or Duties of it, that defect is to
be supplied by calling any other unto his Assistance in Office, who is
qualified to make that supply unto the Edification of the Church. And the like
must be said concerning such Pastors, as through Age or Bodily weakness are
disabled from attendance unto any part of their Duty; for still the Edification
of the Church is that, which in all these things, is in the first place to be
provided for.

7. IT may be enquired, what is the State of those Churches, and what Relation,
with respect unto Communion, we ought to have unto them whose Pastors are
evidently defective in, or neglective of these things, so as that they are not
in any competent measure attended unto. And we may in particular instance in
the first and the last of the Pastoral Duties before insisted on. Suppose a Man
be no way able to Preach the Word unto the Edification of them that are pleaded
to be his Flock; or having any ability, yet does not, will not give himself
unto the Word and Prayer, or not labor in the Word and Doctrine, unto the
great prejudice of Edification: And suppose the same Person be openly
defective, as unto an exemplary Conversation, and on the contrary, lays the
stumbling block of his own Sins and Follies before the eyes of others; what
shall we judge of his Ministry, and of the state of that Church whereof he is a
constituent part, as its Ruler? I Answer,

1. I DO not believe it is in the power of any Church really to conferr the
Pastoral Office by virtue of any Ordination whatever, unto any who are openly
and evidently destitute of all those previous Qualifications which the
Scripture requires in them who are to be called unto this Office. There is
indeed a Latitude to be allowed in judging of them in times of necessity and
great penury of able Teachers; so that Persons in holy Ministry, design the
Glory of God and the Edification of the Church, according to their Ability. But
otherwise there is a nullity in the pretended Office.

2. WHERE any such are admitted through ignorance or mistake, or the Usurpation
of undue Power over Churches, in imposing Ministers on them, there is not an
absolute nullity in their Administrations, until they are discovered and
convicted by the Rule and Law of Christ. But if on evidence hereof, the people
will voluntarily adhere unto them, they are partakers of their Sins, and do
what in them lies to Vn-Church themselves.

3. WHERE such Persons are by any means placed as Pastors in or over any
Churches, and there is no way for the Removal or Reformation, it is Lawful
unto, it is the Duty of every one who takes care of his own Edification and
Salvation, to withdraw from the Communion of such Churches, and to join with
such as wherein Edification is better provided for. For, whereas this is the
sole end of Churches, of all their Offices, Officers and Administrations; it is
the highest folly to imagine that any Disciple of Christ, can be, or is obliged
by his Authority to abide in the Communion of such Churches, without seeking
Relief in the ways of his Appointment, wherein that end is utterly overthrown.

4. WHERE the generality of Churches in any kind of Association are headed by
Pastors defective in these things, in the matter declared, there all public
Church-Reformation is morally impossible; and it is the Duty of private Men to
take care of their own Souls, let Churches and Churchmen say what they please.

SOME few things may yet be enquired into, with reference unto the Office of a
Pastor in the Church: As,

1. WHETHER a Man may be ordained a Pastor or a Minister, without Relation unto
any particular Church, so as to be invested with Office-Power thereby.

IT is usually said, that a Man may be Ordained a Minister unto, or of the
Catholic Church, or to Convert Infidels, although he be not related unto any
particular Flock or Congregation.

I SHALL not at present discuss sundry things about the power and way of
Ordination which influence this Controversy, but only speak briefly unto the
thing it self: And,

1. IT is granted, that a Man endowed with Spiritual Gifts for the Preaching of
the Gospel, may be set apart by Fasting and Prayer unto that Work, when he may
be orderly called unto it in the Providence of God. For, (1.) Such an one has
a Call unto it materially in the Gifts which he has received, warranting him
unto the exercise of them for the Edification of others, as he has occasion, 1
Pet. 4.10, 11. 1 Cor. 14.12. Setting apart unto an important Work by Prayer is
a moral Duty, and useful in Church Affairs in an especial manner, Act. 13.12.
(2.) A public Testimony unto the Approbation of a Person undertaking the Work
of Preaching, is necessary. (1.) Unto the Communion of Churches, that he may be
received in any of them as is occasion; of which sort were the Letters of
Recommendation in the Primitive Church, 1 Cor. 16.3. 2 Cor. 3.1. 3 John 9. (2.)
Unto the safety of them, amongst whom he may exercise his Gifts, that they be
not imposed on by false Teachers or Seducers. Nor would the Primitive Church
allow, nor is it allowable in the Communion of Churches, that any Person not so
testified unto, not so sent and warranted, should undertake constantly to
Preach the Gospel.

2. SUCH Persons so set apart and sent, may be esteemed Ministers in the
general notion of the Word, and may be useful in the calling and planting of
Churches, wherein they may be instated in the Pastoral Office. This was
Originally the Work of Evangelists, which Office being ceased in the Church,
(as shall be proved elsewhere) the Work may be supplied by Persons of this sort.

3. NO Church whatever has power to Ordain Men Ministers for the Conversion of
Infidels. Since the Cessation of extraordinary Officers and Offices, the care
of that Work is devolved merely on the providence of God, being left without
the verge of Church-Institutions. God alone can send and warrant Men for the
undertaking of that Work. Nor can any Man know, or be satisfied in a Call unto
that Work, without some previous guidance of Divine Providence leading him
thereunto. It is indeed the Duty of all the ordinary Ministers of the Church,
to diffuse the knowledge of Christ and the Gospel unto the Heathen and
Infidels, among whom, or near unto whom their Habitation is cast; and they have
all manner of Divine Warranty for their so doing; as many worthy Persons have
done effectually in New England. And it is the Duty of every true Christian,
who may be cast among them by the providence of God, to instruct them according
unto his Ability in the knowledge of the Truth: But it is not in the power of
any Church, or any sort of ordinary Officers, to Ordain a Person unto the
Office of the Ministry for the Conversion of the Heathen, antecedently unto any
designation by Divine Providence thereunto.

4. NO Man can be properly or completely Ordained unto the Ministry, but he is
Ordained unto a determinate Office; as a Bishop, an Elder, a Pastor. But this
no Man can be, but he who is Ordained in and unto a particular Church. For the
contrary practice,

1. WOULD be contrary to the constant practice of the Apostles, who Ordained no
ordinary Officers, but in and unto particular Churches, which were to be their
proper charge and care, Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5. Nor is there mention of any
ordinary Officers in the whole Scripture, but such as were fixed in the
particular Churches where-unto they did relate, Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1. Revel.
2.3. Nor was any such practice known or heard of in the Primitive Church: Yea,

2. IT was absolutely forbidden in the Ancient Church, and all such Ordinations
declared null, so as not to communicate Office-Power or give any Ministerial
Authority. So it is expressly in the First Canon* of the Council of Chalcedon,
and the Council Decrees, That all Imposition of Hands, in such cases, is
invalid and of no effect. Yea, so exact and careful were they in this matter,
that if any one, for any just cause, as he judged himself, did leave his
particular Church or Charge, they would not allow him the Name or Title of a
Bishop, or to Officiate occasionally in that Church, or any where else. This is
evident in the case of Eustathius a Bishop of Pamphilia. The good Man finding
the discharge of his Office very troublesome, by reason of Secular Businesses
that it was encumbered withal, and much opposition, with Reproach that befell
him from the Church it self, of his own accord laid down and resigned his
Charge, the Church choosing one Theodorus in his room. But afterward he
desired, that though he had left his Charge, he might retain the Name, Title
and Honor of a Bishop: For this end he made a Petition unto the Council of
Ephesus, who, as themselves express it, in mere commiseration unto the Old Man,
condescended unto his desire as unto the Name and Title, but not as unto any
Office-Power, which they judge, related absolutely unto a particular Charge,
Epist. Can. Ephesians. 1. ad Synod. in Pamphil.

3. SUCH Ordination wants an essential constitutive Cause, and part of the
Collation of Office-Power, which is the Election of the people, and is
therefore invalid. See what has been proved before unto that purpose.

4. A BISHOP, an Elder, a Pastor, being terms of Relation, to make any one so
without Relation unto a Church, a People, a Flock, is to make him a Father who
has no Child, or an Husband who has no Wife, a Relate without a Correlate,
which is impossible, and implies a contradiction.

5. IT is inconsistent with the whole nature and end of the Pastoral Office.
Whoever is duly Called, set Apart or Ordained unto that Office, he does therein
and thereby take on himself the Discharge of all the Duties belonging
thereunto, and is obliged to attend diligently unto them. If then we will take
a view of what has been proved before to belong unto this Office, we shall
find, that not the least part, scarce any thing of it, can be undertaken and
discharged by such as are Ordained absolutely without Relation unto particular
Churches. For any to take upon them to commit an Office unto others, and not at
the same time charge them with all the Duties of that Office and their
immediate attendance on them; or for any to accept of an Office and
Office-Power, not knowing when or where to exert the Power or perform the
Duties of it, is irregular. In particular, Ruling is an essential part of the
Pastoral Office, which they cannot attend unto who have none to be ruled by
them.

2. MAY a Pastor remove from one Congregation unto another?

THIS is a thing also which the Ancient Church made great Provision against.
For when some Churches were increased in Members, Reputation, Privileges and
Wealth above others, it grew an ordinary practice for the Bishops to design and
endeavor their own removal from a less unto a greater Benefice. This is so
severely interdicted in the Councils of Nice and Chalcedon, as that they would
not allow that a Man might be a Bishop or Presbyter in any other place, but
only in the Church wherein he was Originally Ordained: And therefore, if any
did so remove themselves, Decreed, that they should be sent home again, and
there abide, or cease to be Church Officers, Council. Nicea, Can. 15, 16.
Chalced. Can. 5, 20. Pluralities, as they are called, and open contending for
Ecclesiastical Promotions, Benefices and Dignities, were then either unknown,
or openly condemned.

YET it cannot be denied, but that there may be just causes of the Removal of a
Pastor from one Congregation unto another: For, whereas the end of all
particular Churches is to promote the Edification of the Catholic Church in
general; where, in any especial instance, such a removal is useful unto that
end, it is equal it should be allowed. Cases of this nature may arise from the
consideration of Persons, Places, Times, and many other Circumstances that I
cannot insist on in particular. But that such removals may be without offense,
it is required that they be made, (1.) With the free consent of the Churches
concerned. (2.) With the advice of other Churches, or their Elders, with whom
they walk in Communion. And of Examples of this kind, or of the Removal of
Bishops or Pastors from one Church to another in an orderly manner, by Advice
and Counsel for the good of the whole Churth, there are many instances in the
Primitive Times. Such was that of Gregory Naz. removed from Casima to
Constantinople, though I acknowledge it had no good success,

3. MAY a Pastor voluntarily, or of his own accord, resign and lay down his
Office, and remain in a private Capacity?

THIS also was judged inconvenient, if not unlawful, by the First Synod of
Ephesus, in the case of Eustathius. He was, as it appears, an Aged Man, one
that loved his one peace and quietness, and who could not well bear the
Oppositions and Reproaches which he met withal from the Church or some in it;
and thereon, solemnly upon his own judgment, without advice, laid down and
renounced his Office in the Church, who, thereupon chose a good Man in his
room. Yet did the Synod condemn this practice, and that not without weighty
Reasons, whereby they confirmed their judgment.

BUT yet no general Rule can be established in this case; nor was the judgment
or practice of the Primitive Church precise herein. Clemens, in his Epistle to
the Church of Corinth, expressly advises those on whose occasion there was
disturbance and divisions in the Church, to lay down their Office and withdraw
from it. Gregory Nazianzen did the same at Constantinople, and protests
openly, That although he were himself innocent and free from blame, as he truly
was, and one of the greatest Men of his Age, yet he would depart or be cast
out, rather than they should not have peace among them; which he did
accordingly, Orat. 52. and vit. Nazian. And afterward a Synod at Constantinople
under Photius, concluded, that in some cases it is lawful, Can. 5. Wherefore,

1. IT seems not to be lawful so to do, merely on the account of weakness of
Work and Labor, though occasioned by Age, Sickness, or Bodily Distempers. For
no Man is any way obliged to do more than he is able, with the regular
preservation of his Life; and the Church is obliged to be satisfied with the
conscientious discharge of what Abilities a Pastor has; otherwise providing
for it self in what is wanting.

2. IT is not lawful, merely on a weariness of, and despondency under
opposition and reproaches; which a Pastor is called and obliged to undergo for
the Good and Edification of the Flock, and not to faint in the warfare wereto
he is called.

THESE two were the Reasons of Eustathius at Perga, which were disallowed in
the Council at Ephesus: But,

3. IT is lawful in such an incurable decay of Intellectual Abilities, as
whereon a Man can discharge no Duty of the Pastoral Office unto the Edification
of the Church.

4. IT is lawful, in case of incurable divisions in the Church constantly
obstructing its Edification, and which cannot be removed whilst such a one
continues in his Office, though he be no way the cause of them. This is the
case wherein Clemens gives advice, and whereof Gregory gave an Example in his
own practice.

BUT this Case and its Determination, will hold only where the Divisions are
incurable by any other ways and means. For if those who cause such Divisions
may be cast out of the Church, or the Church may withdraw Communion from them;
or if there be Divisions in fixed Parties and Principles, Opinions or
Practices, they may separate into distinct Communion; in such cases this
Remedy, by the Pastors laying down his Office, is not to be made use of;
otherwise all things are to be done for Edification.

5. IT may be lawful, where the Church is wholly negligent in its Duty, and
persists in that negligence after admonition, in providing, according to their
Abilities, for the outward necessity of their Pastor and his Family. But this
Case cannot be determined without the consideration of many particular
Circumstances.

6. WHERE all or many of these causes concur, so as that a Man cannot
cheerfully and comfortably go on in the discharge of his Office, especially, if
he be pressed in point of Conscience through the Churches noncompliance with
their Duty, with respect unto any of the Institutions of Christ: And if the
Edification of the Church, which is at present obstructed, may be provided for
in their own judgment after a due manner; there is no such grievous yoke laid
by the Lord Christ on the necks of any of his Servants, but that such a Person
may peaceably lay down his Office in such a Church, and either abide in a
private station, or take the care of another Church, wherein he may discharge
his Office (being yet of Ability) unto his own Comfort, and their Edification.

CHAP. VI. Of the Office of Teachers in the Church, or an Enquiry into the
State, Condition, and Work of those called Teachers in the Scripture.
THE Lord Christ has given unto his Church Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11.
He has set in the Church, First, Apostles, Secondarily, Prophets, Thirdly,
Teachers, 1 Cor. 12.28. In the Church that was at Antioch there were Prophets
and Teachers, Act. 13.1. And their Work is both described and assigned unto
them, as we shall see afterward.

BUT the thoughts of learned Men, about those who in the Scripture are called
Teachers, are very various; nor is the Determination of their State and
Condition easy or obvious, as we shall find in our Enquiry.

IF there were originally a distinct Office of Teachers in the Church, it was
lost for many Ages: But yet there was always a Shadow or Appearance of it
retained, First in public Catechists, and then in Doctors or Professors of
Theology in the Schools belonging unto any Church. But this, as unto the Title
of Doctor or Teacher, is but a late Invention. For the occasion of it rose
about the year of Christ, 1135. Lotharius the Emperor having found in Italy a
Copy of the Roman Civil Law, and being greatly taken with it, he Ordained that
it should be publicly Taught and Expounded in the Schools. This he began by
the direction of Imerius, his Chancellor at Bononia; and to give encouragement
unto this Employment, they Ordained, that those who were the public Professors
of it should be solemnly created Doctors, of whom Bulgarus Hugolinus, with
others, were the First. Not long after, this Rite of creating Doctors was
borrowed of the Lawyers by Divines, who publicly taught Divinity in their
Schools. And this imitation first took place in Bononia, Paris and Oxford. But
this Name is since grown a Title of Honor to sundry sorts of Persons, whether
unto any good use or purpose, or no, I know not; but it is in use, and not
worth contending about, especially, if as unto some of them, it be fairly
reconcilable unto that of our Savior, Matthew. 23.8.

BUT the custom of having in the Church Teachers, that did publicly explain
and vindicate the principles of Religion, is far more Ancient, and of known
usage in the Primitive Churches. Such was the Practice of the Church of
Alexandria in their School, wherein the famous Panlaenus, Origin and Clemens
were Teachers; an imitation whereof was continued in all Ages of the Church.

AND indeed, the continuation of such a peculiar Work and Employment, to be
discharged in manner of an Office, is an evidence, that Originally there was
such a distinct Office in the Church. For, although in the Roman Church they
had instituted sundry Orders of Sacred Officers, borrowed from the Jews or
Gentiles, which have no resemblance unto any thing mentioned in the Scripture;
yet sundry things abased and corrupted by them in Church Officers, took their
occasional rise from what is so mentioned.

THERE are Four Opinions concerning those who are called by this Name in the
New Testament.

1. SOME say, that no Office at all is denoted by it; it being only a general
Appellation of those that taught others, whether constantly or occasionally.
Such were the Prophets in the Church of Corinth, that spoke occasionally and in
their turns, 1 Cor. 14. Which is that which all might do who had ability for
it, v. 5.24, 25.

2. SOME say, it is only another name for the same Office with that of a
Pastor, and so not to denote any distinct Office; of which mind Hierom seems to
be, Ephesians. 4.

3. OTHERS allow, that it was a distinct Office, whereunto some were called and
set apart in the Church, but it was only to Teach (and that in a peculiar
manner) the Principles of Religion, but had no Interest in the Rule of the
Church, or the Administration of the Sacred Mysteries; so the Pastor in the
Church was to Rule and Teach, and Administer the Sacred Mysteries: The Teacher
to Teach or Instruct only, but not to Rule, nor Dispense the Sacraments; and
the Ruling Elder to Rule only, and neither to Preach nor Administer Sacraments;
which has the appearance of Order, both useful and beautiful.

4. SOME judge, that it was a distinct Office, but of the same nature and kind
with that of the Pastor, endowed with all the same Powers, but differenced from
it with respect unto Gifts, and a peculiar kind of Work allotted unto it: But
this Opinion has this seeming disadvantage, that the difference between them
is so small, as not to be sufficient to give a distinct denomination of
Officers, or to constitute a distinct Office. And it may be, such a distinction
in Gifts will seldom appear, as that the Church may be guided thereby in their
choice of meet Persons unto distinct Offices. But Scripture-Testimony and Rule
must take place; and I shall briefly examine all these Opinions.

1. THE First is, That this is not the name of any Officer, nor is a Teacher,
as such, any Officer in the Church; but it is used only as a general Name for
any that Teach on any account the Doctrine of the Gospel. I do not indeed know
of any who have in particular contended for this Opinion; but I observe that
very many Expositors take no farther notice of them, but as such. This seems to
me to be most remote from the Truth.

IT is true, that in the First Churches, not only some, but all who had
received Spiritual Light in the Gifts of knowledge and utterance, did teach and
instruct others as they had opportunity, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9, 10, 11. Hence, the
Heathen Philosophers, as Celsus in particular, objected to the Christians of
old, that they suffered Sutlers, and Weavers, and Cobblers to teach among them,
which, they who knew that Paul himself, their great Apostle, wrought at a Trade
not much better, were not offended at. Of this sort were the Disciples
mentioned, Act. 8.4. So was Aquila, Act. 18.26. and the many Prophets in the
Church of Corinth, 2 Epist. Chap. 1.14. But,

1. THE Name (...), is not used in the New Testament but for a Teacher with
Authority. The Apostle John tells us, that (...) is the same with (...), Chap.
20.16. or as it is written, (...), Mark, 10.51. which in mixed dialect was the
same with Rabbi: And (...) and (...), were then in use for the Hebrew (...); of
which see Job 36.22. Isa. 30.20. Now the constant signification of these words,
is, a Master in Teaching, a Teacher with Authority. Nor is (...) used in the
New Testament, but for such a one. And therefore those who are called Teachers,
were such as were set apart unto the Office of Teaching, and not such as were
so called from an occasional Work or Duty.

2. TEACHERS are numbered among the Officers, which Christ has given unto, and
set in the Church, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. So that Originally
Church Officers were intended by them, is beyond contradiction.

3. THEY are mentioned as those, who with others did preside in the Church, and
join in the public ministrations of it, Act. 15.1, 2.

4. THEY are charged to attend unto the Work of Teaching, which none can be,
but they whose Office it is to Teach, Romans 12.7. It is therefore undeniable,
that there is such an Office as that of a Teacher mentioned in the Scripture.

THE Second Opinion is, that although a Teacher be a Church Officer, yet no
distinct Office is intended in that denomination. It is, say they, only another
Name for a Pastor, the Office being one and the same, the same Persons being
both Pastors and Teachers, or called by these several Names, as they have other
Titles also ascribed unto them.

SO it is fallen out, and so it is usual in things of this nature, that Men run
into extremes; Truth pleases them not. In the First Deviation of the Church
from its Primitive Institution, there were introduced, sundry Offices in the
Church that were not of Divine Institution, borrowed partly of the Jews, and
partly of the Gentiles, which issued in the Seven Orders of the Church of Rome.
They did not utterly reject any that were of a Divine Original, but retained
some kind of Figure, Shadow or Image of them. But they brought in others that
were merely of their own invention. In the rejection of this Exorbitancy, some
are apt to run into the other extreme. They will deny and reject some of them
that have a Divine Warranty for their Original. Howbeit, they are not many, nor
burdensome: Yea, they are all such, as without the continuation of them, the
Edification of the Church cannot be carried on in a due manner. For unto the
Beauty and Order of the Church in its Rule and Worship, it is required, not
only that there be many Officers in each Church, but also that they be of
sundry sorts; all Harmony in things Natural, Political and Ecclesiastical,
arising from variety with proportion. And he that shall with Calmness, and
without Prejudice, consider the whole Work that is to be done in Churches, with
the end of their institution, will be able to understand the necessity of
Pastors, Teachers, Ruling-Elders and Deacons, for those ends, and no other. And
this I hope I shall demonstrate in the consideration of these respective
Offices, with the Duties that belong unto them, as I have considered one of
them already. Wherefore, as unto the opinion under present consideration, I say,

1. IN the Primitive Church, about the end of the Second Century, before there
was the least attempt to introduce new Officers into the Church, there were
Persons called unto the Office and Work of public Teaching, who were not
Pastors, nor called unto the Administration of other Ordinances. Those of this
sort, in the Church of Alexandria, were, by reason of their extraordinary
Abilities, quickly of great fame and renown. Their constant Work was publicly
unto all comers, Believers and Unbelievers, to explain and teach the Principles
of Christian Religion, defending and vindicating it from the opposition of its
Heathen Adversaries, whether Atheists or Philosophers. This had never been so
exactly practiced in the Church, if it had not derived from Divine Institution.
And of this sort is the (...) the Catechist, intended by the Apostle, Gal. 6.6.
For it is such an one as constantly labors in the Work of Preaching, and has
those who depend upon his Ministry therein; (...), those that are Taught or
Catechized by him. For, hence alone it is that Maintenance is due unto him for
his Work. Let the Catechized communicate unto the Cathechist, the taught unto
the Teacher in all good things. And it is not the Pastor of the Church that he
intends, for he speaks of him in the same case in another manner, and no where
only with respect unto teaching alone.

2. THERE is a plain distinction between the Offices of a Pastor and a Teacher,
Ephesians. 4.11. Some Pastors and Teachers. This is one of the instances wherein
Men try their Wits, in putting in exceptions unto plain Scripture Testimonies,
as some or other do in all other cases; which if it may be allowed, we shall
have nothing left us certain in the whole Book of God. The Apostle enumerates
distinctly all the Teaching Officers of the Church, both extraordinary and
ordinary. It is granted, that there is a difference between Apostles, Prophets
and Evangelists, but there is none, say some, between Pastors and Teachers;
which are also named distinctly. Why so? Because there is an interposition of
the Article (...) between those of the former sort, and not between Pastors and
Teachers; a very weak consideration to control the evidence of the design of
the Apostle in the Words. We are not to prescribe unto him how he shall express
himself. But this I know, that the discretive and copulative conjunction (...),
and, between Pastors and Teachers, does no less distinguish them the one from
the other, than the (...) and (...) before made use of. And this I shall
confirm from the words themselves.

1. THE Apostle does not say Pastors or Teachers, which in congruity of speech
should have been done, if the same Persons and the same Office were intended.
And the discretive Particle in the close of such an enumeration of things
distinct, as that in this place, is of the same force with the other notes of
distinction before used.

2. AFTER he has named Pastors he names Teachers with a note of distinction.
This must contain either the addition of a New Office, or be an interpretation
of what went before; as if he had said Pastors, that is, Teachers. If it be the
latter, then the name of Teachers must be added, as that which was better known
than that of Pastors, and more expressive of the Office intended. It is
declared who are meant by Pastors in calling them Teachers; or else the
addition of the word is merely superfluous. But this is quite otherwise; the
name of Pastor being more known as unto the Indigitation of Office-Power and
Care, and more appropriated thereunto than that of Teacher; which is both a
common name, not absolutely appropriated unto Office, and respective of one
part of the Pastoral Office and Duty only.

3. NO instance can be given in any place where there is an enumeration of
Church Officers, either by their Names, as 1 Cor. 12.25. or by their Work, as
Romans 12.5, 6, 7. or by the Offices themselves, as Phil. 1.1. of the same
Officer, at the same time to be expressed under various names, which indeed
must needs introduce confusion into such an enumeration. It is true, the same
Officers are in the Scripture called by several Names, as Pastors, Bishops,
Presbyters, but if it had been said any where, that there were in the Church
Bishops and Presbyters, it must be acknowledged that they were distinct
Officers, as Bishops and Deacons are, Phil. 1.1.

4. THE words in their First notion, are not Synonymous; for all Pastors are
Teachers, but all Teachers are not Pastors; and therefore the latter cannot be
exegetical of the former.

3 dly. AS these Teachers are so called and named in contradistinction unto
Pastors in the same place, so they have distinct Office-Works and Duties
assigned unto them in the same place also; Romans 12.18. He that teaches on
teaching; he that exhorts on exhortation. If they have especial Works to
attend unto distinctly, by virtue of their Offices, then are their Offices
distinctly also; for from one there is an especial obligation unto one sort of
Duties, and to another sort from the other.

4 thly. THESE Teachers are set in the Church as in a distinct Office from that
of Prophets; Secondarily, Prophets, Thirdly, Teachers, 1 Cor. 12.28. And so
they are mentioned distinctly in the Church of Antioch, Act. 13.1. There were
in the Church at Antioch Prophets and Teachers. But in both places Pastors are
comprised under the name of Prophets; Exhortation being an especial branch of
Prophecy, Romans 12.6, 7, 8.

5. THERE is a peculiar institution of Maintenance for these Teachers, which
argues a distinct Office, Gal. 6.6.

FROM all these considerations, it appears, that the Teachers mentioned in the
Scripture, were Officers in the Church distinct from Pastors. For they are
distinguished from them, (1.) By their Name, declarative of the especial nature
of their Office. (2.) By their peculiar Work, which they are to attend unto, in
Teaching by virtue of Office. (3.) By the distinct placing in the Church as
peculiar Officers in it, distinct from Prophets or Pastors. (4.) By the
especial constitution of their necessary Maintenance. (5.) By the necessity of
their Work to be distinctly carried on in the Church. Which may suffice for the
removal of the Second Opinion.

THE Third is, that Teachers are a distinct Office in the Church, but such
whose Office, Work and Power, is confined unto Teaching only, so as that they
have no interest in Rule or the Administration of the Sacraments. And,

1. I ACKNOWLEDGE that this seems to have been the way and practice of the
Churches after the Apostles. For they had ordinary Catechists and Teachers in
Assemblies like Schools, that were not called unto the whole Work of the
Ministry.

2. THE name of a Teacher, neither in its native signification, nor in its
ordinary application, as expressive of the Work of this Office, does extend it
self beyond, or signify any thing but the mere Power and Duty of Teaching. It
is otherwise as unto the names of Pastors, Bishops or Overseers, Elders, which
as unto the two former, their constant use in Scripture suited unto their
signification, includes the whole Work of the Ministry; and the latter is a
name of Dignity and Rule. Upon the proposal of Church Officers under these
names, the whole of Office-Power and Duty is apprehended as included in them.
But the name of a Teacher, especially, as significant of that of Rabbi among
the Jews, carries along with it a confinement unto an especial Work or Duty.

3. I DO judge it lawful for any Church, from the nature of the thing it self,
Scripture, general Rules and Directions, to choose, call and set apart meet
Persons unto the Office, Work and Duty of Teachers, without an interest in the
Rule of the Church, or the Administration of the Holy Ordinances of Worship.
The same thing is practiced by many for the substance of it, though not in due
order. And, it may be, the practice hereof duly observed, would lead us unto
the Original Institution of this Office. But,

4. WHEREAS a Teacher, merely as such, has no right unto Rule or the
Administration of Ordinances, no more than the Doctors among the Jews had right
to Offer Sacrifices in the Temple; yet he who is called to be a Teacher, may
also at the same time be called to be an Elder; and a Teaching Elder has the
power of all holy Administrations committed to him.

5. BUT he that is called to be a Teacher in a peculiar manner, although he be
an Elder also, is to attend peculiarly unto that part of his Work from whence
he receives his Denomination. And so I shall at present dismiss this Third
Opinion unto farther consideration, if there be any occasion for it.

THE Fourth Opinion I rather embrace than any of the other, namely, upon a
supposition that a Teacher is a distinct Officer in the Church, his Office is
of the same kind with that of the Pastor, though distinguished from it as unto
degrees, both materially and formally: For,

1. THEY are joined with Pastors in the same Order as their Associates in
Office, Ephesians. 4.1. So they are with Prophets, and set in the Church as they
are, 1 Cor. 12.28, Act. 13.1. (2.) They have a peculiar Work of the same
general nature with that of Pastors assigned unto them, Romans 12.7. Being to
Teach or Preach the Gospel by virtue of Office, they have the same Office for
substance with the Pastors. (3.) They are said (...) in the Church, Act. 13.1.
which comprizeth all Sacred Administrations.

WHEREFORE, upon the consideration of all that is spoken in the Scripture
concerning Church-Teachers, with the various conjectures of all sorts of
Writers about them, I shall conclude my own Thoughts in some few observations,
and then enquire into the state of the Church, with reference unto these
Pastors and Teachers. And I say,

1. THERE may be Teachers in a Church called only unto the Work of Teaching,
without any farther interest in Rule or Right unto the Administration of the
Sacraments. Such they seem to be who are mentioned, Gal. 6.6. They are there
called peculiarly (...), Catechists; and (...), 1 Cor. 4.15. Instructors of
those that are young in the Rudiments of Religion. And such there were in the
Primitive Churches; some whereof were eminent, famous and useful. And this was
very necessary in those days when the Churches were great and numerous. For,
whereas the whole Rule of the Church, and the Administration of all Ordinances
in it, is originally committed unto the Pastor, as belonging entirely unto his
Office; the discharge of it in all its parts, unto the Edification of the
Church, especially when it is numerous, being impossible for any one Man, or it
may be more, in the same Office where all are obliged unto an especial
attendance on one part of it, namely, the Word and Prayer, it pleased the Lord
Christ to appoint such as in distinct Offices should be associated with them,
for the discharge of sundry parts of their Duty. So were Deacons Ordained to
take care of the poor, and the outward concerns of the Church, without any
interest in Rule or Right to Teach. So were, as we shall prove, Elders Ordained
to assist and help in Rule, without any call to Preach or Administer the
Sacraments. And so were Teachers appointed to instruct the Church and others in
the Truth, who have no Right to Rule, or the Administration of other
Ordinances. And thus, although the whole Duty of the Edification of the Church
be still incumbent on the Pastors, yet being supplied with assistance to all
the parts of it, it may be comfortably discharged by them. And if this Order
were observed in all Churches, not only many inconveniences would be prevented,
but the Order and Edification of the Church greatly promoted.

2. HE who is peculiarly called to be a Teacher, with reference unto a
distinction from a Pastor, may yet at the same time be called to be an Elder
also, that is to be a Teaching Elder. And where there is in any Officer a
concurrence of both these, a Right unto Rule as an Elder, and power to Teach,
or Preach the Gospel, there is the same Office and Office-Power, for the
substance of it, as there is in the Pastor.

3. ON the foregoing supposition there yet remains a distinction between the
Office of a Pastor and Teacher; which, as far as light may be taken from their
Names and distinct Asscriptions unto them, consists materially in the different
Gifts which those to be called unto Office have received, which the Church in
their call ought to have respect unto; and formally in the peculiar exercise of
those Gifts in the discharge of their Office, according unto the Assignation of
their especial Work unto them, which themselves are to attend unto.

UPON what has been before discoursed concerning the Office of Pastors and
Teachers, it may be enquired, Whether there may be many of them in a particular
Church, or whether there ought only to be one of each sort: And I say,

1. TAKE Teachers in the Third Sense, for those who are only so, and have no
farther interest in Office-Power, and there is no doubt, but that there may be
as many of them in any Church as are necessary unto its Edification; and ought
so to be. And a due observation of this institution, would prevent the
inconvenience of Men's Preaching constantly, who are in no Office in the Church.
For although I do grant, that those who have once been regularly or solemnly
set A part or Ordained unto the Ministry, have the Right of constant Preaching
inherent in them, and the Duty of it incumbent on them, though they may be
separated from those Churches, wherein and unto whom they were peculiarly
Ordained; yet for Men to give themselves up constantly unto the Work of
Teaching by Preaching the Gospel, who never were set apart by the Church
thereunto, I know not that it can be justified.

2. If there be but one sort of Elders mentioned in the Scripture, it is out of
all question, that there may be many Pastors in the same Church. For there were
many Elders in every Church; Act. 14.22. Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.5. But
if there are sundry sorts of Elders mentioned in the Scripture, as Pastors, who
peculiarly feed the Flock, those Teaching Elders of whom we have spoken, and
those Rulers concerning whom we shall treat in the next place; then no
determination of this enquiry can be taken from the multiplication of them in
any Church.

3. It is certain, that the Order very early observed in the Church was one
Pastor, (...), Praeses, quickly called Episcopus by way of distinction, with
many Elders assisting in Rule and Teaching, and Deacons Ministering in the
things of this Life, whereby the Order of the Church was preserved, and its
Authority represented. Yet I will not deny, but that in each particular Church
there may be many Pastors, with an equality of power, if the Edification of the
Church does require it.

4. IT was the alteration of the state of the Church from its Primitive
Constitution, and Deviation from its First Order, by an occasional coalescency
of many Churches into one, by a new form of Churches never appointed by Christ,
which came not in until after the end of the Second Century, that gave occasion
to corrupt this Order into an Episcopal Pre-eminence, which degenerated more
and more into confusion under the Name of Order. And the absolute equality of
many Pastors in one and the same Church, is liable unto many inconveniences,
if not diligently watched against.

5. WHEREFORE, let the state of the Church be preserved and kept unto its
Original Constitution, which is Congregational, and no other; and I do judge,
that the Order of the Officers, which was so early in the Primitive Church,
namely, of one Pastor or Bishop in one Church, assisted in Rule and all holy
Administrations, with many Elders Teaching or Ruling only, does not so
overthrow Church Order, as to render its Rule or Discipline useless.

6. BUT whereas there is no difference in the Scripture, as unto Office or
Power intimated between Bishops and Presbyters, as we have proved, where there
are many Teaching Elders in any Church, an equality in Office and Power is to
be preserved. But yet this takes not off from the due preference of the
Pastoral Office, nor from the necessity of precedence for the observation of
Order in all Church Assemblies, nor from the consideration of the peculiar
advantages, which Gifts, Age, Abilities, Prudence and Experience, which may
belong unto some according to Rule, may give.

CHAP. VII. Of the Rule of the Church; or, of Ruling Elders.
1. THE Rule and Government of the Church, or the execution of the Authority of
Christ therein, is in the hand of the Elders. All Elders in Office have Rule;
and none have Rule in the Church but Elders. As such, Rule does belong unto
them. The Apostles, by virtue of their especial Office, were entrusted with all
Church Power; but therefore they were Elders also; 1 Pet. 5.1. 2 John 1. 3 John
1. See Act. 21.17. 1 Timothy 5.17. They are some of them on other accounts, called
Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, Ministers, Guides, but what belongs unto any of
them in point of Rule, or what interest they have therein, it belongs unto them
as Elders, and not otherwise; Act. 20.17, 18.

SO under the Old Testament, where the Word does not signify a difference in
Age, but is used in a moral sense, Elders are the same with Rulers or
Governors, whether in Offices Civil or Ecclesiastical; especially the Rulers
of the Church were constantly called its Elders. And the use of the Word, with
the abuse of the Power or Office intended by it, is traduced to signify Men in
Authority (Signeiores, Eldermani) in all places.

2. Church Power acted in its Rule, is called the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, by an expression derived from the Keys that were a sign of Office-Power
in the Families of Kings, Isa. 22.22. and used by our Savior himself to denote
the communication of Church Power unto others, which was absolutely and
universally vested in himself under the Name of the Key of David; Revel. 3.7.
Mat. 16.19.

3. THESE Keys are usually referred unto Two Heads; namely, the one of Order,
the other of Jurisdiction.

4. BY the Key of Order, the Spiritual Right, Power, and Authority of Bishops
or Pastors to Preach the Word, to Administer the Sacraments, Doctrinally to
bind and loose the Consciences of Men, are intended.

5. BY Jurisdiction, the Rule, Government, or Discipline of the Church is
designed, though it was never so called or esteemed in the Scripture or the
Primitive Church, until the whole nature of Church-Rule or Discipline was
depraved and changed. Therefore, neither the Word, nor any thing that is
signified by it, or which it is applied unto, ought to be admitted unto any
consideration in the things that belong unto the Church or its Rule; it being
expressive of, and directing unto that corrupt Administration of things
Ecclesiastical, according unto the Canon Law, by which all Church-Rule and
Order is destroyed. I do therefore at once dismiss all disputes about it, as of
things Foreign to the Gospel and Christian Religion, I mean as unto the
Institutions of Christ in his Church. The Civil Jurisdiction of Supreme
Magistrates about the externals of Religion, is of another consideration. But
that these Keys do include the twofold distinct Powers of Teaching and Rule,
of Doctrine and Discipline, is freely granted.

6. IN the Church of England, (as in that of Rome) there is a peculiar
distribution made of these Keys. Unto some, that is unto one special sort or
order of Men, they are both granted, both the Key of Order and of Jurisdiction;
which is unto Diocesan Bishops, with some others under various Canonical
restrictions and limitations, as Deans and Archdeacons. Unto some is granted
the Key of Order only, without the least interest in Jurisdiction or Rule by
virtue of their Office; which are the Parochial Ministers, or mere Presbyters,
without any additional Title or Power, as of Commissary Surrogates, or the
like. And unto a third sort, there is granted the Key of Rule or Jurisdiction
almost plenipotent, who have no share in the Key of Order, that is, were never
Ordained, Separated, Dedicated unto any Office in the Church; such as are the
Chancellors, etc.

7. THESE Chancellors are the only Lay Elders that I know any where in any
Church; that is, Persons entrusted with the Rule of the Church, and the
Disposition of its Censures, who are not Ordained unto any Church-Office; but
in all other things continue in the Order of the Laity or the People. All
Church Rulers, by institution, are Elders. To be an Elder of the Church, and a
Ruler in it, is all one. Wherefore, these Persons being Rulers in the Church,
and yet thus continuing in the Order of the People, are Lay Elders; whom I
wonder how so many of the Church came so seriously to oppose, seeing this Order
of Men is owned by none but themselves. The Truth is, and it must be
acknowledged, that there is no known Church in the World, (I mean whose Order
is known unto us, and is of any public consideration,) but they do dispose the
Rule of the Church in part, into the hands of Persons, who have not the power
of Authoritative Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments
committed unto them. For even those who place the whole external Rule of the
Church in the Civil Magistrate, do it, as they judge him an Officer of the
Church, entrusted by Christ with Church Power. And those who deny any such
Officers as are usually called Ruling Elders in the Reformed Churches to be of
Divine Institution, yet maintain that it is very necessary that there should be
such Officers in the Church, either appointed by the Magistrate, or chosen by
the people, and that with cogent Arguments. See Grot. de Jure Potestat. Cap.

8. BUT this distribution mentioned of Church Power, is unscriptural; nor is
there any footsteps of it in Antiquity. It is so as unto the two latter
Branches of it. That any one should have the power of Order to Preach the Word,
to Administer the Seals, to bind and loose the Conscience Doctrinally; or
Ministerially to bind and loose in the Court of Conscience, and yet by the
virtue of that Office which gives them this power, not to have a Right and
Power of Rule or Discipline to bind and loose in the Court of the Church, is
that, which neither the Scripture, nor any example of the Primitive Church does
give countenance unto. And as by this means, those are abridged and deprived of
their power, to whom it is granted by the Institution and Law of Christ, as it
is with all Elders duly called unto their Office; so in the Third Branch there
is a grant of Church Power unto such, as by the Law of Christ, are excluded
from any Interest therein. The enormity of which constitution, I shall not at
present insist upon. But Enquiry must be made what the Scripture directs unto
herein: And,

1. THERE is a Work and Duty of Rule in the Church, distinct from the Work and
Duty of Pastoral* Feeding, by the Preaching of the Word and Administration of
the Sacraments. All agree herein, unless it be Erastus and those that follow
him, who seem to oppose it. But their Arguments lie not against Rule in
general, which were brutish, but only a Rule by external Jurisdiction in the
Elders of the Church. So they grant the general Assertion of the necessity of
Rule, for who can deny it? only they contend about the subject of power
required thereunto. A Spiritual Rule by virtue of mutual voluntary
confederation, for the preservation of Peace, Purity and Order in the Church,
few of that opinion deny; at least it is not that which they do oppose. For to
deny all Rule and Discipline in the Church, with all Administration of Censures
in the exercise of a Spiritual Power internally inherent in the Church, is to
deny the Church to be a Spiritual Political Society, overthrow its Nature, and
frustrate its Institution in direct opposition unto the Scripture. That there
is such a Rule in the Christian Church, see Act. 20.28. Romans 12.8. 1 Cor.
12.28. 1 Timothy 9.5. Chap. 5.17. Heb. 13.7, 17. Revel. 2.3.

2. DIFFERENT and distinct Gifts are required unto the discharge of these
distinct Works and Duties. This belongs unto the Harmony of the dispensation of
the Gospel. Gifts are bestowed to answer all Duties prescribed. Hence they are
the First Foundation of all Power, Work and Duty in the Church. Unto every one
of us is given Grace according to the measure of the Gift of Christ, that is,
Ability for Duty, according to the measure wherein Christ is pleased to grant
it; Ephesians. 4.7. There are diversities of Gifts, but the same spirit; and the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every Man to profit withal, 1 Cor.
12.4, 7, 8, 9, 10. Having then Gifts differing according to the Grace given
unto us, etc. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Wherefore, as every Man has received the Gift,
so are they to minister the same, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of
God, 1 Pet. 4.10. Hence are they called the Powers of the World to come, Heb.
6.4, 5. Wherefore, differing Gifts, are the first foundation of differing
Offices and Duties.

3. THAT differing Gifts are required unto the different Works of Pastoral
Teaching on the one hand, and practical Rule on the other, is evident, (1.)
From the Light of Reason, and the nature of the Works themselves being so
different. And, (2.) From experience; Some Men are fitted by Gifts, for the
Dispensation of the Word and Doctrine in a way of Pastoral Feeding, who have no
useful Ability in the Work of Rule; And some are fitted for Rule, who have no
Gifts for the discharge of the Pastoral Work in Preaching. Yea, it is very
seldom that both these sorts of Gifts do concur in any eminency in the same
Persons, or without some notable defect. Those who are ready to assume all
things unto themselves, are for the most part fit for nothing at all. And hence
it is, that most of those who esteem both these Works to belong principally
unto them, do almost totally decline the one, or that of Pastoral Preaching,
under a pretense of attending unto the other, that is, Rule, in a very
preposterous way; for they omit that which is incomparably the greater and more
worthy, for that which is less and inferior unto it, although it should be
attended unto in a due manner.

BUT this, and sundry other things of the like nature, proceed from the
corruption of that Traditional notion, which is true in it self and continued
among all sorts of Christians; namely, that there ought to be some on whom the
Rule of the Church is in an especial manner incumbent, and whose principal Work
it is to attend thereunto. For the great depravations of all Church Government,
proceed from the Corruption and Abuse of this notion, which in it self, and its
original, is true and sacred. Herein also, Malum habitat in alieno fundo. There
is no corruption in Church Order or Rule, but is corruptly derived from, or is
set up as an Image of some Divine Institution.

4. THE Work of Rule, as distinct from Teaching, is in general to watch over
the walking or conversation of the Members of the Church with Authority,
Exhorting, Comforting, Admonishing, Reproving, Encouraging, Directing of them,
as occasion shall require. The Gifts necessary hereunto, are Diligence, Wisdom,
Courage and Gravity, as we shall see afterward. The Pastoral Work, is
principally to reveal the whole Counsel of God, to divide the Word aright, or
to labor in the Word and Doctrine, both as unto the general Dispensation, and
particular Application of it, in all seasons, and on all occasions.

HEREUNTO Spiritual Wisdom, Knowledge, Sound Judgment, Experience and Utterance
are required, all to be improved by continual study of the Word and Prayer. But
this difference of Gifts, unto these distinct Works, does not of it self
constitute distinct Offices, because the same Persons may be meetly furnished
with those of both sorts.

5. YET distinct Works and Duties, though some were furnished with Gifts for
both, was a ground in the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost, for distinct Offices in the
Church, where one sort of them were as much as those of one Office could
ordinarily attend unto, Act. 6.2, 3, 4. Ministration unto the poor of the
Church, for the supply of their Temporal Necessities, is an Ordinance of
Christ. The Administration hereof, the Apostles were furnished for with Gifts
and Wisdom above all others: But yet, because there was another part of their
Work and Duty superior hereunto, and of greater necessity unto the Propagation
of the Gospel and Edification of the Church, namely, a diligent attendance unto
the Word and Prayer, the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost in them thought meet to erect
a New Office in the Church, for the discharge of that part of the Ministerial
Duty which was to be attended unto; yet, not so as to be any obstruction unto
the other. I do not observe this, as if it were lawful for any others after
them to do the same; namely, upon a supposition of an especial Work, to erect
an especial Office. Only I would demonstrate from hence, the equity and
reasonable ground of that Institution, which we shall afterward evince.

6. THE Work of the Ministry in Prayer, and Preaching of the Word, or labor in
the Word and Doctrine, whereunto the Administration of the Seals of the
Covenant is annexed, with all the Duties that belong unto the especial
Application of these things before insisted on, unto the Flock; are ordinarily
sufficient to take up the whole Man, and the utmost of their endowments who are
called unto the Pastoral Office in the Church. The very nature of the Work in
it self is such, as that the Apostle giving a short description of it, adds as
an intimation of its greatness and excellency, Who is sufficient for these
things? 2 Cor. 2.16. And the manner of its performance adds unto its weight.
For not to mention that intension of Mind in the exercise of Faith, Love, Zeal
and Compassion, which is required of them in the discharge of their whole
Office; the diligent consideration of the state of the Flock, so as to provide
Spiritual Food convenient for them; with a constant attendance unto the issues
and effects of the Word in the Consciences and Lives of Men; is enough for the
most part to take up their whole time and strength.

IT is gross ignorance or negligence that occasioneth any to be otherwise
minded. As the Work of the Ministry is generally discharged, as consisting only
in a Weekly provision of Sermons, and the performance of some stated Offices by
Reading, Men may have time and liberty enough to attend unto other occasions.
But in such Persons we are not at present concerned. Our Rule is plain, 1 Timothy
4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

7. IT does not hence follow, that those who are called unto the Ministry of
the Word, as Pastors and Teachers, who are Elders also, are divested of the
Right of Rule in the Church, or discharged from the exercise of it, because
others not called unto their Office, are appointed to be assistant unto them;
that is, Helps in the Government. For the Right and Duty of Rule is inseparable
from the Office of Elders which all Bishops or Pastors are. The Right is still
in them, and the exercise of it consistent with their more excellent Work, is
required of them. So was it in the First Institution of the Sanhedrim in the
Church of Israel; Exodus 18.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Moses had before the
sole Rule and Government of the People. In the addition that was made of an
Eldership for his assistance, there was no diminution of his Right, or the
exercise of it according to his precedent power. And the Apostles, in the
constitution of Elders in every Church, derogated nothing from their own
Authority, nor discharged themselves of their care. So when they appointed
Deacons to take care of Supplies for the Poor, they did not forgo their own
Right, nor the exercise of their Duty as their other Work would permit them,
Gal. 2.9, 10. And in particular, the Apostle Paul manifested his concernment
herein, in the care he took about Collection for the Poor in all Churches.

8. AS we observed at the entrance of this Chapter, the whole Work of the
Church, as unto Authoritative Teaching and Rule, is committed unto the Elders.
For Authoritative Teaching and Ruling, is Teaching and Ruling by virtue of
Office: And this Office whereunto they do belong, is that of Elders, as it is
undeniably attested, Act. 20.17, etc. All that belongs unto the Care,
Inspection, Oversight, Rule and Instruction of the Church, is committed unto
the Elders of it expressly. For Elders is a Name derived from the Jews, denoting
them that have Authority in the Church.
The First signification of the Word in all Languages respects Age. Elders are
Old Men, well stricken in years; unto whom respect and reverence is due by the
Law of Nature and Scripture Command; unless they forfeit their Privilege by
levity or wickedness, which they often do. Now Ancient Men were originally
judged, if not only, yet the most meet for Rule, and were before others
constantly called thereunto. Hence, the Name of Elders was appropriated unto
them, who did Preside and Rule over others in any kind.

ONLY it may be observed, that there is in the Scripture no mention of Rulers
that are called Elders, but such as are in a subordinate Power and Authority
only. Those who were in supreme absolute power, as Kings and Princes, are never
called Elders. But Elders by Office, were such only as had a Ministerial Power
under others. Wherefore, the highest Officers in the Christian Church being
called Elders, even the Apostles themselves, and Peter in particular, 1 Epist.
Chap. 5. v. 1.2. it is evident, that they have only a Ministerial Power; and so
it is declared ver. 4. The Pope would now scarce take it well to be esteemed
only an Elder of the Church of Rome; unless it be in the same sense wherein the
Turkish Monarch is called the Grand Signior. But those who would be in the
Church above Elders, have no Office in it, whatever usurpation they may make
over it.

9. TO the complete constitution of any particular Church, or the perfection of
its Organical State, it is required that there be many Elders in it; at least
more than one. In this proposition lies the next foundation of the Truth which
we plead for, and therefore it must be distinctly considered. I do not
determine what their number ought to be; nor is it determinable, as unto all
Churches. For the Light of Nature sufficiently directs, that it is to be
proportioned unto the Work and End designed. Where a Church is numerous, there
is a necessity of increasing their number proportionable unto their Work. In
the days of Cyprian there was in the Church of Carthage Ten or Twelve of them
that are mentioned by Name; And at the same time, there were a great many in
the Church of Rome under Cornelius. Where the Churches are small, the number of
Elders may be so also. For no Office is appointed in the Church for pomp or
show, but for labor only. And so many are necessary in each Office as are able
to discharge the Work which is allotted unto them. But that Church, be it small
or great, is not complete in its state, is defective, which has not more
Elders than one; who have not so many as are sufficient for their Work.

10. THE Government of the Church, in the judgment and practice of some, is
absolutely Democratical or Popular. They judge that all Church Power or
Authority, is seated and settled in the Community of the Brethren or Body of the
People. And they look on Elders or Ministers, only as Servants of the Church;
not only materially in the Duties they perform, and finally for their
Edification, serving for the good of the Church, in the things of the Church;
but formally also, as acting the Authority of the Church by a mere delegation,
and not any of their own received directly from Christ, by virtue of his Law
and Institution. Hence, they do occasionally appoint Persons among themselves
not called unto, not vested with any Office, to Administer the Supper of the
Lord, or any other solemn Offices of Worship. On this principle and
supposition, I see no necessity of any Elders at all, though usually they do
conferr this Office, on some with solemnity. But as among them, there is no
direct necessity of any Elders for Rule, so we treat not at present concerning
them.

11. SOME place the Government of many particular Churches in a Diocesan
Bishop, with those that act under him, and by his Authority, according unto the
Rule of the Canon Law, and the civil constitution of the Land. These are so far
from judging it necessary that there should be many Elders for Rule in every
particular Church, as that they allow no Rule in them at all, but only assert a
Rule over them. But a Church, where there is no Rule in it self, to be
exercised in the Name of Christ by its own Rulers, Officers, Guides, immediately
presiding in it, is unknown to Scripture and Antiquity. Wherefore, with these
we deal not in this Discourse; nor have any apprehension, that the power of
presenting Men, for any pretended Disorder, unto the Bishops or Chancellors
Court, is any part of Church Power or Rule.

12. OTHERS place the Rule of particular Churches, especially in cases of
greatest moment, in an Association, Conjunction or Combination of all the
Elders of them in one Society, which is commonly called a Classis. So in all
Acts of Rule, there will be a conjunct acting of many Elders. And, no doubt it
is the best provision that can be made on a supposition of the continuance of
the present Parochial Distribution. But those also of this judgment, who have
most weighed and considered the nature of these things, do assert the necessity
of many Elders in every particular Church, which is the common judgment and
practice of the Reformed Churches in all places.

13. AND some there are, who begin to maintain, That there is no need of any
more but One Pastor, Bishop, or Elder, in a particular Church, which has its
Rule in its self; other Elders for Rule being unnecessary. This is a Novel
Opinion, contradictory to the sense and practice of the Church in all Ages. And
I shall prove the contrary.

1. THE pattern of the First Churches constituted by the Apostles, which it is
our Duty to imitate and follow as our Rule, constantly expresses and declares,
That many Elders were appointed by them in every Church, Act. 11.30. Chap.
14.23. Chap. 15.2, 4, 6, 22. Chap. 16.4. Chap. 20.17, etc. 1 Timothy 5.17. Phil.
1.1. Tit. 1.5. 1 Pet. 5.1. There is no mention in the Scripture, no mention in
Antiquity, of any Church wherein there was not more Elders than One, nor does
that Church answer the Original Pattern, where it is otherwise.

2. WHERE there is but one Elder in a Church, there cannot be an Eldership or
Presbytery; as there cannot be a Senate where there is but one Senator; which
is contrary unto 1 Timothy 4.14.

3. THE continuation of every Church in its original State and Constitution,
is, since the ceasing of extraordinary Offices and Powers, committed to the
Care and Power of the Church it self. Hereunto the Calling and Ordaining of
ordinary Officers, Pastors, Rulers, Elders, Teachers, do belong. And therein,
as we have proved, both the Election of the People, submitting themselves unto
them in the Lord, and the solemn setting of them apart by Imposition of Hands,
do concur. But if there be but One Elder only in a Church, upon his Death or
Removal, this Imposition of Hands must either be left unto the People, or be
supplied by Elders of other Churches; or be wholly omitted, all which are
irregular. And that Church Order is defective, which wants the Symbol of
Authoritative Ordination.

4. IT is difficult, if not impossible, on a supposition of One Elder only in a
Church, to preserve the Rule of the Church from being Prelatical or Popular.
There is nothing more frequently objected unto those who dissent from Diocesan
Bishops, than that they would every one be Bishops in their own Parishes, and
unto their own People. All such pretenses are excluded on our principles, of
the Liberty of the People, of the necessity of many Elders in the same Church
in an equality of Power, and the Communion of other Churches in Association:
But practically where there is but One Elder, one of the extremes can be hardly
avoided. If he Rule by himself, without the previous Advice in some cases, as
well as the subsequent consent of the Church, it has an eye of unwarrantable
Prelacy in it: If every thing be to be Originally Transacted, Disposed, Ordered
by the whole Society, the Authority of the Elder will quickly be insignificant,
and he will be little more in point of Rule, than any other Brother of the
Society. But all these Inconveniences are prevented by the fixing of many
Elders in each Church, which may maintain the Authority of the Presbytery, and
free the Church from the Despotical Rule of any Diotr^phes. But in case there
be but one in any Church, unless he have Wisdom to maintain the Authority of
the Eldership in his own Person and Actings, there is no Rule but Confusion.

5. THE nature of the Work whereunto they are called, requires, that in every
Church consisting in any considerable number of Members, there should be more
Elders than One. When God first appointed Rule in the Church under the Old
Testament, he assigned unto every Ten Persons, or Families, a distinct Ruler,
Deuteronomy. 1.15. For the Elders are to take care of the Walk or Conversation of all
the Members of the Church, that it be according unto the Rule of the Gospel.
This Rule is eminent as unto the holiness that it requires, above all other
Rules of moral Conversation whatever. And there is in all the Members of the
Church great Accuracy and Circumspection required in their walking after it and
according unto it. The Order also and Decency which is required in all
Church Assemblies, stands in need of exact care and inspection. That all these
things can be attended unto, and discharged in a due manner in any Church by
One Elder, is for them only to suppose who know nothing of them. And, although
there may be an appearance for a season of all these things in such Churches,
yet there being not therein a due compliance with the Wisdom and Institution of
Christ, they have no present Beauty, nor will be of any long continuance.

THESE considerations, as also those that follow, may seem jejune and
contemptible unto such as have another frame of Church-Rule and Order drawn in
their Minds and Interests. A Government vested in some few Persons, with Titles
of Pre-eminence and Legal Power, exercised in Courts with Coercive
Jurisdiction, by the Methods and Processes of Canons of their own framing, is
that which they suppose does better become the Grandeur of Church-Rulers, and
the State of the Church, than these Creeping Elders with their Congregations.
But, whereas our present enquiry after these things, is only in and out of the
Scripture, wherein there is neither shadow nor appearance of any of these
practices, I beg their pardon, if at present I consider them not.

10. WE shall now make Application of these things unto our present purpose. I
say then, (1.) Whereas there is a Work of Rule in the Church, distinct from
that of Pastoral Feeding. (2.) Whereas this Work is to be attended unto with
diligence, which includes the whole Duty of him that attends unto it. And, (3.)
That the Ministry of the Word and Prayer, with all those Duties that accompany
it, is a full Employment for any Man, and so consequently his principal and
proper Work, which it is unlawful for him to be remiss in by attending on
another with Diligence. And, (4.) Whereas there ought to be many Elders in
every Church, that both the Works of Teaching and Ruling may be constantly
attended unto. (5.) That in the Wisdom of the Holy Ghost, distinct Works did
require distinct Offices for their discharge; all which we have proved already;
our enquiry hereon is, Whether the same Holy Spirit, has not distinguished
this Office of Elders into those two sorts, namely, those who are called unto
Teaching and Rule also; and those who are called unto Rule only, which we
Affirm.

THE Testimonies whereby the Truth of this Assertion is confirmed, are
generally known and pleaded; I shall insist on some of them only, beginning
with that which is of uncontrollable evidence, if it had any thing to conflict
withal but prejudices and interest; and this is 1 Timothy 5.17. (...), is Praesum,
Praesidio; to Preside, to Rule. Praesident probati Seniores. Tertull. And the
Bishop or Pastor in Justin Martyr, is (...). So is the Word constantly used in
the New Testament, Romans 12.8. (...), that Rules; 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. (...), that
are over them, that is, in place of Rule, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5, 12. It is applied unto
Family Rule and Government, as it is also unto care and diligence about good
Works, Tit. 3.8.14. (...) is the whole Presidency in the Church, with respect
unto its Rule. Translators agree in the reading of these Words, so the Hebrew
of Munster, (...), The Elders of the Congregation who well discharge their Rule
or Conduct. So the Syriack, (...), Those Elders. Qui been praesunt Presbyteri;
Vul Lat. Seniori che Governano been; Ital. All agree that it is the Governors
and the Government of the Church in general that is here intended. (...) is the
Word most controverted. All Translators esteem it distinctive, Heb. (...),
Eminently; Sir. (...), Chiefly, Principally; Maxim. (...), who labor
painfully, labor to weariness; travail in the Word and Doctrine.

THE Elders or Presbyters in Office, Elders of the Church that Rule well, or
discharge their Presidency for Rule in due manner, are worthy, or ought to be
reputed worthy of double honor; especially those of them who labor, or are
engaged in the great labor and travail of the Word and Doctrine. AND some
things may be observed in general concerning these words.

1. THIS Testimony relates directly unto the Rules and Principles before laid
down, directing unto the practice of them. According to the Analogy of these
Principles, these Words are to be interpreted. And unless they are overthrown,
it is to no purpose to put in exceptions against the sense of this or that
Word; the Interpretation of them is to be suited unto the Analogy of the things
which they relate unto. If we consider not what is spoken here in consent with
other Scriptures treating of the same matter, we depart from all sober Rules of
Interpretation.

2. ON this supposition, the Words of the Text have a plain and obvious
signification, which at first view presents it self unto the common sense and
understanding of all Men. And where there is nothing contrary unto any other
Divine Testimony, or Evident Reason, such a sense is constantly to be embraced.
There is nothing here of any Spiritual Mystery; but only a direction concerning
outward Order in the Church. In such, cases the literal sense of the Words
rationally apprehended, is all that we are concerned in. But on the first
Proposal of this Text, That the Elders that Rule well, are worthy of double
honor, especially those who labor in the Word and Doctrine; a rational Man
who is unprejudiced, who never heard of the Controversy about Ruling Elders,
can hardly avoid an Apprehension that there are two sort of Elders, some that
labor in the Word and Doctrine, and some who do not so do. The Truth is, it
was Interest and Prejudice that first caused some learned Men to strain their
wits to find out evasions from the evidence of this Testimony: Being so found
out, some others of meaner Abilities have been entangled by them. For there is
not one new Argument advanced in this cause, not one exception given in unto
the sense of the place which we plead for, but what was long since coined by
Papists and Prelatists, and managed with better Colors than some now are able
to lay on them, who pretend unto the same judgment.

3. THIS is the substance of the Truth in the Text. There are Elders in the
Church; there are or ought to be so in every Church. With these Elders the
whole Rule of the Church is entrusted; all these, and only they, do Rule in it.
Of these Elders there are two sorts, for a description is given of one sort
distinctive from the other, and comparative with it. The First sort does Rule,
and also labor in the Word and Doctrine. That these Works are distinct and
different was before declared. Yet, as distinct Works, they are not
incompatible, but are committed unto the same Person. They are so unto them,
who are not Elders only, but moreover Pastors or Teachers. Unto Pastors and
Teachers, as such, there belongs no Rule; although, by the institution of
Christ, the Right of Rule be inseparable from their Office. For all that are
rightfully called thereunto are Elders also, which gives them an Interest in
Rule. They are Elders with the Addition of Pastoral or Teaching Authority. But
there are Elders which are not Pastors or Teachers. For there are some who Rule
well, but labor not in the Word and Doctrine; that is, who are not Pastors or
Teachers.

ELDERS that Rule well, but labor not in the Word and Doctrine, are Ruling
Elders only; and such are in the Text. THE most learned of our Protestant
Adversaries in this case, ^re Erastus, Bilson, Sarravia, Downham, Scultetus,
Mead, Grotius, Hamond; who agree not at all among themselves about the sense of
the Words: For,

1. THEIR whole design and endeavor is to put in Exceptions against the
obvious sense and interpretation of the Words, not fixing on any determinate
exposition of it themselves, such as they will abide by in opposition unto any
other sense of the place. Now this is most sophistical way of arguing upon
Testimonies, and suited only to make Controversies endless. Whose Wit is so
barren, as not to be able to raise one exception or other against the plainest
and most evident Testimony? So the Socinians deal with us, in all the
Testimonies we produce to prove the Deity or Satisfaction of Christ. They
suppose it enough to evade their force, if they can but pretend that the Words
are capable of another sense; although they will not abide by it, that this or
that is their sense. For if they would do so, when that is overthrown the Truth
would be established. But every Testimony of the Scripture has one determinate
sense. When this is contended about, it is equal that those at difference do
express their Apprehensions of the mind of the Holy Spirit in the Word which
they will abide by. When this is done, let it be examined and tried, whether of
the two senses pretended unto, does best comply with the signification and use
of the Words, the context or scope of the place, other Scripture Testimonies,
and the Analogy of Faith. No such Rule is attended unto in this case by our
Adversaries. They think it enough to oppose our sense of the Words, but will
not fix upon any of their own, which if it be disproved, ours ought to take
place. And hence,

2. THEY do not in the least agree among themselves, scarce any Two of them, on
what is the most probable sense of the Words, nor are any of them singly, well
resolved what Application to make of them, nor unto what persons; but only
propose things as their conjecture. But of very many opinions or conjectures
that are advanced in this case, all of them but of one, are accompanied with
the modesty of granting that diverse sorts of Elders are here intended, which,
without more than ordinary confidence, cannot be denied: But,

SOME by Elders that Rule well, do understand Bishops that are Diocesans; and
by those that labor in the Word and Doctrine, ordinary Preaching Presbyters;
which plainly gives them the advantage of Pre-eminence, Reverence and
Maintenance above the other.

SOME by Elders that Rule well, understand ordinary Bishops and Presbyters; and
by those that labor in the Word and Doctrine, Evangelists; so carrying the
Text out of the present concernment of the Church, Deacons are esteemed by some
to have an Interest in the Rule of the Church, and so to be intended in the
first place; and Preaching Ministers in the latter.

SOME speak of two sorts of Elders, both of the same Order, or Ministers; some
that Preach the Word and Administer the Sacraments; and others that are
Employed about inferior Offices, as Reading, and the like, which is the conceit
of Scultetus.

Mr. MEDE weighs most of these conjectures, and at length prefers one of his
own before them all; namely, that by Elders that Rule well, Civil Magistrates
are intended; and by those that labor in the Word and Doctrine, the Ministers
of the Gospel.

BUT some discerning the weakness and improbability of all these Conjectures;
and how easily they may be disproved, betake themselves unto a direct denial of
that which seems to be plainly asserted in the Text; namely, that there are two
sorts of Elders here intended and described, which they countenance themselves
in, by exception unto the application of some Terms in the Text, which we shall
immediately consider.

GROTIVS, as was before intimated, Disputes against the Divine Institution of
such Temporary Lay Elders as are made use of in sundry of the Reformed
Churches. But when he has done, he affirms, That it is highly necessary that
such conjunct Associates in Rule from among the people, should be in every
Church; which he proves by sundry Arguments. And these he would have either
nominated by the Magistrate, or chosen by the People.

WHEREFORE, omitting all contests about the forementioned conceits, or any
other of the like nature, I shall propose One Argument from these Words, and
vindicate it from the exceptions of those of the latter sort.

PREACHING Elders, although they Rule well, are not worthy of double Honor,
unless they labor in the Word and Doctrine.

BUT there are Elders who Rule well that are worthy of double Honor, though
they do not labor in the Word and Doctrine.

THEREFORE, there are Elders that Rule well, who are not Teaching or Preaching
Elders, that is who are Ruling Elders only.

THE Proposition is evident in its own light from the very Terms of it. For to
Preach, is to labor in the Word and Doctrine: Preaching or Teaching Elders,
that do not labor in the Word and Doctrine, are Preaching or Teaching Elders
that do not Preach or Teach. And to say that Preachers, whose Office and Duty
is to Preach, are worthy of that double honor which is due on the account of
Preaching, though they do not Preach, is uncouth and irrational. It is contrary
to the Scripture, and the Light of Nature, as implying a contradiction, that a
Man whose Office it is to Teach and Preach, should be esteemed worthy of double
honor on the account of his Office, who does not as an Officer Teach or Preach.

THE Assumption consists upon the matter, in the very, Words of the Apostle.
For he who says, The Elders who Rule well, are worthy of double Honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, says there are, or may be
Elders who Rule well, who do not labor in the Word and Doctrine, that is, who
are not obliged so to do.

THE Argument from these Words may be otherwise framed, but this contains the
plain sense of this Testimony.

SUNDRY things are excepted unto this Testimony and our Application of it.
Those which are of any weight consist in a contest about Two Words in the Text,
(...) and (...); some place their confidence of Evasion in one of them, and
some in another; the Argument from both being inconsistent. If that sense of
one of these Words which is pleaded as a Relief against this Testimony be
embraced, that which unto the same purpose is pretended to be the sense of the
other, must be rejected. Such shifts does an opposition unto the Truth, put Men
to.

1. SOME say that (...), especially, is not Distinctive, but Descriptive only;
that is, it does not distinguish one sort of Elders from another; but only
describes that single sort of them by an adjunct of their Office, whereof the
Apostle speaks. The meaning of it, they say, is as much as, seeing that. The
Elders that Rule well, are worthy of double Honor; seeing that they also
labor; or especially considering that they Labor, etc.

THAT this is the sense of the word, that it is thus to be interpreted, must be
proved from the Authority of Ancient Translations, or the use of it in other
places of the New Testament, or from its precise Signification and Application
in other Authors learned in this Language; or that it is enforced from the
Context, or Matter treated of.

BUT none of these can be pretended.

1. THE rendering of the word in old Translations we have before considered.
They agree in maxim illi qui; which is distinctive.

2. THE use of it in other places of the New Testament is constantly
distinctive, whether applied to Things or Persons, Act. 20.39. (...), Sorrowing
chiefly at the word, of seeing his face no more. Their sorrow herein was
distinct from all their other trouble, Gal. 6.10. Let us do good unto all;
(...), but chiefly, especially, unto the household of Faith. It puts a
distinction between the household of Faith and all others, by virtue of their
especial privilege; which is the direct use of the word in that place of the
same Apostle, Phil. 4.22. All the Saints salute you; (...), especially they
that are of Caesar's House. Two sorts of Saints are plainly expressed; first
such as were so in general; such as were so also, but under this especial
Privilege and Circumstance, that they were of Caesar's House, which the others
were not; as it is here with respect unto Elders: All Rule well, but some
moreover labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.8. (...) If a man provide
not for his own, especial those of his own House; especially Children or
Servants, which live in his own House, and are thereby distinguished from
others of a more remote Relation. 2 Timothy 4.13. Bring the Books; (...),
especially the Parchments; not because they are Parchments; but among the
Books, the Parchments in particular, and in an especial manner. 2 Pet. 2.9, 10.
The Lord knows how to reserve the Wicked to the Day of Judgment to be punished;
(...) etc. especially those that walk after the Flesh; who shall be singled out
to exemplary Punishment. It is but once more used in the New Testament; namely,
Act. 26.3. where it includes a distinction in the thing under consideration.

WHEREAS this is the constant use of the word in the Scripture, (being
principally used by this Apostle in his Writings) wherein it is distinctive and
comparative of the things and persons, that respect is had unto; it is to no
purpose to pretend that it is here used in another sense, or is otherwise
applied; unless they can prove from the Context that there is a necessity of
their peculiar Interpretation of it.

3. THE use of the word, in other Authors, is concurrent with that of it in the
Scripture, Herodian. Lib. 2. (...) The Syrians are naturally lovers of
Fetivals; especially they that dwell at Antioch. It is the same phrase of
Speech with that here used. For all they that dwelt at Antioch were Syrians;
but all the Syrians dwelt not at Antioch. There is a distinction and
distribution made of the Syrians into two sorts: Such as were Syrians only, and
such as being Syrians, dwelt at Antioch, the Metropolis of the Country. If a
Man should say, that all English Men were Stout and Courageous, especially the
Londoners; he would both affirm the Londoners to be Englishmen, and distinguish
them from the rest of their Countrymen. So, all that labor in the Word and
Doctrine, are Elders; but all Elders do not labor in the Word and Doctrine,
nor is it their Duty so to do; these we call Ruling Elders and, as I judge,
rightly.

4. THE sense which the words will give being so interpreted, as that a
distinction of Elders is not made in them, is absurd; the subject and predicate
of the Proposition being terms convertible; it must be so, if the Proposition
be not allowed to have a Distinction in it. One sort of Elders only, it is said
are here intended. I ask who they are, and of what sort? it is said, the same
with Pastors and Teachers, or Ministers of the Gospel. For if the one sort of
Elders intended, be of another sort, we obtain what we plead for, as fully as
if two sorts were allowed. Who then are these Elders, these Pastors and
Teachers, these Ministers of the Church? Are they not those who labor in the
Word and Doctrine? Yes, it will be said, it is they and no other. Then this is
the sense of the words; Those who labor in the Word and Doctrine, that Rule
well, are worthy of double honor, especially if they labor in the Word and
Doctrine. For if there be but one sort of Elders; then Elders, and those that
labor in the Word and Doctrine, are terms convertible. But Elders, and labor
in the Word and Doctrine, are subject and praedicate in this Proposition.

WHEREFORE, there are few of any Learning or Judgment, that make use of this
Evasion; but allowing a Distinction to be made, they say, That it is as to Work
and Employment, and not as unto Office. Those who in the disharge of their
Office as Elders do so labor as is intended and included in the word (...),
which denotes a peculiar kind of work in the Ministry: Yea, say some, this word
denotes the Work of an Evangelist, who was not confined unto any one place; but
traveled up and down the World to Preach the Gospel. And those of this mind do
allow, That two sorts of Elders are intended in the Words. Let us see whether
they have any better success in this their Conjecture, than the others have in
the former Answer.

1. I GRANT, That (...), the word here used, signifies to Labor with Pains and
Diligence, ad ultimum virium, usque ad fatigationem; unto the utmost of Men's
Strength, and unto Weariness. But,

2. SO to labor in the Word and Doctrine, is the Duty of all Pastors and
Teachers; and who ever does not so labor, is negligent in his Office, and
worthy of severe Blame, instead of double Honor. For,

1. (...), whence is (...), is the Labor of a Minister; and so of any Minister
in his Work of Teaching and Preaching the Gospel, 1 Cor. 3.8. (...), Every one
(that is every one employed in the Ministry, whether to Plant or to Water; to
Convert Men, or to Edify the Church) shall receive his own Reward, according
to his own Labor. He that does not strive, (...), in the Ministry, shall never
receive a Reward, (...), according to his own Labor; and so is not worthy of
double Honor.

2. IT is a general word used to express the work of any, in the Service of
God; whereon it is applied unto the Prophets and Teachers under the Old
Testament, Joh. 4.38. I sent you to Reap that whereon you bestowed no Labor;
(...), others have labored, and you have entered into their Labors: That is
of the Prophets and John the Baptist. Yea, it is so unto the Labor that Women
may take in the serving of the Church, Romans 16.6. Salute Mary, (...), who
labored much; which is more than simply (...), Verse. 12. Salute Tryphoena and
Tryphosa, (...), who labored in the Lord. Verse. 13. Salute the beloved Persis,
(...), who labored much in the Lord. So wide from Truth is it, that this word
should signify a Labor peculiar to some sorts of Ministers, which all are not
in common obliged unto.

3. IF the labor of Evangelists, or of them who traveled up and down to
Preach the Word be intended, then it is so, either because this is the proper
signification of the word, or because it is constantly used elsewhere to
express that kind of Labor. But the contrary unto both of these is evident
from all places wherein it is used. So is it expressly applied to fixed Elders,
1 Thessalonians. 5.12. We exhort you, Brethren, to know, (...), them that labor among
you; who are the Rulers and Instructers.

IT is therefore evident, that this Word expresses no more but what is the
ordinary Indispensable Duty of every Teaching Elder, Pastor or Minister, And if
it be so, then those Elders, that is Pastors or Teachers, that do not perform
and discharge it, are not worthy of double Honor. Nor would the Apostle give
any countenance unto them, who were any way remiss or negligent, in comparison
of others, in the discharge of their Duty; see 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.

THERE are therefore Two sorts of Duties confessedly here mentioned and
commanded; the First is Ruling well, the other Laboring in the Word and
Doctrine. Suppose that both these, Ruling, and Teaching, are committed to one
sort of Persons only, having one and the same Office absolutely, then are some
commended who do not discharge their whole Duty, at least not comparatively
unto others; which is a vain imagination. That both of them are committed unto
one sort of Elders, and one of them only unto another, each discharging its
Duty with respect unto its Work, and so both worthy of Honor, is the mind of
the Apostle.

THAT which is objected from the following verse, namely, that maintenance
belongs unto this double Honor, and so, consequently, that if there be Elders
that are employed in the Work of Rule only, that maintenance is due unto them
from the Church; I answer, It is so no doubt; if, (1.) The Church be able to
make them an Allowance. (2.) If their Work be such as to take up the whole or
the greatest part of their industry; and, (3.) If they stand in need of it:
Without which Considerations, it may be dispensed withal; not only in them, but
in Teaching Elders also.

OUR next Testimony is from the same Apostle, Romans 12.6, 7.

8. HAVING then Gifts differing according unto the Grace given unto us, whether
Prophecy, let us Prophesy according to the proportion of Faith; or Ministry,
let us wait on our Ministry; or he that Teaches on Teaching; or he that
Exhorts on Exhortation, he that gives let him do it with simplicity, he that
Rules with diligence, he that shows mercy with cheerfulness.

OUR Argument from hence is this; There is in the Church (...) one that Rules;
(...) is to Rule with Authority by virtue of Office, whence is (...), and
(...), one that Presides over others with Authority. For the discharge of their
Office, there is (...), a differing peculiar Gift bestowed on some; (...), ver.
7. and there is the especial manner prescribed for the discharge of this
especial Office, by virtue of that especial Gift; (...), it is to be done with
peculiar diligence. And this Ruler is distinguished from him that Exhorts,
and him that Teaches, with whose especial Work, as such, he has nothing to
do; even as they are distinguished from those who give and show mercy. That is,
there is an Elder by Office in the Church, whose Work and Duty it is to Rule,
not to Exhort or Teach Ministerially, which is our Ruling Elder.

IT is Answered, that the Apostle does not treat in this place of Offices,
Functions, or distinct Officers; but of differing Gifts, in all the Members of
the Church, which they are to exercise according as their different nature does
require.

SUNDRY things I shall return hereunto, which will both explain the Context,
and vindicate our Argument.

1. THOSE with whom we have to do principally, allow no exercise of Spiritual
Gifts in the Church, but by virtue of Office. Wherefore, a distinct exercise of
them is here placed in distinct Officers; one, as we shall see, being expressly
distinguished from another.

2. GIVE such a probable enumeration of the distinct Offices in the Church,
which they assert, namely, of Archbishops, Bishops, Presbyters, and
Chancellors, etc. and we shall yield the cause.

3. GIFTS alone do no more, give no other Warranty nor Authority, but only
render Men meet for their exercise, as they are called, and as occasion does
require. If a Man has received a Gift of Teaching, but is not called to
Office, he is not obliged nor warranted thereby, to attend on public Teaching,
nor is it required of him in a way of Duty, nor given in charge unto him, as
here it is.

4. THERE is in One, Rule required with diligence. He is (...), a Ruler; and it
is required of him that he attend unto his Work with diligence. And there are
but two things required unto the confirmation of our Thesis. (1.) That this
Rule is an Act of Office-Power. (2.) That he unto whom it is ascribed, is
distinguished from them unto whom the Pastoral and other Offices in the Church
are committed.

FOR the First, it is evident that Rule is an Act of Office or of Office-Power:
For it requires, (1.) An especial Relation; there is so between him that
Rules, and them that are Ruled; and this is the Relation of Office, or all
confusion will ensue. (2.) Especial Prelation. He that Rules, is over, is above
them that are Ruled; Obey them that are over you in the Lord* This in the
Church cannot be in any, but by virtue of Office* (3.) Especial Authority. All
lawful Rule is an Act of Authority; and there is no Authority in the Church,
but by virtue of Office. Secondly, That this Officer is distinct from all
others in the Church, we shall immediately demonstrate, when we have a little
further cleared the Context. Wherefore,

5. IT is confessed that respect is had unto Gifts; having different Gifts,
ver. 6, 7. As all Office-Power in the Church is founded in them, Ephesians. 4.7, 8,
9, 11, 12. But Gifts, absolutely with reference unto common use, are not
intended, as in some other places. But they are spoken of with respect unto
Offices or Functions, and the communication of them unto Officers, for the
discharge of their Office. This is evident from the Text and Context, with the
whole design of the place: For,

1. THE Analysis of the place directs unto this Interpretation. Three sorts of
Duties are prescribed unto the Church in this Chapter. (1.) Such as are
Universal, belonging absolutely unto all, and every one that appertains unto
it; which are declared ver. 1.2. (2.) Such as are peculiar unto some, by virtue
of that especial place which they have in the Church, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
This can be nothing but Office. (3.) Such as are general or common, with
respect unto occasions, from ver. 8. to the end of the Chapter. Hence the same
Duty is doubly prescribed; to some in way of especial Office, to others in the
way of a Gracious Duty in general. So here, He that gives, let him do it with
simplicity, Verse. 8. is the same Duty or Work for the substance of it, with
Distributing unto the necessity of the Saints, Verse. 13. And the Apostle does
not repeat his Charge of the same Duty in so few words, as required in the same
manner, and of the same persons. But in the first place, he speaks of the
manner of its Performance, by virtue of Office; and in the latter of its
discharge as to the Substance of it, as a Grace in all Believers. The Design of
the Apostle lies plain in the Analysis of this Discourse.

2. THE Context makes the same Truth evident. For,

1. THE whole ordinary Public work of the Church, is distributed into (...),
and (...); Prophecy and Ministry. For the extraordinary Gift of Prophecy is not
here intended; but only that of the Interpretation of the Scripture, whose Rule
is the Analogy of Faith; (...). It is such Prophecy as is to be regulated by
the Scripture it self; which gives the Proportion of Faith. And there is not
any thing, in any, or both of these, Prophecy and Ministry, but it belongs unto
Office in the Church. Neither is there any thing belonging unto Office in the
Church, but may be reduced unto one of these, as they are all of them here, by
the Apostle.

2. THE Gifts spoken of, are in general, referred unto all them who are
intended. Now these are either the whole Church, and all the Members of it, or
all the Officers of the Church only. Hence it is expressed in the Plural
number, (...), we having; that is, all we that are concerned herein. This
cannot be all of the Church; for all the Church have not received the Gifts of
Prophecy and Ministry. Nor can any distinction be made of who does receive
them, and who does not, but with respect unto Office. And therefore,

3. IN the Distribution which ensues of Prophecy, into Exhorting and Teaching;
and of Ministry into Showing, Mercy, Rule, and Giving; having stated these
Gifts in general, in the Officers in general, making distinct Application of
them unto distinct Officers, he speaks in the Singular number, (...). He that
Teaches, he that Exhorts, he that Rules.

6. IT is then evident that Offices are intended; and it is no less evident,
that distinct Offices are so, which was to be proved in the Second place. For,
(1.) The distributive Particle (...), and the indicative Article (...),
prefixed unto each Office in particular, do show them distinct, so far as Words
can do it. As by the Particle (...), whether, they are distinguished in their
nature; whether they be of this or that kind; so by the Article prefixed to
each of them in exercise, they are distinguished in their Subjects. (2.) The
Operations, Work, and Effects ascribed unto these Gifts, require distinct
Offices and Functions in their exercise. And if the Distribution be made unto
all promiscuously without respect unto distinct Offices, it were the only way
to bring confusion into the Church, whereas, indeed here is an accurate Order
in all Church Administrations represented to us. And it is farther evident that
distinct Offices are intended. (1.) From the comparison made unto the Members
of the Body, ver. 4. All the Members have not the same Office; the eye has
one, the ear has another. (2.) Each of the Duties mentioned and given in
charge, is sufficient for a distinct Officer, as is declared Act. 6.

7. IN particular, He that Rules, is a distinct Officer. An Officer, because
Rule is an Act of Office, or Office-Power. And he is expressly distinguished
from all others. But, say some, he that Rules, is he that does so, be who he
will, that is the Pastor or Teacher, the Teaching Elder. But the contrary is
evident. (1.) He that says, He that Exhorts, and then adds, He that Rules,
having distinguished before between Prophecy, whereunto Exhortation does
belong, and Ministry whereof Rule is a part; and prefixing the Prepositive
Indicative Article to each of them, does as plainly put a difference between
them, as can be done by Words. (2.) Rule is the principal Work of him that
Rules. For he is to attend unto it, (...), with Diligence, that is such as is
peculiar unto Rule, in contradistinction unto what is principally required in
other Administrations. But Rule is not the principal Work of the Pastor,
requiring constant and continual attendance. For his labor in the Word and
Doctrine, is ordinarily sufficient for the utmost of his Diligence and
Abilities.

8. WE have therefore in this Context the beautiful Order of things in and of
the Church. All the Duties of it, with respect unto its Edification, derived
from distinct differing Spiritual Gifts, exercised in and by distinct Officers,
unto their peculiar ends. The distinction that is in the nature of those Gifts,
their use and end being provided for in distinct Subjects. The mind of no One
Man, at least ordinarily, is meet to be the seat and subject of all those
differing Gifts in any eminent degree; the Person of no Man being sufficient,
meet, or able to exercise them in a way of Office toward the whole Church;
especially those who labor in the Word and Doctrine, being obliged to give
themselves wholly thereunto, and those that Rule to attend thereto with
diligence; so many distinct Works, Duties and Operations, with the
Qualifications required in their discharge, being inconsistent in the same
Subject; all things are here distributed into their proper Order and Tendency,
unto the Edification of the Church. Every distinct Gift required to be
exercised in a peculiar manner, unto the public Edification of the Church, is
distributed unto peculiar Officers, unto whom an especial Work is assigned to
be discharged by virtue of the Gifts received, unto the Edification of the
whole Body. No Man alive is able to fix on any thing which is necessary unto
the Edification of the Church, that is not contained in these Distributions,
under some of the Heads of them. Nor can any Man find out any thing in these
Assignations of distinct Duties unto distinct Offices, that is superfluous,
redundant, or not directly necessary unto the Edification of the whole, with
all the Parts and Members of it; nor do I know any wise and sober Man who knows
any thing how the Duties enjoined are to be performed, with what Care,
Diligence, Circumspection, Prayer and Wisdom, suited unto the nature, ends and
objects of them, can ever imagine that they can all of them belong unto one and
the same Office, or be discharged by one and the same Person.

LET Men advance any other Church Order in the room of that here declared; so
suited unto the principles of Natural Light, Operations and Duties of diverse
natures, being distributed and assigned to such distinct Gifts; acted in
distinct Offices, as renders those unto whom they are prescribed meet and able
for them; so correspondent to all Institutions, Rules and Examples of
Church Order in other places of Scripture; so suited unto the Edification of
the Church, wherein nothing which is necessary thereunto is omitted, nor any
thing added above what is necessary; and it shall be cheerfully embraced.

THE Truth is, the ground of the different Interpretations and Applications of
this Context of the Apostle, arises merely from the prejudicate*
Apprehensions, that Men have concerning the State of the Church and its Rule.
For if the State of it be National or Diocesan, if the Rule of it be by
Arbitrary Rules and Canons, from an Authority exerting it self in Courts
Ecclesiastical, Legal or Illegal, the Order of things here described by the
Apostle, does no way belong, nor can be accommodated thereunto. To suppose that
we have a full Description and Account in these Words of all the Offices and
Officers of the Church, of their Duty and Authority, of all they have to do,
and the manner how they are to do it, is altogether unreasonable and senceless
unto them, who have another Idea of Church Affairs and Rule, conceived in their
Minds, or received by Tradition, and riveted by Interest. And on the other
hand; those who know little or nothing of what belongs unto the due Edification
of the Church, beyond Preaching the Word and reaping the Advantage that is
obtained thereby, cannot see any necessity of the distribution of these several
Works and Duties unto several Officers; but suppose all may be done well enough
by One or Two in the same Office. Wherefore, it will be necessary, that we
treat briefly of the Nature of the Rule of the Church in particular, and what
is required thereunto, which shall be done in the close of this Discourse.

9. THE Exceptions which are usually put in unto this Testimony, have not the
least countenance from the Text or Context, nor the matter treated of, nor
Confirmation (...) any other Divine Testimony. It is therefore in vain to
contend about them, being such as any Man may multiply at his pleasure on the
like occasion; and used by those who on other considerations, are not willing
that things should be as they are here declared to be by the Apostle. Yet we
may take a brief Specimen of them. Some say it is Gifts absolutely without
respect unto distinct Offices, that the Apostle Treats of; which has been
disproved from the Text and Context before. Some say that Rule is included in
the Pastoral Office, so as that the Pastor only is here intended. But, (1.)
Rule is not his principal Work, which he is to attend unto in a peculiar manner
with diligence above other parts of his Duty. (2.) The care of the Poor of the
Flock belongs also to the Pastoral Office, yet is there another Office
appointed to attend unto it in a peculiar manner, Act. 6. (3.) He that Rules,
is in this place expressly distinguished from him that Exhorts, and him that
Teaches. Some say, that he that Rules, is he that Rules his Family. But this
is disproved by the Analysis of the Chapter before declared. And this Duty,
which is common unto all that have Families, and confined unto their Families,
is ill placed among those public Duties, which are designed unto the
Edification of the whole Church. It is objected, that he that Rules, is here
placed after him that gives, that is the Deacon; I say then it cannot be the
Pastor that is intended; if we may prescribe Methods of expressing himself unto
the Apostle. But he uses his Liberty, and does not oblige himself unto any
Order in the annumeration of the Offices of the Church; see 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10,
28. And some other Exceptions are insisted on of the same nature and
importance, which indeed deserve not our consideration.

10. THERE is the same Evidence given unto the Truth argued for, in another
Testimony of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set some in the Church,
First Apostles, Secondarily Prophets, Thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles,
then Gifts of Healings, Helps, Governments, Diversities of Tongues. I shall not
insist on this Testimony and its Vindication in particular, seeing many things
would be required thereunto, which have been Treated of already. Some things
may be briefly observed concerning it. That there is here an Annumeration of
Officers and Offices in the Church, both extraordinary for that season, and
ordinary for continuance, is beyond exception. Unto them is added, the present
exercise of some extraordinary Gifts, as Miracles, Healing, Tongues. That by
Helps, the Deacons of the Church are intended, most do agree, because their
Original Institution was as helpers in the Affairs of the Church. Governments,
are Governors or Rulers, the Abstract for the Concrete; that is, such as are
distinct from Teachers; such has God placed in the Church, and such there
ought to be. But it is said that Gifts, not Offices are intended; the Gift of
Government, or Gift for Government. If so, then these Gifts are either ordinary
or extraordinary; if ordinary, how come they to be reckoned among Miracles,
Healing, and Tongues? if extraordinary, what extraordinary Gifts for Government
were then given distinct from those of the Apostles; and what instance is any
where given of them in the Scripture? Again, If God has given Gifts for
Government to abide in the Church, distinct from those given unto Teachers, and
unto other Persons than the Teachers, then is there a distinct Office of Rule
or Government in the Church, which is all we plead for.

11. THE Original Order in these things is plain in the Scripture. The Apostles
had all Church Power and Church-Office in themselves, with Authority to
exercise all Acts of them everywhere on all occasions. But considering the
nature of the Church, with that of the Rule appointed by the Lord Christ in it
or over it; they did not, they would not ordinarily exercise their power by
themselves or in their own persons alone. And therefore, when the First Church
consisted of a small number, the Apostles acted all things in it, by the
consent of the whole Multitude or the Fraternity, as we have proved from Acts
the First. And when the number of Believers increased, so as that the Apostles
themselves could not in their own Persons attend unto all the Duties that were
to be performed toward the Church by virtue of Office, they added by the
direction of the Holy Ghost, the Office of the Deacons, for the especial
discharge of the Duty which the Church owes unto its poor Members. Whereas
therefore it is evident, that the Apostles could no more personally attend unto
the Rule of the Church, with all that belongs thereunto, without an
entrenchment on that labor in the Word and Prayer, which was incumbent on
them, than they could attend unto the Relief of the Poor, they appointed
Elders, to help and assist in that part of Office-Work, as the Deacons did in
the other.

THESE Elders are first mentioned, Act. 11.30. where they are spoken of as
those which were well known, and had now been of some time in the Church.
Afterward they are still mentioned in conjunction with the Apostles, and
distinction from the Church it self, Acts 15.2, 4, 6, 22. Chap. 16.4. Chap.
21.18. Now the Apostles themselves were Teaching Elders, that is such as had
the Work of Teaching and Rule committed to them, 1 Pet. 5.1. 2 John 1. And
these Elders are constantly distinguished from them; which makes it evident,
that they were not Teaching Elders. And therefore in all the mention that is
made of them, the Work of Teaching or Preaching is no where ascribed unto them;
which at Jerusalem the Apostles reserved to themselves, Act. 6.2, 3. but they
are every where introduced as joining with the Apostles in the Rule of the
Church, and that in distinction from the Church it self or the Brethren of it.
Yea, it is altogether improbable, that whilst the Apostles were at Jerusalem,
giving themselves wholly unto the Word and Prayer, that they should appoint in
the same Church many more Teaching Elders; though it is plain that the Elders
intended were many.

I SHALL add for a close of all, that there is no sort of Churches in being but
are of this persuasion, that there ought to be Rulers in the Church, that are
not in Sacred Orders, as some call them; or have no interest in the Pastoral or
Ministerial Office, as unto the dispensation of the Word, and Administration of
the Sacraments. For as the Government of the Roman Church is in the hands of
such Persons in a great measure so in the Church of England, much of the Rule
of it is managed by Chancellors, Officials, Commissaries, and the like
Officers, who are absolutely Laymen, and not at all in their holy Orders. Some
would place the Rule of the Church in the Civil Magistrate, who is the only
Ruling Elder, as they suppose. But the generality of all Protestant Churches
throughout the World, both Lutherans and Reformed, do both in their judgment
and practice assert the necessity of the Ruling Elders which we plead for; and
their Office lies at the foundation of all their Order and Discipline, which
they cannot forgo without extreme confusion, yea, without the ruin of their
Churches. And although some among us, considering particular Churches only as
small Societies, may think there is no need of any such Office or Officers for
Rule in them; yet when such Churches consist of some Thousands, without any
opportunity of distributing themselves into several Congregations, as at
Charenton in France, it is a weak imagination, that the Rule of Christ can be
observed in them by Two or Three Ministers alone. Hence, in the Primitive Times
we have instances of Ten, Twenty, yea, Forty Elders in a particular Church,
wherein they had respect unto the Institution under the Old Testament, whereby
each Ten Families were to have a peculiar Ruler. However, it is certain that
there is such a Reformation in all sorts of Churches, that there ought to be
some attending unto Rule, that are not called to labor in the Word and
Doctrine.

CHAP. VIII. The Nature of Church-Polity or Rule; with the Duty of Elders.
HAVING declared who are the Rulers of the Church, something must be added
concerning the Rule it self, which is to be exercised therein. Hereof I have
Treated before in general: That which I now design, is, what in particular
respects them who are called unto Rule only; whereunto some Considerations must
be premised.

1. THERE is Power, Authority, and Rule granted unto and residing in some
Persons of the Church, and not in the Body of the Fraternity or Community of
the People. How far the Government of the Church may be denominated
Democratical from the necessary consent of the people unto the principal Acts
of it in its exercise, I shall not determine. But whereas this consent, and the
liberty of it is absolutely necessary according to the Law of Obedience unto
Christ, which is prescribed unto the Church, requiring that all they do in
compliance therewith be voluntary; as unto the manner of its exercise, being in
dutiful compliance with the guidance of the Rule, it changes not the State of
the Government. And therefore, where any thing is Acted and Disposed in the
Church, by Suffrage, or the plurality of Voices, the Vote of the Fraternity is
not Determining and Authoritative, but only declarative of consent and
obedience. It is so, in all Acts of Rule where the Church is Organical, or in
complete Order.

2. THAT there is such an Authority and Rule instituted by Christ in his
Church, is not liable unto dispute. Where there are Bishops, Pastors, Elders,
Guides, Rulers, Stewards, instituted, given, granted, called, ordained; and
some to be Ruled, Sheep, Lambs, Brethren, obliged by command to obey them,
follow them, submit unto them in the Lord, regard them as over them: There is
Rule and Authority in some persons, and that committed unto them by Jesus
Christ. But all these things are frequently repeated in the Scripture. And when
in the practical Part or Exercise of Rule, due respect is not had unto their
Authority, there is nothing but Confusion and Disorder. When the People judge
that the Power of the Keys is committed unto them as such only, and in them
does the Right of their Use and Exercise reside; that their Elders have no
interest in the disposing of Church Affairs, or in Acts of Church Power, but
only their own suffrages, or what they can obtain by reasoning, and think there
is no Duty incumbent on them to acquiesce in their Authority in any thing (an
Evil apt to grow in Churches) it overthrows all that beautiful Order, which
Jesus Christ has ordained. And if any shall make Advantage of this Complaint,
That where the People have their due Liberty granted unto them, they are apt to
assume that Power unto themselves which belongs not unto them; an evil attended
with troublesome Impertinencies and Disorder, tending unto Anarchy; let them
remember, on the other hand, how upon the confinement of Power and Authority
unto the Guides, Bishops or Rulers of the Church, they have changed the nature
of Church Power, and enlarged their Usurpation, until the whole Rule of the
Church issued in absolute Tyranny. Wherefore, no fear of consequents that may
ensue and arise from the darkness, ignorance, weakness, lusts, corruptions or
secular interests of Men ought to entice us unto the least Alteration of the
Rule by any prudential Provisions of our own.

3. THIS Authority in the Rulers of the Church, is neither Autocratical or
Sovereign, nor Nomothetical or Legislative, nor Despotical or Absolute; but
Organical and Ministerial only. The endless Controversies which have sprung out
of the mystery of iniquity, about an Autocratical and Monarchical Government in
the Church, about power to make Laws to bind the Consciences of Men, yea, to
kill and destroy them, with the whole manner of the execution of this Power, we
are not concerned in. A pretense of any such Power in the Church, is
destructive of the Kingly Office of Christ, contrary to express Commands of
Scripture, and condemned by the Apostles, Isa. 33.22. Jam. 4.12. Mat. 17.5.
Chap. 23.8, 9, 10, 11. Luke 22.25, 26. 2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. 2 Cor.
4.5. 1 Pet. 5.1, 25.

4. AS the Rule of the Church, in those by whom it is exercised, is merely
Ministerial, with respect unto the Authority of Christ, his Law, and the
Liberty of the Church, wherewith he has made it free; so in its nature it is
spiritual, purely and only. So the Apostle Affirms expressly, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6.
For its object is spiritual; namely, the Souls and Consciences of Men whereunto
it extends, which no other Humane Power does; nor does it reach those other
concerns of Men that are subject unto any political Power: Its end is
Spiritual, namely, the Glory of God, in the guidance and direction of the Minds
and Souls of Men, to live unto him, and come to the enjoyment of him; the Law
of it is spiritual, even the Word, Command and Direction of Christ himself
alone; the Acts and Exercise of it in binding and loosing, in remitting and
retaining Sin, in opening and shutting the Kingdom of Heaven, are all Spiritual
merely and only. Neither can there be an Instance given of any thing belonging
unto the Rule of the Church, that is of another nature, Yea, it is sufficient
eternally to exclude any Power or Exercise of it, any Act of Rule or Government
from any Interest in Church Affairs, that it can be proved to be Carnal,
Political, Despotical, of external Operaration, or not entirely Spiritual.

5. THE Change of this Government of the Church, fell out and was introduced
gradually, upon an advantage taken from the unmeetness of the People to be lead
under this Spiritual Rule. For the greatest part of them that made up Christian
Churches, being become ignorant and carnal, that Rule which consists in a
spiritual influence on the Consciences of Men, was no way able to retain them
within the bounds of outward obedience, which was at last only aimed at. There
was therefore another kind of Rule and Government judged necessary to retain
them in any Order or Decorum. And it must be acknowledged, that where the
Members of the Church are not in some degree Spiritual, a Rule that is merely
Spiritual will be of no great use unto them. But principally, this change was
introduced by those that were in possession of the Rule it self; and that on
two grounds. (1.) Their unskilfulness in the management of this Spiritual Rule,
or weariness of the Duties which are required thereunto: This made them willing
to desert it; with that perpetual labor and exercise of all sorts of Graces
which are required in it, and to embrace another more easy, and more suited
unto their Inclinations. (2.) A desire of the Secular advantages of Profit,
Honor and Veneration, which tendered themselves unto them in another kind of
Rule: By these means was the Original Government of the Church, which was of
Divine Institution, utterly lost; and a Worldly Domination introduced in the
room thereof. But the brief delineation given of it before, with what shall now
be added, will demonstrate sufficiently, that all these Disputes and Contests
which are in the World, between the Church of Rome and others about
Church Power and Rule, are utterly foreign unto Christian Religion.

6. I SHALL therefore briefly enquire into these three things, (1.) What is the
Skill and Polity that is required unto the Exercise, or Administration of the
Government of the Church? (2.) What is the sole Law and Rule of it? (3.) What
are the Acts and Duties of it? What it is conversant about; especially those
wherein the Office of Ruling Elders does take place.

1. THE Polity of Church Government subjectively considered, is generally
supported to consist, (1.) In a skill, learning or understanding in the Civil,
and especially the Canon Law, with the additional Canons, accomodating that Law
unto the present state of things of the Nation, to be interpreted according
unto the general Rules of it. (2.) Knowledge of and Acquaintance with the
Constitution, Power, Jurisdiction and Practice of some Law Courts; which being
in their original, grant of Power, manner of Proceeding, Pleas and Censures
merely Secular, are yet called Ecclesiastical or Spiritual. (3.) A good
Discretion to understand a-right the extent of their Power, with the bounds and
limits of it; that on the one hand they let none escape whom they can reach by
the discipline of their Courts, and on the other not entrench so far on the
Civil-Power and the Jurisdiction of other Courts according to the Law of the
Land, as to bring themselves into charge or trouble. (4.) An acquaintance with
the Table of Fees, that they may neither lose their own profit, nor give
advantage unto others to question them for taking more than their due. But in
these things we are not at present concerned.

8. THE skill then of the Officers of the Church for the Government of it, is a
spiritual Wisdom and Understanding in the Law of Christ, for that end, with an
Ability to make application of it in all requisite Instances, unto the
Edification of the whole Church, and all its Members, through a ministerial
Exercise of the Authority of Christ himself, and a due Representation of his
Holiness, Love, Care, Compassion and Tenderness toward his Church.

1. THE sole Rule and Measure of the Government of the Church being the Law of
Christ; that is, the Intimation and Declaration of his Mind and Will, in his
Institutions, Commands, Prohibitions and Promises; an Understanding herein,
with Wisdom, from that Understanding, is and must be the whole of the Skill
enquired after. How this Wisdom is bestowed as a spiritual Gift, how it is to
be acquired in a way of Duty, by Prayer, Meditation and study of the Word, has
been intimated before, and shall fully be declared, in our Discourse of
spiritual Gifts. All Decrees and Decretals, Canons and Glosses come properly in
this matter under one Title of them, namely Extravagant. The utmost Knowledge
of them, and Skill in them will contribute nothing unto this Wisdom. Neither
are any sort of Men more strangers unto it, or unacquainted with it, than they
are, for the most part, who are eminently cunning in such Laws, and the
Jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical Courts. But Wisdom in the knowledge of the Will
of Christ as revealed in the Scripture, is that alone which is of use in the
Government of the Church.

2. A PART of this Wisdom consists in an Ability of Mind to make Application
of the Law of Christ in all requisite Instances, unto the Edification of the
Church in general, and all the Members of it respectively. This Wisdom is not
notional only, but practical. It consists not in a speculative comprehension of
the sense of the Rule, or of the Mind of Christ therein only, though that be
required in the first place; but in an Ability of Mind to make Application of
it, whereunto Diligence, Care, Watchfulness and spiritual Courage are required.
Some are to be Admonished; some to be Rebuked sharply; some to be cut off; in
which and the like cases, a spirit of Government acting it self in Diligence,
Boldness and Courage is necessary. And this is one reason why the Lord Christ
has appointed many Elders in each Church, and those of several sorts. For it
is seldom that any one Man is qualified for the whole work of Rule. Some may
have a good understanding in the Law of the Churches Government; yet through a
natural Tenderness, and an insuperable kind of Modesty, not be so ready and
prompt for that part of this Discipline which consists in Reproofs and Severity
of Censures. Some may not have so great an Ability for the Indagation of the
sense of the Law as others have; who yet upon the knowledge of it being
discovered unto them, have readiness and boldness in Christ to apply it as
occasion does require. All Elders therefore in their variety of Gifts are to be
helpful to each other in the common Work, which they are called unto. But such
as are utterly destitute of these Gifts, are not called unto this Work; nor any
part of it.

3. THE Power that is exercised herein, is the Power and Authority of Christ
committed unto the Elders. Our Authority, which the Lord Christ has given us
for Edification, and not for Destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8. It is granted unto the
Rulers of the Church, not formally to reside in them, as the Power of a King is
in his own person; but ministerially and instrumentally only. For it must be
the Authority of Christ himself, whereby the Consciences of Men are spiritually
affected, with reference unto spiritual Ends; whereby they are bound or losed
in Heaven and Earth, have their Sins remitted or retained. And the
consideration hereof is that alone which gives a due regard unto the Ministry
of the Church, in the discharge of their Office among them that desire to
commend their Consciences unto the Lord Christ in what they do.

4. THE especial Design of the Rule of the Church in its Government is to
represent the Holiness, Love, Compassion, Care and Authority of Christ toward
his Church. This is the great end of Rule in the Church, and of all the
Discipline which is to be exercised by virtue thereof. Whilst this is not
attended unto, when the Officers and Rulers of the Church do not endeavor in
all the actings of their Power and Office, to set forth these Virtues of
Christ; to exemplify that impression of them which he has left in his Laws
and Rule, with the Divine Testimonies which he gives of them in his own person,
they utterly deviate from the principal end of all Rule in the Church. For Men
to act herein in a way of Domination, with a visible Elation of Mind and Spirit
above their Brethren, with Anger, Wrath and Passion, by Rules, Order and Laws
of their own devising; without the least consideration of what the Lord Christ
requires, and what is the frame of his Heart toward all his Disciples, is to
reflect the highest Dishonor imaginable upon Christ himself. He who comes into
the Courts of the King in Westminster- Hall, when filled with Judges, Grave,
Learned and Righteous, most ordinarily be allowed to judge of the King himself,
his Wisdom, Justice, Moderation and Clemency, by the Law which they proceed
upon, and their manner of the Administration of it. But God forbid that
Christians should make a Judgment concerning the Holiness, Wisdom, Love and
Compassion of Christ, by the Representation which (as is pretended) is made of
him and them in some Courts, wherein Church-Rule and Discipline is Admistred.
When any had offended of old, their Censure by the Church was called the
Bewailing of them, 2 Cor. 12.24. and that because of the Sorrow, Pity and
Compassion whereby in that Censure they evidenced the compassion of the Lord
Christ toward the Souls of Sinners. This is scarce answered by those pecuniary
mulcts and other penalties, which, with indignation and contempt, are inflicted
on such as are made Offenders, whether they will or no. Certainly, those who
love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and have a due honor for the Gospel,
will at one time or another begin to think meet, that this stain of our
Religion should be washed away.

2 dly. THE Rule and Law of the exercise of Power in the Elders of the Church,
is the Holy Scripture only. The Lord Christ is the only Lawgiver of the
Church; all his Laws unto this end are recorded in the Scripture; no other Law
is effectual, can oblige or operate upon the object or unto the ends of
Church-Rule. If the Church make a Thousand Rules or Canons, or Laws for
Government, neither any of them, nor all of them in general, have any the least
power to oblige Men unto obedience or compliance with them, but only so far, as
virtually and materially they contain what is of the Law of Christ, and derives
force from thence. As the Judges in our Courts of Justice, are bound to judge
and determine in all cases, out of and according to the Law of the Land; and
when they do not, their Sentence is of no validity, but may and ought to be
reversed. But if wilfully or of choice, they should introduce Laws or Rules not
legally established in this Nation, judging according unto them, it would
render them highly criminal and punishable. It is no otherwise in the Kingdom
of Christ, and the Rule thereof. It is by his Law alone that Rule is to be
exercised in it. There is nothing left unto the Elders of the Church, but the
Application of his Laws, and the General Rules of them unto particular cases
and occasions. To make, to bring, to execute any other Rules, Laws or Canons in
the Government of his Church, is to usurp on his Kingly Dominion, whereunto all
Legislative Power in the Church is appropriate. Nor is it possible that any
thing can fall out in the Church, that any thing can be required in the Rule of
it, nor can any instance be given of any such thing, wherein, for the ends of
Church-Rule, there is or can be any more left unto the Rulers of it, but only
the Application and Execution of the Laws of Christ. Unto this Application to
be made in a due manner, the Wisdom and Skill before described is requisite,
and that alone. Where there are other Laws, Rules or Canons of the Government
of the Church; and where the Administration of them is directed by Laws Civil
or Political, there is a skill in them required unto that Administration, as
all will confess. So is the Wisdom we before described, and that alone,
necessary unto that Rule of the Church which the Lord Christ has ordained; the
Instrument and means whereof, is his Word and Law alone.

3 dly. THE matter of this Rule about which it is conversant, and so the Acts
and Duties of it may be reduced unto Three Heads.

1. THE Admission and Exclusion of Members. Both these are Acts of Church Power
and Authority, which are to be exercised by the Elders only in a Church that is
Organical and complete in its Officers. There is that in them both, which is
founded in and warranted from the Light and Law of Nature and Rules of Equity.
Every Righteous voluntary Society coalescing therein rightfully, upon known
Laws, and Rules for the Regulation of it unto certain ends, has naturally a
power inherent in it and inseparable from it, to receive into its
incorporation, such as being meet for it, do voluntarily offer themselves
thereunto; as also to reject, or withhold the Privileges of the Society, from
such as refuse to be Regulated by the Laws of the Society. This power is
inherent in the Church essentially considered antecedently unto the enstating
of Officers in it: By virtue of their mutual confederation they may receive
into the privileges of the Society those that are meet, and withdraw the same
privileges from those that are unworthy. But in these actings of the Church,
essentially considered, there is no exercise of the Power of the Keys, as unto
Authoritative Rule, but what is merely Doctrinal. There is in what it does a
declaration of the Mind of Christ, as unto the State of the Persons whom they
do receive or reject. But unto the Church as Organical, as there are Elders or
Rulers instated in it according unto the Mind of Christ, there is a peculiar
Authority committed for those Acts of the Admission and Exclusion of Members.
Unto this end is the Key of Rule committed unto the Elders of the Church, to be
applied with the consent of the whole Society, as we shall see afterward.

2 dly. THE Direction of the Church in all the Members of it, unto the
observance of the Rule and Law of Christ in all things, unto his Glory and
their own Edification. And all these things may be reduced unto these Four
Heads. (1.) Mutual, Intense, peculiar Love among themselves, to be exercised
continually in all the Duties of it. (2.) Personal Holiness in Gracious Moral
Obedience. (3.) Usefulness toward the Members of the same Church, toward
other Churches, and all Men absolutely, as occasion and opportunity do require.
(4.) The due performance of all those Duties, which all the Members of the
Church owe mutually unto each other, by virtue of that Place and Order which
they hold and possess in the Body. About these things is Church-Rule to be
exercised; for they all belong unto the preservation of its Being, and the
attainment of its Ends.

3 dly. HEREUNTO also belongs the disposal of the outward concernments of the
Church in its Assemblies, and in the management of all that is performed in
them, that all things may be done Decently and in Order. The disposal of Times,
Seasons, Places, the way and manner of managing all things in
Church Assemblies, the Regulation of Speeches and Actions, the appointment of
Seasons for extraordinary Duties, according unto the General Rules of the Word,
and the Reason of things from present Circumstances, are Acts of Rule, whose
Right resides in the Elders of the Church.

THESE things being premised, we may consider what is the Work and Duty of that
sort of Elders, which we have proved to be placed by Christ for Rule in the
Church. For, considering that which has been spoken before concerning the
Pastoral Office, or the Duty of Teaching-Elders of the Church, and what has
now been added concerning its Rule in general; I cannot but admire that any one
Man should have such a confidence in his own Abilities, as to suppose himself
meet and able for the Discharge of the Duties of both sorts in the least Church
of Christ that can well be supposed. Yea, supposing more Teaching-Elders in
every Church than one, yet if they are all and every one of them equally bound
to give themselves unto the Word and Prayer, so as not to be diverted from that
Work by any inferior Duties, if they are obliged to labor in the Word and
Doctrine to the utmost of their strength continually, it will appear at length
to be necessary, that there should be some whose peculiar Office and Duty is to
attend unto Rule with Diligence. And the Work of these Elders consists in the
things ensuing.

1. THEY are joined unto the Teaching Elders in all Acts and Duties of
Church Power, for the Rule and Government of the Church. Such are those before
declared. This is plain in the Text, 1 Timothy 5.17. Both sorts of Elders are
joined and do concur in the same Rule and all the Acts of it; one sort of them
laboring also in the Word and Doctrine. Of both sorts is the Presbytery or
Eldership composed, wherein resides all Church Authority. And in this
conjunction, those of both sorts are every way equal, determining all Acts of
Rule by their common suffrage. This gives Order, with a necessary
representation of Authority, unto the Church in its Government.

2. THEY are in particular to attend unto all things wherein the Rule or
Discipline of the Church is concerned, with a due care that the Commands of
Christ be duly observed by and among all the Members of the Church. This is the
substance of the Rule which Christ has appointed, whatever be pretended unto
the contrary. Whatever is set up in the World, in opposition unto it or
inconsistent with it, under the Name of the Government of the Church, is
foreign unto the Gospel. Church-Rule is a due care and provision, that the
Institutions, Laws, Commands and Appointments of Jesus Christ be duly observed,
and nothing else. And hereof, as unto the Duty of the Elders, we may give some
instances: As,

1. TO watch diligently over the ways, walking and conversation of all the
Members of the Church, to see that it be blameless, without offense, useful,
exemplary and in all things answering the holiness of the Commands of Christ,
the honor of the Gospel, and profession which in the World they make thereof.
And upon the observation which they so make, in the watch wherein they are
placed, to instruct, admonish, charge, exhort, encourage, comfort, as they see
cause. And this are they to attend unto, with Courage and Diligence.

2. TO watch against all risings or appearances of such differences and
divisions on the account of things Ecclesiastical or Civil, as unto their
Names, Rights and Proprieties in the World, that are contrary unto that Love
which the Lord Christ requires in a peculiar and eminent manner to be found
amongst his Disciples. This he calls his own new Command, with respect unto his
Authority requiring it, his Example first illustrating it in the World, and the
peculiar fruits and effects of it which he revealed and taught. Wherefore, the
due observance of this Law of Love in it self and all its fruits, with the
Prevention, Removal or Condemnation of all that is contrary unto it, is that in
which the Rule of the Church does principally consist. And considering the
Weakness, the Passions, the Temptations of Men, the mutual Provocations and
Exasperations that are apt to fall out even among the best, the influence that
Earthly occasions are apt to have upon their Minds, the frowardness sometimes
of Men's natural Tempers; the attendance unto this one Duty or part of Rule,
requires the utmost diligence of them that are called unto it. And it is merely
either the want of Acquaintance with the nature of that Law and its Fruits,
which the Lord Christ requires among his Disciples, or an undervaluation of the
Worth and Glory of it in the Church, or inadvertency unto the causes of its
decays, and of breeches made in it; or ignorance of the Care and Duties that
are necessary unto its preservation, that induce Men to judge that the Work of
an especial Office is not required hereunto.

3. THEIR Duty is to warn all the Members of the Church of their especial
Church-Duties, that they be not found negligent or wanting in them. There are
especial Duties required respectively of all Church Members, according unto the
distinct Talents, whether in things Spiritual or Temporal, which they have
received. Some are Rich, and some are Poor; some are Old, and some are Young;
some in Peace, some in Trouble; some have received more spiritual Gifts than
others, and have more opportunities for their Exercise. It belongs unto the
Rule of the Church, that all be Admonished, Instructed, and Exhorted to attend
unto their respective Duties; not only publicly in the preaching of the Word,
but personally as occasion does require, according to the observation which
those in Rule do make of their Forwardness or Remissness in them. In
particular, and in the way of instance, Men are to be warned that they
contribute unto the Necessities of the Poor, and other occasions of the Church
according unto the Ability that God in his Providence has entrusted them
withal; and to admonish them that are defective herein, in order to their
Recovery unto the discharge of this Duty, in such a measure as there may be an
Equality in the Church, 2 Cor. 8.14. And all other Duties of an a-like nature
are they to attend unto.

4. THEY are to watch against the beginnings of any Church-Disorders, such as
those that infested the Church of Corinth, or any of the like sort; with
remissness as unto the Assemblies of the Church and the Duties of them, which
some are subject unto, as the Apostle intimates, Heb. 10.25. On the Constancy
and Diligence of the Elders in this part of their Work and Duty, the very Being
and Order of the Church do greatly depend. The want hereof has opened a door
unto all the Troubles, Divisions and Schisms, that in all Ages have invaded and
perplexed the Churches of Christ from within themselves. And from thence also
have Decays in Faith, Love and Order insensibly prevailed in many, to the
dishonor of Christ, and the danger of their own Souls. First one grows remiss
in attending unto the Assemblies of the Church, and then another; first to one
degree, then to another, until the whole Lump be infected. A diligent watch
over these things as to the beginnings of them in all the members of the Church
will either heal and recover them that offend, or it will warn others, and keep
the Church from being either corrupted or defiled, Heb. 3. Chap. 12.

5. IT belongs unto them also to visit the Sick, especially such as whose
inward or outward conditions do expose them unto more than ordinary trials in
their Sickness; that is the Poor, the Afflicted, the Tempted in any kind. This
in general is a moral Duty, a Work of Mercy; but it is moreover a peculiar
Church-Duty by virtue of Institution. And one end of the Institution of
Churches, is, that the Disciples of Christ may have all that Spiritual and
Temporal Relief which is needful for them, and useful to them in their Troubles
and Distresses. And if this Duty were diligently attended unto by the Officers
of the Church, it would add much unto the Glory and Beauty of our Order, and be
an abiding reserve with Relief in the Minds of them whose outward condition
exposes them to straits and sorrows in such a season.

I ADD hereunto as a Duty of the same nature, the visitation of those who
suffer unto Restraint and Imprisonment upon the account of their Profession,
adherence unto Church Assemblies, or the Discharge of any Pastoral or
Office-Duties in them. This is a case wherewith we are not unacquainted, nor
are like so to be. Some look on this as the Duty of all the Members of the
Church, who yet enjoy their Liberty; and so it is, as their Opportunities and
Abilities will allow them, provided their discharge of it be useful unto those
whom they visit, and inoffensive unto others. But this Duty diligently attended
unto by the Elders, representing therein the care and love of the whole Church,
yea, of Christ himself unto his Prisoners, is a great Spring of Relief and
Comfort unto them. And by the Elders may the Church be acquainted what yet is
required of them in a way of Duty on their account. The care of the Primitive
Churches herein was most eminent.

6. IT belongs unto them and their Office, to advise with and give direction
unto the Deacons of the Church, as unto the making Provision and Distribution
of the Charity of the Church for the Relief of the Poor. The Office of the
Deacons is principally Executive, as we shall see afterward. Inquisition into
the state of the Poor, with all their circumstances, with the warning of all
the Members of the Church unto Liberality for their Supply, belongs unto the
Elders.

7. WHEN the State of the Church is such, through Suffering, Persecution and
Affliction, that the Poor be multiplied among them, so as that the Church it
self is not able to provide for their Relief in a due manner, if any Supply be
sent unto them from the love and bounty of other Churches, it is to be
deposited with these Elders, and disposed according to their advice, with that
of the Teachers of the Church, Act. 11.30.

8. IT is also their Duty, according to the advantage which they have by their
peculiar inspection of all the Members of the Church, their ways and their
walking, to acquaint the Pastors or Teaching-Elders of the Church, with the
State of the Flock, which may be of singular use unto them for their Direction
in the present Work of the Ministry. He who makes it not his business to know
the State of the Church which he ministers unto in the Word and Doctrine, as to
their Knowledge, their Judgment and Understanding, their Temptations and
Occasions, and applies not himself in his Ministry to search out what is
necessary and useful unto their Edification; he fights uncertainly in his whole
Work, as a Man beating the Air. But, whereas their obligation to attend unto
the Word and Prayer, confines them much unto a retirement for the greatest part
of their time, they cannot by themselves obtain that Acquaintance with the
whole Flock, but that others may greatly assist therein from their daily
Inspection, Converse and Observation.

9. AND it is their Duty to meet and consult with the Teaching-Elders, about
such things of importance, as are to be proposed in and unto the Church, for
its consent and compliance. Hence, nothing crude or indigested, nothing
unsuited to the sense and Duty of the Church, will at any time be proposed
therein, so to give occasion unto contests or janglings, disputes contrary unto
Order or Decency; but all things may be preserved in a due regard unto the
Gravity and Authority of the Rulers.

10. TO take care of the due Liberties of the Church, that they be not imposed
on by any Diotrephes in Office, or without it.

11. IT is incumbent on them in times of Difficulties and Persecution, to
consult together with the other Elders concerning all those things which
concern the present Duty of the Church, from time to time, and their
preservation from violence, according unto the will of Christ.

12. WHEREAS, there may be, and oft-times is but One Teaching-Elder, Pastor or
Teacher in a Church, upon his Death or Removal, it is the Work and Duty of
these Elders, to preserve the Church in Peace and Unity; to take care of the
continuation of its Assemblies; to prevent Irregularities in any Persons or
Parties among them; to go before, to direct and guide the Church in the Call
and Choice of some other meet Person or Persons in the room of the deceased or
removed.

THESE few instances have I given of the Work and Duty of Ruling Elders. They
are all of them such as deserve a greater enlargement in their Declaration and
Confirmation, than I can here afford unto them. And sundry things of the like
nature, especially with respect unto Communion with other Churches and Synods:
But what has been spoken is sufficient unto my present purpose. And to
manifest that it is so, I shall add the ensuing Observations.

1. ALL the things insisted on, do undoubtedly and unquestionably belong unto
the Rule and Order appointed by Christ in his Church. There is no one of them,
that is liable unto any just Exception from them by whom all Church Order is
not despised. Wherefore where there is a Defect in them or any of them, the
Church it self is defective as unto its own Edification. And where this Defect
is great, in many of them, there can be no Beauty, no Glory, no Order in any
Church, but only an outward show and appearance of them. And that all these
things do belong unto the Duty of these Elders, there needs no other Proof nor
Confirmation, but that they all undoubtedly and unquestionably belong unto that
Rule and Order, which the Lord Christ has appointed in his Church, and which
the Scripture testifies unto, both in general and particular. For all the
things which belong unto the Rule of the Church, are committed to the care of
the Rulers of the Church.

2. IT is a vain Apprehension to suppose that one or two Teaching Officers in a
Church, who are obliged to give themselves unto the Word and Prayer, to labor
with all their might in the Word and Doctrine, to preach in and out of season;
that is, at all times, on all opportunities as they are able, to Convince
Gainsayers by Word and Writing, pleading for the Truth; to assist and guide
the Consciences of all, under their Temptations and Desertions, with sundry
other Duties, in part spoken to before, should be able to take Care of, and
attend with Diligence unto all these things, that do evidently belong unto the
Rule of the Church. And hence it is, that Churches at this day do live on the
Preaching of the Word, the proper work of their Pastor, which they greatly
value, and are very little sensible of the Wisdom, Goodness, Love and Care of
Christ in the Institution of this Rule in the Church, nor are partakers of the
Benefits of it unto their Edification. And the supply which many have made
hitherto herein, by persons either unacquainted with their Duty, or insensible
of their own Authority, or cold if not negligent in their Work, does not answer
the end of their Institution. And hence it is that the Authority of Government
and the Benefit of it, are ready to be lost in most Churches. And it is both
vainly and presumptuously pleaded, to give countenance unto a neglect of their
Order, that some Churches do walk in Love and Peace, and are Edified without
it; supplying some defects by the prudent Aid of some Members of them. For it
is nothing but a preference of our own Wisdom unto the Wisdom and Authority of
Christ; or at best an unwillingness to make a venture on the warranty of his
Rule, for fear of some disadvantages that may ensue thereon.

3. WHEREAS sundry of the Duties beforementioned, are, as unto the substance
of them, required of the Members of the Church, in their several stations,
without any especial Obligation to attend unto them with Diligence, to look
after them, or power to Exercise any Authority in the discharge of them, to
leave them from under the Office-Care of the Elders, is to let in Confusson and
Disorder into the Church, and gradually to remove the whole advantage of the
Discipline of Christ, as it is come to pass in many Churches already.

IT is therefore Evident, that neither the Purity, nor the Order, nor the
Beauty or Glory of the Churches of Christ, nor the Representation of his own
Majesty and Authority in the Government of them, can be long preserved without
a Multiplication of Elders in them, according to the proportion of their
respective Members, for their Rule and Guidance. And for want hereof have
Churches of old and of late, either degenerated into Anarchy and Confusion,
their self Rule being managed with vain Disputes and Janglings, unto their
Division and Ruin; or else given up themselves unto the Domination of some
Prelatical Teachers, to Rule them at their pleasure, which proved the bane and
poison of all the Primitive Churches; and they will and must do so in the
neglect of this Order for the Future.

CHAP. IX. of DEACONS.
THE Original Institution, Nature and Use of the Office of Deacons in the
Church, are so well known, as that we need not much insist upon them. Nor shall
I treat of the Name which is common unto any kind of Ministry Civil or Sacred;
but speak of it as it is appropriated unto that especial Work for which this
Office was ordained.

The remote foundation of it lies in that of our Savior, The poor you have
always with you, Joh. 12.8. He does not only foretell, That such there should be
in the Church, but recommends the care of them who should be so, unto the
Church. For he makes use of the words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 15.11. For the poor
shall never cease out of the Land; therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall
open thy hand wide unto thy Brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy. This Legal
Institution, founded in the Law of Nature, does the Lord Christ by his
Authority transferr and translate unto the use of Gospel Churches among his
Disciples.

AND it may be observed, that at the same instant Hypocrisy and Avarice began
to attempt their Advantage on the consideration of this Provision for the Poor,
which they afterward effected unto their safety. For on the pretense hereof,
Judas immediately condemned an eminent Duty toward the person of Christ, as
containing a cost in it, which might have been better laid out in Provision for
the Poor: The Ointment poured on our Savior he thought might have been sold
for Three hundred pence (it may be about Forty or Fifty Pound) and given to the
Poor, But this he said, not that he cared for the Poor but because he was a
Thief, and had the Bag; out of which he could have made a good prey unto
himself, Joh. 12.6. And it may be observed, that although Judas maliciously
began this murmuring; yet at last some of the other Disciples were too
credulous of his insinuation, seeing the other Evangelists, ascribe it to them
also. But the same pretense, on the same grounds, in following Ages was turned
unto the greatest advantage of Hypocrisy and Covetousness that ever was in the
World. For under this pretense of providing for the Poor, the Thieves who had
got the Bag, that is the Ruling part of the Clergy, with the Priests, Friars
and Monks who served them, allowed Men in the neglect of the greatest and most
important Duties of Religion toward Christ himself, so as that they would give
all that they had to the Poor; not that they cared for the Poor, but because
they were Thieves, and had the Bag; by which means they possessed themselves of
the greatest part of the Wealth of the Nations professing Christian Religion.
This was their compliance with the Command of Christ; which they equally made
use of in other things.

THIS Foundation of their Office was farther raised by the Preaching of the
Gospel among the Poor. Many of them who first received it, were of that state
and condition as the Scripture every where testifies. The Poor are
Evangelized, Matthew. 11.5. God has chosen the Poor, Jam. 2.5. And so it was in
the First Ages of the Church; where the Provision for them was one of the most
eminent Graces and Duties of the Church in those days. And this way became the
Original Propagation of the Gospel. For it was made manifest thereby, that the
Doctrine and Profession of it was not a matter of Worldly Design or Advantage;
God also declared therein of how little esteem with him the Riches of this
World are; and also Provision was made for the exercise of the Grace of the
Rich in their Supply, the only way whereby they may Glorify God with their
Substance. And it were well if all Churches, and all the Members of them would
wisely consider how eminent is this Grace, how excellent is this Duty, of
making Provision for the Poor, how much the Glory of Christ and Honor of the
Gospel are concerned herein. For, whereas for the most part it is looked on as
an ordinary Work to be performed transiently and curiously, scarce deserving
any of the time which is allotted unto the Churches public Service and Duties,
it is indeed one of the most eminent Duties of Christian Societies, wherein the
principal exercise of the Second Evangelical Grace, namely Love, does consist.

THE care of making Provision for the Poor being made in the Church an
Institution of Christ, was naturally incumbent on them who were the First only
Officers of the Church, that is, the Apostles. This is plain from the occasion
of the Institution of the Office of the Deacons, Act. 6. The whole Work and
Care of the Church being in their hands, it was impossible that they should
attend unto the whole and all the parts of it in any manner. Whereas therefore
they gave themselves, according to their Duty, mostly unto those parts of their
Work, which were incomparably more excellent and necessary than the other,
namely Preaching of the Word and Prayer; there was such a defect in this other
part of ministration unto the Poor, as must unavoidably accompany the actings
of humane nature, not able to apply it self constantly unto things of diverse
natures at the same time. And hereon those who were concerned quickly, as the
manner of all is, expressed their resentment of a neglect in somewhat an undue
Order; there was a murmuring about it, Ver. 1. The Apostles hereon declared
that the principal part of the Work of the Ministry in the Church, namely the
Word and Prayer, was sufficient for them constantly to attend unto. Afterward
indeed Men began to think that they could do all in the Church themselves, but
it was when they began to do nothing in a due manner. And whereas the Apostles
chose, as their Duty, the Work of Prayer and Preaching, as that which they
would and ought entirely give up themselves unto, and for the sake of that Work
would deposite the care of other things on other hands; they are a strange kind
of Successors unto them, who lay aside that Work which they determined to
belong unto them principally and in the first place, to apply themselves unto
any thing else whatever.

YET did not the Apostles hereon utterly forgo the care of providing for the
Poor which being originally committed unto them by Jesus Christ, they would not
divest themselves wholly of it. But by the Direction of the Holy Ghost they
provided such assistance in the Work, as that for the future it might require
no more of their time or pains but what they should spare from their principal
Employment. And the same care is still incumbent on the ordinary Pastors and
Elders of the Churches, so far as the execution of it does not interfere with
their principal Work and Duty, from which those who understand it aright, can
spare but little of their time and strength.

HEREON the Apostles, by the Authority of Christ and direction of the Holy
Spirit, under whose Infallible Guidance they were in all the general
concernments of the Church, Instituted the Office of Deacons, for the discharge
of this necessary and important Duty in the Church, which they could not attend
unto themselves. And whereas the Lord Christ had in an especial manner
committed the care of the Poor unto the Disciples, there was now a declaration
of his Mind and Will, in what way and by what means he would have them provided
for.

AND it was the Institution of a new Office, and not a present supply in a Work
of Business which they designed. For the limitation of an especial
Ecclesiastical Work, with the Designation of Persons unto that Work, with
Authority for the discharge of it, ( set over this business) with a separation
unto it, do completely constitute an Office, nor is there any thing more
required thereunto.

BUT whereas there are three things that concur and are required unto the
ministration unto the Poor of the Church. (1.) The Love, Charity, Bounty and
Benevolence of the Members of the Church, in contribution unto that
ministration. (2.) The care and oversight of the discharge of it. And, (3.) The
actual Exercise and Application of it; the last only belongs unto the Office of
the Deacons, and neither of the first are discharged by the Institution of it.
For the first is both a Duty of the Light and Law of Nature, and in its moral
part enforced by many especial Commands of Christ; so as that nothing can
absolve Men from their obligation thereunto. The Office and Work of the Deacons
is to excite, direct and help them in the exercise of that Grace, and discharge
of the Duty therein incumbent on them. Nor is any Man, by the entrusting a due
proportion of his good things in the hands of the Deacons for its distribution,
absolved thereby from his own personal discharge of it also. For it being a
moral Duty required in the Law of Nature, it receives peculiar obligations
unto a present exercise by such Circumstances as Nature and Providence do
suggest: The care also of the whole Work is as was said, still incumbent on the
Pastors and Elders of the Church; only the ordinary Execution is committed unto
the Deacons.

NOR was this a Temporary Institution for that season, and so the Officers
appointed Extraordinary; but was to abide in the Church throughout all
Generations. For, (1.) The Work it self, as a distinct work of Ministry in the
Church, was never to cease, it was to abide for ever; The Poor you shall have
always with you. (2.) The Reason of its Institution is perpetual; namely, that
the Pastors of the Churches are not sufficient in themselves to attend unto the
whole work of Praying, Preaching, and this Ministration. (3.) They are
afterward not only in this Church at Jerusalem, but in all the Churches of the
Gentiles reckoned among the fixed Officers of the Church, Phil. 1.1. And, (4.)
Direction is given for their Continuation in all Churches, with a prescription
of the Qualifications of the person to be Chosen and called into this Office, 1 Timothy 3.8, 10, 11. (5.) The way of their Call is directed, and an Office
committed unto them, Let them be first proved, then let them use the Office of
a Deacon. (6.) A Promise of Acceptance is annexed unto the diligent discharge
of this Office, Verse. 13.

HENCE those who afterward utterly perverted all Church Order, taking out of
the hands and care of the Deacons, that work which was committed to them by the
Holy Ghost in the Apostles, and for which End alone, their Office was
Instituted in the Church, assigning other Work unto them, whereunto they are
not called nor appointed; yet thought meet to continue the Name and the
pretense of such an Office, because of the evident Institution of it, unto a
Continuation. And whereas when all things were swelling with Pride and Ambition
in the Church, no sort of its Officers contenting themselves with their
Primitive Institution; but striving by various degrees to somewhat in Name and
Thing, that was high and a-loft, there arose from the Name of this Office the
Meteor of an Archdeacon, with strange Power and Authority, never heard of in
the Church for many Ages: But this belongs unto the Mystery of Iniquity;
whereunto neither the Scripture nor the Practice of the Primitive Churches do
give the least countenance. But some think it not inconvenient even to sport
themselves in matter of Church Order and Constitutions.

THIS Office of Deacons, is an Office of service, which gives not any Authority
or Power in the Rule of the Church. But being an Office, it gives Authority
with respect unto the special Work of it under a general notion of Authority;
that is, a Right to attend unto it in a peculiar manner, and to perform the
things that belong thereunto. But this Right is confined unto the particular
Church whereunto they do belong. Of the Members of that Church are they to make
their Collections, and unto the Members of that Church are they to Administer.
Extraordinary Collections from, or for other Churches, are to be made and
disposed by the Elders, Acts 11.30.

WHEREAS, the Reason of the Institution of this Office was in general to free
the Pastors of the Churches who labor in the Word and Doctrine from Avocations
by outward things, such as wherein the Church is concerned; it belongs unto the
Deacons not only to take care of and provide for the Poor, but to manage all
other Affairs of the Church of the same kind; such as are providing for the
place of the Church Assemblies, of the Elements for the Sacraments, of Keeping,
Collecting and Disposing of the Stock of the Church, for the maintenance of its
Officers, and incidencies, especially in the time of Trouble or Persecution.
Hereon are they obliged to attend the Elders on all occasions, to perform the
Duty of the Church toward them, and receive directions from them. This was the
constant practice of the Church in the Primitive Times, until the Avarice and
Ambition of the Superior Clergy enclosed all Alms and Donations unto
themselves; the Beginning and Progress whereof is excellently described and
traced by Paulus Sharpius, in his Treatise of matters Beneficiary.

THAT maintenance of the Poor which they are to distribute, is to be collected
by the voluntary Contributions of the Church, to be made ordinarily every first
Day of the Week, and as occasion shall require in an extraordinary manner, 1
Cor. 16.1, 2. And this Contribution of the Church ought to be, (1.) In a way of
Bounty, not sparingly, 2 Cor. 9.5, 6, 7. (2.) In a way of Equality, as unto
Men's Abilities, 2 Cor. 8.13, 14. (3.) With respect unto present Successes and
Thriving in Affairs, whereof a Portion is due to God; as God has prospered
him, 1 Cor. 16.2. (4.) With willingness and freedom, 2 Cor. 8.12. Chap. 7.
Wherefore it belongs unto the Deacons in the Discharge of their Office, (1.) To
acquaint the Church with the present necessity of the Poor. (2.) To stir up the
particular Members of it unto a free Contribution according unto their Ability.
(3.) To admonish those that are negligent herein, who give not according to
their porportion; and to acquaint the Elders of the Church with those who
persist in a neglect of their Duty.

THE consideration of the State of the Poor unto whom the Contributions of the
Church are to be ministered, belongs unto the discharge of this Office. As, (1.)
That they are Poor indeed, and do not pretend themselves so to be, for
advantage. (2.) What are the Degrees of their Poverty, with respect unto their
Relations and Circumstances, that they may have suitable Supplies. (3.) That in
other things they walk according unto Rule. (4.) In particular that they Work
and Labor according to their Ability; for he that will not labor must not eat
at the public Charge. (5.) To Comfort, Counsel and Exhort them unto Patience,
Submission, Contentment with their Condition, and Thankfulness; all which might
be enlarged and confirmed, but that they are obvious.

THE Qualifications of Persons to be called unto this Office, are distinctly
laid down by the Apostles, 1 Timothy 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Upon the Trial,
Knowledge and Approbation of them, with respect unto these Qualifications,
their Call to this Office consists. (1.) In the choice of the Church. (2.) In a
separation unto it by Prayer and Imposition of Hands, Act. 6.3, 5, 6. And the
Adjuncts of their ministration are, (1.) Mercy to represent the tenderness of
Christ toward the Poor of the Flock, Romans 12.8. (2.) Cheerfulness to relieve
the Spirits of them that receive against thoughts of being troublesome and
burdensome to others. (3.) Diligence and Faithfulness by which they purchase to
themselves a good Degree, and great boldness in the Faith which is in Christ
Jesus.

IT remains only that we enquire into some few things relating unto this
Office, and those that are called unto it. As,

1. WHAT is the meaning of the Apostle, where he affirms, that the Deacons in
the Discharge of their Office, (...), 1 Timothy 3.13. Do purchase or procure unto
themselves a good Degree. (...) is a Step, a Degree, a Seat a little Exalted,
and Metaphorically it is applied to denote Dignity and Authority. This good
Degree, which Deacons may obtain, is in the judgment of most the Office of
Presbytery. This they shall be promoted unto in the Church. From Deacons they
shall be made Presbyters. I cannot comply with this Interpretation of the
Words. For, (1.) The Office of Presbytery is called (...), a good Work, no
where (...), a good Degree. (2.) The difference between a Deacon and a
Presbyter is not in Degree, but in Order. A Deacon made a Presbyter is not
advanced unto a further Degree in his own Order; but leaves it for another.
(3.) The diligent discharge of the Work of a Deacon, is not a due preparation
for the Office of the Presbytery, but an hinderance of it; for it lies wholly
in the providing and disposal of Earthly things, in a serving of the Tables of
the Church, and those private of the Poor: But preparation for the Ministry
consists in a Man's giving himself unto Study, Prayer and Meditation.

I SHALL only give my conjecture on the Words, the Apostle seems to me to have
respect unto Church Order, with Decency therein, in both these Expressions,
shall purchase to themselves a good Degree, and great confidence in the Faith:
(...) is of the same signification with (...), which is a Seat raised in an
Assembly to hear or speak. So says the Schol. on Sophoc. Oed. (...). The place
where the Assembly (or Church) met, was divided round about with Seats in
Degrees, some above others, where all that met might without trouble hear him
that stood in the midst as they sat. And countenance is given hereunto by what
is observed concerning the custom of sitting in the Jewish Synagogues. So
Ambrose; Traditio est Synagogae, ut sedentes disputarent, Siniores dignitate in
Cathedris, subsequentes in subselliis, novissimi in pavimento; It is the
Tradition or Order of the Synogogue, that the Elders in Dignity (or Office)
should discourse sitting in Chairs; the next Order on Forms or Benches, and the
last on the Floor. So speaks Philo before him; (...), when we meet in sacred
places, places of Divine Worship, the younger sort according to their Quality
sit in Orders under the Elders. And this James the Apostle has respect unto in
the Primitive Assemblies of the Christian Jews. For reproving their partiality
in accepting of Men's Persons, preferring the Rich immoderately before the Poor,
he instanceth in their disposing of them unto Seats in their Assemblies. They
said unto the Rich Man, (...), sit thou here in a good place; that is in (...),
in the best degree; and to the Poor, stand thou there on the floor, or sit at
my footstool, without respect unto those other Qualifications whereby they
were to be distinguished. Wherefore, the Apostle having respect unto
Church Assemblies, and the Order to be observed in them, the (...) here
intended, may signify no more but a place of some eminency in the
Church Assemblies, which is due unto such Deacons, where with boldness and
confidence they may assist in the management of the Affairs of the Church,
which belongs unto the Profession of the Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

IF any shall rather think that both of the Expressions do signify an increase
in Gifts and Grace, which is a certain consequence of Men's faithful discharge
of their Office in the Church, wherein many Deacons of old were eminent unto
Martyrdom, I shall not contend against it.

2. WHEREAS there are Qualifications expressly required in the Wives of Deacons,
as that they should be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things, 1 Timothy 3.12. which is to be considered before their call to Office; supposing
that any of them do fall from the Faith as becoming Papists, Socinians, or
Quakers, whether their Husbands may be continued in their Office?

Ans. 1. HE who in his own Person faithfully discharges his Office, may be
continued therein, yea, though his Wife should be actually Excommunicated out
of the Church. Every One of us must give an account of himself unto the Lord.
He rejects us not for what we cannot remedy. The sinning Person shall bear his
own judgment. (2.) Such an one ought to take care, by virtue of his Authority
as an Husband, that as little offense as possible may be given to the Church by
his Wife, when she loses the qualification of not being a slanderer, which is
inseparable from such Apostates.

3. MAY a Deacon be dismissed from his Office wholly, after he has been
solemnly set apart unto it by Prayer?

Ans. 1. THE very end of the Office being only the convenience of the Church
and its accommodation, the continuation of Men in this Office is to be
regulated by them. And if the Church at any time stand not in need of the
Ministry of this or that Person, they may, upon his desire, discharge him of
his Office. (2.) Things may so fall out with Men, as unto their outward
circumstances, with respect unto either their Persons in Bodily Distempers and
Infirmities, or their Condition in the World, as that they are not able any
longer to attend unto the due discharge of this Office; in which case they
ought to be released. (3.) A Man may be solemnly set apart unto a Work and Duty
by Prayer for a limited Season, suppose for a year only; wherefore this does
not hinder but that a Man on just Reasons may be dismissed at any time from his
Office, though he be so set apart unto it. (4.) A Deacon by unfaithfulness and
other offenses, may forfeit his Office, and be justly excluded from it, losing
all his Right unto it and Interest in it, and therefore on just Reasons may be
dismissed wholly from it. (5.) For any one to desert his Office
through forwardness, covetousness, sloth or negligence, is an offense and
scandal which the Church ought to take notice of. (6.) He who desires a
dismission from his Office, ought to give an account of his desires and the
Reasons of them unto the Church, that the Ministry which he held may be duly
supplied, and love continued between him and the Church.

4. HOW many Deacons may there be in one Congregation?

Ans. AS many as they stand in need of, for the ends of that Ministry; and they
may be at all times increased, as the State of the Church does require; and it
is meet that there should always be so many, as that none of the Poor be
neglected in the daily Ministration, nor the Work be made burdensome unto
themselves.

5. WHAT is the Duty of the Deacons toward the Elders of the Church?

Ans. WHEREAS the care of the whole Church in all its concernments is
principally committed unto the Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, it is the Duty of
the Deacons in the discharge of their Office, (1.) To acquaint them from time
to time with the state of the Church, and especially of the Poor, so far as it
falls under their Inspection. (2.) To seek and take their Advice in matters of
greater importance relating unto their Office. (3.) To be assisting unto them
in all the outward concerns of the Church.

6. MAY Deacons Preach the Word and Baptize authoritatively by virtue of their
Office?

Ans. (1.) THE Deacons, whose Office is instituted, Act. 6. and whose
Qualifications are fixed, 1 Timothy 3. have no call unto, or Ministerial Power in
these things. The limitation of their Office, Work and Power, is so express, as
will not admit of any debate. (2.) Persons once called unto this Office, might
of old in an extraordinary manner, may at present in an ordinary way, be called
unto the preaching of the Word; but they were not then, they cannot be now
authorized thereunto by vrtue of this Office. (3.) If a new Office be erected
under the name of Deacons, it is in the will of them by whom it is erected, to
Assign what Power unto it they please.

CHAP. X. Of EXCOMMVNICATION.
THE Power of the Church toward its Members (for it has nothing to do with
them that are without) may be referred unto Three Heads, (1.) The Admission of
Members into its Society. (2.) The Rule and Edification of them that belong
unto it. (3.) The Exclusion out of its Society of such as obstinately refuse to
live and walk according unto the Laws and Rules of it. And these things belong
essentially and inseparably unto every free Society, and are comprehensive of
all Church Power whatever.

THE Second of these has been treated of in the Discourse concerning Church
Offices and Rule. And all that belongs unto the first of them, is fully
declared in the Chapters of the Essential Constituent parts of Gospel Churches,
namely their Matter and Form. The Third must be now spoken, unto which is the
Power of Excommunication.

THERE is nothing in Christian Religion, about which the contest of Opinions
has been more fierce than this of Excommunication, most of them proceeding
evidently from false Presumptions and secular Interests. And no greater
instance can be given of what the Serpentine wits of Men engaged by the desire
of Domination and Wealth, and assisted by opportunities may attain unto. For
whereas, as we shall see immediately, there is nothing more plain, simple, and
more exposed unto the common understanding of all Christians, yea of all
Mankind, than is this Institution of Christ; both as unto its Nature, Form and
Manner of Administration, nothing more wholesome nor useful unto the Souls of
Men; nothing more remote from giving the least disturbance or prejudice to
Civil Society, to Magistrates or Rulers, unto the Personal or Political Rights
or Concernments of any one individual in the World: It has been Metamorphosed
into an hideous Monster; an Engine of Priestly Domination and Tyranny, for the
Deposition or Assassination of Kings and Princes, the Wasting of Nations with
bloody Wars, the Terror of the Souls of Men, and the destruction of their
Lives, with all their Earthly Concerns, unto the Erection of a Tyrannical
Empire, no less pernicious unto the Christian World, than those of the Saracens
or the Turks. He is a stranger unto all that has passed in the World for near
a Thousand Years, who knows not the Truth of these things. And to this very day
the greatest part of them that are called Christians are so supinely Ignorant
and Doting, or so infatuated and blinded by their Prejudices and Corrupt
Interests, as to suppose, or to say, That if the Pope of Rome do Excommunicate
Kings or Princes, they may be lawfully deposed from their Rule, and in some
cases killed; and that other persons being rightly Excommunicated according
unto certain Laws, Rules, and Processes, that some have framed, ought to be
Fined, Punished, Imprisoned, and so Destroyed. And about these things there are
many Disputes and Contests; when if Men were awakned out of their Lethargy they
would be laughed at, as the most ridiculous and contemptible Mormo's that ever
appeared in the World; though they are no laughing matter at present, unto them
that are concerned in them.

SUPPOSING then, Ecclesiastical Excommunication (as I at present suppose, and
shall immediately prove it) to be an appointment of our Lord Jesus Christ;
these things are plain and evident concerning it, not capable of any modest
Contradiction, (1.) That there is no Divine Evangelical Institution, that is
more suited unto the Light of Nature, the Rules of common Equity, and
Principles of unseared Consciences, as unto the Nature, Efficacy and Rule of
it, than this is. (2.) That the way of the Administration and Exercise of the
Power and Acts of it, is so determined, described and limited in the Scripture,
and the Light of Nature, as that there can be no gross error or mistake about
it, but what proceeds from Secular Interests, Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, or
other vicious Habits and Inclinations of the minds of Men. (3.) That the whole
Authority of it, its Sentence, Power and Efficacy, are merely Spiritual, with
respect unto the Souls and Consciences of Men only; and that to extend it
directly or indirectly, immediately or by consequences, unto the temporal hurt,
evil or damage of any in their Lives, Liberties, Estates, Natural or Legal
Privileges, is opposite unto, and destructive of the whole Government of Christ
in and over his Church. All these things wilfully appear in the account which
we shall give of it.

IT is therefore evident, as was intimated, that nothing in Christian Practice
has been, or is more abused, corrupted or perverted, than this of
Excommunication has been and is. The Residence of the Supreme Power of it to
be exercised toward and over all Christians, Rulers and Subjects, in the Pope
of Rome, or in other single Persons absolutely, over less or greater
Distributions of them; the Administration of it by Citations, Processes,
Pleadings and Contentions in wrangling Law Courts according unto Arbitrary
Canons and Constitutions, whose Original is either known, or unknown; the
Application of it unto the Hurt, Damage, Evil or Loss of Men in their Temporal
Concerns, are utterly and openly foreign unto the Gospel, and expressly contrary
unto what the Lord Christ has appointed therein. It would require a whole
Volume to declare the horrible abuses that both in point of Right, and in
matter of Fact, with the pernicious consequences that have ensued thereon,
which the corruption of this Divine Institution has produced: But to make a
Declaration hereof, does not belong to my present design; besides, it has in
some good measure been done by others. In brief, it is so come to pass that it
is made a mere Political Engine, of an external forcible Government, of the
Persons of Men, unto the ends of the Interests of some, who have got a pretense
of its Power, administered by such ways and means, as wherein the Consciences of
Men, neither of those by whom it is Administered, nor of those unto whom it is
Applied, are any way concerned, with respect unto the Authority, or any
Institution of Jesus Christ.

FROM an observation hereof, and a desire to vindicate as well Christian
Religion from such a scandalous Abuse as Mankind from Bondage, to such a
monstrous fiction as is the present power and exercise of it, some have fallen
into another extreme, denying that there is any such thing as Excommunication,
appointed or approved by the Gospel. But this neither is, nor ever will be a
way to reduce Religion nor any thing in it, unto its Primitive Order and
Purity. To deny the Being of any thing because it has been abused, when there
could have been no abuse of it, but upon a supposition of its Being, is not a
rational way to reprove and convince that abuse. And when those who have
corrupted this Institution, find the insufficiency of the Arguments produced to
prove that there never was any such Institution, it makes them secure in the
practice of their own Abuses of it. For they imagine that there is nothing
incumbent on them to justify their present possession and exercise of the Power
of Excommunication; but that Excommunication it self is appointed in the Church
by Christ, whereas the true consideration of this Appointment, is the only
means to divest them of their power and practice. For the most effectual course
to discharge and disprove all corruptions in the Agenda or Practicals of
Religion, as the Sacraments, public Worship, Rule and the like, is to propose
and declare the things themselves in their Original simplicity, and purity, as
appointed by Christ, and recorded in the Scriptures. A real view of them in
such a Proposal, will divest the minds of Men, not corrupted and hardened by
Prejudice and Interest, of those erroneous conceptions of them, that from some
kind of Tradition they have been prepossessed withal. And this I shall now
attempt in this particular of Excommunication.

THERE has been great enquiry about the nature and exercise of this Ordinance,
under the Old Testament, with the Account given of it by the latter Jews. For
the Right and Power of it in general, belongs unto a Church as such, every
Church, and not that which is purely Evangelical only. This I shall not enquire
into; it has been sifted to the bran already, and intermixed with many
Rabbinical conjectures and mistakes. In general, there is nothing more certain,
than that there was a doubl^ Removal of Persons by Church Authority, from the
communion of the whole Congregation in Divine Worship. The one for a Season,
the other for Ever; whereof I have given Instances elsewhere. But I intend only
the consideration of what belongs unto Churches under the New Testament. And to
this end we may observe,

1. THAT all lawful Societies, constituted such by voluntary confederation,
according unto peculiar Laws and Rules of their own choice, unto especial
Duties and Ends, have a Right and Power by the Light of Nature, to receive into
their Society those that are willing and meet, engaging themselves to observe
the Rules, Laws and Ends of the Society; and to Expel them out of it who
wilfully deviate from those Rules. This is the life and form of every lawful
Society or Community of Men in the World, without which they can neither
coalesce nor subsist. But it is required hereunto,

1. THAT those who so enter into such a Society, have Right or Power so to do.
And many things are required unto this end: As, (1.) That those who enter into
such a Society be sui Juris; have a lawful Right to dispose of themselves, as
unto all the Duties and Ends of such a Society. Hence Children, Servants,
Subjects, have no power in themselves to enter into such Societies, without the
interposition of and obligation from a power Superior unto that of Parents,
Masters, or Princes, namely, that of God himself. (2.) That the Rules, Laws,
and ends of the Society be lawful, good and useful unto themselves and others.
For there may be a confederation in and for evil; which is a combination that
gives no Right nor Power, over one another, or toward others that enter into
it. (3.) That it contains nothing that is prejudicial unto others in things
Divine or Humane. (4.) Nor oblige unto the omission or neglect of any Duty,
that Men by virtue of any Relations, Natural, Moral or Political, do owe unto
others: Nor, (5.) Is hurtful unto themselves in their Lives, Liberties, Names,
Reputation, usefulness in the World, or any thing else, unto whose preservation
they are obliged by the Law of Nature. Nor, (6.) Can be, or are such Persons
obliged to forsake the conduct of themselves in things Divine and Humane, by
the Light of their own Consciences, by an Engagement of blind obedience unto
others, which would render every Society unlawful by the Law of God and Light
of Nature. (7.) Least of all, have any Persons Right or Power to oblige
themselves in such Societies, unto things Evil, Sinful, Superstitious or
Idolatrous.

THESE things are plain, and evident in themselves, and every way sufficient to
divest all the Religious Societies and Fraternities that are erected in the
Church of Rome, of all that Right and Power which belongs unto lawful
Societies, constituted by voluntary confederation. And if any thing
inconsistent with these principles of Natural Light be pretended in Churches,
it divests them of all Power, as to the exercise of it, by virtue of any
compact or confederation whatever.

2. IT is required that a Society, by voluntary consent vested with the Right
and Power mentioned, do neither give nor take away any Right, Privilege or
Advantage, to, or from any Members of the Society which belong unto them
Naturally or Politically; but their Power is confined unto those things alone,
wherein Men may be benefited and advantaged by the Society. And this is the
foundation of all political Societies. Men, for the sake and benefit of them,
may and ought to forego many particular Advantages, which, without them, they
might make unto themselves. But they cannot forego any of those Rights, which
in their several Relations are inseparably annexed unto them by the Law of
Nature, nor give power over themselves in such things unto the Society. So is
it with Churches; the power of expulsion out of their Society, extends only
unto the Benefits and Advantages which the Society, as such, does afford and
communicate. Now these are only things Spiritual if Churches be an institution
of him, whose Kingdom is not of this World. The power then that is in Churches,
by virtue of their being what they are, extends not it self unto any outward
concernments of Men, as unto their Lives, Liberties, Natural or Political
Privileges, Estates or Possessions; unless we shall say, that Men hold and
possess these things by virtue of their Relation unto the Church, which is to
overthrow all Natural and Humane Right in the World. De facto, Men are now
compelled whether they will or no, to be esteemed to be of this or that Church,
and to be dealt withal accordingly. But if they had not been divested of their
natural Liberty, they know not how, without their own consent, and should be
taught, that by entering into a Church, they must come under a new Tenure of
their Lives, Liberties and Estates, at the Will of the Lords of the Society
according to the Customs of their Courts, there would not be so many Wise Men
in Churches, as now there are thought to be.

BUT this is the true State of things in the Church of Rome, and among others
also. Christians are esteemed to be of them, and belong unto them, whether they
will or no. Immediately hereon all the Rights, Liberties, Privileges,
Possessions which they enjoy by the Law of God and Nature, and by the just Laws
and Constitutions of Men in Civil Governments, under which they live, come to
depend upon, and be subject unto the especial Laws and Rules of the Society
which they are adjudged to belong unto. For upon expulsion out of that Society
by Excommunication, according unto the Laws and Rules which it has framed unto
it self, all their Rights and Titles, and Liberties and Enjoyments are
forfeited and exposed to Ruin. Some indeed do earnestly and learnedly contend
that the Pope of Rome has not Power to Excommunicate Sovereign Kings and
Princes; and that if he do, they make no forfeiture of Life or Dignity thereby.
And there are good Reasons why they do so. But in the mean time, they deal with
other poor Men after the same manner. For if a poor Man be Excommunicated,
immediately he loses the free Tenure of his Life, Liberty and Goods, by the
Law of the Church and the Land, and is Committed to the Gaol without Bail or
Mainprize. So that by this Artifice, all Men hold their Natural and Civil
Rights, by the Rules of the Church Society whereto they are supposed to belong.
And as this utterly overthrows the foundation of all that Property according to
the Laws of the Land, which is so much talked of and valued; so indeed it would
be destructive of all Order and Liberty, but that the Church is wise enough not
to employ this Engine unto Great Men and Men in Power, who may yet deserve
Excommunication as well as some of their poor Neighbors, if the Gospel be
thought to give the Rule of it. But those that are poor, helpless and
friendless, shall in the pursuit of this Excommunication be driven from their
Houses, cast into Prisons, and kept there until they and their Families starve
and perish. And it is apparent that we are beholding unto the Greatness,
Authority, and Wealth of many, whom the Ecclesiastical Courts care not to
conflict withal, that the whole Nation is not actually brought under this new
Tenure of their Lives, Liberties and Estates, which on this presumption they
are obnoxious unto.

AND all this evil arises from the neglect and contempt of this fundamental
Rule of all Societies, apparent unto all in the Light of Nature it self;
namely, that they have no Power in or over any Thing, Right, Privilege or
Advantage, but what Men are made Partakers of by virtue of such Societies,
their Rule and Laws whereunto they are obliged. But of this sort are not the
Lives, the Liberties, the Houses and Possessions of Men, with respect unto the
Church. They receive them not from the Church, and a Man would certainly think,
that the Church could not take them away.

YEA, we live and subsist in Order, upon the good Nature and Wisdom of Men, who
judge it best neither to exert their Power, nor act their Principles in this
matter. For, whereas they esteem all the Inhabitants of the Land to belong unto
their Church; if they should in the first place Excommunicate all that ought to
be Excommunicated by the Rule and Law of the Gospel, and then all that ought to
be so, according to their own Laws and Canons, both which a Man would think
they were obliged in point of Conscience unto; and in pursuit of their
Sentence, send out the Capias for them all, I very much question whether any of
them would go to Prison or no; and then in what a fine case would this
Government be; and if they should all go to Gaol, I am persuaded the King would
be in an ill State to defend his Realms against his Enemies.

3. EVERY Society has this Power toward those who are incorporated in it by
their own consent, and not toward others. For whence should they have such a
Power, or who should commit it unto them? Nor can any be cast out from those
Privileges which they never had an Interest in, nor a Right unto. The Apostles
Rule holds in this case, especially with respect unto Churches; What have we to
do to judge them that are without. And as unto the exercise of this Power, they
are all to be esteemed to be without, who are not rightly incorporated into
that particular Church, by which they may be ejected out of it. A Power of
Excommunication at Random toward all that those who exercise it can extend
force unto, has no foundation either in the Light of Nature or Authority of
the Scripture. And it would be ridiculous in any Corporation to disfranchise
such as never belonged unto it, who were never Members of it.

4. THE only Reason or Cause for the expulsion of any Person out of such a
Society, is a wilful deviation from the Rules and Laws of the Society, whose
observance he had engaged unto upon his entrance into it. Nothing else can be
required unto the Preservation of a Man's Interest in any Right or Privilege,
but what he took upon himself to perform in his Admittance into it. And if the
great Rule of every Church-Society, be, That Men observe and do whatsoever the
Lord Christ has commanded, none can be justly ejected out of that Society, but
upon a wilful disobedience unto his Commands. And therefore
the casting of Men out of Church*Communion on light and trivial occasions, or
for any Reasons or Causes whatever, but such as essentially belong unto the
Rules and Laws whereon the Church does originally coalesce into a Society, is
contrary unto Natural Light, and the Reason of the Things themselves.

THUS far I say is every lawful confederate Society enabled and warranted by
the Light of Nature, to remove from its Communion, and from a participation in
its Rights and Privileges any of its number who will not walk according to the
Rules and Principles of its Coalescency and Constitution. Whereas therefore the
Rule of the Constitution of the Church is, That Men walk together in holy
Obedience unto the Commands of Christ, and the observance of all his
Institutions, without giving Offense unto one another, or those that are
without, by any sinful miscarriage, and do abide in the Profession of the
Truth; if any one shall wilfully and obstinately transgress in any of these
things, it is the Right and Duty, and in the Power of the Church to remove him
from its Society.

BUT this is not the entire nor the next immediate Ground, Reason, or Warranty
of Ecclesiastical Excommunication. For this natural Equity will not extend it
self unto cases that are in things Spiritual and Supernatural; nor will the
actings of the Church thereon reach unto the Consciences of Men, for the proper
ends of Excommunication. Wherefore it was necessary that it should have a
peculiar Institution in the Church by the Authority of Jesus Christ. For,

1. THE Church is such a Society as no Men have Right or Power either to enter
into themselves, or to exclude others from, but by virtue of the Authority of
Christ. No warranty from the Light of nature, or from the Laws of Men, or their
own voluntary confederation, can enable any to constitute a Church-Society,
unless they do all things expressly in obedience unto the Authority of Christ.
For his Church is his Kingdom, his House; which none can constitute or build
but himself. Wherefore it is necessary, that the power of Admission into, and
Exclusion from the Church, do arise from his Grant and Institution. Nor is it
in the power of any Men in the World, to admit into, or exclude from this
Society but by virtue thereof.

2. EXCOMMVNICATION is an act of Authority, as we shall see afterward. But no
Authority can be exercised in the Church, toward any person whatever, but by
virtue of the Institution of Christ. For the Authority it self however
ministerially exercised by others, is his alone; and he exerts it not, but in
the ways of his own appointment. So in particular the Apostle directs, that
Excommunication be exerted in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, in
and by his Authority, 1 Cor. 5.4.

3. THE Privileges from which Men are excluded by Excommunication are not such,
as they have any Natural or Civil Right unto (as has been proved) but merely
such as are granted unto the Church by Jesus Christ; and Men cannot by virtue
of any Agreement among themselves, without a Warranty from him by his
Institution, Expel others from the Privileges which are merely of his Grant and
Donation. He alone therefore has given and granted this Power unto the Church,
namely of Excluding any by the Rules and Ways of his Appointment from the
Privileges of his Grant, which is the peculiar Power of Excommunication
inquired after.

4. THERE is such an Efficacy assigned unto Excommunication in binding the
Consciences of Men, in retaining their Sins, in the Destruction or
Mortification of the Flesh, in the Healing and Recovery of Sinners; as nothing
but the Authority of a Divine Institution can give unto it. By virtue of
natural Light and mutual Consent, Men may free themselves from the Company and
Society of those who will not walk with them according to Rules of Communion
agreed upon among them; but they cannot reach the Minds and Consciences of
others with any of these Effects.

5. THAT Excommunication is an express Ordinance of our Lord Jesus Christ in
his Churches is fully declared in the Scripture. For, (1.) The power of it is
contained in the Authority given by Christ unto the Church, under the Name of
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. For the Power expressed therein is not
merely Doctrinal and Declarative as is the preaching of the Gospel, the
consequent whereof upon the Faith or Unbelief of them that hear it, is the
Remitting or Retaining of their Sin in Heaven and Earth; but it is Disciplinary
also, as it is appropriated unto the House whose Keys are committed unto the
Stewards of it. And seeing the design of Christ was to have his Church Holy,
Unblameable and without offense in the World, that therein he might make a
Representation of his own Holiness, and the Holiness of his Rule; and whereas
those of whom it is constituted, are liable and subject unto Sins scandalous
and offensive, reflecting dishonor on himself and the Church, in being the
occasion of sinning unto others; that design would not have been accomplished,
had he not given this Authority unto his Church to cast out and separate from
it self all that do by their Sins so give offense. And the neglect of the
exercise of this Authority in a due manner, was the principal means whereby the
Glory, Honor, and usefulness of the Churches in the World, were at length
utterly lost. (2.) It has a direct Institution, Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20. If thy Brother shall Trespass, etc. tell it unto the Church; but if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man and a
Publican. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth shall be
bound in Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven, etc. After all the Learned and Unlearned Contests that have been about
this place, the sense of it is plain and obvious, unto such as whose Minds are
not clouded with prejudices about such Churches and such Excommunications as
are utterly foreign unto the Scripture. But that by Trespasses in this place,
Sins against God giving scandal or offense, are intended, has been proved
before; as also, that by a Church, a particular Christian Congregation is
intended. This Church has the cognizance of the scandalous offenses of its
Members committed unto it, when brought before it in the due Order described.
Hereon it makes a Determination, designing in the first place the Recovery of
the Person offending, from his Sin, by his hearing of its Counsel and Advice.
But in case of Obstinacy, it is to remove him from its Communion, leaving him
in the outward condition of an Heathen and a Publican. So is he to be esteemed
by them that were offended with his Sin, and that because of the Authority of
the Church binding him in Heaven and Earth unto the punishment due unto his
Sin, unless he does Repent. The Rejection of an offending Brother out of the
Society of the Church, leaving him as unto all the Privileges of the Church, in
the State of an Heathen, declaring him liable unto the Displeasure of Christ,
and Everlasting Punishment without Repentance, is the Excommunication we plead
for; and the Power of it, with its Exercise, is plainly here granted by Christ
and Ordained in the Church. (3.) According unto this Institution was the
practice of the Apostles, whereof we have several Instances. I might insist
upon the Excommunication of Simon the Magician, a baptized professor, by Peter,
who declared him to have neither part or lot in the Church upon the discovery
of his wickedness, Act. 8.13, 20, 21, 22, 23. Yet because it was the single Act
of one Apostle, and so may be esteemed extraordinary, I shall omit it. However,
that fact of the Apostle is sufficiently declarative of what is to be done in
the Church in like cases, and which if it be not done, it cannot be preserved
in its purity according unto the mind of Christ. But that which was directed by
the Apostle Paul in the Church of Corinth toward the incestuous Person, is
express, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2, 5, 6, 7. (1.) He declares the Sin whereof the Person
charged was guilty, with the Ignominy and Scandal of it, Ver. 1. (2.) He blames
the Church that they had not been affected with the Guilt and Scandal of it, so
as to have proceeded to his Removal or Expulsion out of the Church, that he
might be taken away or cut off from them, Ver. 2. (3.) He declares his own
judgment in the case, that he ought to be so taken away or removed, which yet
was not actually effected by that Judgment and Sentence of his, Ver. 3. (4.) He
declares the causes of this Excision. (1.) The Supreme efficient cause of it,
is the Power or Authority of the Lord Jesus Christ instituting this Ordinance
in his Church, giving Right and Power unto it for its administration, In the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with his Power. (2.) The declarative cause
of the Equity of this Sentence, which was the Spirit of the Apostle, or the
Authoritative Declaration of his judgment in the case, with my Spirit. (3.) The
Instrumental Ministerial cause of it, which is the Church; do it in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered together, Ver. 4. and thereby
purge out the old Leaven, that you may be a new Lump, Ver. 7. whence the
punishment of this Sentence is said to be inflicted by many, 2 Cor. 2.6. that
is, all those who on his Repentance were obliged to forgive and comfort him,
that is the whole Church, Ver. 7. (5.) The nature of the Sentence is the
delivering of such an one to Satan for the destruction of the Flesh, that the
Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, Ver. 5. Not the destruction
of his Body by Death, but the through mortification of the Flesh, whereby he
was shortly afterward recovered and restored into his former condition. The
whole of what we plead for, is here exemplified; as, (1.) The cause of
Excommunication, which is a scandalous Sin unrepented of. (2.) The preparation
for its execution, which is the Churches sense of the Sin and Scandal, with
Humiliation for it. (3.) The warranty of it, which is the Institution of
Christ, wherein his Authority is engaged. (4.) The manner and form of it, by an
Act of Authority with the consent of the whole Church. (5.) The effect of it in
a total separation from the Privileges of the Church. (6.) The end of it. (1.)
With respect unto the Church, its purging and vindication. (2.) With respect
unto the Person Excommunicated; his Repentance, Reformation and Salvation.

IT is usually replied hereunto, that this was an extraordinary act of
Apostolical Power, and so not to be drawn by us into Example. For he himself
both determines the case, and asserteth his presence in Spirit, that is by his
Authority to be necessary unto what was done. Besides, it was a delivery of the
Man to Satan, that is, into his power to be afflicted and cruciated by him, to
be terrified in his Mind, and punished in his Body to the destruction of the
Flesh, that is unto Death. Such was the Delivery of a Man to Satan by the
Apostle mentioned here, and 1 Timothy 1.9, 20. in the judgment of many of the
Ancients. But there is no such Power in any Church at present to deliver an
offender unto Satan, nor any appearing effects of such a pretense. Wherefore,
this is a matter which belongs not unto Churches at present.

I ANSWER, (1.) What the Apostles did in any Church, whether present or absent,
by their own Authority, did not prejudice the Right of the Churches themselves,
nor their Power acted in Subordination unto them and their guidance. So it is
evident in this place, that notwithstanding the exerting of any Apostolical
Power intimated, the Church it self is charged with its Duty, and directed to
exercise its Authority in the Rejection of the Offender. (2.) There is nothing
extraordinary in the case. (1.) It is not so that a Member of a Church should
fall into a scandalous Sin, unto the dishonor of Christ and the Church, giving
offense unto Persons of all sorts. (2.) It is an ordinary Rule, founded in the
Light of Nature, confirmed here and elsewhere by express Divine Commands, that
such an one be rejected from the Society and Communion of the Church, until he
give satisfaction by Repentance and Reformation. (3.) It is that without which
the Church cannot be preserved in its purity, nor its being be continued, as
both Reason and Experience do manifest. (4.) The judgment both of the Fact and
Right was left unto the Church it self, whence it was afterward highly
commended by the Apostle for the diligent discharge of its Duty herein, 2 Cor.
2. In brief, it is such a Divine Order that is here prescribed, as without the
observance whereof, no Church can long subsist. (5.) There is no difficulty in
the other part of the Objection, about the Delivery unto Satan. For, (1.) It
cannot be proved, that hereon the Offender was delivered so into the power of
Satan to be cruciated, agitated, and at length killed, as some imagine; nor can
any instance of any such thing, be given in the Scripture or Antiquity; though
there be many of them, who upon their rejection out of the Church, were enraged
unto an opposition against it, as it was with Simon Magus, Marcian, and others.
(2.) Yea, it is evident that there was no such thing included in their delivery
unto Satan, as is pretended. For the design and end of it was the Man's
Humiliation, Recovery and Salvation, as is expressly affirmed in the Text; and
this effect is actually had, for the Man was healed and restored. Wherefore,
this Delivery unto Satan, is an Ordinance of Christ for the exciting of Saving
Grace in the Souls of Men, adapted unto the case of falling by scandalous Sins,
peculiarly effectual above any other Gospel Ordinance. Now this cannot be such
a Delivery unto Satan, as that pretended, which can have no other end but
Destruction and Death. (3.) This Delivery unto Satan is no more but the casting
of a Man out of the visible Kingdom of Christ, so giving him up as unto his
outward condition into the state of Heathens and Publicans which belonged unto
the Kingdom of Satan. For he, who by the Authority of Christ himself, according
unto his Law and Institution, is not only debarred from a participation of all
the privileges of the Gospel, but also visibly and regularly divested of all
present Right to them and Interest in them, he belongs unto the visible Kingdom
of Satan. The gathering of Men by Conversion into the Church, is the turning of
them from the Power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. a delivery from the Power of
Darkness, that is, the Kingdom of Satan, and a translation unto the Kingdom of
Christ, Col. 1.13. Wherefore, after a Man has by Faith, and his conjunction
unto a visible Church, been translated into the Kingdom of Christ, his just
rejection out of it, is the Redelivery of him into the visible Kingdom of
Satan, which is all that is here intended. And this is an act suited unto the
end whereunto it is designed. For a Man hereby is not taken out of his own
Power and the conduct of his own Mind, not acted or agitated by the Devil, but
is left unto the sedate consideration of his present state and condition. And
this, if there be any spark of ingenuous Grace left in him, will be effectually
operative, by shame, grief and fear, unto his Humiliation, especially
understanding that the design of Christ and his Church herein, is only his
Repentance and Restoration.

HERE is therefore, in his instance, an Everlasting Rule given unto the Church
in all Ages, the ordinary Occurrences of the like cases requiring an ordinary
Power for Relief in them, without which the Church cannot be preserved. That it
is the Duty of the Church enjoined unto it by the Lord Jesus Christ, and that
necessary unto its Glory, its own Honor and Edification to reject scandalous
Offenders out of its Communion, is evidently declared in this place: And to
suppose that to be the Duty of the Church, which it has no Power or Authority
to discharge, (seeing without them it cannot be discharged) is a wild
imagination.

4. THE Duty of the Church herein, with such other particular Duties as suppose
the Institution hereof, are in many places directed and enjoined. It is so in
that insisted on, 1 Cor. 5. The foundation of the whole Discourse and practice
of the Apostle there Recorded lies in this, That Churches ought to cut off from
among them scandalous Offenders; and that to the End they may preserve
themselves pure; and that this they ought to do in the Name of Christ, and by
virtue of his Authority, Verse. 2, 4, 7. And this is the whole of that
Excommunication which we plead for. The manner of its Administration we shall
consider afterward, 2 Cor. Chap. 2.6, 7, 8. The Apostle commends the Church
for what they had done in the Excommunication of the Incestuous person, calling
it a Punishment, inflicted on him by them, Verse. 6. He gives also an account of
the Effect of this Sentence against him, which was his Humiliation and
Repentance, Verse. 7. And hereon gives direction for his Restoration, by an Act
of the Church forgiving him, and confirming their Love unto him. Men may fancy
to themselves strange Notions of Excommunication, with reference unto its
Power, the Residence of that Power, its Effects, Extent and Ends; and so either
on the one hand erect it into an Engine of Arbitrary Domination over the Church
and all the Members of it; or deny on the other, that there is any such
Institution of Christ in force in his Churches. But we can be taught nothing
more plainly of the Mind of Christ, than that he has given Power unto his
Church to cast out of their Communion obstinate scandalous Offenders, and to
restore them again upon their Repentance, enjoining it unto them as their Duty.
And it is an Evidence of a woeful degeneracy in Churches, from their Primitive
Institution, when this sentence is so administered, as that it has an effect,
by virtue of Humane Laws, or the outward concerns of Men, but no influence on
their Consciences unto Humiliation and Repentance, which is the principal End
of its appointment. The Apostle treats of the same matter, Gal. 5.7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. He speaks of those false Teachers who opposed and overthrew what lay in
them, the Fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel. These at that time were in great
Power and Reputation in the Churches of the Galatians whom they had corrupted
with their false Opinions; so as that the Apostle does not directly enjoin
their immediate Excision; yet he declares what they did deserve, and what was
the Duty of the Church toward them, when freed from their Delusions, Verse. 12.
I would they were even cut off that trouble you. Men have exercised their Minds
in curious conjectures about the sense of these Words, altogether in vain and
needlessly. The curiosity of some of the best of the Ancients, applying it unto
a forcible Eunuchism is extremely fond. No other Excision is intended, but that
which was from the Church, and to be done by the Church in obedience unto the
Truth. Neither the Subject Matter treated of, the nature of the Crime
condemned, nor the state of the Church, or design of the Apostle, will admit of
any other Exposition, 2 Thessal. 3.7. The Apostle gives command unto the
Brethren of the Church, and that in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly. What it is to walk
disorderly he declares immediately, namely, to live in an open disobedience
unto any of the commands of Christ, not after the Tradition which he received
of us, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel which he had delivered unto them.
This withdrawing is as unto Church Communion, which cannot be done but upon
some act of the Church, depriving them of the Rights of it. For if every Member
of the Church should be left unto his own judgment and practice herein, it
would bring all things into confusion. And therefore, Verse. 14. he requires
that a note be set on such a Person by the Church, that is, a Sentence be
denounced against him, before the Duty of withdrawing from him by the Brethren
be incumbent on them. See to the same purpose Tit. 3.10, 11. 1 Timothy 5.20.
Revel. 2.2, 14, 15, 20, 21.

IT is therefore evident that this Censure, Judgment, Spiritual punishment, is
an Institution of Christ, for whose Administration he has given Authority unto
his Church, as that which is necessary unto its Edification, with its
preservation in Honor, Purity and Order.


THERE have been many Disputes about it, as unto its Order and Kinds. Some
suppose that there are two sorts of Excommunication; the one they call the
lesser, and the other the greater: Some three sorts, as it is supposed there
were among the Jews. There is no mention in the Scripture of any more sorts,
but one, or of any Degrees therein. A segregation from all participation in
Church Order, Worship and Privileges, is the only Excommunication spoken of in
the Scripture. But whereas an offending Person may cause great disorder in a
Church, and give great scandal unto the Members of it, before he can be
regularly cut off or expelled the Society; some do judge that there should a
Suspension of him from the Lords Table at least, precede total or complete
Excommunication in case of Impenitency. And it ought in some cases so to be.
But this Suspension is not properly an especial Institution; but only an act of
prudence in Church-Rule to avoid offense and scandal. And no Men question but
that this is lawful unto, yea, the Duty of the Rulers of the Church, to require
any one to forbear for a season from the use of their Privilege in the
participation of the Supper of the Lord, in case of scandal and offense which
would be taken at it, and ensue thereon. And if any Person shall refuse a
Submission unto them in this Act of Rule, the Church has no way for its
Relief, but to proceed unto the total Removal of such a Person from their whole
Communion. For the Edification of the whole Church must not be obstructed by
the Refractoriness of any one among them.

THIS Excommunication, as we have proved before, is an act of Church Authority,
exerted in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And if so, then it is an act of
the Officers of the Church, namely, so far as it is Authoritative; for there is
no Authority in the Church properly so called, but what resides in the Officers
of it. There is an Office in the Church, which is merely Ministerial without
any formal Authority, that is of the Deacons. But there is no Authority in
exercise, but what is in the Elders and Rulers of the Church. And there are two
Reasons, which prove that the power of Excommunication, as to the Authoritative
Exercise of it, is in the Elders of the Church. (1.) Because the Apostles, by
virtue of their Office-Power in every Church, did join in the Authoritative
Excommunication, as is plain in the case insisted on, 1 Cor. 5. And there is no
Office-Power now remaining, but what is in the Elders of the Church. (2.) It is
an Act of Rule. But all Rule, properly so called, is in the hands of Rulers
only. We may add hereunto, that the care of the preservation of the Edification
of all its Members, of the Correction and Salvation of Offenders, is
principally incumbent on them, or committed unto them as we have declared; as
also, that they are best able to judge when and for what this Sentence ought to
be denounced against any, which requires their best skill in the Wisdom of
Spiritual Rule. And therefore the omission of the exercise of it, when it was
necessary, is charged as a neglect on the Angels or Rulers of the Churches, as
the due execution of it is commended in them. And therefore unto them it does
belong with respect unto their Office, and is thereon an Office-Act, or an Act
of Authority.

HOWBEIT, it cannot be denied, but that the Interest, yea, the power of the
whole Church in the Fraternity of it, is greatly to be considered herein. For
indeed, wherever the Apostle Treats of it, he does not any where recommend it
unto the Officers of the Church in a peculiar manner, but unto the whole Church
and the Brethren therein. This is evident in the places before quoted.
Wherefore the whole Church is concerned herein, both in point of Duty,
Interest, and Power. (1.) In point of Duty; for by virtue of the mutual watch
of all the Members of the Church over each other, and of the care incumbent on
every one of them, for the Good, the Honor, the Reputation and Edification of
the whole, it is their Duty jointly and severally to endeavor the purging out
from among them of every thing that is contrary unto those ends. And they who
are not concerned in these things, are dead and useless Members of the Church.
(2.) In Interest, they have also a concernment therein. They are to look that
no root of bitterness spring up amongst them, lest themselves are at length
defiled thereby. It is usually said, that the good are not defiled by holding
Communion with them that are wicked in a participation of holy Ordinances. And
there is some Truth in what is said, with reference unto wicked undiscovered
Hypocrites; or such as are not scandalously flagitious: But to promote this
Persuasion, so as to beget an opinion in Church Members, that they are no way
concerned in the scandalous Sins and Lives of those with whom they walk in all
Duties of Spiritual Communion, openly avowing themselves Members of the same
Body with them, is a Diabolical Engine invented to countenance Churches in
horrible security unto their ruin. But yet besides that defilement, which may
be contracted in a joint participation of the same Ordinances with such
Persons; there are other ways almost innumerable, whereby their Example, if
passed by without Animadversion, may be pernicious unto their Faith, Love and
Obedience. Wherefore they are obliged in point of Spiritual Interest, as they
take care of their own Souls, to concur in the ejection out of the Church, of
obstinate Offenders. (3.) In point of Power. For the Execution of this Sentence
is committed unto and rests in the Body of the Church. According as they
concur and practice, so it is put in Execution or Suspended; for it is they
who must withdraw Communion from them, or the Sentence is of no use or
validity; this punishment must be inflicted by the many, who also are to
restore him who is so rebuked. Wherefore, Excommunication, without the consent
of the Church, is a mere nullity.

BUT if any one shall say, that Excommunication is not an Act of Authority nor
of Office, but of Power residing in the community resulting from their common
suffrage, guided and directed by the Officers or Elders of the Church, I shall
again take up this Enquiry immediately, and speak unto it more distinctly; lest
what is here spoken should not be sufficient unto the satisfaction of any.

OUR next Enquiry is concerning the object of this Church Censure; or who they
are that ought to be Excommunicated. And,

1. THEY must be Members of that Church, by which the Sentence is to be
denounced against them. And this, as we have proved before, they cannot be
without their own consent. One Church cannot Excommunicate the Members of
another. They are unto them as unto this matter without, and they have no power
to judge them. The foundation of the Right to proceed against any herein, is in
their own voluntary engagement to observe and keep the Rules and Laws of the
Society whereunto they are admitted. The offense is given unto that Church in
the first place, if not only. And it is an Act of the Church for its own
Edification. And there is a nullity in the Sentence which is ordained, decreed
or denounced by any who are not Officers of that Church in particular, wherein
the Sin is committed.

2. THESE Church Members that may be justly Excommunicated, are of Two sorts.

1. SUCH as continue obstinate in the practice of any scandalous Sin, after
private and public admonition. The process from the first Offense in
Admonition, is so stated in ordinary cases, Matthew. 18. that there is no need
farther to declare it. The Time that is to be allotted unto the several Degrees
of it, shall be spoken unto afterward. And unto a right judgment of obstinacy
in any scandalous Sin, it is required, (1.) That the Sin considered in it self
be such, as is owned to be such, by all, without doubting, dispute or
haesitation. It must be some Sin that is judged and condemned in the Light of
Nature, or in the express Testimony of Scripture; yea, such as the Holy Ghost
witnesses, that continued in without Repentance, it is inconsistent with
Salvation. If the thing it self, to be Animadverted on, be dubious or
disputable whether it be a Sin or no, especially such a Sin, either from the
Nature of the Fact, or the Qualifications of the Person offending, or from
other Circumstances, so as that the guilty Person is not self-condemned, nor
are others fully satisfied in their Minds about the nature of it, there is no
room for Excommunication in such cases. And if it be once allowed to be applied
toward any Sins, but such as are evident to be so (as the Apostle says, the
Works of the Flesh are manifest) in the Light of Nature, and Express Testimony
of Scripture, not only will the Administration of it be made difficult, a
matter of dispute, unfit for the Determination of the Body of the Church, but
it will leave it unto the wills of Men to prostitute unto litigious brawls,
quarrels and differences, wherein Interest and Partiality may take place; which
is to profane this Divine Institution. But confine it as it ought to be, unto
such Sins as are condemned in the Light of Nature, or by Express Testimony of
Scripture, as inconsistent with Salvation by Jesus Christ, if persisted in, and
all things that belong unto the Administration of it, will be plain and easy.

FROM the neglect of this Rule proceeded that horrible confusion and disorder
in Excommunication and the Administration of it, which for sundry Ages
prevailed in the World. For as it was mostly applied unto things holy, just,
and good, or the performance of such Gospel Duties as Men owed to Christ, and
their own Souls; so being exercised with respect unto irregularities, that are
made such merely by the Arbitrary Constitutions and Laws of Men, and that in
cases frivolous, trifling, and of no importance, it was found necessary to be
managed in and by such Courts, such Processes, such forms of Law, such
Pleadings and intricacies of Craft, such a burden of Cost and Charge, as is
uncertain whether it ought to be more bewailed, or derided.

2. IT is required hereunto, that the matter of Fact, as unto the Relation of
the Sin unto the particular Offender, be confessed, or not denied, or clearly
proved. How far this is to extend, and what ground of procedure there may be in
Reports or Fame concurring with leading Circumstances, we shall enquire
afterward. And although in such cases of public Fame, a good Testimony from
those of Credit and Repute in the Church given unto the supposed guilty Person,
is of use and sufficient in some cases, singly to oppose unto public Reports;
yet to require a Man to purge himself by others, from any feigned scandalous
imputation, is an unwarrantable Tyranny.

3. IT is also required, that the previous process in and by private and
public Admonition, and that repeated with patient waiting for the success of
each of them, be duly premised. Whether this extend it self unto all causes of
Excommunication, shall be afterward enquired into. Ordinarily it is so
necessary unto the Conviction of the Mind and Conscience of the Offender, and
to leave him without either provocation from the Church, or excuse in himself,
so suited to be expressive of the Grace and Patience of Christ toward Sinners,
so requisite unto the satisfaction of the Church it self in their proceedure,
as that the omission of it will probably render the Sentence useless and
ineffectual. A crying out, I admonish a First, a Second, a Third time, and so
to Excommunication, is a very absurd observation of a Divine Institution.

4. IT is required, that the case of the Person to be censured as unto his
profession of Repentance on the one hand, or obstinacy on the other, be judged
and determined by the whole Church in love and compassion. There are few who
are so profligately wicked, but that, when the Sin wherewith they are charged,
is evidently such in the Light of Nature and Scripture, and when it is justly
proved against them, they will make some profession of Sorrow and Repentance.
Whether this be sufficient, as in most cases it is, to suspend the present
proceeding of the Church, or quite to lay it aside, is left unto the judgment
of the Church it self, upon consideration of present Circumstances, and what is
necessary unto its own Edification. Only this Rule must be continually
observed, that the least appearance of haste or undue precipitation herein, is
to be avoided in all these cases, as the bane of Church-Rule and Order.

AGAIN, The manner of its Administration, according to the mind of Christ, may
be considered. And hereunto are required, (1.) Prayer, without which it can no
way be administered in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Administration of
any solemn Ordinance of the Gospel, without Prayer, is an horrible profanation
of it. And the neglect or contempt hereof, in any who take upon them to
Excommunicate others, is an open Proclamation of the nullity of their Act and
Sentence. And the observation of the Administration of it without any due
Reverence of God, without solemn invocation of the Name of Christ, thereby
engaging his Presence and Authority in what they do, is that principally which
has set the Consciences of all mankind at liberty from any concernment in this
Ecclesiastical Censure; and whence those that Administer it expect no other
success of what they do, but what they can give it by outward force. And where
this fails, Excommunication is quickly laid aside. As it was when the Pope
threatened the Cantons of the Swissers, that if they complied not with some of
his Impositions, he would Excommunicate them; whereon they sent him word they
would not be Excommunicated, which ended the matter. Wherefore, when our Lord
Jesus Christ gives unto his Church the power of binding and loosing, directing
them in the exercise of that power, he directs them to ask assistance by
Prayer, when they are gathered together, Matthew. 18.18, 19, 20. And the Apostle
directs the Church of Corinth, that they should proceed unto this Sentence when
they were gathered together in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 5.4.
which could not be without calling on his Name. In brief, without Prayer,
neither is the Ordinance it self sanctified unto the Church, nor are any meet
to Administer it, nor is the Authority of Christ either owned or engaged, nor
Divine Assistance attained; neither is what is done any more Excommunication
than any rash Curse is, so that many proceed inordinately out of the Mouths of
Men.

AND the Prayer required herein is of three sorts. (1.) That which is previous
for guidance and direction in a matter of so great weight and importance. It is
no small thing to fall into mistakes, when Men act in the Name of Christ, and
so engage his Authority in what he will not own. And the best of Men, the best
of Churches, are liable unto such mistakes, where they are not under the
guidance of the holy Spirit, which is to be obtained by Prayer only. (2.) In,
or together with the Administration of it; that what is done on Earth may be
ratified in Heaven, by the approbation of Christ, and be made effectual unto
its proper End. (3.) It must be followed with the Prayer of the Church unto the
same purpose; all with respect unto the Humiliation, Repentance, Healing and
Recovery of the Offender.

2 ly, IT is to be accompanied with Lamentation or Mourning. So the Apostle
reproving the Church of Corinth for the omission of it when it was necessary,
tells them, That they had not mourned; that the offender might be taken away
from among them, 1 Cor. 5.2. It is not to be done without mourning: And himself
calls the Execution of this Sentence from this Adjunct, his bewailing of them.
I shall bewail many that have sinned already, 2 Cor. 12.2. Compassion for the
person offending, with respect unto that dangerous condition whereinto he has
cast himself; the Excision of a Member of the same Body with whom they have had
Communion in the most holy Mysteries of Divine Worship, and sat down at the
Table of the Lord, with a due sense of the Dishonor of the Gospel by his fall,
ought to ingenerate this Mourning or Lamentation in the Minds of them who are
concerned in the Execution of the Sentence. Nor is it advisable for any Church
to proceed thereunto, before they are so affected.

3 ly, IT is to be accompanied with a due sense of the future Judgment of
Christ. For we herein Judge for Christ, in the matters of his House and
Kingdom. And woe to them who dare pronounce this Sentence without a persuasion
on good grounds, that it is the Sentence of Christ himself. And there is a
Representation also in it of the future Judgment, when Christ will Eternally
cut off and separate from himself all Hypocrites and impenitent Sinners. This
is well expressed by Tertullian, Ibidem etiam Exhortationes, Castigationes and
Censura Divina (speaking of the Assemblies of the Church) nam and judicatur
magno cum pondere, ut apud certos de Dei conspectu; summumque futuri judicii
praejudicium est, si quis ita d liquerit ut a Communicatione Orationis and
Conventus, and omnis sancti commercii relegetur, Apol. cap. 39. Were this Duty
observed, it would be a preservative against that inter-mixture of corrupt
Affections, and corrupt Ends, which often impose themselves on the Minds of
Men, in the exercise of this Power.

Lastly, THE Nature and End of this Judgment or Sentence being Corrective, not
Vindicative; for Healing, not Destruction, what is the Duty of the Church, and
those principally concerned in the pursuit of it to render it effectual, is
plainly evident. Of what use a Significavit and Capias may be in this case I
know not; they belong not unto Christian Religion; much less do Fire and Faggot
do so. Prayer for the person cut off; Admonition as occasion is offered;
Compa^sion in his distressed Estate, which is so much the more deplorable, if
he know it not; forbearance from common Converse, with readiness for the
Restoration of Love, in all the fruits of it, contain the principal Duties of
the Church, and all the Members of it toward them that are justly
Excommunicate.

WHAT farther belongs unto this Head of Church-Rule or Order shall be spoken
unto in the Resolution of some Cases or Enquiries, wherein also some Things
only mentioned already, shall be more fully explained.

I HAVE made some enquiry before, whether Excommunication be an act of
Authority and Jurisdiction in the Officers of the Church, or an act of Power in
the Fraternity of the Church. But for the sake of some by whom it is desired, I
shall a little more distinctly enquire after the Truth herein; though I shall
alter nothing of what was before laid down. And,

1. IT is certain, it has been proved, and I now take it for granted, That the
Lord Christ has given this Power unto the Church. Wherefore in the exercise of
this Power, both the Officers and Members of the Church are to act according
unto their respective Interests. For that Exercise of Power in the Church
toward any, which is not an act of Obedience unto Christ, in them that
exercise it, it is in it self null. There is therefore no Distinction or
Distribution of Power in the Church, but by the interposition of especial Duty.

2. THE Institution of Christ, with respect unto a Church as it is a peculiar
Society for its especial Ends, do not deprive it of its natural Right, as it is
a Society. There is in every Community, by voluntary Confederation, a natural
Right and Power to expel those from its Society, who will not be ruled by the
Laws of its Constitution. And if the Church should, by the Institution of a
Power, new as unto the way, manner and ends of its Exercise, be deprived of its
Original, radical Power, with respect unto the general End of its own
Preservation, it would not be a gainer by that Institution. It may be easily
understood, that the Lord Christ should in particular appoint the Way and
Manner of the Exercise of this Power or Administration of this Sentence,
committing the care thereof unto the Officers of the Church. But it cannot be
well understood, that thereby he should deprive the Church of its Right, and
forbid them their Duty in preserving their Society entire and pure. Neither can
it be so in an especial manner committed unto any, as that upon their neglect,
whereby those who by the Law and Rule of Christ, ought to be cast out of the
Churches Communion, are continued in it unto its Sin and Defilement, the Church
it self should be free from guilt. Wherefore the Apostle expressly charge the
whole Church of Corinth with Sin and neglect of Duty, in that the incestuous
person was not put away from among them: This could not be, if so be the Power
of it were so in the Hands of a few of the Officers, that the Church had no
Right to act in it. For none can incurr a Guilt merely by the defect of others
in the Discharge of their Duty.

3. THE Church essentially considered is before its ordinary Officers; for the
Apostle ordained Officers in every Church. But the Church in that State has
Power to put away from among them and their Communion an obstinate Offender.
They have it, as they are a Society, by voluntary confederation. Wherein this
comes short of Authoritative Excommunication, will immediately appear.

4. WHERE a Church is complete and Organized with its stated Rulers, as the
Church of Corinth was, yet Rules, Instructions and Commands are given expressly
unto the Fraternity or Community of the Church, for their Duty and Acting in
the Administration of this Sentence, and the cutting off an Offender, 1 Cor.
5.2, 4, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 2.7, 8. Yea, the (...), or infliction of the Sentence, is
ascribed unto them, Ver. 5. All these things do suppose a Right and Duty
thereon to Act according to their Interest in Excommunication, to reside in the
whole Church: Wherefore,

5. THERE are some Acts belonging hereunto, that the Church it self in the Body
of the Fraternity, cannot be excluded from without destroying the nature of the
Sentence it self, and rendering it ineffectual. Such are the previous cognizance
of the Cause, without which they cannot be blamed for any neglect about it;
preparatory Duties unto its Execution, in Prayer, Mourning and Admonition,
which are expressly prescribed unto them; and a Testification of their consent
unto it, by their common Suffrage. Without these things, Excommunication is but
a Name with a noise; it belongs not unto the Order appointed by Christ in his
Church.

6. HENCE arise the Duties of the Church toward an Excommunicated Person, that
are consequential unto his exclusion from among them. Such are Praying for him,
as one noted by the Church, and under the Discipline of Christ; avoiding
Communion with him in public and private, that he may be ashamed, and the
like; all which arise from their own voluntary actings in his exclusion; and
such, as without a judgment of the cause, they cannot be obliged unto.

7. YET on the other side, unto the formal compleatness of this Sentence, an
Authoritative Act of Office-Power is required. For, (1.) There is in it such an
Act of Rule, as is in the hands of the Elders only. (2.) The Executive Power of
the Keys in binding and loosing, so far as it comprizeth Authority to be acted
in the Name of Christ, is entrusted with them only.

8. WHEREFORE I shall say no more in answer unto this Enquiry; but that
Excommunication is an act of Church Power in its Officers and Brethren, acting
according unto their respective Rights, Interests, and Duties particularly
prescribed unto them. The Officers of the Church act in it as Officers with
Authority, the Brethren or the Body of the Church with Power; yet so, as that
the Officers are no way excluded from their Power, Consent and Suffrage in the
acting of the Church, but have the same Interest therein with all other Members
of the Church; but the Community of the Church have no Interest in those
Authoritative actings of the Officers which are peculiar unto them. Where
either of these is wanting, the whole Duty is vitiated, and the sense of the
Sentence rendered ineffectual.

I. IT is Enquired, Whether Excommunication, justly deserved, may and ought to
be omitted in case of trouble, or danger that may ensue unto the Church therein.

IT is usually granted that so it may and ought to be; which seems in general
to have been the judgment of Austin.

THE Troubles and Dangers intended, are threefold. (1.) From the Thing it
self. (2.) From the Persons to be Excommunicated. (3.) From the Church.

1. TROUBLE may arise from the Thing it self. For there being an exercise of
Authority or Jurisdiction in it over the Persons of Men, not granted from the
Civil Magistrate by the Law of the Land, those that execute it may be liable
unto Penalties ordained in such cases.

2. THE Persons to be Excommunicated may be Great, and of great Interest in the
World, so as that if they receive a provocation hereby, they may occasion or
stir up Persecution against the Church, as it has often fallen out.

3. THE Church it self may be divided on these considerations, so as that
lasting differences may be occasioned among them, which the omission of the
Sentence might prevent.

FOR Answer hereunto, some things must be premised. As,

1. HERE is no supposition of any thing sinful or morally evil in the Church,
its Officers, or any of its Members, by refusing to omit the pronouncing of
this Sentence. Whether there be any Sin in giving occasion unto the troubles
mentioned, to be avoided by an omission of Duty, is now to be enquired into.

2. WE must suppose, (1.) That the cause of Excommunication be clear and
evident, both as unto the merit of the Fact, and the due Application of it unto
the Person concerned; so as that no Rational indifferent Man shall be able to
say, that it is meet that such an one should be continued a Member of such a
Society; as it ought to be, wherever Excommunication is administered. (2.)
That sufficient Time and space of Repentance, and for giving satisfaction unto
the Church (whereof afterward) has been allowed unto the Person after
Admonition. (3.) That the Church does really suffer in Honor and Reputation by
tolerating such a scandalous Offender among them.

I ANSWER, On these suppositions I see no just Reason to countenance the
omission of the Execution of this Sentence, or to acquit the Church from the
guilt of Sin in so doing. For,

1. THE first presence of Danger is vain. There is not the least shadow of
Jurisdiction in this Act of the Church. There is nothing in it that touches
any thing which is under the Protection and Conservation of Humane Laws. It
reaches not the Persons of Men in their Lives, or Liberties; nor their Estates
or the least Secular Privileges that they do enjoy; it does not expose them to
the Power or Censures of others, nor prejudge them as unto Office or Advantage
of Life. There is therefore no concernment of the Law of the Land herein, no
more than in a Parents disenheriting a Rebellious Child.

2. AS unto danger of Persecution, by the means of the Person provoked, I say,
(1.) The same may be pleaded as unto all other Duties of obedience unto Jesus
Christ wherewith the World is provoked; and so the whole profession of the
Church should give place to the fear of Persecution. To testify against Sin in
the way of Christ's appointment, is a case of Confession. (2.) The Apostles were
not deterred by this consideration from the Excommunication of Simon Magus, the
seducing Jews, Hymeneus and Alexander, with others. (3.) The Lord Christ
commands and reproves his Churches, according as they were strict in the
observation of this Duty, or neglective of it, notwithstanding the fear of
Persecution thereon, Revel. 2.3. And, (4.) He will take that care of his Church
in all their obedience unto him, as shall turn all the consequents thereof unto
their advantage.

3. AS unto danger of Differences in the Church, there is nothing to be said;
but that if Rule, Order, Love and Duty will not prevent such Differences, there
is no way appointed of Christ for that end: And if they are sufficient for it,
(as they are abundantly) they must bear their own blame who occasion such
Differences.

II. BUT it may be said, What if such an Offender as justly deserves to be
Excommunicated, and is under admonition in order thereunto in case of
Impenitency, should voluntarily withdraw himself from, and leave the Communion
of the Church, is there any necessity to proceed against him by Excommunication?

Answ. 1. SOME say it is enough, if it be declared in the Church that such an
one has cut off himself from the Church, and is therefore no longer under
their watch or care, but is left unto himself and the World. And this is
sufficient with them who own no Act of Office-Power or Authority in
Excommunication, but esteem it only a noted cessation of Communion, which
destroys a principal Branch of the Power of the Keys. Wherefore,

2. WHERE the offense is plain, open, scandalous, persisted in; where
Admonition is despised or not complied with, it is the Duty of the Church to
denounce the Sentence of Excommunication against such a Person, notwithstanding
his voluntary departure: For,

1. NO Man is to make an Advantage unto himself, or to be freed from any
Disadvantage, Censure or Spiritual Penalty, by his own Sin; such as is the
voluntary Relinquishment of the Church, by a Person under Admonition for
scandalous Offenses.

2. IT is necessary unto the Church, both as unto the Discharge of its Duty,
and the vindication of its Honor; as also from the Benefit and Edification it
will receive by those Duties of Humiliation, Mourning and Prayer, which are
necessary unto the Execution of this Sentence.

3. IT is necessary for the good and benefit of him who so deserves to be
Excommunicated. For, (1.) The end of the Institution of the Ordinance, is his
Correction, not his Destruction, and may be effectual unto his Repentance and
Recovery. (2.) It is to be followed with sharp Admonition and Prayer, which in
due time, may reach the most profligate Sinner.

4. IT becomes not the Wisdom and Order of any Society entrusted with Authority
for its own preservation, as the Church is by Christ himself; to suffer Persons
obnoxious unto Censure by the fundamental Rules of that Society, to cast off
all respect unto it, to break their Order and Relation, without Animadverting
thereon, according to the Authority wherewith they are entrusted. To do
otherwise is to expose their Order unto contempt, and Proclaim a Diffidence in
their own Authority, for the Spiritual punishment of Offenders.

5. ONE end of the Appointment of the Power and Sentence of Excommunication in
the Church, is to give Testimony unto the future final judgment of Christ
against impenitent Sinners, which none of them can run away from, nor escape.

III. A THIRD Enquiry may be, Whether in case of any great and scandalous Sin,
the Church may proceed unto Excommunication, without any previous Admonition.

Answ. 1. PERSONS may be falsely accused of, and charged with great Sins, the
greatest of Sins, as well as those of a lesser Degree, and that both by
particular Testimonies and public Reports, as it was with the Lord Christ
himself; which daily Experience confirms. Wherefore, all haste and
precipitation like that of David in judging the Case of Mephibosheth, is
carefully to be avoided, though they are pressed under the pretenses of the
greatness and notoriety of the Sin.

2. THERE is no individual actual Sin, but it is capable of great Aggravation
or Alleviation from its Circumstances: These the Church is to enquire into, and
to obtain a full knowledge of them, that all things being duly weighed, they
may be affected with the Sin in a due manner, or after a goodly sort; which is
essential unto the right administration of this Ordinance.

3. THIS cannot be done, without Personal Conference with the Offender, who is
to be allowed to speak for himself. This Conference, in case guilt be
discovered, cannot but have in it the nature of an Admonition, whereon the
Church is to proceed, as in case of previous solemn admonition, in the Order,
and according to the Rule which shall be immediately declared.

IV. FOURTHLY, Whether on the first knowledge of an Offense or scandalous Sin,
if it be known unto the Church, that the offending Party is penitent, and
willing to declare his Humiliation and Repentance for the satisfaction of the
Church, may the Church proceed unto his Excommunication, in case the Sin be
great and notorious?

Answ. 1. IT is certain, that in an orderly Progress, as unto more private
Sins, a compliance by Repentance with the First or Second Admonition, does put
a stop unto all further Ecclesiastical proceedure.

2. BUT whereas the Enquiry is made concerning Sins, either in their own Nature
or in their Circumstances, great and of disreputation unto the Church: I Answer,

IF Repentance be evidenced unto the Consciences of the Rulers of the Church to
be sincere, and proportionable unto the Offense in its outward Demonstration,
according unto the Rule of the Gospel, so as that they are obliged to judge in
Charity, that the Person sinning is pardoned and accepted with Christ, as all
sincerely penitent Sinners are undoubtedly; the Church cannot proceed unto the
Excommunication of such an Offender. For,

1. IT would be publicly to reject them whom they acknowledge that Christ does
receive. This nothing can warrant them to do; yea, so to do is to set up
themselves against Christ, or at least to make use of his Authority against his
Mind and Will. Yea, such a Sentence would destroy it self; for it is a
Declaration that Christ does disapprove them, whom he does approve.

2. THEIR so doing would make a misrepresentation of the Gospel, and of the
Lord Christ therein. For, whereas the principal design of the Gospel, and of
the Representation that is made therein of Christ Jesus, is to evidence that
all sincerely Penitent Sinners, that Repent according unto the Rule of it, are
and shall be Pardoned and Accepted; by the Rejection of such a Person in the
face of his sincere Repentance, there is an open contradiction thereunto.
Especially it would give an undue sense of the Heart, Mind, and Will of Christ
toward Repenting Sinners; such as may be dangerous unto the Faith of
Believers, so far as the Execution of this Sentence is Doctrinal: For such it
is, and declarative of the Mind of Christ according unto the judgment of the
Church. The Image therefore of this Excommunication, which is set up in some
Churches, wherein the Sentence of it is denounced without any regard unto the
Mind of Christ, as unto his Acceptance or Disapprobation of those whom they
Excommunicate, is a Teacher of Lies.

3. SUCH a proceedure is contrary unto the nature and end of this Sentence. For
it is Corrective and Instructive, not properly punishing and vindictive. The
sole end of it, with respect whereunto it has its Efficacy from Divine
Institution, is the Humiliation, Repentance and Recovery of the Sinner. And if
this be attained before, the infliction of this Sentence is contrary to the
nature and end of it.

IT will be said, that it has another end also; namely, the preservation of
the purity of the Church, and the vindication of its Honor and Reputation,
wherein it suffers by the scandalous offenses of any of its Members. Whereunto,
I say, (1.) No Church is or can be made impure by them whom Christ has purged;
as he does all those who are truly penitent. (2.) It is no Dishonor unto any
Church to have Sinners in it, who have evidenced sincere Repentance. (3.) The
present offense and scandal may be provided against by an Act of Rectoral
Prudence, in causing the offending Person to abstain from the Lords Table for a
Season.

V. IT is Enquired, (Fifthly) Whether such as voluntarily, causlesly and
disorderly, do leave the Communion of any Church whereof they are Members,
though not guilty of any scandalous immoralities, man and ought to be
Excommunicated?

Answ. 1. WHERE Persons are esteemed Members of Churches by external causes
without their own consent, or by Parochial cohabitation, they may remove from
one Church unto another by the Removal of their Habitation, according unto
their own Discretion. For such cohabitation being the only formal Cause of any
Relation to such a Church in particular, upon the ceasing of that cause, the
Relation cease of its own accord.

2. WHERE Persons are Members of Churches by mutual confederation, or express
personal consent, causless departure from them is an evil liable unto many
Aggrevations.

3. BUT whereas the principal end of all particular Churches is Edification,
there may be many just and sufficient Reasons why a Person may remove himself
from the constant Communion of one Church unto that of another. And of these
Reasons he himself is judge, on whom it is incumbent to take care of his own
Edification above all other things. Nor ought the Church to deny unto any such
Persons their Liberty desired peaceably and according unto Order.

4. IT was declared before, that where any Persons guilty of, and under
Admonition for any scandalous Sin, do withdraw from the Communion of any
Church, their so doing, is no impediment unto a farther procedure against them.

5. WHEREAS there are amongst us Churches, or those who are so esteemed in the
Consciences of Men, so far differing in Principles and Practices, as that they
have not entire Communion with one another in all parts of Divine Worship, it
may be Enquired, Whether if a Man leave a Church of one sort to join with one
of another; as suppose he leave a select Congregation to join in a Parochial
Church constantly and totally, he may be justly Excommunicated for so doing,
without the consent of the Church whereunto he did belong.

Answ. 1. IT is certain on the one hand, that if any Man leave the Communion of
Parochial Assemblies to join himself unto a Select Congregation, those who have
Power over those Parishes, will make no question whether they shall
Excommunicate him or no in their way. But,

2. SUPPOSING Persons so departing from particular Congregations, (1.) To be
free from scandalous Sins. (2.) That they depart quietly without attempting
Disorder or Confusion in the Church. (3.) That they do actually join themselves
unto the Communion of some Church, whose Constitution, Principles and Worship
they do approve, whereby their visible Profession is preserved; the Church may
not justly proceed unto their Excommunication: It may suffice to declare, that
such Persons have on their own accord forsaken the Communion of the Church, are
no more under its Watch or Care; neither is the Church further obliged toward
them, but as unto Christian Duties in general.

6. AS for those whose departure is as voluntary and causless so accompanied
with other evils, such as are Revilings, Reproaches and false Accusations, as
is usual in such Cases, they may be proceeded against as obstinate Offenders.

VI. THE Sixth Enquiry is, What Time is to be given after solemn Admonition
before actual Excommunication?

Answ. 1. THE manner of some to run over the Words, I Admonish you a First,
Second, and Third time, so immediately to make way for the Sentence of
Excommunication, is that wherein Men are greatly to be pitied for their
Ignorance of the nature of those things which they take on themselves to Act,
Order, and Dispose of, that we ascribe it not unto worse and more evil Causes.

2. THE nature of the thing it self, requires a considerable Season or space of
Time, between solemn Admonition and Excommunication. For the end and design of
the former is the Repentance and Recovery of the Offender. Nor does its
Efficacy thereunto depend on, or consist in the actual giving of it; but as
other moral Causes which may Work gradually, upon occasional Advantages. Want
of Light, some present Exasperation and Temptation, may seem to frustrate a
present Admonition, when they do but suspend its present Efficacy, which it may
afterward obtain on the Conscience of the Offender.

3. IT being a Church Admonition that is intended; it is the Duty of the Church
to abide in Prayer and waiting for the Fruit of it according to the appointment
of Christ. And herein the case may possibly require some long time to be spent.

4. NO present appearance of Obstinacy or impenitence under Admonition, (which
is usually pleaded) should cause an immediate proceedure unto Excommunication.
For, (1.) It is contrary unto the distinct Institution of the one, and the
other; wherein the former is to be allowed its proper Season for its Use and
Efficacy. (2.) It does not represent the patience and forbearance of Christ
toward his Church and all the Members of it. (3.) It is not suited unto the
Rule of that Love which hops all things, bears all things, etc. (4.) All
grounds of hope for the Recovery of Sinners by Repentance, are to be attended
unto, so as to deferr the ultimate Sentence.

Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est. 5. IF new Sins are added of
the same, or any other kind, unto former scandals, whilst Persons are under
Admonition, it is an Indication of the necessity of a proceedure.

VII. IT may be farther Enquired, Whether a Man may be Excommunicated for
Errors in matters of Faith, or false Opinions about them?

Answ. 1. THE Case is so plainly and positively stated, Rev. 2.2, 6, 15, 16,
20. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Tit. 3.10, 11. and other places, that it needs no farther
Determination. Wherefore,

2. IF the Errors intended, are about or against the Fundamental Truths of the
Gospel, so as that they that hold them, cannot hold the Head, but really make
Shipwreck of the Faith, no pretended usefulness of such Persons, no
peaceableness as unto outward deportment, which, Men guilty of such
Abominations, will frequently cover themselves withal, can countenance the
Church in forbearing after due Admonition, to cut them off from their
Communion. The nature of the evil, the danger that is from it unto the whole
Church, as from a Gangrene in any Member, unto the Body, the Indignation of
Christ expressed against such pernicious Doctrines, the opposition of them to
the building of the Church on the Rock, which in most of them is opposed, to
render a Church altogether inexcusable, who omit their Duty herein.

3. FALSE Opinions in lesser things, when the foundation of Faith and Christian
Practice are not immediately concerned, may be tolerated in a Church, and
sundry Rules are given unto this end in the Scripture, as, Romans 14.1, 2, 3,
etc. Phil. 3.15, 16. Howbeit, in that low ebb of Grace, Love and Prudence,
which we are come unto, it is best for Edification, that all Persons peaceably
dispose themselves into those Societies with whom they most agree in Principles
and Opinions; especially such as relate or lead unto practice in any Duties of
Worship. But,

4. WITH respect unto such Opinions, if Men will, as is usual, wrangle and
contend to the disturbance of the peace of the Church, or hinder it in any
Duty, with respect unto its own Edification, and will neither peaceably abide
in the Church, nor peaceably depart from it, they may and ought to be proceeded
against with Censures of the Church.

VIII. WHETHER persons Excommunicated out of any Church may be admitted unto
the hearing of the Word in the Assemblies of that Church?

Answ. 1. THEY may be so; as also to be present at all Duties of Moral Worship;
for so many Heathens and Unbelievers, 1 Cor. 14.23, 24.

2. WHEN persons are under this Sentence, the Church is in a state of expecting
of their Recovery and Return; and therefore are not to prohibit them any Means
thereof, such as is preaching of the Word.

IX. HOW far extends the Rule of the Apostle toward persons rejected of the
Church, 1 Cor. 5.11. With such an one no not to Eat; as that also, Note that
Man and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed? 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.

1. TO Eat comprizeth all ordinary Converse in things of this Life; Give us our
daily Bread. (2.) To Note, is either the act of the Church, setting the Mark of
its Censure and Disapprobation on him; or the Duty of the Members of the
Church, to take notice of him, as unto the End of not keeping company with him.
Wherefore,

2. HEREIN all ordinary Converse of Choice, not made necessary by previous
occasions, is forbidden. The Rule, I say, forbids, (1.) All ordinary Converse
of Choice; not that which is occasional. (2.) Converse about Earthly secular
Things, not that which is Spiritual; for such an one may, and ought still to be
admonished, whilst he will hear the word of Admonition. (3.) It is such
Converse as is not made previously necessary, by Men's mutual Engagement in
Trade and the like. For that is founded on such Rules of Right and Equity, with
such Obligations in point of Truth, as Excommunication cannot Dissolve.

3. NO suspension of Duties antecedently necessary by virtue of natural or
moral Relation, is allowed or countenanced by this Rule. Such are those of
Husband and Wife, Parents and Children, Magistrates and Subjects, Masters and
Servants, Neighbors, Relations in propinquity of Blood. No Duties arising from
or belonging unto any of these Relations, are released, or the Obligation unto
them weakened by Excommunication. Husbands may not hereon forsake their Wives if
they are Excommunicated, nor Wives their Husbands; Magistrates may not withdraw
their Protection from any of their Subjects; because they are Excommunicate;
much less may Subjects withhold their Obedience on any pretense of the
Excommunication of their Magistrates, as such. And the same is true as unto all
other natural or moral Relations.

4. THE Ends of this prohibition are, (1.) To testify our Condemnation of the
Sin, and disapprobation of the person guilty of it, who is Excommunicated. (2.)
The Preservation of our selves from all kinds of participation in his Sin. (3.)
To make him ashamed of himself, that if he be not utterly profligate and given
up unto total Apostasy, it may occasion in him thoughts of returning.

X. HOW ought persons Excommunicated to be received into the Church upon their
Repentance?

Answ. 1. AS unto the internal manner; with all readiness and cheerfulness;
with, (1.) Meekness, to take from them all Discouragement and disconsolation,
Gal. 6.1. (2.) With Compassion, and all means of Relief and Consolation, 2 Cor.
2.7. (3.) With Love in all the demonstrations of it, Verse. 8. (4.) With Joy, to
represent the Heart of Christ toward Repenting Sinners.

2. THE outward manner of the Restoration of such a person consists, in, (1.)
His Testification of his Repentance unto the satisfaction of the Church. (2.)
The express Consent of the Church unto his Reception. (3.) His renewed
Engagement in the Covenant of the Church, whereby he is re-instated, or jointed
again in the Body, in his own proper place. In all which the Elders, by their
Authority, are to go before the Church.

ALL sorts of persons do now condemn the Opinions of the Novatians, in refusing
the Readmission of lapsed Sinners into the Church upon Repentance. But there
may be an Evil observed amongst some, leading that way, or unto what is worse:
And this is, that they seek not after the Recovery of those that are
Excommunicated, by Prayer, Admonition, Exhortation in a spirit of Meekness and
Tenderness; but are well satisfied that they have quitted themselves of their
Society. It is better never to Excommunicate any, than so to carry it toward
them when they are Excommunicated. But there is a sort of Men, unto whom if a
Man be once an Offender, he shall be so for ever.

XI. OUR last Enquiry shall be, Whether Excommunication may be regular and
valid, where the matter of Right is dubious and disputable? As many such cases
may fall out, especially with respect unto the occasions of Life, and mutual
Converse; or when the matter of Fact is not duly proved by positive Witnesses,
on the one hand, and is denied on the other.

Answ. 1. THE foundation of the Efficacy of Excommunication, next and under its
Divine Institution, lies in the Light and Conviction of the Consciences of them
that are to be Excommunicated. If these are not affected with a sense of Guilt,
as in dubious cases they may not be, the sentence will be of no Force nor
Efficacy.

2. A CASE wherein there is a difference in the judgment of good and wise Men
about it, is to be esteemed such a dubious Case as is exempted from this
Censure. Nothing is to be admitted here to take place, but what is reprovable
by natural Light, and the concurrent Judgment of them that fear God.

3. IF the case be about such a Right or Wrong, in pretended Fraud,
Overreaching, or the like, as is determinable by Civil-Laws, the Church is no
judge in such Cases; unless it be by way of Arbitration, 1 Cor. 6.

4. IF the Question be about Doctrines that are not in Points fundamental, so
as those who dissent from the Church do carry it peaceably and orderly, there
can be no proceedure unto Ecclesiastical Censures: But if Men will do at on
their own Opinions, wrangling, contending, and breaking the Peace of the Church
about them, there are other Rules given in that case.

5. IF the matter of Fact be to be determined and stated by Witness, it is
absolutely necessary by virtue of Divine Institution, that there be Two or
Three concurrent Testimonies; one Witness is not to be regarded. See Deuteronomy.
19.15. Numb. 35.30. Matthew. 18.16, etc. Wherefore the ensuing Rules or
Directions are to be observed in the matter of Excommunication.

1. NO Excommunication is to be allowed in cases Dubious and Disputable,
wherein Right and Wrong are not easily determinable unto all unprejudiced
persons, that know the Will of God in such things. Nor is it to be admitted
when the matter of Fact stands in need of Testimony, and is not proved by Two
Witnesses at the least.

2. ALL Prejudices, all Partiality, all Provocations, all Haste and
Precipitation, are most carefully to be avoided in this Administration; for the
Judgment is the Lords. Wherefore,

3. WE are continually, in all things that tend unto this Sentence, and
eminently in the Sentence it self, to charge our Consciences with the Mind of
Christ, and what he would do himself in the case; considering his Love, Grace,
Mercy and Patience; with instances of his Condescension which he gave us in
this World.

4. THERE is also required of us herein, a constant Remembrance, that we also
are in the Flesh, and liable to Temptation, which may restrain and keep in awe
that forwardness and confidence which some are apt to manifest in such cases.
In all these things, a watchful Eye is to be kept over the methods of Satan;
who by all means seeks to pervert this Ordinance unto the Destruction of Men,
which is appointed for their Edification; and too often prevails in that
Design. And if by the Negligence of a Church in the management and pursuit of
this Ordinance, he gets advantage to pervert it, unto the Ruin of any, it is
the fault of that Church, in that they have not been careful of the Honor of
Christ, therein. Wherefore,

1. AS Excommunication by a cursed Noise and Clamor with Bell, Book and Candle
(such as we have instances of in some Papal Councils) is an horrible
Antichristian Abomination. So,

2. IT is an undue Representation of Christ and his Authority, for persons
openly guilty of profaneness in sinning, to Excommunicate them who are
blameless in all Christian Obedience.

3. ALL Excommunication is Evangelically null where there is wanting an
Evangelical frame of spirit in those by whom it is Administered; and there is
present an Anti-evangelical Order in its Administration.

4. IT is sufficiently evident, that after all the Contests and Disputes about
this Excommunication that have been in the World, the Noise that it has made,
the horrible Abuses that it has been put unto, the wresting of all
Church Order and Rule to give countenance unto a corrupt Administration of it,
with the needless Oppositions that have been made against its Institution;
there is nothing in it, nothing belongs unto it, nothing required unto its
Administration, wherein Men's outward Interests are at all concerned, and which
the smallest number of sincere Christians in any Church-Society, may not
perform and discharge unto the Glory of Christ, and their own Edification.

IT is the Mystery of Iniquity that has traversed these things into such a
state and posture, as is unintelligible unto spiritual Wisdom, unpracticable in
the Obedience of Faith, and ruinous unto all Evangelical Order and Discipline.

CHAP. XI. Of the Communion of Churches.
CHURCHES so appointed, and established in Order as has been declared, ought
to hold Communion among themselves, or with each other, as unto all the ends of
their Institution and Order: For these are the same in all. Yea, the general
end of them, is in Order of Nature considered antecedently unto their
Institution in particular. This end is the Edification of the Body of Christ in
general, or the Church Catholic. The promotion hereof is committed jointly and
severally unto all particular Churches. Wherefore, with respect hereunto, they
are obliged unto mutual Communion among themselves, which is their consent,
endeavor and conjunction in and for the promotion of the Edification of the
Catholic Church, and therein their own, as they are Parts and Members of it.

THIS Communion is incumbent on every Church, with respect unto all other
Churches of Christ in the World equally. And the Duties and Acts of it in all
of them, are of the same kind and nature. For there is no such disparity
between them, or subordination among them, as should make a difference between
the Acts of their mutual Communion; so as that the Acts of some should be Acts
of Authority, and those of others Acts of obedience or subjection. Where ever
there is a Church, whether it be at Rome or Egubium, in a City or a Village,
the Communion of them all is mutual, the Acts of it of the same kind; however
one Church may have more Advantages to be useful and helpful therein than
another. And the abuse of those Advantages was that which wrought effectually
in the beginning of that disorder, which at length destroyed the Catholic
Church, with all Church Communion whatever. For some Churches, especially that
of Rome, having many Advantages, in Gifts, Abilities, Numbers and Reputation
above many, above most Churches for usefulness in their mutual Communion; the
Guides of it insensibly turned and perverted the Addresses made unto them, the
Advises and Assistances desired of them in way of Communion, or their pretenses
of such Addresses and Desires, into an Usurpation, first of a primacy of
Honor, then of Order, then of Supremacy and Jurisdiction, unto the utter
overthrow of all Church Order and Communion, and at length of the whole nature
of the Catholic Church, as stated and subsisting in particular Churches, as we
shall see.

ALL Churches on their first institution, quickly found themselves indigent and
wanting, though not as unto their Being, Power and Order; yet as unto their
well-being, with their preservation in Truth and Order, upon extraordinary
Occurrences, as also with respect unto their usefulness and serviceableness,
unto the general end of furthering the Edification of the Church Catholic. The
care hereof, and the making provision for this defect, was committed by our
Lord Jesus Christ unto the Apostles during their Lives, which Paul calls (...),
2 Cor. 11.28. The care of all the Churches. For what was only a pressing care
and burden unto them, was afterward contended for by others, as a matter of
Dignity and Power; the pretense of it in one especially being, turned into a
cursed Domination, under the Style and Title of Servus Servorum Dei.

BUT if a Thousand pretenses should be made of supplying Churches defects after
the decease of the Apostles, by any other Order, Way or Means, besides this of
the equal Communion of Churches among themselves, they will be all found
destitute of any Countenance from the Scripture, Primitive Antiquity, the
nature, use, and end of Churches, yea, of Christian Religion it self. Yet the
pretense hereof is the sole foundation of all that disposal of Churches into
several stories of Subordination, with an Authority and Jurisdiction over one
another, which now prevails in the World. But there is no place for such
Imaginations, until it be proved, either that our Lord Jesus Christ has not
appointed the mutual Communion of Churches among themselves by their own
consent; or that it is not sufficient for the preservation of the Union, and
furtherance of the Edification of the Church Catholic, whereunto it is
designed.

WHEREFORE, our Lord Jesus Christ, in his infinite Wisdom, has constituted his
Churches in such a State and Order, as wherein none of them are able of
themselves, always and in all instances, to attain all the ends for which they
are appointed, with respect unto the Edification of the Church Catholic. And
he did it for this end, that whereas the whole Catholic Church is animated by
one spirit, which is the bond of Union between all particular Churches, (as we
shall see) every one of them may Act the Gifts and Graces of it unto the
Preservation and Edification of the whole.

HEREIN then, we acknowledge, lies the great difference which we have with
others about the state of the Church of Christ in this World; we do believe
that the mutual Communion of particular Churches amongst themselves, in an
equality of Power and Order, though not of Gifts and Usefulness, is the only
way appointed by our Lord Jesus Christ after the Death of the Apostles, for the
attaining the general end of all particular Churches, which is the Edification
of the Church Catholic, in Faith, Love and Peace. Other ways and means have
been found out in the World for this end, which we must speak unto immediately.
Wherefore, it behooves us to use some Diligence in the consideration of the
Causes, Nature and Use of this Communion of Churches.

BUT it must be moreover premised, that whereas this Communion of Churches is
Radically and Essentially the same among all Churches in the World, yet, as
unto the ordinary actual exercise of the Duties of it, it is confined and
limited by Divine Providence, unto such Churches, as the natural means of the
discharge of such Duties may extend unto. That is unto those which are planted
within such Lines of Communication, such precincts or boundaries of Places and
Countries, as may not render the mutual performance of such Duties insuperably
difficult. Yet is not the World it self so wide, but that all places being made
pervious by Navigation, this Communion of Churches may be visibly professed,
and in some instances practiced among all Churches, from the rising of the Sun
even unto the going-down of the same, where the Name of Christ is known among
the Gentiles; wherein the true nature of the Catholic Church and its Union
does consist, which is utterly overthrown by the most vehement pretenses that
are made unto it, as those in the Church of Rome.

WHEREFORE such a Communion of Churches is to be enquired after, as from which
no true Church of Christ is or can be excluded; in whose actual exercise they
may and ought all to live, and whereby the general end of all Churches in the
Edification of the Catholic Church may be attained. This is the true and only
Catholicism of the Church, which whoever departs from, or substitutes any thing
else in the room of it, under that Name, destroys its whole nature, and
disturbs the whole Ecclesiastical Harmony, that is, of Christ's Institution.

HOWEVER therefore we plead for the Rights of particular Churches, yet our real
Controversy with most in the World, is for the Being, Union and Communion of
the Church Catholic, which are variously perverted by many, and separating it
into Parties, and confining it to Rules, Measures and Canons of their own
finding out and Establishment. For such things as these, belong neither to the
internal nor external Form of that Catholic Church, whose Being in the World
we believe, and whose Union we are obliged to preserve. And whoever gives any
Description of, or Limitation to the Catholic Church, besides what consist in
the Communion of particular Churches intended, does utterly overthrow it, and
therein an Article of our Faith.

BUT this Communion of Churches cannot be duly apprehended, unless we enquire
and determine wherein their Union does consist. For Communion is an Act of
Union, that receives both its Nature and Power from it, or by virtue of it. For
of what Nature soever the Union of things distinct in themselves be, of the
same is the Communion that they have among themselves.

IN the Church of Rome, the Person of the Pope, as he is Pope, is the Head and
Center of all Church Union. Nor is there allowed any Union of particular
Churches with Christ or among themselves, but in and through him. An Universal
subjection unto him and his Authority, is the original spring of all Church
Union among them. And if any one Soul fail herein, if as unto things of Faith
and Divine Worship, he do not depend on the Pope, and live in subjection unto
him, he is reputed a Stranger and For^^^ner unto the Catholic Church. Yea,
they affirm, that be a Man never so willing for, and desirous of an Interest in
Christ, he cannot have it but by the Pope.

THE Communion of Churches congenial and suited unto this Union, proceeding
from it, and exercised by virtue of it, arises from a various contignation of
Order, or the erection of one story of Church Interest upon another, until we
come to the Idol placed on the top of this Babel. So is this Communion carried
on from the obedience and subjection of the lowest rubbish of Ecclesiastical
Order, unto Diocesans, of them to Metropolitans, of them to Patriarchs or
Cardinals, of them to the Pope; or an ascent is made from Diocesan Synods, by
Provincial and National, to those that are called Ecumenical, whose Head is
the Pope.

YET Two things must be farther observed to clear this Communion of the Roman
Catholic Church; as, (1.) That there is no ascent of Church Order or Power by
a vital Act of Communion from the lower Degrees, Orders or Consociations, and
by them to the Pope, as though he should receive any thing of Church Power from
them; but all the plenitude of it being originally vested in him, by these
several Orders and Degrees, he communicates of it unto all Churches, as the
Life of their Conjunction and Communion. (2.) That no Man is so jointed in this
Order, so compacted in this Body, but that he is also personally and
immediately subject to the Pope, and depends on him as unto his whole
profession of Religion.

AND this is that which constitutes him formally to be what he is, that is
Antichrist; and the Church State arising from its Union unto him, holding him
as its Head, subsisting in a Communion by virtue of power received through
various Orders and Constitutions from him, to be Antichristian. For he and it,
are set up in the room of, and in direct opposition unto the Lord Christ, as
the Head of the Catholic Church, and the Church state thereon depending. This
we have described, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Speaking the Truth in Love, may grow up,
etc. As also, Col. 2.19. Where there is a Rejection of them who belong not unto
the Church Catholic, taken from its Relation unto Christ, and the nature of
its dependence on him; not holding the Head, etc.

WHEN Men shall cease to be wilfully blind, or when the powers of the strong
Delusion that begin to abate shall expire, they will easily see the direct
Opposition that is between these two Heads and two Churches, namely Christ and
the Pope, the Catholic Church and that of Rome.

I KNOW well enough all the Evasions and Distinctions that are invented to
countenance this Anti-christianism. As that there is a double Head, one of
internal influence of Grace which Christ is, and the Pope is not; the other of
Rule and Authority, which the Pope is. But this also is twofold; Supreme and
Remote; or Immediate and Subordinate; the first is Christ, the latter is the
Pope. And there is yet farther a twofold Head of the Church, the one invisible
which is Christ; the other visible which is the Pope.

NOT to insist on these gross and horrible Figments of a twofold Head of the
Catholic Church in any sense, which are foreign to the Scripture, foreign to
Antiquity, whereof never one word was heard in the Church for Six hundred Years
after Christ, deforming the beautiful Spouse of Christ into a Monster; we will
allow at present, that the Pope is only the immediate, visible, subordinate
Head of all Rule and Authority to their Church, which is what they plead for.
Then I say that the Church whereof he is the Head is his Body; that it holds
him as its Head; that it is compacted together by the Officers and Orders that
depend on him, and receive all their influence of Church Power and Order from
him, which though he communicates not by an internal influence of Grace and
Gifts (alas poor wretch) yet he does it by Officers, Offices, Orders and Laws;
so giving Union and Communion unto the whole Body by the effectual working of
every joint and part of the Hierarchy under him, for its Union, Communion and
Edification. This, I say, is the Antichrist, and the Antichristian
Church State, as I shall be at any time ready to maintain.

LET any Man take a due prospect of this Head, and this Body as related and
united by the Bond of their own Rules, Constitutions and Laws, acting in
worldly Pomp, Splendour and Power with horrid bloody Cruelties against all that
oppose it, and he will not fail of an open view of all the Scriptural
Lineaments of the Apostate Antichristian State of the Church.

I SAY again, This assigning of the original of all Church Order, Union and
Communion unto the Pope of Rome, investing him therewith as an Article of
Faith, constituting him thereby the Head of the Church; and the Church thereon
his Body, as it must be if he be its Head; so as that from him all power of
Order, and for all Acts of Communion, should be derived, returning all in
Obedience and Subjection unto him, does set up a visible, conspicuous
Antichristian Church State, in opposition unto Christ and the Catholic
Church. But with this sort of Men we deal not at present.

THERE is a pretense unto an ^nion of Churches not derived from the Papal
Headship. And this consists in the Canonical subjection of particular Churches
unto a Diocesan Bishop; and of such Bishops to Metropolitans; which though de
facto it be at present terminated and stated within the bounds of a Nation; yet
de jure it ought to be extended unto the whole Catholic Church.

ACCORDING unto this Principle, the Union of the Catholic Church consists in
that Order, whereby particular Churches are distributed into Deanaries,
Arch-Deaconries, Exempt Peculiars, under Officials; Diocesses, Provinces, under
Metropolitans, and so by or without Patriarchs to avoid the Rock of the Papacy,
issuing in a General-Council, as I suppose. But,

1. TO confine the Union and Communion of the Catholic Church hereunto, is at
present absolutely destructive both of the Church and its Communion. For all
particular Churches, when they are by a coalescency extended unto those, which
are Provincial or National, have both Politically and Ecclesiastically such
bounds fixed unto them, as they cannot pass to carry on Communion unto, and
with the Church as Catholic, by any Acts and Duties belonging unto their
Order: And hereby the Union and Communion of the Church is utterly lost. For
the Union of the Catholic Church, as such, does always equally exist, and the
Communion of it is always equally in exercise, and can consist in nothing but
what does so exist and is so exercised. Wherever is the Catholic Church,
there is the Communion of Saints. But nothing of this can be obtained by virtue
of this Order.

2. WE enquire at present after such an Union as gives particular Churches
Communion among themselves; which this Order does not, but absolutely
overthrows it; leaving nothing unto them but subjection to Officers set over
them, who are not of them, according to Rules and Laws of their appointment;
which is foreign to the Scripture and Antiquity.

3. THIS Order it self, the only bond of the pretended Union having no Divine
Institution, especially as to its extent unto the whole Catholic Church, nor
any intimation in the Scripture, and being utterly impossible to be put in
execution or actual exercise, no Man can declare what is the Original or Center
of it, whence it is deduced, and wherein it rests.

HAVING removed these pretenses out of our way, we may easily discern wherein
the Union, and consequently the Communion of ^ll particular Churches does
consist, and in the due observation whereof, all that Church Order which the
Lord Christ has appointed and does accept, is preserved.

I SAY then, that the true and only Union of all particular Churches, consists
in that which gives Form, Life and Being unto the Church Catholic, with the
Addition of what belongs unto them as they are particular. And this is, that
they have all one and the same God and Father, one Lord Jesus Christ, one Faith
and one Doctrine of Faith, one hope of their calling or the promised
Inheritance, one Regeneration, one Baptism, one Bread and Wine; united unto God
and Christ in one Spirit, through the bond of Faith and Love.

THIS Description, with what is suited thereunto, and explanatory of it, is all
the account which is given us in the Scripture of the constituting form of the
Catholic Church, and of the Union of particular Churches among themselves.
What Church soever fails in the essential parts of this Description, or any of
them, it is separated from the Catholic Church, nor has either Union or
Communion with any true Churches of Christ.

TWO things concur unto the completing of this Union of Churches. (1.) Their
Union or Relation unto Christ. (2.) That which they have among themselves.

1. THE Lord Christ himself is the Original and Spring of this Union, and every
particular Church is united unto him as its Head, besides which, with or under
which, it has none. This Relation of the Church unto Christ as its Head, the
Apostle expressly affirms to be the foundation and cause of its Union, Ephesians.
4.15, 16. Col. 2.19. the places before quoted. Hereby it is also in God the
Father, 2 These. 1.1. Or has God as its Father. And unless this Union be
dissolved, unless a Church be disunited from Christ, it cannot be so from the
Catholic Church, nor any true Church of Christ in particular; however, it may
be dealt withal by others in the World.

FROM Christ, as the Head and Spring of Union, there proceeds unto all
particular Churches, a bond of Union, which is his Holy Spirit, acting it self
in them by Faith and Love, in and by the ways and means, and for the ends of
his appointment.

THIS is the Kingly, Royal, Beautiful Union of the Church. Christ, as the only
head of Influence and Rule bringing it into a Relation unto himself as his
Body, communicating of his Spirit unto it, governing it by the Law of his Word,
enabling it unto all the Duties of Faith, Love and Holiness.

FOR unto the completing of this Union on the part of the Church, these things
are required. (1.) Faith in him, or holding him as the Head, in the sincere
belief of all things concerning his Person, Office and Doctrine in the Gospel,
with whatever belongs thereunto. (2.) Love unto him and all that is his. (3.)
That especial Holiness, whose foundation is Repentance and Effectual Vocation.
(4.) The Observance of his Commands, as unto all Duties of Divine Worship.
These things are essentially requisite unto this Union on the part of the
Church. The Reality and Power of them, is the internal form of the Church; and
the profession of them is its external form.

2. THERE concurreth hereunto an Union among themselves, I mean all particular
Churches throughout the World, in whom the Church Catholic does Act its Power
and Duty, And the Relation that is between these Churches, is that which is
termed Relatio aequiparentiae, wherein neither of the Relata is the first
foundation of it; but they are equal. It does not arise from the Subordination
of one unto another, they being all equal as unto what concerns their Essence
and Power. And the bond hereof is that especial Love which Christ requires
among all his Disciples, acting it self unto all the ends of the Edification of
the whole Body.

TAKE in the whole, and the Union of Churches consists in their Relation unto
God as their Father, and unto Christ as their only immediate Head of Influence
and Rule, with a participation of the same Spirit, in the same Faith and
Doctrine of Truth, the same kind of Holiness, the same Duties of Divine
Worship, especially the same Mysteries of Baptism and the Supper, the
observance of the same Rules or Commands of Christ in all Church Order, with
mutual Love, effectual unto all the ends of their Being and Constitution, or
the Edification of the Church Catholic.

THERE may be failures in them or some of them, as unto sundry of these things;
there may be differences among them about them, arising from the Infirmities,
Ignorance and Prejudices of them of whom they do consist, the best knowing here
but in part; but whilst the substance of them is preserved, the Union of all
Churches, and so of the Catholic Church is preserved.

THIS is that blessed oneness which the Lord Christ prayed for so earnestly for
his Disciples, that they might be one in the Father and the Son, one among
themselves, and made perfect in one, Joh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23. without any
respect unto that horrid Image of it, which was set up in the latter days of
the Church, which all Men were compelled to bow down unto, and Worship, with
the fire of Nebuchadnezzars Furnance. Of any other Union there is not the least
mention in the Scripture.

THIS Union of the Catholic Church in all particular Churches, is always the
same, inviolable, unchangeable, comprehending all the Churches in the World at
all times; not confinable unto any State or Party, not interruptible by any
external form, nor to be prevailed against by the Gates of Hell; and all such
Disputes about a Catholic Church, and its Union, as can be so much as
questionable among them that profess to believe the Gospel, are in direct
opposition unto the Prayers and Promises of Jesus Christ. Whilst Evangelical
Faith, Holiness, Obedience unto the Commands of Christ, and Mutual Love abide
in any on the Earth, there is the Catholic Church; and whilst they are
professed, that Catholic Church is visible; other Catholic Church upon the
Earth I believe none; nor any that needs other things unto its Constitution.

THESE things being premised, I proceed unto that which is our present Enquiry,
namely, Wherein the Communion of particular Churches among themselves does
consist.

THE Communion of Churches, is their joint actings in the same Gospel Duties
toward God in Christ, with their mutual actings toward each other, with
respect unto the end of their Institution and Being, which is the Glory of
Christ in the Edification of the whole Catholic Church.

AS unto the actings of the first sort, the ground of them is Faith, and
therein is the first Act of the Communion of Churches. And this Communion in
Faith among all the Churches of Christ is twofold. (1.) General in the belief
of the same Doctrine of Truth, which is according unto Godliness, the same
Articles of Faith, and the public profession thereof; so that every one of
them is the Ground and Pillar of the same Truth. This the Primitive Church
provided for in Creeds and Symbols, or Confessions of Faith, as is known. But
as never any one of them was expressly owned by all Churches; so in process of
time they came to be abused, as expressing the sense of the present Church,
whether true or false. Hence we have as many Arian Creeds yet extant, as those
that are Orthodox. But unto the Communion of all particular
Churches in the World, there is nothing required but a belief of the Scripture
to be the Word of God, with a professed assent unto all Divine Revelations
therein contained; provided that no Error be avowed that is contrary to the
principal or fundamental Doctrines of it. For although any Society of Men
should profess the Scripture to be the Word of God, and avow an Assent unto the
Revelations made therein, yet by the conceptions of their Minds, and
misunderstanding of the sense of the Holy Spirit therein, they may embrace and
adhere unto such Errors, as may cut them off from all Communion with the
Catholic Church in Faith. Such are the denial of the holy Trinity, the
Incarnation of the Son of God, His Divine Person or Office, the Redemption of
the Church by his Blood; the necessity of Regeneration by his Spirit, and the
like. And they may also add that of their own unto their professed Belief, as
shall exclude them from Communion with the Catholic Church. Such are the
Assertion of Traditions as equal with the written Word; of another Head of the
Church besides the Lord Christ; of another Sacrifice besides what he once
offered for all; and the like. But where any are preserved from such Heresies
on the one hand and the other, there is no more required unto Communion with
the whole Church, as unto Faith in general, but only the Belief before
described.

2. THIS Communion in Faith respects the Church it self as its material Object.
For it is required hereunto, that we believe that the Lord Christ has had in
all Ages, and especially has in that wherein we live, a Church on the Earth,
confined unto no Places nor Parties of Men, no Empires nor Dominions, or
capable of any confinement; as also that this Church is Redeemed, Called,
Sanctified by him; that it is his Kingdom, his Interest, his concernment in the
World; that thereunto, and all the Members of it, all the Promises of God do
belong and are confined; that this Church he will save, preserve and deliver
from all oppositions, so as that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it; and after Death will raise it up and glorify it at the last day. This is
the Faith of the Catholic Church concerning it self; which is an Ancient
fundamental Article of our Religion. And if any one deny that there is such a
Church called out of the World, separated from it, unto which alone, and all
the Members of it, all the Promises of God do appertain, in contradistinction
unto all others, or confines it unto a Party, unto whom these things are not
appropriate, he cuts himself off from the Communion of the Church of Christ.

IN the Faith hereof, all the true Churches of Christ throughout the World,
have a comforting refreshing Communion, which, is the spring of many Duties in
them continually.

3. THIS Communion of Churches in Faith, consists much in the principal Fruit
of it; namely, Prayer. So is it stated, Ephesians. 2.18. For through Christ we have
an Access by one Spirit unto the Father. And that therein the Communion of the
Catholic Church does consist, the Apostle declares in the following Verses;
19, 20, 21, 22. Now therefore, etc. For Prayer in all Churches having one
object, which is God even the Father, God as the Father, proceeding in all from
one and the same Spirit, given unto them as a Spirit of Grace and Supplications
to make Intercession for them, and all of them continually offered unto God by
the same High Priest* who adds unto it the Incense of his own Intercession, and
by whom they have all an access unto the same Throne of Grace, they have all a
blessed Communion herein continually. And this Communion is the more express in
that the Prayers of all are for all; so as that there is no particular Church
of Christ in the World, not any one Member of any of them, but they have the
Prayers of all the Churches in the World, and of all the Members of them every
day. And however this Communion be invisible unto the eyes of Flesh, yet is it
glorious and conspicuous unto the eye of Faith; and is a part of the glory of
Christ the Mediator in Heaven. This Prayer proceeding from, or wrought by one
and the same Spirit in them all, equally bestowed on them all, by virtue of the
Promise of Christ; having the same object, even God as a Father, and offered
unto him by the same High Priest, together with his own Intercession, gives
unto all Churches a Communion, far more glorious than what consists in some
outward Rites and Orders of Men's devising.

BUT now if there be any other Persons or Churches, who have any other Object
of their Prayers, but God even the Father, and as our Father in Christ; or have
any other Mediators or Intercessors, by whom to convey or present their Prayers
unto God, but Christ alone, the only High Priest of the Church; or do renounce
the Aid and Assistance of the Holy Spirit, as a Spirit of Grace and
Supplications, they cut themselves off from all Communion with the Catholic
Church herein.

4. THE Unity of Faith in all Churches, affects Communion among them, in the
Administration of the same Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper of the Lord.
These are the same in, unto, and amongst them all. Neither do some, variations
in the outward manner of their Administration, interrupt that Communion. But,
wherever the continuation of these Ordinances is denied, or their nature or
use is perverted, or Idolatrous Worship is annexed unto their Administration,
there Communion with the Catholic Church is renounced.

5. THEY have also by Faith Communion herein, in that all Churches do profess a
subjection unto the Authority of Christ in all things, and an obligation upon
them to do and observe all whatsoever he has Commanded.

OTHER instances of the like nature might be given; but these are sufficient to
manifest how unscriptural the Notion is, That there is no proper Communion with
or among Churches but what consists in a compliance with certain Powers, Orders
and Rites, the pressing whereof under the Name of Uniformity, has cast all
thoughts of real, Evangelical Church Communion into Oblivion.

SECONDLY, Churches Ordained and Constituted in the way and manner, and for the
Ends declared in our former Discourse on this Subject, and by virtue of their
Union unto Christ and among themselves, living constantly in all places of the
World in the actual exercise of that Communion, which consists in the
performance of the same Church-Duties toward God in Christ, unto their own
Continuation, Increase, and Edification, have also an especial Union among
themselves, and a mutual Communion thence arising.

THE Bond of this Union is Love; not the common regulated Affection of Humane
nature so called; not merely that Power and Duty which is engraven on the
Hearts of Men, by the Law of Creation, toward all of the same kind and blood
with themselves; but an especial Grace of the Holy Spirit, acting in the Church
as the Principle and Bond of its Union unto its self; whence the command of it
is called a New Commandment; because in it self, as unto the only Example of it
in the Person of Christ, the Causes and Motives unto it, with its peculiar Ends
and proper Exercise, it was absolutely New and Evangelical. An Explanation of
the Nature of it belongs not unto this place although it be a Grace and a Duty
of so much importance, wherein so much of the Life, Power and peculiar Glory of
Christian Religion does consist, and is either so utterly lost, or has such
vile Images of it set up in the World, that it deserves a full Consideration;
which it may receive in another place.

I SAY the Holy Spirit of Grace and Love, being given from Christ, the Fountain
and Center of all Church-Union, to dwell in, and abide with his Church, thereby
uniting it unto himself, does work in it, and all the Members of it, that
mutual Love, which may, and does animate them unto all those mutual Acts which
are proper unto the Relation wherein they stand, by virtue of their Union unto
Christ their Head, as Members of the same Body one with another.

HEREIN consists the Union of every Church in it self, of all Churches among
themselves, and so of the whole Catholic Church; their Communion consisting in
regular Acts and Duties, proceeding from this Love, and required by virtue of
it.

THIS account of the Union and Communion of Churches may seem strange unto
some, who are enamoured on that Image which is set up of them in the World, in
Canons, Constitutions of Rites, and outward Order in various Subordinations and
Ceremonies, which are most remote from making any due Representation of them.

THE Church, in its dependence on Christ its Head, being by his Institution
disposed unto its proper Order for its own Edification, or fitly joined
together and compacted, this Love working effectually in every Office, Officer
and Member, according as unto its disposal in the Body, for the receiving and
communicating Supplies for Edification, gives the whole both its Union and
Communion, all the actings of it being regulated by Divine Rule and
Prescription.

INSTEAD hereof to erect a Machine, the Spring and Center of whose motions are
unknown, any other, I mean, but external force compacted by the Iron joints and
bands of humane Laws, edifying it self by the power of Offices and Officers,
foreign unto the Scripture, acting with Weapons that are not Spiritual, but
Carnal, and mighty through him whose Work it is to cast the Members of the
Church of Christ into Prison, as unto an outward Conformity, is to forsake the
Scripture and follow our own Imagination.

THE outward Acts of Communion among Churches, proceeding from this love, and
the obligation that is on them to promote their mutual Edification, may be
referred unto the Two Heads of Advice and Assistance.

CHURCHES have Communion unto their mutual Edification, by Advice in Synods or
Councils, which must in this place be considered.

SYNODS are the Meetings of diverse Churches by their Messengers or Delegates,
to consult and determine of such things as are of common concernment unto them
all, by virtue of this Communion which is exercised in them.

1. THE necessity and warranty of such Synods, arises, (1.) From the Light of
Nature. For all Societies which have the same Original, the same Rule, the same
Interest, the same Ends, and which are in themselves mutually concerned in the
good or evil of each other, are obliged by the power and conduct of Reason, to
advise in common for their own good, on all Emergencies that stand in need
thereof.

CHURCHES are such Societies; they have all one and the same Authoritative
Institution, one and the same Rule of Order and Worship, the same ends as we
have declared; and their entire Interest is one and the same. When therefore
any thing occurs amongst them, that is attended with such Difficulties as
cannot be removed or taken away by any one of them severally, or in whose
Determination all of them are equally concerned, not to make use herein of
common Advice and Counsel, is to forsake that natural Light which they are
bound to attend unto in all Duties of Obedience unto God.

2. THE Union of all Churches, before described in one Head, by one Spirit,
through one Faith and Worship, unto the same ends, does so compact them into
one Body mystical, as that none of them is or can be complete absolutely
without a joint acting with other Members of the same Body unto the common good
of the whole, as occasion does require. And this joint acting with others in
any Church, can be no otherwise, but by common Advice and Counsel, which
natural Circumstances render impossible by any means but their convention in
Synods, by their Messengers and Delegates. For although there may be some use
of Letters missive, and was so eminently in the Primitive Churches, to ask the
Advice of one another in difficult Cases, (as the first instance we have of the
Communion of Churches after the days of the Apostles, is in the Letter of the
Church of Corinth unto that of Rome, desiring their Advice about the composing
of a difference among them, and the Answer of the Church of Rome thereunto;)
yet many Cases may fall out among them, which cannot be Reconciled or
Determined but by present Conference, such as that was Recorded, Act. 15. No
Church therefore is so Independent, as that it can always, and in all Cases,
observe the Duties it owes unto the Lord Christ and the Church Catholic, by
all those Powers which it is able to act in it self distinctly, without
conjunction with others. And the Church that confines its Duty unto the Acts of
its own Assemblies, cuts it self off from the external Communion of the Church
Catholic; nor will it be safe for any Man to commit the Conduct of his Soul to
such a Church. Wherefore,

3. THIS acting in Synods is an Institution of Jesus Christ; not in an express
Command, but in the nature of the thing it self fortified with Apostolical
Example. For having erected such a Church State, and disposed all his Churches
into that Order and mutual Relation unto one another, as that none of them can
be complete, or discharge their whole Duty without mutual Advice and Counsel;
he has thereby ordained this way of their Communion in Synods, no other being
possible unto that end. And hereby such Conventions are interested in the
promise of his presence; namely, that where Two or Three are gathered together
in his Name, there he will be in the midst of them. For these Assemblies being
the necessary effect of his own constitution in the nature and use of his
Churches, are or may be in his Name, and so enjoy his presence.

4. THE end of all particular Churches is the Edification of the Church
Catholic unto the Glory of God in Christ. And it is evident, that in many
Instances this cannot be attained, yea, that it must be sinfully neglected,
unless this way for the preservation and carrying of it on be attended unto.
Truth, Peace and Love may be lost among Churches, and so the Union of the
Catholic Church in them be dissolved, unless this means for their Preservation
and Reparation be made use of. And that particular Church which extends not its
Duty beyond its own Assemblies and Members, is fallen off from the principal
end of its Institution. And every Principle, Opinion, or Persuasion, that
inclines any Church to confine its Care and Duty unto its own Edification only;
yea, or of those only which agree with it in some peculiar practice, making it
neglective of all due means of the Edification of the Church Catholic, is
Schismatical.

5. THERE is direction hereunto included in the Order and Method of
Church-Proceedings in case of offense, prescribed unto it by Christ himself.
The beginning and rise of it, is between two individual Persons; thence is it
carried unto the cognizance and judgment of two or three others before
unconcerned; from them it is to be brought unto the Church; and there is no
doubt but the Church has Power to determine concerning it, as unto its own
Communion, to continue the Offender in it or reject him from it. This must
abide, as unto outward Order and the Preservation of Peace. But no Church is
Infallible in their judgment absolutely in any case; and in many, their
determinations may be so doubtful as not to affect the Conscience of him who is
Censured. But such a Person is not only a Member of that particular Church, but
by virtue thereof of the Catholic Church also. It is necessary therefore that
he should be heard and judged as unto his Interest therein, if he do desire it.
And this can no way be done, but by such Synods as we shall immediately
describe.

6. SYNODS are Consecrated unto the use of the Church in all Ages, by the
Example of the Apostles, in their guidance of the First Churches of Jews and
Gentiles; which has the force of a Divine Institution, as being given by them
under the Infallible conduct of the Holy Ghost, Act. 15. which we shall speak
farther unto immediately.

HAVING seen the Original of Church Synods or their Formal Cause, we consider
also their Material Cause, or the subject matter to be treated of or determined
in them. And this in general is every thing wherein Churches are obliged to
hold Communion among themselves, when any thing falls out amongst them, which
otherwise would disturb that Communion. And hereof some Instances may be given.

1. CHURCHES have mutual Communion in the profession of the same Faith. If any
doubts or differences do arise about it, any Opinions be advanced contrary unto
it, either in any particular Church, which they cannot determine among
themselves or among sundry Churches, the last outward means for the
preservation of the Rule of Faith among them, and of their Communion in the
condemnation of Errors and Opinions contrary unto the form of wholesome Words,
is by these Synods or Councils. The care hereof, is indeed in the first place
committed unto the Churches themselves, as was at large before declared: But in
case through the subtilty, prevalency, and interest of those by whom damnable
Doctrines are broached, the Church it self whereunto they do belong, is not
able to rebuke and suppress them; nor to maintain its profession of the Truth,
or that by suffering such things in one Church, others are in danger to be
infected or defiled, this is the last external Refuge that is left for the
preservation of the Communion of Churches in the same Faith. We have multiplied
Examples hereof in the Primitive Churches, before the degeneracy of these
Synods into Superstition and Domination. Such was eminently that gathered at
Antioch for the condemnation of the Heresies of Paulus Samosatenus the Bishop
of that Church.

2. IT is so, with respect unto that Order, Peace and Unity, wherein every
particular Church ought to walk in it self, and amongst its own Members. There
were Schisms, Divisions, Strife and Contentions in some of the Churches that
were of Apostolical planting and watering: So there was at Antioch, and
afterward at Corinth, as also of some of the Churches in Galatia. The Duty of
Remedying and Healing these Divisions and Differences from what cause soever
they arise, is first incumbent on each particular Member in every such Church.
Unto them it is given in charge by the Apostle in the first place; and if every
one of them do perform their Duty in Love, an end will be put unto all strife.
In case of failure therein, the whole Church is charged in the exercise of its
Power, Authority and Wisdom, to rebuke and compose such Differences. But in
case it is not able so to do, as it fell out in the Church at Antioch, then an
Assembly of other Churches walking in actual Communion with that Church wherein
the Difference is arisen, and thereon concerned in their Prosperity and
Edification, by their Messengers and Delegates, is the last outward means for
its Composure.

3. WHERE there has been any Male Administration of Discipline, whereby any
Members of a Church have been injured, as suppose they are unduly cast out of
the Church by the Power and Interest of some Diotrephes; or that any Members of
the Church make a Party and Faction to depose their Elders, as it was in the
Church of Corinth, when the Church at Rome gave them Advice in the case: It is
necessary from the Communion of Churches and the Interest the Persons injured
have in the Catholic Church, whose Edification is the end of all
Church-Administrations, that the proceedings of such a Church be renewed by a
Synod, and a Remedy provided in the case. Nor was it the mind of the Apostle
that they should be left without Relief, which were unduly cast out of the
Church by Diotrephes; nor is there any other ordinary way hereof, but only by
Synods; but this case I suppose I shall speak unto afterward.

4. THE same is the case with respect unto Worship, as also of Manners and
Conversation. If it be reported or known by Credible Testimony that any Church
has admitted into the exercise of Divine Worship any thing superstitious or
vain, or if the Members of it walk like those described by the Apostle, Phil.
3.18, 19. unto the Dishonor of the Gospel and of the ways of Christ, the
Church it self not endeavoring its own Reformation and Repentance; other
Churches walking in Communion therewith, by virtue of their common Interest in
the Glory of Christ, and Honor of the Gospel, after more private ways for its
Reduction, as Opportunity and Duty may suggest unto their Elders, ought to
Assemble in a Synod for Advice, either as to the use of farther means for the
Recovery of such a Church, or to withold Communion from it in case of
Obstinacy in its evil ways. The want of a due attendance unto this part of the
Communion of Churches, with respect unto Gospel Worship in its Purity, and
Gospel Obedience in its Power, was a great means of the Decay and Apostasy of
them all. By reason of this Negligence instead of being helpful one to another
for their mutual Recovery, and the Revival of the things that were ready to
die, they gradually infected one another, according as they fell into their
Decays, and countenanced one another by their Examples unto a continuance in
such Disorders.

THE Image which in late Ages was set up hereof in Diocesan and Metropolitical
Visitations, and those of lesser districts under Officers of Antichristian
Names, has been useful rather unto Destruction than Edification. But so it
has fallen out in most things concerning Church Order, Worship and Discipline.
The Power and Spirituality of Divine Institutions being lost, a Machine has
been framed to make an appearance and representation of them to divert the
minds of Men from enquiring after the Primitive Institution of Christ, with an
experience of their Efficacy.

CONSIDERING what we have learned in these later Ages, by woeful experience of
what has fallen out formerly amongst all the Churches in the World, as unto
their Degeneracy from Gospel Worship and Holiness, with the abounding of
Temptations in the days wherein we live, and the spiritual decays that all
Churches are prone unto, it were not amiss if those Churches which do walk in
express Communion, would frequently meet in Synods to enquire into the
spiritual state of them all, and to give advice for the correction of what is
amiss, the due preservation of the purity of Worship, the exercise of
Discipline, but especially of the Power, Demonstration and Fruit of Evangelical
Obedience.

2. HENCE it is evident what are the ends of such Synods among the Churches of
Christ. The general end of them all, is to promote the Edification of the whole
Body or Church Catholic. And that, (1.) To prevent Divisions from differences
in judgment and practice which are contrary thereunto. The First Christian
Synod was an Assembly of the two First Churches in the World by their
Delegates. The First Church of the Jews was at Jerusalem, and the First Church
of the Gentiles was at Antioch; to prevent Divisions, and to preserve Communion
between them, was the First Synod Celebrated, Act. 15. (2.) To avoid or cure
offenses against mutual love among them. (3.) To advance the light of the
Gospel by a joint Confession and Agreement in the Faith. (4.) To give a
concurrent Testimony against pernicious Heresies or Errors, whereby the Faith
of any is overthrown or in danger so to be. (5.) To relieve such by advice, as
may be by any Diotrephes unduly cast out of the Church.

WHAT are the ends whereunto they have been used, may be seen in the Volumes
written concerning them, and the numberless Laws enacted in them, whereof very
little belongs unto the Discipline of the Gospel, or real Communion of Churches.

3. THE measure or extent of them arises from concernment and convenience. All
unprejudiced Persons do now acknowledge, that the pretense of Ecumenical
Councils, wherein the whole Church of Christ on the Earth, or all particular
Churches should be represented, and so obliged to acquiesce in their
Determinations, is a fond Imagination. And it were easy to demonstrate in
particular, how every one of them which has in vulgar esteem obtained that
Title, were openly remote from so being. Such Councils never were, and, as it
is improbable, never will nor can be, nor are any way needful unto the
Edification of the Church.

THEIR due measure and bounds, as was said before, are given them by
concernment and convenience; wherein respect also may be had unto the Ability
of some Churches to promote Edification above others. Such Churches as are in
the same instances concerned in the causes of them before declared, and may be
helpful unto the ends mentioned, are to convene in such Synods. And this
concernment may be either from some of those causes in themselves, or from that
Duty which they owe unto other Churches which are immediately concerned. So it
was in the Assistance given by the Church at Jerusalem, in that case which was
peculiar to the Church of Antioch.

WITH this interest or concernment, there must be a concurrence of natural,
moral and political Conveniences. Some Churches are planted at such distances
from others, that it is naturally impossible that they should ever meet
together to advise by their Messengers, and some at such as that they cannot
assemble but with such difficulties and hazzards as exempt them from the Duty
of it. And whereas they are placed under different Civil Governments, and those
oft-times engaged in mutual enmities, and always jealous of the actings of
their own Subjects in conjunction with them that are not so, they cannot so
convene and preserve the outward peace of the Churches. Hence the largest of
the Councils of old that are called Ecumenical, never pretended farther than
the single Roman Empire; when there were innumerable Churches planted under the
Civil Jurisdiction of other Sovereigns.

WHEREFORE in the Assembling of Churches in Synods, respect is to be had unto
the convenience of their meeting, that it may be so far as is possible without
trouble or danger. And this, with respect unto the causes or occasions of them
will determine what Churches, which or how many may be necessary on such
occasions to constitute a Synod. And it is useful hereunto, that the Churches
which are planted within such a circumference as gives facility or convenience
for such conventions, should by virtue of their mutual Communion, be in express
readiness to convene on all occasions of common concernment.

AGAIN, in the assistance which in the way of Advice and Counsel, any one
Church may stand in need of from others, respect is to be had in their desire,
unto such Churches as are reputed and known to have the best ability to give
Advice in the case; on which account the Church at Antioch addressed themselves
in a peculiar manner unto the Church at Jerusalem which was far distant from
them.

BUT in all these cases use is to be made of Spiritual Prudence, with respect
unto all sorts of Circumstances; which, although some would deny as the
privilege of even matters of Fact, and the Application of general Scripture
Rules unto Practice, because we require Divine Institution unto all parts of
Religious Worship; yet we must not decline from using the best we have in the
service of Christ and his Church; rather than comply with any thing which in
the whole substance of it, is foreign to his Institution.

IT was the Roman Empire under one Monarch in its Civil Distributions for Rule
and Government, which gave the first rise and occasion unto a pretended visibly
Ruling Catholic Church under one Spiritual Monarch, distributed into those
that were Patriarchal, Diocesan, Metropolitical, and others of inferior kinds.
For retaining the people in their Civil Distributions whereinto they were cast
according to the Polity and Interest of the Empire, there were Ecclesiastical
Officers assigned unto each distribution, answerable unto the Civil Officers
which were ordained in the Polity of the Empire. So in answer unto Deputies,
Exarchs, Praefects, Governors of Provinces and Cities, there were found out
and erected Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Diocesans, in various Allotments of
Territories and Powers, requiring unto their complete State one visible
Monarchical Head, as the Empire had, which was the Pope. And whereas the
Emperors had not only a Civil Rule and Power, but a Military also, exercised
under them by Legates, Generals, Tribunes, Centurions, and the like; so there
was raised an Ecclesiastical Militia in various Orders of Monks, Friars, and
Votaries of all sorts, who under their immediate Generals and Praefects did
depend absolutely on the Sovereign Power of the New Ecclesiastical Monarch. So
was the visible professing Church molded and fashioned into an Image of the
old Roman Pagan Empire, as it was foretold it should be, Revel. 13, 14, 15. And
although this Image was first framed in compliance with it, and for a
resemblance of it; yet in process of time it substituted it self entirely in
the room of the Empire, taking all its Power unto it self, and doing all its
Works.

FROM this distribution of various sorts of new-framed Churches in the Roman
Empire, arose a constitution of Synods or Councils in subordination one unto
another, until by sundry degrees of Ascent they arrived unto those which they
called general under the conduct of the Pope, whose Senate they were.

BUT these things have no countenance given them by any Divine Institution,
Apostolical Example, or practice of the First Churches, but are a mere product
of Secular Interest working it self in a Mystery of Iniquity.

SINCE the Dissolution of the Roman Empire, Nations have been cast into
distinct Civil Governments of their own, whose Sovereignty is in themselves, by
the event of War and Counsels thereon emergent. Unto each of these it is
supposed there is a Church State accommodated; as the Church of England, the
Church of Scotland, the Church of France, and the like; whose Original and
Being depends on the First event of War in that Dissolution. Unto these new
Church-States whose Being, Bounds and Limits are given unto them absolutely by
those of the Civil Government which they belong unto, it is thought meet that
Ecclesiastical Synods should be accommodated. But in what way this is to be
done there is not yet an agreement; but it is not my present business to
consider the differences that are about it, which are known unto this Nation on
a dear account. Yet this I shall say, that whereas it is eminently useful unto
the Edification of the Church Catholic, that all the Churches professing the
same Doctrine of Faith, within the Limits of the same Supreme Civil Government,
should hold constant actual Communion among themselves unto the ends of it
before mentioned, I see not how it can be any abridgment of the Liberty of
particular Churches, or interfere with any of their Rights which they hold by
Divine Institution, if through more constant lesser Synods for Advice, there be
a communication of their mutual concerns unto those that are greater, until, if
occasion require and it be expedient, there be a general Assembly of them all
to advise about any thing wherein they are all concerned. But this is granted
only with these Limitations: (1.) That the Rights of particular Churches be
preserved in the free Election of such as are to be Members of all these
Synods. (2.) That they assume no Authority or Jurisdiction over Churches or
Persons in things Civil or Ecclesiastical. (3.) That none are immediately
concerned in this proper Synodal Power or Authority, (which what it is we shall
enquire) who are not present in them by their own Delegates.

FOR that kind of Synods which some call a Classis, which is a convention of
the Elders or Officers of sundry Parochial Churches, distinguished for
Presential Communion, ordinarily in some acts of it by virtue of their Office,
and for the exercise of Office-Power, it is the constitution of a new kind of
particular Churches, by a combination of them into one, whose Original
distinction is only in the Civil Limits of their Cohabitation; which probably
may be done sometimes, and in some places, unto Edification.

4. THE Persons of whom all sorts of Ecclesiastical Synods are to consist, must
be enquired into. And there is nothing of mere humane prudential constitution
that has longer obtained in the Church, than that those should be Officers of
the Churches only. And, whereas, after the days of the Apostles we
have no Record of any Synods of more Churches than one, until after the
distinction was made between Bishops and Presbyters, they were made up of both
sorts of them. But afterward, those who were peculiarly called Bishops,
enclosed this Right unto themselves; on what grounds God knows, there being no
one Tittle in the Scripture, or the Light of Reason to give them countenance
therein.

IT must therefore be affirmed, that no Persons, by virtue of any Office
merely, have Right to be Members of Ecclesiastical Synods as such. Neither is
there either Example or Reason to give color unto any such pretense. Farther
is no Office-Power to be exerted in such Synods as such, neither conjunctly by
all the Members of them, nor singly by any of them. Officers of the Church,
Bishops, Pastors, Elders, may be present in them, ought to be present in them,
are meetest for the most part so to be, but merely as such, it belongs not unto
them. The Care, Oversight and Rule of the Churches whereunto they do belong,
the Flock among them distinctly is committed unto them, and for that they are
instructed with Power and Authority by virtue of their Office. But as unto
their conjunction in Synods, which is a mere act and effect of the Communion of
Churches among themselves, it is not committed unto them in a way of peculiar
Right by virtue of their Office. If it be so, without respect unto the power of
the Magistrate in calling them, or of the Churches in choosing them, then it
belongs unto them all; for that which belongs unto any of them, as such by
virtue of Office, belongs equally unto all, and if it belongs unto all, then it
belongs unto all of one sort only, as for instance Bishops; or unto all of all
sorts, as for instance Presbyters also. If it be stated in the latter way, then
every Presbyter, as such by virtue of his Office, has Right and Power to be
present in all Ecclesiastical Synods, equal with that of the Bishops. For
although it be supposed that his Office is not equal unto theirs; yet it is so
also that this Right does equally belong unto his Office. If the former be
avowed, namely, that this Right belongs unto Bishops only (such as are pleaded
for) by virtue of their Office as such; then, (1.) I desire that any tolerable
proof of the confinement of this Right unto such an Office be produced, either
from the Scripture or Reason, or the Example of the First Churches; which as
yet I have never seen. (2.) I fear not to say, that a false presumption hereof
was one principal cause and means of introducing Tyranny into the Churches, and
the utter ruin of their Liberty.

CONCERNING the composition that is made herein, that some should convene in
Ecclesiastical Synods by their own personal Right, and in virtue of their
Office, and others by a kind of Delegation from some of their own Order, it
being a mere political constitution, which I shall immediately speak unto, it
is not here to be taken notice of.

THERE is nothing therefore in Scripture Example, or the Light of Natural
Reason, with the principles of all Societies in Union or Communion, that will
lead us any farther than this; that such Synods are to be composed, and consist
of such Persons as are chosen and delegated by those Churches respectively who
do act and exert their Communion in such Assemblies. So was it in the First
Example of them, Act. 15. The Church of Antioch chose and sent Messengers of
their own number, to advise with the Apostles and Elders of the Church at
Jerusalem; at which Consultation the Members of that Church also were present.
And this is the whole of the nature and use of Ecclesiastical Synods. It is on
other accounts that they make up so great a part of the History of the Church.
For the first Three Hundred years, they were nothing but voluntary conventions
of the Officers or Elders, Bishops and Presbyters, with some others of
neighboring Churches, on the occasion of Differences or Heresies among them.
In and from the Council of Nice, there were Assemblies of Bishops and others
called together by the Authority of the Roman Emperors, to advise about
matters of Faith. In after Ages those which were called in the Western parts of
the World, in Italy, Germany, France and England, were of a mixed nature
advising about things Civil and Political, as well as Sacred and Religious,
especially with respect unto mutual contests between Popes and Princes. In them
the whole nature of Ecclesiastical Synods, was lost and buried, and all
Religion almost destroyed.

THUS this laudable practice of Churches acting their mutual Communion by
meeting in Synods or Assemblies by their Delegates or Messengers, to advise
about things of their common concernment and joint Edification, as occasion
should require, founded in the Light of Nature, and countenanced by Primitive,
Apostolical Example, was turned by the designing Interests and Ambition of Men,
unto the enstating of all Church Power in such Synods, and the Usurpation of a
Power given unto no Churches, nor all of them together, as might be made
evident by instances innumerable.

AND whereas they have made such a noise in Christian Religion, and have filled
so many Volumes with their Acts and doings, yet some of them, who under the
Pope, would place all Religion in them, do grant and contend that they are a
mere Humane Invention: So Bellarmine affirms Pighius to have done in his Book
de Coelest. Hierarch. Lib. 6. Cap. 1. But for his part he judges that it is
more probable that they have a Divine Original by virtue of that Word; Where
Two or Three are gathered together in my Name, there I will be in the midst of
them, Matthew. 18. De Council. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. which will not bear the least part
of the superstructure pretended to be built upon it.

OF these Delegates and Messengers of the Church, the Elders or Officers of
them, or some of them at least, ought to be the principal. For there is a
peculiar care of public Edification incumbent on them, which they are to
exercise on all just occasions: They are presumed justly to know best the state
of their own Churches, and to be best able to judge of matters under
consideration. And they do better represent the Churches from whom they are
sent, than any private Brethren can do; and so receive that Respect and
Reverence which is due to the Churches themselves. As also they are most meet
to report and recommend the Synodal Determinations unto their Churches; and a
contrary practice would quickly introduce confusion.

BUT yet it is not necessary that they alone should be so sent or Delegated by
the Churches; but many have others joined with them, and had so until
Prelatical Usurpation overturned their Liberties. So there were others beside
Paul and Barnabas sent from Antioch to Jerusalem; and the Brethren of that
Church, whatever is impudently pretended to the contrary, concurred in the
Decree and Determination there made.

5. THAT which is termed the calling of these Synods, is nothing but the
voluntary consent of the Churches concerned to meet together by their Delegates
and Messengers, for the ends before declared.

I NO way deny, but that a Christian Magistrate may convene by his Authority
the Bishops, Pastors or Ministers, with such others as he shall think meet
within his own Territories; yea, and receive into his Convention meet Men out
of the Territories of others by their consent, to advise among themselves, and
to give him Advice about such concernments of Religion, and of the Church under
his Dominion, and Regulate himself accordingly. It has been practiced with
good success, and may be with bad also. And I do deny that Churches have Power,
without the consent and Authority of the Magistrate, to convene themselves in
Synods to exercise any Exterior Jurisdiction that should affect the Persons of
his Subjects, any otherwise than by the Law of the Land is allowed.

BUT whereas the Synods whereof we Treat, and which are all that belong unto
the Church, can take no cognizance of any Civil Affairs wherein the Persons of
Men are outwardly concerned; have no Jurisdiction in any kind, can make no
determination, but only Doctrinal Declarations of Divine Truth, of the same
nature with the Preaching of the Word; there is no more required unto their
calling beyond their own consent, but only that they may meet in external peace
by the permission of the Magistrate; which when they cannot obtain, they must
deport themselves as in case of other Duties required of them by the Law of
Christ.

6. IN the last place I shall speak briefly of the Power and Authority of these
Synods, in what measures, extent and numbers soever they are assembled. For
although this may be easily Collected from what has been declared concerning
their Original, Nature, Causes, Use and Ends; yet it may be necessary to be
more particularly enquired into, because of the many differences that are about
it.

THERE is a threefold Power ascribed unto Synods. The First is declarative,
consisting in an Authoritative Teaching and declaring the Mind of God in the
Scripture. The Second is constitutive, appointing and ordaining things to be
believed, or done and observed by and upon its own Authority: And Thirdly
executive in Acts of Jurisdiction toward Persons and Churches.

THE Persons whom the Authority pleaded, may affect, are of Two sorts. (1.)
Such as have their proper Representatives present in such Synods, who are
directly concerned in its conciliary determinations. (2.) Such as have no such
Representatives in them, who can be no otherwise concerned but in the Doctrine
materially considered, declared in them.

WHEREFORE the ground of any Churches receiving, complying with, or obeying the
Determinations and Decrees of Synods must be; either, (1.) The evidence of
Truth, given unto those Determinations by the Synod from the Scripture; or,
(2.) The Authority of the Synod it self affecting the Minds and Consciences of
those concerned.

IN the First way, wherein the Assent and Obedience of Churches is resolved
ultimately into the evidence of Truth from the Scripture, upon the judgment
which they make thereof, not only the discovery of Truth is to be owned, but
there is an Authoritative Proposal of it by virtue of the promised presence of
Christ in them, if duly sought and regarded; whence great Respect and Reverence
is due unto them.

THE Power of a Synod for the execution of its Decrees, respects either, (1.)
The Things or Doctrines declared; and is recommendatory of them on its
Authority from the presence of Christ; or, (2.) Persons; to Censure,
Excommunicate or punish those who receive them not.

THESE things being premised, the just Power of Synods may be positively and
negatively declared in the two following Assertions.

1. THE Authority of a Synod declaring the mind of God from the Scripture in
Doctrine, or giving Counsel as unto practice Synodically unto them whose proper
Representatives are present in it, whose Decrees and Determinations are to be
received and submitted unto on the evidence of their Truth and Necessity, as
recommended by the Authority of the Synod from the promised Presence of Christ
among them, is suitable unto the Mind of Christ, and the Example given by the
Apostles, Act. 15.

HENCE it is evident, that in and after such Synods, it is in the power of
Churches concerned, humbly to consider and weigh, (1.) The evidences of the
Presence of Christ in them, from the manner, causes and ends of their
Assembling, and from their Deportment therein. (2.) What regard in their
Constitutions and Determinations there has been unto the Word of God, and
whether in all things it has had its due pre-eminence. (3.) How all their
Determinations have been educed from its Truth, and are confirmed by its
Authority.

WITHOUT a due exercise of judgment, with respect unto these things, none can
be obliged by any Synodical Determinations; seeing without them, and on the
want of them, many Assemblies of Bishops who have had the outward Appearance
and Title of Synods or Councils, have been Dens of Thieves, Robbers, Idolaters,
managing their Synodical Affairs with fury, wrath, horrible craft, according to
their Interests, unto the Ruin of the Church; such were the Second Ephesine,
the Second at Nice, and that at Trent, and others not a few.

HENCE nothing is more to be feared, especially in a state of the Church
wherein it is declining in Faith, Worship and Holiness, than Synods, according
to the usual way of their calling and convention, where these things are
absent. For they have already been the principal means of leading on and
justifying all the Apostasy which Churches have fallen into. For never was
there yet Synod of that nature, which did not confirm all the Errors and
Superstitions which had in common practice entered into the Church, and opened a
Door to a progress in them; nor was ever the pretense of any of them for
outward Reformation of any use or signification.

2. THE Authority of a Synod determining Articles of Faith? constituting Orders
and Decrees for the conscientious observance of things of their own
appointment, to be submitted unto and obeyed on the Reason of that Authority,
under the penalty of Excommunication, and the trouble by Custom and Tyranny
thereto annexed, or acted in a way of Jurisdiction over Churches or Persons, is
a mere Humane Invention, for which nothing can be pleaded but prescription from
the Fourth Century of the Church, when the progress of the fatal Apostasy
became visible.

THE proof of both these Assertions depends on what was before declared of the
nature and use of these Synods. For if they are such as we have evinced, no
other Power or Authority can be ascribed unto them but that here allowed. Yet
the whole may be farther illustrated by some brief considerations of the
Assembly at Jerusalem in the nature of a Synod, Recorded, Act. 15.

1. THE occasion of it was a difference in the Church of Antioch, which they
could not compose among themselves, because those who caused the Difference,
pretended Authority from the Apostles, as is evident v. 1. and 14.

2. THE means of its convention, was the desire and voluntary reference of the
matters in debate, made by the Church at Antioch where the difference was, unto
that at Jerusalem, whence, as it was pretended, the cause of the difference
arose unto the hazard of their mutual Communion, to be consulted of with their
own Messengers.

3. THE Persons constituting the Synod, were the Apostles, Elders and Brethren
of the Church at Jerusalem, and the Messengers of that Antioch, with whom Paul
and Barnabas were joined in the same Delegation.

4. THE matter in difference was debated as unto the mind of God concerning it
in the Scripture, and out of the Scripture: On James's proposal the
determination was made.

5. THERE was nothing imposed a new on the practice of the Churches, only
direction is given* in one particular instance as unto Duty, necessary on many
accounts unto the Gentile Converts, namely to abstain from Fornication, and
from the use of their Liberty in such instances of its practice as whereon
scandal would ensue, which was the Duty of all Christians even before this
determination, and is so still in many other instances besides those mentioned
in the Decree; only it was now declared unto them.

6. THE Grounds whereon the Synod proposed the Reception of and compliance with
its Decrees were Four, (1.) That what they had determined was the mind of the
Holy Ghost: It pleased the Holy Ghost. This mind they knew either by
Inspiration, or immediate Revelation made unto themselves, or by what was
Written or Recorded in the Scripture, which on all other occasions they
alleged as what was the Word, and spoken by the Holy Ghost. And it is evident,
that it was this latter way, namely, a discovery of the mind of the Holy Ghost
in the Scripture that is intended. However, it is concluded that nothing be
proposed or confirmed in Synods, but what is well known to be the mind of the
Holy Ghost in the Scripture, either by immediate Inspiration, or by Scripture
Revelation. (2.) The Authority of the Assembly as convened in the Name of
Christ, and by virtue of his Presence, whereof we have spoken before: It
pleased the Holy Ghost and us. (3.) That the things which they had determined
were necessary, that is antecedently so unto that determination; namely, the
abstaining from the use of their Liberty in things indifferent in case of
scandal. (4.) From the Duty, with respect unto the Peace and mutual Communion
of the Jewish and Gentile Churches: Doing thus, say they, ye shall do well,
which is all the Sanction of their Decree; manifesting that it was Doctrinal,
not Authoritative in way of Jurisdiction.

7. THE Doctrinal Abridgement of the Liberty of the Gentile Christians in case
of scandal, they call the imposing of no other Burden, in opposition unto what
they rejected, namely, the imposing a yoke of Ceremonies upon them, v. 10. So
as that the meaning of these Words is, That they would lay no Burden on them at
all, but only advise them unto things necessary for the avoidance of scandal.
For it is impious to imagine that the Apostles would impose any yoke, or lay
any burden on the Disciples, but only the yoke and burden of Christ, as being
contrary to their Commission, Matthew. 28.19, 20.

HENCE it will follow, That a Synod convened in the Name of Christ, by the
voluntary consent of several Churches concerned in mutual Communion, may
declare and determine of the mind of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture, and
Decree the observation of things true and necessary, because revealed and
appointed in the Scripture, which are to be received, owned and observed, on
the evidence of the mind of the Holy Ghost in them, and the Ministerial
Authority of the Synod it self.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 31. for to read do. p. 23. l. 34. r. state. p. 27 l. 2. r.
believers be p. 31. l. 11. r. Mat. 20. p. 40. l. 23. r. if so, be. p. 41. l.
25. r. we enquire not. p. 47. l. ult. r. these. p. 53. l. 6. Ephesians. 4.7. p. 71.
l. 33. r. Light. p. 72. l. 8. r. mere. p. 103 l. 33. r. Auricular. p. 112. l.
29. r. Conc. p 117. l. 9. after publicly add Read. p. 119. l. 22* r. their
mixed. p. 129. l. 5. for 18 r. 28. p. 132. l. 9. for 9. r. 3. p. 141. l. 30.
read over you p. 147. l. 25. for 39. r. 38. p. 168. l. 20. for 24. r. 21. p.
186. l. 20. r. (...). p 192. l. 14. r. will fully. p 205. l. 35 r. this. p.
228. l. 21 r. do. p. 244. l. 9. r. furnace. p 256. l. 15. r. probable.


