THE True Way TO LOYALTY A SERMON

PREACHED By JOHN OWEN, Chaplain to the Right Honorable Henry, Lord Gray of
Ruthin.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Eddowes, at the Three Chairs next Door to the
Fleece Tavern in Cornhil. MDCLXXXIV.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Jonathan Raymund, Knight, And Alderman of the City
of LONDON.
SIR,
THE great and many Obligations, which I have received from your self and good
Lady, made it easy to determine to whom I ought in Duty to direct this
Discourse, as a public Testimony of my Gratitude and Thankfulness. And truly,
I have had a very great Longing, for some time, to meet with an Opportunity of
paying my Respects to you in some eminent, visible way, to the end the World
might see and know, what a grateful Sense I have of those Favors which I am
never able to requite.

But there was another Consideration which did mightily prevail with me to
ascribe this Sermon to your Patronage; and that is, the Agreeableness of this
Subject of Loyalty with your Practice and Inclinations, who gave sufficient and
the most convincing Proofs of it in a time of Trial, when Loyalty was going
down the Wind, and when some People who had no just or material Objection
against Sir Jonathan Raymund upon account of his fitness to serve the Public,
yet reflected upon his Loyalty, as his Crime, and that which, in their Opinion,
did spoil all other Qualifications. But Sir, This has much redounded to your
Honor and Reputation among all good Men, that you did so slight the Censures
of some malevolent People, who had ill Will against you, for no other Reason,
but because you had such good will to His Majesty and his Government, as to
show your self such a brave Example of steady and unshaken Loyalty, in unstable
Times; and one that out of pure Choice would undertake to come in in the very
heat of the Day, and steer the Affairs of a great City, when the Government was
in great Distress, and pestered with powerful and implacable Enemies on all
sides. Nay, such is your Love of Majesty and Zeal for Loyalty, that you are
promoting it in all Companies wherever you come; and, as I have particularly
observed, you take singular Care to train up your Children the same way, and
encourage nothing more, both in Children and Servants, than Loyalty to the
Government. (...) such is your Temper and Humor, that you (...) not easily
admit any as your Friend or Ser^^^^ (...) who is not a true and trusty Subject.
Your House seems to me a kind of School and Seminary of Loyalty; and you have
so large a Stock and Treasure of it in your Self and Family, that you are able
to plant and furnish a whole Town.

But I fear I may be thought a Bold and Conceited Man, for venturing such a
plain and easy Discourse into the World, when there are Numbers of excellent
Discourses upon this very Subject, which are no less elegant than profitable.
But as to this, I dare undertake to vindicate my Self and Sermon too, forasmuch
as the Subject I now treat on is so great and excellent in it self, that it
needs no Flourishes or Advantages of Oratory, to recommend and set it off: And
I humbly conceive, that the plainer it is, the fitter it will be for the
plainer sort of People, which are most numerous; and if others shall blame me,
for not whetting my Style, and using that Tartness of Expression, which is now
the modish way of treating all Dissenters, and Persons that appear disaffected
to the Government; I answer, That Severity, in any sort, is much against my
Nature, and that I have studiously declined all Satyr and Invectives, for this
very Reason, Because I have known many hardened by that means, but never any
converted.

And now Sir, not to detain you any longer, I here present you with a plain
Discourse of Loyalty, and the true and only way to preserve all People in
Obedience to Authority; which as I am confident it will gain your Favor and
Protection, for the sake of its Subject, so I hope it may do some general Good
in the World in that way it is designed; which is the earnest Wish, and
principal Aim of,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, JOHN OWEN.

TITUS 3. verse. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work.


THIS Text is in the nature of a standing Monitor, and perpetual Remembrancer
to us of the Subjection and Obedience which we owe to our Superiors: And I
suppose, that the Apostle takes occasion to preach up this Doctrine of
Obedience the more, because it was commonly suggested, in the first Days and
Rise of Christianity, that it was a Religion which brought perfect Freedom and
Liberty along with it, and which tended to level all Orders and Distinctions of
Men, as, high and low, bond and free, Master and Servant, and so make every
Body alike Gentlemen; that is, it was taught, and maintained, by a vile sort of
Men, called Gnostics, That Christianity was a brave, frank, and generous
Religion, whose main Design was, to dissolve all Ties and Obligations of
Obedience, and set all People free from a state of Subjection. And therefore,
we may observe, how that the Apostle, out of an extraordinary Care to prevent
this growing Error and Mistake, which People were so prone to fall into, by
reason of a natural Love and Desire of Liberty, takes the Pains, in several of
his Epistles, to discourse this Matter plainly and fully, and more especially
in part of the fifth and sixth Chapters of the Ephesians. He there runs through
all those Bonds and Relations wherein we stand engaged to one another, either
as Husband and Wife, Master and Servant, or Father and Children; and shows, how
that the Gospel Liberty, and Privileges, do not consist in bursting these
Bonds asunder, or in untying the Knot of Government and Obedience, whereby we
are knit together in mutual Relations and Dependencies. Nor do the Doctrines
contained in the Gospel teach any thing tending to such Licentiousness and
Disorders, nor in the least prompt or encourage Men to lessen or draw off their
Obedience to their Superiors, of what Quality or Degree soever they be: but on
the contrary, it is manifest that there are no Doctrines so auspicious and
friendly to Government, that do so much preserve the Rule and Order of it, or
fasten the Bonds and Ligaments of Humane Societies in a due Subordination of
one part to another, as the Doctrines of Christianity, which would have a very
happy Influence upon Government, and the Peace and Order of the World, in case
they were as truly practiced as they are plainly taught and delivered in the
Gospel. But though Religion does so well provide for the Safety, and Peace, and
Security of the Government: yet, of late Years, Loyalty and Obedience have been
things very much out of Fashion and Request, and Doctrines which some could not
hear, or bear with any Patience. The Truth is, we have had the Unhappiness to
live in an Age, wherein Loyalty has been persecuted and punished, as the worst
of Crimes, and even now it is a hard thing to persuade some, that it is either
a Virtue, or a Duty; so that it is little esteemed of by them, and less
practiced: and therefore the Apostle, as if he did foresee how apt Men would be
to flag and faulter in this great Point of Loyalty and Obedience, commands that
the Doctrine of Obedience be preached up, and Men often be reminded of their
Duty in this Particular, saying, Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, etc.

In discoursing of which Words, I shall first set my self to prove, That
Loyalty, and Obedience to Authority, is a necessary and indispensable Duty of
Religion.

Secondly, Prescribe some Rules and Directions how to preserve and establish us
in this Loyalty and Obedience.

First then, I shall set my self to prove, that Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority, is a necessary and indispensable Duty of Religion.

There is no Duty, in all the Sacred Volume, which is more plain and legible
than this of Loyalty and Obedience to Magistrates: and yet some of late years
have been so stupid, or rather, wilfully blind, as to overlook it; and, which
is very strange, have pretended Power and Skill to discover and spell out the
Doctrine of Resistance from the Thirteenth of the Romans, which is a famous
Sermon and Discourse of Obedience; which is a plain and evident Proof how
unconscionably some People will sophisticate and pervert the plainest
Scripture, when it is to serve a turn, and in order to carry on a desperate
Design. But however, Men may industriously oppose the Truth, and hoodwink their
Understandings when they desire to delude themselves and others, yet it is as
true as Gospel, that Resistance of the Higher Powers is a damnable Sin; for,
They that resist, says St. Paul, shall receive to themselves Damnation. But I
defy the most four Patrons, and stiff Assertors of this evil Doctrine of
Resistance, to produce one Place or Sentence of Scripture, which sounds or
looks that way; whereas, I can confidently and truly affirm, that there are
several great Expressions concerning Obedience to our Superiors, and a huge
Vein of Loyalty that runs all along throughout the Holy Scriptures; some
Instances whereof are these, Touch not mine Anointed, nor do my Prophets no
harm. Fear God, Honor the King. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers; with many other Phrases of the like Importance. And it is very
observable, that there is no Duty which is pressed with more Vehemence, or the
Threatenings of a severer Penalty, or more largely insisted on than this of
Obedience and Subjection; as if it were the unum necessarium of Religion. And
we may farther take notice, That our Savior himself gives us the greatest
Example of it, in paying Tribute when he might have lawfully refused: and to
remove and prevent all Exceptions to this heavenly Doctrine of Obedience,
acquaints the Jews, that albeit they might look upon themselves as a free and
peculiar People, and stand highly upon their singular Grants and Privileges,
so as to think scorn to truckle or bend in a way of Subjection to any Power on
Earth, yet seeing it was their Fate to fall under the Power and Dominion of the
Romans, who were now uppermost, and become their Masters by absolute Conquest
and Victory, they were as things now stood with 'em to pay all dutiful Homage
and Submission to 'em, as being the Higher Powers. And St. Paul is very brisk
and positive in this matter, and commands Obedience, and to be subject for
Conscience sake, even in the Reign of Nero, who was a Monster of Wickedness and
Tyranny. So that I cannot see with what pretense of Reason or Conscience Men
can dispute Obedience to Authority, in all just and lawful Commands. And I do
much wonder how a whole Generation of Men can have the Face to pretend to
extraordinary Religion and Sanctity, and yet at the same time live in such a
known Sin and Wickedness, as is that of Disobedience to Superiors; and I much
more wonder, how they can call upon Kings and Princes to rule altogether
according to Law, when they themselves are such lawless People, and live in
such a manifest Violation; and Defiance of all those Laws of the Land, which
are made in Favor and Confirmation of Obedience. But I would that all Men
would know, and consider, That a quiet and peaceable Subjection to Authority is
one of the great Capital Laws of the Christian Religion: and therefore; for Men
to make nothing to break such a plain Fundamental Law, and disregard such an
essential Duty of Religion, is a great sign, that they make very little
Conscience of their ways, and a shrewd Argument, that they have little or no
Religion. And this is the Proposition which I promised in the first place to
make out and maintain, viz. That Loyalty, and Obedience to Authority, is a
necessary and indispensable Duty of Religion.

I shall now, in the second place, prescribe some Rules and Directions, how to
preserve and establish us in Loyalty and Obedience. Which was the thing I
principally intended.

As first, By renouncing ill Principles and Doctrines dangerous to Government.

Secondly, By suppressing our Passions and first Inclinations to Rebellion.

Thirdly, By entertaining good Thoughts and Opinions of our Superiors.

Fourthly, By avoiding evil and factious Company.

Fifthly, By ceasing to envy and mutter at our Superiors.

Sixthly, By praying for those in Authority, and the Prosperity of the
Government.

And lastly, endeavor to satisfy those Scruples and Jealousies which make
some People so restless and unquiet under the present Government. And all this,
I promise to perform with that Softness and Candor, as to give no just
Provocation or Offense to the most passionate Dissenter, if any such should be
here present.

First then, one way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority, is, by renouncing ill Principles and Doctrines dangerous to
Government.

It Is natural for Men to act according to their Principles, and follow the
tendency of those Doctrines which they have been taught, there being, in a
manner, the same Relation between Men's Principles and Practices, as between the
Cause and Effect. Now, ill Principles will, in time, turn into matter of
Conscience: but, when Men are once strongly persuaded that they ought to do a
thing, though it be never so unlawful in it self, yet they will act it with as
much Courage and Resolution, as they would in the most righteous Cause in the
World; for, one of an erroneous and misguided Conscience, will be as fierce and
active in his way as he that has the most tender and pure Conscience. So that
none are so mischievous and fatal Enemies to the Government as those that think
themselves bound, in Duty and Conscience, to subvert and overthrow it. And for
the Truth and Confirmation of this, I will appeal to our late Experience, and
the great Bustles and Stirs which some People make at present. It Is certain,
that the Government is always in danger from Men of ill Principles, because
they lie under a perpetual Temptation to rebel. Now of those many Principles
and Doctrines which have for some Years so mightily prevailed, and pestered the
World, I shall only recount two, which I think to be of as pernicious a
Consequence, and to have had as great an Influence in disturbing the
Government, as any others that can be named.

The Principles and Doctrines are these two;
That Dominion is founded in Grace; and
That it is lawful to fight for Religion.
The one takes away all consideration of Right and Justice, and the other
authorizes and sanctifies Rebellion.

And tho some among us take a peculiar Pride, and would be thought the more
religious for clamouring against the Papists, as altogether unsufferable, upon
account of their dangerous Principles and Practices; yet I would fain know,
what Difference there is between these two Opinions of the Lawfulness of
deposing Kings for Heresy, and fighting for Religion: The one is a pure
Jesuitical Principle, and the other a Fanatic. And truly, both accord and jump
together in the same Sentiments and Opinions in Opposition to Government, save
only, that the latter has the Cunningness to lick the Jesuits Principles into
another Form, and put them into a different Dress. But this has been the Trick
of all those who have had any Spleen or Design against the Government, to
disguise their Malice and wicked Intentions with the plausible and specious
Titles and Pretenses of Religion and Reformation: and when they have had a mind
to rebel, that they might put a good Face and a fair Gloss upon the matter,
they begin to find Fault with their Prince for some personal Failings or
Enormities of Life, or not being so close a Friend to Religion, nor so godly,
as they would have him to be, or else quarrel at the Administration of Public
Affairs, as wanting Conduct and Policy, and not being agreeable to Honor and
Justice. And this we have seen practiced all along, by that Party of Men who
are a continual Plague and Burden to the Government, how that they are always
picking Flaws in their Prince's Religion or Government upon the account of some
Defects in his Morals, or some Error and Miscarriage of State; and so represent
him as a Person not fit, or religious enough, to govern: for this Principle,
That Dominion is founded in Grace, lies at the bottom, and is the Foundation,
of all our Dissenters Rage and implacable Aversion to the King and his
Government. For, they looking upon themselves as the Godly Party, and that none
love or practice Religion like themselves, do thereupon think that none but the
Godly have a Right to govern: and though a Prince were as Holy as an Angel,
yet, unless he be righteous in their Eyes, and according to their Standard of
Holiness, he would be rejected as unfit to rule over 'em.

And hence it was, that in the late Times of Usurpation this sort of Men made
no Scruple to plunder and spoil others of their Estates, and seat themselves in
their Possessions, giving out to the World, That the Wicked did forfeit all
Right to their Estates, and that none could hold an Estate by any Tenure but
that of Holiness; and so made a shift, under the Pretenses of a singular Piety,
and a confident engrossing Holiness to themselves, to convert the Sinners
Lands, as they called all Rich and Loyal Persons, into the Inheritance of the
Saints, as they call themselves.

And the Truth is, wherever this Principle prevails it will mightily provoke
and stir up People against their Superiors, in case of the least Failure in
point of Morality, or that which they account Religion, and the only
Qualification for Government. And who can ever be quiet or safe in their
Possessions when a Company of enthusiastic and hotheaded People, as most of
this Persuasion are, shall take an occasion to quarrel with others for their
Impieties, and grow very angry with 'em for their Sins, to the end they might
have some color and grounds to justify their Plunder and Sequestration? And
it is certain, that those who are so mightily for putting the Government
altogether into the Hands of the Righteous, will be very apt to strike in for
their own Preferment; for, generally such kind of People are mightily conceited
of their own worth, and are always Righteous in their own Eyes. But, as this
Doctrine has done a world of mischief in causing People narrowly to inspect and
animadvert upon all the Failings and Miscarriages of their Superiors, (so
seeking Occasions against 'em) even to the despising them for some Weaknesses
and Imperfections, which are, perhaps, unavoidable in their Circumstances, and
no more than some sad Instances of humane Frailty: so likewise that other
Doctrine of the Lawfulness of fighting for Religion, has equalled the former in
its mischievous Effects. And tho some who have dipped their Hands in Royal and
Innocent Blood, and have been exercised in the Slaughter of the Righteous, have
called it fighting the Lord's Battles, and assumed to themselves the Name of
strict Professors and Reformers of Religion; yet it is certain, that such as are
so ready to fight for Religion, and promote it by the Sword, have no Religion
at all. For, Religion is a peaceable, quiet thing, and Fighting and Quarrels
are as contrary to it, as are the most dissonant things in Nature; as are the
Lamb and the Wolf, the soft Airs of Music, and that raging, merciless Element
the Ocean.

And I am verily persuaded, that these Principles and Doctrines which I have
now mentioned, and the like to them, which I have no time to recite or display
in their proper Colors, have been the Occasion of vast Troubles and
Distractions in this Kingdom.

And doubtless, this very Doctrine of Resistance and opposing Princes, in case
we do not like their Religion, which was so maliciously intended, and so boldly
maintained by a late Mercenary Pen, in a Book entitled, The Life of Julian the
Apostate, has tended very much to dissettle some in their Loyalty, and
confirmed others in their Rebellious Principles. And perhaps the Arguments
which were there used to confirm and propagate that wicked Position, might very
much heat and spur on that unhappy Gentleman the late Lord Russel, to those
Consults and Debates which cost him his precious Life, and brought him to such
an inglorious end. And besides all this, the great Danger is, That these
turbulent and ill Principles, may, like Errors, not dye with their Authors, but
convey themselves to Posterity: and we have too plain a Demonstration in this
Age, that Rebellion, as well as some natural Diseases, runs in a Blood, and
propagates it self from one Generation to another. The Way then to be rooted
and grounded in Loyalty, is, to have our Minds seasoned with sound, wholesome,
and Loyal Principles; for, such as are our Principles, such also will be our
Practices: and no Man that has imbibed ill Principles, or gives ear to
treasonable Doctrines, will ever make a good Christian or a good Subject. And
this is one way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority; viz. By renouncing ill Principles and Doctrines dangerous to
Government.

Secondly, Another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty and Obedience,
is, by suppressing our Passions and first Inclinations to Rebellion.

When we once deliver up our selves to the Sway and Predominancy of our unruly
Passions and Affections, there is no other likelihood but that the Government
should suffer, and be molested by us: for, most certainly, the great Blustrings
and Storms, both in Church and State, arise from our swelling and unmortified
Passions of Ambition, Malice, Revenge, and the like.

It Is these which imbitter and fire our Spirits against one another, and by
Continuance boil up into Rage and Fury, and so help to put the whole Nation
into a Flame. It Is these which, like Gunpowder, tear up the Foundations of
Peace and Government; and if they be not timely checked and curbed some way or
other, will hurl all into Confusion, and unhinge the World. In a word, It Is
these which first raise a Tumult within our own Breast, and then fly and break
out into public Mischiefs and Disorders; and can there be any Peace and
Quietness as long as these reign and domineer? But then as to our bad
Inclinations, they must be checked and overruled equally with our Passions;
and we must be sure to crush both in their first Risings and Motions against
the Government: It Is true, that bad Inclinations do not presently deprave the
Mind, but corrupt and taint it by degrees. They lie hovering over the Soul, and
play Fast and Loose about it, till by length of time they come to be fixed and
radicated, and grow into Temper and Constitution. Rebellion, like all other
Wickedness, has it is Rise and Beginnings, its several Steps and Stages, and
gradual Progressions, to open Violence and Hostility: for, as nemo repent fit
turpissimus, no Man grows desperately wicked on the sudden, so no Man turns a
Rebel without some pausing and Consideration, without some previous discontents
and disaffections to the Government. The Seeds of Sedition must have some time
to settle in before they will spring up into actual Mischief and Danger; but,
except they are nip'd in the very Bud, they will insensibly vitiate the Heart
and Affections, and breed in us a desperate and plaguey Itch of Rebellion. And I
do really believe, that some Persons who have appeared in actual Rebellion
against their Prince, did at first as little dream they should be guilty of any
such thing, as Hazael, when it was first suggested to him that he should make
such Havoc and a bloody Slaughter in Israel; saying, with great Abhorrence and
Detestation, What, is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great thing!
But yet, by giving way to bad Inclinations, and the evil Instigation of others,
have been toled on actually to engage in a most horrid and bloody Rebellion.
The Truth is, Men can scarce apprehend what will be the Issue and final Result
of their Passions and bad Inclinations, when they first consent to 'em: they
don't know whither they will lead 'em, or into what furious and unlawful
Actions they may hurry and transport 'em, or to what a sad and miserable end
they may bring 'em in process of Time; for all Passions and bad Inclinations do
improve and gather Strength by Indulgence; if they continue for any while, they
soak into Men's Natures, and strangely pervert the very Temper and Dispositions
of their Minds: so that by continual yielding and giving way to these
boisterous Passions of Spite, Malice, and Revenge, Men at length come to be
fierce, turbulent, and unruly, that there is no keeping 'em within Compass, or
reducing them to a quiet, peaceable, and good Behavior. And therefore it is
sound and wholesome Advice to resist the Beginnings of Evil, whether of Body or
Mind; for just as an ill Wound which may soon be cured by a timely Care and
Application of proper and fitting Remedies, but if long neglected will ranckle
and fester into an incurable Gangreen; so our turbulent Passions and evil
Inclinations may easily be suppressed, by striving against 'em at first: but if
they are let alone to go on and prosper, they will then prove fatal to
Government, and swell into the most outrageous Treason and Rebellion. And this
is another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority; viz. By suppressing our Passions and first Inclinations to Rebellion.

Thirdly, Another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority, is, by entertaining good Thoughts and Opinions of our Superiors.

And this is a very proper Method and Means to secure our Obedience to
Government; forasmuch as there can be no Certainty or Security of Obedience
unless Men's Hearts are right and sincere toward their Governors.

It is always seen, that where Men have ill Thoughts or Opinions of any Person,
they can never heartily love or be truly reconciled to him, nor yet think well
of any of his Actions: they may indeed make a fair show, and carry it smoothly
to outward Appearance, but there can never be any real or sincere Friendship.
And it is the very same in case of Obedience to Superiors; for, where Subjects
have no honorable Thoughts or venerable Opinion of their Prince, they can then
never obey him out of any Principle of Love, but purely as Slaves, out of
Constraint and fear of Punishment. Now where Obedience is the Result of such a
slavish Fear, it will never last longer than till Men are afraid to rebel, and
they will fear no longer when they once get an Opportunity and Power to rebel:
so that that Obedience which is altogether grounded and established upon Fear,
is of a most uncertain Date and Tenure; and the Government which so depends can
never be safe or happy for the Prince. And therefore, if we desire to approve
our selves good and obedient Subjects, we must ground our Obedience in hearty
Love and Affections to our Prince; and this we can never do, unless we resolve
to chide away and banish far from us all unkind and uncharitable Thoughts and
Suspicions of our Prince, either as touching his Religion or his Government:
for if a Prince be never so wise and religious, yet if we are resolved not to
think him so, this ill Nature and morose Temper of ours will make us extremely
censorious, and to put an ill Construction upon all his Actions and
Proceedings. Tho a Prince should deserve never so well of his Subjects by his
prudent and kind Government, as certainly our King is the most meritorious
Prince in the World in both Respects; who if he had no other divine Qualities
but his vast Wisdom and Clemency, is the fittest Person on Earth to be God's
Vicegerent. I say, should a Prince be never so wise and gracious, yet if
Subjects will be peevish and cross-grained, and have an utter Aversion and
Antipathy to his Government, it is impossible they should obey him from the
Heart, when let him do the best he can he shall never please 'em. And therefore
Solomon takes the best way to secure our Love and Obedience to our Superiors,
when he forbids us to curse the King even in our Thoughts. He knew very well,
that there is no preserving Majesty from Contempt unless we retain a secret
Reverence for him in our Hearts; for evil Thoughts are next door to evil
Practices, and a fair Introduction to Rebellion. He was sensible, That nothing
could so facilitate and secure Obedience to Governors, as a real Love and
Liking to 'em, and an honoring 'em from the very bottom of our Souls. We know
that Love always follows Liking; and where there is not a real Liking there can
never be a true and hearty Love; and it is impossible for a People to obey
their Prince as they ought to do when they have no good Opinion or Conceit of
him: and therefore we should labor to possess our Minds and Hearts with good
Thoughts and candid Opinions of our Rulers and Governors, which will dispose
us to put the best and fairest Construction upon all their Actions: and then
will our Obedience come so freely and sweetly from us, that we shall find
Pleasure in obeying, as well as our King in governing. And this is another way
to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to Authority; viz. By
entertaining good Thoughts and Opinions of our Superiors.

Fourthly, Another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience
to Authority, is, By avoiding Evil and Factious Company.

I need not tell you what Prejudice or Advantages we are capable of receiving
from Company, the good or evil Conversation of others, what Power or Influence
it has to improve Men in Virtue or Vice: but generally, bad Company alters Men
soonest, and most, and is most infectious, which may be ascribed to our
stronger natural Propensions to Evil, and our greater Susceptibleness of it,
than what is really good and virtuous. But so it is ever known to be, that Men,
by keeping Company, contract a likeness of Temper and Disposition with those
with whom they usually and frequently converse, and make Friendship; with the
froward Men will grow froward, with the Meek they will grow meek; and therefore
Solomon advises, not to keep Company with an angry Man: which He might do upon
a double account, either as that might prove fatal and dangerous to his Person,
or else infect his Mind with the same Passion. And I am apt to believe, that
some honest and well-meaning Men, who at first detested all Practices against
the Government, have been corrupted, and drawn into Plots and treasonable
Designs purely by keeping Company with such as were factious, and disaffected
to the Government. It Is a hard matter for him that is a Companion of base
People, to preserve his Integrity or escape Defilement; and one may shrewdly
guess at the Temper and Principles of a Man by the Company he keeps. It Is
certain, that whilst Men indulge themselves the Liberty of tatling about the
Government, and against it, in Seditious Clubs and Conventicles, they will, by
continual Discourses of this nature, envenome their Spirits, and come to steep
their Language in the Gall of Bitterness: for as it is observed, that the
frequent talking of some Vices infects the Fancy and vitiates the Mind, and so
procreates a Love and a Longing to them; so it is often seen, that by
treasonable Talk Men slide and fall into actual Rebellion; for from evil
Discourses to evil Actions, is a natural Progression. And therefore Solomon
gives very proper Advice for the preventing all Treasonable Practices, when he
says, Prove. 24.21. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them which are given to change: that is, Do not associate and hold
Correspondency with Men of roving Heads and unsettled Minds, who are governed
by no steady good Principle, but are restless and uneasy under all
Governments. No Body knows, no not themselves, what will please 'em: they are
dissatisfied with any Government long, and affect Novelty and Change in
Government, as well as in other things: with such Persons hold no Commerce at
all, have no Dealings with 'em, nor interest your self in their Designs and
Projects: when you chance to meet with Persons so very whimsical, and of such
fickle and unstable Minds, be sure you contract no Friendship with 'em, but
decline their Society, as what will prove dangerous to your self, as well as
the Government. See then that you carefully and studiously avoid the Company of
such People as are always contriving, and hankering after new Forms and Models
of Government, and meddle not with them which are given to change. And this is
another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority; viz. By avoiding factious and pestilent Company.

Fifthly, Another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority, is, By ceasing to envy and mutter at our Superiors.

Could we who are placed in a remote and lower Sphere, be sensible of the Cares
and Encumbrances of a Crown, we should, I persuade my self, be so far from
envying the Glory of Princes, that we should heartily pity and lament their
Condition. Did we but consider their many thoughtful and busy Hours, how
watchful they are for our Good, when perhaps we are sleeping and snoring in our
Beds; how they are bandying of things and racking their Brains in deep Consults
and Debates for the public Welfare, at such times as our Thoughts and Minds
are at perfect Ease and Rest; how they have their Hands and Heads full too,
when we have little or nothing at all to busy and disturb us, and how
difficult and laborious a Province it is to rule and govern. Did we thus
consider the great Cares and Difficulties of Government, certainly it would
mightily abate and take off our Spleen and Envy against our Superiors; it
would make us more tender of adding any greater Load of Troubles to that mighty
weight of Business which they already sustain. Kings and Princes have Cares
enough (God help 'em) in the very best Juncture of Affairs, when their
Government is most easy and safe, when all things go on in a due and orderly
Course; yet they find work enough to preserve Peace and Quietness in their
Kingdoms, and need not be put to the Trouble of quelling Riots, or appeasing
the Rage and Fury of a factious Multitude: they find enough to do to defend us
from our Enemies abroad, to watch their Motions, and dive into their Policies;
so that it is, in my Mind, great Cruelty and Baseness to force them upon the
same Guard and Watchfulness at home, by our intestine Broils and Dissentions,
and making continual Stirs and Commotions in the State.

In the Name of God, what is it that we the People of this Nation would have,
or can reasonably expect or desire to enjoy, more than now we do? What is it
that we so much grumble and are discontented at? Are we troubled that our
Rulers are studying and projecting continually for our Good and the Safety of
the Public? Are we troubled that we have such excellent Laws to protect and
defend us, and that Justice is administered with so much Temper and Moderation?
Are we troubled that our Superiors will take upon 'em the Pains and Trouble to
govern us who cannot govern our selves? Or, Are we troubled that our Religion
prospers, and grows every day more and more victorious over those who have been
given up to strong Errors and Delusions. Do any of these things trouble us? If
they do not, then it is plain that we are arrant Knaves, and resolve to quarrel
and find fault out of pure Crossness, and design to vex the Government. But if
they do trouble us, then we deserve to be troubled another way for being such
Fools as not to understand our own Interest and Advantage; then nothing can
prevent our troubling our selves, or proving troublesome to Authority, but only
the whetting the Sword of Justice, and making us feel the Power of the public
Rods and Axes: and then we shall have something to trouble us indeed. But if we
can find no just Matter or Occasion of Offense upon any of the former Accounts,
why then do we not humbly acquiesce in the Determinations of our Superiors,
and yield up a ready and quiet Obedience to all the lawful Commands and
Injunctions of Authority?

If some People, who live under other Governments where the Prince's Will is an
absolute Law, and who many times requires Obedience as well without Reason as
without Law; I say, if these People should understand the great Liberty and
Immunities of the Subjects of this Realm, and how sweetly and bravely we live,
even more like Princes than Subjects, and how that every one may live as he
lists, and serve God as much as he pleases, if he do either as he ought and
should, they would stand amazed at our Happiness, and wonder what ails the
People of England that they are no quieter, nor better satisfied, under such a
gentle and fine tempered Government. For my own part, I must needs say, that I
am often, in my private Musings and Retirements from the World, lifting up my
Heart and Hands to Heaven, humbly adoring the great Mercy and Goodness of
Almighty God, in giving me my Lot and Station under such an equal and
favorable Government, where all People may be as happy as they can wish or
desire, and are debarred the Liberty of nothing but making themselves and
others unhappy by their foolish Divisions. And truly, if we grumble and mutter
now, we grumble and mutter for we know not what: and I wish, with all my Heart,
that we live not to see those Times wherein we may have Reason to complain, and
smart soundly for our present Petulancy and Wantonness.

Alas, poor foolish People that we are! We do not, we will not, understand our
own Happiness! And what an easy thing it is to obey, in comparison of what it
is to govern: I see we are not to be persuaded or convinced of the great
Privileges and Comforts of a private Life, and how that Subjects enjoy more
Ease and Quietness in one Day, than perhaps their Rulers and Governors do all
the Days of their Lives: but, as far as we can ghess by the Troubles and Cares
belonging to the Rule and Government of a private Family, it is no such sweet
and pleasant thing to govern, as some People may imagine. A Crown, indeed, is a
glorious Thing to behold, and People do naturally stare and gaze upon its
outward Pomp and Splendor; but they have not the Sagacity to discern with what
Cares and Thorns this glittering thing is stuffed and lined within.

I know not what others may think, but it was ever my Opinion, since I could
make any true Judgment of things, that we are infinitely beholding to our
Rulers for the Pains and Care they are pleased to undergo in managing the
Public Concerns of a whole Nation, which redounds so much to every individual
Man's Interest and Advantage: and, I think we can never thoroughly recompense or
pay a sufficient Tribute of Thankfulness and Obedience to our Governors for
their accepting the Charge and Trouble of so vast a Conduct. And therefore, is
it not very ill done of some, and an unpardonable Crime in those that make it
their Business out of the Malignity of their Spirits against the Government, to
sow the Seeds of Discord and Faction, to cherish private Animosities and
Discontents among People of different Persuasions, to the end they might grieve
Majesty and make more Work for their Superiors; and, which is more, have
labored, with all their might and main, to misrepresent and bespatter the King
and his Government by infamous Libels, and false, scandalous Stories, thinking,
by this means, to make Majesty more uneasy in his Throne, and to render both
Him and his Government universally odious? Whereas it is the Duty, and will be
the Practice, of every good Subject, to endeavor by a ready and quiet
Obedience, and a peaceable Behavior, to alleviate and sweeten those Cares and
Troubles which are so essential to Government. And this is another way to
preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to Authority; viz. By
ceasing to envy and mutter at our Superiors.

Sixthly, and lastly, Another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and
Obedience to Authority, is, by Praying for those in Authority, and the
Prosperity of the Government.

Government is one of the greatest Blessings that can be to the World; a prime
Instrument of humane Felicity, without which, Men would live and act like
Salvages, and worry one another like so many Beasts of Prey: without Government
the World would be a miserable and a dangerous place to live in, and all things
would run into the greatest Disorder and Confusion. It Is from the Benefit and
Protection of the Laws that all Societies keep and maintain their Rights and
Privileges, that Men have the Liberty and Freedom to get Estates, and to enjoy
'em quietly and peaceably when they have done. It Is by the Force and Power of
Laws that we have our Lives and Liberties guarded from continual Violence and
Invasion; and lastly, It Is Government that secures us in the exercise of our
Religion, and befriends us with so much Time, and Leisure, and Opportunities
for Devotion: and therefore, considering all these happy Effects of Government,
we ought to pray, in point of Interest, for the Prosperity of Kings, and the
good Success of their Government, that under them we may live peaceable and
quiet Lives, in all Godliness and Honesty. And though the Primitive Christians
had the Misfortune to be informed against, by some of their malicious and
implacable Adversaries, as Persons dangerous to the Government, and that their
very Religion and Principles naturally led and prompted 'em to Treason and
Rebellion against the State; yet this is known to be a false and malicious Lie,
and that none were greater Friends to the Government than they, tho the
Government was an utter Enemy to them: which is confirmed by their quiet and
peaceable Behavior under the Government, and their assiduous and fervent
Prayers for the Prosperity of the Empire under which they lived. Which stand
upon Record in the Writings of several of the Fathers, and have of late been
transcribed and produced by several Learned Men, in Testimony of their Loyalty,
and to shame and reproach the Disloyalty of some Christians in these days if
they had any Shame in 'em.

We must all needs know and confess, That Government was ordained and
instituted for the Good of the World; and the better that succeeds and
prospers, the better it will be for us. And if some cannot be brought to pray
for its Prosperity, it is a Sign, that they do not regard their own private
Interest and Welfare which are involved in the Public, or else that they have
no kindness for their Superiors or their Fellow Subjects, in wishing ill to
the Government, that so those that sit at the Helm may appear odious to the
People: or else, rather than not to be gratified in their private Piques and
Animosities against the Government, care not if the whole Kingdom be ruined.

But, if some Men that are Lovers of Anarchy and Confusion, will not be
persuaded that Government is useful and profitable, I could almost wish that
such People (if others that are wiser and better could be safe) might for some
while have their own choice, and try the Experiment of such Dissolution and
Disorders; or others that declare for Government, but are mightily set against
that kind of Government which is Monarchical and which it is our Happiness to
enjoy, shall hereupon oppose it, or not pray for the Prosperity and Continuance
of the present Government, that they also might have their own Wishes and
Hearts desire in suffering the Tyranny and Distraction of a Commonwealth, if
that were possible, without a real Change of that happy and blessed Government
which we are now under. But it is a vain and fruitless Attempt for a man of my
small Moment in the World, to dispute with such Persons about the Duty and
Obligation of praying for our Governors and Government, when it is evident,
that they despise an Apostolical Rule whereby we are commanded to pray for
Kings and all in Authority over us. And truly, when it is so that People shall
think much to pray for their Rulers, they will as certainly think much to obey
'em; or, where they shall only pray formally and to avoid the Suspicion of
Disloyalty, they had even as good not pray at all, for God accepts not of the
Prayers of such insincere and hollow-hearted Hypocrites, neither will the
Government thrive one Jot the better for 'em. Yet I doubt not but God has
hitherto preserved our Gracious Sovereign and his Government from the sundry
Attempts and nefarious Designs of the Sons of Violence, as the Fruit and
Blessing of the numerous fervent Prayers of pious and good Men, which have been
incessantly offered up to Heaven for the Conservation of both. And this is
another way to preserve and establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to
Authority; viz. By praying for those in Authority, and the Prosperity of the
Government.

Having now prescribed several Rules and Directions how to preserve and
establish us in Loyalty, and Obedience to Authority, I shall now, in the last
place, proceed to satisfy those Scruples and Jealousies which make some People
so restless and unquiet under the present Government.

Now, these Fears and Jealousies must be grounded either upon a Suspicion of
their Prince's Firmness and Constancy to the Protestant Religion, or else upon
a Suspicion of a Change of Government; upon both which Accounts, I shall show
Men's Fears and Jealousies to be altogether groundless and unreasonable.

First, If these Fears are grounded upon a Suspicion of their Prince's Firmness
and Constancy to the Protestant Religion, (I speak out what others by their
Whispers and Muttrings have given us too much Reason to believe they suspect
and think) they are then altogether groundless and unreasonable. For it is
highly improbable that a Prince should waver in his Religion, or incline to
part with it in his Prosperity, when he could not be overcome to change it in
the time of his Adversity, and when some who went under the Name of strict
Professors and Protestants had done enough, by their cruel and unchristian
Practices toward him, to put him out of Conceit with it. But it is well known,
that during the Time of his Majesty's Exile and Banishment, when he was under
great Temptations to change his Principles, both from the Spite and Malice of
his Subjects at home, and the Kindness and Friendship which was proffered him
abroad, that notwithstanding these great Provocations on the one Hand, and as
great Allurements on the other, still he had the Courage and Bravery to
preserve his Faith and Conscience inviolable. And when his Religion was brought
to the Test and Trial, it is manifest, That the Impressions of Religion were so
strong and well-grounded in him, that no power of Art, or force of Disputation,
could alter or control 'em, not the greatest Subtilty and cunning Sophistry of
the Jesuits, could win upon him, or so far insinuate any contrary Persuasion
into his Mind, as in the least to stagger him in his Faith: but he continued
firm and steadfast to his first Principles, and came off a brave, stout
Confessor, and Defender of that Faith and Religion for which his Father died a
Glorious Martyr. So that Men's Fears of Popery coming in, upon a Suspicion of
their Prince's Firmness and Constancy to the Protestant Religion, is (to say no
worse) very unkind and uncharitable, and a Diminution to that Glory he did
himself and the Protestant Religion, when he stood out and maintained his
Ground under so great a Trial of Afflictions and Temptations too.

Secondly, Men's Fears of Popery coming in, upon a Suspicion of a Change of
Government, are highly absurd and unreasonable.

The Protestant Religion is now of long Continuance among us, and is so united
and incorporated into the Government of the State, that Church and State must
live and fall together. And such was the Care and Policy of those who attempted
the first Reformation, that they so ordered the matter, as to make it Men's
temporal Interest to preserve and stand up for the Protestant Religion, by
alienating the Church Lands and Revenues into the Hands of the Laity; so that
now most of the best and greatest Estates in England consist and lie chiefly in
those Lands which formerly belonged wholly and entirely to the Church. So that
it is against one of the most common and received Maxims, which is, That Men
will be of that Religion which is most for their present Interest, to think
that ever the People of this Nation will desire or consent to a Change of
Government, when by that means they will hazard their Estates, and be in danger
of losing all. If, indeed, the coming in of Popery would be for Men's Advantage,
and add to their Revenues, for ought I know, vast Numbers would be tempted to
embrace it. But, when it will so endanger their Fortunes, if not beggar 'em
quite, I can never believe, or imagine, That the People of this Nation, who
have either Lands or Brains, will change or turn to Popery, whatever they may
turn to else. Besides, the Protestant Religion, as I hinted before, is now of a
considerable Standing among us, and has had time to settle, which it had not
when People flew off from it in Queen Mary's Days. Then the Reformation was in
a great measure imperfect, and but in its Infancy, and it was impossible it
should be confirmed and ratified when People had only some small Taste and
Relish of it, as now it is, by so many repeated Laws in the Successions of
several Princes; and therefore it was no wonder that People were so soon
persuaded to turn off a new Religion, and revert to the old one, But now that
we are grown better acquainted with the Protestant Religion, and are so well
convinced of its great Excellency and Reasonableness, in comparison of the
Romish, it will be a hard thing to introduce Popery at this time of Day;
because, such is the Genius of this Nation, That when they take to a thing,
especially to Religion, they will not leave or part with it, if they can
possibly help it. and so it is that the Protestant Religion has had the good
Fortune to be most agreeable to their Minds and Persuasions, of any Religion in
the World: and therefore, considering it is their great Diana, none that knows
the English Zeal and Resolution, in matters of Religion, will be so hardy or
foolish as to attempt to change or ravish it from 'em. And besides this, before
there can be a Change of Government, which must be effected by a Change of
Religion, there must be such a repealing of Laws, and Alteration of Properties,
and such vast Changes, as are not to be expected in the Revolutions of an Age:
so that although some Men may fear the coming in of Popery, yet if it be
considered what a great and strange Alteration there must be, both in the
Constitutions of the Nation, and the very Temper of the People, in all humane
Probability, it can never prevail in our days. And, tho some People are
possessed with such mighty Fears of Popery, and its prevailing among us, yet,
if I may speak my Mind freely, and without Offense, I see more Reason to fear,
that, according to the Atheism and Wickedness of the Times, we shall come
shortly to be of no Religion at all.

Fear is one of the most boundless and ranging Passions belonging to Humane
Nature, and which prevails more or less according to the Variety and Difference
of Men's Tempers and Constitutions; but, where it meets with a Person whose
Faculty of Imagination is quicker and more operative than ordinary, there it
swells and multiplies, even to the transforming every weak and idle Fancy into
a prodigious Monster and Bugbear. And therefore it is observed, That those who
appear so mightily afraid of the Introduction of Popery among us, are a sort of
People that are naturally suspicious and jealous of every thing, in whom Fear
is the most prevailing and governing Passion: and therefore, as to the Business
of Popery, if People will indulge their Fears and Jealousies, it is certain they
may as much fear a thing that will never come as that which may come: so that
there is no such way to cure some Peoples desperate. Fears of Popery, as to
advise them to consult their Reason touching the Probability of Events, more
than their Passions, which are often very vain and extravagant.

And now, though I am convinced I have done my Duty both to God and Man, in
preaching upon this necessary and material Subject of Loyalty and Obedience,
yet I fancy that some People may object against this Discourse, for no other
Reason, but because it is a Sermon of that Nature and Strain; and perhaps,
judge it unreasonable and improper for such an Auditory, where none but Loyal
and conformable Persons are supposed to be. This, indeed, is such a trifling
and silly Cavil, that I could hardly believe any such thing, but that I know it
to be true, for People to cry out, that a Sermon is unseasonable and improper,
only because they have no mind to hear of a Duty which they have no Mind to
practice. And it is certain, that those that so flounce and carp at a Discourse
of Loyalty, and Obedience to Authority, must have a sore place somewhere, some
little Ailing and Infirmity of Mind and Conscience, as to the Point of Loyalty,
which they cannot endure should be touched or rubbed up. But I am strongly of
Opinion, that no Man will ever grumble to hear handsomely of a thing he loves:
and therefore I conclude, that whoever is offended at a Sermon of Loyalty and
Obedience, can have no real Love or Liking to the thing it self.

But in Answer to this slight and poor Cavil, I say this, That I think a Sermon
of Loyalty to be always seasonable, and that Ministers are as much bound to
preach it up as any other necessary Duty of Religion, whether People will hear,
or whether they will forbear. And the same Objection lies against all Sermons
as well as this of Loyalty: for if we preach nothing but what is new, and not
tell People of their Duty because they pretend to know it already, then all
preaching will soon be at an end. But we think it, as the Apostle did, meet and
necessary, to put People in Mind of Loyalty and Obedience, for the same reason
that we put 'em in mind of all other Duties; viz. not because they don't know
'em, but because they will not practice what they know. And moreover, I think
that a Sermon of Loyalty is more especially in season at this time, considering
how the World now goes, and how much the Government is threatened by a sort of
Factious and ungovernable Men. And I think none of us can be too perfect in
this Lesson of Obedience; and perhaps some People may not be so perfect as they
take themselves to be; and it is a Sign that they need to be taught Loyalty,
when they cannot endure to hear of it, and appear so very uneasy and nettled
at a Discourse that tends that way. But let not such Persons flatter themselves
with an Opinion of their great Loyalty, when they resent it so very ill to be
told of it; for, this Impatience and Dislike must needs proceed from
Lukewarmness, and a very cold and imperfect Love of Obedience to Authority.
Indeed, according to some Men's bitter way of arguing, no Subject can be very
pleasing; and perhaps it may occasion some People to fly quite off from their
Duty which they had but little mind to before. And therefore, I have all along
been careful not to offend any through hot and fiery Language, or provoke 'em
by hard Names and odious Appellatives, which I think mighty unbecoming this
Sacred Place, where a Decency ought to be observed in our Words as well as
Actions. Herein, then, do I comfort my self, that I have handled this Doctrine
of Obedience with those gentle, but solid Arguments, that I presume the most
violent Fanatic cannot justly quarrel at 'em, and I defy the wisest and most
conceited Fanatic of 'em all, either to answer or confute 'em.

FINIS.

