THE Reason of Faith. OR AN Answer unto that Enquiry, Wherefore we believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God. WITH The Causes and Nature of that Faith
wherewith we do so. WHEREIN The Grounds whereon the Holy Scripture is believed
to be the Word of God with Faith Divine and Supernatural, are declared and
vindicated.

By JOHN OWEN, D. D.

If they hear not Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead, Luke 16. 51. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel
Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultry, near Cornhill. 1677.

TO THE READER.
HAving added a brief Account of the Design, Order, and Method of the ensuing
Discourse in an Appendix at the Close of it; I shall not here detain the Reader
with the Proposal of them. Yet some few things remain, which I judge it
necessary to mind him of. Be he who he will, I am sure we shall not differ
about the weight of the Argument in hand; for whether it be the Truth we
contend for, or otherwise, yet it will not be denied, but that the
Determination of it, and the settling of the minds of Men about it, are of the
highest concernment unto them. But whereas so much has been written of late by
others on this Subject, any further Debate of it may seem either needless or
unseasonable. Something therefore may be spoken to evidence that the Reader is
not imposed on by that, which may absolutely fall under either of those
Characters. Had the End in and by these Discourses been effectually
accomplished, it had been altogether useless to renew an endeavor unto the
same purpose. But whereas an Opposition unto the Scripture, and the Grounds
whereon we believe it to be a Divine Revelation, is still openly continued
amongst us; a continuation of the Defense of the one and the other cannot
reasonably be judged either needless or unseasonable. Besides, most of the
Discourses published of late on this Subject have had their peculiar Designs,
wherein that here tendered is not expressly engaged. For some of them do
principally aim to prove, that we have sufficient Grounds to believe the
Scripture, without any recourse unto, or reliance upon the Authoritative
Proposal of the Church of Rome; which they have sufficiently evinced beyond any
possibility of rational Contradiction from their Adversaries. Others have
pleaded and vindicated those rational Considerations, whereby our Assent unto
the Divine Original of it, is fortified and confirmed against the Exceptions
and Objections of such whose Love of Sin, and Resolutions to live therein,
tempts them to seek for shelter in an Atheistical Contempt of the Authority of
God, evidencing it self therein. But as neither of these are utterly neglected
in the ensuing Discourse, so the peculiar Design of it is of another nature.
For the Inquiries managed therein, namely, what is the Obligation upon us to
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God? what are the Causes, and what is
the Nature of that Faith whereby we do so? what it rests on, and is resolved
into, so as to become a Divine and Acceptable Duty? do respect the Consciences
of Men immediately, and the Way whereby they may come to Rest and Assurance in
Believing. Whereas therefore it is evident, that may are often shaken in their
Minds, with-those Atheistical Objections against the Divine Original and
Authority of the Scripture, which they frequently meet (...); that many know
not how to extricate themselves from the ensnaring Questions that they are
often attaqued withal about them; not for want of a due Assent unto them, but
of a right Understanding what is the true and formal Reason of that Assent;
what is the firm Basis and Foundation that it rests upon; what Answer they may
directly and peremptotily give unto that Enquiry, Wherefore do you believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God? I have endeavored to give them those
Directions herein, that upon a due Examination they will find compliant with
the Scripture it self, right Reason, and their own Experience. I am not
therefore altogether without hopes that this small Discourse may have its use,
and be given out in its proper season. Moreover, I think it necessary to
acquaint the Reader, that as I have allowed all the Arguments pleaded by others
to prove the Divine Authority of the Scripture, their proper place, and force;
so where I differ in the Explication of any thing belonging unto this Subject
from the Conceptions of other Men, I have heartily examined such Opinions, and
the Arguments wherewith they are confirmed, without straining the Words,
cavilling at the Expressions, or reflections on the Persons of any of the
Authors of them. And whereas I have my self been otherwise dealt withal by
many, and know not how soon I may be so again, I do hereby free the Persons of
such Humors and Inclinations from all fear of any Reply from me, or the least
notice of what they shall be pleased to write or say. Such kind of Writings are
of the same consideration with me, as those multiplied false Reports which some
have raised concerning me, the most of them so ridiculous and foolish, so alien
from my Principles, Practice, and Course of life, as I can not but wonder how
any Persons pretending to Gravity and Sobriety, are not sensible how their
Credulity and Inclinations are abused in the hearing and repetition of them.
The Occasion of this Discourse is that which in the last Place I shall acquaint
the Reader withal. About three years since I published a Book about the
Dispensation and Operations of the Spirit of God. That Book was one Part only
of what I designed on that Subject. The Consideration of the Work of the Holy
Spirit, as the Spirit of Illumination, of Supplication, of Consolation, and as
the Immediate Author of all Spiritual Offices, and Gifts extraordinary and
ordinary, is designed unto the second Part of it. Hereof this ensuing Discourse
is concerning one Part of his Work, as a Spirit of Illumination, which upon the
earnest Requests of some acquainted with the Nature and Substance of it, I have
suffered to come out by it self, that it might be of the more common use, and
more easily obtained.

May, 11th. 1677.
The Reason of Faith. OR The Grounds whereon the Scripture is believed to be
the Word of God with Faith Divine and Supernatural.
THe principal design of that Discourse, whereof the ensuing Treatise is a
part, is to declare the Work of the Holy Ghost in the Illumination of the minds
of Men. For this Work is particularly and eminently ascribed unto him; or the
Efficacy of the Grace of God by him dispensed, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Heb. 6. 4.
Luke 2. 32. Acts 13. 47. Chap. 24. 45. Chap. 26. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
The objective Cause and outward Means of it, are the Subjects at present
designed unto Consideration. And it will issue in these two Enquiries.

1. On what Grounds, or for what Reason, we do believe the Scripture to be the
Word of God with Faith Divine and Supernatural, as it is required of us in a
way of Duty.

2. How or by what means we may come to understand aright the Mind of God in
the Scripture, or the Revelations that are made unto us of his Mind and Will
therein.

For by Illumination in general, as it denotes an Effect wrought in the minds
of Men, I understand that Supernatural Knowledge that any Man has, or may have
of the Mind and Will of God, as revealed unto him by Supernatural Means, for
the Law of his Faith, Life, and Obedience. And this so far as it is comprised
in the first of these Inquiries, is that, whose Declaration we at present
design, reserving the latter unto a distinct Discourse by it self also. Unto
the former some things may be premised.

First, Supernatural Revelation is the only Objective cause and means of
Supernatural Illumination. These things are commensurate. There is a natural
knowledge of Supernatural things, and that both Theoretical, and Practical, Romans
1. 19. Chap. 2. 14, 15. And there may be a Supernatural knowledge of Natural
things, 1 Kings 4. 31, 32, 33, 34. Exodus 31. 3, 4, 5, 6. But unto this
supernatural Illumination, it is required, both that its Object be things only
supernaturally revealed, or as supernaturally revealed, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. and
that it be wrought in us by a supernatural Efficiency, or the immediate
Efficacy of the Spirit of God, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19. 2 Cor. 4. 6. This David
prays for, Psalm. 119. 18. (...) Reveal, or Uncover mine eyes, bring light and
spiritual understanding into my mind, that I may behold ((...), with open face,
or as in the Syriack (...), with a revealed, or uncovered face, the vail being
taken away, 2 Cor. 3. 18.) Wondrous things out of thy Law. The Light he prayed
for within, did merely respect the Doctrine of the Law without. This the
Apostle fully declares; Heb. 1. 1, 2. The various Supernatural Revelations that
God has made of himself, his Mind and Will from first to last, are the sole
and adequate Object of Supernatural Illumination.

Secondly, This Divine external Revelation, was originally by various ways,
(which we have elsewhere declared) given unto sundry persons immediately,
partly for their own Instruction and Guidance in the Knowledge of God and his
Will, and partly by their Ministry to be communicated unto the Church. So was
it granted unto Enoch the seventh from Adam, who thereon prophesied to the
warning and instruction of others: Jude 14, 15. And to Noah, who became thereby
a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. And to Abraham, who thereon commanded
his Children and Household to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. And other
instances of the like kind may be given: Genesis 4. 26. Chap. 5. 28. And this
course did God continue a long time, even from the first promise to the giving
of the Law, before any Revelations were committed to writing, for the space of
2460 years. For so long a season did God enlighten the minds of Men by
Supernatural external immediate occasional Revelations. Sundry things may be
observed of this divine dispensation, As

1. That it did sufficiently evidence its self to be from God, unto the minds
of those unto whom it was granted, and theirs also unto whom these Revelations
were by them communicated. For during this season Satan used his utmost
endeavors to possess the minds of men with his delusions under the pretense of
divine Supernatural Inspirations. For hereunto belongs the Original of all his
Oracles, and Enthusisasmes among the Nations of the World. There was therefore
a divine Power and Efficacy attending all Divine Revelations ascertaining and
infallably assuring the minds of men of their being from God. For if it had not
been so, men had never been able to secure themselves, that they were not
imposed on by the crafty deceits of Satan, especially in such Revelations as
seemed to contain things contrary to their Reason, as in the command given to
Abraham for the sacrificing his Son, Genesis 22. 2. Wherefore these immediate
Revelations had not been a sufficient means to secure the Faith and Obedience
of the Church, if they had not carried along with them their own evidence that
they were from God. Of what nature that Evidence was, we shall afterward
enquire. For the present I shall only say, that it was an Evidence unto Faith
and not to Sense; as is that also which we have now by the Scripture. It is not
like that which the Sun gives of it self by its Light, which there needs no
exercise of Reason to assure us of; for Sense is irresistibly affected with it.
But it is like the Evidence which the Heavens and the Earth give of their being
made and created of God, and thereby of his Being and Power. This they do
undeniably and infallibly. Psalm. 19. 1, 2. Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. Yet is it
required hereunto, that men do use and exercise the best of their rational
Abilities in the consideration and contemplation of them. Where this is
neglected, notwithstanding their open and visible Evidence unto the contrary,
men degenerate into Atheism. God so gave out these Revelations of himself, as
to require the exercise of the Faith, Conscience, Obedience, and Reason of them
unto whom they were made, and therein they gave full Assurance of their
proceeding from him. So he tells us that his Word differs from all other
pretended Revelations, as the Wheat does from the Chaff, Jer. 23. 28. But yet
it is our duty to try and sift the Wheat from the Chaff, or we may not
evidently discern the one from the other.

2. The things so revealed were sufficient to guide and direct all persons in
the Knowledge of their duty to God, in all that was required of them in a way of
Faith or Obedience. God from the beginning gave out the knowledge of his Will
(...), by sundry parts and degrees; yet so that every Age and Season had Light
enough to guide them in the whole Obedience required of them, and unto their
Edification therein. They had knowledge enough to enable them to offer
Sacrifices in Faith, as did Abel; to walk with God, as did Enoch; and to teach
their Families the fear of the Lord, as did Abraham. The World perished not for
want of sufficient Revelation of the mind of God at any time. Indeed when we go
to consider those divine Instructions which are upon Record that God granted
unto them, we are scarce able to discern how they were sufficiently enlightened
in all that was necessary for them to believe and do. But they were unto them
as a Light shining in a dark place. Set up but a Candle in a dark room, and it
will sufficiently enlighten it, for men to attend their necessary occasions
therein. But when the Sun is risen and shines in at all the Windows, the light
of the Candle grows so dim and useless, that it seems strange that any could
have advantage thereby. The Sun of Righteousness is now risen upon us, and
Immortality is brought to light by the Gospel. If we look now on the
Revelations granted unto them of old, we may yet see there was light in them,
which yields us little more advantage than the light of a Candle in the Sun.
But unto them who lived before this Sun arose, they were a sufficient Guide
unto all Duties of Faith and Obedience. For

3. There was during this season a sufficient Ministry, for the declaration of
the Revelations, which God made of Himself and his Will. There was the natural
Ministry of Parents, who were obliged to instruct their Children and Families
in the knowledge of the Truth which they had received. And whereas this began
in Adam, who first received the Promise, and therewithal whatsoever was
necessary unto Faith and Obedience; the knowledge of it could not be lost
without the wilful neglect of Parents in teaching, or of Children and Families
in learning. And they had the extraordinary Ministry of such as God entrusted
new Revelations withal, for the confirmation and inlargment of those before
received, who were all of them Preachers of Righteousness unto the rest of
Mankind. And it may be manifested, that from the giving of the first Promise,
when divine external Revelations began to be the Rule of Faith and Life unto
the Church, to the writing of the Law; there was always alive one or other, who
receiving divine Revelations immediately, were a kind of infallible Guides unto
others. If it was otherwise at any time, it was after the death of the
Patriarks, before the Call of Moses, during which time, all things went into
Darkness and Confusion. For oral Tradition alone would not preserve the Truth
of former Revelations. But by whom these Instructions were received, they had a
sufficient outward means for their Illumination, before any divine Revelations
were recorded by Writing. Yet,

4. This way of Instruction, as it was in it self imperfect, and liable to many
disadvantages, so through the weakness, negligence and wickedness of men, it
proved insufficient to retain the knowledge of God in the World. For under this
Dispensation the Generality of Mankind fell into their great Apostasy from God,
and betook themselves unto the conduct and service of the Devil; of the ways,
means, and degrees whereof I have discoursed* elsewhere. De Naturae Theologiae,
lib. 3.
Hereon God also regarded them not, but suffered all Nations to walk in their
own ways, Acts 14. 16. giving them up to their own hearts lusts to walk in
their own Counsels; as it is expressed, Psalm. 81. 12. And although this fell
not out without the horrible wickedness and ingratitude of the World; yet there
being then no certain Standard of divine Truth, whereunto they might repair,
they brake off the easier from God through the imperfection of this
Dispensation. If it shall be said, that since the Revelation of the Will of God
has been committed unto Writing, men have Apostatized from the Knowledge of
God, as is evident in many Nations of the World, which sometimes professed the
Gospel, but are now overrun with Heathenism, Mahometism, and Idolatry: I say,
this has not come to pass through any defect in the way and means of
Illumination, or the Communication of the Truth unto them; but God has given
them up to be destroyed for their wickedness and ingratitude, and unless we
repent, we shall all likewise perish, Romans 1. 18. 2 These. 2. 11, 12. Otherwise
where the Standard of the Word is once fixed, there is a constant means of
preserving divine Revelations. Wherefore,

Thirdly, God has gathered up into the Scripture all divine Revelations given
out by himself from the beginning of the World, and all that ever shall be so
to the end thereof, which are of general use unto the Church, that it may be
thoroughly instructed in the whole mind and will of God, and directed in all
that Worship of Him, and Obedience unto Him, which is necessary to give us
acceptance with Him here, and to bring us unto the eternal enjoyment of him
hereafter. For (1.) When God first committed the Law to writing, with all those
things which accompanied it, he obliged the Church unto the use of it alone,
without Additions of any kind. Now this he would not have done, had he not
expressed therein, that is the Books of Moses, all that was any way needful
unto the Faith and Obedience of the Church. For he did not only command them to
attend with all diligence unto his Word, as it was then written for their
instruction and direction in Faith and Obedience, annexing all sorts of
Promises unto their so doing, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. but also expressly forbids them, as
was said, to add any thing thereunto, or to conjoyn any thing therewith, Deuteronomy.
4. 2. chap. 12, 32. which he would not have done, had he omitted other divine
Revelations, before given, that were any way necessary unto the use of the
Church. As he added many new Ones, so he gathered in all the old from the
unfaithful Repository of Tradition, and fixed them in a Writing, given by
divine Inspiration. (2.) For all other divine Revelations, which were given out
to the Church, for its use in general under the Old Testament, they are all
comprised in the following Books thereof; Nor was this (that I know of) ever
questioned by any Person pretending to Sobriety; though some, who would be glad
of any pretense against the Integrity and Perfection of the Scripture, have
fruitlesly wrangled about the loss of some Books, which they can never prove
concerning any one, that was certainly of a divine Original. (3.) The full
Revelation of the whole mind of God, whereunto nothing pretending thereunto is
ever to be added, was committed unto, and perfected by Jesus Christ, Heb. 1. 1,
2. That the Revelations of God, made by him, whether in his own Person, or by
his Spirit unto his Apostles, were also by divine Inspiration committed to
Writing, is expressly affirmed concerning what he delivered in his own personal
Ministry, Luke 1. 4. Acts 1. 1. John 20. 31. and may be proved by
uncontrollable Arguments concerning the rest of them. Hence, as the Scriptures
of the old Testament were shut up with a Caution and Admonition unto the
Church, to adhere unto the Law and Testimony, with threatening of a Curse unto
the contrary, Mal. 4. 4, 5, 6. So the Writings of the New Testament are closed
with a Curse on any that shall presume to add any thing more thereunto, Rev.
22. 18. Wherefore,

Fourthly, The Scripture is now become the only external means of divine
supernatural Illumination, because it is the only Repository of all divine
supernatural Revelation, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. Isa. 8. 20. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. The
Pretenses of Tradition, as a collateral means of preserving and communicating
supernatural Revelation, have been so often evicted of falsity, that I shall
not further press their impeachment. Besides, I intend those in this Discourse
by whom it is acknowledged, that the Bible is, as a sufficient and perfect, so
the only Treasury of divine Revelations: And what has been offered by any to
weaken or impair its esteem, by taking off from its credibility, perfection and
sufficiency as unto all its own proper ends, has brought no advantage unto the
Church, nor benefit unto the Faith of Believers. But yet,

Fifthly, In asserting the Scripture to be the only external means of divine
Revelation, I do it not exclusively unto those Institutions of God which are
subordinate unto it, and appointed as means to make it effectual unto our
souls, As

1. Our own personal endeavors in reading, studying and meditating on the
Scripture, that we my come unto a right Apprehension of the things contained in
it, are required unto this purpose. It is known to all, how frequently this
Duty is pressed upon us, and what Promises are annexed to the performance of
it; see Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. chap. 11. 18, 19. Josh. 1. 8. Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 119.
Col. 3. 16. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Without this it is in vain to expect Illumination by
the Word. And therefore we may see multitudes living and walking in extreme
darkness, when yet the Word is everywhere nigh unto them; Bread, which is the
Staff of life, will yet nourish no man who does not provide it, and feed upon
it; no more would Manna, unless it was gathered and prepared. Our own Natures,
and the Nature of divine Revelations considered, and what is necessary for the
application of the one to the other, makes this evident. For God will instruct
us in his mind and will, as we are men, in and by the rational faculties of our
souls. Nor is an external Revelation capable of making any other impression on
us, but what is so received. Wherefore, when I say, that the Scripture is the
only external means of our Illumination, I include therein all our own personal
endeavors to come to the knowledge of the mind of God therein, which shall be
afterward spoken unto. And those, who under any pretenses do keep, drive, or
persuade men from reading and meditating on the Scripture, do take an effectual
course to keep them in and under the power of Darkness.

2. The mutual Instruction of one another in the mind of God out of the
Scripture, is also required hereunto. For we are obliged by the Law of Nature
to endeavor the good of others in various degrees, as our Children, our
Families, our Neighbors, and all with whom we have Conversation. And this is
the principal Good absolutely considered, that we can communicate unto others,
namely, to instruct them in the knowledge of the mind of God. This whole Duty
in all the Degrees of it is represented in that Command, Thou shall teach my
Words diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in
thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Thus when our Savior found his Disciples talking
of the things of God by the way side, he bearing unto them the person of a
private man, instructed them in the sense of the Scripture, Luke 24. 26, 27,
32. And the neglect of this Duty in the World, which is so great that the very
mention of it, or the least attempt to perform it, is a matter of scorn and
reproach, is one cause of the great ignorance and darkness, which yet abounds
among us. But the nakedness of this folly, whereby men would be esteemed
Christians in the open contempt of all Duties of Christianity, will in due time
be laid open.

3. The Ministry of the Word in the Church is that which is principally
included in this Assertion. The Scripture is the only means of Illumination,
but it becomes so principally by the application of it unto the minds of men
in the Ministry of the Word, see Mat. 5. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Church, and the Ministry of it, are the
Ordinances of God unto this end, that his Mind and Will as revealed in the
Word, may be made known to the Children of Men, whereby they are enlightened.
And that Church and Ministry, whereof this is not the first principal design
and work, is neither appointed of God, nor approved by him. Men will one day
find themselves deceived in trusting to empty Names, it is Duty alone, that
will be Comfort and Reward, Dan. 12. 3.

Sixthly, That the Scripture, which thus contains the whole of divine
Revelation, may be a sufficient external cause of Illumination unto us, two
things are required.

1. That we believe it to be a divine Revelation, that is the Word of God, or a
Declaration of Himself, his Mind and Will, immediately proceeding from Him; or
that it is of a pure divine Original, proceeding neither from the folly or
deceit, nor from the skill or honesty of men; so is it stated, 2 Pet. 1. 19,
20, 21. Heb. 1. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Isa. 8. 20. It tenders no light or instruction
under any other notion, but as it comes immediately from God; not as the Word of
Man, but as it is indeed the Word of the Living God, 1 These. 2. 13. And what
ever any one may learn from or by the Scriptures under any other consideration,
it belongs not unto the Illumination we enquire after. Nehem. 8. 8. Isa. 28.
9. Hos. 14. 9. Prove. 1. 6. Psalm. 119. 34: Mat. 15. 16. 2 Timothy 2. 7. 1 John 5.
20.

2. That we understand the things declared in it, or the Mind of God as
revealed and expressed therein. For if it be given unto us a sealed Book, which
we cannot read, either because it is sealed, or because we are ignorant and
cannot read, whatever Visions or means of Light it has in it, we shall have no
advantage thereby, Isa. 29. 11, 12. It is not the Words themselves of the
Scripture only, but our understanding them that gives us light, Psalm. 119. 130.
(...), -- the opening the Door, the entrance of thy Word gives light. It must
be opened, or it will not enlighten. So the Disciples understood not the
Testimonies of the Scripture concerning the Lord Christ, they were not
enlightened by them, until he expounded them unto them, Luke 24. 27, 45. As we
have the same instance in the Eunuch and Philip, Acts 8. 31, 35, 36. To this
very day the Nation of the Jews have the Scriptures of the old Testament, and
the outward Letter of them in such esteem and veneration, that they even adore
and worship them, yet are they not enlightened by it. And the same is fallen out
among many that are called Christians, or they could never embrace such foolish
opinions, and practice such Idolatries in worship as some of them do, who yet
enjoy the Letter of the Gospel.

And this brings me to my design, which we have been thus far making way unto;
and it is to show that both these are from the Holy Ghost; namely that we truly
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God; and that we understand savingly
the mind of God therein, both which belong unto our Illumination.

That which I shall first enquire into, is, the way how, and the ground whereon
we come to believe the Scripture to be the Word of God in a due manner. For
that this is required of us in a way of duty, namely, that we should believe
the Scripture to be the Word of God with Faith Divine and Supernatural, I
suppose will not be denied, and it shall be afterward proved. And what is the
work of the Spirit of God herein, will be our first enquiry.

Secondly, Whereas we see by experience, that all who have or enjoy the
Scripture, do not yet understand it, or come to an useful saving Knowledge of
the Mind and Will of God therein revealed; our other enquiry shall be, how we
may come to understand the Word of God aright, and what is the work of the
Spirit of God in the assistance which he affords us unto that purpose.

With respect unto the first of these Enquiries, whereunto the present
discourse is singly designed, I affirm that it is the work of the Holy Spirit
to enable us to believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, or the
supernatural immediate Revelation of his mind unto us, and infallibly to
evidence it unto our minds, so as that we may spiritually and savingly
acquiesce therein. Some upon a mistake of this Proposition do seem to suppose
that we resolve all Faith into private suggestions of the Spirit, or deluding
pretenses thereof; and some (it may be) will be ready to apprehend that we
confound the efficient Cause, and formal Reason of Faith or believing, rendering
all rational Arguments and external Testimonies useless. But indeed there
neither is nor shall be any occasion administered unto these fears or
imaginations. For we shall plead nothing in this matter but what is consonant
to the Faith and Judgment of the Ancient and present Church of God, as shall be
fully evidenced in our progress. I know some have found out other ways whereby
the minds of men as they suppose may be sufficiently satisfied in the Divine
Authority of the Scripture. But I have tasted of their new Wine and desire it
not, because I know the Old to be better, though what they plead is of use in
its proper place.

My Design requires that I should confine my discourse unto as narrow bounds as
possible, and I shall so do; showing,

1. What it is in general, infallibly to believe the Scripture to be the Word
of God, and what is the Ground and Reason of our so doing? Or, what it is to
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, as we are required to believe it
so to be in a way of Duty.

2. That there are external Arguments of the divine Original of the Scripture,
which are effectual Motives to persuade us to give an unfeigned assent
thereunto.

3. That yet moreover God requires of us, that we believe them to be his Word
with Faith divine, supernatural, and infallible.

4. Evidence the Grounds and Reasons whereon we do so believe, and ought so to
do.

Unto these Heads most of what ensues in the first part of this Discourse may
be reduced.

It is meet that we should clear the Foundation whereon we build, and the
Principles whereon we do proceed; that what we design to prove may be the
better understood by all sorts of Persons, whose edification we intend. For
these things are the equal concernment of the learned and unlearned. Wherefore
some things must be insisted on, which are generally known and granted. And our
first Enquiry is, What it is to believe the Scripture to be the Word of God
with Faith divine and supernatural, according as it is our duty so to do.

And in our Believing or our Faith, two things are to be considered. (1.) What
it is that we do believe. And (2.) Wherefore we do so believe it? The first is
the material Object of our Faith, namely, the things which we do believe; the
latter the formal Object of it, or the Cause and Reason why we do believe them;
and these things are distinct. The Material Object of our Faith, is the things
revealed in the Scripture, declared unto us in propositions of Truth. For
things must be so proposed unto us, or we cannot believe them. That God is one
in three Persons, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the like
propositions of Truth, are the material Object of our Faith, or the things that
we do believe; And the Reason why we do believe them, is, because they are
proposed in the Scripture. Thus the Apostle expresses the whole of what we
intend, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. I delivered unto you first of all that which I also
received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and
that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures. Christ's Death and Burial and Resurrection are the things proposed
unto us to be believed, and so the Object of our Faith. But the Reason why we
believe them is, because they are declared in the Scriptures, see Acts 8. 28,
29, 30. Sometimes indeed this Expression of believing the Scriptures by a
Metonymy, denotes both the formal and material Objects of our Faith, the
Scriptures themselves as such, and the things contained in them, so John 2. 22.
They believed the Scripture and the Word that Jesus said, or the things
delivered in the Scripture, and further declared by Christ, which before they
understood not. And they did so believe what was declared in the Scriptures,
because it was so declared in them; both are intended in the same Expression,
they believed the Scripture, under various considerations, so Acts 26. 27. The
material Object of our Faith therefore are the Articles of our Creed, by whose
Enumeration we answer unto that question, what we believe? giving an account of
the hope that is in us, as the Apostle does, Acts 26. 22, 23. But if moreover
we are asked a Reason of our Faith or Hope, or why we believe the things we do
profess, as God to be One in three Persons, Jesus Christ to be the Son of God?
we do not answer, because so it is, for this is that which we believe, which
were senseless. But we must give some other Answer unto that Enquiry, whether
it be made by others or our selves. The proper Answer unto this Question
contains the formal Reason and Object of our Faith, that which it rests upon
and is resolved into. And this is that which we look after.

2. We do not in this Enquiry intend any kind of Persuasion or Faith but that
which is divine and infallible, both which it is from its formal Reason or
objective Cause. Men may be able to give some kind of Reasons, why they believe
what they profess so to do, that will not suffice or abide the trial in this
case, although they themselves may rest in them. Some it may be can give no
other Account hereof, but that they have been so instructed by them whom they
have sufficient reason to give credit unto; or that they have so received them
by Tradition from their Fathers. Now whatever Persuasion these Reasons may
beget in the minds of men, that the things which they profess to believe are
true, yet if they are alone, it is not divine Faith whereby they do believe,
but that which is merely humane, as being resolved into humane Testimony only,
or an Opinion on probable Arguments; for no Faith can be of any other kind,
than is the Evidence it reflects on, or arises from. I say, it is so where
they are alone: for I doubt not but that some who have never further considered
the reason of their believing than the teaching of their Instructors, have yet
that Evidence in their own souls of the Truth and Authority of God in what they
believe, that with respect thereunto their Faith is divine and supernatural.
The Faith of most has a beginning and progress not unlike that of the
Samaritans, John 4. 40, 41, 42. as shall be afterward declared.

3. When we enquire after Faith that is infallible, or believing infallibly,
which, as we shall show hereafter, is necessary in this case, we do not intend
an inherent quality in the Subject, as though he that believes with Faith
infallible must himself also be infallible; much less do we speak of
Infallibility absolutely, which is a property of God, who alone from the
perfection of his Nature can neither deceive nor be deceived. But it is that
Property or Adjunct of the Assent of our Minds unto divine Truths or
supernatural Revelations, whereby it is differenced from all other kinds of
Assent whatever. And this it has from its formal Object, or the Evidence
whereon we give this Assent. For the nature of every Assent is given unto it by
the nature of the Evidence which it proceeds from, or relyeth on. This in
divine Faith is divine Revelation, which being infallible, renders the Faith
that rests on it, and is resolved into it, infallible also. No man can believe
that which is false, or which may be false, with divine Faith, for that which
renders it divine, is the divine Truth and Infallibility of the Ground and
Evidence which it is built upon. But a man may believe that which is true,
infallibly so, and yet his Faith not be infallible; That the Scripture is the
Word of God is infallibly true, yet the Faith whereby a man believes it so to
be, may be fallible, for it is such as his Evidence is, and no other; He may
believe it to be so on Tradition, or the Testimony of the Church of Rome only,
or on outward Arguments, all which being fallible, his Faith is so also,
although the things he assents unto be infallibly true. Wherefore unto this
Faith divine and infallible, it is not required that the Person in whom it is,
be infallible; nor is it enough that the thing it self believed be infallibly
true, but moreover that the Evidence whereon he does believe it be infallible
also. So it was with them who received divine Revelations immediately from God:
It was not enough that the things revealed unto them were infallibly true, but
they were to have infallible Evidence of the Revelation it self; then was their
Faith infallible, though their persons were fallible. With this Faith then a
man can believe nothing but what is divinely true, and therefore it is
infallible; and the reason is, because Gods Veracity, who is the God of Truth,
is the only Object of it; Hence says the Prophet, (...) -- 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.
Believe in the Lord your God, and you shall be established; or that Faith which
is in God and his Word is fixed on Truth, or is infallible. Hence the Enquiry
in this case is, what is the Reason why we believe any thing with this faith
divine or supernatural? or what it is the believing whereof makes our Faith
divine, infallible and supernatural? Wherefore,

4. The Authority and Veracity of God revealing the material Objects of our
Faith, or what it is our Duty to believe, is the formal Object and Reason of
our Faith, from whence it arises and whereinto it is ultimately resolved. That
is, the only Reason why we do believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, that
God is one single Essence subsisting in three Persons, is because that God who
is Truth, the God of Truth, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. who cannot lie, Tit. 1. 2. and whose
Word is Truth. John 17. 17. and the Spirit which gave it out is Truth, 1 John 5
6. has revealed these things to be so; and our believing these things on that
ground renders our Faith divine and supernatural. Supposing also a Respect unto
the subjective Efficiency of the Holy Ghost, inspiring it into our minds,
whereof afterward. For to speak distinctly, our Faith is supernatural, with
respect unto the production of it in our minds by the Holy Ghost; and
infallible, with respect unto the formal Reason of it, which is divine
Revelation; and is divine, in opposition unto what is merely humane on both
accounts.

As things are proposed unto us to be believed as true, Faith in its Assent
respects only the Truth or Veracity of God; but whereas this Faith is required
of us in a way of Obedience, and is considered not only physically in its
nature, but morally also as our Duty, it respects also the Authority of God,
which I therefore join with the Truth of God, as the formal Reason of our
Faith, see 2 Samuel 7. 28. And these things the Scripture pleads and and argues,
when Faith is required of us in the way of Obedience. Thus says the Lord, is
that which is proposed unto us as the Reason why we should believe what is
spoken, whereunto often times other divine Names and Titles are added,
signifying his Authority who requires us to believe; Thus says the Lord God,
the Holy One of Israel, Isa. 30. 15. Thus says the High and Lofty One, who
inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy, Isa. 57. 15. Believe the Lord your
God, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. The Word of the Lord precedeth most Revelations in the
Prophets, and other Reason why we should believe, the Scripture proposes none,
Heb. 1. 1, 2. yea the Interposition of any other Authority between the things
to be believed and our Souls and Consciences, besides the Authority of God,
overthrows the nature of divine Faith; I do not say, the Interposition of any
other means whereby we should believe, of which sort God has appointed many,
but the interposition of anyother Authority, upon which we should believe, as
that pretended in and by the Church of Rome. No men can be Lords of our Faith,
though they may be helpers of our Joy.

5. The Authority and Truth of God, considered in themselves absolutely, are
not the immediate formal Object of our Faith, though they are the ultimate
whereinto it is resolved. For we can believe nothing on their Account unless it
be evidenced unto us; and this Evidence of them is in that Revelation which God
is pleased to make of himself; for that is the only means whereby our
Consciences and Minds are affected with his Truth and Authority. We do
therefore no otherwise rest on the Truth and Veracity of God in any thing than
we rest on the Revelation which he makes unto us, for that is the only way
whereby we are affected with them; Not the Lord is true absolutely, but, Thus
says the Lord, and the Lord has spoken, is that which we have immediate
regard unto. Hereby alone are our minds affected with the Authority and
Veracity of God, and by what way soever it is made unto us, it is sufficient
and able so to affect us. At first, as has been showed, it was given
immediately to some Persons, and preserved for the use of others, in an oral
Ministry; but now all Revelation, as has also been declared, is contained in
the Scriptures only.

6. It follows that our Faith whereby we believe any divine supernatural Truth,
is resolved into the Scripture, as the only means of divine Revelation,
affecting our Minds and Consciences with the Authority and Truth of God; or the
Scripture, as the only immediate, divine, infallible Revelation of the Mind and
Will of God, is the first immediate formal Object of our Faith, the sole Reason
why, and ground whereon we do believe the things that are revealed, with Faith
Divine, Supernatural and Infallible. We do believe Jesus Christ to be the Son
of God. Why do we so do, on what ground or reason? It is because of the
Authority of God commanding us so to do, and the Truth of God testifying
thereunto. But how or by what means are our Minds and Consciences affected with
the Authority and Truth of God, so as to believe with respect unto them, which
makes our Faith Divine and Supernatural? It is alone the Divine, Supernatural,
Infallible Revelation that he has made of this sacred Truth, and of his Will,
that we should believe it. But what is this Revelation, or where is it to be
found? It is the Scripture alone which contains the entire Revelation that God
has made of himself in all things which he will have us to believe or do.
Hence,

7. The last Enquiry arises, how, or on what ground, for what Reasons do we
believe the Scripture to be a divine Revelation proceeding immediately from
God; or to be that Word of God which is Truth divine and infallible? Whereunto
we answer, it is solely on the Evidence that the Spirit of God in and by the
Scripture it self, gives unto us that it was given by immediate Inspiration
from God. Or the Ground and Reason whereon we believe the Scripture to be the
Word of God, are the Authority and Truth of God evidencing themselves in and by
it unto the Minds and Consciences of Men. Hereon as whatever we assent unto as
proposed in the Scripture, our Faith rests on and is resolved into the Veracity
and Faithfulness of God, so is it also in this of believing the Scripture it
self to be the infallible Word of God, seeing we do it on no other Grounds but
its own Evidence that so it is.

This is that which is principally to be proved, and therefore to prepare for
it, and to remove prejudices, something is to be spoken to prepare the way
thereunto.

1. There are sundry cogent Arguments which are taken from External
considerations of the Scripture, that evince it on rational Grounds to be from
God. All these are motives of credibility, or effectual perswasives to account
and esteem it to be the Word of God. And although they neither are, nor is it
possible they ever should be, the Ground and Reason whereon we believe it so to
be with Faith Divine and Supernatural; yet are they necessary unto the
confirmation of our Faith herein against Temptations, Oppositions, and
Objections. These Arguments have been pleaded by many and that usefully, and
therefore it is not needful for me to insist upon them. And they are the same
for the substance of them in ancient and modern Writers, however managed by
some with more Learning, Dexterity, and force of Reasoning than by others. It
may not be expected therefore that in this short discourse, designed unto
another purpose, I should give them much improvement. However I shall a little
touch on those which seem to be most cogent, and that in them wherein in my
Apprehention their strength does lie. And I shall do this to manifest that
although we plead that no Man can believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God
with Faith Divine, Supernatural and Infallible, but upon its own internal
Divine Evidence and Efficacy, yet we allow and make use of all those external
Arguments of its sacred Truth and divine Original which are pleaded by others,
ascribing unto them as much weight and cogency as they can do, acknowledging
the persuasion which they beget and effect to be as firm as they can pretend it
to be. Only we do not judge them to contain the whole of the Evidence which we
have for Faith to rest in, or to be resolved into; yea not that at all, which
renders it Divine, Supernatural, and Infallible. The Rational Arguments we say
which are, or may be used in this matter, with the humane Testimonies whereby
they are corroborated, may and ought to be made use of and insisted on; And it
is but vainly pretended that their use is superseded by our other Assertions;
as though where Faith is required, all the subservient use of Reason were
absolutely discarded, and our Faith thereby rendered irrational; And the assent
unto the divine Original and Authority of the Scriptures, which the mind ought
to give upon them, we grant to be of as high a nature as is pretended to be,
namely, a moral certainty. Moreover, the Conclusion which unprejudiced Reason
will make upon these Arguments, is more firm, better grounded, and more
pleadable, than that which is built merely on the sole Authority of any Church
whatever. But this we assert, that there is an assent of another kind, unto the
divine Original and Authority of the Scriptures required of us; namely, that of
Faith divine and supernatural. Of this none will say that it can be effected
by, or resolved into the best and most cogent of rational Arguments and
external Testimonies, which are absolutely humane and fallible. For it does
imply a contradiction to believe infallibly upon fallible evidence. Wherefore I
shall prove, that beyond all these Arguments and their effect upon our minds,
there is an Assent unto the Scripture as the Word of God required of us with
Faith divine, Supernatural and Infallible; and therefore there must be a divine
Evidence which is the Formal Object and Reason of it, which alone it rests on,
and is resolved into, which shall also be declared and proved. But yet, as was
said in the first place, because their property is to level the ground, and to
remove the rubbish of Objections out of the way, that we may build the safer on
the sure Foundation, I shall mention some of those which I esteem justly
pleadable in this cause. And,

1. The Antiquity of these Writings, and of the divine Revelation contained in
them, is pleaded in Evidence of their divine Original. And it may be so
deservedly. For where it is absolute, it is unquestionable: that which is most
ancient in any kind is most true; God himself makes use of this plea against
Idols, Isa. 43. 10, 11, 12. Ye are my witnesses says the Lord, I even I, am
the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior; I have declared and have saved,
and I have showed when there was no strange God amongst you: therefore ye are
my witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God. That which he asserts is, that he
alone is God, and no other. This he calls the people to testify by this
Argument, that he was among them as God, that is, in the Church, before any
strange God was known or named. And so it is justly pleaded in the behalf of
this Revelation of the Mind of God in the Scripture; it was in the World long
before any other thing or writing pretended to be given unto the same end.
Whatever therefore ensued with the like design, must either be set up in
competition with it, or opposition unto it, above which it has its advantage
merely from its Antiquity. Whereas therefore this Writing in the first books of
it, is acknowledged to be antienter than any other that is extant in the World,
or indeed that ever was so, and may be proved so to be: it is beyond all
reasonable apprehension that it should be of humane Original. For we know how
low, weak, and imperfect all humane Inventions were at the first, how rude and
unpolished in every kind, until Time, Observation, following Additions and
Diminutions had shaped, formed, and improved them. But this Writing coming
forth in the World, absolutely the first in its kind, directing us in the
Knowledge of God and our selves, was at first and at once so absolutely complete
and perfect, that no Art, Industry or Wisdom of Man, could ever yet find any
just defect in it, or was able to add any thing unto it whereby it might be
bettered or improved. Neither from the beginning would it ever admit of any
Additions unto it, but what came from the same Fountain of divine Revelation
and Inspirarion, clearing it self in all Ages from all addition and
superfetation of Men whatever. This at least puts a singular character upon
this Book, and represents it with that reverend Awe and Majesty, that it is the
highest petulancy not to pay it a sacred respect.

This Argument is pursued by many at large, as that which affords great
variety of Historical and Chronological Observations. And it has been so
scanned and improved, that nothing but the giving of it a new dress remains for
present or future Diligence. But the real force of it lies in the consideration
of the People, by and amongst whom this Revelation first commenced in the
World, and the time wherein it did so. When some Nations had so improved and
cultivated the light of Nature as greatly to excel others in Wisdom and
Knowledge, they generally looked upon the people of the Jews as ignorant and
barbarous. And the more wise any of them conceived themselves, the more they
despised them. And indeed they were utter Strangers unto all those Arts and
Sciences, whereby the faculties of men's Minds are naturally enlightened and
enlarged. Nor did they pretend unto any Wisdom whereby to stand iu competition
with other Nations, but only what they received by divine Revelations. This
alone God himself had taught them to look upon and esteem as their only Wisdom
before all the World, Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7, 8. Now we shall not need to consider what
were the first Attempts of other Nations, in expressing their conceptions
concerning things Divine, the Duty, and Happiness of Man. The Egyptians and
Grecians were those who vied for Reputation in the improvement of this Wisdom.
But it is known and confessed that the utmost production of their endeavors,
were things foolish, irrational and absurd, contrary to the Being and
Providence of God, to the light of Nature, leading mankind into a maze of folly
and wickedness. But we may consider what they attained unto in the fullness of
time by their utmost improvement of Science, Wisdom, mutual Intelligence,
Experience, Communication, laborious Study and Observation. When they had added
and subducted to and from the Inventions of all former Ages from Time
immemorial, when they had used and improved the Reason, Wisdom, Invention, and
Conjectures of all that went before them in the study of this Wisdom, and had
discarded whatever they had found by experience unsuited to natural Light and
the common Reason of mankind, yet it must be acknowledged that the Apostle
passes a just censure on the utmost of their Seize, namely, that they
waxed vain in their Imaginations, and the World in Wisdom knew not God. Whence
then was it that in one Nation, esteemed barbarous, and really so with respect
unto that Wisdom those Arts and Sciences which enobled other Nations, from that
Antiquity wherein it is not pretended that Reason and Wisdom had received any
considerable improvement; without Converse, Communication, Learning or
Experience, there should at once proceed such a Law, Doctrine and Instructions
concerning God and Man, so stable, certain, uniform, as should not only
incomparably excel all products of humane Wisdom unto that purpose, however
advantaged by Time and Experience, but also abide invariable throughout all
Generations, so as that whatever has been advanced in opposition unto it, or
but differing from it, has quickly sunk under the weight of its own
unreasonableness and folly? This one consideration, unless Men have a Mind to
be contentious, gives sufficient satisfaction, that this Book could have no
other Original, but what it pleads for it self, namely, an immediate Emanation
from God.

2. It is apparent that God in all Ages has had a great Regard unto it, and
acted his Power and Care in its preservation. Were not the Bible what it
pretends to be, there had been nothing more suitable to the Nature of God, and
more becoming divine Providence, then long since to have blotted it out of the
World. For to suffer a Book to be in the World, from the beginning of times,
falsely pretending his Name and Authority, seducing so great a portion of
Mankind into a pernicious and ruinous Apostasy from him, as it must do, and
does, if it be not of a divine Original, and exposing unconceivable multitudes
of the best, wisest, and soberest amongst them, unto all sorts of bloody
miseries which they have undergone in the behalf of it, seems not consonant
unto that infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and care wherewith this World is governed
from above. But on the contrary, whereas the malicious craft of Satan, and the
prevalent power and rage of Mankind, has combined and been set at work to the
ruin and utter Suppression of this Book, proceeding sometimes so far as that
there was no appearing way for its escape; yet through the watchful care and
Providence of God, sometimes putting it self forth in miraculous Instances, it
has been preserved unto this day, and shall be so to the consummation of all
things. The event of that which was spoken by our Savior, Matthew. 5. 18. does
invincibly prove the divine Approbation of this Book, as that does its divine
Original; Till Heaven and Earth pass away, one Jot or one Tittle shall in no
wise pass from the Law. Gods perpetual care over the Scriptures for so many
Ages, that not a letter of it should be utterly lost, nothing that has the
least tendency toward its end should perish, is evidence sufficient of his
regard unto it. Especially would it be so, if we should consider with what
remarkable Judgments and severe Reflections of Vengeance on its opposers, this
care has been managed, instances whereof might be easily multiplied. And if
any will not ascribe this preservation of the Books of the Bible, not only in
their Being, but in their purity and Integrity free from the least just
suspicion of corruption, or the intermixture of any thing humane or
heterogeneous, unto the care of God; it is incumbent on him to assign some
other cause proportionate to such an effect, whilst it was the interest of
Heaven, and the Endeavor of the Earth and Hell to have it corrupted and
destroyed. For my part I cannot but judge that he that sees not an hand of
divine Providence stretched out in the preservation of this Book, and all that
is in it, its Words and Syllables for thousands of years, through all the
overthrows and deluges of Calamities that have befallen the World, with the
weakness of the means whereby it has been preserved, and the interest in some
Ages of all those in whose power it was to have it corrupted, as it was of the
Apostate Churches of the Jews and Christians, with the open opposition that
has been made unto it, does not believe there is any such thing as divine
Providence at all. It was first written in the very infancy of the Babylonian
Empire, with which it afterward contemporized about 900 years. By this
Monarchy that people which alone had these Oracles of God committed unto them,
were oppressed, destroyed, and carried into captivity. But this Book was then
preserved amongst them whilst they were absolutely under the power of their
Enemies, although it condemned them and all their Gods and Religious Worship,
wherewith we know how horribly mankind is enraged. Satan had enthroned himself
as the Object of their Worship, and the Author of all ways of divine veneration
amongst them. These they adhered unto as their principal interest, as all
People do unto that they esteem their Religion. In the whole World there was
nothing that judged, condemned, opposed him or them, but this Book only, which
was now absolutely in their power. If that by any means could have been
destroyed, then when it was in the hands but of a few, and those for the most
part flagitious in their lives, hating the things contained in it, and wholly
under the power of their Adversaries, the Interest of Satan, and the whole
World in Idolatry, had been secured. But through the mere provision of divine
care it outlived that Monarchy, and saw the ruin of its greatest Adversaries.
So it did also during the continuance of the Persian Monarchy which succeeded,
whilst the people was still under the power of Idolaters, against whom this was
the only Testimony in the World. By some branches of the Grecian Monarchy a
most fierce and diligent attempt was made to have utterly destroyed it; but
still it was snatched by divine Power out of the Furnace, not one hair of it
being singed, or the least detriment brought unto its perfection. The Romans
destroyed both the people and place designed until then for its preservation,
carrying the ancient copy of the Law in triumph to Rome on the conquest of
Jerusalem; And whilst all absolute power and dominion in the whole World, where
this Book was known or heard of, was in their hands, they exercised a rage
against it for sundry Ages, with the same success that former enemies had. From
the very first; all the Endeavors of Mankind that professed an open enmity
against it have been utterly frustrate. And whereas also those unto whom it was
outwardly committed, as the Jews first, and the Antichristian Church of
Apostatized Christians afterward, not only fell into Opinions and Practices
absolutely inconsistent with it, but also built all their present and future
Interests on those Opinions and Practices; yet none of them durst ever attempt
the corrupting of one Line in it, but were forced to attempt their own
Security, by a pretense of Additional Traditions, and keeping the Book it self,
as much as they durst, out of the hands and knowledge of all not engaged in the
same Interest with themselves. Whence could all this proceed but from the
watchful Care and Power of divine Providence? And it is brutish folly not to
believe, that what God does so protect did originally proceed from Himself,
seeing it pleads and pretends so to do: For every wise Man will take more Care
of a Stranger, than a Bastard falsely imposed on him unto his Dishonor.

3. The Design of the whole and all the parts of it has an impress on it of
divine Wisdom and Authority. And hereof there are two parts, First, to reveal
God unto men, and Secondly, to direct men to come unto the enjoyment of God.
That these are the only two great Concerns of our nature, of any rational
Being, were easy to prove, but that it is acknowledged by all those with whom I
treat. Now never did any Book or Writing in the World, any single or joint
endeavors of mankind, or invisible Spirits, in the way of Authority, give out
a Law, Rule, Guide, and Light for all mankind universally in both these,
namely, the Knowledge of God, and our selves, but this Book only; and if any
other, it may be, like the Alcoran, did pretend in the least thereunto, it
quickly discovered its own folly, and exposed it self to the contempt of all
wise and considerate men. The only Question is, how it has discharged it self
in this Design? for if it has completely and perfectly accomplished it, it is
not only evident that it must be from God, but also that it is the greatest
Benefit and Kindness, that divine Benignity and Goodness ever granted unto
Mankind; for without it all men universally must necessarily wander in an
endless Maze of uncertainties, without ever attaining Light, Rest, or
Blessedness, here or hereafter. Wherefore,

1. As it takes on it self to speak in the Name and Authority of God, and
delivers nothing, commands nothing, but what becomes his infinite Holiness,
Wisdom, and Goodness; so it makes that Declaration of him in his Nature, Being,
and Subsistence, with the necessary Properties and Acts thereof, his Will, with
all his voluntary Actings or Works, wherein we may be or are concerned, so as
that we may know him aright, and entertain true Notions and Apprehensions of
him, according to the utmost capacity of our finite, limited Understanding.
Neither do we urge his Authority in this case, but here and elsewhere resort
unto the Evidence of his Reasonings compared with the Event or Matter of Fact.
What horrible Darkness, Ignorance and Blindness was upon the whole World with
respect unto the Knowledge of God? what confusion and debasement of our Nature
ensued thereon, whilst God suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, and
winked at the times of their Ignorance, the Apostle declares at large, Romans 1.
from the 19th verse to the end of the Chapter. The Sum is, That the only true
God being become unknown to them, as the wisest of them acknowledged, Acts 17.
21. and as our Apostle proved against them; the Devil that Murderer from the
Beginning, and Enemy of Mankind, had under various pretenses substituted
himself in his Room, and was become the God of this World, as he is called, 2
Cor. 4. 4. and had appropriated all the religious Devotion and Worship of the
Generality of Mankind unto himself; For the things which the Gentiles
sacrificed, they sacrificed unto Devils, and not unto God, as our Apostle
affirms, 1 Cor. 10. 20. and as may easily be evinced; and I have abundantly
manifested it De Naturae Theologiae lib. cap.
elsewhere. It is acknowledged that some few speculative Men among the Heathens
did seek after God in that horrid Darkness wherewith they were encompassed, and
labored to reduce their Conceptions and Notions of his Being, unto what Reason
could apprehend of infinite Perfections, and what the Works of Creation and
Providence could suggest unto them; but as they could never come unto any
certainty or consistency of Notions in their own minds, proceeding but a little
beyond Conjecture, as is the manner of them who seek after any thing in the
dark, much less with one another, to propose any thing unto the World for the
use of Mankind in these things by common consent; so they could none of them
either ever free themselves from the grossest practical Idolatry in worshipping
the Devil, the Head of their Apostasy from God; nor in the least influence the
minds of the Generality of Mankind with any due Apprehensions of the divine
Nature: This is the Subject and Substance of the Apostles Disputation against
them, Romans 1. In this state of things, what misery and confusion the World
lived in for many Ages, what an endless Labyrinth of foolish slavish
Superstitions and Idolatries it had cast it self into, I have in another Vbi
supra de Origin and Progressu Idololatriae.
Discourse particularly declared. With respect hereunto the Scripture is well
called by the Apostle Peter, a Light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 11. 9. It
gives unto all men at once a perfect, clear, steady, uniform Declaration of
God, his Being, Subsistence, Properties Authority, Rule and Actings, which
evidenceth it self unto the Minds and Consciences of all whom the God of this
World has not absolutely blinded by the power of prejudices and lusts,
confirming them in an Enmity unto, and hatred of God himself. There is indeed
no more required to free Mankind from this horrible darkness, and enormous
conceptions about the Nature of God, and the Worship of Idols, but a sedate
unprejudiced Consideration of the Revelation of these things in the Book of the
Scripture. We may say therefore to all the World with our Prophet, When they
say unto you, Seek unto them who have familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards that
peep and mutter; Should not a people seek unto their God? for the living, to
the dead? To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this
Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 19, 20. And this also
plainly manifests the Scripture to be of a divine Original. For if this
Declaration of God, this Revelation of Himself and his Will, is incomparably
the greatest and most excellent Benefit that our Nature is capable of in this
World, more needful for, and useful unto Mankind than the Sun in the Firmament,
as to the proper end of their Lives and Beings; and if none of the wisest men
in the World neither severally nor jointly could attain unto themselves, or
make known unto others this Knowledge of God, so that we may say with our
Apostle, that in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1.
21. And whereas those who attempted any such things, yet waxed vain in their
Imaginations and Conjectures, so that no one person in the World dares own the
Regulation of his Mind and Understanding by their Notions and Conceptions
absolutely, although they had all advantages of Wisdom, and the Exercise of
Reason above those, at the least the most of them, who wrote and published the
Books of the Scripture; it cannot with any pretense of Reason be questioned
whether they were not given by Inspiration from God as they pretend and plead.
There is that done in them which all the World could not do, and without the
doing whereof all the World must have been eternally miserable, and who could
do this but God? If any one shall judge, that that Ignorance of God, which was
among the Heathens of old, or is among the Indians at this day, is not so
miserable a matter as we make it; or that there is any way to free them from it
but by an Emanation of Light from the Scripture, he dwells out of my present
way upon the Confines of Atheism; so that I shall not divert unto any Converse
with him: I shall only add, That whatever Notions of Truth conc^rning God and
his Essence there may be found in those Philosophers who lived after the
Preaching of the Gospel in the World, or are at this day to be found among the
Mahumetans, or other false Worshippers in the World, above those of the more
ancient Pagans, they all derive from the Fountain of the Scripture, and were
thence by various means traduced.

2. The second End of this Doctrine is to direct Mankind in their proper Course
of living unto God, and attaining that Rest and Blessedness whereof they are
capable, and which they cannot but desire. These things are necessary to our
Nature, so that without them it were better not to be; for it is better to have
no Being in the World, than whiles we have it always to wander, and never to
act toward its proper end, seeing all that is really good unto us consists in
our Tendency thereunto, and our Attainment of it. Now as these things were
never stated in the minds of the Community of Mankind, but that they lived in
perpetual confusion; so the Enquiries of the Philosophers about the chief end
of Man, the Nature of Felicity or Blessedness, the ways of attaining it, are
nothing but so many uncertain and fierce Digladiations, wherein not any one
Truth is asserted, nor any one Duty prescribed, that is not spoiled and
vitiated by its Circumstances and Ends; besides they never rose up so much as
to a Surmise of or about the most important matters of Religion, without which
it is demonstrable by reason, that it is impossible we should ever attain the
End for which we are made, nor the Blessedness whereof we are capable. No
account could they ever give of our Apostasy from God, of the Depravation of
our Nature, of the Cause, or necessary Cure of it. In this lost and wandering
Condition of Mankind the Scripture presents it self as a Light, Rule and
Guide unto all, to direct them in their whole Course unto their end, and to
bring them unto the enjoyment of God; and this it does with that clearness and
evidence as to dispel all the Darkness, and put an end unto all the Confusions
of the minds of Men, as the Sun with rising does the shades of the Night,
unless they wilfully shut their eyes against it, loving Darkness rather than
Light, because their deeds are evil. For all the Confusion of the minds of men
to extricate themselves from, whence they found out and immixed themselves in
endless Questions to no purpose, arose from their Ignorance of what we were
originally, of what we now are, and how we came so to be, by what way or means
we may be delivered or relieved, what are the Duties of Life, or what is
required of us in order to our living to God as our chiefest end, and wherein
the Blessedness of our Nature does consist: All the World was never able to
give an Answer tolerably satisfactory unto any one of these Enquiries, and yet
unless they are all infallibly determined, we are not capable of the least Rest
or Happiness above the Beasts that perish. But now all these things are so
clearly declared and stated in the Scripture, that it comes with an Evidence
like a Light from Heaven on the Minds and Consciences of unprejudiced Persons.
What was the Condition of our Nature in its first Creation and Constitution,
with the Blessedness and Advantage of that Condition; how we fell from it; and
what was the Cause, what is the Nature, and what the Consequents and Effects of
our present Depravation and Apostasy from God; how Help and Relief is provided
for us herein by infinite Wisdom, Grace and Bounty; what that Help is; how we
may be interested in it, and made partakers of it; what is that System of
Duties, or Course of Obedience unto God which is required of us; and wherein
our eternal Felicity does consist: are all of them so plainly and clearly
revealed in the Scripture, as in general to leave Mankind no ground for Doubt,
Enquiry, or Conjecture; set aside inveterate Prejudices from Tradition,
Education, false Notions into the Mould whereof the mind is cast, the Love of
Sin, and the Conduct of Lust, which things have an inconceivable power over the
Minds, Souls, and Affections of Men; and the Light of the Scripture in these
things is like that of the Sun at Noonday, which shuts up the way unto all
further Enquiry, and efficaciously necessitates unto an Acquiescency in it. And
in particular in that Direction which it gives unto the Lives of Men, in order
unto that Obedience which they ow to God, and that Reward which they expect
from him, there is no instance conceivable of any thing conducing thereunto,
which is not prescribed therein, nor of any thing which is contrary unto it
that falls not under its Prohibition. Those therefore whose Desire or Interest
it is, that the Bounds and Differences of Good and Evil should be unfixed and
confounded, who are afraid to know what they were, what they are, or what they
shall come unto; who care to know neither God nor themselves, their Duty nor
their Reward, may despise this Book, and deny its divine Original: others will
retain a sacred Veneration of it, as of the Offspring of God.

4. The Testimony of the Church may in like manner be pleaded unto the same
purpose: and I shall also insist upon it, partly to manifest wherein its true
Nature and Efficacy does consist, and partly to evince the vanity of the old
Pretense, that even we also who are departed from the Church of Rome do receive
the Scripture upon the Authority thereof; whence it is further pretended, that
on the same Ground and Reason we ought to receive whatever else it proposes
unto us.

1. The Church is said to be the Ground and Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Which is the only Text pleaded with any Sobriety, to give countenance unto the
Assertion of the Authority of the Scripture with respect unto us, to depend on
the Authority of the Church. But the Weakness of a Plea to that purpose from
hence has been so fully manifested by many already, that it needs no more to
be insisted on. In short, it cannot be so the Ground and Pillar of Truth, that
the Truth should be as it were built and rest upon it as its Foundation; for
this is directly contrary to the same Apostle, who teaches us, that the Church
it self is built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner Stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. The Church cannot be the
Ground of Truth, and Truth the Ground of the Church in the same sense or kind.
Wherefore the Church is the Ground and Pillar of Truth, in that it holds up and
declares the Scriptures, and the things contained therein, so to be.

2. In receiving any thing from a Church, we may consider the Authority of it,
or its Ministry. By the Authority of the Church in this matter we intend no
more but the weight and importance that is in its Testimony, as Testimonies do
vary according to the Worth, Gravity, Honesty, Honor, and Reputation of them
by whom they are given. For to suppose an Authority, properly so called, in any
Church, or all the Churches of the World, whereon our Reception of the
Scripture should depend, as that which gives its Authority toward us, and a
sufficient Warranty to our Faith, is a nice Imagination: For the Authority and
Truth of God stand not in need, nor are capable of any such Attestation from
Men; all they will admit of from the children of Men is, that they do humbly
submit unto them, and testify their so doing with the Reasons of it. The
Ministry of the Church in this matter is that Duty of the Church, whereby it
proposes and declares the Scripture to be the Word of God, and that as it
has occasion to all the World. And this Ministry also may be considered either
formally, as it is appointed of God unto this End, and blessed by him; or
materially, only as the thing is done, though the Grounds whereon it is done,
and the manner of doing it be not divinely approved.

We wholly deny that we receive the Scripture, or ever did, on the Authority of
the Church of Rome in any sense whatever, for the Reasons that shall be
mentioned immediately. But it may be granted, that together with the Ministry
of other Churches in the World, and many other Providential Means of their
Preservation, and successive Communication, we did de Facto receive the
Scriptures by the Ministry of the Church of Rome also, seeing they also were in
the possession of them: But this Ministry we allow only in the latter sense, as
an actual means in subserviency unto God's Providence, without respect unto any
especial Institution.

And for the Authority of the Church in this case, in that sense wherein it is
allowed, namely, as denoting the Weight and Importance of a Testimony, which
being strengthened by all sorts of Circumstances, may be said to have great
Authority in it, we must be careful unto whom or what Church we grant or allow
it. For let men assume what Names or Titles to themselves they please, yet if
the Generality of them be corrupt or flagitious in their lives, and have great
secular Advantages, which they highly prize and studiously improve, from what
they suppose and profess the Scripture to supply them withal, be they called
Church, or what you please, their Testimony therein is of very little value;
for all men may see that they have an earthly worldly Interest of their own
therein. And it will be said, that if such Persons did know the whole Bible to
be a Fable (as one Pope expressed himself to that purpose) they would not
forego the Profession of it, unless they could more advantage themselves in the
World another way. Wherefore, whereas it is manifest unto all, that those who
have the Conduct of the Roman Church have made and do make to themselves great
earthly temporal Advantages, in Honor, Power, Wealth, and Reputation in the
World, by their Profession of the Scripture, their Testimony may rationally be
supposed to be so far influenced by self interest, as to be of little Validity.

The Testimony therefore which I intend, is that of multitudes of persons of
unspotted Reput^^ion on all other accounts in the World, free from all
possibility of impeachment as unto any designed evil or conspiracy among
themselves, with respect unto any corrupt end, and who having not the least
secular Advantage by what they testified unto, were absolutely secured against
all Exceptions, which either common Reason or common Usage among Mankind can
put in unto any Witness whatever. And to evidence the force that is in this
Consideration, I shall briefly represent, (1.) Who they were that gave and do
give this Testimony in some especial Instances. (2.) What they gave this
Testimony unto. (3.) How or by what means they did so.

And in the first place, The Testimony of those by whom the several Books of
the Scripture were written, is to be considered: They all of them severally and
jointly witnessed, that what they wrote was received by Inspiration from God.
This is pleaded by the Apostle Peter in the Name of them all, 2 Pet. 1. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made
known unto you the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye
witnesses of his Majesty. For he received from God the Father, honor and
glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent Glory, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which came from Heaven
we heard, when we were with him in the holy Mount. We have also a more sure
word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man: but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. This is the
concurrent Testimony of the Writers both of the Old Testament and the New;
Namely, that as they have certain knowledge of the things they wrote, so their
writing was by Inspiration from God. So in particular John bears witness unto
his Revelations, Chap. 19. 9. Chap. 22. 6. These are the true and faithful
sayings of God. And what weight is to be laid hereon, is declared; Joh. 21. 24.
This is that Disciple which testifyeth of these things, and wrote these things,
and we know that his testimony is true. He testified the Truth of what he
wrote; but how was it known to the Church there intended, (we know that his
Testimony is true) that so it was indeed? He was not absolutely (...), or one
that was to be believed in merely on his own account; yet here it is spoken in
the name of the Church with the highest Assurance; and we know that his
Testimony is true. I answer: this assurance of theirs did not arise merely from
his moral or natural endowments or holy Counsels, but from the Evidence they
had of his divine Inspiration, Whereof we shall treat afterward.

The things pleaded to give force unto this Testimony in particular, are all
that such a Testimony is capable of, and so many as would require a large
discourse by it self to propose, discuss, and confirm them. But supposing the
Testimony they gave, I shall in compliance whith my own design reduce the
Evidences of its Truth unto these two considerations: (1.) of their Persons,
and (2.) of the Manner of their Writing.

1. As to their Persons they were absolutely removed from all possible
suspicion of deceiving or being deceived. The Wit of all the Atheistical
Spirits in the World is not able to fix on any one thing, that would be a
tolerable ground of any such suspicion concerning the integrity of witnesses,
could such a Testimony be given in any other case. And surmises in things of
this nature which had no pleadable ground for them, are to be looked on as
Diabolical suggestions, or Atheistical Dreams, or at best the false
Imaginations of weak and distempered Minds. The nature and design of their
work, their unconcernment with all secular interests, their unacquaintance with
one another, the Times and Places wherein the things reported by them were done
and acted, the facility of convincing them of falsehood, if what they wrote in
matter of fact, which is the Fountain of what else they taught, in case it were
not true, the evident certainty that this would have been done arising from the
known Desire, Ability, Will and Interest of their Adversaries so to do, had it
been possible to be effected, seeing this would have secured them the Victory
in the conflicts wherein they were violently engaged, and have put an immediate
issue unto all that difference and uproar that was in the World about their
Doctrine; their Harmony among themselves without conspiracy or antecedent
Agreement, the miseries which they underwent, most of them without hope of
releif or recompense in this World, upon the Sole Account of the Doctrine
taught by themselves, with all other circumstances innumerable that are
pleadable to evince the sincerity and integrity of any witnesses whatever, do
all concur to prove that they did not follow cunningly devised Fables in what
they declared concerning the Mind and Will of God as immediately from himself.
To confront this evidence with bare Surmizes, incapable of any rational
Countenance or Confirmation, is only to manifest what brutish impudence
Infidelity and Atheism are forced to retreat unto for shelter.

2. Their Style and Manner of Writing deserves a peculiar consideration. For
there are impressed on it all those Characters of a divine Original, that can
be communicated unto such an outward Adjunct of divine Revelation.
Notwithstanding the distance of the Ages and Seasons wherein they lived, the
difference of the Languages wherein they wrote, with the great variety of their
Parts, Abilities, Education and other circumstances, yet there is upon the
whole and all the parts of their writing, that Gravity, Majesty, and Authority,
mixed with plainness of speech and absolute freedom from all appearance of
affectation of esteem or applause, or any things else that derive from humane
frailty, as must excite an Admiration in all that seriously consider them. But
I have at large Exercitat. on the Epist. to the Heb. Exer. 1.
elsewhere insisted on this consideration. And have also in the same place
showed that there is no other writing extant in the world that ever pretended
unto a divine Original, as the Apocriphal Books under the Old Testament, and
some fragments of spurious pieces pretended to be written in the days of the
Apostles, but they are, not only from their matter, but from the manner of
their writing, and the plain footsteps of humane Artifice and Weakness therein
sufficient for their own conviction, and do openly discover their own vain
pretensions. So must every thing necessarily do, which being merely humane,
pretends unto an immediate derivation from God. When men have done all they
can, these things will have as evident a difference between them, as there is
between Wheat and Chaff, between real and painted Fire, Jer. 23. 28, 29.

2. Unto the Testimony of the Divine Writers themselves, we must add that of
those who in all Ages have believed in Christ through their Word, which is the
description which the Lord Jesus Christ gives of his Church. Joh. 17. 20. This
is the Church, that is, those who wrote the Scripture; and those who believe in
Christ through their word through all Ages, which bears witness to the divine
Original of the Scripture, and it may be added, that we know this witness is
true. With these I had rather venture my Faith and eternal condition, then with
any Society, any real or pretended Church whatever. And among these there is an
especial consideration to be had of those innumerable multitudes who in the
primitive times witnessed this confession all the World over. For they had many
advantages above us, to know the certainty of sundry matters of fact which the
verity of our Religion depends upon. And we are directed unto an especial
regard of their Testimony, which is signalized by Christ himself. In the great
Judgment that is to be passed on the World, the first Appearance is of the
Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus Christ, and for the
Word of God. Rev. 20. 4. And there is at present an especial regard unto them
in Heaven upon the account of their Witness and Testimony. Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11.
These were they who with the loss of their lives by the Sword, and other ways
of violence gave testimony unto the Truth of the Word of God. And to reduce
these things unto a rational consideration, who can have the least occasion to
suspect all those persons of folly, weakness, credulity, wickedness, or
conspiracy among themselves, which such a diffused multitude was absolutely
incapable of? Neither can any man undervalue their Testimony, but he must
comply with their Adversaries against them, who were known generally to be of
the worst of Men. And who is there that believes there is a God, and an eternal
future State, that had not rather have his Soul with Paul than Nero, with the
Holy Martyrs than their bestial Persecutors? Wherefore this Suffrage and
Testimony, begun from the first writing of the Scripture, and carried on by the
best of Men in all Ages, and made conspicuously glorious in the primitive times
of Christianity, must needs be with all wise men unavoidably cogent, at least
unto a due and sedate consideration of what they bare witness unto, and
sufficient to scatter all such prejudices as Atheism or profaneness may raise
or suggest.

Secondly; What it was they gave Testimony unto is duly to be considered. And
this was not that the Book of the Scripture was Good, Holy, and True in all the
contents of it only, but that the whole and every part of it was given by
divine Inspiration, as their Faith in this matter is expressed, 2 Pet. 1. 20,
21. On this account and no other did they themselves receive the Scripture, as
also believe and yield Obedience unto the things contained in it. Neither would
they admit that their Testimony was received, if the whole World would be
content to allow of, or obey the Scripture on any other, or lower terms. Nor
will God himself allow of an Assent unto the Scripture under any other
conception, but as the Word which is immediately spoken by himself. Hence they
who refuse to give credit thereunto, are said to belly the Lord, and say it is
not he, Jer. 5. 2. Yea to make God a liar; 1 John 5. 10. If all mankind should
agree together to receive and make use of this Book, as that which taught
nothing but what is Good, useful, and profitable to humane Society; as that
which is a complete Directory unto men in all that they need to believe or do
toward God, the best means under Heaven to bring them to setlement,
satisfaction, and assurance in the Knowledge of God and themselves, as the
safest Guide to eternal blessedness, and therefore must needs be written and
composed by persons, Wise, Holy, and Honest above all comparison, and such as
had that Knowledge of God and his Will as is necessary unto such an undertaking,
yet all this answers not the Testimony given by the Church of Believers in all
ages unto the Scriptures. It was not lawful for them, it is not for us, so to
compound this matter with the World. That the whole Scripture was given by
Inspiration from God, that it was his Word, his true and faithful sayings, was
that which in the first place they gave Testimony unto, and we also are obliged
so to do. They never pretended unto any other Assurance of the things they
professed, nor any other Reason of their Faith and Obedience, but that the
Scripture wherein all these things are contained was given immediately from
God, or was his Word. And therefore they were always esteemed no less Traitors
to Christianity who gave up their Bibles to Persecutors than those who denied
Jesus Christ.

3. The manner wherein this Testimony was given, adds to the importance of it.
For (1.) Many of them, especially in some seasons, gave it in, and with sundry
miraculous operations. This our Apostle pleads as a corroboration of the
witness given by the first preachers of the Gospel unto the Truths of it; Heb.
2. 4. as the same was done by all the Apostles together; Act. 5. 32. It must be
granted that these Miracles were not wrought immediately to confirm this single
Truth, that the Scripture was given by inspiration of God. But the end of
miracles is to be an immediate witness from Heaven, or Gods attestation to
their Persons and Ministry by whom they were wrought. His Presence with them,
and Approbation of their Doctrine, were publicly declared by them. But the
miracles wrought by the Lord Christ and his Apostles, whereby God gave
immediate Testimony unto the divine Mission of their Persons, and infallible
truth of their Doctrine, might either not have been written as most of them
were not, or they might have been written and their doctrine recorded in Books
not given by inspiration from God. Besides, as to the miracles wrought by
Christ himself, and most of those of the Apostles, they were wrought among them
by whom the Books of the Old Testament were acknowledged as the oracles of God,
and before the writing of those of the New; So that they could not be wrought
in the immediate confirmation of the one or the other. Neither have we any
infallible Testimony concerning these Miracles, but the Scripture it self,
wherein they are recorded: whence it is necessary that we should believe the
Scripture to be infallibly true before we can believe on grounds infallible the
miracles therein recorded to be so. Wherefore I grant that the whole force of
this consideration lies in this alone, that those who gave Testimony to the
Scripture to be the Word of God, had an Attestation given unto their Ministry
by these miraculous operations; concerning which we have good collateral
security also.

2. Many of them confirmed their Testimony with their Sufferings, being not
only witnesses but Martyrs in the peculiar Church notion of that word, grounded
on the Scripture, Act. 22. 20. Rev. 2. 13. Chap. 17. 7. So far were they from
any Worldly advantage by the Profession they made, and the Testimony they gave,
as that in the confirmation of them they willingly and cheerfully underwent
whatever is evil, dreadful, or destructive to humane nature in all its
temporary concerns. It is therefore unquestionable that they had the highest
Assurance of the Truth in these things which the Mind of Man is capable of. The
management of this Argument is the principal design of the Apostle in the whole
11th Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. For having declared the nature of
faith in general, namely, that it is the subsistence of things hoped for, and
the evidence of things not seen, ver. 1. That is such an ^ssent unto and
confidence of invisible things, things capable of no demonstration from Sense
or Reason, as respects divine Revelation only, whereinto alone it is resolved:
for our encouragement thereunto and establishment therein, he produces a long
Catalogue of those who did, suffered, and obtained great things thereby. That
which he principally insists upon is the Hardships, Miseries, Cruelties,
Tortures, and several sorts of Deaths which they underwent; especially from
ver. 35. to the end. These he calls a Cloud of Witnesses wherewith we are
compassed about, Chap. 12. 1. giving Testimony unto what we do believe, that
is, divine Revelation; and in an especial manner the promises therein
contained, unto our encouragement in the same duty, as he there declares. And
certainly what was thus testified unto by so many Great, Wise, and Holy
Persons, and that in such a way and manner, has as great an outward evidence
of its Truth, as any thing of that nature is capable of in this World.

3. They gave not their Testimony casually, or on some extraordinary Occasion
only, or by some one solemn act, or in some one certain way, as other
Testimonies are given nor can be given otherwise; but they gave their Testimony
in this cause, in their whole course, in all that they thought, spoke, or did
in the World, and in the whole disposal of their ways, lives and actions, as
every true Believer continues to do at this day. For a man when he is
occasionally called out to give a verbal Testimony unto the divine original of
the Scripture, ordering in the mean time the whole course of his conversation,
his hopes, designs, ayms and ends without any eminent respect or regard unto
it, his Testimony is of no value, nor can have any influence on the minds of
sober and considerate men. But when men do manifest and evince that the
Declaration of the mind of God in the Scripture has a Sovereign divine
Authority over their Souls and Consciences absolutely and in all things, then
is their Witness cogent and efficacious. There is to me a thousand times more
force and weight in the Testimony to this purpose of some holy persons, who
universally and in all things with respect unto this World, and their future
eternal condition, in all their thoughts, words, actions and ways do really
experiment in themselves and express to others, the power and Authority of this
Word of God in their Souls and Consciences, living, doing, suffering, and dying
in peace, assurance of mind and consolation thereon, then in the verbal
declaration of the most splendid numerous Church in the World, who evidence not
such an inward sense of its power and Efficacy. There is therefore that force
in the real Testimony which has been given in all Ages, by all this sort of
persons, not one excepted, unto the divine Authority of the Scripture, that it
is highly arrogant for any one to question the Truth of it, without evident
convictions of its imposture, which no person of any tolerable Sobriety did
ever yet pretend unto.

I shall add in the last place the consideration of that Success which the
doctrine derived solely from the Scripture, and resolved thereinto, has had in
the World upon the Minds and Lives of Men, especially upon the first preaching
of the Gospel. And two things offer themselves hereon immediately unto our
consideration; First the Persons by whom this doctrine was successfully carried
on in the World, and Secondly the Way and Manner of the propagation of it. Both
which the Scripture takes notice of in particular, as evidences of that divine
power which the Word was really accompanied withal. For the persons unto whom
this work was committed, I mean the Apostles and first Evangelists, were, as to
their outward condition in the World, Poor, Low, and every way despised; and as
unto the endowments of their minds, destitute of all those Abilities and
Advantages which might give them either Reputation or Probability of Success in
such an undertaking. This the Jews marked in them with contempt; Act. 4. 13.
And the Gentiles also generally despised them on the same account. As they
afforded our Apostle no better title than that of a Babbler, Act. 17. 18. So for
a long time they kept up the Public Vogue in the World, that Christianity was
the Religion of Idiots and Men Illiterate. But God had another design in this
order of things, which our Apostle declares upon an admission of the
inconsiderable meanness of them unto whom the dispensation of the Gospel was
committed; 2 Cor. 4. 7. We have this treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us. The Reason why God would
make use of such Instruments only in so great a work was, that through their
meanness his own glorious power might be more conspicuous. There is nothing
more common among men, nor more natural unto them, than to admire the
excellencies of those of their own Race and Kind, and a willingness to have all
evidences of a divine Supernatural power clouded and hidden from them. If
therefore there had been such persons employed as Instruments in this work,
whose Powers, Abilities, Qualifications, and Endowments might have been
probably pretended as sufficient, and the immediate causes of such an effect,
there would have been no observation of the divine power or glory of God. But
he who is not able to discern them in the bringing about of so mighty a work by
means so disproportionate thereunto, is under the power of the unrelievable
prejudices intimated by our Apostle in this case, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 5, 7.

Secondly, The Means which were to be used unto this end, namely, the subduing
of the World unto the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel, so erecting the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ in the minds of men, who before were under the
Power and Dominion of his Adversary, must either be Force and Arms; or
Eloquence, in plausible persuasive reasonings. And mighty works have been
wrought by the one and the other of them. By the former have Empires been set
up and established in the World; and the superstition of Mahomet imposed on
many Nations. And the latter also has had great effects on the minds of many.
Wherefore it might have been expected that those who had engaged themselves in
so great a design and work as that mentioned, should betake themselves unto the
one or other of these means and ways; For the Wit of Man cannot contrive any
way unto such an end, but what may be reduced unto one of these two; seeing
neither upon the principles of nature, nor on the Rules of humane Wisdom or
Policy can any other be imagined. But even both these ways were abandoned by
them, and they declared against the use of either of them. For as outward
Force, Power, and Authority they had none, the use of all carnal weapons being
utterly inconsistent with this Work and Design, so the other way of persuasive
Orations, of enticing words, of Alluring Arts and Eloquence, with the like
effects of humane Wisdom and Skill, were all of them studiously declined by
them in this work, as things extremely prejudicial to the success thereof, 1
Cor. 2. 4, 5. But this alone, they betook themselves unto; they went up and
down preaching to Jews and Gentiles, that Jesus Christ died for our sins, and
rose again according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. And this they did by
Virtue of those Spiritual Gifts, which were the hidden Powers of the World to
come, whose Nature, Virtue and Power others were utterly unacquainted withal.
This Preaching of theirs, this Preaching of the Cross, both for the Subject,
Matter, and Manner of it, without Art, Eloquence or Oratory, was looked on as a
mavelous foolish thing, a sweaty kind of babbling, by all those who had got
any Reputation of Learning or Cunning amongst men. This our Apostle at large
discourses, 1 Cor. 1. In this State of things, every thing was under as many
improbabilities of Success unto all rational Conjectures as can be conceived.
Besides, together with the Doctrine of the Gospel that they preached, which was
new and uncouth unto the World, they taught Observances of Religious Worship in
Meetings, Assemblies, or Conventicles to that end, which all the Laws in the
World did prohibit, Acts 18. 13. c. 16. 21. Hereupon no sooner did the Rulers
and Governors of the World begin to take notice of them, and what they did,
but they judged that it all tended to Sedition, and that Commotions would ensue
thereon. These things enraged the Generality of Mankind against them and their
Converts, who therefore made havoc of them with incredible fury. And yet
notwithstanding all these Disadvantages, and against all these Oppositions,
their Doctrine prevailed to subdue the World to the Obedience thereof. And
there may be added unto all these things one or two Considerations from the
State of Things at that time in the World, which signalize the quality of this
Work, and manifest it to have been of God.

As (1.) That in the New Testament the Writers of it do constantly distribute
all those with whom they had to do in this World, into Jews and Greeks, which
we render Gentiles, the other Nations of the World coming under that
Denomination because of their Preeminence on various Accounts. Now the Jews at
that time were in solidum, possessed of all the true Religion that was in the
World; and this they boasted of as their Privilege, bearing up themselves with
the Thoughts and Reputation of it every where and on all occasions; it being at
that time their great Business to gain Proselytes unto it, whereon also their
Honor and Advantage did depend. The Greeks on the other side were in as full a
possession of Arts, Sciences, Literature, and all that which the World calls
Wisdom, as the Jews were of Religion; and they had also a Religion received by
a long Tradition of their Fathers from time immemorial, which they had
variously cultivated and dressed with Mysteries and Ceremonies unto their own
complete satisfaction. Besides the Romans, who were the ruling Part of the
Gentiles, did ascribe all their Prosperity, and the whole Raising of their
stupendous Empire to their Gods, and the religious Worship they gave unto them;
so that it was a fundamental Maxim in their Policy and Rule, that they should
prosper or decay, according as they observed or were negligent in the Religion
they had received. As indeed not only those who owned the true God and his
Providence, but before Idolatry and Superstition had given place unto Atheism,
all people did solemnly impute all their Achievements and Successes unto their
Gods, as the Prophet speaks of the Caldeans, Mal. 1. 11. And he who first
undertook to record the Exploits of the Nations of the World, does constantly
assign all their Good and Evil unto their Gods, as they were pleased or
provoked. The Romans in especial boasted that their Religion was the cause of
their Prosperity; Pietate and Religione atque hac una Sapientia, quod Deorum
immortalium Numine omnia regi gubernarique prospeximus, omnes Gentes
Nationesque superamus, says their great Oracle, Orat. de Har. Resp. And
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, a great and wise Historian, giving an account of
the Religion of the Romans, and the Ceremonies of their Worship, affirms, that
he does it unto this end, That those who have been ignorant of the Roman Piety,
should cease to wonder at their Prosperity and Successes in all their Wars,
seeing by reason of their Religion they had the Gods always propitious and
succourable unto them. Antiq. Romans lib. 2. The Consideration hereof made them
so obstinate in their Adherence unto their present Religion, that when after
many Ages and hundreds of Years, some Books of Numa their second King, and
principal Establisher of their Commonwealth, were occasionally found, instead
of paying them any respect, they ordered them to be burnt, because one who had
perused them, took his Oath that they were contrary to their present Worship
and Devotion. And this was that, which upon the Declension of their Empire
after the Prevalency of the Christian Religion, those who were obstinate in
their Paganism reflected severely upon the Christians; the Relinquishment of
their old Religion they fiercely avowed to be the Cause of all their
Calamities. In answer unto which Calumny principally Austin wrote his excellent
Discourse, De Civitate Dei.

In this state of things the Preachers of the Gospel come among them, and not
only bring a new Doctrine, under all the Disadvantages before mentioned, and
moreover that he who was the Head of it was newly crucified by the present
powers of the Earth for a Malefactor; but also such a Doctrine as was expressly
to take away the Religion from the Jews, and the Wisdom from the Greeks, and
the principal Maxim of Polity from the Romans, whereon they thought they had
raised their Empire. It were easy to declare how all those Sects were engaged
in worldly Interest, Honor, Reputation, Principles of Safety, to oppose,
decry, condemn, and reject this new Doctrine. And if a Company of sorry
Craftsmen were able to fill a whole City with Tumult and Uprore against the
Gospel, as they did when they apprehended it would bring in a decay of their
Trade, Acts 19. what can we think was done in all the World, by all those who
were engaged and enraged by higher Provocations? It was as death to the Jews to
part with their Religion, both on the account of the Conviction they had of its
Truth, and the Honor they esteemed to accrue to themselves thereby. And for
the Greeks to have all that Wisdom, which they and their Forefathers had been
laboring in for so many Generations, now to be all rejected as an impertinent
Foolery by the sorry Preachments of a few illiterate Persons; it raised them
unto the highest Indignation. And the Romans were wise enough to secure the
Fundamental Maxim of their State. Wherefore the World seemed very sufficiently
fortified against the Admission of this new and strange Doctrine, on the Terms
whereon it was proposed. There can be no Danger sure that ever it should obtain
any considerable Progress: But we know that things fell out quite otherwise;
Religion, Wisdom and Power, with Honor, Profit, Interest, Reputation, were
forced all to give way to its Power and Efficacy.

2. The World was at that time in the highest Enjoyment of Peace, Prosperity
and Plenty, that ever it attained from the entrance of sin; and it is known how
from all these things are usually made Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the
Lusts thereof. Whatever the Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Sensuality of any
Persons could carry them forth to lust after, the World was full of
satisfactions for. And most men lived as in the eager pursuit of their Lusts,
so in a full supply of what they did require. In this Condition the Gospel is
preached unto them, requiring at once, and that indispensibly, a Renunciation
of all those worldly Lusts, which before had been the Salt of their Lives. If
men designed any Compliance with it, or Interest in it, all their Pride,
Ambition, Luxury, Covetousness, Sensuality, Malice, Revenge, must all be
mortified and rooted up. Had it only been a new Doctrine and Religion,
declaring that Knowledge and Worship of God which they never heard of before,
they could not but be very wary in giving it entertainment; but when withal it
required at the first Instant, that for its sake they should pull out their
right eyes, and cut off their right hands, to part with all that was dear and
useful unto them, and which had such a prevalent Interest in their Minds and
Affections, as corrupt Lusts are known to have; this could not but invincibly
fortify them against its Admittance. But yet this also was forced to give
place, and all the Fortifications of Satan therein was by the Power of the Word
cast to the Ground, as our Apostle expresses it, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Where he
gives an Account of that Warfare, whereby the World was subdued to Christ by
the Gospel. Now a man, that has a mind to make himself an Instance of
conceited Folly and Pride, may talk as though there was in all this no Evidence
of divine Power giving Testimony to the Scripture, and the Doctrine contained
in it, but the Characters of it are so legible unto every modest and sedate
Prospect, that they leave no room for Doubt or Haesitation.

But the force of the whole Argument is liable unto one Exception of no small
Moment, which must therefore necessarily be taken notice of and removed. For
whereas we plead the Power, Efficacy and Prevalency of the Gospel in former
days, as a Demonstration of its divine Original, it will be enquired, Whence it
is, that it is not still accompanied with the same Power, nor does produce the
same Effects. For we see the Profession of it is now confined to narrow Limits,
in comparison of what it formerly extended it self unto; neither do we find
that it gets Ground any where in the World, but is rather more and more
straightened every day. Wherefore either the first Prevalency that is asserted
unto it, and argued as an Evidence of its Divinity, did indeed proceed from
some other accidental Causes in an efficacious though unseen Concurrence, and
was not by an Emanation of Power from it self; or the Gospel is not at present
what it was formerly, seeing it has not the same Effect upon, or Power over
the Minds of Men, as that had of old. We may therefore suspend the pleading of
this Argument from what was done by the Gospel formerly, lest it reflect
disadvantage upon what we profess at present.

Answ. 1. Whatever different Events may fall out in different Seasons, yet the
Gospel is the same as ever it was from the Beginning. There is not another
Book, containing another Doctrine, crept into the World instead of that once
delivered unto the Saints. And whatever various Apprehensions men may have
through their Weakness or Prejudices concerning the things taught therein, yet
are they in themselves absolutely the same that ever they were, and that
without the loss or change of a material Word or Syllable in the manner of
their Delivery. This I have proved elsewhere, and it is a thing capable of the
most evident Demonstration. Wherefore whatever Entertainment this Gospel meets
withal at present in the World, its former Prevalency may be pleaded in
Justification of its divine Original.

2. The Cause of this Event lies principally in the Sovereign Will and
Pleasure of God. For although the Scripture be his Word, and he has testified
it so to be by his Power, put forth and exerted in Dispensations of it unto
men, yet is not that divine Power included or shut up in the Letter of it, so
that it must have the same Effect where ever it comes. We plead not that there
is absolutely in its self, its Doctrine, the Preaching or Preachers thereof,
such a Power, as it were naturally and physically to produce the Effects
mentioned. But it is an Instrument in the Hand of God unto that work which is
his own, and he puts forth his Power in it, and by it, as it seems good unto
him. And if he does at any time so put forth his divine Power in the
Administration of it, or in the use of this Instrument, as that the great Worth
and Excellency of it shall manifest it self to be from him, he gives a
sufficient Attestation of it. Wherefore the Times and Seasons of the Prevalency
of the Gospel in the World are in the Hand and at the Sovereign Disposal of
God. And as he is not obliged ( for who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who
has been his Counselor?) to accompany it with the same Power at all times and
seasons; so the Evidence of his own Power going along with it at any time
whiles under an open Claim of a divine Original, is an uncontrollable
Approbation of it. Thus at the first Preaching of the Word, to fulfill the
Promises made unto the Fathers from the Foundation of the World, to glorify his
Son Jesus Christ, and the Gospel it self which he had revealed, he put forth
that effectual divine Power in its Administration, whereby the World was
subdued unto the Obedience of it. And the Time will come when he will revive
the same Work of Power and Grace to retrieve the World into a subjection to
Jesus Christ. And although he does not in these latter Ages cause it to run and
prosper among the Nations of the world, who have not as yet received it as he
did formerly, yet considering the state of things at present among the
Generality of Mankind, the Preservation of it in that small Remnant by whom it
is obeyed in sincerity, is a no less glorious Evidence of his Presence with it,
and Care over it, than was its eminent Propagation in days of old.

3. The Righteousness of God is in like manner to be considered in these
things. For whereas he had granted the inestimable Privilege of his Word unto
many Nations, they through their horrible ingratitude and wickedness detained
the Truth in Unrighteousness; so that the continuance of the Gospel among them
was no way to the Glory of God, no nor yet unto their own Advantage. For
neither Nations nor Persons will ever be advantaged by an outward Profession of
the Gospel, whilst they live in a Contradiction and Disobedience to its
Precepts; yea nothing can be more pernicious to the Souls of Men. This Impiety
God is at this day revenging on the Nations of the World, having utterly cast
off many of them from the Knowledge of the Truth, and given up others unto
strong Delusions, to believe Lies, though they retain the Scriptures and
outward Profession of Christianity. How far he may proceed in the same way of
Righteous Vengeance toward other Nations also, we know not, but ought to
tremble in the Consideration of it. When God first granted the Gospel unto the
World, although the Generality of Mankind had greatly sinned against the Light
of Nature, and had rejected all those supernatural Revelations that at any time
had been made unto them; yet had they not sinned against the Gospel it self,
nor the Grace thereof. It pleased God therefore to wink at, and pass over that
Time of their Ignorance, so as that his Justice should not be provoked by any
of their former sins, to withold the Efficacy of his divine Power in the
Administration of the Gospel from them, whereby he called them to Repentance.
But now after that the Gospel has been sufficiently tendered unto all Nations,
and has, either as unto its Profession, or as unto its Power with the
Obedience that it requires, been rejected by the most of them; things are quite
otherwise stated. It is from the Righteous Judgment of God, revenging the sins
of the World against the Gospel it self, that so many Nations are deprived of
it, and so many left obstinate in its Refusal. Wherefore the present state of
things does no way weaken or prejudice the Evidence given unto the Scripture by
that mighty Power of God, which accompanied the Administration of it in the
World. For what has since fallen out, there are secret Reasons of Sovereign
Wisdom, and open Causes in Divine Justice, whereunto it is to be assigned.

These things I have briefly called over, and not as though they were all of
this kind that may be pleaded, but only to give some Instance of those external
Arguments, whereby the divine Authority of the Scripture may be confirmed.

Now these Arguments are such as are able of themselves to beget in the Minds
of Men, sober, humble, intelligent, and unprejudiced, a firm Opinion, Judgment
and Persuasion, that the Scripture does proceed from God. Where Persons are
prepossessed with invincible Prejudices contracted by a Course of Education,
wherein they have imbibed Principles opposite and contrary thereunto, and have
increased and fortified them by some fixed and hereditary Enmity against all
those whom they know to own the Divinity of the Scripture, as it is with
Mahometans, and some of the Indians; these Arguments it may be will not prevail
immediately to work nor effect their Assent. It is so with respect unto them
also, who out of Love unto, and Delight in those ways of Vice, Sin, and
Wickedness, which are absolutely and severely condemned in the Scripture,
without the least hope of a Dispensation unto them that continue under the
Power of them, who will not take these Arguments into due Consideration. Such
Persons may talk and discourse of them, but they never weigh them seriously
according as the Importance of the Cause does require. For if men will examine
them as they ought, it must be with a sedate Judgment, that their eternal
Condition depends upon a right Determination of this Enquiry. But for those who
can scarce get Liberty from the Service and Power of their Lusts, seriously to
consider what is their Condition, or what it is like to be; it is no wonder if
they talk of these things after the manner of these days, without any
Impression on their Minds and Affections, or Influence on the practical
Understanding. But our Enquiry is after what is a sufficient Evidence for the
Conviction of rational and unprejudiced Persons, and the Defeating of
Objections to the contrary, which these and the like Arguments do every way
answer.

Some think fit here to stay, that is, in these or the like external Arguments,
or rational Motives of Faith, such as render the Scriptures so credible, as
that it is an unreasonable thing not to assent unto them. That Certainty which
may be attained on these Arguments and Motives, is (as they say) the highest
which our Minds are capable of with respect unto this Object, and therefore
includes all the Assent which is required of us unto this Proposition, that the
Scriptures are the Word of God; or all the Faith whereby we believe them so to
be. When I speak of these Arguments, I intend not them alone which I have
insisted on, but all others also of the same kind, some whereof have been urged
and improved by others with great Diligence; for in the Variety of such
Arguments as offer themselves in this Cause, every one chooses out what seems
to him most cogent, and some amass all that they can think on. Now these
Arguments with the Evidence tendered in them are such, as nothing but perverse
Prejudice can detain men from giving a firm Assent unto. And no more is
required of us, but that according to the Motives that are proposed unto us,
and the Arguments used to that purpose, we come unto a Judgment and Persuasion,
called a moral Assurance of the Truth of the Scripture, and endeavor to yield
Obedience unto God accordingly.

And it were to be wished that there were more than it is feared there are, who
were really so affected with these Arguments and Motives. For the Truth is,
Tradition and Education practically bear the whole sway in this matter. But yet
when all this is done, it will be said, that all this is but a mere natural
Work, whereunto no more is required, but the natural exercise and acting of our
own Reason and understanding; that the Arguments and Motives used, though
strong, are humane and fallible, and therefore the Conclusion we make from them
is so also, and wherein we may be deceived; that an Assent grounded and
resolved into such rational Arguments only, is not Faith in the sense of the
Scripture; in brief, that it is required that we believe the Scriptures to be
the Word of God with Faith divine and supernatural, which cannot be deceived.
Two things are replied hereunto.

1. That where the Things believed are divine and supernatural, so is the Faith
whereby we believe them, or give our Assent unto them. Let the Motives and
Arguments whereon we give our Assent be of what kind they will, so that the
Assent be true and real, and the Things believed be divine and supernatural,
the Faith whereby we believe them is so also. But this is all one, as if in
things natural a man should say, our Sight is green when we see that which is
so, and blew when we see that which is blew. And this would be so in things
moral, if the Specification of Acts were from their material Objects; but it is
certain that they are not of the same Nature always with the Things they are
conversant about, nor are they changed thereby from what their Nature is in
themselves, be it natural or supernatural, humane or divine. Now things divine
are only the material Object of our Faith, as has been showed before; and by
an Enumeration of them do we answer unto the Question, What is it that you do
believe? But it is the formal Object or Reason of all our Acts from whence they
are denominated, or by which they are specified. And the formal Reason of our
Faith, Assent or Believing, is that which prevails with us to believe, and on
whose Account we do so, wherewith we answer unto that Question, Why do you
believe? If this be humane Authority, Arguments highly probable, but absolutely
fallible, Motives cogent, but only to beget a moral Persuasion, whatever we do
believe thereon, our Faith is humane, fallible, and a moral Assurance only.
Wherefore it is said*

2. That this Assent is sufficient, all that is required of us, and contains in
it all the Assurance which our minds are capable of in this matter. For no
further Evidence nor Assurance is in any case to be enquired after than the
subject matter will bear. And so is it in this Case, where the Truth is not
exposed to Sense, nor capable of a scientifical Demonstration, but must be
received upon such Reasons and Arguments, as carry it above the highest
Probability, though they leave it beneath Science or Knowledge, or infallible
Assurance; if such a Persuasion of Mind there be.

But yet I must needs say, that although those external Arguments, whereby
learned and rational Men have proved or may yet further prove the Scripture to
be a divine Revelation given of God, and the Doctrine contained in it to be a
heavenly Truth, are of singular Use for the strengthening of the Faith of them
that do believe, by relieving the mind against Temptations and Objections that
will arise to the contrary, as also for the Conviction of Gainsayers; yet to
say that they contain the formal Reason of that Assent, which is required of us
unto the Scripture as the Word of God, that our Faith is the Effect and Product
of them, which it rests upon and is resolved into, is both contrary to the
Scripture, destructive of the Nature of divine Faith, and exclusive of the Work
of the Holy Ghost in this whole matter.

Wherefore I shall do these two things before I proceed to our principal
Argument designed. (1.) I shall give some few Reasons, proving that the Faith
whereby we believe the Scripture to be the Word of God is not a mere firm moral
Persuasion, built upon external Arguments and Motives of Credibility; but is
divine and supernatural, because the formal Reason of it is so also. (2.) I
shall show what is the Nature of that Faith, whereby we do or ought to believe
the Scripture to be the Word of God; what is the work of the holy Spirit about
it, and what is the proper Object of it. In the first I shall be very brief,
for my design is to strengthen the Faith of all, and not to weaken the Opinions
of any.

Divine Revelation is the proper Object of divine Faith. With such Faith we can
believe nothing but what is so, and what is so can be received no otherwise by
us. If we believe it not with divine Faith, we believe it not at all. Such is
the Scripture as the Word of God every where proposed unto us; and we are
required to believe, that is, first to believe it so to be, and then to believe
the things contained in it. For this Proposition, that the Scripture is the
Word of God, is a divine Revelation, and so to be believed. But God no where
requires nor ever did, that we should believe any divine Revelation upon such
Grounds, much less on such Grounds and Motives only. They are left unto us as
consequential unto our Believing, to plead with others in behalf of what we
profess, and for the Justification of it unto the World. But that which
requires our Faith and Obedience unto in the receiving of divine Revelations,
whether immediately given and declared, or as recorded in the Scripture, is his
own Authority and Veracity, I am the Lord, the High and Lofty One. Thus says
the Lord. To the Law and to the Testimony. This is my Son, hear him. All
Scripture is given by Inspiration from God. Believe the Lord and his Prophets.
This alone is that which he requires us to resolve our Faith into. So when he
gave unto us the Law of our Lives, the eternal and unchangeable Rule of our
Obedience unto him in the ten Commandments, he gives no other Reason to oblige
us thereunto, but this only, I am the Lord thy God. The sole formal Reason of
all our Obedience is taken from his own Nature and our Relation unto him. Nor
does he propose any other Reason why we should believe him, or the Revelation
which he makes of his Mind and Will. And our Faith is part of our Obedience,
the Root, and principal Part of it; therefore the Reason of both is the same.
Neither did our Lord Jesus Christ nor his Apostles ever make use of such
Arguments or Motives for the ingenerating of Faith in the minds of men; nor
have they given Directions for the use of any such Arguments to this End and
Purpose. But when they were accused to have followed cunningly devised Fables,
they appealed unto Moses and the Prophets, to the Revelations they had
themselves received, and those that were before recorded. It is true they
wrought Miracles in confirmation of their own divine Mission, and of the
Doctrine which they taught. But the Miracles of our Savior were all of them
wrought amongst those who believed the whole Scripture then given to be the
Word of God; and those of the Apostles were before the Writings of the Books of
the New Testament. Their Doctrine therefore materially considered, and their
Warranty to teach it, was sufficiently yea abundantly confirmed by them. But
Divine Revelation formally considered, and as written, was left upon the old
Foundation of the Authority of God who gave it. No such Method is prescribed,
no such Example is proposed unto us in the Scripture, to make use of these
Arguments and Motives for the Conversion of the Souls of men unto God, and the
ingenerating of Faith in them. Yea in some Cases the use of such means is
decryed as unprofitable, and the Sole Authority of God, putting forth his Power
in and by his Word, is appealed unto, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5, 13. chap. 14. 26, 27. 2
Cor. 4. 7. But yet in a way of Preparation subservient unto the receiving the
Scripture as the Word of God, and for the Defense of it against Gainsayers and
their Objections, their use has been granted and proved. But from first to
last in the Old and New Testament the Authority and Truth of God are constantly
and uniformly proposed as the immediate Ground and Reason of Believing his
Revelations; nor can it be proved that he does accept or approve of any kind of
Faith or Assent, but what is built thereon and resolved thereinto. The Sum is,
We are obliged in a way of Duty, to believe the Scriptures to be a Divine
Revelation, when they are ministerially or providentially proposed unto us,
whereof afterward. The Ground whereon we are to receive them is the Authority
and Veracity of God speaking in them; we believe them because they are the Word
of God. Now this Faith whereby we so believe is Divine and Supernatural,
because the mal Reason of it is so, namely Gods Truth and Authority. Wherefore
we do not, nor ought to believe the Scripture as highly probable, or with a
moral Persuasion and Assurance built upon Arguments absolutely fallible, and
humane only. For if this be the formal Reason of Faith, namely, the Veracity
and Authority of God, if we believe not with Faith divine and supernatural, we
believe not at all.

2. The moral Certainty treated of, is a mere Effect of Reason. There is no
more required unto it, but that the Reasons proposed for the Assent required,
be such as the mind judges to be convincing and prevalent; whence an inferior
Kind of Knowledge, or a firm Opinion, or some kind of Persuasion, which has
not yet gotten an intelligible Name, does necessarily ensue. There is therefore
on this Supposition no need of any Work of the Holy Ghost, to enable us to
believe, or to work Faith in us; for no more is required herein but what
necessarily arises from a naked Exercise of Reason. If it be said, that the
Enquiry is not about what is the Work of the Spirit of God in us; but
concerning the Reasons and Motives to Believing that are proposed unto us. I
answer, it is granted; but that we urge herein is, that the Act which is
exerted on such Motives, or the Persuasion which is begotten in our minds by
them is purely natural, and such as requires no especial Work of the Holy Ghost
in us for the effecting of it. Now this is not Faith, nor can we be said in the
Scripture sense to believe thereby, and so in particular not the Scriptures to
be the Word of God. For Faith is the Gift of God, and is not of our selves,
Ephesians 2. 8. It is given unto some on the behalf of Christ, Phil. 1. 29. and not
unto others, Mat. 11. 29. chap. 13. 11. But this Assent on external Arguments
and Motives is of our selves, equally common and exposed unto all. No man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. But he who
believes the Scripture truly, aright, and according to his Duty, does say so.
No man comes to Christ, but he that has heard and learned of the Father, John
6. 45. And as this is contrary to the Scripture, so it is expressly condemned by
the ancient Church; particularly by the second Arausican Council, Can. 5. 7. Si
quis sicut augmentum ita etiam initium Fidei, ipsumque credulitatis affectum,
non per gratiae donum, id est, per inspirationem Spiritus Sancti, corrigentem
voluntatem nostram ab infidelitate ad fidem, ab impietate ad pietatem, sed
naturaliter nobis inesse dicit, Apostolicis Dogmatibus adversarius approbatur.
And plainly, Can. 7. Si quis per naturae vigorem bonum aliquod quod ad Salutem
pertinet vitae eternae cogitare ut expedit, aut eligere, sive salutari, id est,
evangelicae Praedicaiioni consentire posse affirmat absque illumi natione et
inspiratione Spiritus Sancti, qui dat omnibus suavitatem consentiendo et
credendo veritati, haeretico fallitur Spiritu.

It is still granted that the Arguments intended (that is all of them which are
true indeed, and will endure a strict Examination, for some are frequently made
use of in this Cause which will not endure a Trial) are of good use in their
place and unto their proper end; that is to beget such an Assent unto the Truth
as they are capable of effecting. For although this be not that which is
required of us in a way of Duty, but inferior to it, yet the mind is prepared
and disposed by them unto the receiving of the Truth in its proper Evidence.

3. Our Assent can be of no other Nature than the Arguments and Motives whereon
it is built, or by which it is wrought in us, as in Degree it cannot exceed
their Evidence. Now these Arguments are all humane and fallible; exalt them
unto the greatest esteem possible, yet because they are not Demonstrations, nor
do necessarily beget a certain Knowledge in us (which indeed if they did, there
were no room left for Faith or our Obedience therein) they produce an Opinion
only, though in the highest kind of Probability, and firm against Objections.
For we will allow the utmost Assurance that can be claimed upon them. But this
is exclusive of all divine Faith as to any Article, Thing, Matter or Object to
be believed. For Instance; a man professes that he believes Jesus Christ to be
the Son of God. Demand the Reason why he does so, and he will say; because God
who cannot lie, has revealed and declared him so to be, proceed yet further
and ask him, where or how God has revealed and declared this so to be? and he
will answer, in the Scripture, which is his Word; enquire now further of him,
which is necessary, wherefore he believes this Scripture to be the Word of God,
or an immediate Revelation given out from him; for hereunto we must come and
have somewhat that we may ultimately rest in, excluding in its own Nature all
further Enquiries, or we can have neither certainty, nor stability in our
Faith. On this Supposition his answer must be, that he has many cogent
Arguments that render it highly propable so to be, such as have prevailed with
him to judge it so to be, and whereon he is fully persuaded, as having the
highest Assurance hereof that the matter will bear, and so does firmly believe
them to be the Word of God. Yea but it will be replied, all these Arguments are
in their kind or Nature humane, and therefore fallible, such as it is possible
they may be false; for every thing may be so that is not immediately from the
first essential Verity. This Assent therefore unto the Scriptures as the Word
of God is humane, fallible, and such as wherein we may be deceived. And our
Assent unto the things revealed, can be of no other kind than that we give unto
the Revelation it self. For thereinto it is resolved, and thereunto it must be
reduced; these waters will rise no higher than their Fountain. And thus at
length we come to believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God with a Faith humane
and fallible, and which at last may deceive us; which is to receive the Word of
God as the Word of Men, and not as it is in truth the Word of God, contrary to
the Apostle, 1 These. 2. 13. Wherefore,

4. If I believe the Scripture to be the Word of God with an humane Faith only,
I do no otherwise believe whatever is contained in it, which overthrows all
Faith properly so called. And if I believe what is contained in the Scripture
with Faith divine and supernatural, I cannot but by the same Faith believe the
Scripture it self, which removes the moral Certainty treated of out of our way.
And the Reason of this is, that we must believe the Revelation, and the things
revealed with the same kind of Faith, or we bring confusion on the whole work
of believing. No man living can distinguish in his Experience between that
Faith, wherewith he lieves the Scripture, and that wherewith he believes the
Doctrine of it, or the things contained in it; nor is there any such
Distinction or Difference intimated in the Scripture it self; but all our
believing is absolutely resolved into the Authority of God revealing. Nor can
it be rationally apprehended that our Assent unto the things revealed, should
be of a kind and nature superior unto that which we yield unto the Revelation
it self. For let the Arguments which it is resolved into be never so evident
and cogent, let the Assent it self be as firm and certain as can be imagined,
yet is it humane still, and natural, and therein is inferior unto that which is
divine and supernatural. And yet on this Supposition that which is of a
superior kind and nature is wholly resolved into that which is of an inferior,
and must be take it self on all occasions thereunto for relief and
confirmation. For the Faith whereby we believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of
God, is on all occasions absolutely melted down into that whereby we believe
the Scriptures to be the Word of God.

But none of these things are my present especial Design, and therefore I have
insisted long enough upon them. I am not enquiring what Grounds men may have to
build an Opinion, or any kind of humane Persuasion upon, that the Scriptures
are the the Word of God, no nor yet how we may prove or maintain them so to be
unto Gainsayers; but what is required hereunto that we may believe them to be
so with Faith divine and supernatural, and what is the Work of the Spirit of
God therein.

But it may be further said, that these external Arguments and Motives are not
of themselves, and considered separately from the Doctrine which they testify
unto, the sole Ground and Reason of our Believing. For if it were possible that
a thousand Arguments of a like cogency with them were offered to confirm any
Truth or Doctrine, if it had not a divine Worth and Excellency in it self, they
could give the mind no Assurance of it. Wherefore it is the Truth it self, or
Doctrine contained in the Scripture which they testify unto, that animates them
and gives them their Efficacy. For there is such a Majesty, Holiness, and
Excellency in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and moreover such a Suitableness in
them unto unprejudiced Reason, and such an Answerableness unto all the rational
Desires and Expectations of the Soul, as evidence their Procedure from the
Fountain of infinite Wisdom and Goodness. It cannot but be conceived impossible
that such excellent, heavenly Mysteries, of such use and benefit unto all
Mankind, should be the Product of any created Industry. Let but a man know
himself, his State and Condition in any measure, with a desire of that
Blessedness which his nature is capable of, and which he cannot but design;
when the Scripture is proposed unto him in the Ministry of the Church, attested
by the Arguments insisted on, there will appear unto him in the Truths and
Doctrines of it, or in the things contained in it, such an Evidence of the
Majesty and Authority of God, as will prevail with him to believe it to be a
divine Revelation. And this Persuasion is such, that the mind is established in
its Assent unto the Truth, so as to yield Obedience unto all that is required
of us. And whereas our Belief of the Scripture is in order only to the right
Performance of our Duty, or all that Obedience which God expects from us, our
minds being guided by the Precepts and Directions, and duly influenced by the
Promises and Threatenings of it thereunto, there is no other Faith required of
us but what is sufficient to oblige us unto that Obedience.

This being, so far as I can apprehend, the Substance of what is by some
learned men proposed and adhered unto, it shall be briefly examined. And I say
here as on other occasions, that I should rejoice to see more of such a Faith
in the World, as would effectually oblige men unto Obedience out of a
Conviction of the Excellency of the Doctrine and the Truth of the Promises and
Threatenings of the Word, though learned men should never agree about the formal
Reason of Faith. Such Notions of Truth, when most diligently inquired into, are
but as sacrifice compared with Obedience. But the Truth it self is also to be
enquired after diligently.

This Opinion therefore either supposes what we shall immediately declare,
namely, the necessity of an internal effectual Work of the Holy Spirit in the
Illumination of our minds, so enabling us to believe with Faith divine and
supernatural, or it does not. If it does, it will be found, as I suppose, for
the Substance of it to be co-incident with what we shall afterward assert and
prove to be the formal Reason of Believing. However as it is usually proposed,
I cannot absolutely comply with it, for these two Reasons among others.

1. It belongs unto the Nature of Faith, of what sort soever it be, that it be
built on and resolved into Testimony. This is that which distinguishes it from
any other Conception, Knowledge, or Assent of our minds, on other Reasons and
Causes. And if this Testimony be divine, so is that Faith whereby we give
assent unto it, on the part of the Object. But the Doctrines contained in the
Scripture, or the subject Matter of the Truth to be believed, have not in them
the Nature of a Testimony, but are the material not formal Objects of Faith,
which must always differ. If it be said that these Truths or Doctrines do so
evidence themselves to be from God, as that in and by them we have the Witness
and Authority of God himself proposed unto us, to resolve our Faith into, I
will not further contend about it; but only say that the Authority of God, and
so his Veracity, do manifest themselves primarily in the Revelation it self,
before they do so in the things revealed, which is that we plead for.

2. The Excellency of the Doctrine or things revealed in the Scriptures
respects not so much the Truth of them in speculation, as their Goodness and
Suitableness unto the Souls of Men, as to their present Condition and eternal
End. Now things under that Consideration respect not so much Faith, as
spiritual Sense and Experience. Neither can any man have a due Apprehension of
such a goodness suitable unto our Constitution and Condition, with absolute
usefulness in the Truth of the Scripture, but on a Supposition of that
antecedent Assent of the mind unto them, which is Believing; which therefore
cannot be the Reason why we do believe.

But if this Opinion proceed not upon the aforesaid Supposition (immediately to
be proved) but requires no more unto our satisfaction in the Truth of the
Scripture and Assent thereon, but the due Exercise of Reason, or the natural
Faculties of our Minds about them when proposed unto us, then I suppose it to
be most remote from the Truth, and that amongst many other Reasons, for these
that ensue.

1. On this Supposition the whole Work of Believing would be a Work of Reason.
Be it so, say some, nor is it meet it should be otherwise conceived. But if so,
then the Object of it must be things so evident in themselves and their own
Nature, as that the Mind is as it were compelled by that Evidence unto an
Assent, and cannot do otherwise. If there be such a Light and Evidence in the
things themselves with respect unto our Reason in the right use and exercise of
it, then is the Mind thereby necessitated unto its Assent; which both
overthrows the Nature of Faith, substituting an Assent upon natural Evidence in
the room thereof, and is absolutely exclusive of the necessity or use of any
Work of the Holy Ghost in our Believing, which sober Christians will scarce
comply withal.

2. There are some Doctrines revealed in the Scripture, and those of the most
Importance that are so revealed, which concern and contain things so above our
Reason, that without some previous supernatural Dispositions of Mind, they
carry in them no Evidence of Truth unto mere Reason, nor of Suitableness unto
our Constitution and End. There is required unto such an Apprehension both the
spiritual Elevation of the Mind by supernatural Illumination, and a divine
Assent unto the Authority of the Revelation thereon, before Reason can be so
much as satisfied in the Truth and Excellency of such Doctrines. Such are those
concerning the Holy Trinity, or the Subsistence of one singular Essence in
three distinct Persons; the Incarnation of the Son of God; the Resurrection of
the dead and sundry other that are the most proper Subjects of divine
Revelation. There is an heavenly Glory in some of these things, which as Reason
can never thoroughly apprehend because it is finite and limited, so as it is in
us by Nature, it can neither receive them, nor delight in them as doctrinally
proposed unto us, with all the Aids and Assistance before mentioned. Flesh and
Blood reveals not these thisgs unto our minds, but our Father which is in
Heaven. Nor does any man know these Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but he
unto whom it is given; nor do any learn these things aright, but those that are
taught of God.

3. Take our Reason singly without the Consideration of divine Grace and
Illumination, and it is not only weak and limited, but depraved and corrupted.
And the carnal mind cannot subject it self unto the Authority of God in any
supernatural Revelation whatever. Wherefore the Truth is, that the Doctrines of
the Gospel, which are purely and absolutely so, are so far from having a
convincing Evidence in themselves of their divine Truth, Excellency and
Goodness, unto the Reason of men as unrenewed by the Holy Ghost, as that they
are foolishness and most undesirable unto it, as I have elsewhere proved at
large* We shall therefore proceed.

There are two Things considerable with respect unto our Believing the
Scriptures to be the Word of God in a due manner, or according to our Duty. The
first respects the Subject, or the mind of man, how it is enabled thereunto;
the other the Object to be believed, with the true Reason why we do believe the
Scripture with Faith divine and supernatural.

The first of these must of necessity fall under our Consideration herein, as
that without which, what ever Reasons, Evidences or Motives are proposed unto
us, we shall never believe in a due manner. For whereas the mind of man, or the
minds of all men are by nature depraved, corrupt, carnal, and enmity against
God; they cannot of themselves, or by virtue of any innate Ability of their
own, understand or assent unto spiritual things in a spiritual manner, which we
have sufficiently proved and confirmed before. Wherefore that Assent which is
wrought in us by mere external Arguments, consisting in the rational Conclusion
and Judgment which we make upon their Truth and Evidence, is not that Faith
wherewith we ought to believe the Word of God.

Wherefore that we may believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God according
to our Duty, as God requires it of us, in an useful, profitable, and saving
manner, above and beyond that natural humane Faith and Assent which is the
Effect of the Arguments and Motives of Credibility, before insisted on, with
all others of the like kind, there is and must be wrought in us by the power of
the Holy Ghost Faith supernatural and divine, whereby we are enabled so to do,
or rather whereby we do so. This Work of the Spirit of God, as it is distinct
from, so in order of Nature it is antecedent unto all divine objective Evidence
of the Scriptures being the Word of God, or the formal Reason moving us to
believe it; wherefore without it whatever Arguments or Motives are proposed
unto us, we cannot believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God in a due
manner, and as it is in duty required of us.

Some, it may be, will suppose these things (...), and impertinent unto our
present purpose. For while we are enquiring on what Grounds we believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God, we seem to fly to the Work of the Holy Ghost
in our own minds, which is irrational. But we must not be ashamed of the
Gospel, nor of the Truth of it, because some do not understand, or will not
duly consider what is proposed. It is necessary, that we should return unto the
Work of the Holy Spirit, not with peculiar respect unto the Scriptures that are
to be believed, but unto our own Minds and that Faith wherewith they are to be
believed. For it is not the Reason, why we believe the Scriptures, but the
Power whereby we are enabled so to do, which at present we enquire after.

1. That the Faith whereby we believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, is
wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, can be denied only on two Principles or
Suppositions. (1.) That it is not Faith divine and supernatural whereby we
believe them so to be, but only we have other moral Assurance thereof. (2.)
That this Faith divine and supernatural is of our selves, and is not wrought in
us by the Holy Ghost. The first of these has been already disproved, and shall
be further evicted afterward; and it may be they are very few who are of that
Judgment. For generally whatever men suppose the prime Object, principal
Motive, and formal Reason of that Faith to be, yet that it is Divine and
Supernatural they all acknowledge. And as to the second what is so, it is of the
Operation of the Spirit of God. For to say it is divine and supernatural, is to
say that it is not of our selves, but that it is the Grace and Gift of the
Spirit of God, wrought in us by his divine and supernatural Power. And those of
the Church of Rome, who would resolve our Faith in this matter objectively into
the Authority of their Church, yet subjectively acknowledge the Work of the
Holy Spirit ingenerating Faith in us, and that Work to be necessary to our
Believing the Scripture in a due manner. Externae omnes and humanae
persuasiones non sunt satis ad credendum, quantumcunque ab hominibus
competenter ea quae sunt fidei proponantur. Sed necessaria est insuper causa
interior, hoc est divinum quoddam lumen incitans ad credendum, and oculi quidam
interni Dei beneficio ad videndum dati, says Canus, Loc. Theol. lib. 2. cap.
8. Nor is there any of the Divines of that Church which dissent herein. We do
not therefore assert any such divine formal Reoson of Believing as that the
mind should not stand in need of supernatural Assistance enabling it to assent
thereunto. Nay we affirm that without this there is in no man any true Faith at
all, let the Arguments and Motives whereon he believes be as forcible and
pregnant with Evidence as can be imagined. It is in this Case as in things
natural; neither the the Light of the Sun, nor any persuasive Arguments unto
men to look up unto it, will enable them to discern it, unless they are endued
with a due visive Faculty.

And this the Scripture is express in beyond all possibility of Contradiction.
Neither is it that I know of, by any as yet in express terms denied. For indeed
that all which is properly called Faith with respect unto divine Revelation,
and is acceptted with God as such, is the Work of the Spirit of God in us, or
is bestowed on us by him, cannot be questioned by any who own the Gospel. I
have also proved it elsewhere so fully and largly as that I shall give it at
present no other Confirmation, but what will necessarily fall in with the
Description of the Nature of that Faith whereby we do believe, and the Way or
Manner of its being wrought in us.

The Work of the Holy Ghost unto this purpose consists in the saving
Illumination of the Mind, and the Effect of it is a supernatural Light, whereby
the Mind is renewed, see Romans 12. 1. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. chap. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.
It is called an Heart to understand, Eyes to see, Ears to hear, Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
The opening of the Eyes of our Vunderstanding, Ephesians. 1. 18. The giving of an
Understanding, 1 John 5. 20. Hereby we are enabled to discern the Evidences of
the divine Original and Authority of the Scripture that are in it self, as well
as assent unto the Truth contained in it; and without it we cannot do so. For
the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can be know them because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. And unto this end it is written in the Prophets, that
we shall be all taught of God, John 6. 45. That there is a divine and heavenly
Excellency in the Scripture, cannot be denied by any, who on any Grounds or
Motives whatever do own its divine Original. For all the Works of God do set
forth his Praise, and it is impossible that any thing should proceed
immediately from Him, but that there will be express Characters of divine
Excellencies upon it; and as to the Communication of these Characters of
Himself, he has magnified his Word above all his Name. But these we cannot
discern be they in themselves never so illustrious, without the effectual
Communication of the Light mentioned unto our Minds; that is without divine
supernatural Illumination.

Herein he who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, shines into our
Hearts the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.
6. He irradiates the Mind with a spiritual Light, whereby it is enabled to
discern the Glory of spiritual Things: This they cannot do in whom the God of
this World has blinded the eyes of them that believe not, lest the Light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God should shine into them,
v. 6. Those who are under the Power of their natural Darkness and Blindness,
especially where there are in them also superadded Prejudices begotten and
increased by the craft of Satan, as there are in the whole World of
Unbelievers, cannot see nor discern that divine Excellency in the Scripture,
without an Apprehension whereof no man can believe it a right to be the Word of
God. Such Persons may assent unto the Truth of the Scripture and its divine
Original, upon external Arguments and rational Motives, but believe it with
Faith Divine and Supernatural on those Arguments and Motives only, they cannot.

There are two things which hinder or disenable men from believing with Faith
divine and supernatural, when any Divine Revelation is objectively proposed
unto them. First, The natural Blindness and Darkness of their Minds, which are
come upon all by the Fall, and the Depravation of our Nature that ensued
thereon. Secondly, The Prejudices that through the Crafts of Satan the God of
this World, their minds are possessed with, by Traditions, Educations, and
Converse in the World. This last Obstruction or Hinderance may be so far
removed by external Arguments and Motives of Credibility, as that men may upon
them attain unto a moral Persuasion concerning the Divine Original of the
Scripture. But these Arguments cannot remove or take away the native Blindness
of the mind, which is removed by their Renovation and Divine Illumination
alone. Wherefore none (I think) will positively affirm that we can believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God, in the way and manner which God requires,
without a supernatural Work of the Holy Spirit upon our minds in the
Illumination of them; So David prays that God would open his eyes, that he
might behold wondrous things out of the Law, Psalm. 119. 10. That he would make
him understand the way of his Precepts, v. 27. That he would give him
understanding and he should keep the Law, v. 34. So the Lord Christ also opened
the understandings of his Disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures,
Luke 24. 45. As he had affirmed before that it was given unto some to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, and not unto others, Mat. 11. 25. chap. 13.
11. And neither are these things spoken in vain, nor is the Grace intended in
them needless.

The Communication of this Light unto us the Scripture calls Revealing and
Revelation, Mat. 11. 25. Thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent,
and have revealed them unto Babes; that is giving them to understand the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven when they were preached unto them. And no
man knows the Father but he to whom the Son reveals him, v. 27. So the
Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that God would give them the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of Christ, that the eyes of their
understandings being enlightened, they might know etc. chap. 1. v. 17, 18, 19.
It is true, these Ephesians were already Believers, or considered by the
Apostle as such; but if he judged it necessary to pray for them, that they
might have the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation to enlighten the eyes of their
Understanding, with respect unto further Degrees of Faith and Knowledge; or as
he speaks in another place, that they might come unto the full Assurance of
Understanding, to the acknowledgment of the Mystery of God, Col. 2. 2. Then it
is much more necessary to make them Believers, who before were not so, but
utter strangers unto the Faith.

But as a Pretense hereof has been abused, as we shall see afterward, so the
pleading of it is liable to be mistaken. For some are ready to apprehend, that
this Retreat unto a Spirit of Revelation, is but a pretense to discard all
rational Arguments, and to introduce Enthusiasm into their room. Now although
the Charge be grievous, yet because it is groundless, we must not forego what
the Scripture plainly affirms and instructs us in, thereby to avoid it.
Scripture Testimonies may be expounded according to the Analogy of Faith, but
denied or despised, seem they never so contrary unto our Apprehension of
things, they must not be. Some (I confess) seem to disregard both the objective
Work of the Holy Spirit in this matter, whereof we shall treat afterward, and
his subjective Work also in our minds, that all things may be reduced unto
Sense and Reason. But we must grant that a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation to
open the eyes of our Understanding, is needful to enable us to believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God in a due manner, or forgo the Gospel. And our
Duty it is to pray continually for that Spirit, if we intend to be established
in the Faith thereof.

But yet we plead not for external immediate Revelations, such as were granted
unto the Prophets, Apostles, and other Penmen of the Scripture. The Revelation
we intend differs from them both in its especial Subject and formal Reason, or
Nature, that is in the whole kind. For, (1.) The subject matter of divine
Prophetical Revelation, by a (...), or immediate divine Inspiration, are things
not made known before. Things they were, hid in God, or the Counsels of his
Will, and revealed unto the Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 5,
9, 10. Whether they were Doctrines or Things, they were at least as unto their
present Circumstances made known from the Counsels of God by their Revelation.
But the Matter and Subject of the Revelation we treat of, is nothing but what
is already revealed. It is an internal Revelation of that which is outwardly
and antecedent unto it; beyond the Bounds thereof it is not to be extended. And
if any pretend unto immediate Revelations of things not before revealed, we
have no concernment in their Pretenses. (2.) They differ likewise in their
Nature or Kind. For immediate, divine, prophetical Revelation consisted in an
immediate Inspiration, or Afflatus, or in Visions and Voices from Heaven, with
a Power of the Holy Ghost transiently affecting their Minds, guiding their
Tongues and Hands to whom they were granted, whereby they received and
represented divine Impressions, as an Instrument of Music does the Skill of
the Hand whereby it is moved; the Nature of which Revelation I have more fully
discoursed elsewhere. But this Revelation of the Spirit consists in his
effectual Operation, freeing our Minds from Darkness, Ignorance, and Prejudice,
enabling them to discern spiritual Things in a due manner. And such a Spirit of
Revelation is necessary unto them who would believe aright the Scripture, or
any thing else that is divine and supernatural contained therein. And if men
who through the Power of Temptations and Prejudices are in the dark, or at a
loss as to the great and fundamental Principle of all Religion, namely, the
Divine Original and Authority of the Scripture, will absolutely lean unto their
own understandings, and have the whole Difference determined by the natural
Power and Faculties of their own Souls, without seeking after divine Aid and
Assistance, or earnest Prayer for the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation to open
the eyes of their understandings, they must be content to abide in their
Uncertainties, or to come off from them without any Advantage to their Souls.
Not that I would deny unto men, or take them off from the Use of their Reason
in this matter; for what is their Reason given unto them for, unless it be to
use it in those things which are of the greatest importance unto them? Only I
must crave leave to say, that it is not sufficient of it self to enable us to
the performance of this Duty, without the immediate Aid and Assistance of the
Holy Spirit of God.

If any one upon these Principles shall now ask us, Wherefore we believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God? We do not answer, It is, because the Holy
Ghost has enlightened our minds, wrought Faith in us, and enabled us to believe
it. Without this we say indeed, did not the Spirit of God so work in us, and
upon us, we neither should nor could believe with Faith divine and
supernatural. If God had not opened the Heart of Lydia, she would not have
attended unto the things preached by Paul so as to have received them; and
without it the Light oftentimes shines into Darkness, but the Darkness
comprehends it not. But this neither is nor can be the formal Object of our
Faith, or the Reason why we believe the Scripture to be of God, or any thing
else; neither do we, nor can we rationally answer by it unto this Question, why
we do believe. This Reason must be something external and evidently proposed
unto us. For whatever Ability of spiritual Assent there be in the Understanding
which is thus wrought in it by the Holy Ghost, yet the Understanding cannot
assent unto any thing with any Kind of Assent natural or supernatural, but what
is outwardly proposed unto it as true, and that with sufficient Evidence that
it is so. That therefore which proposes any thing unto us as true, with
Evidence of that Truth, is the formal Object of our Faith, or the Reason why we
do believe. And what is so proposed must be true, and must be evidenced to be
true, or we cannot believe it; and according to the Nature of that Evidence
such is our Faith; Humane if that be Humane; and Divine if that be so. Now
nothing of this is done by that saving Light which is infused into our minds,
and is therefore not the Reason why we believe what we do so.

Whereas therefore some who seem to conceive that the only general Ground of
believing the Scripture to be the Word of God, does consist in rational
Arguments and Motives of Credibility, do grant that private Persons may have
their Assurance hereof from the Illumination of the Holy Ghost, though it be
not pleadable to others; they grant what is not, that I know of, desired by
any, and which in it self is not true. For this Work consisting solely in
enabling the mind unto that Kind of Assent which is Faith divine and
supernatural, on supposition of an external formal Reason of it duly proposed,
is not the Reason why any do believe, nor the Ground whereunto their Faith is
resolved.

It remains only that we enquire whether our Faith in this matter be not
resolved into an immediate internal Testimony of the Holy Ghost, assuring us of
the divine Original and Authority of the Scripture, distinct from the Work of
spiritual Illumination, before described. For it is the common Opinion of
Protestant Divines, that the Testimony of the Holy Ghost is the Ground whereon
we believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and in what sense it is so
shall be immediately declared. But hereon are they generally charged by those
of the Church of Rome and others, that they resolve all the Ground and
Assurance of Faith into their own particular Spirits, or the Spirit of every
one that will pretend thereunto. And this is looked upon as a sufficient
Warranty to reproach them with giving countenance unto Enthusiasms, and
exposing the minds of men to endless delusions. Wherefore this matter must be a
little further enquired into. And,

By an internal Testimony of the Spirit, an extraordinary Afflatus, or new
immediate Revelation may be intended. Men may suppose they have, or ought to
have an internal particular Testimony that the Scripture is the Word of God,
whereby, and whereby alone they may be infallibly assured that so it is. And
this is supposed to be of the same nature with the Revelation made unto the
Prophets and Penmen of the Scripture; for it is neither an external Proposition
of Truth, nor an internal Ability to assent unto such a Proposition. And
besides these there is no divine Operation in this kind, but an immediate
Prophetical Inspiration or Revelation. Wherefore as such a Revelation or
immediate Testimony of the Spirit is the only Reason why we do believe, so it
is that alone which our Faith rests on and is resolved into.

This is that which is commonly imputed unto those who deny either the
Authority of the Church, or any other external Arguments or Motives of
Credibility, to be the formal Reason of our Faith. Howbeit there is no one of
them that I know of, who ever asserted any such thing. And I do therefore deny
that our Faith is resolved into any such private Testimony, immediate
Revelation or Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. And that for the ensuing Reasons.

1. Since the finishing of the Canon of the Scripture, the Church is not under
that Conduct, as to stand in need of such new extraordinary Revelations. It
does indeed live upon the internal gracious Operations of the Spirit, enabling
us to understand, believe, and obey the perfect complete Revelation of the Will
of God already made, but new Revelations it has neither need nor use of. And
to suppose them, or a necessity of them, not only overthrows the Perfection of
the Scripture, but also leaves us uncertain whether we know all that is to be
believed in order unto Salvation, or our whole Duty, or when we may do so. For
it would be our Duty to live all our days in expectation of new Revelations,
wherewith neither Peace, Assurance, nor Consolation are consistent.

2. Those who are to believe, will not be able on this Supposition to secure
themselves from Delusion, and from being imposed on by the Deceits of Satan.
For this new Revelation is to be tried by the Scripture, or it is not. If it be
to be tried and examined by the Scripture, then does it acknowledge a superior
Rule, Judgment and Testimony, and so cannot be that which our Faith is
ultimately resolved into. If it be exempted from that Rule of trying the
Spirits, then (1.) It must produce the Grant of this Exemption, seeing the Rule
is extended generally unto all Things and Doctrines that relate unto Faith or
Obedience. (2.) It must declare what are the Grounds and Evidences of its own
(...), or self-credibility, and how it may be infallibly or assuredly
distinguished from all Delusions, which can never be done. And if any tolerable
Countenance could be given unto these things, yet we shall show immediately that
no such private Testimony though real, can be the formal Object of Faith, or
Reason of Believing.

3. It has so fallen out in the Providence of God, that generally all who have
given up themselves in any things concerning Faith or Obedience unto the
pretended Conduct of immediate Revelations, although they have pleaded a
respect unto the Scripture also, have been seduced into Opinions and Practices
directly repugnant unto it. And this with all Persons of Sobriety is sufficient
to discard this Pretense.

But this internal Testimony of the Spirit is by others explained quite in
another way. For they say, that besides the Work of the Holy Ghost before
insisted on, whereby he takes away our natural blindness, and enlightening our
minds enables us to discern the divine Excellencies that are in the Scripture;
there is another internal Efficiency of his, whereby we are moved, persuaded
and enabled to believe: Hereby we are taught of God, so as that finding the
Glory and Majesty of God in the Word, our Hearts do by an ineffable Power
assent unto the Truth without any Hesitation. And this Work of the Spirit
carries its own Evidence in it self, producing an Assurance above all humane
Judgment, and such as stands in need of no further Arguments or Testimonies;
this Faith rests on and is resolved into. And this some learned men seem to
embrace, because they suppose that the objective Evidence which is given in the
Scripture it self, is only moral, or such as can give only a moral Assurance.
Whereas therefore Faith ought to be divine and supernatural, so must that be
whereinto it is resolved, yea it is so alone from the formal Reason of it. And
they can apprehend nothing in this Work that is immediately divine, but only
this internal Testimony of the Spirit, wherein God himself speaks unto our
Hearts.

But yet neither, as it is so explained, can we allow it to be the formal
Object of Faith, nor that wherein it does acquiesce. For,

1. It has not the proper Nature of a divine Testimony. A divine Work it may
be, but a divine Testimony it is not; but it is of the nature of Faith to be
built on an external Testimony. However therefore our minds may be established
and enabled to believe firmly and steadfastly by an ineffable internal Work of
the Holy Ghost, whereof also we may have a certain experience; yet neither that
Work nor the Effect of it can be the Reason why we do believe, nor whereby we
are moved to believe, but only that whereby we do believe.

2. That which is the formal Object of Faith, or Reason whereon we believe, is
the same, and common unto all that do believe. For our Enquiry is not how or by
what means this or that man came to believe, but why any one or every one ought
so to do, unto whom the Scripture is proposed. The Object proposed unto all to
be believed is the same; and the Faith required of all in a way of Duty is the
same, or of the same kind and nature, and therefore the Reason why we believe
must be the same also. But on this Supposition there must be as many distinct
Reasons of believing as there are Believers.

3. On this Supposition, it cannot be the Duty of any one to believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God, who has not received this internal Testimony
of the Spirit. For where the true formal Reason of believing is not proposed
unto us, there it is not our duty to believe. Wherefore although the Scripture
be proposed as the Word of God, yet is it not our duty to believe it so to be,
until we have this Work of the Spirit in our hearts, in case that be the formal
Reason of believing. But not to press any further, how it is possible men may
be deceived and deluded in their Apprehensions of such an internal Testimony of
the Spirit, especially if it be not to be tried by the Scripture; which if it
be, it loses its (...) or self-credibility, or if it be it casts us into a
Circle which the Papists charge us withal; it cannot be admitted as the formal
Object of our Faith, because it would divert us from that which is public,
proper, every way certain and infallible.

However that Work of the Spirit which may be called an internal real Testimony
is to be granted, as that which belongs unto the Stability and Assurance of
Faith. For if he did no otherwise work in us, or upon us, but by the
Communication of spiritual Light unto our minds, enabling us to discern the
Evidences that are in the Scripture of its own Divine Original, we should often
be shaken in our Assent, and moved from our Stability. For whereas our
spiritual darkness is removed but in part, and at best whilst we are here we
see things but darkly, as in a Glass, all things believed having some sort of
Inevidence or Obscurity attending them; and whereas Temptations will frequently
shake and disturb the due respect of the Faculty unto the Object, or interpose
Mists and Clouds between them, we can have no Assurance in Believing unless our
minds are further established by the Holy Ghost. He does therefore three ways
assist us in believing, and ascertain our minds of the things believed, so as
that we may hold fast the beginning of our Confidence firm and steadfast unto
the end. For,

1. He gives unto Believers a spiritual Sense of the Power and Reality of the
things believed, whereby their Faith is greatly established. And although the
divine Witness, whereunto our Faith is ultimately resolved, does not consist
herein, yet it is the greatest corroborating Testimony whereof we are capable.
This is that which brings us unto the Riches of the full Assurance of
Understanding, Col. 2. 2. as also, 1 These. 1. 5. And on the Account of this
Spiritual Experience is our perception of Spiritual Things, so often expressed
by Acts of Sense, as tasting, seeing, feeling, and the like means of Assurance
in things natural. And when Believers have attained hereunto, they do find the
divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Authority of God so present unto them, as that
they need neither Argument, nor Motive, nor any thing else to persuade them
unto, or confirm them in believing. And whereas this spiritual Experience which
Believers obtain through the Holy Ghost, is such as cannot rationally be
contended about, seeing those who have received it, cannot fully express it,
and those who have not, cannot understand it, nor the Efficacy which it has to
secure and establish the mind; it is left to be determined on by them alone,
who have their Senses exercised to discern Good aad Evil. And this belongs unto
the internal subjective Testimony of the Holy Ghost.

2. He assists, helps, and relieves us against Temptations to the contrary, so
as that they shall not be prevalent. Our first prime Assent unto the divine
Authority of the Scripture upon its proper Grounds and Reasons, will not secure
us against future Objections and Temptations unto the contrary, from all manner
of Causes and Occasions. David's Faith was so assaulted by them, as that he
said in his have, that all men were liars. And Abraham himself, after he had
received the Promise, that in his Seed all Nations should be blessed, was
reduced unto that anxious Enquiry, Lord God what will thou give me, seeing I go
childless? Gen 15. 2. And Peter was so winnowed by Satan, that although his
Faith failed not, yet he greatly failed and fainted in its Exercise. And we all
know what fears from within, what fightings from without we are exposed unto in
this matter. And of this sort are all those Atheistical Objections against the
Scripture, which these Days abound withal; which the Devil uses as fiery Darts
to inflame the Souls of men, and to destroy their Faith; and indeed this is
that Work which the Powers of Hell are principally engaged in at this day.
Having lopt off many Branches, they now lay their Ax to the Root of Faith, and
thence in the midst of the Profession of Christian Religion, there is no
greater Controversy than whether the Scriptures are the Word of God or not.
Against all these Temptations does the Holy Ghost give in such a continual
supply of spiritual Strength and Assistance unto Believers, as that they shall
at no time prevail, nor their Faith totally fail. In such cases the Lord Christ
intercedes for us, that our Faith fail not, and Gods Grace is sufficient
against the buffetings of these Temptations. And herein the Truth of Christ's
Intercession, with the Grace of God, and its Efficacy, are communicated unto us
by the Holy Ghost. What are those internal Aids whereby he establishes and
assures our Minds against the Force and Prevalency of Objections and
Temptations against the Divine Authority of the Scripture, how they are
communicated unto us, and received by us, this is no place to declare in
particular. It is in vain for any to pretend unto the name of Christians, by
whom they are denied. And these also have the nature of an internal real
Testimony, whereby Faith is established.

And because it is somewhat strange, that after a long quiet Possession of the
professed Faith, and Assent of the Generality of the Minds of Men thereunto,
there should now arise among us such an open Opposition unto the divine
Authority of the Scriptures, as we find there is by Experience; it may not be
amiss in our passage to name the principal Causes or Occasions thereof: For if
we should bring them all into one Reckoning, as justly we may, who either
openly oppose it and reject it, or who use it or neglect it at their pleasure,
or who set up other Guides in Competition with it or above it, or otherwise
declare that they have no sense of the immediate Authority of God therein; we
shall find them to be like the Moors or Slaves in some Countries or
Plantations, they are so great in number and force above their Rulers and other
Inhabitants, that it is only want of Communication, with Confidence, and some
distinct Interests, that keep them from casting off their Yoke and Restraint. I
shall name three Causes only of this surprising and perilous Event.

1. A long continued outward Profession of the Truth of the Scripture, without
an inward Experience of its Power, betrays men at length to question the Truth
it self, at least not to regard it as divine. The Owning of the Scriptures to
be the Word of God bespeaks a divine Majesty, Authority, and Power to be
present in it and with it. Wherefore after men, who have for a long time so
professed, do find that they never had any real Experience of such a divine
Presence in it by any Effects upon their own Minds, they grow insensibly
regardless of it, or to allow it a very common place in their thoughts. When
they have worn off the Impressions that were on their mind from Tradition,
Education, and Custom, they do for the future rather not oppose it than in any
way believe it. And when once a Reverence unto the Word of God on the Account
of its Authority is lost, an Assent unto it on the Account of Truth will not
long abide. And all such Persons, under a Concurrence of Temptations and
outward Occasions, will either reject it, or prefer other Gnides before it.

2. The Power of Lust rising up unto a Resolution of living in those Sins,
whereunto the Scripture does unavoidably annex eternal Ruin, has prevailed
with many to cast off its Authority. For whilst they are resolved to live in an
Outrage of Sin, to allow a divine Truth and Power in the Scripture is to cast
themselves under a present Torment, as well as to ascertain their future
Misery: for no other can be his Condition who is perpetually sensible that God
always condemns him in all that he does, and will assuredly take vengeance of
him, which is the constant language of the Scripture concerning such Persons.
Wherefore although they will not immediately fall into an open Atheistical
Opposition unto it, as that which it may be is not consistent with their
Interest and Reputation in the World, yet looking upon it as the Devils did on
Jesus Christ, as that which comes to torment them before their time, they keep
it at the greatest distance from their thoughts and minds, until they have
habituated themselves unto a Contempt of it. There being therefore an utter
impossibility of giving any pretense of Reconciliation between the Owning of
the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and a Resolution to live in an excess of
known Sin; Multitudes suffer their Minds to be bribed by their corrupt
Affections to a Relinquishment of any Regard unto it.

3. The scandalous Quarrels, and Disputations of those of the Church of Rome
against the Scripture and its Authority, have contributed much unto the ruin
of the Faith of many. Their great Design is by all means to secure the Power,
Authority, and Infallibility of their Church. Of these they say continually, as
the Apostle in another case of the Mariners, unless these stay in the Ship we
cannot be saved; Without an Acknowledgment of these things they would have it,
that men can neither at present believe, nor be saved hereafter. To secure this
Interest, the Authority of the Scripture must be by all means questioned and
impaired. A divine Authority in it self they will allow it, but with respect
unto us it has none but what it obtains by the Suffrage and Testimony of their
Church. But whereas Authority is (...), and consists essentially in the
Relation and Respect which it has unto others, or those that are to be subject
unto it; to say that it has an Authority in it self, but none toward us, is
not only to deny that it has any Authority at all, but also to reproach it
with an empty name. They deal with it as the Soldiers did with Christ, they
put a Crown on his Head, and clothed him with a purple Robe, and bowing the
Knee before him mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews. The ascribe unto it
the Crown and Robe of Divine Authority in it self, but not toward any one
Person in the World. So, if they please, God shall be God, and his Word be of
some Credit among men. Herein they seek continually to entangle those of the
weaker Sort, by urging them vehemently with this Question, How do you know the
Scripture to be the Word of God? and have in continual readyness a number of
sophistical Artifices to weaken all Evidences that shall be pleaded in its
behalf. Nor is that all; but on all Occasions they insinuate such Objections
against it from its Obscurity, Imperfection, want of Order, Difficulties, and
seeming Contradictions in it, as are suited to take off the minds of men from a
firm Assent unto it, or Reliance on it. As if a Company of men should conspire
by crafty multiplied Insinuations, divulged on all advantages, to weaken the
Reputation of a chaste and sober Matron; although they cannot deprive her of her
Virtue; yet unless the World were wiser than for the most part it appears to
be, they will insensibly take off from her due esteem. And this is as bold an
Attempt as can well be made in any Case. For the first Tendency of these
Courses is to make men Atheists, after which success it is left at uncertain
hazard whether they will be Papists or no. Wherefore as there can be no greater
nor more dishonorable Reflection made on Christian Religion, than that it has
no other Evidence or Testimony of its Truth, but the Authority and Witness of
those by whom it is at present professed, and who have notable worldly
advantages thereby; so the minds of multitudes are secretly influenced by the
Poison of these Disputes, to think it no way necessary to believe the Scripture
to be the Word of God; or at least are shaken off from the Grounds whereon they
have professed it so to be. And the like Dis-service is done unto Faith and the
Souls of Men, by such as advance a Light within, or immediate Inspiration into
Competition with it, or the Room of it. For as such Imaginations take place and
prevail in the minds of men, so their Respect unto the Scripture, and all Sense
of its divine Authority does decay, as Experience does openly manifest.

It is, I say, from an unusual Concurrence of these and the like Causes and
Occasions, that there is at present among us such a Decay in, Relinquishment
of, and Opposition unto the Belief of the Scripture, as it may be former Ages
could not parallel.

But against all these Objections and Temptations, the Minds of true Believers
are secured by Supplies of spiritual Light, Wisdom, and Grace from the Holy
Ghost.

There are several other especial gracious Actings of the Holy Spirit on the
minds of Believers, which belong also unto this internal real Testimony,
whereby their Faith is established. Such are his anointing and sealing of them,
his witnessing with them, and his being an Earnest in them, all which must be
elsewhere spoken unto. Hereby is our Faith every day more and more increased
and established. Wherefore although no internal Work of the Spirit can be the
formal Reason of our Faith, or that which it is resolved into; yet is it such,
as without it we can never sincerely believe as we ought, nor be established in
believing against Temptations and Objections.

And with respect unto this Work of the Holy Ghost it is, that Divines at the
first Reformation did generally resolve our Faith of the divine Authority of
the Scripture into the Testimony of the Holy Spirit. But this they did not do
exclusively unto the proper use of external Arguments and Motives of
Credibility, whose Store indeed is great, and whose Fountain is inexhaustible.
For they arise from all the indubitable Notions that we have of God or our
selves, in reference unto our present Duty or future Happiness. Much less did
they exclude that Evidence thereof which the Holy Ghost gives unto it in and by
it self. Their Judgment is well expressed in the excellent Words of one of
them. Maneat ergo (says he) hoc fixum, quos Spiritus intus docuit solid
acquiescere in Scriptura, and hanc quidem esse (...), neque demonstrationi and
rationibus subjici eam fas esse; quam tamen meretur apud nos certitudinem
Spiritus testimonio consequi; eisi enim Reverentiam sua sibi ultro Majestate
conciliat, tunc tamen demum serio nos afficit, quum per Spiritum obsignata est
cordibus nostris. Istius ergo veritate illuminati, jam non aut nostro, aut
aliorum judicio credimus a Deo esse Scripturam; sed supra humanum judicium
certo certius constituimus, non secus ac si ipsius Dei numen illic intueremur
hominum ministerio, ab ipsissimo Dei ore ad nos fluxisse. Non Argumenta, non
very Similitudines quaerimus, quibus judicium nostrum incumbat; sed ut rei
extra estimandi aleam positae judicium ingeniumque nostrum subjicimus. Non
qualiter superstitionibus solent miseri homines captivam mentem addicere; sed
quia non dubiam vim Numinis illic sentimus vigere and spirare, quam ad parendum
scientes ac volentes, vividius tamen and efficacius quam pro humana aut
voluntate aut scientia trahimur and accendimur. Talis ergo est Persuasio quae
rations non requirat, talis notitia cui optima ratio cosnstet, nempe, in qua
securius constantiusque men's qui scat, quam in ullis rationibus; talis denique
sensus, qui nisi ex caelesti Revelatione nequeat. Non aliud loquor quam quod
apud se experitur fidelium unusquisque nisi quod long infra justam rei
explicationem verba subsidunt. Calv. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 7, 8, 9.

And we may here briefly call over what we have attained or passed through.
For, (1.) We have showed in general both what is the Nature of divine
Revelation, and divine Illumination, with their mutual Respect unto one
another. (2.) What are the principal external Arguments or Motives of
Credibility, whereby the Scripture may be proved to b^ of a divine Original.
(3.) What kind of Persuasion is the Effect of them, or what is the Assent which
we give unto the Truth of the Scriptures on their Account. (4.) What objective
Evidence there is unto Reason in the Doctrine of the Scriptures to induce the
mind to assent unto them. (5.) What is the Nature of that Faith whereby we
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, and how it is wrought in us by the
Holy Ghost. (6.) What is that Internal Testimony which is given unto the divine
Authority of the Scriptures by the holy Spirit, what is the Force and Use
thereof. The Principal Part of our Work does yet remain.

That which we have thus far made way for, and which is now our only remaining
Enquiry, is, What is the Work of the Holy Ghost with respect unto the objective
Evidence which we have concerning the Scripture, that it is the Word of God,
which is the formal Reason of our Faith, and whereinto it is resolved, that is,
we come to enquire and to give a direct Answer unto that Question, Why we
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God? what it is that our Faith rests
upon herein? and what it is that makes it the Duty of every man to believe it
so to be, unto whom it is proposed. And the Reason why I shall be the briefer
herein is, because I have long since in another Discourse cleared this
Argument, and I shall not here again call over any thing that was delivered
therein, because what has been unto this day gainsaid unto it, or excepted
against it, has been of little Weight or Consideration. Unto this great
Enquiry therefore I say,

We believe the Scripture to be the Word of God with divine Faith for its own
sake only; or our Faith is resolved into the Authority and Truth of God only,
as revealing himself unto us therein and thereby. And this Authority and
Veracity of God do infallibly manifest or evince themselves unto our Faith, or
our Minds in the exercise of it, by the Revelation it self in the Scripture,
and no otherwise Or, Thus says the Lord, is the Reason why we ought to
believe, and why we do so; why we believe at all in general, and why we believe
any thing in particular. And this we call the formal Object or Reason of Faith.

And it is evident that this is not God himself absolutely considered; for so
he is only the material Object of our Faith; He that comes unto God must
believe that he is, Heb. 11. 6. Nor is it the Truth of God absolutely, for that
we believe as we do other essential Properties of his Nature: But it is the
Truth of God revealing himself, his mind and will unto us in the Scripture.
This is the sole Reason why we believe any thing with Divine Faith.

It is, or may be enquired, wherefore we do believe Jesus Christ to be the Son
of God, or that God is one in Nature, subsisting in three Persons, the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit? I answer, it is, because God himself, the first Truth,
who cannot lie, has revealed and declared these things so to be, and he who is
our All, requires us so to believe. If it be asked how, wherein, or whereby
God has revealed and declared these things so to be, or what is that
Revelation which God has made hereof? I answer, It is the Scripture, and that
only. And if it be asked, how I know this Scripture to be a Divine Revelation,
to be the Word of God? I answer, (1.) I do not know it demonstratively, upon
rational scientifical Principles, because such a Divine Revelation is not
capable of such a Demonstration, 1. Cor. 2. 9. (2.) I do not assent unto it, or
think it to be so upon Arguments and Motives highly probable, or morally
uncontrollable only, as I am assuredly persuaded of many other things whereof I
can have no certain Demonstration, 1 These. 2. 15. But I believe it so to be
with Faith divine and supernatural, resting on, and resolved into the Authority
and Veracity of God himself, evidencing themselves unto my Mind, my Soul and
Conscience by this Revelation it self, and not otherwise.

Here we rest, and deny that we believe the Scripture to be the Word of God
formally for any other Reason but it self, which assures us of its Divine
Authority. And if we rest not here, we must run on the Rock of a moral
Certainty only; which shakes the Foundation of all Divine Faith, or fall into
the Gulf and Labyrinth of an endless Circle in proving two things mutually by
one another, as the Church by the Scripture, and the Scripture by the Church in
an everlasting Rotation. Unless we intend so to wander we must come to
something wherein we may rest for its own sake, and that not with a strong and
firm Opinion, but with Divine Faith. And nothing can rationally pretend unto
this Privilege, but the Truth of God manifesting it self in the Scripture. And
therefore those, who will not allow it hereunto, do some of them wisely deny
that the Scriptures being the Word of God is the Object of Divine Faith
directly, but only of a moral Persuasion from eternal Arguments and
Considerations. And I do believe that they will grant, that if the Scripture be
so to be believed, it must be for its own sake. For those who would have us to
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God upon the Authority of the Church,
proposing it unto us, and witnessing so to be, though they make a fair
appearance of a ready and easy way for the exercise of Faith, yet when things
come to be sifted and tried, they do so confound all sorts of things, that they
know not where to stand or abide. But it is not now my Business to examine
their Pretenses, I have done it elsewhere. I shall therefore prove and
establish the Assertion laid down, after I have made way to it by one or two
previous Observations.

1. We suppose herein all the Motives of Credibity before mentioned, that is,
all the Arguments ab extra, which vehemently persuade the Scripture to be the
Word of God, and wherewith it may be protected against Objections and
Temptations to the contrary. They have all of them their Use, and may in their
proper place be insisted on. Especially ought they to be pleaded when the
Scripture is attacked by an Atheism, arising from the Love and Practice of
those Lusts and Sins which are severely condemned therein, and threatened with
the utmost Vengeance. With others they may be considered as previous
inducements unto believing, or concomitant means of strengthening Faith in them
that do believe. In the first way, I confess, to the best of my Observation of
things past and present, their Use is not great, nor ever has been in the
Church of God. For assuredly the most that do sincerely believe the divine
Original and Authority of the Scripture, do it without any great Consideration
of them, or being much influenced by them. And there are many who, as Austin
speaks, are saved simplicitate credendi, and not subtilitate disputandi, that
are not able to enquire much into them, nor yet to apprehend much of their
Force and Efficacy, when they are proposed unto them. Most Persons therefore
are effectually converted to God and have saving Faith whereby they believe the
Scripture, and virtually all that is contained in it, before they have ever
once considered them. And God forbid we should think that none believe the
Scripture aright, but those who are able to apprehend and manage the subtle
Arguments of learned men produced in their Confirmation. Yea we affirm on the
contrary, that those who believe them on no other Grounds have indeed no true
Divine Faith at all. Hence they were not of old insisted on for the
ingenerating of Faith in them to whom the Word was preached, nor ordinarily are
so to this day by any who understand what is their Work and Duty. But in the
second way, wherever there is occasion from Objections, Oppositions, or
Temptations, they may be pleaded to good use and purpose. And they may do well
to be furnished with them, who are unavoidably exposed unto trials of that
Nature. For as for that Course which some take in all places and at all times
to be disputing about the Scriptures, and their Authority; it is a Practice
giving countenance unto Atheism, and is to be abhorred of all that fear God,
and the Consequents of it are sufficiently manifest.

2. The Ministry of the Church, as it is the Ground and Pillar of Truth,
holding it up and declaring it, is in an ordinary way previously necessary unto
Believing. For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. We
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God for it self alone, but not by it
self alone. The Ministry of the Word is the means which God has appointed for
the Declaration and making known the Testimony which the Holy Spirit gives in
the Scripture unto its Divine Original. And this is the ordinary way whereby
men are brought to believe the Scripture to be the Word of God. The Church in
its Ministry, owning, witnessing, and avowing it so to be, instructing all
sorts of Persons out of it, there is together with a sense and apprehension of
the Truth and Power of the things taught and revealed in it, Faith in it self
as the Word of God, ingenerated in them.

3. We do also here suppose the internal effectual Work of the Spirit begetting
Faith in us as was before declared; without which we can believe neither the
Scripture nor any Thing else with Faith divine, not for want of Evidence in
them but of Faith in our selves.

These things being supposed we do affirm, that it is the Authority and Truth
of God, as manifesting themselves in the supernatural Revelation made in the
Scripture, that our Faith arises from and is resolved into. And herein
consists that Testimony which the Spirit gives unto the Word of God that it is
so; for it is the Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth. The
Holy Ghost being the immediate Author of the whole Scripture does therein and
thereby give Testimony unto the Divine Truth and Original of it, by the
Characters of Divine Authority and Veracity impressed on it, and evidencing
themselves in its Power and Efficacy. And let it be observed, that what we
assert respects the Revelation it self, the Scripture, the Writing, (...), and
not merely the things written or contained in it. The Arguments produced by
some to prove the Truth of the Doctrines of the Scripture, reach not the Cause
in hand. For our Enquiry is not about believing the Truths revealed, but about
believing the Revelation it self, the Scripture it self to be Divine. And this
we do only because of the Authority and Veracity of the Revealer, that is of
God himself, manifesting themselves therein.

To manifest this fully, I shall do these things.

1. Prove that our Faith is so resolved into the Scripture as a Divine
Revelation, and not into any thing else, that is, we believe the Scripture to
be the Word of God for its own sake, and not for the sake of any thing else,
either external Arguments, or authoritative Testimony of men whatever.

2. Show how or by what means the Scripture does evidence its own divine
Original, or the Authority of God is so evidenced in it and by it, as that we
need no other formal Cause or Reason of our Faith, whatever Motives or Means of
Believing we may make use of. And as to the first of these.

1. That is the formal Reason whereon we do believe, which the Scripture
proposes as the only Reason why we should so do, why it is our Duty to do so,
and whereunto it requires our Assent. Now this is to it self as it is the Word
of God, and because it is so. Or it proposes the Authority of God in it self,
and that alone, which we are to acquiesce in, and the Truth of God and that
alone which our Faith is to rest on, and is resolved into. It does not require
us to believe it upon the Testimony of any Church, or on any other Arguments
that it gives us to prove that it is from God; but speaks unto us immediately
in his name, and thereon requires Faith and Obedience.

Some it may be, will ask, Whether this prove the Scripture to be the Word of
God, because it says so of it self, when any other Writing may say the same?
But we are not now giving Arguments to prove unto others the Scripture to be
the Word of God, but only proving and showing what our own Faith rests on,
and is resolved into, or at least ought so to be. How it evidenceth it self
unto our Faith to be the Word of God we shall afterward declare. It is
sufficient unto our present purpose, that God requires us to believe the
Scripture for no other Reason but because it is his Word, or a Divine
Revelation from him; and if so, his Authority and Truth are the formal Reason
why we believe the Scripture or any thing contained in it. To this purpose do
Testimonies abound in particular, besides that general Attestation which is
given unto it in that sole Preface of divine Revelations, Thus says the Lord;
and therefore they are to be believed. Some of them we must mention.

Deuteronomy. 31. 11, 12, 13. When all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy
God in the place which he shall choose, thou shall read this Law before all
Israel in their hearing; Gather the people together, Men, Women, and Children,
and the Stranger that is within thy Gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the Lord your God, and observe to do all the Works of this
Law, and that their Children which have not known any thing may hear and learn
to fear the Lord your God. It is plain that God here requires Faith and
Obedience of the whole people, Men, Women and Children. The Enquiry is what he
requires it unto? It is to this Law, to this Law written in the Books of
Moses, which was to be read unto them out of the Book, at the hearing of which
they were obliged to believe and obey. To evidence that Law to be his, he
proposes nothing but it self. But it will be said, that Generation was
sufficiently convinced that the Law was from God, by the Miracles which they
beheld in the giving of it. But moreover it is ordered to be proposed unto
Children of future Generations, who knew nothing, that they may hear and learn
to fear the Lord.

That which by the Appointment of God is to be proposed unto them that know
nothing that they may believe, that is unto them the formal Reason of their
Believing. But this is the written Word, Thou shall read this Law unto them who
have known nothing, that they may hear and learn, etc. Whatever use therefore
there may be of other Motives or Testimonies to commend the Law unto us, of the
Ministry of the Church especially, which is here required unto the Proposal of
the Word unto men, it is the Law it self, or the written Word which is the
Object of our Faith, and which we believe for its own sake; see also chap. 29.
29. where revealed things are said to belong unto us and our Children that we
might do them, that is receive them on the Account of their Divine Revelation.

Isa. 8. 19, 20. And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have
familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards, that peep and mutter; should not a people
seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? To the Law, and to the
Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
Light in them. The Enquiry is by what means men may come to satisfaction in
their Minds and Consciences, or what their Faith and Trust is in. Two Things
are proposed unto this end. (1.) Immediate diabolical Revelations, real or
pretended. (2.) The written Word of God, the Law and the Testimony. Hereunto
are we sent, and that upon the Account of its own Authority alone, in
opposition unto all other pretenses of Assurance or Security. And the sole
Reason why any one does not acquiesce by Faith in the written Word, is because
he has no Mornings, or Light of Truth shining on him. But how shall we know
the Law and Testimony, this written Word, to be the Word of God, and believe it
so to be, and distinguish it from every other pretended Divine Revelation, that
is not so? This is declared;

Jerem. 23. 28, 29. The Prophet that has a Dream, let him tell a Dream; and he
that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully. What is the Chaff to the
Wheat, says the Lord? Is not my Word like as fire, says the Lord? and like an
Hammer that breaks the Rock in pieces? It is supposed that there are two
Persons in Reputation for Divine Revelations esteemed Prophets; one of them
only pretends so to be, and declares the Dreams of his own Fancy, or the
Divinations of his own Mind, as the Word of God. The other has the Word of God
and declares it faithfully from him. Yea but how shall we know the one from the
other? Even as men know Wheat from Chaff, by their different Natures and
Effects. For as false pretended Revelations are but as Chaff which every Wind
will scatter; so the true Word of God is like a Fire, and like an Hammer, is
accompanied with that Light, Efficacy, and Power, that it manifests it self
unto the Consciences of men so to be. Hereon does God call us to rest our Faith
on it in opposition unto all other Pretenses whatever.

But is it of this Authority and Efficacy in it self? See Luke 16. 27, 28, 29,
30, 31. Then said he, [the rich Man in Hell,] I pray thee therefore Father,
that thou would send him [Lazarus who was dead,] unto my Fathers house, for
I have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them lest they also come into
this place of torment. Abraham says unto him, they have Moses and the
Prophets, let them hear them. And he said, Nay Father Abraham, but if one went
unto them from the dead they would repent; and he said unto him, if they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from
the dead. The Question here between Abraham and the rich Man in this Parable,
indeed between the Wisdom of God and the superstitious Contrivances of Men, is
about the way and means of bringing those who are Unbelievers and impenitent
unto Faith and Repentance. He who was in Hell apprehended that nothing would
make them believe but a Miracle, one rising from the dead and speaking unto
them; which or the like mavelous Operations many at this day think would have
mighty power and influence upon them to settle their minds and change their
lives; should they see one rise from the dead, and come and converse with them,
this would convince them of the Immortality of the Soul, of future Rewards and
Punishments, as giving them sufficient Evidence thereof, so that they would
assuredly repent and change their Lives; but as things are stated they have no
sufficient evidence of these things, so that they doubt so far about them as
that they are not really influenced by them; give them but one real Miracle and
you shall have them for ever. This I say, was the Opinion and Judgment of him
who was represented in Hell, as it is of many who are posting thither apace. He
who was in Heaven thought otherwise, wherein we have the immediate Judgment of
Jesus Christ given in this matter, determining this Controversy. The Question
is about sufficient Evidence and Efficacy to cause us to believe Things divine
and supernatural; and this he determines to be in the written Word, Moses and
the Prophets. If he that will not believe on the single Evidence of the written
Word to be from God, or a Divine Revelation of his Will, will never believe
upon the Evidence of Miracles nor any other Motives, then that written Word
contains in it self the entire formal Reason of Faith, or all that Evidence of
the Authority and Truth of God in it, which Faith divine and supernatural rests
upon; that is, it is to be believed for its own sake. But says our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, if men will not hear, that is, believe Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead, and come and
preach unto them, a greater Miracle than which they could not desire. Now this
could not be spoken, if the Scripture did not contain in it self the whole
entire formal Reason of Believing; for if it have not this, something necessary
unto believing would be wanting, though that were enjoyed. And this is directly
affirmed,

John 20. 30, 31. And many other Signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not written in this Book. But these are written, that you
might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing you
might have life through his Name. The Signs which Christ wrought did evidence
him to be the Son of God. But how come we to know and believe these Signs? what
is the way and means thereof? Says the blessed Apostle, these things are
written that you may believe; this writing of them by Divine Inspiration is so
far sufficient to beget and assure Faith in you, as that thereby you may have
eternal life through Jesus Christ. For if the writing of Divine Things and
Revelations be the means appointed of God to cause men to believe unto eternal
life, then it must as such carry along with it sufficient Reason why we should
believe, and Grounds whereon we should do so. And in like manner is this matter
determined by the Apostle Peter,

2 Pet. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. For we have not followed cunningly devised
Fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his Majesty. For he received from God the
Father honor and glory, when there came such a Voice to him from the excellent
Glory; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this Voice which
came from Heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy Mount. We have
also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as
unto a Light shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star
arise in your hearts. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is
of any private interpretation. For the Prophecy came not in old time by the
will of man; but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.
The Question is about the Gospel, or the Declaration of the powerful Coming of
Jesus Christ, whether it were to be believed or no? and if it were, upon what
Grounds? Some said it was a cunningly devised Fable; others, that it was a
fanatical Story of mad men, as Festus thought of it when preached by Paul, Acts
26. 24. and very many are of the same mind still. The Apostles on the contrary
averred that what was spoken concerning him were Words of truth and soberness,
yea faithful Sayings, and worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15. that is, to
be believed for its Worth and Truth. The Grounds and Reasons hereof are two.
(1.) The Testimony of the Apostles, who not only conversed with Jesus Christ,
and were eye Witnesses of his Majesty, beholding his Glory, the Glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, John 1. 14. which they
gave in Evidence of the Truth of the Gospel, 1 John 1. 1. But also heard a
miraculous Testimony given unto him immediately from God in Heaven, ver. 17.
18. This gave them indeed sufficient Assurance; but whereinto shall they
resolve their Faith who heard not this Testimony? Why they have a more sure,
that is, a most sure Word of Prophecy, that is, the written Word of God, that
is sufficient of it self to secure their Faith in this matter, especially as
confirmed by the Testimony of the Apostles, whereby the Church comes to be
built in its Faith on the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.
20. But why should we believe this Word of Prophecy? may not that also be a
cunningly devised Fable, and the whole Scripture be but the Suggestions of men's
private Spirits, as is objected? Ver. 20. All is finally resolved into this,
that the Writers of it were immediately moved and acted by the Holy Ghost, from
which Divine Original it carries along its own Evidence with it. Plainly that
which the Apostle teaches us is, that we believe all other Divine Truths for
the Scriptures sake, or because they are declared therein; but the Scripture we
believe for its own sake, or because holy men of God wrote it as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost.

So is the whole Object of Faith proposed by the same Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 2. The
Words that were spoken before by the holy Prophets, and the Commandments of the
Apostles of the Lord and Savior. And because our Faith is resolved into them,
we are said to be built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, as
was said Ephesians. 2. 20. that is, our Faith rests solely, as on its proper
Foundation which bears the weight of it, on the Authority and Truth of God in
their Writings. Hereunto we may add that of Paul.

Romans 16. 25, 26. According to the Revelation of the Mystery which was kept
secret since the World began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures
of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the everlasting God, made
known unto all Nations for the Obedience of Faith. The matter to be believed is
the Mystery of the Gospel, which was kept secret since the World began, or from
the giving of the first Promise, not absolutely, but with respect unto that
full manifestation which it has now received. This God commands to be
believed, the everlasting God, he who has sovereign Authority over all,
requires Faith in a way of Obedience hereunto. But what Ground or Reason have
we to believe it? This alone is proposed, namely, the Divine Revelation made in
the Preaching of the Apostles, and Writings of the Prophets; for Faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. This Course and no
other did our Savior, even after his Resurrection, take to beget and confirm
Faith in the Disciples, Luke 24. 25, 26, 27. That great Testimony to this
purpose; 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. I do not plead in particular, because I have
so fully insisted on it in another Discourse.

From these and many other Testimonies to the same purpose, which might be
produced, it is evident,

1. That it is the Scripture it self, the Word or Will of God as revealed or
written, which is proposed unto us as the Object of our Faith and Obedience,
which we are to receive and believe with Faith divine and supernatural.

2. That no other Reason is proposed unto us either as a Motive to encourage
us, or as an Argument to assure us that we shall not be mistaken, but only its
own Divine Original and Authority, making our Duty necessary, and securing our
Faith infallibly. And those Testimonies are with me of more weight a thousand
times than the plausible Reasonings of any to the contrary. With some indeed it
is grown a matter of contempt to quote or cite the Scripture in our Writings,
such Reverence have they for the Ancient Fathers, some of whose Writings are
nothing else but a perpetual Contexture of Scripture. But for such who pretend
to despise those Testimonies in this Case, it is because either they do not
understand what they are produced to confirm, or cannot answer the Proof that
is in them. For it is not unlikely but that some Persons well conceited of
their own Understanding in things wherein they are most ignorant, will pride
and please themselves in the Ridiculousness of proving the Scripture to be the
Word of God by Testimonies taken out of it. But as was said, we must not forgo
the Truth because either they will not or cannot understand what we discourse
about.

2. Our Assertion is confirmed by the uniform Practice of the Prophets and
Apostles, and all the Penmen of the Scripture, in proposing these Divine
Revelations which they received by immediate Inspiration from God. For that
which was the Reason of their Faith unto whom they first declared those Divine
Revelations, is the Reason of our Faith now they are recorded in the Scripture.
For the writing of it being by God's Appointment, it comes into the room and
supplies the place of their Oral Ministry. On what Ground soever men were
obliged to receive and believe Divine Revelations, when made unto them by the
Prophets and Apostles, on the same are we obliged to receive and believe them
now they are made unto us in the Scripture, the VVriting being by divine
Inspiration, and appointed as the Means and Cause of our Faith. It is true, God
was pleased sometimes to bear witness unto their personal Ministry by Miracles,
or Signs and Wonders, as Heb. 2. 4. God bearing them witness. But this was only
at some seasons, and with some of them. That which they universally insisted
on, whether they wrought any Miracles or no, was, that the Word which they
preached, declared, wrote, was not the Word of man, came not by any private
Suggestion, or from any Invention of their own, but was indeed the Word of God,
1 These. 2. 13. and declared by them as they were acted by the Holy Ghost. 2
Pet. 1. 21.

Under the Old Testament, although the Prophets sometimes referred Persons unto
the Word already written, as that which their Faith was to acquiesce in, Isa.
8. 20, Mal. 4. 4. setting out its Power and Excellency for all the ends of
Faith and Obedience, Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 119. and not to any thing else,
nor to any other Motives or Arguments to beget and require Faith, but its own
Authority only; yet as to their own especial Messages and Revelations, they
laid the Foundation of all the Faith and Obedience which they required, in this
alone, Thus says the Lord, the God of Truth. And under the New Testament, the
infallible Preachers and Writers thereof do in the first place propose the
Writings of the Old Testament to be received for their own sake, or on the
Account of their Divine Original; see John 45. 46, 47. Luke 16. 29, 31. Mat.
21. 42. Acts 18. 24, 25, 28. Acts 24. 14. chap. 26. 22. 2 Pet. 1. 21. Hence are
they called the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. And Oracles always required an
Assent for their own sakes, and other Evidence they pleaded none. And for the
Revelations which they superadded, they pleaded that they had them immediately
from God by Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 1. And this was accompanied with such an
infallible Assurance in them that received it as to be preferred above a
Supposition of the highest Miracle to confirm any thing to the contrary; Gal.
1. 8. For if an Angel from Heaven should have preached any other Doctrine than
what they revealed and proposed in the Name and Authority of God, they were to
esteem him accursed. For this Cause they still insisted on their Apostolical
Authority and Mission, which included infallible Inspiration and Directions as
the Reason of the Faith of them unto whom they preached and wrote. And as for
those who were not themselves divinely inspired, or wherein those that were so
did not act by immediate Inspiration, they proved the Truth of what they
delivered by its consonancy unto the Scriptures already written, referring the
Minds and Consciences of Men unto them for their ultimate Satisfaction; Acts
18. 28. chap. 28. 33.

3. It was before granted, that there is required as subservient unto
believing, as a means of it, or the Resolution of our Faith into the Authority
of God in the Scriptures, the ministerial Proposal of the Scriptures and the
Truths contained in them, with the Command of God for Obedience unto them, Romans
16. 25. 26. This Ministry of the Church, either extraordinary or ordinary, God
has appointed unto this End, and ordinarily it is indispensible thereunto,
Romans 10. 14, 15. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a Preacher, and how shall they preach unless they
are sent? Without this ordinarily we cannot believe the Scripture to be the
Word of God, nor the things contained in it to be from him, though we do not
believe either the one or the other for it. I do grant that in extraordinary
cases outward Providence may supply the room of this Ministerial Proposal; for
it is all one as unto our Duty by what means the Scripture is brought unto us.
But upon a Supposition of this Ministerial Proposal of the Word, which
ordinarily includes the whole Duty of the Church in its Testimony and
Declaration of the Truth, I desire to know whether those unto whom it is
proposed are obliged without further external Evidence to receive it as the
Word of God, to rest their Faith in it, and submit their Consciences unto it?
The Rule seems plain, that they are obliged so to do, Mark 16. 16. We may
consider this under the distinct ways of its Proposal extraordinary, and
ordinary.

Upon the Preaching of any of the Prophets by immediate Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, or on their Declaration of any new Revelation they had from God, by
preaching or writing, suppose Isaiah or Jeremiah, I desire to know whether or
no all Persons were bound to receive their Doctrine as from God, to believe and
submit unto the Authority of God in the Revelation made by him, without any
external Motives or Arguments, or the Testimony or Authority of the Church
witnessing thereunto? If they were not, then were they all excused as
guiltless, who refused to believe the Message they declared in the Name of God,
and in despising the Warnings and Instructions which they gave them. For
external Motives they used not, and the present Church mostly condemned them
and their Ministry; as is plain, and the Case of Jeremiah. Now it is impious to
imagine that those to whom they spoke in the Name of God were not obliged to
believe them, and it tends to the overthrow of all Religion. If we shall say
that they were obliged to believe them, and that under the Penalty of divine
Displeasure, and so to receive the Revelation made by them, or their
Declaration of it, as the Word of God; then it must contain in it the formal
Reason of believing, or the full and entire Cause. Reason and Ground why they
ought to believe with Faith divine and supernatural. Or let another Ground of
Faith in this Case be assigned.

Suppose the Proposal be made in the ordinary Ministry of the Church. Hereby
the Scripture is declared unto Men to be the Word of God; they are acquainted
with it, and what God requires of them therein, and they are charged in the
Name of God to receive and believe it. Does any Obligation unto believing hence
arise? It may be some will say that immediately there is not; only they will
grant that men are bound hereon to enquire into such Reasons and Motives, as
are proposed unto them for its Reception and Admission. I say, there is no
doubt but that Men are obliged to consider all things of that Nature which are
proposed unto them, and not to receive it with brutish implicit Belief. For the
receiving of it is to be an Act of Men's own Minds or Understandings, on the
best Grounds and Evidences which the Nature of the thing proposed is capable
of. But supposing Men to do their Duty in their diligent Enquiries into the
whole Matter, I desire to know, whether by the Proposal mentioned there come
upon Men an Obligation to believe? If there do not, then are all Men perfectly
innocent, who refuse to receive the Gospel in the preaching of it, as to any
respect unto that preaching; which to say, is to overthrow the whole
Dispensation of the Ministry. If they are obliged to believe upon the preaching
of it, then has the Word in it self those Evidences of its Divine Original and
Authority, which are a sufficient Ground of Faith, or Reason of Believing; For
what God requires us to believe upon, has so always.

As the Issue of this whole Discourse, it is affirmed, that our Faith is built
on and resolved into the Scripture it self, which carries with it its own
Evidence of being a Divine Revelation. And therefore does that Faith ultimately
rest in the Truth and Authority of God alone, and not in any Human Testimony,
such as is that of the Churh, nor in any rational Arguments or Motives that are
absolutely fallible.

It may be said that if the Scripture thus evidence it self to be the Word of
God, as the Sun manifests it self by Light, and Fire by Heat, or as the first
Principles of Reason are evident in themselves without further Proof or
Testimony; then every one, and all men, upon the Proposal of the Scripture unto
them, and its own bare Assertion, that it is the Word of God, would necessarily
on that Evidence alone assent thereunto, and believe it so to be. But this is
not so, all Experience lies against it; nor is there any pleadable Ground of
Reason that so it is, or that so it ought to be.

In Answer unto this Objection I shall do these two things.

1. I shall show what it is, what Power, what Faculty in the Minds of Men,
whereunto this Revelation is proposed, and whereby we assent unto the Truth of
it, wherein the Mistakes whereon this Objection proceeds will be discovered.

2. I shall mention some of those things, whereby the Holy Ghost testifies and
gives Evidence unto the Scripture in and by it self, so as that our Faith may
be immediately resolved into the Veracity of God alone.

1. And in the first place we may consider, that there are three Ways whereby
we assent unto any thing that is proposed unto us as true, and receive it as
such.

1. By inbred Principles of natural Light, and the first rational Actings of
our Minds. This in Reason answers Instinct in irrational Creatures. Hence God
complains that his People did neglect and sin against their own natural Light,
and first Dictates of Reason, whereas brute Creatures would not forsake the
Conduct of the Instinct of their Natures, Isa. 1. 3. In general, the Mind is
necessarily determined to an Assent unto the proper Objects of these
Principles; it cannot do otherwise. It cannot but assent unto the prime
Dictates of the Light of Nature, yea those Dictates are nothing but its Assent.
Its first Apprehension of the things which the Light of Nature embraces,
without either express Reasonings or further Consideration, are this Assent.
Thus does the Mind embrace in it self the general Notions of moral Good and
Evil, with the Difference between them, however it practically complies notwith
what they guide unto; Jude v. 10. And so does it assent unto many Principles of
Reason, as that the whole is greater than the part, without admitting any
debate about them.

2. By rational Considerations of things externally proposed unto us. Herein
the Mind exercises its discursive Faculty, gathering one thing out of another,
and concluding one thing from another. And hereon is it able to assent unto
what is proposed unto it in various Degrees of Certainty, according unto the
nature and degree of the Evidence it proceeds upon. Hence it has a certain
Knowledge of some things; of others an Opinion or Persuasion prevalent against
the Objections to the contrary, which it knows, and whose Force it understands*
which may be true or false.

3. By Faith. This respects that Power of our Minds, whereby we are able to
assent unto any thing as true, which we have no first Principles concerning, no
inbred Notions of, nor can from more known Principles make unto our selves any
certain rational Conclusions concerning them. This is our Assent upon
Testimony, whereon we believe many Things, which no Sense, inbred Principles,
nor Reasonings of our own, could either give us an Acquaintance with, or an
Assurance of. And this Assent also has not only various Degrees, but is also
of diverse Kinds, according as the Testimony is which it arises from, and
rests on; as being Humane if that be Humane, and Divine if that be so also.

According to these distinct Faculties and Powers of our Souls, God is pleased
to reveal or make known himself, his Mind or Will three ways unto us. For he
has implanted no Power on our Minds, but the principal Use and Exercise of it
are to be with respect unto himself, and our living unto him, which is the end
of them all. And a neglect of the improvement of them unto this end, is the
highest Aggravation of Sin. It is an Aggravation of Sin, when men abuse the
Creatures of God otherwise than he has appointed, or in not using them to his
Glory; when they take his Corn, and Wine and Oil, and spend them on their
Lusts, Hos. 2. 8. It is an higher Aggravation when men in sinning abuse and
dishonor their own Bodies; for these are the principal external Workmanship of
God, being made for Eternity, and whose Preservation unto his Glory is
committed unto us in an especial manner. This the Apostle declares to be the
peculiar Aggravation of the Sin of Fornication and Uncleanness in any kind, 1
Cor. 6. 18, 19. But the Height of Impiety consists in the Abuse of the
Faculties and Powers of the Soul, wherewith we are endowed purposely and
immediately for the glorifying of God. Hence proceed Unbelief, Profaneness,
Blasphemy, Atheism, and the like Pollutions of the Spirit of Mind. And these
are Sins of the highest Provocation. For the Powers and Faculties of our Minds
being given us only to enable us to live unto God, the diverting of their
principal Exercise unto other Ends, is an Act of Enmity against him, and
Affront unto him.

1. He makes himself known unto us by the innate Principles of our Nature, unto
which he has communicated as a Power of apprehending, so an indelible Sense of
his Being, his Authority and his Will, so far as our natural Dependence on him,
and moral Subjection unto him do require. For whereas there are two things in
this natural Light and first Dictates of Reason; first, a Power of Conceiving,
Discerning, and Assenting; and secondly, a Power of Judging and Determining
upon the things so discerned and assented unto: by the one God makes known his
Being, and Essential Properties; by the other his Sovereign Authority over all.

As to the first, the Apostle affirms, that (...), Romans 1. 19. That which may
be known of God, (his Essence, Being, Subsistence, his natural, necessary,
essential Properties) is manifest in them; that is, it has a self evidencing
Power, acting it self in the Minds of all Men endued with natural Light and
Reason.

And as unto his Sovereign Authority, he does evidence it in and by the
Consciences of men, which are the Judgment that they make, and cannot but make,
of themselves and their Actions, with respect unto the Authority and Judgment
of God, Romans 2. 14, 15. And thus the Mind does assent unto the Principles of
God's Being and Authority, antecedently unto any actual Exercise of the
discursive Faculty of Reason, or other Testimony whatever.

2. He does it unto our Reason in its Exercise, by proposing such things unto
its Consideration, as from whence it may and cannot but conclude in an Assent
unto the Truth of what God intends to reveal unto us that way. This he does by
the Works of Creation and Providence, which present themselves unavoidably unto
Reason in its Exercise, to instruct us in the Nature, Being, and Properties of
God.

Thus the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
Handiwork. Day unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows
Knowledge. There is no Speech nor Language where their Voice is not heard,
Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3. But yet they do not thus declare, evidence and reveal the
Glory of God unto the first Principles and Notions of natural Light, without
the actual Exercise of Reason. Only they do so when we consider his Heavens the
Work of his Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which he has ordained, as the same
Psalmist speaks Psalm. 8. 3. A rational Consideration of them, their Greatness,
Order, Beauty, and Use, is required unto that Testimony and Evidence which God
gives in them and by them unto Himself, his glorious Being, Power. To this
purpose the Apostle discourses at large concerning the Works of Creation, Romans
1. 20, 21, 22. as also of those of Providence, Acts 14. 15, 16, 17. chap. 17.
24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and the rational Use we are to make of them, verse 29. So
God calls unto Men for the Exercise of their Reason about these Things,
reproaching them with Stupidity and Brutishness where they are wanting therein;
Isa, 46. 7, 8, 9. chap. 44. 18, 19. 20.

3. God reveals himself unto our Faith, or that Power of our Souls whereby we
are able to ass^nt unto the Truth of what is proposed unto us upon Testimony.
And this he does by his Word, or the Scriptures proposed unto us in the manner
and way before expressed.

He does not reveal himself by his Word unto the Principles of natural Light,
nor unto Reason in its Exercise. But yet these Principles, and Reason it self,
with all the Faculties of our Minds, are consequentially affected with that
Revelation, and are drawn forth into their proper Exercise by it. But in the
Gospel the Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1. 17.
not to natural Light, Sense or Reason in the first place. And it is Faith that
is the Evidence of things not seen, as revealed in the Word, Heb. 11. 1. Unto
this kind of Revelation, Thus says the Lord, is the only Ground and Reason of
our Assent; and that Assent is the Assent of Faith, because it is resolved into
Testimony alone.

And concerning these several ways of the Communication or Revelation of the
Knowledge of God, it must be always observed, that there is a perfect
consonancy in the things revealed by them all. If any thing pretends from the
one what is absolutely contradictory unto the other, or our Senses as the means
of them, it is not to be received.

The Foundation of the whole, as of all the actings of our Souls, is in the
inbred Principles of natural Light, or first necessary Dictates of our
intellectual rational Nature. This, so far as it extends, is a Rule unto our
Apprehension in all that follows. Wherefore if any pretend in the Exercise of
Reason, to conclude unto any thing concerning the Nature, Being, or Will of
God, that is directly contradictory unto those Principles and Dictates, it is
no Divine Revelation unto our Reason, but a Paralogism from the defect of
Reason in its Exercise. This is that which the Apostle charge on, and
vehemently urges against the Heathen Philosophers. Inbred Notions they had in
themselves of the Being and Eternal Power of God; and these were so manifest in
them thereby, that they could not but own them. Hereon they set their rational
discursive Faculty at work in the Consideration of God and his Being. But
herein were they so vain and foolish, as to draw Conclusions directly contrary
unto the first Principles of natural Light, and the unavoidable Notions which
they had of the Eternal Being of God, Romans 1. 21, 22, 23, 24. And many upon
their pretended rational Consideration of the promiscuous Event of things in
the World, have foolishly concluded that all things had a fortuitous Beginning,
and have fortuitous Events, or such as from a Concatenation of antecedent
Causes are fatally necessarily, and are not disposed by an infinitely Wise,
Unerring, Holy Providence. And this also is directly contradictory unto the
first Principles and Notions of natural Light, whereby it openly proclaims it
self not to be an Effect of Reason in its due Exercise, but a mere Delusion.

So if any pretend unto Revelations by Faith, which are contradictory unto the
first Principles of natural Light, or Reason in its proper Exercise about its
proper Objects, it is a Delusion. On this Ground the Roman Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is justly rejected; for it proposes that as a Revelation by
Faith, which is expressly contradictory unto our Sense and Reason in their
proper Exercise about their proper Objects. And a supposition of the
possibility of any such thing, would make the ways whereby God reveals and
makes known himself, to cross and enterfere one with another; which would leave
us no certainty in any thing Divine or Humane.

But yet as these means of Divine Revelation do harmonize and perfectly agree
one with the other; so they are not objectively equal, or equally extensive,
nor are they coordinate, but subordinate unto one another. Wherefore there are
many things discernable by Reason in its Exercise, which do not appear unto the
first Principles of natural Light. So the Sober Philosophers of old attained
unto many true and great Conceptions of God, and the Excellencies of his
Nature, above what they arrived unto, who either did not or could not cultivate
and improve the Principles of natural Light in the same manner as they did. It
is therefore Folly to pretend that things so made known of God are not
infallibly true and certain, because they are not obvious unto the first
Conceptions of natural Light, without the due Exercise of Reason, provided they
are not contradictory thereunto. And there are many Things revealed unto Faith
that are above and beyond the Comprehension of Reason, in the best and utmost
of its most proper Exercise. Such are all the principal Mysteries of Christian
Religion. And it is the height of Folly to reject them, as some do, because
they are not discernable and comprehensible by Reason, seeing they are not
contradictory thereunto. Wherefore these Ways of Gods Revelation of Himself,
are not equally extensive, or commensurate, but are so subordinate one unto
another, that what is wanting unto the one is supplied by the other, unto the
Accomplishment of the whole and entire end of Divine Revelation; and the Truth
of God is the same in them all.

The Revelation which God makes of Himself in the first way, by the inbred
Principles of natural Light, does sufficiently and infallibly evidence it self
to be from Him; it does it in, unto, and by those Principles themselves. This
Revelation of God is infallible, the Assent unto it is infallible, which the
infallible Evidence it gives of it self makes to be so. We dispute not now what
a few Atheistical Scepticks pretend unto, whose Folly has been sufficiently
detected by others. All the Sobriety that is in the World consents in this,
that the Light of the Knowledge of God, in and by the inbred Principles of our
Minds and Consciences, does sufficiently, uncontroulably, and infallibly
manifest it self to be from him, and that the Mind neither is, nor can be
possibly imposed on in its Apprehensions of that Nature. And if the first
Dictates of Reason concerning God do not evidence themselves to be from God,
they are neither of any Use nor Force; for they are not capable of being
confirmed by external Arguments; and what is written about them is to show
their Force and Evidence, not to give them any. Wherefore this first Way of
Gods Revelation of himself unto us is infallible, and infallibly evidenceth it
self in our Minds according to the Capacity of our Natures.

2. The Revelation that God makes of Himself by the Works of Creation and
Providence, unto our Reason in Exercise, or the Faculties of our Souls as
discursive, concluding rationally one thing from another, does sufficiently,
yea infallibly evidence and demonstrate it self to be from him, so that it is
impossible we should be deceived therein. It does not do so unto the inbred
Principles of natural Light, unless they are engaged in a rational exercise
about the means of the Revelation made; that is, we must rationally consider
the Works of God, both of Creation and Providence, or we cannot learn by them
what God intends to reveal of himself; and in our doing so we cannot be
deceived. For the invisible things of God from the Creation of the World are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
Power and Godhead, Romans 1. 20. They are clearly seen, and therefore may be
perfectly understood as to what they teach of God without any possibility of
Mistake. And wherever men do not receive the Revelation intended in the Way
intended, that is, do not certainly conclude that what God teaches by his Works
of Creation and Providence, namely, his Eternal Power and Godhead, with the
essential Properties thereof, Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Righteousness, and the
like, is certainly and infallibly so, believing it accordingly; it is not from
any defect in the Revelation, or its self-evidencing Efficacy, but only from
the depraved, vicious Habits of their Minds, their Enmity against God, and
Dislike of him. And so the Apostle says, that they who rejected or improved
not the Revelation of God, did it, because they did not like to retain God in
their Knowledge, Romans 1. 28. For which Cause God did so severely revenge their
natural Unbelief, as is there expressed. See Isa. 46. 8. chap 44. 15, 19, 20.
That which I principally insist on from hence is, that the Revelation which God
makes of himself by the Works of Creation and Providence, does not evidence it
self unto the first Principles of natural Light, so as that an Assent should be
given thereunto without the Actual Exercise of Reason, or the discursive
Faculty of our Minds about them; but thereunto it does infallibly evidence it
self. So may the Scripture have and has a self evidencing Efficacy, though
this appear not unto the Light of first natural Principles, no nor to bare
Reason in its Exercise. For,

3. Unto our Faith God reveals himself by the Scripture, or his Word which he
has magnified above all his Name, Psalm. 138. 2. that is, implanted on it more
Characters of Himself, and his Properties, than on any other Way whereby he
reveals or makes himself known unto us. And this Revelation of God by his
Word, we confess, is not sufficient nor suited to evidence it self unto the
Light of Nature, or the first Principles of our Understanding, so that by bare
Proposal of it to be from God, we should by virtue of them immediately assent
unto it, as men assent unto self-evident natural Principles, as that the part
is lesser than the whole, or the like. Nor does it evidence it self unto our
Reason in its mere natural Exercise, as that by virtue thereof we can
demonstratively conclude that it is from God, and that what is declared therein
is certainly and infallibly true. It has indeed such external Evidences
accompanying it, as makes a great Impression on Reason it self. But the Power
of our Souls whereunto it is proposed is that whereby we can give an Assent
unto the Truth upon the Testimony of the Proposer, whereof we have no other
Evidence. And this is the principal and most noble Faculty and Power of our
Natures. There is an Instinct in brute Creatures, that has some Resemblance
unto our inbred natural Principles; and they will act that Instinct, improved
by Experience, into a great likeness of Reason in its Exercise, although it be
not so. But as unto the Power or Faculty of giving an Assent unto Things on
Witness or Testimony, there is nothing in the Nature of irrational Creatures
that has the least Shadow of it or Likeness unto it. And if our Souls did want
but this one Faculty of assenting unto Truth upon Testimony, all that remains
would not be sufficient to conduct us through the affairs of this natural Life.
This therefore being the most noble Faculty of our Minds, is that whereunto the
highest Way of Divine Revelation is proposed.

4. That our Minds in this especial Case to make our Assent to be according
unto the Mind of God, and such as is required of us in a way of Duty, are to be
prepared and assisted by the Holy Ghost, we have declared and proved before. On
this Supposition the Revelation which God makes of himself by his Word, does no
less evidence it self unto our Minds in the Exercise of Faith to be from him,
or gives no less infallible Evidence as a Ground and Reason why we should
believe it to be from him, than his Revelation of himself by the Works of
Creation and Providence does manifest it self unto our Minds in the Exercise of
Reason to be from him, nor with less Assurance that what we assent unto in and
by the Dictates of natural Light. And when God reveals himself, that is, his
Eternal Power and Godhead, by the things that are made, the Works of Creation,
the Heavens declaring his Glory, and the Firmament showing his handiwork; the
Reason of Men stirred up and brought into Exercise thereby, does infallibly
conclude upon the Evidence that is in that Revelation, that there is a God, and
he eternally Powerful and Wise, without any further Arguments to prove the
Revelation to be true. So when God by his Word reveals himself unto the Minds
of Men, thereby exciting and bringing forth Faith into Exercise, or the Power
of the Soul to assent unto Truth upon Testimony, that Revelation does no less
infallibly evidence it self to be Divine or from God, without any external
Arguments to prove it so to be. If I shall say unto a man that the Sun is risen
and shines on the Earth; if he question or deny it, and ask how I will prove
it; it is a sufficient Answer to say, that it manifests it self in and by its
own Light: and if he add, that this is no proof to him for he does not discern
it; suppose that to be so, it is a satisfactory Answer to tell him that he is
blind; and if he be not so, that it is to no purpose to argue with him who
contradicts his own Sense, for he leaves no Rule whereby what is spoken may be
tried or judged on. And if I tell a Man that the Heavens declare the Glory of
God, and the Firmament shows his Handiwork, or that the Invisible Things of
God from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
Things that are made; and he shall demand how I prove it; it is a sufficient
Answer to say, that these things in and by themselves do manifest unto the
Reason of every man in its due and proper Exercise, that there is an Eternal,
infinitely Wise and Powerful Being, by whom they were caused, produced and
made; so as that whosoever knows how to use and exercise his reasonable
Faculty in the Consideration of them, their Original, Order, Nature and Use,
must necessarily conclude that so it is. If he shall say, that it does not so
appear unto him that the Being of God is so revealed by them; It is a
sufficient Reply, in case he be so indeed, to say he is Phrenetick, and has
not the Use of his Reason; and if he be not so, that he argues in express
Contradiction unto his own Reason, as may be demonstrated. This the Heathen
Philosophers granted. Quid potest (says Cicero) esse tam apertum tamque
perspicuum, cum Coelum suspeximus, coelestiaque contemplati sumus, quam esse
aliquod Numen praestantissimae mentis, quo haec reguntur; quod qui dubitat haud
sane intelligo cur non idem Sol sit, an nullus sit dubitare possit. De Natura
Deor. lib. 2. And if I declare unto any one, that the Scripture is the Word of
God, a Divine Revelation, and that it does evidence and manifest it self so to
be. If he shall say, that he has the Use and Exercise of his Sense and Reason
as well as others, and yet it does not appear unto him so to be; it is as unto
the present Enquiry, a sufficient Reply for the Security of the Authority of
the Scriptures (though other means may be used for his Conviction) to say, that
all men have not Faith; by which alone the Evidence of the Divine Authority of
the Scriptures is discoverable; in the Light whereof alone we can read those
Characters of its Divine Extract, which are impressed on it, and communicated
unto it.

If it be not so, seeing it is a Divine Revelation, and it is our Duty to
believe it so to be, it must be either because our Faith is not fitted, suited,
nor able to receive such an Evidence, suppose God would give it unto the
Revelation of himself by his Word, as he has done unto those by the Light of
Nature and Works of Providence; or because God would not or could not give such
an Evidence unto his Word as might manifest it self so to be. And neither of
these can be affirmed without an high Reflection on the Wisdom and Goodness of
God.

That our Faith is capable of giving such an Assent is evident from hence,
because God works it in us, and bestows it upon us for this very End. And God
requires of us that we should infallibly believe what he proposes unto us, at
least when we have infallible evidence that it is from him. And as he
appoints Faith unto this end, and approves of its Exercise, so he does both
judge and condemn them who fail therein, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. Isa. 7. 9. Mark 16.
16. Yea our Faith is capable of giving an Assent, though of another kind, more
firm and accompanied with more Assurance, than any is given by Reason in the
best of its Conclusions. And the Reason is, because the Power of the Mind to
give Assent upon Testimony, which is its most noble Faculty, is elevated and
strengthened by the Divine Supernatural Work of the Holy Ghost, before described.

To say that God either could not or would not give such a Power unto the
Revelation of himself by his Word, as to evidence it self to be so, is
exceedingly prejudicial unto his Honor and Glory, seeing the everlasting
Welfare of the Souls of Men is incomparably more concerned therein than in the
other ways mentioned. And what Reason could be assigned why he should implant a
less Evidence of his Divine Authority on this than on them, seeing he designed
far greater and more glorious Ends in this than in them. If any one shall say
the Reason is, because this kind of Divine Revelation is not capable of
receiving such Evidences; it must be either because there cannot be evident
Characters of Divine Authority, Goodness, Wisdom, Power, implanted on it or
mixed with it; or because an Efficacy to manifest them cannot be communicated
unto it. That both these are otherwise, shall be demonstrated in the last Part
of this Discourse, which I shall now enter upon.

It has been already declared, that it is the Authority and Veracity of God,
revealing themselves in the Scripture and by it, that is the formal Reason of
our Faith, or Supernatural Assent unto it as it is the Word of God.

It remains only that we enquire in the Second Place into the Way and Means
whereby they evidence themselves unto us, and the Scripture thereby to be the
Word of God, so as that we may undoubtedly and infallibly believe it so to be.
Now because Faith, as we have showed, is an Assent upon Testimony, and
consequently Divine Faith is an Assent upon Divine Testimony. There must be
some Testimony or Witness in this case whereon Faith does rest. And this we say
is the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, the Author of the Scriptures, given unto
them in them and by them. And this Work or Testimony of the Spirit may be
reduced unto two Heads, which may be distinctly insisted on.

1. The Impressions or Characters which are subjectively left in the Scripture
and upon it, by the Holy Spirit its Author, of all the Divine Excellencies or
Properties of the Divine Nature, are the first Means evidencing that Testimony
of the Spirit which our Faith rests upon; or they do give the first Evidence of
its Divine Original and Authority, whereon we do believe it. The Way whereby we
learn the eternal Power and Deity of God from the Works of Creation, is no
otherwise but by those Marks, Tokens and Impressions of his Divine Power,
Wisdom and Goodness that are upon them. For from the Consideration of their
Subsistence, Greatness, Order, and Use, Reason does necessarily conclude an
Infinite Subsisting Being, of whose Power and Wisdom these things are the
manifest Effects. These are clearly seen and understood by the Things that are
made; we need no other Arguments to prove that God made the World, but it self.
It carries in it and upon it the infallible Tokens of its Original. See to
this purpose the blessed Meditation of the Psalmist, Psalm. 104. throughout. Now
there are greater and more evident Impressions of Divine Excellencies left on
the written Word from the Infinite Wisdom of the Author of it, than any that
are communicated unto the Works of God, of what sort soever. Hence David
comparing the Works and the Word of God, as to their instructive Efficacy in
declaring God and his Glory, although he ascribe much unto the Works of
Creation, yet does he prefer the Word incomparably before them, Psalm. 19. 1, 2,
3, 7, 8, 9. and Psalm. 146. ver. 8, 9. etc. and 19. 20. And these do manifest
the Word unto our Faith to be his more clearly, than the other do the Works to
be his, unto our Reason. As yet I do not know that it is denied by any, or the
contrary asserted, namely, that God, as the immediate Author of the Scripture,
has left in the very Word it self Evident Tokens and Impressions of his
Wisdom, Prescience, Omniscience, Power, Goodness, Holiness, Truth, and other
Divine, Infinite Excellencies, sufficiently evidenced unto the enlightened Minds
of Believers. Some I confess speak suspitiously herein; but until they will
directly deny it, I shall not need further to confirm it, than I have done long
since in another Treatise. And I leave it to be considered, whether (morally
speaking) it be possible that God should immediately by himself from the
eternal Counsels of his Will reveal Himself, his Mind, the Thoughts and
Purposes of his Heart, which had been hidden in Himself from Eternity, on
purpose that we should believe them, and yield Obedience unto him according to
the Declaration of Himself so made, and yet not give with it, or leave upon it
any (...), any infallible Token, evidencing him to be the Author of that
Revelation. Men who are not ashamed of their Christianity, will not be so to
profess and seal that Profession with their Blood, and to rest their eternal
Concernments on that Security herein which they have attained, namely, that
there is that Manifestation made of the glorious Properties of God in and by
the Scripture, as it is a Divine Revelation which incomparably excells in
Evidence all that their Reason receives concerning his Power from the Works of
Creation.

This is that whereon we believe the Scripture to be the Word of God with Faith
Divine and Supernatural, if we believe it so at all. There is in it self that
Evidence of its Divine Original from the Characters of Divine Excellencies left
upon it by its Author the Holy Ghost, as Faith quietly rests in, and is
resolved into. And this Evidence is manifest unto the meanest and most
unlearned no less than unto the wisest Philosophers. And the Truth is, if
Rational Arguments and External Motives were the sole Ground of receiving the
Scripture to be the Word of God, it could not be, but that learned Men and
Philosophers would have always been the forwardest and most ready to admit it,
and most firmly to adhere unto it, and its Profession. For whereas all such
Arguments do prevail on the Minds of Men according as they are able aright to
discern their Force and judge of them, learned Philosophers would have had the
Advantage incomparably above others. And so some have of late affirmed, that it
was the wise, rational, and learned Men, who at first most readily received the
Gospel; an Assertion which nothing but gross Ignorance of the Scripture it
self, and all the Writings concerning the Original of Christianity, whether of
Christians or Heathens, could give the least Countenance unto; see 1 Cor. 1.
23, 26. From hence is the Scripture so often compared unto Light, called Light,
a Light shining in a dark place, which will evidence it self unto all who are
not blind, or do wilfully shut their Eyes, or have their Eyes blinded by the
God of this World, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the
Image of God, should shine unto them; which Consideration I have handled at
large elsewhere.

2. The Spirit of God evidenceth the Divine Original and Authority of the
Scripture, by the Power and Authority which he puts forth in it and by it over
the Minds and Consciences of Men, with its Operation of Divine Effects thereon.
This the Apostle expressly affirms to be the Reason and Cause of Faith, 1 Cor.
14. 24, 25. If all prophesy, and there comes in one that believes not, or one
unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the
Secrets of his Heart made manifest, and so falling down on his Face, he will
worship God, and report that God is in you of a Truth. The Acknowledgment and
Confession of God to be in them or among them, is a Profession of Faith in the
Word administered by them. Such Persons assent unto its Divine Authority, or
believe it to be the Word of God. And on what Evidence or Ground of Credibility
they did so, is expressly declared. It was not upon the Force of any external
Arguments produced and pleaded unto that Purpose. It was not upon the Testimony
of this or that, or any Church whatever; nor was it upon a Conviction of any
Miracles which they saw wrought in its Confirmation. Yea the Ground of the
Faith and Confession declared, is opposed unto the Efficacy and Use of the
Miraculous Gift of Tongues, v. 23, 24. Wherefore the only Evidence whereon they
received the Word, and acknowledged it to be of God, was that Divine Power and
Efficacy, whereof they found and felt the Experience in themselves. He is
convinced of all, judged of all, and thus are the Secrets of his Heart made
manifest, whereon he falls down before it with an Acknowledgment of its Divine
Authority, finding the Word to come upon his Conscience with an irresistible
Power of Conviction and Judgment thereon [ He is convinced of all, judged of
all,] He cannot but grant that there is (...) a Divine Efficacy in it, or
accompanying of it. Especially his Mind is influenced by this, that the Secrets
of his Heart are made manifest by it. For all Men must acknowledge this to be
an Effect of Divine Power; seeing God alone is (...), he who searches,
knows, and judges the Heart. And if the Woman of Samaria believed that
Jesus was the Christ, because he told her all things that ever she did, John 4.
29. there is Reason to believe that Word to be from God, which makes manifest
even the Secrets of our Hearts. And although I do conceive that by the Word of
God, Heb. 4. 12. the Living and Eternal Word is principally intended, yet the
Power and Efficacy there ascribed to him is that which he puts forth by the
Word of the Gospel. And so that Word also, in its Place and use, pierces to
the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, of the Joints and Marrew, and is a
Discerner, or passes a critical Judgment on the Thoughts and Intents of the
Heart, or makes manifest the Secrets of men's Hearts, as it is here expressed.
Hereby then does the Holy Ghost so evidence the Divine Authority of the Word,
namely, by that Divine Power which it has upon our Souls and Consciences, that
we do assuredly acquiesce in it to be from God. So the Thessalonians are
commended that they received the Word not as the Word of Men, but as it is in
truth the Word of God, which effectually works in them that believe, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 15. It distinguishes it self from the Word of Men, and evidences it self to
be indeed the Word of God by its effectual Operation in them that believe. And
he who has this Testimony in himself has a higher and more firm Assurance of
the Truth than what can be attained by the Force of external Arguments, or the
Credit of Humane Testimony. Wherefore I say in general, that the Holy Spirit
gives Testimony unto, and evinceth the Divine Authority of the Word, by its
Powerful Operations and Divine Effects on the Souls of them that do believe. So
that although it be weakness and foolishness unto others, yet as is Christ
himself unto them that are called, it is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of
God.

And I must say, that although a Man be furnished with external Arguments of
all Sorts concerning the Divine Original and Authority of the Scriptures;
although he esteem his Motives of Credibility to be effectually persuasive, and
have the Authority of any or all the Churches in the World to confirm his
Persuasion, yet if he have no Experience in himself of its Divine Power,
Authority and Efficacy, he neither does nor can believe it to be the Word of
God in a due manner, with Faith Divine and Supernatural. But he that has this
Experience has that Testimony in himself which will never fail.

This will be the more manifest, if we consider some few of those many
Instances, wherein it exerts its Power, or the Effects which are produced
thereby.

The Principal Divine Effect of the Word of God is in the Conversion of the
Souls of Sinners unto God. The Greatness and Glory of this Work we have
elsewhere declared at large. And all those who are acquainted with it as it is
declared in the Scripture, and have any Experience of it in their own Hearts,
do constantly give it as an Instance of the exceeding Greatness of the Power of
God. It may be they speak not improperly, who prefer the Work of the New
Creation before the Work of the Old, for the express Evidences of Almighty
Power contained in it, as some of the Ancients do. Now of this Great and
Glorious Effect the Word is the only Instrumental Cause, whereby the Divine
Power operates and is expressive of it self. For we are born again, born of
God, not of Corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible by the Word of God, which
abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 21. For of his own Will does God beget us with the
Word of Truth, Jam. 1. 18. The Word is the Seed of the New Creature in us, that
whereby our whole Natures, our Souls and all their Faculties are changed and
renewed into the Image and Likeness of God. And by the same Word is this new
Nature kept and preserved, 1 Pet. 2. 2. and the whole Soul carried on unto the
Enjoyment of God. It is unto Believers an Ingrafted Word, which is able to save
their Souls; James 1. 21. The Word of God's Grace, which is able to build us
up, and give us an Inheritance among them that are sanctified, Acts 20. 32. And
that because it is the Power of God unto Salvation unto them that do believe,
Romans 1. 16. All the Power which God puts forth and exerts in the Communication
of that Grace and Mercy unto Believers, whereby they are gradually carried on
and prepared unto Salvation, he does it by the Word. Therein, in an especial
manner, is the Divine Authority of the Word evidenced by the Divine Power and
Efficacy given unto it by the Holy Ghost. The Work which is effected by it in
the Regeneration, Conversion, and Sanctification of the Souls of Believers,
does evidence it infallibly unto their Consciences, that it is not the Word of
Man, but of God. It will be said, this Testimony is private in the Minds only
of them on whom this Work is wrought. And therefore do I press it no further;
but he that believes has the Witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10. Let it be
granted, that all who are really converted unto God by the Power of the Word,
have that infallible Evidence and Testimony of its Divine Original, Authority,
and Power in their own Souls and Consciences, that they thereon believe it with
Faith Divine and Supernatural, in Conjunction with the other Evidences before
mentioned, as Parts of the same Divine Testimony, and it is all I aim at herein.

But yet although this Testimony be privately received (for in it self it is
not so, but common unto all Believers) yet is it ministerially pleadable in the
Church, as a Principal Motive unto Believing. A Declaration of the Divine Power
which some have found by Experience in the Word, is an Ordinance of God to
convince others, and to bring them unto the Faith. Yea of all the external
Arguments that are or may be pleaded to justify the Divine Authority of the
Scripture, there is none more prevalent nor cogent, than this of its mighty
Efficacy in all Ages on the Souls of Men, to change, convert, and renew them
into the Image and Likeness of God, which has been Visible and Manifest.

Moreover there are yet other particular Effects of the Divine Power of the
Word on the Minds and Consciences of Men, belonging unto this general Work,
either preceding or following of it, which are clearly sensible and enlarge the
Evidence. As,

1. The Work of Conviction of Sin on those who expected it not, who desired it
not, and who would avoid it if by any means possible they could. The World is
filled with Instances of this Nature; whilst Men have been full of love to
their Sins, at Peace in them, enjoying Benefit and Advantage by them, the Word
coming upon them in its Power, has awed, disquieted, and terrified them, taken
away their Peace, destroyed their Hopes, and made them, as it were whether they
would or no, that is, contrary to their Desires, Inclinations and carnal
Affections, to conclude that if they comply not with what is proposed unto them
in that Word, which before they took no notice of, nor had any regard unto,
they must be presently or eternally miserable.

Conscience is the Territory or Dominion of God in Man, which he has so
reserved unto himself, that no Human Power can possibly enter into it, or
dispose of it in any wise. But in this Work of Conviction of Sin, the Word of
God, the Scripture, enters into the Conscience of the Sinner, takes possession
of it, disposes it unto Peace or Trouble by its Laws or Rules, and no
otherwise. Where it gives Disquietments, all the World cannot give it Peace;
and where it speaks Peace there is none can give it Trouble. Were not this the
Word of God, how should it come thus to speak in his Name, and to act his
Authority in the Consciences of Men as it does? when once it begins this Work,
Conscience immediately owns a new Rule, a new* Law, a new Government, in order
to the Judgment of God upon it and all its Actions. And it is contrary to the
Nature of Conscience to take this upon it self, nor would it do so, but that it
sensibly finds God speaking and acting in it, and by it; see 1 Cor. 14. 25, 26.
An Invasion may be made on the outward Duties that Conscience disposes unto;
but none can be so upon its internal Actings. No Power under Heaven can cause
Conscience to think, act, or judge otherwise than it does by its immediate
Respect unto God. For it is the Minds self-judging with respect unto God; and
what is not so, is no Act of Conscience. Wherefore to force an Act of
Conscience implies a Contradiction. However it may be defiled, bribed, seared,
and at length utterly debauched; admit of a Superior Power, a Power above or
over it self under God it cannot.

I know Conscience may be prepossessed with Prejudices; and by Education, with
the Insinuation of Traditions, take on it self the Power of False, Corrupt,
Superstitious Principles and Errors, as Means of Conveying unto it a Sense of
Divine Authority; So is it with the M^humetans, and other false Worshippers in
the World. But the Power of those Divine Convictions, whereof we treat, is
manifestly different from such prejudicate Opinions. For where these are not
imposed on Men by Artifices and Delusions easily discoverable, they prepossess
their Minds and Inclinations by Traditions, antecedently unto any right
Judgment they can make of themselves or other things; and they are generally
wrapped up and condited in their secular Interests. The Convictions we treat of
come from without, upon the Minds of Men, and that with a sensible Power,
prevailing over all their previous Thoughts and Inclinations. Those first
affect, deceive and delude the notional Part of the Soul, whereby Conscience is
insensibly influenced and diverted into improper Respects, and is deceived as
to its judging of the Voice of God; these immediately principle the Practical
Understanding and self-judging Power of the Soul. Wherefore such Opinions and
Persuasions are gradually insinuated into the Mind, and are admitted insensibly
without Opposition or Reluctance, being never accompanied at their first
Admission with any secular Disadvantage. But these Divine Convictions by the
Word befall Men, some when they think of nothing less, and desire nothing less;
some when they design other Things, as the Pleasing of their Ears, or the
Entertainment of their Company; and some that go on purpose to deride and scoff
at what should be spoken unto them from it. It might also be added unto the
same purpose, how confirmed some have been in their carnal Peace and Security,
by Love of Sin, with innumerable inveterate Prejudices; what Losses and Ruin
to their outward Concernments many have fallen into by admitting of their
Convictions; what Force, Diligence, and Artifices have been used to defeat
them, what Contribution of Aid and Assistance has there been from Satan unto
this purpose; and yet against all has the Divine Power of the Word absolutely
prevailed, and accomplished its whole designed Effect. See 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
Jerem. 23. 29. Zach. 1. 6.

2. It does it by the Light that is in it, and that Spiritual Illuminating
Efficacy wherewith it is accompanied. Hence it is called a Light shining in a
dark Place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. That Light whereby God shines into the Hearts and
Minds of Men, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 6. Without the Scripture all the World is in
Darkness. Darkness covers the Earth, and thick Darkness the People, Isa* 60. 2.
It is the Kingdom of Satan filled with Darkness and Confusion. Superstition,
Idolatry, lying Vanities, wherein Men know not at all what they do, nor whither
they go, fill the whole World; even as it is at this Day. And the Minds of Men
are naturally in Darkness; there is a Blindness upon them that they cannot see
nor discern Spiritual Things, no not when they are externally proposed unto
them, as I have at large evinced elsewhere. And no Man can give a greater
Evidence that it is so, than he who denies it so to be. With Respect unto both
these Kinds of Darkness the Scripture is a Light, and accompanied with a
Spiritual Illuminating Efficacy, thereby evidencing it self to be a Divine
Revelation. For what but Divine Truth could recall the Minds of Men from all
their wanderings in Error, Superstition, and other Effects of Darkness, which of
themselves they love more than Truth? All Things being filled with Vanity,
Error, Confusion, Misapprehensions about God and our selves, our Duty and End,
our Misery and Blessedness; the Scripture, where it is communicated by the
Providence of God, comes in as a Light into a Dark Place, discovering all
Things clearly and steadily, that concern either God or our selves, our present
or future Condition; causing all the Ghosts, and false Images of Things which
Men had framed and fancied unto themselves in the Dark, to vanish and
disappear. Digitus Dei! this is none other but the Power of God. But
principally it evidenceth this its Divine Efficacy, by that Spiritual Saving
Light, which it conveighs into and implants on the Minds of Believers. Hence
there is none of them who have gained any Experience by the Observation of
God's Dealings with them, but shall, although they know not the Ways and
Methods of the Spirits Operations by the Word, yea can say with the Man unto
whom the Lord Jesus restored his Sight, One thing I know, that whereas I was
born blind, now I see. This Power of the Word, as the Instrument of the Spirit
of God for the Communication of Saving Light and Knowledge unto the Minds of
Men, the Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 3. 18. chap. 4. 4, 6. By the Efficacy of this
Power does he evidence the Scripture to be the Word of God. Those who believe,
find by it a Glorious Supernatural Light introduced into their Minds, whereby
they who before saw nothing in a distinct affecting manner in Spirituals, do
now clearly discern the Truth, the Glory, the Beauty, and Excellency of
Heavenly Mysteries, and have their Minds transformed into their Image and
LikeLineness. And there is no Person who has the Witness in himself of the
kindling of this Heavenly Light in his Mind by the Word, but has also the
Evidence in himself of its Divine Original.

3. It does in like manner evidence its Divine Authority by the Awe, which it
puts on the Minds of the Generality of Mankind unto whom it is made known, that
they dare not absolutely reject it. Multitudes there are unto whom the Word is
declared, who hate all its Precepts, despise all its Promises, abhor all its
Threatenings, like nothing, approve of nothing of what it declares or proposes,
and yet dare not absolutely refuse or reject it. They deal with it as they do
with God Himself, whom they hate also, according to the Revelation which he
has made of Himself in his Word. They wish he were not, sometimes they hope he
is not, would be glad to be free of his Rule, but yet dare not, cannot
absolutely deny and disown Him, because of that Testimony for Himself, which he
keeps alive in them whether they will or no. The same is the Frame of their
Hearts and Minds toward the Scripture, and that for no other Reason but
because it is the Word of God, and manifests it selfsso to be. They hate it,
wish it were not, hope it is not true, but are not by any Means able to shake
off a Disquiet in the Sense of its Divine Authority. This Testimony it has
fixed in the Hearts of Multitudes of its Enemies; Psalm. 45. 5.

4. It evidences its Divine Power in administering strong Consolations in the
deepest and most unrelievable Distresses. Some such there are, and such many
Men fall into, wherein all Means and Hopes of Relief may be utterly removed and
taken away. So is it when the Miseries of Men are not known unto any that will
so much as pity them, or wish them Relief; or if they have been known, and
there has been an Eye to pity them, yet there has been no Hand to help them.
Such has been the Condition of innumerable Souls, as on other Accounts, so in
particular under the power of Persecutors; when they have been shut up in
filthy and nasty Dungeons, not to be brought out but unto Death by the most
exquisite Tortures that the Malice of Hell could invent, or the bloody Cruelty
of Man inflict. Yet in these and the like Distresses does the Word of God by
its Divine Power and Efficacy break through all interposing Difficulties, all
dark and discouraging Circumstances, supporting, refreshing, and comforting
such poor distressed Sufferers, yea commonly filling them under overwhelming
Calamities with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. Though they are in Bonds,
yet is the Word of God not bound; neither can all the Power of Hell, nor all
the Diligence or Fury of Men keep out the Word from entering into Prisons,
Dungeons, Flames, and to administer strong Consolations against all Fears,
Pains, Wants, Dangers, Deaths, or whatever we may in this mortal Life be
exposed unto. And sundry other Instances of the like Nature might be pleaded,
wherein the Word gives evident Demonstrations unto the Minds and Consciences of
Men of its own Divine Power and Authority; which is the second Way whereby the
Holy Ghost its Author gives Testimony unto its Original.

But it is not merely the Grounds and Reasons whereon we believe the Scripture
to be the Word of God, which we designed to declare. The whole Work of the Holy
Spirit enabling us to believe them so to be was proposed unto Consideration.
And beyond what we have insisted on, there is yet a further peculiar Work of
his, whereby he effectually ascertains our minds of the Scriptures being the
Word of God, whereby we are ultimately established in the Faith thereof. And I
cannot but both admire and bewail that this should be denied by any that would
be esteemed Christians. Wherefore if there be any Necessity thereof, I shall
take Occasion in the Second Part of this Discourse further to confirm this Part
of the Truth thus far debated, namely, that God by his Holy Spirit does
secretly and effectually persuade and satisfy the Minds and Souls of Believers
in the Divine Truth and Authority of the Scriptures, whereby he infallibly
secures their Faith against all Objections and Temptations whatsoever; so that
they can safely and comfortably dispose of their Souls in all their
Concernments, with respect unto this Life and Eternity, according unto the
undeceivable Truth and Guidance of it. But I shall no further insist on these
Things at present.

Three Things do offer themselves unto Consideration from what has been
discoursed.

1. What is the Ground and Reason why the meanest and most unlearned Sort of
Believers do assent unto this Truth, that the Scriptures are the Word of God,
with no less Firmness, Certainty, and Assurance of Mind, than do the wisest and
most Learned of them. Yea ofttimes the Faith of the former Sort herein is of
the best Growth, and firmest Consistency against Oppositions and Temptations.
Now no Assent of the Mind can be accompanied with any more Assurance, than the
Evidence whose Effect it is, and which it is resolved into, will afford. Nor
does any Evidence of Truth beget an Assent unto it in the Mind, but as it is
apprehended and understood. Wherefore the Evidence of this Truth, wherein
soever it consists, must be that which is perceived, apprehended and understood
by the meanest and most unlearned Sort of true Believers. For, as was said,
they do no less firmly assent and adhere unto it, than the Wisest and most
Learned of them. It cannot therefore consist in such subtle and learned
Arguments, whose Sense they cannot understand or comprehend. But the Things we
have pleaded are of another Nature. For those Characters of Divine Wisdom,
Goodness, Holiness, Grace, and Sovereign Authority, which are implanted on the
Scripture by the Holy Ghost, are as legible unto the Faith of the Meanest, as
of the most Learned Believer. And they also are no less capable of an
Experimental Understanding of the Divine Power and Efficacy of the Scriptures
in all its Spiritual Operations, than those who are more Wise and Skillful in
discerning the Force of External Arguments and Motives of Credibility. It must
therefore of necessity be granted, that the formal Reason of Faith consists in
those Things, whereof the Evidence is equally obvious unto all Sorts of
Believers.

2. Whence it is that the Assent of Faith, whereby we believe the Scriptures to
be the Word of God, is usually affirmed to be accompanied with more Assurance
than any Assent which is the Effect of Science upon the most demonstrative
Principles. They who affirm this, do not consider Faith as it is in this or
that Individual Person, or in all that do sincerely believe; but in its own
Nature and Essence, and what it is meet and able to produce. And the Schoolmen
do distinguish between a Certainty or Assurance of Evidence, and an Assurance
of Adherence. In the latter they say the Certainty of Faith does exceed that of
Science; but it is less in respect of the former. But it is not easily to be
conceived how the Certainty of Adherence should exceed the Certainty of
Evidence, with respect unto any Object whatsoever. That which seems to render a
Difference in this Case is, that the Evidence which we have in Things
scientifical is Speculative, and affects the Mind only; but the Evidence which
we have by Faith effectually works on the Will also, because of the Goodness
and Excellency of the Things that are believed. And hence it is that the whole
Soul does more firmly adhere unto the Objects of Faith upon that Evidence which
it has of them, than unto other Things whereof it has clearer Evidence,
wherein the Will and the Affections are little or not at all concerned. And
Bonaventure gives a Reason of no small weight, why Faith is more certain than
Science, not with the Certainty of Speculation, but of Adherence; Quoniam
fideles Christiani, nec Argumentis, nec Tormentis, nec Blandimentis adduci
possunt, vel inclinari, ut Veritatem quam credunt* vel ore tenus negent; quod
nemo peritus alicujus scientiae faceret, si acerrimis Tormentis cogeretur
scientiam suam de conclusione aliqua Geometrica vel Arithmetica retractare.
Stultus enim and ridiculus esset Geometra, qui pro sua scientia in
Controversiis Geometricis mortem anderet subire, nisi in quantum dictat Fides,
non esse mentiendum. And whatever may be said of this Distinction, I think it
cannot modestly be denied, that there is a greater Assurance in Faith, than any
is in scientifical Conclusions; until as many good and wise Men will part with
all their worldly Concernments, and their Lives, by the most exquisite
Tortures, in the Confirmation of any Truth which they have received merely on
the Ground of Reason acting in Humane Sciences, as have so done on the
Certainty which they had by Faith, that the Scripture is a Divine Revelation.
For in bearing Testimony hereunto, have innumerable Multitudes of the Best, the
Holiest and the VVisest Men that ever were in the World, cheerfully and
joyfully sacrificed all their Temporal, and adventured all their Eternal
Concernments. For they did it under a full Satisfaction that in parting with
all temporary things, they should be eternally Blessed, or eternally Miserable,
according as their Persuasion in Faith proved true or false. Wherefore unto
the Firmitude and Constancy which we have in the Assurance of Faith, three
Things do concur.

1. That this Ability of Assent upon Testimony, is the highest and most noble
Power or Faculty of our rational Souls; and therefore where it has the highest
Evidence whereof it is capable, which it has in the Testimony of God, it
gives us the highest Certainty or Assurance, whereof in this World we are
capable.

2. Unto the Assent of Divine Faith there is required an especial internal
Operation of the Holy Ghost. This renders it of another Nature than any mere
natural Act and Operation of our Minds. And therefore if the Assurance of it
may not properly be said to exceed the Assurance of Science in Degree, it is
only because it is of a more excellent kind, and so is not capable of
Comparison unto it as to Degrees.

3. That the Revelation which God makes of Himself, his Mind and Will by his
Word, is more excellent, and accompanied with greater Evidence of his
infinitely Glorious Properties, wherein alone the Mind can find absolute Rest
and Satisfaction (which is its Assurance) than any other Discovery of Truth of
what sort soever is capable of. Neither is the Assurance of the Mind absolutely
perfect in any thing beneath the Enjoyment of God. Wherefore the Soul by Faith
making the nearest Approaches, whereof in this Life it is capable, unto the
Eternal Spring of Being, Truth and Goodness, it has the highest Rest,
Satisfaction and Assurance therein that in this Life it can attain unto.

3. It follows from hence, that those that would deny either of those two
Things, or would so separate between them, as to exclude the Necessity of
either unto the Duty of Believing, namely, the internal Work of the Holy Spirit
on the Minds of Men, enabling them to believe, and the external Work of the
same Holy Spirit giving Evidence in and by the Scripture unto its own Divine
Original; do endeavor to expel all True Divine Faith out of the World, and to
substitute a probable Persuasion in the room thereof.

For a Close unto this Discourse, which has now been drawn forth unto a
greater Length than was at first intended, I shall consider some Objections
that are usually pleaded in Opposition unto the Truth asserted and vindicated.

It is therefore objected in the first Place, that the Plea hitherto insisted
on cannot be managed without great Disadvantage to Christian Religion. For if
we take away the Rational Grounds, on which we believe the Doctrine of Christ
to be True and Divine, and the whole Evidence of the Truth of it be laid on
things not only derided by Men of Atheistical Spirits, but in themselves such
as cannot be discerned by any but such as do believe, on what Grounds can we
proceed to convince an Unbeliever?

Answer 1. By the way, it is one thing to prove and believe the Doctrine of
Christ to be True and Divine; another to prove and believe the Scripture to be
given by Inspiration of God, or the Divine Authority of the Scripture, which
alone was proposed unto Consideration. A Doctrine True and Divine may be
written in and proposed unto us by Writings that were not divinely and
infallibly inspired; and so might the Doctrine of Christ have been, but not
without the unspeakable Disadvantage of the Church. And there are sundry
Arguments which forcibly and effectually prove the Doctrine of Christ to have
been True and Divine, which are not of any Efficacy to prove the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures; though on the other hand, whatever does prove the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures, does equally prove the Divine Truth of the
Doctrine of Christ.

2. There are two Ways of convincing Unbelievers; the one insisted on by the
Apostles and their Followers, the other by some learned Men since their Days.
The Way principally insisted on by the Apostles was by preaching the Word it
self unto them in the Evidence and Demonstration of the Spirit, by the Power
whereof manifesting the Authority of God in it, they were convinced; and
falling down acknowledged God to be in it of a Truth* 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. chapter 14.
25, 26. It is likely that in this their Proposal of the Gospel, the Doctrine
and Truths contained in it unto Unbelievers, that those of Atheistical Spirits
would both deride them and it; and so indeed it came to pass, many esteeming
themselves to be Bablers and their Doctrine to be errant Folly. But yet they
desisted not from pursuing their Work in the same way, whereunto God gave
success. The other Way is to prove unto Unbelievers that the Scripture is True
and Divine by rational Arguments, wherein some learned Persons have labored,
especially in these last Ages, to very good purpose. And certainly their
Labors are greatly to be commended, whilst they attend unto these Rules. (1.)
That they produce no Arguments but such as are cogent, and not liable unto just
Exceptions. For if to manifest their own Skill or Learning they plead such
Reasons as are capable of an Answer and Solution, they exceedingly prejudice
the Truth by subjecting it unto dubious Disputations, whereas in it self it is
Clear, Firm, and Sacred. (2.) That they do not pretend their rational Grounds
and Arguments to be the Sole Foundation that Faith has to rest upon, or which
it is resolved into. For this were the ready way to set up an Opinion instead
of Faith Supernatural and Divine. Accept but of these two Limitations, and it
is acknowledged that the rational Grounds and Arguments intended may be
rationally pleaded, and ought so to be, unto the Conviction of Gainsayers. For
no Man does so plead the self-evidencing Power of the Scripture, as to deny
that the Use of other external Motives and Arguments is necessary to stop the
Mouths of Atheists, as also unto the further Establishment of them who do
believe. These Things are subordinate, and no way inconsistent.

The Truth is, if we will attend unto our own and the Experience of the whole
Church of God, the way whereby we come to believe the Scripture to be the Word
of God ordinarily is this and no other. God having first given his Word as the
Foundation of our Faith and Obedience, has appointed the Ministry of Men, at
first extraordinary, afterward ordinary, to propose unto us the Doctrines,
Truths, Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings contained therein. Together with
this Proposition of them, they are appointed to declare that these things are
not from themselves, nor of their own Invention, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. And
this is done variously. Unto some the Word of God in this Ministry thus comes,
or is thus proposed, preached or declared, whilst they are in a Condition not
only utterly unacquainted with the Mysteries of it, but filled with contrary
Apprehensions and consequently Prejudices against it. Thus it came of old unto
the Pagan World, and must do so unto such Persons and Nations as are yet in the
same state with them. Unto these the first Preachers of the Gospel did not
produce the Book of the Scriptures, and tell them that it was the Word of God,
and that it would evidence it self unto them so to be. For this had been to
despise the Wisdom and Authority of God in their own Ministry. But they
preached the Doctrines of it unto them, grounding themselves on the Divine
Revelation contained therein. And this Proposition of the Truth or Preaching of
the Gospel was not left of God to work it self into the Reasons of Men by the
Suitableness of it thereunto; but being his own Institution for their
Illumination and Conversion, he accompanied it with Divine Power, and made it
effectual unto the Ends designed, Romans 1. 16. And the Event hereof among
Mankind was, that by some this new Doctrine was derided and scorned, by others
whose Hearts God opened to attend unto it, it was embraced and submitted unto.
Among those who after the Propagation of the Gospel are born, as they say,
within the Pale of the Church, the same Doctrine is variously instilled into
Persons according unto the several Duties and Concerns of others to instruct
them. Principally the Ministry of the Word is ordained of God unto that End
whereon the Church is the Ground and Pillar of Truth. Those of both Sorts unto
whom the Doctrine mentioned is preached or proposed, are directed unto the
Scriptures as the Sacred Repository thereof. For they are told that these
things come by Revelation from God, and that Revelation is contained in the
Bible, which is his Word. Upon this Proposal with Enquiry into it and
Consideration of it, God cooperating by his Spirit, there is that Evidence of
its Divine Original communicated unto their Minds through its Power and
Efficacy, with the Characters of Divine Wisdom and Holiness implanted on it,
which they are now enabled to discern, that they believe it and rest in it as
the immediate Word of God. Thus was it in the Case of the Woman of Samaria, and
the Inhabitants of Sychar, with respect unto their Faith in Christ Jesus, John
4. 42. This is the way whereby Men ordinarily are brought to believe the Word
of God, Romans 10. 14, 15. and that neither by external Arguments or Motives,
which no one Soul was ever converted unto God by, nor by any mere naked
Proposal and Offer of the Book unto them, nor by Miracles, nor by Immediate
Revelation or private subjective Testimony of the Spirit; nor is their Faith a
Persuasion of Mind, that they can give no Reason of, but only that they are so
persuaded.

But it will be yet further objected, that if there be such clear Evidences in
the thing it self, that is, in the Divine Original and Authority of the
Scriptures, that none who freely use their Reason can deny it; then it lies
either in the naked Proposal of the Things unto the understanding; and if so,
then every one that assents unto this Proposition, that the whole is greater
than the part, must likewise assent unto this that the Scripture is the Word of
God; or the Evidence must not ly in the naked Proposal, but in the Efficacy of
the Spirit of God in the minds of them unto whom it is proposed.

Answ. 1. I know no Divine, Ancient or Modern, Popish or Protestant, who does
not assert that tere is a work of the Holy Ghost on the minds of men necessary
unto a due Belief of the Scriptures to be the Word of God. And the
Consideration hereof ought not by any Christian to be excluded. But they say
not that this is the Objective Testimony or Evidence on which we believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God, concerning which alone is our Enquiry.

2. We do not dispute how far or by what means this Proposition, the Scripture
is the Word of God, may be evidenced merely unto our Reason; but unto our
understanding as capable of giving an Assent upon Testimony. It is not said
that this is a first Principle of Reason, though it be of Faith, nor that it is
capable of a Mathematical Demonstration. That the whole is greater than the
part, is self-evident unto our Reason upon its first Proposal; but such none
pretends to be in the Scripture, because it is a Subject not capable of it. Nor
do those who denying the self-evidence of the Scripture, pretend by their
Arguments for its Divine Authority to give such an Evidence of it unto Reason,
as is in first Principles, or Mathematical Demonstrations, but content
themselves with that which they call a Moral Certainty. But it is by Faith we
are obliged to receive the Truth of this Proposition, which respects the Power
of our Minds of assent unto Truth upon Testimony, infallibly on that which is
infallible. And hereunto it evidenceth its own Truth, not with the same, but
with an Evidence and Certainty of an higher nature and nobler kind than that of
the strictest Demonstration in things natural, or the most forcible Argumens in
things moral.

3. It will be objected, that if this be so, then none can be obliged to
receive the Scripture as the Word of God who has not Faith, and none have
Faith but those in whom it is wrought by the Spirit of God, and thereinto all
will be resolved at last.

Answ. 1. Indeed there is no Room for this Objection; for the whole Work of the
Spirit is pleaded only as he is the efficient Cause of Believing, and not the
objective, or Reason why we do believe. But

2. We must not be ashamed to resolve all we do well, spiritually and in
obedience to the Command of God, unto the Efficacious Operation of the Holy
Ghost in us, unless we intend to be ashamed of the Gospel. But this still makes
his internal Operation to be the efficient, and not his internal Testimony to
be the formal Reason of our Faith.

3. It is another Question, whether all Obligation unto Duty is and must be
proportionate unto our own Strength without Divine Assistance; which we deny:
and affirm that we are obliged unto many things by virtue of Gods Command,
which we have no power to answer but by virtue of his Grace.

4. Where the Proposal of the Scripture is made in the way before described,
those unto whom it is proposed are obliged to receive it as the Word of God,
upon the Evidence which it gives of it self so to be. Yea every Real, True,
Divine Revelation made unto Men, or every Proposal of the Scripture by Divine
Providence, has that Evidence of its being from God accompanying of it, as is
sufficient to oblige them unto whom it was made to believe it, on pain of his
Displeasure. If this were otherwise, then either were God obliged to confirm
every particular Divine Revelation with a Miracle (which as to its Obligation
unto Believing wants not its difficulty) which he did not, as in many of the
Prophets; nor does at this day at the first Proposal of the Gospel to the
Heathen; or else when he requires Faith and Obedience in such ways as in his
Wisdom he judges meet, that is in the ordinary Ministry of the Word, they are
not obliged thereby, nor is it their Sin to refuse a Compliance with his Will.

5. If this Difficulty can be no otherwise avoided, but by affirming that the
Faith which God requires of us with respect unto his Word, is nothing but a
natural Assent unto it upon rational Arguments and Considerations which we have
an Ability for, without any spiritual Aid of the Holy Ghost, or respect unto
his Testimony, as before described; which overthrows all Faith, especially that
which is Divine. I shall rather ten thousand times allow of all the just
Consequences that can follow on the Supposition mentioned, than admit of this
Relief. But of those Consequences this is none, that any unto whom the
Scripture is proposed are excepted from an Obligation unto Believing.

In like manner there is no difficulty in the usual Objection which respects
particular Books of the Scripture, why we receive them as Canonical, and reject
others; as namely, the Book of Proverbs, and not of Wisdom; of Ecclesiastes,
and not Ecclesiasticus. For,

1. As to the Books of the Old Testament, we have the Canon of them given us in
the New, where it is affirmed, that unto the Church of the Jews were committed
the Oracles of God: which both confirms all that we receive, and excludes all
that we exclude. And unto the New, there are no Pretenders, nor ever were to
the least Exercise of the Faith of any.

2. All Books whatever that have either themselves pretended unto a Divine
Original, or have been pleaded by others to be of that Extract, have been and
may be from themselves, without further help, evicted of falsehood in that
pretense. They have all of them hitherto in matter or manner, in plain
Confessions, or other sufficient Evidence, manifested themselves to be of an
human Original. And much Danger is not to be feared from any that for the
future shall set forth with the same pretense.

3. We are not bound to refuse the Ministry of the Church, or the Advantages
of Providence whereby the Scripture is brought unto us, with the Testimonies
which either directly or collaterally any one Part of it gives unto another.
Although the Scripture be to believed for it self, yet it is not ordinarily to
be believed by it self, without the help of other means.

4. On these Suppositions I fear not to affirm that there are on every
Individual Book of the Scripture, particularly those named, those Divine
Characters and Criteria, which are sufficient to difference them from all other
VVritings whatever, and to testify their Divine Authority unto the Minds and
Consciences of Believers. I say of Believers; for we enquire not on what Ground
unbelievers, or those who do not believe, do believe the Word of God, nor yet
directly on what outward Motives such Persons may be induced so to do. But our
sole Enquiry at present is, what the Faith of them who do believe is resolved
into. It is not therefore said that when our Lord Jesus Christ (for we
acknowledge that there is the same Reason of the first giving out of Divine
Revelations, as is of the Scripture) came and preached unto the Jews, that
those mere Words, I am the Light of the World, or the like* had all this
Evidence in them or with them; for nothing he said of that kind may be
separated from its Circumstances; but supposing the Testimonies given in the
Scripture before hand to his Person, Work, Time, and Manner of Coming, with the
Evidence of the Presence of God with him in the declaration that he made of his
Doctrine, and himself to be the Messiah, the Jews were bound to believe what he
taught, and himself to be the Son of God the Savior of the World, and so did
many of them upon his Preaching only, John 4. 42. And in like manner they were
bound to believe the Doctrine of John Baptist, and to submit unto his
Institutions although he wrought no Miracle, and those who did not, rejected
the Counsel of God for their Good, and perished in their unbelief. But although
our Lord Jesus Christ wrought no Miracles to prove the Scripture then extant to
be the Word of God, seeing he wrought them among such only as by whom that was
firmly believed; yet the Wisdom of God saw it necessary to confirm his
Personal Ministry by them. And without a Sense of the Power and Efficacy of the
Divine Truth of the Doctrine proposed, Miracles themselves will be despised; so
they were by some who were afterward converted by the Preaching of the Word,
Acts 2. 13. chap. 3. 7, 8. or they will produce only a false Faith, or a
ravished Assent upon an Amazement, that will not abide, Acts 8. 13, 21.

APPENDIX.
A Summary Representation of the Nature and Reason of that Faith wherewith we
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, with some Attestations given unto
the Substance of what has been delivered concerning it, shall give a Close to
this Discourse. As to the first Part of this Design, the Things that follow are
proposed.

I. Unto the Enquiry, on what Grounds or for what Reason we believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God, many Things are supposed, as on all hands
agreed upon, whose Demonstration or Proof belongs not unto our present Work.
Such are,

1. The Being of God, and his Self-subsistence, with all the Essential
Properties of his Nature.

2. Our Relation unto him and Dependence on him, as our Creator, Benefactor,
Preserver, Judge, and Rewarder, both as unto Things Temporal, and Eternal.
Wherefore,

3. The (...), whatever may be known of God by the Light of Nature, whatever is
manifest in or from the Works of Creation or Providence, and necessary Actings
of Conscience, as to the Being, Rule and Authority of God, is supposed as
acknowledged in this Enquiry.

4. That beyond the Conduct and Guidance of the Light of Nature, that Men may
live unto God, believe and put their Trust in him, according to their Duty, in
that Obedience which he requires of them, so as to come unto the Enjoyment of
Him, a Supernatural Revelation of his Mind and Will unto them, especially in
that Condition wherein all Mankind are since the Entrance of Sin, is necessary.

5. That all those unto whom God has granted Divine Revelations immediately
from Himself, for their own use, and that of all other Men unto whom they were
to be communicated, were infallibly assured that they came from God, and that
their Minds were no way imposed on in them.

6. That all these Divine Revelations, so far as they are any way necessary to
guide and instruct Men in the true Knowledge of God, and that Obedience which is
acceptable unto him, are now contained in the Scriptures, or those Books of the
Old and New Testament which are commonly received and owned among all Sorts of
Christians.

These Things I say are supposed unto our present Enquiry, and taken for
granted; so as that the Reader is not to look for any direct Proof of them in
the preceding Discourse. But on these Suppositions it is alleged and proved,

1. That all Men unto whom it is duly proposed as such, are bound to believe
this Scripture, these Books of the Old and New Testament, to be the Word of
God; that is to contain and exhibit an Immediate* Divine, Supernatural
Revelation of his Mind and Will, so far as is any way needful that they may
live unto him; and that nothing is contained in them, but what is of the same
Divine Original.

2. The Obligation of this Duty of thus Believing the Scripture to be the Word
of God, arises partly from the Nature of the Thing it self, and partly from
the especial Command of God. For it being that Revelation of the Will of God,
without the Knowledge whereof, and Assent whereunto, we cannot live unto God as
we ought, nor come unto the enjoyment of him; it is necessary that we should
believe it unto those Ends; and God requires it of us, that so we should do.

3. We cannot thus believe it in a way of Duty, but upon a sufficient Evidence
and prevalent Testimony that so it is.

4. There are many cogent Arguments, Testimonies, and Motives to persuade,
convince, and satisfy unprejudiced Persons, that the Scripture is the Word of
God, or a Divine Revelation, and every way sufficient to stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers, proceeding on such Principles of Reason, as are owned and approved
by the Generality of Mankind. And Arguments of this Nature may be taken from
almost all Considerations of the Properties of God, and his Government of the
World, of our Relation unto him, of what belongs unto our present Peace, and
future Happiness.

5. From the Arguments and Testimonies of this Nature, a firm Persuasion of
Mind defensible against all Objections, that the Scripture is the Word of God,
may be attained; and that such, as that those who live not in Contradiction
unto their own Light and Reason through the Power of their Lusts, cannot but
judge it their Wisdom, Duty, and Interest to yield Obedience unto his Will as
revealed therein.

6. But yet that Persuasion of Mind which may be thus attained, and which
rests wholly upon these Arguments and Testimonies, is not entirely that Faith
wherewith we are obliged to believe the Scripture to be the Word of God in a
way of Duty. For it is not to be merely Human, how firm soever the Persuasions
in it may be, but Divine and Supernatural, of the same kind with that whereby
we believe the things themselves contained in the Scripture.

7. We cannot thus believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, nor any
Divine Truth therein contained, without the effectual Illumination of our Minds
by the Holy Ghost. And to exclude the Consideration of his Work herein is to
cast the whole Enquiry out of the Limits of Christian Religion.

8. Yet is not this Work of the Holy Spirit in the Illumination of our Minds,
whereby we are enabled to believe in a way of Duty with Faith Supernatural and
Divine, the Ground and Reason why we do believe, or the Evidence whereon we do
so, nor is our Faith resolved thereinto.

9. Whereas also there are sundry other Acts of the Holy Spirit in and upon
our minds, establishing this Faith against Temptations unto the contrary, and
further ascertaining us of the Divine Original of the Scripture, or testifying
it unto us; yet are they none of them severally, nor all of them jointly, the
formal Reason of our Faith, nor the Ground which we believe upon. Yet are they
such as that as without the first Work of Divine Illumination we cannot
believe at all in a due manner; so without his other consequent Operations we
cannot believe steadfastly against Temptations and Oppositions. Wherefore,

10. Those only can believe the Scripture aright to be the Word of God in a
way of Duty, whose minds are enlightened, and who are enabled to believe by the
Holy Ghost.

11. Those who believe not are of two Sorts, for they are either such as oppose
and gainsay the Word as a cunningly devised Fable; or such as are willing
without prejudice to attend unto the consideration of it. The former Sort may
be resisted, opposed, and rebuked by external Arguments, and such moral
Considerations as vehemently persuade the Divine Original of the Scripture, and
from the same Principles may their mouths be stopped as to their Cavils and
Exceptions against it. The other Sort are to be led on unto believing by the
Ministry of the Church in the dispensation of the Word it self, which is the
Ordinance of God unto that purpose. But,

12. Neither sort do ever come truly to believe, either merely induced
thereunto by force of moral Arguments only, or upon the Authority of that
Church by whose Ministry the Scripture is proposed unto them to be believed.
Wherefore,

13. The formal Reason of Faith Divine and Supernatural whereby we believe the
Scripture to be the Word of God in the way of Duty, and as it is required of
us, is the Authority and Veracity of God alone, evidencing themselves unto our
Minds and Consciences in and by the Scripture it self. And herein consists
that Divine Testimony of the Holy Ghost, which as it is a Testimony gives our
Assent unto the Scriptures the general nature of Faith, and as it is a Divine
Testimony gives it the especial nature of Faith Divine and Supernatural.

14. This Divine Testimony given unto the Divine Original of the Scripture in
and by it self whereinto our Faith is ultimately resolved, is evidenced and
made known, as by the Characters of the infinite Perfections of the Divine
Nature that are in it and upon it; so by the Authority, Power and Efficacy over
and upon the Souls and Consciences of Men, and the Satisfactory Excellency of
the Truths contained therein, wherewith it is accompanied.

15. Wherefore although there be many cogent external Arguments whereby a moral
steadfast Perwasion of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures may be attained,
and it be the principal Duty of the true Church in all Ages to give Testimony
thereunto, which it has done successively at all all times since first it was
entrusted with it; and so although there be many other Means whereby we are
induced, persuaded, and enabled to believe it, yet is it for its own sake only,
efficaciously manifesting it self to be the Word of God, or upon the Divine
Testimony that is given in it and by it thereunto, that we believe it to be so
with Faith Divine and Supernatural.

Corel. Those who either deny the necessity of an internal subjective Work of
the Holy Ghost enabling us to believe, or the objective Testimony of the Holy
Spirit given unto the Scripture in and by it self, or do deny their joint
concurrence in and unto our Believing, do deny all Faith properly Divine and
Supernatural.

This being the Substance of what is declared and pleaded for in the preceding
Treatise; to prevent the Obloquy of some, and confirm the Judgment of others, I
shall add the Suffrage of Ancient and Modern Writers given unto the principal
Parts of it, and whereon all other things asserted in it do depend.

Clemens Alexandrinus discourses at large unto this purpose, Stromat. 7.
(...). We have the Lord himself for the Principle or Beginning of Doctrine, who
by the Prophets, the Gospel, and blessed Apostles, in various manners and by
diverse degrees goes before us, or leads us unto knowledge. [This is that which
we lay down as the Reason and Ground of Faith, namely, the Authority of the
Lord himself instructing us by the Scriptures.] So he adds; (...). And if any
one suppose that he needs any other Principle, the Principle will not be
kept. [that is, if we need any other Principle whereinto to resolve our Faith,
the Word of God is no more a Principle unto us.] But he who is faithful from
himself is worthy to be believed in his Sovereign Writing and Voice, which as
it appears is administered by the Lord for the benefit of men. And certainly
we use it as a Rule of judging for the invention of things. But whatever is
judged, is not credible or to be believed until it is judged; and that is no
Principle which stands in need to be judged. The Intention of his Words is,
that God who alone is to believed for himself, has given us his Word as the
Rule whereby we are to judge of all things. And this Word is so to be believed,
as not to be subject unto any other Judgment; because if it be so it cannot be
either a Principle or a Rule. And so he proceeds; (...). Wherefore it is meet
that embracing by Faith the most sufficient indemonstrable Principle, and
taking the Demonstrations of the Principle from the Principle it self, we are
instructed by the Voice of the Lord himself unto the acknowledgment of the
Truth. In few Words he declares the Substance of what we have pleaded for. No
more do we maintain in this Cause, but what Clemens does here assert; namely,
that we believe the Scripture for it self, as that which needs no antecedent
or external Demonstration; but all the Evidence and Demonstration of its Divine
Original is to be taken from it self alone; which yet he further confirms,
(...). For we would not attend or give credit simply to the definitions of Men,
seeing we have right also to define in contradiction unto them. And seeing it
is not sufficient merely to say or assert what appears to be Truth, but to
beget a belief also of what is spoken, we expect not the Testimony of Men, but
confirm that which is enquired about with the voice of the Lord, which is more
full and firm than any Demonstration, yea which rather is the only
Demonstration. -- Thus we taking our Demonstrations of the Scripture out of the
Scripture, are assured by Faith, as by Demonstration. And in other places, as
Strom. 4. he plainly affirms that the way of Christians was to prove the
Scripture by it self, and all other things by the Scripture.

Basilius speaks to the same purpose on Psalm. 115. (...). Faith which draws the
Soul to assent above all methods of Reasonings, Faith which is not the Effect
of Geometrical Demonstrations, but of the Efficacy of the Spirit. The Nature,
Cause, and Efficacy of that Faith whereby we believe the Scripture to be the
Word of God, are asserted by him.

Nemesius de Homin. cap. 2. (...). The Doctrine of the Divine Oracles has its
credibility from it self, because of its Divine Inspiration.

The Words of Austin, though taken notice of by all, yet may here be again
reported. Confess. lib. II. cap. 3. Audiam and intelligam quo modo fecisti
Coelum and Terram. Scripsit hoc Moses, scripsit and abiit, transivit hinc ad
te; neque enim nunc ante me est. Nam si esset, tenerem eum, and rogarem eum,
and per te obsecrarem, ut mihi ista panderet, and praeberem aures corporis mei,
sonis erumpentibus ex ore ejus. At si Hebraea voce loqueretur, frustra pulsaret
sensum meum, nec inde mentem meam quicquam tangeret. Si autem Latin, scirem
quid diceret, sed unde scirem an verum diceret? quod etsi hoc scirem number and ab
illo scirem? Intus utique mihi, intus in domicilio cogitationis, nec hebraea,
nec graeca, nec latina, nec barbara veritas, sine oris and linguae organis,
sine strepitu syllabarum diceret, verum dicit; at ego statim erectus
confidenter illi homini tuo dicerem, verum dicis; Cum ergo illum interrogare
non possim, te quo plenus vera dixit, Veritas, te Deus meus rogo, parce
peccatis meis, and qui illi servo tuo dedisti haec dicere, da and mihi haec
intelligere. I would hear, I would understand how thou made the Heaven and
the Earth. Moses wrote this, he wrote it, and is gone hence to thee; for he is
not now before me; for if he were, I would hold him, and ask him and beseech
him for thy sake, that he would open these things unto me, and I would apply
the ears of my body to the sounds breaking forth from his mouth. But if he
should use the Hebrew Language, in vain should he affect my sense, for he would
not at all touch my mind; if he should speak Latin, I should know what he said;
but whence should I know that he spoke the Truth? and if I should know this
also, should I know it of him? Within me, in the habitation of my own thoughts,
Truth neither in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, nor any barbarous Language, without the
Organs of mouth or tongue, without the Noise of syllables, would say, he speaks
the Truth; and I being immediately assured or certain of it, would say unto
that servant of thine, thou speak Truth. Whereas therefore I cannot ask him,
I ask thee, O Truth, with which he being filled spoke the things that are true;
O my God, I ask of thee; pardon my sins, and thou who gave unto this thy
servant to speak these things, give unto me to understand them.

That which is most remarkable in these Words is, that he plainly affirms that
Faith would not ensue on the declaration of the Prophets themselves if they
were present with us, unless there be an internal Work of the Holy Spirit upon
our minds to enable us, and persuade them thereunto. And indeed he seems to
place all Assurance of the Truth of Divine Revelations in the inward Assurance
which God gives us of them by his Spirit; which we have before considered.

The second Arausican Council gives full Testimony unto the necessity of the
internal Grace of the Spirit, that we may believe. Can. 7. Siquis Evangelicae
proedicationi consentire posse confirmat, absque Illuminatione and Inspiratione
Spiritus Sancti, haeretico fallitur Spiritu.

To descend unto later times wherein these things have been much disputed, yet
the Truth has beamed such Light into the eyes of many, as to enforce an
Acknowledgment from them, when they have examined themselves about it. The
Words of Baptista Mantuanus are remarkable; de Patient. lib. 3. cap. 2. Saepe
mecum cogitavi, unde tam suadibilis sit ipsa Scriptura, unde tam potenter
influat in animos auditorum, unde tantum habeat Energiae, ut non ad opinandum
tantum, sed ad solid credendum omnes inflectat? Non est hoc imputandum
rationum evidentiae quas non adducit; non artis industriae aut verbis suavibus
ad persuadendum accomodatis quibus non utitur; sed vide an id in causa sit quod
persuasi sumus eam a prima veritate fluxisse? sed unde sumus ita persuasi nisi
ab ipsa? quasi ad ei credendum nos suiipsius contrahat authoritas. Sed unde oro
hanc authoritatem sibi vendicavit? neque enim vidimus nos Deum concionantem,
scribentem, docentem, tamen ac si vidissemus, credimus and tenemus a Spiritu
Sancto fluxisse quae legimus; forsan fuerit haec ratio firmiter adhaerendi,
quod in ea veritas sit solidior quamvis non clarior; habet enim omnis veritas
vim inclinativam, and major majorem, and maxima maximam; sed cur ergo non omnes
credunt Evangelio? Respond* quod non omnes trahuntur a Deo. Sed longa opus est
disputatione? firmiter sacris Scripturis ideo credimus quod divinam
Inspirationem intus accipimus. I have often thought with my self whence the
Scripture it self is so persuasive, from whence it does so powerfully influence
the minds of its hearers, that it inclines or leads them not only to receive an
Opinion, but surely to believe. This is not to be imputed to the Evidence of
Reasons which it does not produce, nor unto the Industry of Art, with words
smooth and fit to persuade, which it uses not; see then if this be not the
cause of it, that we are persuaded that it comes from the first Truth or
Verity. But whence are we so persuaded but from it self alone? as if its own
Authority should effectually draw us to believe it. But whence I pray has it
this Authority? we saw not God preaching, writing, or teaching of it; but yet
as if we had seen him, we believe and firmly hold, that the things which we
read proceeded from the Holy Ghost. It may be this is the Reason why we so
firmly adhere unto it, that truth is more solid in it, though not more clear
than in other writings; for all Truth has a persuasive power, the greater
Truth, the greater power, and that which is greatest the greatest Efficacy of
all. But why then do not all believe the Gospel? Answ. Because all are not
drawn of God. But what need is there of any long disputation? we therefore
firmly believe the Scriptures, because we have received a Divine Inspiration
assuring of us. And in what Sense this is allowed has been declared in the
preceding Discourse.

I shall close the whole with the Testimony of them, by whom the Truth which we
assert is most vehemently opposed, when it rises in opposition unto an
especial interest of their own.

Two things there are which are principally excepted against in the Doctrine of
Protestants, concerning our belief of the Scripture. The first is with respect
unto the Holy Spirit as the efficient cause of Faith, for whereas they teach
that no man can believe the Scripture to be the Word of God in a due manner and
according unto his duty, without the real internal Aid and Operation of the
Holy Ghost, however it be proposed unto him, and with what Arguments soever the
Truth of its Divine Original be confirmed; this is charged on them as an Error
and a Crime. And secondly, whereas they also affirm that there is an inward
Testimony or Witness of the Holy Spirit, whereby he assures and confirms the
minds of men in the Faith of the Scriptures with an Efficacy exceeding all the
persuasive Evidence of outward Arguments and Motives; this also by some they
are traduced for. And yet those of the Roman Church who are looked on as most
averse from that Resolution of Faith which most Protestants acquiesce in, do
expressly maintain both these Assertions.

The Design of Stapleton, de principiis Fidei, controver. 4. lib. 8. cap. 1. is
to prove, impossible esse sine speciali gratia, ac dono fidei divinitus
infuso, actum verae fidei producere, aut ex very nominis fide credere. Which he
there proves with sundry Arguments, namely, that it is impossible to produce
any act of Faith, or to believe with Faith rightly so called, without special
Grace, and the Divine Infusion of the Gift of Faith. And Bellarmin speaks to
the same purpose; Argumenta quae articulos fidei nostrae credibiles faciunt,
non talia sunt ut fidem omnino indubitatam reddant, nisi men's divinitus
adjuvetur. De Great. and lib. Arbit. lib. 6. cap. 3. The Arguments which render
the Articles of our Faith credible, are not such as produce an undoubted Faith,
unless the mind be divinely assisted.

Melchior Canus, loc. Theol. lib. 2. cap. 8. disputes expressly to this purpose;
Id statuendum est, authoritatem humanam and incitamenta omnia illa praedicta,
sive alia quaecunque adhibita ab eo qui proponit fidem, non esse sufficientes
causas ad credendum ut credere tenemur, sed praeterea opus esse interiori causa
efficiente, id est, Dei speciali auxilio moventis ad credendum. This is firmly
to be held, that human Authority, and all the Motives before mentioned, nor any
other which may be used by him who proposes the Object of Faith to be
believed, are not sufficient causes of believing as we are obliged to believe;
but there is moreover necessary an internal efficient Cause moving us to
believe, which is the especial Help or Aid of God. And a little after he speaks
yet more plainly. Externae igitur omnes and humanae persuasiones non sunt satis
ad credendum, quantumcunque ab hominibus competenter ea quae sunt fidei
proponantur; sed necessaria est insuper causa interior, hoc est, divinum
quoddam lumen incitans ad credendum, and oculi quidam interiores Dei beneficio
ad videndum dati. Wherefore all external human Persuasions or Arguments are not
sufficient Causes of Faith, however the things of Faith may be sufficiently
proposed by Men; there is moreover necessary an internal Cause, that is, a
certain Divine Light, inciting to believe, or certain internal Eyes to see,
given us by the Grace of God. Yea all other learned men of the same Profession
do speak to the same purpose.

The other Assertion also they do no less comply withal; Arcanum divini
Spiritus Testimonium prorsus necessarium est, ut quis Ecclesiae Testimonio ac
Judicio circa Scripturarum approbationem credat, (says Stapleton). The secret
Testimony of the Spirit is altogether necessary that a Man may believe the
Testimony and Judgment of the Church about the Scriptures. And the Words of
Gregory de Valentia are remarkable. Cum hactenus ejusmodi Argumenta pro
authoritate Christianae Doctrinae fecerimus, quae per seipsa satis prudentibus
esse debeant, ut animum inducant velle credere; tamen nescio an non sit
argumentum iis omnibus majus, quod qui vere Christiani sunt, ita se animo
affectos esse, quod ad fidem attinet, sentiunt, ut praecipue quidem propter
nullum Argumentum, quod vel hactenus fecimus vel ratione similiter excogitari
possit, sed propter aliud nescio quid, quod alio quodam modo and long fortius
quam ulla Argumenta persuadet, at ad firmiter credendum se intelligant. Tom. 3.
in Thom. Disp. 7. Qu. 1. punc. 4.. 2. Let any man compare these Words with
those of Calvin. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 7. sect. 5. which as I remember I have
cited before, and he will know whence the sense of them was taken. Whereas
(says he) we have hitherto pleaded Arguments for the Authority of Christian
Doctrine, which even by themselves ought to suffice prudent persons to induce
their minds to belief, yet I know not whether there be not an Argument greater
than they all, namely, that those who are truly Christians do find or feel by
experience their minds so affected in this matter of Faith, that they are moved
(and obliged) firmly to believe, neither for any Argument that we have used,
nor for any of the like sort that can be found out by Reason, but for somewhat
else which persuades our minds in another manner, and far more effectually than
any Arguments whatever. And to show what he means by this internal Argument and
Persuasion, he affirms elsewhere, that, Deus ipse imprimis est, qui Christianam
Doctrinam atque adeo Scripturam sacram veram esse, voce Revelationis suae and
interno quodam instinctu and impulsu, humanis mentibus contestatur. It is God
Himself who by the voice of his Revelation, and by a certain internal Instinct
and Impulse witnesses unto the minds of Men the Truth of Christian Doctrine,
or of the Holy Scripture.

These few Testimonies have I produced amongst the many that might be urged to
the same purpose, not to confirm the Truth which we have pleaded for, which
stands on far surer foundations; but only to obviate Prejudices in the minds of
some, who being not much conversant in things of this Nature, are ready to
charge what has been delivered unto this purpose with Singularity.

FINIS.

