OBJECTIONS TO Mr. Lowndes's PROPOSAL About the AMENDMENT Of our COIN.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin, and are to be sold by John W^i^^^^, in
Stationer's Court, near Amen-Corner, 1695.

OBJECTIONS TO Mr. Lowndes's Proposal About the Amendment of our COIN.
IT must be granted, that Mr. Lowndes has with great Pains and Integrity given
us a perfect History of our Coin, and Standard, now established for some
Hundreds of Years past, the which is absolutely necessary for all Persons to
understand that pretends with any manner of Judgment to correct or to propose
Methods in order to the amendment thereof.

And it must also be agreed, that he has proposed a very practicable Method in
amending and exchanging the same, and that with as little Disturbance or
Confusion as can be imagined; but yet I must dissent from him in his Opinion,
concerning raising the Value of our Mill'd-Money now in being; and from his
Opinion in making new Money so much less than Value, and odd Pieces; it is a
Matter of a very weighty Consideration, therefore I humbly crave Leave to offer
some few Particulars.

Says Mr. Lowndes, to this Effect, Silver is advanced,

In Answer to which, consider upon what Occasion, Silver got up at this Rate;
not so much through Scarcity, as upon the Report of a Committee of the last
Sessions of Parliament, viz. That New Money should be made of 4s. 6d. Value, to
go for 5s. whereupon Silver presently advanc*d, and (as in most other Cases) it
run in extremes, 'till it had reached this Rate.

Now if you make our Money so much Less, what Assurance have you that Silver
will not presently run up at yet a higher Rate, and I am very apt to believe it
will; there being a Necessity for so great a Quantity upon this Occasion, and
then you will be under the very same Circumstances or rather worse, for it is
not so much the rise of Silver as the disrepute and under Value of our Money in
comparison with other Commodities that make the Difference, all Commodities
being much Dearer than heretofore.

I therefore rather propose that the Price of Silver* be settled by Act of
Parliament, to bear even pace with our Coin, or something under, that Persons
that have it may be encouraged to bring it to the Mint, and a severe
Prohibition against exporting it, for some small Time till the Coin be amended.

My Second Objection, is, against making New viz. 13d. ob. 9d. and 4d. ob. are
to some People* I may say to most People. This will be a perpetual Vexation and
Trouble to the Unskilful, and Illiterate, neither can it answer any End more
than saving the recoynage of what remains; and therefore if the Wisdom of the
King and Parliament shall think fit to alter the Standard, I rather propose
that all be new coined into Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, the extraordinary
Charge will be very Inconsiderable; the Wants of it during the Fabrication may
be a little Inconvenience; but if so many Mints be set up, as proposed, there
will soon be a supply, and then we shall be freed from the Inconvenience for
the time to come.

My third Objection is against the Proposal of

I cannot see any great Difference between debasing the Note.
Metal, which Mr. Lownds himself condemns, and making it less; for in either
Case you receive but so much Silver.

The main Argument for the Affirmative seems to be of Silver being advanced;
but I have answered that already.

Though settling the Price of Silver to bear Pace with our Coin may be some Loss
to some particular Men, it is not considerable in respect of the Public.

1. Now the Reasons for my Objection are these which I will endeavor to make
good as I go, viz.

If Money be made less, Silver will presently advance proportionably, the
Reason is plain, viz. because you may carry your Silver to the Mint and have so
much Money made of it gratis. Exchanges and Remittances from abroad will answer
the real Value of the Bullion and no otherwise, and the Prices of all
Commodities will soon follow. As for Instance, the Danes and Swedes, as I am
told, are great Exporters of our Bullion to balance their Trade: Now if you
make Money less, and Silver becomes dearer, what you paid 4s. for, you must
then pay 5s. So that it seems to me a mere Chimera, and agrees only in
Denomination with 5s. whereas in all other Respects it answers no more than 4s.
viz. the real Value of the Bullion, -- unless it be in Payment of Rents, Debts,
and Contracts already executed, where in some Persons will be cheated
sufficiently if this Project takes; as I will show anon.

It Is not the Impression that gives our Money the Sanction Note.
on or Valuation, (except the Clipped Money now in Use, and that in some measure
keeps up through Custom and Necessity: And for this Reason, because you can have
no such made: For if you carry your Bullion to the Mint, they must make it of
lawful Weight and Fineness: Could you have it coined of the Weight of our
Clipped Money, you would soon find *it would be respected as no more than the
Value of the Bullion whereof it is made) For Money is valuable by the Bullion
whereof it is made; and Bullion according to the Reputation it has in the World.

And whereas it is alleged that we shall soon be

Pray let us look back for 150 Years, and compare the Value of Money then with
the Value now, you may find

Anno 1531, viz. the 23d. H. 8* there was a great Feast kept by the Sergeants
at Law, and the Bill of Fare was 24 great Beeves of 26s. 8d. apiece, the
Carcass of an Ox 24s. 100 fat Muttons of 2s. 10d. 51 great Veals of 4s. 8d.
apiece, and other things answerable; and it was provided in the 1st. and 2d. of
P. and M. by Act of Parliament, that Wheat should not be exported if it
exceeded the common Price of 6s. 8d. the Quarter, nor Barley 3s. per Quarter,
etc. This was but about 141 Years since. It Is plain Money was the same then it
is now, or rather not so good; but was then 8 times the Value it is now:
Consider but the Reason, and you must agree Money is more plentiful now than it
was then, and this is the only Reason. Consider who are the Losers, and you
must agree that Men of Estates are the Losers by this Plenty of Money. For
Instance, the free Farm Rents, Copy hold and Freehold Rents are the same now
they were then, and Money the same. A Manor of 50l. per Annum. Quitt Rents
then is equivolent to 400l. per Annum now. I need not argue this Point farther,
only desire you to observe that Money in its own Nature lessens in Value
considerable, as Silver becomes more plenty in the world; I may say two per
Cent. per Ann. of the Product, which few Men consider.

But the Vulgar Opinion is, that let us have but Money Plenty and we shall
drive a great Trade, and by that Means employ our Poor, and they conclude we
can never have too much Money.

This is a common Error, few Men that I have met with, but have granted it
without examination.

But I averr quite the contrary, viz. That over plenty of Money is the certain
destruction of Trade.

For if Money be plenty, other things and the necessities of Life must be dear,
as also Men's Labor; this must naturally follow, for many People will not
labor if Money and the Necessities of Life may be had without: this must be
granted; the certain consequence is, that we can not afford the Products of
their Labor so Cheap as our Neighbors do. As for Example.

Cloth, Searge, Bays and other Commodities, which are now wrought up for 100l.
will not perhaps (if Money be proportionable more plenty) be wrought up for
120l. it cannot be imagined ours will sell for 120l. when they can have as good
20 per Cent. Cheaper from Holland, and other Places; so here is an End of your
Streights Trade, and consequently of all the Staple Commodities in this
Kingdom, and when the Current of Business is got into another Channel, it is not
an easy Matter to regain it, and it will not be regained 'till we have reduced
our Labors at under Rates, and can under-sell our Neighbors. It Is the want of
Money makes the old Wife trot, and the scarcity that makes it so valuable.

But besides this, if Money be made less than Value, before Trade in all
respects be brought to a proportionable Rate, we may expect it to be
counterfeited, and falsified to a great Degree; and that before we are well
cured of this Evil, we may expect to find our selves under as bad or worse
Circumstances, upon the same Account; for the Forger will not only have the
Advantage of making it less than Value, but may by adulterating the Silver,
diminish it also in Fineness, and so resemble our true Stamp, that it may be
hard for the Eye to distinguish the Difference, and yet have Profit to answer
his Expectations,

And it is replied, it will be exported if of full Value; this is also an Error:
perhaps some may be exported, but when it is become scarce here, and that it
will go further, and buy more Commodities in our Markets, then in others, the
Merchants will soon bring it back in Specie.

But suppose just as much as Necessity requires, and no more, be coined; I
confess this will do the Jobb, but then it concerns you to find a means to
secure us against these Inconveniences; first against falsifying and
counterfeiting our Money, and to secure the Mint, that it may by its Scarcity
keep up its Reputation; either of which Inconveniences, I doubt, is past Humane
Invention to make Laws that will secure us against.

I find a great stupidity and dullness of Apprehension, in some Men, about the
Valuation of our Money, and with great Difficulty have I made them sensible of
this Error, viz. That a Crown's a Crown, and if it goes so, it is no matter if
it were Leather, concluding that all things are Valuable by our Money, and
Money by its self: so I will only add this Example to expain this Fallacy to
unthinking Men; for I think it is sufficiently demonstrated before. Suppose the
King and Parliament should ordain Copper Money of the size of a Crown-Piece,
should go for a Crown, and the Mint open as it is now, That whoever brings
Copper shall gratis have it coined into Crown-Pieces; this you may call a
Crown, will pay Rents and Debts as a Crown, but shall never pay a Man's Wages,
nor puchase any Commodity further than the Value of the Copper, because a Man
may purchase a Pound of Copper for a Day's Labor, or for the Value of 15 d. in
any Commodity, and carrying it to the Mint may have 5 l. made of it: Pardon
this Digression.

So that I hope, and am persuaded, it will be concluded by all; First, that we
are under a Necessity of having our Coin amended, with all imaginable
Expedition.

- Secondly, That it be made of equal Weight and Fineness with our present
Milled Money.

Thirdly, That the Price of Silver be fixed, to bear even Pace with our Coin,
or something under. And that a severe Prohibition against exporting it, 'till
this Evil be remedied, which may well be done, by laying the Penalty of Ten
times the Value, half to the Prosecutor, and half to the King, and a Penalty
upon those that conceal it.

And for the Modus Mr. Lowndes has laid down a very practicable Method, viz.
by several Mints* going at the same time: I will not repeat his Arguments, but
observe there are only Two things wanting to effect it, viz. The Bullion, and a
Fund, both which I will project and supply.

1. There is much Colledge-Plate in the Universities, and in other Guilds and
Fraternities, which lies as it were in a dead Hand, and no body the better for
it: what if that were ordered to the Mint, saving what is necessary for their
Use, (it may be done in a Commendatory not a Compulsatory Way) and the Interest
of the Money which it comes to, to be paid out of some part of the King's
Revenue, in Augmentation of the respective Fellowships and Scholarships and
Proprietaries, here is every body the Better, and no body the Worse for it. All
the Plate used in public Houses shall be brought to the Mint, and the Owners
shall receive the Value in present Money, which if the Owners shall neglect or
refuse to do, they shall be deprived of their Licenses, and disabled for ever
after keeping a public House, or selling Wine, Beer, Ale, Sider, or Brandy by
retail, etc.

That the Price of Silver be set, viz. that no Silver, Directly nor Indirectly,
be sold for more than 4s. and 10d. per Ounce Sterling, and a Penalty upon all
those that shall sell for or demand more, Fashion excepted.

This alone will bring Silver enough to the Mint, and I am not of Mr. Lowndes's
Opinion, that here is so great a Want of Silver in this Nation; for I am
persuaded, here is as much Silver in this Nation, now, as ever there was since
the World began; for there is scarce a public or private House, how Mean so
ever, but have Plate more or less, which within my Remembrance of 20 or 25
Years was nothing near so Common.

Then for a Fund; Suppose,

Every Batchellor, that is 21 Year old, or upwards, and worth 300 l. or more,
be obliged to pay 20 s. a Quarter, for Five Years.

If worth 500 l. or above, to pay 40 s. a Quarter, for Five Years.

If worth 1000 l. or more to pay 4 l. a Quarfor Five Years.

Every married Man, that has been married Two Years, or upwards, and no Child
nor Children living, to pay as Batchellors.

Every Widow and Widower, that has no Child nor Children living, to pay as
Batchellors above.

This to be renewed, altered, corrected, and amended, by Assessors every
Quarter as Occasion or Circumstances may alter or require.

Taxes are certainly (in my Judgment) best laid, where they can be best born,
and least felt, and certainly this can hurt no Man. I beg Pardon if I have
lanch*d too far.

For Guineas, If the House of Commons would be pleased to address to the King,
that no more might be coined, till the House had duly considered that matter,
it would prevent the growing Mischief, and Gold being imported at this rate,
which is to our certain Loss.

POSTSCRIPT.
I NO sooner had finished this, but there was a Paper handed to me, Styled, A
Letter from Amsterdma, which I take to be worth the reading, for we may thereby
see, through our selves and our own Circumstances, in the Matters herein
treated off.

And whereas it is therein alleged, that we are in Debt to them, and our other
Neighbors, for our Gold, which they have Trip'd upon us at extravagant Rates,
that we must pay them, and they are not such Fools as to take our clipped
Money, nor Guineas more than the Ancient Worth, and real Value, and that we
must lose 20 per Cent. in our Remittances, and argues for Money to be made of
full Value.

I received also an Answer to it (but I Question whether it be printed) that
true it is if we make our Money of full Value, we must lose 20 per Cent. in the
return, and therefore proposes it of 3 / 4 Value; and Guineas to be settled at
30 s. then says he, you must take our Money if you will be Paid, and we shall
go to Market as cheap as you: For if our Cloth cost 10 l. which in Fact is but
7 l. 10 s. you cannot propose it at a cheaper Rate.

Both which are well argued, and the Notions clear and undoubtedly True; and
it is most certain that we are under a Dilemma. Loss and Inconveniences
attending us on either side: but let us balance the one with the other, and you
will find those proposed by the Dutchman to be nothing near so grievous by 99
Parts in 100; for,

Some Debts may be contracted by our Merchants for this Gold, which we have
bought too Dear, and in paying it* it is certain we must lose 20 or 25 per Cent.
but to oblige the Merchants to whom we may attribute this Loss, in some
measure, and who have shared in the Spoil, and to enable them to pay their
Debts, at an easy Rate, and to their Advantage; Must we release a quarter Part
of the Debts of all the Subjects of this Kingdom? Must all Rents of Lands and
Bargains executed, sink at one Dash, completely, a quarter part; which must be
the Case if we lessen our Money to that Proportion?

It Is True, amongst our selves, it will light much on the poorer Sort, and
laboring People, who will not very soon understand the Cheat; and they have
gained upon us in the Value of their Wages of late Years: a Shilling may be a
Shilling to them, but when they are possessed that it is but 9 d. what will become
of your ancient Rents, many of them I doubt will not be worth the collecting?

So that I conceive the Inconvenience you would avoid, bears no proportion with
those we shall inevitably fall under* if Money be made Less.

Note, It may be presumed our Merchants have not imported much Silver since the
Golden Trade came up, which perhaps, as Mr. Lowndes observes, may have
occasioned a scarcity* of foreign Bullion at present; but if the Mint be stopped
upon Guineas, I am persuaded there will as much Gold go back in Specie, as will
pay their Debts.

FINIS.

