INDVLGENCE AND TOLERATION CONSIDERED: IN A LETTER UNTO A Person of Honor.

London, Printed in the year 1667.

SIR,
I Have considered the Discourses sent me, published lately about Indulgence
and Toleration. At their first view, I confess I was not a little surprised
with their Number, as not understanding the reason of their Multiplication at
this time, nor what it was that had made them swarm so unseasonably. Upon their
perusal, I quickly perceived a defect in them all, which could no other ways be
supplied; whether it be so by this means or no, Impartial Men will judge. The
Design seems to have been; That what is wanting in them singly in Reason, may
jointly be made up in Noise; and their respective defects in Argument, be
supplied by their communion in Suffrage. It will doubtless be the wisdom of
those who are concerned in what they oppose, to stand out of their way, at
least until the storm is over.

-- Omnis campis diffugit arator
Omni and Agricola, --
Dum pluit in terris, ut possint sole reducto
Excercere diem. --
Their Reason will be better attended to, when this earnestness has a little
spent it self. For Men who have attained more than perhaps they ever aimed at,
at least than they had just reason to expect, have commonly for a while strong
desires to secure their possessions, which Time and a due consideration of
their Title and Interest, may somewhat calm and allay. In the mean time,
because You expect it, I shall give you a brief account of my thoughts
concerning the Matter treated of by them; and if that do not too long detain
me, of the reasonings also which they make use of. Some things I do much
commend their Ingenuity in; For whereas two things were proposed to them, A
Compliance with some by way of Condescension, and a Forbearance of others by
way of Moderation, they equally declare against them both. They will neither
admit others to them, but upon their own terms to the utmost Punctilio; nor
bear with any in their dissent from them in the least different Observances;
but all must be alike pursued by Law and Force, to their Ruin. Whether this
seem not to be the frame of men's spirits, whose Fortune and Power (as one of
them speaks) tempts them to an insolency, sober and dis-interested persons will
judge. The minds I confess of fortunate Men are for the most part equal unto
their Successes: and what befalls them, they count their due. Nothing else
could persuade these men that they alone were to be esteemed English, Men, and
that not only as unto all Privileges and Advantages attending that Title; but
so far also, as to desire that all who differ from them, should be exterminated
from their Native Soil. It were well if we could see more of their endeavors
to merit so high a favor, more of that usefulness, and advantage which they
bring to the Kingdom, that might countenance them in pleading that they alone
ought to be in it. For my part, I can see little consistency with Christianity,
Humanity, or Prudence, in these Resolutions. For certainly if that be Christian
Religion which we are taught in the Gospel, it inclines men, especially those
who are Teachers of it, (such as the Authors of these Discourses, at least most
of them, seem to be) unto a greater Condescension than that expressed, upon the
Causes, and for the Ends of its being desired. The request of some for a
Condescension, seems to be no more, but that the Rulers of the Church would
forbear the prescription and imposition of such things on the Consciences and
Practice of men, (for it is vain to pretend that Conscience is not concerned in
practice in the worship of God) as there is not one word about, nor any thing
inclining, leading, or directing toward, in the whole Bible, that were never
thought of, mentioned or commanded by Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, or any
Apostolical Men; that if they had not unhappily fallen upon the minds of some
Men to invent, none knows who, nor where, nor when, would have had no
concernment in Christian Religion.

They indeed who impose them, say they are things indifferent. But the
differences that have been almost this hundred years about these things
indifferent, is enough to frighten and discourage unbiased men from having any
thing to do with them. And what wise man, methinks would not at length be
contented, that these differences and indifferent things may be parted withal
together? Besides, they on whom they are imposed, account them not so: They
look upon them as unlawful for them to use and practice (all circumstances
considered) at least most of them do so. And they plead by the important
Argument of their Sufferings, that it is merely on the account of Conscience
that they do not conform unto them. Others think that it is not so; but I am
sure it is possible that it may be so; and if it be so, they cannot use them
without endangering the Eternal Ruin of their own Souls; though others may
speed otherwise in their observances, who have other thoughts and apprehensions
of their Nature and Use. And yet on the other side, if those that impose these
things, can make it appear with any probability, (I had almost said if they
would but pretend) that they were obliged in Conscience to impose them, by my
consent there should be an end of this strife. But whilst there is this
Left Handed Contest, Real Will and Pretended Prudence, fighting against
Conscience and Duty, it is like to be untoward and troublesome. And for what
end is it that some desire that there might be at least some relaxation as to
the present severe Impositions of some of the things which are thus contended
about? They say it is merely that they might serve God in the Gospel to the
good of others, without sinning against him, to the ruin of themselves. They
speak particularly unto Men who profess it to be their Calling, their Work,
their Design to promote the blessed ends of the Gospel toward the Souls of
Men: They desire of them that they may have leave to come and help them in
reference unto this end. Nor can it be pretended, That they themselves are
sufficient for the Work, and that they have no need of the Assistance of
others: God and Man know that this cannot be reasonably pleaded.

And this is a business, which certainly by such men as profess themselves to
be Guides and Rulers of the Church, can hardly be justified unto him who is the
great Lord of it. When the Disciples found some casting out of Devils in his
name, they rebuked them because they followed not with them; a worse and
greater nonconformity than that which some are now charged withal; and yet the
rebuke of others, procured only one to themselves. He said well of old,
concerning those who contended to promote common good; (...). This is a good
strife for mortal men: So is that which is for promoting of the good of the
souls of men by the preaching of the Gospel; and shall it be forbid for such
things,

-- Quae dicere Nolo, of so little importance are they in this matter, which
has an influence into Eternity. What is answered unto this request? Stories
are told of things past and gone; scattered interests, dissolved intrigues,
buried miscarriages, such as never can have any aspect on the present posture
of Affairs, and minds of men in this Nation, are gathered together, and raked
out of their graves, to compose Mormoes for the affrightment of (...) a regard
to the ways of peace and moderation: This they enlarge upon with much
Rhetoric, and some little Sophistry; Like him of old, of whom it was said,
that being charged with other things,

-- Crimina rasis
Librat in antithetis; doctas posuisse figuras
Landatur. --
Many inconveniences are preterded, as like to ensue upon such a
condescension: but in the mean time men die, and some it may be perish for want
of that help and instruction in the things of Eternity, which there are many
ready to give them, whilst it is altogether uncertain, whether any one of the
pretended inconveniences will ensue or no: I fear whilst men are so engaged in
their thoughts about what is good and convenient for them at the present, they
do scarce sufficiently ponder, what account of their actions they must make
hereafter.

But neither is this all that these Authors contend for: Men are not only
denied by them an admission into their Societies to preach the Gospel, unless
it be on such terms as they cannot in conscience admit of, and which others are
no way obliged in conscience to imposs upon them; but all forbearance of, or
indulgence unto them who cannot conform unto the present establishment, is
decried, and pleaded against: What though men are peaceable, and useful in the
Commonwealth? What though they are every way sound in the Faith, and cordialy
embrace all the doctrine taught formerly in the Church of England? What though
those in this condition are many, and such as in whose peace and industry, the
welfare of the Nation is exceedingly concerned? What if they offer to be
instructed by any who will take that work upon them, in the things about which
their differences are? What if they plead conscience toward God, and that
alone, in their dissent; it being evidently against their whole temporal
interest? What if they have given evidence of their readiness in the ways of
Christ and the Gospel, to oppose every error that is either pernicious to the
souls of men, or any way of an evil aspect to public peace and tranquillity?
All is one, they are neither severally, nor jointly, no one of them, nor all of
them, in the judgment of these Gentlemen, to be forborne, or to have any
Indulgence exercised toward them; but Laws are to be made and put in execution
against them to their ruin, extirpation and destruction. It may be it will be
said, that these things are unduly imposed on them, seeing they press for a
prosecution of men by Laws and rigor, not for dissenting from what is
established, or not practicing what is prescribed in the public Worship of
God, but for practicing what is of their own choice therein, in Meetings and
Assemblies of their own; otherwise they may keep their consciences unto
themselves without molestation.

But it does not appear, that this can be justly pleaded in their defense: For
as the Prohibition of men under severe and distructive penalties, from that
exercise of the worship of God, which is suitable to their light, and which
they are convinced that he requires of them, so that in nothing it interfere
with the fundamentals of Christian Religion, or public tranquillity, is as
destitute of all Foundation in Scripture and Reason at all times, and as things
may be circumstantiated in Prudence or Policy; as the enforcing of them to a
practical compliance with any mode or way of Worship against their Light and
conscience; so the practice in this latter case has been more severe amongst
us, than in the former. For a Testimony hereof, we have those great Multitudes
which at this day are Excommunicated by the Courts Ecclesiastical, merely for
their not attending the public Assemblies of the Nation in their
Administrations: And as they are by this means, as things now stand, cast, as
they say, into the condition of men Outlawed and deprived of all privileges
of their birthright as Englishmen (of which sort there are forty times more,
than have been proceeded against unto the same issue in all his Majesty's
Courts of Justice in England for many years) so in the pursuit of that
sentence, many are cast into prisons, where they lie perishing (sundry being
dead in that state already) whilst their families are starved or reduced to the
utmost extremity of poverty, for want of those supplies which their industry
formerly furnished them with all: And what influence this will have into the
state of this Nation; time will manifest, if men are not as yet at leisure to
consider. The hands that by this means are taken off from labor, the stocks
from employment, the minds from contrivances of industry in their own concerns,
the poverty that is brought on Families, in all which the common good has no
small Interest, are not I fear sufficiently considered by persons whose
fullness and plenty either diverts their thoughts from taking notice of them,
or keeps off any impressions on their minds and judgments from what is
represented concerning them. Others begin to feel the evil, whose morning they
saw not, gathering up toward them, in the decay of their Revenues, and
intanglements of their Estates, which without timely remedy, will increase upon
them, until the breach grow too great for an ordinary healing.

And I am persuaded that none who have been active in these proceedings, will
take upon themselves the trouble of confirming this kind of Church Discipline
out of the Scriptures, or Examples of the Primitive Churches, for some hundreds
of years.

This therefore, is that which by these men is pleaded for; namely that all the
Protestants in England who so dissent from the established Forms and Modes of
Worship, as either to absent themselves from their Observances, or to attend
unto any other way of Worship, which being suitable to the Principles of that
Religion which they profess, (namely Protestantism) they are persuaded is
according to the Mind of God, and which He requires of Them, be proceeded
against, not only with Ecclesiastical Censures, but also with Outward,
Pecuniary, and Corporal Punishments, to the depriving of Them in the progress,
of Their whole Liberty, Freedom, and Benefit of the Laws of the Land, and in
some Cases unto Death it self; and that no Dispensation or Relaxation of this
severity, be countenanced or granted. And herein I confess, whatever Pretenses
be used, whatever Fears and Jealousies of Events upon a contrary Course, or the
granting of an Indulgence be pleaded, I am not of their Minds; nor do I think
that any countenance can be given to this severe Principle and Opinion, either
from the Scriptures of the Old or New Testament, or from the Example of any who
ever endeavored a Conformity unto the Rules of them. This is the state of the
Controversy, as by these Authors formed and handled; nor may any thing else be
pretended, when such Multitudes are ready to give Evidence unto it, by what
they have suffered and undergone. Do but open the Prisons for the relief of
those Peaceable, Honest, Industrious, Diligent Men, who some of them have lain
several Years in Durance, merely in the pursuit of Excommunication, and there
will be Testimony enough given to this state of the Controversy.

This being so, pray give me leave to present you with my hasty Thoughts, both
as to the Reasonableness, Conscience, and Principles of pursuing that Course of
Severity toward Dissenters, which I find so many Concerned Persons to plead
for: And also of the way of their Arguings and Pleas.

And first as unto Reason and Conscience, I think Men had need look well unto
the Grounds of their Actings, in things wherein they proceed against the Common
Consent of Mankind, expressed in all instances of the like occasion, that have
occurred in the World; which is as great an Evidence of the Light and Law of
Nature, as any can be obtained. For what all Men generally consent in, is from
the common Nature of all. We are not indeed much concerned to inquire after the
practice of the Heathen in this matter, because as the Apostle testifies, their
Idolatrous Confusion in Religion was directly and manifestly against the Light
of Nature; and where the foundation was laid in a transgression of that Law, it
is no wonder if the proceeding upon it be so also. There was a Law amongst the
Romans, reported by the Orator to be one of those of the Twelve Tables,
forbidding any to have private Gods of their own: But this regarded the Gods
themselves, the Object of their Worship, and not the Way of Worshipping them,
which was peculiar and separate to many Families and Tribes amongst them, and
so observed. Scarce any Family or Tribe of note, that had not its special and
separate Sacra. Besides, they seemed to have little need of any new Authorized
Gods, seeing as Varro observed, they had of them they owned, no less than
thirty thousand. And I have often thought that Law was imposed on them by the
craft and projection of Satan, to keep them off from the knowledge of the true
God: For notwithstanding this Law, they admitted into their Superstition all
sorts of Idols even the folly of Egyptians themselves, as having Temples in
Rome unto Isis and Scrapis. Only this Law was pleaded to keep off the
knowledge of the true God, Act. 18. 13. And of him they had the highest
contempt, calling the place of his Worship, the Land

-- Dei incerti. -- And the Custom among the Athenians not to admit any
strange Objects of Worship, any Unwarranted Devotion, was never made use of,
but to oppose the Gospel, unless it were when they destroyed the Wisest and
Best Man that ever the City bred, for giving some intimation of the true God,
and not consenting with the City in Opinion about their Established Devotions:
Other use of these Laws there was none. It is true, when any Sacra or
Superstitious Observances were actually used to induce Men and Women to Sin and
Wickedness, contrary to the Light of Nature, the very Being of Civil Societies,
the Romans severely animadverted upon them: Otherwise this Law was not made use
of, but only against the Jews first, and the Christians afterward; whereby it
was consecrated to the use of Idolatry, and rendered unmeet for the Churches
Service or Reception.

The Jews were those who were first entrusted with the Truth of Religion and
the Worship of God. And it is known what was their Law, their Custom, their
Practice in this Matter. Whoever would dwell amongst them, if they owned their
Fundamentals, they afforded them the Blessing and Peace of the Land. All that
they required of such Persons, was but the Observation of the Seven Noachical
Precepts, containing the Principles of the Light of Nature, as to the Worship
of one God, and Moral Honesty amongst Men; whoever would live amongst them of
the Gentiles, and took upon themselves the observation of these Fundamentals,
although they subjected themselves to no instituted Ordinances, they called
Proselytes of the Gate, and gave them all Liberty and Peace. And in those who
submitted unto the Law of Moses, who knows not what different Sects and
Opinions, and Modes of Worship there were amongst them, which they never once
supposed that they had any Rule to proceed against by external Force and
Coercion.

The Case is yet more evidently expressed in the Judgment and Actings of the
first Christians. It will be utterly superfluous to show how that for three
hundred years, there was not any amongst them who entertained thoughts of
Outward Force against those who differed from the Most, in the things of
Christian Religion. It has been done I perceive of late by others, And yet in
that space of time, with that Principle, the Power of Religion subdued the
World, and brake the force of that Law whereby the Romans through the
Instigation of Satan, endeavored with Force and Cruelty to suppress it. When
the Empire became Christian, the same Principle bare sway. For though there
were mutual Violences offered by those who differed in great and weighty
Fundamental Truths, as the Homousians and Arians; As to those who agreeing in
the important Doctrines of the Gospel, took upon themselves a peculiar and
separate way of Worship and Discipline of their own, whereby they were exempt
from the common Course and Discipline of the Church, then in use, never any
thoughts entered into men, to give unto them the least disturbance. The Kingdom
of Egypt alone had at the same time above forty thousand Persons, Men and
Women, living in their private and separate Way of Worship, without the least
control from the Governors of Church or State; yea, with their Approbation
and Encouragement.

So was it all the World over, not to mention the many different Observances
that were in and amongst the Churches themselves, which occasioned not
Division, much less Persecution of one another. And so prevalent is this
Principle, that notwithstanding all their Design for a forcing unto an
Uniformity, as their peculiar Interest, yet it has taken place in the Church
of Rome it self, and does so to this day. It is known to all, that there is no
Nation wherein that Religion is inthroned, but that there are thousands in it
that are allowed their particular ways of Worship, and are exempt from the
common ordinary Jurisdiction of the Church.

It seems therefore, that we are some of the first who ever any where in the
World, from the Foundation of it, thought of ruining and destroying Persons of
the SAME RELIGION with our selves, merely upon the choice of some Peculiar Ways
of Worship in that Religion. And it is but reasonable, as was observed, for men
to look well to the grounds of what they do, when they act contrary to the
Principles of the Law of Nature, expressed in so many Instances by the consent of
Mankind. And I fear all men do not aright consider, what a secret Influence
into the Enervating of Political Societies such Intrenchments on the Principles
of Natural Light, will assuredly have. For those things which spring up in the
Minds of Men without Arguing or Consideration from without, will insensibly
prevail in them against all Law and Constitution to the Contrary. It is in vain
to turn Nature out of doors, it will return. And whence shall we learn what
Natureinclines unto, unless from the common practice of Mankind in all
Instances, where an evident demonstration may not be given, of the prevalent
influence of the interest of some Men unto the contrary? Which is.

-- Pessimus Diuturnitatis custos. It will not always prevail, nor ever at any
time without great regreet and commotion in the minds of Men, who have no
concern in that Interest.

Consider also the thing it self, of Forcing the Consciences of Man, in manner
before expressed; and you will find it so uncouth; as I am persuaded you will
not know well what to make of it. Learned Divines tell us, That Conscience is
the Judgment that a man makes of Himself and his Actions, with reference to
the future Judgment of God; or to that purpose. Now let others do what they
will, Conscience will still make this Judgment, nor can it do otherwise.
Whatever Men can alter in the Outward Actings of Men's Lives, they can alter
Nothing in the Inward Constitution of the Nature given it by God in its
Creation, which refers to its Future End. How can this be forced?

It is said therefore, Let Men take this liberty unto themselves: Who forbids
them to judge of Themselves and of their Actions, what they please? None goes
about to take this Liberty from them.

But is this all? Conscience does not judge of Men and their Actions, but with
respect unto what in the Name of God it requires them to be, and to do. It
first requires several things of them in the Name of God, and then judges upon
their performance, with reference unto the Judgment of God: And this is the
sovereign Dictate of it, Worship God according to that Light and Understanding
which you have, of what is that Worship which is acceptable with Him, in matter
and manner, and no otherwise. If this Command be not obeyed, Conscience will
judge with reference unto the Judgment to come. Let Conscience then have its
Liberty for this Work, and this Difference is at an end.

But it will be said, If Conscience must be free as to it first Act of
Directing and Commanding, as well as unto its Self-Judging, it may lead men to
all Abominations, Wickedness, Murders, Sedition and Filthiness; and so a
Liberty unto them also must be granted. So I have heard men speak, but I have
wondered also that any man that has a Conscience of his own, or knows what
Conscience is, should give entertainment to so fond an Immagination: I would
ask any man whether ever he found any such direction in his own Conscience, or
any Inclination that way? Nay, if he have not constantly sound a severe
Interdiction given in by his Conscience against all such things? And how can he
then conceive it possible that the Conscience of any man should be of such a
Make, and Constitution; seeing naturally it is abselutely the same in all.
Besides, as was said, It is a man's judgment of himself in reference to the
future Judgment of God. And this Intimation supposes, that a man may judge
that God at the Last day will approve of Adaltery, Murders, Seditions and the
like Evils! Which is to suppose all common inbred Notions of God to be blotted
out of the mind: Nay it is utterly impossible, as implying a contradiction,
that any man should consider God as a Judge, as Conscience does always, and
suppose his Approbation of the Evils specified, or of any of the like nature
and importance: But men will yet say that Conscience has been pretended for
these things. I answer, never by any in their wits. And what any brainsick,
or Enthusiastic Person may say or do in his Paroxisms, is not to have any
place in considerations of what becomes a guidance of the Actions of Mankind
one toward another. It is true; that somethings as they have been
Circumstantiated, have been debated, even in Conscience, whether they have been
Lawful or no; that is whether God would approve of them, or condemn them at the
last day. But what is evil in it self, and against the light of Nature, there
is no direction unto it, no approbation of it from Conscience in the least. To
take away this Liberty of Conscience in things of its proper Cognizance and
Duty, seems to me, to be as much as to say, men shall not judge themselves with
referrence to the Judgment of God to come; which is to put Gods great
Vicegerent out of his place and Throne.

Let us now apply this notion of Conscience unto the present occasion. There is
prescribed a way of Divine Worship, with Ceremonies, Forms of Prayer, and
Orders for the Administration of Sacraments, all things that concern the Joint
and Public Worship of God. What is the Work or Duty of Conscience in
reference hereunto? Is it not, in the first place, to apply the Mind and
Understanding to consider of what sort it is, in referrence unto the future
Judgment of God? This cannot be denied; the first Actings of a man who makes
any Conscience of what hedoes, must be of this sort. If then it apprehend it to
be such as God will approve of the Practice, and Observation of it at the last
Day, Conscience is satisfied, and reflects no self-Condemning thoughts upon its
Observance. But suppose a man does not understand it so to be; he cannot
conceive it to be appointed so by Christ, nor that any men have Warrant,
Authority, or Commission to impose on the practice of others what is not so
appointed by him. How shall he do to be otherwise minded? Can he force himself
to assent unto that, whereunto in truth he does not assent? Is it in his power
so to do: Ask any man who has an Understanding, whether he can apply it to
what he will; that is to assent, or not assent unto what is proposed unto him:
All men will assuredly say, that their assent necessarily follows the
evidence that they have of the truth of any thing, and that otherwise it is not
to be obtained. The Mind despises all violence, or coaction from the Will:
Yea, it implys a Contradiction that a man should cause himself to assent unto
that unto which he does not assent. Can then other men compel this assent? It
is so far otherwise that God himself will not; yea, be it spoken with reverence
of his Holiness, cannot force such an assent, seeing it implies a
Contradiction; Namely, that a man should assent and not assent to the same
Proposition at the same time: Neither can a man himself force himself, neither
can all the men in the World force him, to understand more than he does
understand, or can do so. Men do not seem to have exercised many reflect Acts
of Considertaion on themselves, who suppose that any can command their
Understandings to apprehend what they please, or to assent unto things at their
will. These things follow Conviction and Evidence; and so God himself procures
the Assent of Men unto what he reveals; and otherwise the Understanding is
absolutely free from all imposition.

If a man then cannot understand these things to be approved of God, and
accepted with him; suppose they are so, yet if a man cannot apprehend them so
to be, what is the next work that Conscience will apply it self unto? Is it not
to declare in the Soul, that if it practice these things, God will judge it the
Last Day, and pronounce Sentence against him? For Conscience, as was said, is a
Man's Judgment of Himself and his Moral Actions, with respect unto the future
Judgment of God. And I am persuaded that this is the condition of Thousands,
in reference to the present Impositions. Their Apprehensions and Judgments of
themselves in this Matter, are to them unavoidable and insuperable. It is not
in their power to think otherwise than they do, nor to judge otherwise of
themselves in reference unto the the practice of the things imposed on them,
than they do. Neither can all the men in the World force them to think or judge
otherwise. If ever Light, and Evidence unto their Conviction of the Contrary,
is imparted to them, or do befall them, they will think and judge according to
it; in the mean time, they crave that they may not be forced to act against
their Light and Consciences, and so unavoidably cast themselves into
destruction. All then that some desire of others, is, That they would but give
them leave to endeavor to please God; seeing they know it is a fearful thing
to fall into his Hands as an Avenger of Sin. God deals not thus with Men; for
although He requires them to believe whatever He reveals, and proposes as an
object of Faith, and to obey whatever He commands, yet he gives them sufficient
evidence for the one, and Warranty of his Authority in the other; and himself
alone is JUDGE of what Evidence is so sufficient. But men can do neither of
these: They can neither give Evidence to their Propositions, nor Warrant to
their Authority in their Impositions in Spiritual things, and yet they exact
more than does God himself: But so it is, when once his Throne is invaded, his
Holiness, Wisdom, and Clemency are not proposed to be imitated, but a fond
abuse of Soveraignity alone, is aimed at.

To impose Penaltics then infercing men to a Compliance and Acting in the
Worship of God, contrary unto what they are Convinced in their Consciences to
be his Mind and Will, is to endeavor the enforcing of them to reject all
respects unto the future Judgments of God; which as it is the highest
wickedness in them to do, so has not God Authorized any of the Sons of men, by
any means to endeavor their Compulsion unto it. For the former of these, that
men may Act in the things of God, contrary unto what they are persuaded he
requires of them; I suppose none will ever attempt to persuade themselves or
others. Atheism will be the end of such an Endeavor.

The sole Question is, Whether God has Authorized, and does warrant any man,
of what sort soever, to compel others to Worship and serve him, contrary to
the way and manner that they are in their Consciences persuaded that he does
accept and approve. God indeed where men are in Errors and Mistakes about his
Will and Worship would have them taught, and Instructed, and sends out his
own Light and Truth to guide them, as seems good unto him.

But to affirm that he has Authorized men to proceed in the way before
mentioned, is to say, that he has set up an Authority against himself, and
that which may give control to His.

These things being so, seeing Men are bound Indispensibly not to Worship God
so as they are convinced and persuaded, that he will not be Worshipped; and to
Worship him as he has Appointed and Commanded, upon the Penalty of Answering
their Neglect and Contempt her^of with their everlasting Condition at the last
day; And seeing God has not Warranted or Authorized any man to enforce them to
Act contrary to their Light, and that persuasion of his Mind and Will which he
has given them in their own Consciences; nor to punish them for yiedling
Obedience in Spiritual things unto the Command of God as his mind is by them
apprehended, if the things themselves, though mistaken, are such as no way
interfere with the common Light of Nature or Reason of Mankind, the
Fundamental Articles of Christian Religion, Moral Honesty, Civil Society, and
Public Tranquillity: especially if in the things wherein men acting, as is
supposed, according to their own Light and Conscience in difference from
others, are of small Importance, and such as they probably plead are unduly and
ungroundedly imposed on their Practice, or Prohibited unto them, it remains to
be considered whether the grounds and ends proposed in Exercise of the Severity
pleaded for, be agreeable to common Rules of Prudence, or the state and
condition of things in this Nation.

The ground which men proceed upon in their resolutions for Severity, seems to
be, That the Church and Commonwealth may stand upon the same Bottom and
Foundation; that their Interest may be every way the same, of the same breadth
and length, and to be mutually narrowed or widened by each other.

The Interest of the Kingdom they would have to stand upon the Bottom of
Uniformity: So that the Government of it should, as to the beneficial ends of
Government, comprehend them only, whom the Church compriseth in its Uniformity;
and so the Kingdoms Peace, should be extended only unto them, unto whom the
Churches Peace is extended. Thus they say, that the Kingdom and the Church, or
its present Order and Establishment, are to be like Hypocrates Twins, not only
to be Born together, and to Die together, but to cry and laugh together, and to
be equally affected with their mutual Concerns: But these things are evident
mistakes in Policy, and such as Multiplied Experience have evidenced so to be.
The Comparison of Monarchy or the Fundamental Constitution of the Policy and
Government of this Nation, with the present Church Order, and State,
Established on a Right, mutable and changeable Laws; And which have received
many alterations, and may at any time when it seems good to the King and
Parliament, receive more; is expressive of a Principle of so evil an Aspect
toward the solid Foundation of the Policy of this Nation, as undoubtedly those
who are principally concerned in it, are obliged not to admit an avowance of.
For whereas it is not the Gospel in general, nor Christian Religion, or
Religion considered as it best corresponds with the Gospel, or the mind of
Christ therein, but the present Church Order, Rule and Policy, that is
intended; all men know that it is Founded in, and stands solely amongst us, on
such Laws, as is usual with Parliaments to Enact in one Session, and to repeal
in another; or at least to Enact in one Age, and to repeal in another,
according as Use and Experience manifests them to be conducing, or obstructing
unto Public Good. And whereas the constitution of the Civil Government of the
Nation, is built upon no such Alterable or Changable Laws, but has quite
another Foundation, Obnoxious to Nothing, but to the All-over-Ruling providence
of the most High, it is a great shaking and weakening unto its Fixation and
Interest in the minds of Men, to have it compared with things every day
alterable at pleasure. And the attempt to Plant the Kingdoms Peace, on the
Foundation of the Churches Uniformity, which may on a thousand occasions
wherein the Peace of the Kingdom of it self is not in the least concerned, be
narrowed unto a Scantling wholly unproportionate unto such a Superstruction, is
without doubt as great a mistake in Government as any persons can fall into.
All the World knows, how full at this day it is of various Opinions and
Practices in things concerning Religion; and how unsuccessful the Attempts of
all sorts have been for their Extinguishment. It is no less known, as has in
part already been discoursed, how unavoidable unto Men, considering the various
Alotments of their Condition in Divine Providence, their different
Apprehensions and Persuasions about these things are. He therefore that will
build the Interest of a Nation, on an Uniformity of Sentiment and Practices in
these things, had need well fix this floating Delos, if he intend not to have
his Government continually tossed up and down.

The true Civil Interest of this Nation, in the (...) Government, and Laws
thereof, with the Benefits and Advantages of them, and the Obedience that is
due unto them, Every Englishman is born unto; he falls into it from the Womb;
it grows up with him; he is indispensably engaged into it, and holds all his
temporal Concernments by it: He is able also by Natural Reason to understand
it, so far as in point of Duty he is concerned, and is not at liberty to
dissent from the Community. But as for Religion, it is the Choice of Men; and
he that chooses not his Religion, has none: For although it is not of
necessity, that a Man formally chooses a Religion, or one way in Religion in an
opposition unto, and with the rejection of another; yet it is so that he so
chooses in opposition to no Religion, and with Judgment about it, and
approbation of that which he does embrace, which has the nature of a voluntary
choice.

This being the Liberty, this the Duty of every Man, which is, always has
been, and probably always will be issued in great variety of Persuasions, and
different Apprehensions, to confine the Peace and Interest of Civil Societies
unto any one of them, seems scarce suitable unto that Prudence which is
requisite for the steerage of the present state or things in the World. For my
part, I can see no reason the Civil State has to expose its Peace unto all
those Uncertain Events which this Principle will lead unto. And it seems very
strange, and I am persuaded that on due Consideration it will seem strange that
any should continue in desire of confining the bottom of the Nations Interest
in its Rule and Peace, unto that Uniformity in Religion, which as to a firm
Foundation in the Minds and Consciences of Men, has discovered it self to be
no more diffused amongst the Body of the People, than at present it is, and
from which such Multitudes do, upon grounds to themselves unconquerable,
dissent; resolving to continue so doing, whatever they suffer for it; who yet
otherwise unanimously acquiesce in the Civil Government, and are willing to
contribute to the utmost of their Endeavors, in their several places, unto its
Peace and Prosperity.

Whatever therefore be the Resolution as to a present procedure, I heartily
wish that the Principle it self might for the future be cast out of the Minds
of Men; that the State and Rule of the Nation, might not by plausible and
specious pretenses, suited to the interest of some few Men be rendered obnoxious
unto impression from the variety of Opinions about things Religious, which as
far as I see, is like to be continued in the World.

Especially ought this consideration, if I mistake not, be applied unto those
Differences about which alone this Discourse is intended; namely, those which
are amongst men of the same Religion in all the Substantials of it, and which
having been of long continuance deduced from one Age to another, are greatly
diffused, and deeply rooted in the Minds of Men; being such also, as no
countenance can be given to act severely toward them, from any thing in the
Scriptures, or practice of the first Churches in the World.

And I hope it will never more amongst sober and dis-engaged persons be said or
thought, that the Interest of England, or of its Rule and Government, is in any
thing confined unto a precise determination of the Differences in the Minds and
Consciences of Men, so that those who are of one Mind in them, and would impose
the Apprehension and Practice of their Persuasion upon others, should be alone
comprehended therein.

But let the Ground of this Severity in proceeding against Dissenters be never
so weak or infirm, yet if the End proposed in it be accomplished, the Counsel
will appear at last to have been advisable. What then is the end of these
things, of this Severity so earnestly pressed after, to be engaged into?
Suppose the best appearing Success that in this case can be supposed, and all
that seems to be desired; namely that by External Force and Compulsion, Men be
brought unto an Outward Conformity in, and unto the things that are imposed on
them. This is the utmost of what seems to be desired or aimed at. For no man
surely is so vain as to imagine that Compulsion and Penalties are a means
suited to persuade or convince the Minds of Men. Nay, Commonly it is known,
that they have a contrary effect, and do exceedingly confirm men in their own
persuasions, and into an alienation from the things they are compelled unto.

Suppose then this End to be obtained: Is there better Peace or Establishment
assured to the present Church. Order thereby, than what it may enjoy whilst Men
have their Liberty to profess their dissent? Both Reason and Experience do
testify the contrary.

Nor will the Church find any more dangerous Opponents, upon any emergent
occasion, that those who have been compelled to Uniformity against their
Conviction. For bearing their Condition always as their Burden, they will not
be wanting unto an opportunity to ease themselves of it.

And it may be sundry Persons now vested with Ecclesiastical Power, if they
would recollect their former Thoughts and Expressions, might remember that they
both conceived and declared their mind to this purpose; that former Severities
in the like kind, were unduly and disadvantagiously pursued against that strong
inclination in so many unto an Indulgence, and Freedom from their Impositions,
which surely they cannot think to be now lessened or weakened.

But present Power is apt to change the minds of Men, and make them neither
remember what were their former apprehensions, nor foresee what would be their
thoughts upon a disappointment in their present Undertakings.

But neither yet can this rationally be supposed; nor is it probable in the
least, that the outward Conformity intended, will ever be obtained by Rigor;
especially where the reasons of it are so remote from influencing the
Consciences of Men. For whatever Arguments may be used for a Restraint to be
put upon Conscience, in things concerning Faith and the Worship of God, which
must be taken from the nature of the things themselves, are utterly superseded
and made useless, by the nature of the Differences that are in contest between
the Imposers, and those that deprecate their Impositions. For as very little
has been done, especially of late, to prove the Lawfulness of the things
imposed, nothing at all to assert their Necessity; so the nature of the things
themselves, about which the difference is; quite casts them out of the compass
and reach of those Arguments which are pleaded in the case of Coercion and
Penalties in the things of Religion or the Worship of God. For if men should be
able to prove that Heresies and Idolatries are to be punished in the Persons of
them that do assert them: no Conclusion will or can be thence made, as I
suppose, for their Punishment and Ruin, who by the Confession of them that
would punish them, are neither Heretics nor Idolaters.

Force must stand alone in this case; and what small Influence it is like to
have on the practices of Men, when it has no pretense of Reason nor Judgment,
wherein Conscience is concerned to give its countenance, is not uneasy to
determine. Nay Experience has sufficiently in most places baffled this
Attempt: Violence has been used in matters of Religion to the shame and stain
of Christanity; and yet never succeeded any where, to Extinguish that
Persuasion and Opinion which it was designed to extirpate.

It may be; for a while indeed and sometimes it may obtain such succese, as to
seem to have effected the end amed at. But still within a short space, mostly
in the compass of the same Age, it has been manifest, that it has but laid in
Provision for future Troubles, Oppositions, and Animofities.

Let the Prelates, or Rulers therefore of the Church advise, press unto, and
exercise this Severity whilst they please; They may as evidently see the Issue
of it, as if it were already accomplished. Some may be ruined, Multitudes
provoked, the Trade of the Nation obstructed, some few be enforced unto an
Hypocritical compliance with what is against the Light of their Consciences,
compassion be stirred up in the residue of the People for innocent Sufferers,
and by all Indignation against themselves and their ways increased; considering
what are the things about which these differences are, How deeply rooted a
dissent from the present Establishment is in the minds of Multitudes: For how
long a season that Persuasion has been delivered down unto them, evenever
since the first Reformation, gradualy increasing in its Suffrage to this day;
the Advantages that it has had for its Growth and Improvement, with successes
evidently suitable unto them; and resolution that men's Spirits are raised unto,
to suffer and forgo the utmost of their Earthly Concernments, rather than to
live and die in an open Rebellion to the commanding Light of God in their
Consciences: It is the utmost vanity to have other Expectations of the end of
such a course of Rigor and Prosecution.

In the mean time, I am sure whoever gets by Persecution, the King loses by
it.

For what if some Officers of Ecclesiastical Courts have been enriched by the
booty they have got from Dissenters? What advantage is it all this while to the
Kingdom? when so many Families are Impoverished, so many ruined, as are by
Excommunications and Imprisonments ensuing thereon, so many more discouraged
from the exercise of their Faculties, or Improvement of their Stocks, so many
driven beyond the Seas; and yet all this nothing, unto what in the same kind,
must and will ensue, if the course sometimes begun should be pursued. To me it
seems that an attempt for the pretended Conformity, (for attained it will never
be) is scarce a due Compensation for his Majesty's loss in the diminishing of
his Subjects and their Wealth, wherewith it is and will be certainly attended.
Besides, to ruin men in all their Substantials of Body and Life, for
Ceremonies, and those our own Countrymen and Neighbors, seems to carry with
it somewhat of that severity which Englishmen after the subsiding of the
impetuous Impressions of Provocations, do naturally abhor, and will not long by
any means give Countenance unto.

On the Consideration of these things, and other doubtless of more deep
Investigation, his Majesty has often declared, not only his Resolution to
grant the Indulgence Intimated in his Gracious Declaration to that purpose, but
also the exceeding Suitableness of those Intentions unto his own Inclination
and Clemency. The Advantages which have already ensued unto the Nation, in the
Expectation of Indulgence, have been also remembered, and repeated by him with
an uncontrouleable manifestation of its conducibleness for the future, unto the
Peace and Prosperity of the Kingdom. And it seems very strange, that so Noble
and Royal Dispositions, such Thoughts and Counsels of Wisdom and Authority such
Protections of Care and Solicitude for the Kingdoms Good, should be all
Sacrificed to the Interest of any one Party of Men whatsoever.

I cannot but hope, that His Majesty will reassume those blessed Counsels of
Peace: Especially considering that the Spirits of Men are singularly disposed
to receive and put a due Valuation upon the Execution of them. For all those
who desiring an Indulgence, though differing amongst themselves in some things,
do jointly cast their Expectations and Desires into a dependence on His
MAJESTY, with Advice of His PARLIAMENT.

And as notwithstanding their Mutual Differences, they are united in this
Expectation, so may they be made Partakers of it: Although in other things
their Differences continue, they cannot but agree in Loyalty and Gratitude:
When the Denial of it unto them, although they still differ in other things,
will reconcile their Minds in regreet against the Impositions they Jointly
undergo.

And, whereas men have by the Fears, Dangers, and Sufferings which they have
passed through, evidenced to all the World, that the Liberty and Freedom of
their Consciences is of more consideration with them, than all other things
whatever; and have learned themselves also how to esteem and value that
Liberty, without which they are sensible how miserable their Condition is, and
is like to be, it is impossible that any stronger Obligation unto Peaceableness
Loyalty, and Thankfulness, can be put upon the Subjects of any Nation, then a
Grant of the Indulgence desired would put upon Multitudes in this. This would
set their minds at Liberty fom Fears and Contrivances for the Avoidance of
Impendent Dangers; encourage them to engage the utmost of their Endeavors and
Abilities in the businesses of Peace and Security, leaving them no Fears, but
only of any Disturbance of the state of things, which has secured unto them
all their principal Interests in the World.

And how foolish, senceless, and unbecoming of Men, would any other Thoughts
be? To think, That Men who have given this Evidence at least, That they are
such as exercise A Good Conscience toward God and Others, in that they have
suffered for it, and are ready yet farther so to do, should not despise and
contemn all suggestions of unpeaceable Dispositions, or should suppose that
they have any Community of Interest with such as being not concerned in
Conscience with them; at least not so far as to evidence it to be their Chief
and Principal Interest, as theirs it is; or to have any Inclination to the
Disturbance of the Public Tranquillity, wherein all their Desires and Aims are
secured; Is to judge by such Imaginations of Folly, Madness and Wickedness, as
Those who use these Pretenses, would be loath to be judged by; although They
have not given that Testimony of Their Respects unto Conscience, which the
Others have done.

And hereby, whereas the Parliament have been necessitated through the Exigence
of the public Affairs, to engage the Nation in payments not passed through
without difficulty, they will, as was said, put a real and effectual Obligation
upon great multitudes of Men, without the least semblance of Disadvantage unto
any others.

Neither is this a matter of any Expense, but only of Generous Clemency in
themselves, and the deposition of Wrath, Envy, and Revenge in some few others;
things that may be parted withal, without the least detriment unto humane
Society. And, as it is in the Matter alone of Indulgence, and Conscience,
wherein the People are capable of a sensible Obligation, others not concerned
therein, being apt to think that all which is done for them, is but their due,
and less sometimes then is so; those Partakers of it, by an avowment of the
favor received, will be in their own minds indispensably bound to promote the
common Interest of Public Good.

It is true indeed, that the Parliament have thought meet some years past, to
direct unto another course of Proceedure? But Dies Diem Docet.

And wise men are never wont pertinaciously to adheer unto the pursuit of
Conjectures and Projections about future Events; Such as former Laws were
Suited unto, against Experience, and those second Thoughts which a new
consideration of things may suggest unto them: Besides the alterations of
Affairs in many concernments, may fully justify the alteration in Resolutions
pleaded for; which is not such neither, as to be contradictory unto any thing
already Established, but what may be brought into Compliance with it, and
Subordination to it: They may say of what is past, as was by one said of old:

Res durae and regni Novitas me talia cogunt. The present Assurance of public
Peace and Tranquillity, admitts of Counsels impartially tending to the Good of
all, uninfluenced by a mixture of Fears and Jealousies.

But suppose the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation to be much Secured and
Advantaged by an Indulgence, as undoubtedly under the Protection and Blessing
of God, it will be; yet I have heard some say, and it is commonly pleaded, That
the Church will not be able to keep its Station, or to retain it Members in
compliance; but they will many, if not most of them, make use of the Liberty
desired; especially if it be for and unto Protestants, which must be prevented.
Now this I confess seems strange to me, that any such events should be feared
or expected.

Those who make this Objection, Suppose the Church to be really possessed of
Truth and Order in the matters that are in difference; They express every day
not only the great Sense they have of the Learning, Ability and Piety of the
Clergy, but are ready also on all occasions, to contemn their Adversaries, as
men Unlearned, Weak, and Inconsiderate. It is also granted that all outward
Privileges, Encouragements, Advantages, Promotions, Preferments, Dignities,
Public Conveniences, Legal Maintenance, are still to be confined unto the
Church, and its Conformists; as also that those who desire the benefit of
Indulgence, must together with an Exemption from all these, pay all Dues
required by the Law to them; and if they will join themselves unto others,
besides a Deprivation of the great conveniences of their usual places of
Assemblies, and their Legal Interest in them, and the Inconveniences of
reparing unto other Assemblies, it may be far remote from then Habitations,
contribute also to the Maintenance of their Teachers where it is indispensably
needed.

If I say, all these and the like Considerations, with a Reputation of public
Favor, and regard with Authority, be not sufficient to preserve and secure the
Church in its Station, and its Members in the Communion of it, It is evident
that they are things which have no Foundation in the Consciencies or Minds of
Men, but stand merely on the props of Law and Power. Which if true, is yet a
Secret which ought not to be divulged.

I confess Chief Justice Hubbart, in his Reports, in the Case of Colt, and the
Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, says, That though it be de Jure Divino, that
Christian People be provided of Christian Officers and Duties, as of Teaching,
Administration of the Sacraments, and the like; and of Pastors for that
purpose; and therefore to devar them wholly of it, were expressly against the
Law of God; yet all other things, as he there shows, are not so: For (says he)
We know well that the primitive Church in her greatest purity, were but
Uoluntary Congregations of Believers, submitting themselves to the Apostles and
after to other Pastors, to whom they did minister of their Temporals, as God
did move them. A liberty for which state is pleaded for, the thing it self
being owned to be according to the Pattern of the Primitive Church in her
greatest Purity.

And if it be so as he speaks, all other Orders and Observances in the Church,
must be built only on Law and Custom. But yet such is their Force also on the
minds of Men, that as attended with the advantages and conveniences before
mentioned, and fenced by the inconveniences and disadvantages which attend
Dissenters; the Differences also contended about, being of no more weight than
they are; there is no doubt but the most of men, at least to the full as many
as without force to Conscience, will do so under the severest Penalties to the
contrary, will continue their adherence to the present Church-Rate, although
the Liberty of the dissent desired, should be indulged.

It may be this suggestion of Peace and Moderation, may not have an equal
relish unto all Pallats, nor find a like reception in the minds of all. The
Interest of some, and the Prejudices of others, are so important with them, as
that they cannot attend unto impartial Reason in this matter. I am persuaded
that some have scarce any better or more forcible Argument, to satisfy their
own Minds that they are in the right in Religion, than the inclination they
find in themselves to hate and persecute them whom they suppose to be in the
wrong; or at least that they can no longer believe that to be Truth which they
profess, than whilst they are willing and ready to destroy with violence that
which is contrary unto it. For what is forborne, they suppose must needs be
approved; all which are so palpable misapprehensions, as there needs no
Endeavor to lay them open.

It is far enough from being an evidence of Truth in any, that they are ready
to destroy them that are otherwise minded. It is Error and Superstition, which
being conscious of their own weakness, are impatient until their Contraries are
ruined. And never are there such Mutual Violences in Matters of Religion, as
where the several opposite Parties are all of them most grossly erroneous and
superstitious.

The Egyptians were of old the scorn and sport of the World for their Devotions
in general: Oxen, Apes, Crocodiles, Garlic, and Onions, being some of the best
of their Deities: And yet about these they had amongst themselves such endless
Animosities, and mutual Persecutions of one another, as can scarce be
paralleled. So he tells us:

Immortale odium and nunquam sanabile bellum,
Ardet adbuc ombos and Tentyra; summus utrinque
Inde furor vulgo, quod numina vicinorum
Odit uterque locus.
And what was the ground and occasion of the Quarrel?

-- Crocodilon odorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam Serpentibus Ibin.
Their Controversy was about the Worship of a Crocodile on the one hand, and
of a Fowl that devoured Serpents, on the other.

Neither is the Difference of much more importance, or managed with much more
moderation, which is at this Day between the Turks and Persians, about the true
Successor; of Mahomet.

So little Reason have Men to please themselves with a surmize of being
possessed of the Truth, by the inclination that they find in themselves to
persecute the contrary: Seeing such an inclination is an inseparable Companion
of Error and Superstition, and is generally heightened to Cruelty and Revenge,
according as Men by them are drenched in Folly and Blindness.

It is yet pretended by some, That such a Toleration as will satisfy them that
desire it, and secure the Public Tranquillity, however it may please in the
notion of it, will yet be sound unpracticable when it comes to be examined and
instanced.

But it is evident that these pretenses must be countenanced by some peculiar
Consideration of this Nation, and Government thereof; seeing the utmost of what
is here desired, is both established and practiced in other Nations. The whole
of it is plainly exercised in the Kingdom of France, where the Protestants
paying all Duties to the Church, sustaining all Burdens and Offices in the
Commonwealth, equal with others, are freed from Ecclesiastical Courts,
Censures, and Offices, and all Penalties for their Dissent, with an allowance
for the Worship of God in their own Assemblies, provided by themselves, and
known to the Magistrates under whose Jurisdiction they are; which is the sum of
all that is here desired. The like Liberty, if I mistake not, is granted to the
French and Dutch Churches here in England. The United Provinces of the
Netherlands have continued in the same practice ever since the Reformation. So
also has the Kingdom of Poland, where the Dissenters are both numerous, and
divided among themselves. Lutherans are tolerated in the Dominions of the
Pauls-grave, Elector of Brandenburg, and Landtgrave of Hassia: So are
Calvinists in many free Cities of the Empire; in some places of the Kingdom of
Denmark: And both Lutherans and Calvinists in sundry Principalities in Germany,
whose Magistrates are of the Roman Religion. In the Hereditary Dominions of the
Emperor, wherever Difference in Religion once made an entrance, either a
Forbearance and Toleration is granted and continued, as in Hungary; or the
Countries themselves have been made utterly waste and desolate, as Bohemia and
Moravia, and yet in a great measure continue so to be. The Attempts of the Duke
of Savoy against it, have been condemned, detested and abhorred, by all Princes
of the same Religion with himself, and yet have ended in some tolerable
forbearance. It is also known, that the Kings of England have by virtue of
their Power in things Ecclesiastical, in all Ages as occasion required, and as
they saw meet, exempted Persons and Societies from the common and ordinary
course and way of Church Discipline and Inspection.

Certainly therefore the unpracticableness of such an Indulgence lies in the
desires of them, whose Interest, as they apprehend, is opposite unto it;
although it is more probable, that their Moderation known and declared in this
matter, would give them a greater Interest in public Esteem and Veneration,
then by any other ways they are like to obtain. Neither is this at all by wise
men to be despised, who are able to foresee the probable events of continued
Exasperation. Why then should men pretend, that that cannot be done, which has
been done, and is done at this day in so many Kingdoms and Nations, with the
wished-for success by Peace and Happiness?

And as it may be very few Instances can be given of such Severity against
Dissenters, who come up to so full an Agreemment in all material things with
them from whom they dissent, as that of late practiced, and still pressed for
in England; so it will be found, that whether we respect the Nature and Temper
of the People of this Land, or the admission of the Principles of Dissent, with
the grounds of them, in Multitudes; or the Resolution to undergo all
Difficulties and Sufferings, rather than to transgress against the Light of
their Consciences; or their Valuation of Forbearance above all Secular Things
whatever: There is no Nation under Heaven, wherein such an INDULGENCE or
TOLERATION as is desired, would be more Welcome, Useful, Acceptable, or more
subservient to Tranquillity, Trade, Wealth and Peace.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 22. for Omni read Omnis.


