(...) OR THE Grace and Duty OF BEING Spiritually-Minded, Declared and
Practically Improved

By JOHN OWEN D. D.

ROMANS 8.6. To be Spiritually-Minded is Life and Peace.

COLOS. 3.2. Set your Affections on things Above.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock, in
the Poultry, near the Church, 1681.

The Preface.
I Think it necessary to give the Reader a brief account of the nature and
design of the plain ensuing Discourse, which may both direct him in the
reading, and be some kind of Apology for my self in the publishing of it. He
may therefore know, that the Thoughts here communicated, were originally
private Meditations for my own use, in a season wherein I was every way unable
to do any thing for the Edification of others, and far from expectation that
ever I should be so able any more in this World. Receiving, as I thought, some
Benefit and satisfaction in the Exercise of my own Meditations therein, when
God was graciously pleased to restore a little strength unto me, I insisted on
the same Subject, in the Instruction of a private Congregation; and this I did,
partly out of a sense of the Advantage I had received my self by being
conversant in them and partly from an Apprehension, that the Duties directed
and pressed unto, in the whole Discourse, were seasonable from all sorts of
present Circumstances, to be declared and urged on the Minds and Consciences of
Professors. For leaving others unto the choice of their own Methods and
Designs, I acknowledge that these are the two things whereby I regulate my Work
in the whole Course of my Ministry. To impart those Truths of whose Power I
hope I have had in some measure, a real Experience, and to press those Duties
which present Occasions, Temptations, and other Circumstances do render
necessary to be attended unto in a peculiar manner, are the things which I
would principally apply my self unto in the Work of teaching others. For as in
the Work of the Ministry, in general, the whole Council of God concerning the
Salvation of the Church by Jesus Christ is to be declared; so in particular, we
are not to fight uncertainly as men beating the Air, nor shoot our Arrows at
Random, without a certain Scope and Design. Knowledge of the Flock whereof we
are Overseers, with a due Consideration of their Wants, their Graces, their
Temptations, their Light, their Strength, and Weakness, are required herein.
And when in pursuance of that Design, the Preparation of the Word to be
dispensed, proceeds from Zeal to the glory of God, and Compassion unto the
Souls of Men; when it is delivered with the Demonstration of a due Reverence
unto God whose Word it is, and of Authority toward them unto whom it is
dispensed, with a deep sense of that great account which both they that Preach,
and they that hear the word Preached, must shortly give, before the Judgment
Seat of Christ; there may the a Comfortable Expectation of a Blessed Issue of
the whole Work. But my present Design is only to declare in particular, the
Reasons why I Judged the Preaching and Publishing of this small and plain
Discourse concening the Grace and Duty of being Spiritually Minded not to be
altogether unseasonable at this time, in the present circumstances of of most
Christians. And the first thing which I would observe unto this End is, the
present Importunity of the World to Impose itself on the Minds of Men; and the
various ways of insinuation whereby it posesseth and fills them. If it
attain hereunto, if it can fill the Minds, the Thoughts and Affections of men
with it self, it will in some, fortify the Soul against Faith and Obedience,
and in others, Weaken all Grace, and endanger Eternal Ruin.

For if we Love the World the Love of the Father is not in us; And when the
World fills our Thoughts, it will entangle our Affections. And First, the
Present State of all Public Affairs in it, with an apprehended concernment of
Private Persons therein, continually Exercises the Thoughts of many, and is
almost the only subject of their mutual converse. For the World is at present
in a mighty hurry, and being in many places cast off from all Foundations of
stedfastness, it makes the Minds of Men giddy with its Revolutions, or
disorderly in the Expectations of them.

Thoughts about these things are both allowable and unavoydable, if they take
not the Mind out of its own Power, by their multiplicity, vehemence, and
urgency, until it be unframed as unto Spiritual things, retaining neither room
nor time for their entertainment.

Hence Men walk and talk, as if the World were all, when Comparatively it is
nothing.

And when men come with their warmed Affections reeking with thoughts of these
things unto the performance of, or attendance unto any Spiritual Duty, it is
very Difficult for them, if not impossible to stir up any Grace unto a Due and
vigourous exercise. Unless this plausible Advantage which the World has
obtained of insinuating it self and its Occasions into the Minds of Men, so as
to fill them and Possess them, be watched against, and obviated, so far, at
least, as that it may not transform the Mind into its own Image and likeness
this Grace of being Spiritually-Minded which is Life and Peace cannot be
attained nor kept unto it is due Exercise.

Nor can we be, any of us, delivered from this Snare, at this season, without a
watchful endeavor to keep and preserve our Minds in the Constant Contemplation
of things Spiritual and Heavenly, proceeding from the prevalent adherence of
our Affections unto them, as will appear in the ensuing discourse.

Again there are so great and Pregnant Evidences of the Prevalency of an
Earthly Worldly Frame of Spirit, in many who make Profession of Religion, that
it is high time they were called unto a due consideration, how unanswerable
they are therein, unto the power and Spirituallity of that Religion which they
do Profess. There is no way whereby such a Frame may be evinced to prevail in
many; yea in the Generallity of such Professiors, that is not manifest unto
all. In their habits, attires and vestments, in their usual converse and
mispence of time, in their over liberal entertainment of themselves and others
unto the borders of Excess, and sundry other things of an a like nature, there
is in many, such a Conformity unto the World (a thing severely forbidden) that
it is hard to make a distinction between them. And these things do manifest
such a predominancy of Carnal Affections in the Minds of Men, as whatever may
be pretended unto the contrary, is inconsistent with Spiritual Peace. To call
Men off from this evil Frame of Heart and Mind, to discover the Sin and danger
of it, to direct them unto the ways and means whereby it may be Effected, to
supply their Thoughts and Affections with better Objects, to discover and
press that Exercise of them which is indispensiblely required of all
Believers, if they design Life and Peace, is, some part of the work of the
ensuing Discourse. It may be it will be Judged but a Weak attempt as unto the
attaining of that end. But it cannot be denied to have these two Advantages;
first that it is seasonable; and secondly that it is sincerely intended. And if
it have this only success, that it may occasion others who have more Ability
and opportunity then I have, to bring in their Assistance for an opposition
unto the vehement and Importunate insinuations of the World in these things, to
have an entertainment in the Minds of Professors, this Labor will not be Lost.
But things are come to that pass amongst us, that unless a more than ordinary
vigorous Exercise of the Ministry of the Word, with other means appointed unto
the same end be engaged in, to recall Professors, unto that strict
Mortification, that Sincerity of Conversation, that separation from the ways of
the World, that Heavenly Mindedness, that Delight in the Contemplation of
Spiritual things, which the Gospel and the whole Nature of Christian Religion
do require, we shall loose the Glory of our Profession, and leave it very
uncertain what will be our Eternal Condition. The same may be spoken concerning
Love of the World as unto the Advantages and Emoluments which Men trust to
attain unto themselves thereby. This is that wi^h renders Men Earthly Minded,
and most remote from having their Conversations above. In the pursuit of this
Corrupt Affection do many Professors of Religion, grow withering, useless,
sapless, giving no Evidence that the Love of God abides in them. On these and
many other accounts, do many, Christians evidence themselves to be strangers
from Spiritual Mindedness, from a Life of Meditation and Holy Contemplation on
things above; Yet unless we are found in these things in some Good Measure no
Grace will thrive or Flourish in us; No Duty will be rightly Performed by us,
no Condition Sanctified or Improved, nor are we Prepared, in a due manner, or
made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Wherefore as was said, to
direct and provoke Men, unto that which is the only remedy of all these Evils
which alone is the means of giving them a view, into, and a fore taste of
Eternal Glory; Especially unto such who are in my own Condition, namely in a
very near approach unto a Departure out of this World, is the Design and Scope
of the ensuing Discourse; wi^h is recommended unto the Grace of God for the
benefit of the Reader.

ROMANS viii. 6. -- But to be Spiritually minded is Life and Peace.
CHAP. I.
The Words of the Text explained.

THE Expression in our Translation sounds differently from that in the
Original. To be spiritually minded, say we. In the Original it is (...); as
that in the former part of the Verse is (...); which we render to be carnally
minded. In the Margin we read, the minding of the Flesh and the minding of the
Spirit. And there is great Variety in the rendering of the words in all
Translations both ancient and modern. Prudentia, Sapientia, Intelligentia,
Men's, Cogitatio, Discretio, id quod Spiritus sapit; the Wisdom, the
Understanding, the Mind, the Thought or Contrivance, the Discretion of the
Spirit, that which the Spirit savoureth, are used to express it. All our
English Translations from Tindals the first of them, have constantly used, to
be spiritually minded. Neither do I know any words whereby the Emphasis of the
Original, considering the design of the Apostle in the place can be better
expressed. But the Meaning of the Holy Ghost in them must be further enquired
into.

In the whole Verse there are two entire Propositions containing a double
Antithesis, the one in their Subjects, the other in their Predicates. And this
Opposition is the highest and greatest that is beneath eternal Blessedness, and
Eternal Ruin.

The Opposite Subjects, are the minding of the Flesh, and the minding of the
Spirit; or the being carnally minded, and spiritually minded. And these two, do
constitute two States of Mankind, unto the One of which every individual Person
in the World does belong. And it is of the highest Concernment unto the Souls
of men, to know whetherof them they appertain unto. As unto the Qualities
expressed by the Flesh and the Spirit, there may be a mixture of them in the
same Persons at the same time; there is so in all that are Regenerate. For in
them the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the
Flesh, and these are contrary, Gal. 5.17. Thus different contrary actings in
the same Subject constitute not distinct States* But where either of them is
predominant or has a prevalent Rule in the Soul, there it makes a different
State. This Distinction of States, the Apostle expresses v. 9. But ye are not
in the Fesh, but in the Spirit. Some are in the flesh; and cannot please God,
v. 8. They are after the flesh, v. 5. they walk after the flesh, v. 1. they
live after the flesh, v. 13. This is one State. Others are in the Spirit, v. 9.
after the Spirit, v. 5. walk after the Spirit, v. 1. This is the other State.
The first sort are carnally minded, the other are spiritually minded. Unto One
of these does every living Man belong, he is under the ruling Conduct of the
Flesh or of the Spirit; there is no middle state; though there are different
Degrees in each of these as to Good and Evil.

The Difference between these two States is great, and the distance in a manner
infinite, because an Eternity in Blessedness or Misery does depend upon it. And
this at present is evidenced by the different Fruits and Effects of the
Principles and their Operations which constitute these different States; which
is expressed in the Opposition that is between the Predicates of the
Proposition; For the minding of the Flesh is death; but the minding of the
Spirit is Life and Peace.

I. To be carnally minded is death. Death as it is absolutely poenal, is either
Spiritual or Eternal. The first of these it is formally, the other
meritoriously. It is formally death spiritual; for they that are carnally
minded, are dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2.1. For those who fulfill the
desires of the flesh and of the mind, are by nature Children of wrath, v. 3.
are penally under the power of spiritual death. They are dead in sins and the
uncircumcision of the flesh, Col. 2.13. And it is death eternal, Meritoriously.
For if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, Romans 8.13. as the Wages of Sin is
death, Chap. 6.23.

The Reason why the Apostle denounces so woeful a doom, so dreadful a Sentence
on the carnal mind, he declares in the two next Verses. For the carnal mind is
Enmity against God; for it is not subject unto the Law of God, nor indeed can
be; so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. If it be thus with
the Carnal mind, it is no wonder that to be carnally minded is death; it is not
meet it should be any thing else. That which is Enmity against God, is under
the Curse of God.

In Opposition hereunto it is affirmed, that to be spiritually minded, or the
minding of the Spirit, is life and peace. And these are the things which we are
particularly to enquire into; Namely, What is this minding of the Spirit; and
then How it is Life and Peace.

1. The Spirit in this Context is evidently used in a double sense, as is usual
where both the Holy Spirit himself and his Work on the Souls of men, are
related unto. (1.) The Person of the Spirit of God himself, or the Holy Ghost
is intended by it, v. 9. If so be that the Spirit of God dwells in you. And
so also v. 11. The Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead. He is
spoken of as the principal efficient Cause of all the spiritual Mercies and
Benefits here and afterward insisted on. (2.) It is used for the Principle of
spiritual Life wrought in all that are regenerate by the Holy Ghost. For that
which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, Joh. 3.6.

It is most probable that the name Spirit is here used in the latter sense, not
for the Spirit-himself, but for that which is born of the Spirit, the Principle
of spiritual Life in them that are born of God. For it is in its Nature,
Actings, Inclinations, and Operations opposed unto the flesh, v. 1.4, 5; But
the Flesh here intended is that inherent corrupt Principle of Depraved Nature,
whence all evil Actions do proceed, and wherewith the Actions of all Evil Men
are vitiated. The Opposition between them is the same with that mentioned and
declared by the Apostle, Gal. 5.17, 18, etc. Wherefore the Spirit in this Place
is the holy vital Principle of new Obedience wrought in the Souls of Believers
by the Holy Ghost, enabling them to live unto God.

2. Unto this Spirit there is (...) ascribed, which, as we have intimated, is
translated with great Variety. (...), is the principal Power and Act of the
mind. It is its Light, Wisdom, Prudence, Knowledge, Understanding and
Discretion. It is not so with respect unto Speculation, or Ratiocination
merely; which is (...), or (...). But this (...) is its Power as it is
practical, including the habitual frame and Inclination of the Affections also.
It is its faculty to conceive of things with a delight in them and adherence
unto them, from that suitableness which it finds in them unto all its
Affections. Hence we translate (...) sometimes to think, that is, to conceive
and judge, Romans 12.3. Sometimes to set the Affections, Col. 3.2. to have such
an Apprehension of things as to cleave unto them with our Affections. Sometimes
to mind; to mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. which includes that relish and
savor which the mind finds in the things it is fixed on. No where does it
design a Notional Conception of things only; but principally the engagement of
the Affections unto the things which the mind apprehends.

(...) the word here used, expresses the actual exercise (...), of the Power
of the mind before described. Wherefore the minding of the Spirit, is the
actual exercise of the mind as renewed by the Holy Ghost, as furnished with a
principle of spiritual life and light in its conception of spiritual things,
and the setting of its Affections on them, as finding that relish and savor in
them, wherewith it is pleased and satisfied.

And something we must yet further observe, to give light unto this Description
of the minding of the Spirit as it is here spoken of.

1. It is not spoken of absolutely as unto what it is in it self, but with
respect unto its Power and Prevalency in us; significantly rendered, to be
spiritually minded; that is, to have the mind changed and renewed by a
Principle of spiritual Life and Light, so as to be continually acted and
influenced thereby unto thoughts and Meditations of spiritual things, from the
Affections cleaving unto them with delight and satisfaction. So on the contrary
it is, when Men mind earthly things. From a Principle of love unto them,
arising from their suitableness unto their corrupt Affections, their Thoughts,
Meditations and Desires are continually engaged about them. Wherefore,

2. Three things may be distinguished in the great Duty of being spiritually
minded under which Notion it is here recommended unto us.

1. The actual exercise of the Mind in its thoughts, Meditations and desires
about things spiritual and Heavenly. So is it expressed in the Verse foregoing.
They that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh; they think on
them, their contrivances are about them, and their desires after them. But they
that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. They mind them by fixing
their Thoughts and Meditations upon them.

2. The Inclination, Disposition and frame of the mind, in all its Affections
whereby it adheres and cleaves unto spiritual things. This minding of the
Spirit resides habitually in the Affections. Wherefore the (...) of the Spirit,
or the mind as renewed and acted by a spiritual Principle of light and life, is
the Exercise of its Thoughts, Meditations and desires on spiritual things,
proceeding from the Love and delight of its Affections in them, and engagement
unto them.

3. A Complacency of mind from that Gust, Relish and Savor which it finds in
spiritual things, from their suitableness unto its Constitution, Inclinations
and desires. There is a Salt in Spiritual things, whereby they are condited and
made savoury unto a renewed Mind; though to others they are as the White of an
Egg, that has no taste or savor in it. In this Gust and Relish lies the
sweetness and satisfaction of spiritual Life. Speculative Notions about
Spiritual things, when they are alone are dry, sapless and barren. In this
Gust we taste by Experience that God is Gracious, and that the Love of Christ
is better than Wine, or whatever else has the most grateful relish unto a
sensual Appetite. This is the proper Foundation of the Joy which is unspeakable
and full of Glory.

All these things do concur in the minding of the Spirit, or to constitute any
Person spiritually minded. And although the Foundation of the whole Duty
included in it, lies in the Affections, and their immediate Adherence unto
spiritual things, whence the Thoughts and Meditations of the mind about them do
proceed, yet I shall treat of the distinct Parts of this Duty in the Order laid
down, beginning with the Exercise of our Thoughts and Meditations about them.
For they being the first genuine Actings of the Mind, according unto the
Prevalency of Affections in it, they will make the best and most evident
discovery of what nature the Spring is from whence they do arise. And I shall
not need to speak distinctly unto what is mentioned in the third place,
concerning the Complacency of the Mind in what its Affections are fixed on, for
it will fall in with sundry other things that are to be spoken unto.

But before we do proceed, it is not amiss, as I suppose, to put a remark upon
those important Truths, which are directly contained in the Words, proposed as
the Foundation of the present Discourse. As,

1. To be spiritually minded is the great distinguishing Character of true
Believers from all Unregenerate Persons. As such, is it here asserted by the
Apostle. All those who are carnally minded, who are in the flesh, they are
unregenerate, they are not born of God, they please him not, nor can do so, but
must perish for ever. But those who are spiritually minded, are born of God, do
live unto him, and shall come to the Enjoyment of him. Hereon depends the Trial
and Determination of what State we do belong unto.

2. Where any are Spiritually minded, there and there alone is Life and Peace.
What these are, wherein they do consist, what is their Excellency and
Pre-eminence above all things in this World, how they are the Effects and
Consequents of our being spiritually minded, shall be afterward declared.

There is neither of these Considerations, but is sufficient to demonstrate of
how great Concernment unto us it is to be spiritually minded, and diligently to
enquire whether we are so or no.

It will therefore be no small Advantage unto us, to have our Souls and
Consciences always affected with, and in due Subjection unto the Power of this
Truth; Namely, that to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace; whence it will
follow, that whatever we may think otherwise, if we are not so, we have neither
of them, neither Life nor Peace. It will, I say, be of use unto us, if we are
affected with the Power of it. For many greatly deceive themselves in hearing
the Word. They admit of Sacred Truths in their Understanding, and assent unto
them; but take not in the Power of them on their Consciences, nor strictly
judge of their State and Condition by them, which proves their Ruin. For
hereby they seem to themselves to believe, that whereof in truth they believe
not one Syllable as they ought. They hear it, they understand it in the Notion
of it, they assent unto it, at least they do not contradict it, yea they
commend it oftentimes and approve of it. But yet they believe it not. For if
they did, they would judge themselves by it, and reckon on it, that it will be
with them at the last day, according as things are determined therein.

Or such Persons are as the Apostle James declares, like a man beholding his
natural face in a Glass; for he beholds himself and goes his ways, and
straightway forgets what manner of man he was, Jam. 1.23, 24. There is a
Representation made of them, their State and Condition unto them in the Word;
they behold it, and conclude that it is even so with them, as the Word does
declare. But immediately their minds are filled with other thoughts, acted by
other Affections, taken up with other Occasions, and they forget in a moment
the Representation made of themselves and their Condition. Wherefore all that I
have to offer on this Subject will be utterly lost, unless a firm persuasion
hereof be fixed on our minds, unless we are under the Power of it, that to be
spiritually minded is life and peace; so that whatever our Light and Profession
be, our Knowledge or our Duty, without this we have indeed no real Interest in
Life and Peace.

These things being premised, I shall more practically open the Nature of this
Duty, and what is required unto this frame of spirit. To be Spiritually minded
may be considered either as unto the Nature and Essence of it, or as unto its
Degrees; for one may be so more than another, or the same Person may be more so
at one time than another. In the first way it is opposed unto being carnally
minded, in the other unto being earthly minded.

To be carnally minded is, as the Apostle speaks, Death, it is so every way;
and they who are so, are dead in trespasses and sins. This is opposed unto
being Spiritually minded as unto its Nature or Essence. Where a man as unto the
Substance and Being of the Grace and Duty intended is not Spiritually minded,
he is carnally minded, that is, under the power of Death spiritual, and
obnoxious unto death Eternal. This is the principal Foundation we proceed upon;
whence we demonstrate the indispensible necessity of the frame of mind enquired
after.

There are two ways wherein Men are Earthly-minded. The one is absolute, when
the love of earthly things is wholly predominant in the mind. This is not
formally and properly to be carnally minded, which is of a larger extent. The
one Denomination is from the Root and Principle, namely, the Flesh; the other
from the Object, or the things of the Earth. The latter is a branch from the
former, as its root. To be earthly minded, is an operation and effect of the
carnal mind in one especial way and Instance. And it is as exclusive of Life
and Salvation as the Carnal mind it self, Phil. 3.19. 1 John 2.16. This
therefore is opposed unto the Being of Spiritual mindedness, no less than to be
carnally minded, is. When there is in any a Love of earthly things that is
predominant, whence a Person may be rightly denominated to be earthly minded,
he is not nor can be spiritually minded at all; he has no Interest in the
frame of heart and Spirit intended thereby. And thus it is evidently with the
greatest part of them who are called Christians in the World, let them pretend
what they will to the contrary.

Again; there is a being Earthly-minded, which consists in an inordinate
Affection unto the things of this World. It is that which is sinful, which
ought to be mortified, yet is it not absolutely inconsistent with the Substance
and Being of the Grace enquired after. Some who are really and truly
spiritually minded, yet may, for a time at least, be under such an inordinate
Affection unto, and care about earthly things, that if not absolutely, yet
comparatively, as unto what they ought to be and might be, they may be justly
said to be earthly minded. They are so in respect of those degrees in being
spiritually minded, which they ought to aim at, and may attain unto. And where
it is thus, this Grace can never thrive or flourish, it can never advance unto
any eminent degree.

This is the Zoar of many Professors; that little one wherein they would be
spared. Such an earthly-mindedness as is wholly inconsistent with being
Spiritually minded, as unto the State and Condition which depends thereon, they
would avoid. For this they know would be absolutely exclusive of Life and
Peace; They cannot but know that such a frame is as inconsistent with
Salvation, as living in the vilest sin that any man can contract the Guilt of.
There are more ways of Spiritual and Eternal death than one, as well as of
Natural. All that dye, have not the Plague; and all that perish eternally are
not guilty of the same profligate sins. The Covetous are excluded from the
Kingdom of God, no less severely than Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers and
Thieves, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. But there is a Degree in being earthly minded, which
they suppose their Interest, Advantages, Relations and Occasions of life do
call for, which they would be a little indulged in; They may abide in such a
frame without a disparagement of their Profession. And the truth is, they have
too many companions to fear an especial Reflection on themselves. The Multitude
of the Guilty take away the sense and shame of the Guilt. But besides, they
hope well that it is not inconsistent absolutely with being spiritually minded;
Only they cannot well deny but that it is contrary unto such degrees in that
grace, such thriving in that Duty, as is recommended unto them. They think well
of others who are Spiritually minded in an eminent degree. At least they do so
as unto the thing it self in general; for when they come unto particular
Instances of this or that man, for the most part, they esteem what is beyond
their own Measure to be little better than pretense. But in general to be
Spiritually minded in an eminent degree, they cannot but esteem it a thing
excellent and desirable. But it is for them who are more at leisure than they
are; their Circumstances and Occasions require them to satisfy themselves with
an inferior measure.

To obviate such Pretenses I shall insist on nothing in the Declaration of this
Duty and the necessity of it, but what is incumbent on all that believe, and
without which they have no Grounds to assure their Conscience before God. And
at present in general I shall say, Whoever he be, who does not sincerely aim at
the highest degree of being spiritually minded, which the means he enjoys
would lead him unto, and which the light he has received does call for; who
judges it necessary unto his present Advantages, Occasions and Circumstances,
to rest in such measures or degrees of it, as he cannot but know that they come
short of what he ought to aim at, and so does not endeavor after Compleatness
in the Will of God herein, can have no satisfaction in his own mind, has no
unfailing Grounds, whereon to believe that he has any thing at all of the
Reality of this Grace in him. Such a Person possibly may have Life which
accompanies the Essence of this Grace, but he cannot have Peace which follows
on its Degree in a due Improvement. And it is to be feared, that far the
greatest number of them who satisfy themselves in this Apprehension, willingly
neglecting an Endeavor after the further Degrees of this Grace, and growth in
this Duty, which their Light or Convictions, and the means they enjoy do
suggest unto them, are indeed carnally minded, and every way obnoxious unto
death.

CHAP. II.
A particular Account of the Nature of this Grace and Duty of being Spiritually
minded. How it is Stated in and evidenced by our Thoughts.

HAving Stated the General Concernments of that Frame of mind which is here
recommended unto us, we may proceed to enquire more particularly into the
Nature of it, according unto the Description before given, in distinct
Propositions. And we shall carry on both these Intentions together; First, to
show, What it is, and wherein it does consist; and then how it does evidence it
self, so as that we may frame a right Judgment whether it be in us or no. And
we shall have no regard unto them, who either neglect or despise these things
on any pretense whatever. For this is the Word according unto which we shall
all shortly be Judged; To be Carnally minded is Death; but to be Spiritually
minded is Life and Peace.

Thoughts and Meditations as proceeding from spiritual Affections are the first
things wherein this Spiritual mindedness does consist, and whereby it does
evidence it self. Our Thoughts are like the Blossoms on a Tree in the Spring.
You may see a Tree in the Spring all covered with Blossoms that nothing else of
it appears. Multitudes of them fall off and come to nothing. Ofttimes where
there are most Blossoms there is least fruit. But yet there is no fruit, be it
of what sort it will, Good or Bad, but it comes in and from some of those
Blossoms. The mind of man is covered with Thoughts as a Tree with Blossoms.
Most of them fall off, vanish and come to nothing, end in Vanity; and sometimes
where the mind does most abound with them, there is the least Fruit; The Sap of
the mind is wasted and consumed in them. Howbeit there is no Fruit which
actually we bring forth, be it good or bad, but it proceeds from some of these
Thoughts. Wherefore ordinarily these give the best and surest Measure of the
Frame of men's minds. As a man Thinks in his Heart, so is he; Pro. 23.7. In
case of strong or violent Temptations, the real frame of a man's heart is not to
be judged by the Multiplicity of Thoughts about any object. For whether they
are from Satan's Suggestions, or from inward Darkness, trouble and horror, they
will impose such a continual sense of themselves on the mind, as shall engage
all its thoughts about them. As when a man is in a Storm at Sea, the current of
his Thoughts runs quite another way, than when he is in safety about his
occasions. But ordinarily Voluntary Thoughts are the best measure and
indication of the frame of our minds. As the nature of the Soil is judged by
the Grass which it brings forth; so may the disposition of the Heart by the
predominancy of Voluntary thoughts. They are the original acting of the Soul;
the way whereby the Heart puts forth and empties the Treasure that is in it;
the waters that first rise and flow from the fountain. Every man's Heart is his
Treasury; and the Treasure that is in it, is either Good or Evil; as our
Savior tells us. There is a good and bad Treasure of the Heart; but whatever a
man has, be it good or evil, there it is. This Treasure is opening, emptying
and spending it self continually, though it can never be exhausted. For it has
a Fountain in Nature or Grace, which no Expense can diminish; yea it increases
and gets strength by it. The more you spend of the Treasure of your Hearts
in any kind, the more will you abound in Treasure of the same kind. Whether it
be Good or Evil, it grows by Expense and Exercise. And the principal way
whereby it puts forth it self, is by the Thoughts of the mind. If the Heart be
Evil, they are for the most part vain, filthy, corrupt, wicked, foolish; If it
be under the Power of a Principle of Grace, and so have a good Treasure in it,
it puts forth it self by thoughts suitable unto its Nature, and compliant with
its inclinations.

Wherefore, these Thoughts give the best measure of the frame of our Minds and
Hearts. I mean such as are Voluntary, such as the mind of its own accord is apt
for, inclines and ordinarily betakes it self unto. Men may have a multitude of
Thoughts about the Affairs of their Callings and the Occasions of life, which
yet may give no due measure of the inward frame of their Hearts. So men whose
calling and work it is to study the Scripture or the things revealed therein,
and to preach them unto others; cannot but have many Thoughts about Spiritual
things; and yet may be, and oftentimes are, most remote from being spiritually
minded. They may be forced by their Work and Calling to think of them early and
late, Evening and Morning; and yet their Minds be no way rendered or proved
Spiritual thereby. It were well if all of us who are Preachers would diligently
examine our selves herein. So is it with them who oblige themselves to read the
Scripture, it may be so many Chapters every day; notwithstanding the diligent
performance of their Task, they may be most remote from being spiritually
minded. See Ezekiel. 33.31. But there is a certain Track and Course of Thoughts
that men ordinarily betake themselves unto, when not affected with present
Occasions. If these be vain, foolish, Proud, Ambitious, sensual or filthy, such
is the mind and its frame. If they be Holy, Spiritual and Heavenly, such may
the frame of the mind be judged to be. But these things must be more fully
explained.

It is the great Character and description of the frame of men's minds in an
unregenerate Condition, or before the Renovation of their Natures, That every
Imagination of the Thoughts of their Hearts are only evil continually, Genesis
6.5. They are continually coining Figments and Imaginations in their Hearts,
stamping them into Thoughts that are vain, foolish and wicked. All other
Thoughts in them are occasional; these are the natural, genuine product of
their Hearts. Hence the clearest and sometimes first discovery of the
bottomless evil Treasure of filth, folly and wickedness that is in the Heart of
man by nature, is from the innumerable multitude of evil Imaginations, which
are there coined and thrust forth every day. So the wicked are said to be like
the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt; Isa.
57.20. There is a fullness of evil in their Hearts, like that of water in the
Sea. This fullness is troubled or put into continual Motion by their Lusts and
impetuous desires. Hence the mire and dirt of evil Thoughts are continually
cast up in them.

It is therefore evident that the Predominancy of Voluntary thoughts is the
best and most sure indication of the inward frame and State of the mind. For if
it be so on the one side as unto the Carnal mind, it is so on the other as unto
the Spiritual. Wherefore to be spiritually minded in the first place is, to
have the Course and Stream of those Thoughts which we ordinarily retreat unto,
which we approve of as suited unto our Affections, to be about spiritual
things. Therein consists the minding of the Spirit.

But because all men, unless horribly profligate, have thoughts about spiritual
things, yet we know that all men are not spiritually minded, we must consider,
What is required unto such Thoughts, to render them a certain Indication of the
state of our minds. And there are these three things required hereunto.

1. That they be natural, arising from our selves, and not from outward
occasions. The Psalmist mentions the inward thoughts of men, Psalm. 49.11. and
64.6. But whereas all thoughts are the inward Acts of the mind, it should seem
that this expression makes no distinction of the especial kind of Thoughts
intended, from those of another sort. But the difference is not in the formal
Nature of them, but in the Causes, Springs and Occasions. Inward thoughts are
such as arise merely and solely from men's inward Principles, Dispositions and
Inclinations, that are not suggested or excited by any outward Objects. Such in
wicked men are those actings of their Lusts, whereby they entice and seduce
themselves, Jam. 1.14. Their Lusts stir up thoughts leading and encouraging
them to make Provision for the flesh. These are their inward Thoughts. Of the
same Nature are those thoughts which are the minding of the Spirit. They are
the first natural egress and genuine acting of the habitual disposition of the
Mind and Soul.

Thus in Covetous men there are two sorts of thoughts, whereby their
Covetousness acts it self. First; Such as are occasioned by outward Objects and
Opportunities. So it was with Achan; Josh. 7.21. When, says he, I saw among
the Spoils a goodly Babylonish Garment, and two hundred Shekels of Silver, and
a Wedge of Gold, then I coveted them. His sight of them with an Opportunity of
possessing himself of them, excited covetous thoughts and desires in him. So is
it with others every day, whose Occasions call them to converse with the
Objects of their Lusts. And some by such Objects may be surprised into Thoughts
that their minds are not habitually inclined unto. And therefore when they are
known, it is our duty to avoid them. But the same sort of Persons have thoughts
of this nature arising from themselves only, their own dispositions and
inclinations, without any outward Provocations. The vile Person will speak
villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, Isa. 32.6. And this he does as the
liberal devises liberal things, v. 8. from his own disposition and
inclination, he is contriving in his thoughts how to act according to them. So
the Unclean Person has two sorts of thoughts with respect unto the
satisfaction of his Lusts. First, Such as are occasioned in his mind by the
external Objects of it. Hereunto Stage Plays, Revellings, Dancings with the
Society of bold Persons, Persons of corrupt Communication do contribute their
wicked Service. For the avoidance of this Snare, Job made a Covenant with his
Eyes, Chap. 31.1. And our Savior gives that holy Declaration of the evil of
it, Mat. 5.28. But he has an habitual Spring of these thoughts in himself
constantly enclining and disposing him thereunto. Hence the Apostle Peter tells
us that such Persons have eyes full of an Adulteress, that cannot cease from
sin, 2 Ep. 2.14. Their own Affections make them restless in their thoughts and
contrivances about sin. So is it with them who are given to excess in Wine or
strong Drink. They have pleasing thoughts raised in them from the Object of
their lust represented unto them. Hence Solomon gives that advice against the
Occasion of them. Prove. 23.31. But it is their own habitual disposition which
carries them unto pleasing thoughts of the satisfaction of their Lusts, which
he describes, v. 34, 35. So is it in other Cases. The thoughts of this latter
sort, are men's inward thoughts; and such must these be of Spiritual things,
whence we may be esteemed spiritually minded.

Psalm. 45.1. Says the Psalmist, My Heart is enditing a good matter; I speak of
the things which I have made touching the King. He was meditating on Spiritual
things, on the things of the Person and Kingdom of Christ. Hence his Heart
bubbled up (as it is in the Original) a good matter. It is an Allusion taken
from a quick Spring of living Waters; From its own life and fullness it bubbles
up the water that runs and flows from it. So is it with these thoughts in them
that are Spiritually minded. There is a living fullness of Spiritual things in
their minds and Affections, that springs up into holy thoughts about them.

From hence does our Savior give us the great Description of Spiritual life.
It is a Well of living Water springing up into everlasting life. Joh. 4.12. The
Spirit with his Graces residing in the Heart of a Believer, are a Well of
living Water. Nor is it such a Well as content with its own fullness does not of
its own accord without any Instrument or pains in drawing send out its
refreshing waters, as it is with most Wells though of living Water. For this is
spoken by our Savior in answer and opposition unto that Objection of the
Woman, upon this mention of giving living water, v. 10. Sir, says she, thou
have nothing to draw, and the Well is deep, whence will thou have this Water;
V. 11. True, says he, such is the nature of this Well and Water, dead earthly
things. They are of no use unless we have Instruments, Lines and Buckets to
draw withal. But the living Water which I shall give is of another nature. It
is not water to be kept in a Pit or Cistern without us, whence it must be
drawn; but it is within us; and that not dead and useless, but continually
springing up unto the use and refreshment of them that have it. For so is it
with the Principle of the New Creature, of the new Nature, the Spirit and his
Graces in the Hearts of them that do believe. It does of it self and from it
self, without any external Influence on it, incline and dispose the whole Soul
unto spiritual Actings that tend unto Eternal Life. Such are the thoughts of
them that are Spiritually minded. They arise from the inward Principle,
Inclination and Disposition of the Soul, are the bublings of this Well of
living water; they are the mindings of the Spirit.

So our Savior describes them, Matthew. 12.35. A Good man out of the Good
Treasure of the Heart brings forth Good things. First the Man is Good; as he
said before, make the Tree Good, or the Fruit cannot be Good, v. 33. He is made
so by Grace in the Change and Renovation of his Nature; For in our selves we
are every way evil. This Good man has a Treasure in his Heart. So all men
have; as the next words are; the evil man out of the evil Treasure of the
Heart. And this is the great difference that is between men in this world.
Every man has a Treasure in his Heart; that is, a prevailing inexhaustible
Principle of all his actings and operations. But in some this Treasure is Good,
in others it is Evil. That is, the prevailing Principle in the Heart, which
carries along with it its dispositions and Inclinations, is in some Good and
gracious, in others it is evil. Out of this Good Treasure, a Good man brings
forth Good things. The first opening of it, the first bringing of it forth, is
by these thoughts. The Thoughts that arise out of the Heart are of the same
nature with the Treasure that is in it. If the Thoughts that naturally arise
and spring up in us, are for the most part vain, foolish, sensual, earthly,
selfish, such is the Treasure that is in our Hearts, and such are we. But where
the Thoughts that thus naturally proceed from the Treasure that is in the
Heart, are spiritual and holy, it is an argument that we are spiritually minded.

Where it is not thus with our Thoughts, they give no such Evidence as that
enquired after. Men may have Thoughts of spiritual things, and that many of
them, and that frequently, which do not arise from this Principle, but may be
resolved into two other Causes. (1.) Inward Force; (2.) Outward Occasions.

1. Inward Force as it may be called. This is by Convictions. Convictions put a
kind of a force upon the mind, or an Impression that causes it to act contrary
unto its own habitual Disposition and Inclination. It is in the Nature of water
to descend. But apply an Instrument unto it, that shall make a compression of
it, and force it unto a vent, it will fly upwards vehemently, as if that were
its natural motion. But so soon as the force of the Impression cease, it
returns immediately unto its own proper tendency, descending toward its
center. So is it with men's Thoughts oft-times. They are earthly, their natural
course and motion is downwards unto the Earth and the things thereof. But when
any efficacious Conviction presses on the mind, it forces the egress of its
Thoughts upwards toward Heavenly things. It will think much and frequently of
them; as if that were their proper motion and Course. But so soon as the Power
of the Conviction decays or wears off, that the mind is no more sensible of
its force and impression; the thoughts of it return again unto their old Course
and Track, as the water tends downwards.

This State and frame is graphically described, Psalm. 78.35, 36, 37. When he
slew them, then they sought him, and they returned and enquired early after
God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer. Nevertheless they did but flatter him with their mouths, and they
lied unto him with their tongues; for their Heart was not right with him,
neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. Men in Troubles, Dangers, Sickness,
Fears of Death, or under effectual Conviction of Sin from the preaching of the
Word, will endeavor to think and meditate on spiritual Things. Yea they will
be greatly troubled that they cannot think of them more than they do, and
esteem it their folly that they think of any thing else. But as freedom and
Deliverance do approach, so these thoughts decay and disappear. The mind will
not be compelled to give place unto them any more. The Prophet gives the Reason
of it, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots, then may ye also do good, that are accustomed unto evil. They have had
another haunt, been taught another course, the habit and Inclination of the
mind lies another way, and they will no longer tend toward spiritual things,
than an impression is on them from their Convictions.

And it is an Argument of very mean Seize, of a low and weak degree in
this frame of heart, or in our being spiritually minded, when our Thoughts of
spiritual things, do rise or fall according unto renewed occasional
Convictions. If when we are under Rebukes from God in our Persons or Relations,
in fears of death, and the like, and withal have some renewed convictions of
sin, in Commission, or Omission of Duties, and thereon do endeavor to be more
spiritually minded in the constant exercise of our Thoughts on spiritual
things, which we fail in; and these thoughts decay as our Convictions in the
causes of them, do wear off or are removed, we have attained a very low degree
in this Grace, if we have any Interest in it at all.

Water that arises and flows from a living Spring runs equally and
constantly, unless it be obstructed or diverted by some violent opposition; but
that which is from Thunder-showers, runs furiously for a season, but is quickly
dried up. So are those Spiritual Thoughts which arise from a prevalent internal
Principle of Grace in the Heart, they are even and constant, unless an
interruption be put upon them for a season by Temptations. But those which are
excited by the Thunder of convictions, however their streams may be filled for
a season; they quickly dry up and utterly decay.

2. Such Thoughts may arise in the minds of men not spiritually minded from
outward means and Occasions. Such I intend as are indeed useful, yea appointed
of God for this End among others, that they may ingenerate and stir up holy
Thoughts and Affections in us. But there is a difference in their use and
Operation. In some they excite the inward Principle of the mind to act in holy
Thoughts according unto its own sanctified disposition and prevalent
Affections. This is their proper End and Use. In others they occasionally
suggest such thoughts unto the minds of men, which spring only from the Notions
of the things proposed unto them. With respect unto this End also, they are of
singular use unto the souls of men, howbeit such thoughts do not prove men to
be spiritually minded. Where you till and manure your Land, if it brings forth
plentiful crops of Corn, it is an Evidence that the Soil it self is good and
fertile; the dressing of it only gives occasion and Advantage to put forth its
own Fruit-bearing Virtue. But if in the tilling of Land, you lay much dung upon
it, and it brings forth here and there an handful where the dung lay; you will
say, the Soil is barren, it brings forth nothing of it self. These means that
we shall treat of, are as the tilling of a fruitful Soil, which help it in
bringing forth its fruit, by exciting its own Virtue and Power. They stir up
holy Affections unto holy Thoughts and desires. But in others, whose hearts are
barren, they only serve, as it were, some of them here and there, to stir up
spiritual Thoughts, which gives no Evidence of a gracious Heart or Spirit. But
because this is a matter of great Importance, it shall be handled distinctly by
it self.

CHAP. III.
Outward Means and Occasions of Thoughts of such Spiritual things, which do not
prove men to be spiritually minded. Preaching of the Word. Exercise of Gifts.
Prayer. How we may know, Whether our Thoughts of spiritual things in Prayer are
truly spiritual Thoughts, proving us to be spiritually minded.

1. SUch a Means is the preaching of the Word it self. It is observed
concerning many in the Gospel, that they heard it willingly, received it with
joy, and did many things gladly, upon the Preaching of it. And we see the same
thing exemplified in multitudes every day. But none of these things can be
without many thoughts in the minds of such Persons, about the Spiritual things
of the Word. For they are the Effects of such Thoughts, and being wrought in
the minds of men, will produce more of the same Nature. Yet were they all
Hypocrites, concerning whom these things are spoken, and were never spiritually
minded.

The cause of this Miscarriage is given us by our Savior, Math. 13.20, 21. He
that receives the seed into stony places, the same is he that hears the
Word, and anon receives it with Joy; yet has he not root in himself, but
dureth for a while. The Good Thoughts they have, proceed not from any principle
in themselves. Neither their Affections nor their thoughts of these things,
have any internal root whereon they should grow. So is it with many who live
under the present dispensation of the Gospel. They have thoughts of spiritual
things continually suggested unto them; and they do abide with them more or
less according as they are affected. For I speak not of them who are either
despisers of what they hear, or way-side hearers, who understand nothing of
what they hear, and immediately lose all sense of it, all thoughts about it.
But I speak of them who attend with some Diligence, and receive the Word with
some Joy. These insensibly grow in knowledge and understanding, and therefore
cannot be without some thoughts of spiritual things. Howbeit for the most part
they are, as was said, but like unto waters that run after a shower of rain.
They pour out themselves as if they proceeded from some strong living Spring,
whereas indeed they have none at all. When once the waters of the shower are
spent their Channel is dry, there is nothing in it but Stones and dirt. When
the Doctrine of the Word falls on such Persons as showers of rain, it gives a
Course, sometimes greater sometimes less, unto their Thoughts toward spiritual
things. But they have not a Well of water in them springing up into Everlasting
life. Wherefore after a while their minds are dried up from such thoughts;
nothing remains in them but earth, and that perhaps foul and dirty.

It must be observed, that the best of men, the most holy and spiritually
minded, may have, nay ought to have their Thoughts of spiritual things excited,
multiplied, and confirmed by the preaching of the Word. It is one end of its
Dispensation, one principal use of it in them by whom it is received. And it
has this effect two ways. (1.) As it is the spiritual food of the Soul,
whereby its Principle of Life and Grace is maintained and strengthened. The
more this is done, the more shall we thrive in being spiritually minded. (2.)
As it administreth occasion unto the Exercise of Grace. For proposing the
proper Object of Faith, Love, Fear, Trust, Reverence unto the Soul, it draws
forth all those Graces into Exercise. Wherefore, although the Vigorous actings
of spiritual thoughts be occasional from the Word, be more under and after the
preaching of it, than at other times, it is no more but what arises from the
nature and use of the Ordinance, by Gods own appointment, nor is it any
Evidence that those with whom it is so, are not spiritually minded; but on the
contrary that they are. Yet where men have no other thoughts of this matter but
what are occasioned by the outward dispensation of the Word, such thoughts do
not prove them to be spiritually minded. Their Endeavors in them are like
those of men in a dream. Under some oppression of their spirits, their
Imagination fixes on something or other, that is most earnestly to be desired
or avoided. Herein they seem to themselves to strive with all their might, to
endeavor to go, run or contend, but all in vain; every thing fails them, and
they are not relieved until they are awaked. So such Persons in Impressions
they receive from the Word, seem to strive and contend in their thoughts and
resolutions to comply with what is proposed unto them; but their strength
fails, they find no success, for want of a Principle of Spiritual Life, and
after a time give over their Endeavors until they are occasionally renewed
again. Now the Thoughts which in the Dispensation of the Word do proceed from
an inward Principle of Grace excited unto its due exercise, are distinguishable
from them which are only occasionally suggested unto the mind by the Word
outwardly Preached. For (1.) They are especial actings of Faith and Love
toward the things themselves that are Preached. They belong unto our receiving
the Truth in the Love thereof. And Love respects the Goodness of the things
themselves, and not merely the Truth of the Propositions wherein they are
expressed. The other Thoughts are only the sense of the Mind as affected with
Light and Truth, without any cordial Love unto the things themselves. (2.) They
are accompanied with Complacency of Soul arising from Love, Experience, more or
less, of the Power of them, and their suitableness unto the new Nature or
Principle of Grace in them. For when our minds find that so indeed it is in us,
as it is in the Word; that this is that which we would be more conformable
unto; it gives a secret Complacency with satisfaction unto the soul. The other
Thoughts which are only occasional, have none of these Concomitants or Effects,
but are dry and barren, unless it be in a few words or transient Dicourse. (3.)
The former are means of spiritual growth. So some say the natural growth of
Vegetables is not by insensible motion, but by Gusts and sensible eruptions of
increase. These are both in spiritual Growth, and the later consists much in
those thoughts which the Principle of the new Nature is excited unto by the
Word in the latter.

2. The Duty of Prayer is another means of the like Nature. One Principal end
of it is to excite, stir up, and draw forth the Principle of Grace, of Faith
and Love in the Heart, unto a due Exercise in holy thoughts of God and
Spiritual things, with Affections suitable unto them. Those who design not this
End in Prayer, know not at all what it is to Pray. Now all sorts of Persons
have frequent Occasion to join with others in Prayer, and many are under the
Conviction that it is their own Duty to Pray every day, it may be in their
Families and otherwise. And it is hard to conceive how men can constantly join
with others in Prayer, much more how they can Pray themselves, but that they
must have thoughts of Spiritual things every day; Howbeit it is possible that
they may have no Root, or living spring of them in themselves, but they are
only occasional impressions on their minds from the outward performance of the
Duty. I shall give some Instances of the Grounds hereof, which on many Reasons
require our diligent Consideration.

Spiritual Thoughts may be raised in a Person in his own Duty, by the Exercise
of his Gifts, when there is no acting of Grace in them at all. For they lead
and guide the mind unto such things as are the matter of Prayer; that is
Spiritual things. Gifts are nothing but a spiritual improvement of our natural
Faculties or Abilities. And a man cannot speak or utter any thing but what
proceeds from his Rational Faculties by Invention or Memory, or both, managed
in and by his thoughts, unless he speak by rote, and that which is not
rational. What therefore proceeds from a man's rational Faculty in and by the
Exercise of his Gifts, that his Thoughts must be exercised about.

A man may read a long Prayer that expresses Spiritual things, and yet never
have one Spiritual thought arise in his mind about them. For there is no
exercise of any Faculty of his mind required unto such reading, but only to
attend unto the words that are to be read. This I say may be so, I do not say
that it is always so, or that it must be so. But as was said in the Exercise of
Gifts, it is impossible but there must be an Exercise of Reason, by Invention,
Judgment, and Memory; and consequently thoughts of spiritual things. Yet may
they all be merely occasional from the present external performance of the
Duty, without any living spring or exercise of Grace. In such a Course may men
of tolerable Gifts continue all their days, unto the satisfaction of themselves
and others, deceiving both them and their own Souls.

This being evident from the Scripture and Experience, an Enquiry may be made
thereon, as unto our own concernment in these things; especially of those who
have received Spiritual Gifts of their own, and of them also in some degree,
who usually enjoy the Gifts of others in this Duty. For it may be asked, how we
shall know whether the thoughts which we have of spiritual things in and upon
Prayer do arise from Gifts only, those of our own or other men's, giving
occasion unto them, or are influenced from a living Principle and Spring of
Grace in our Hearts. A case this is (however by some it may be apprehended) of
great importance, and which would require much time fully to resolve. For there
is nothing whereby the refined sort of Hypocrites do more deceive themselves
and others, nothing whereby some men do give themselves more Countenance in an
Indulgence unto their Lusts, than by this Part of the Form of Godliness, when
they deny the Power thereof. And besides, it is that wherein the best of
Believers ought to keep a diligent watch over themselves; in every particular
Instance of the Performance of this Duty. With respect hereunto in an especial
manner are they to watch unto Prayer. If they are at any time negligent herein,
they may rest in a bare exercise of Gifts, when on a due examination and trial,
they have no Evidence of the acting of Grace in what they have done. I shall
therefore with what brevity I can give a Resolution unto this Enquiry. And to
this end Observe,

1. It is an ancient Complaint, that Spiritual things are filled with great
obscurity and difficulty; and it is true. Not that there is any such thing in
themselves, for they all come forth from the Father of lights, and are full of
Light, Order Beauty and Wisdom. And Light and Order are the only means whereby
any thing makes a discovery of it self. But the Ground of all darkness and
difficulty in these things lies in our selves. We can more clearly and steadily
see and behold the Moon and the Stars, than we can the Sun when it shines in
its greatest Luster. It is not because there is more light in the Moon and
Stars than in the Sun, but because the light of the Sun is greater then our
visive Faculty can directly bear and behold. So we can more clearly discover
the Truth and distinct Nature of things Moral and Natural, than we can of
things that are Heavenly and Spiritual. See John 3.14. Not that there is more
substance or reality in them, but because the Ability of our Understanding is
more suited unto the Comprehension of them. The other are above us. We know but
in Part, and our minds are liable to be hindered and disordered in their
apprehension of things Heavenly and Spiritual, by Ignorance, Temptations, and
Prejudices of all sorts. In nothing more are men subject unto mistakes than in
the application of things unto themselves, and a Judgment of their Interest in
them. Fear, self-love, with the prevalency of Temptations and Corruptions, do
all engage their Powers to darken the light of the mind and to pervert its
Judgment. In no case does the deceitfulness of the heart, or of sin which is
all one, more act it self. Hence Multitudes say Peace to themselves, to whom
God does not speak Peace; and some who are Children of Light do yet walk in
darkness. Hence is that fervent Prayer of the Apostle for help in this case,
Ephesians. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. There is also a great similitude between Temporary
Faith, and that which is Saving and durable; and between Gifts and Grace in
their Operations, which is that that is under present Consideration. It is
acknowledged therefore, that without the especial light and conduct of the
Spirit of God, no man can make such a Judgment of his State and his Actions,
as shall be a stable Foundation of giving Glory to God, and of obtaining peace
unto his own soul. And therefore the greatest part of mankind do constantly
deceive themselves in these things.

But ordinarily under this blessed Conduct in the search of our selves and the
Concernments of our duty, we may come unto a satisfaction whether they are
influenced by Faith, and have Grace exercised in them, especially this duty of
Prayer, or whether it derive from the power of our natural Faculties, raised by
Light and spiritual Gifts only; and so whether our spiritual Thoughts therein
do spring from a Vital Principle of Grace, or whether they come from occasional
impressions on the mind, by the performance of the Duty it self.

If men are willing to deceive themselves, or to hide themselves from
themselves, to walk with God at all per adventures, to leave all things at
hazard, to put off all Trials unto that at the last day, and so never call
themselves unto an account as unto the nature of their Duties in any particular
Instance, it is no wonder, if they neither do nor can make any distinction in
this matter as unto the true nature of their Thoughts in Spiritual Duties. Two
things are required hereunto.

1. That we impartially and severely examine and try the Frames and actings of
our minds in holy Duties by the Word of Truth; and thereon not be afraid to
speak that plainly unto our Souls which the Word speaks unto us. This diligent
search ought to respect our Principles, Aims, Ends, Actings, with the whole
deportment of our Souls in every duty. See 2 Cor. 13.5. If a man receives much
Money, and look only on the outward Form and Superscription, when he supposes
that he has great store of current Coin in Gold and Silver, he may have only
heaps of Lead or Copper by him. But he that trades in it as the comfort and
support of his natural life and condition, he will try what he receives both by
the Balance and the Touchstone, as the occasion requires, especially if it be
in a time when much adulterated Coin is passant in the World. And if a man
reckons on his Duties by Tale and Number, he may be utterly deceived; and be
spiritually poor and a Bankrupt, when he esteems himself rich, increased in
Goods and wanting nothing. Some Duties may appearingly hold in the Balance as
to Weight, which will not hold it at the Touchstone as to Worth. Both means
are to be used if we would not be mistaken in our Accounts. Thus God himself in
the midst of a multitude of Duties calls the People to try and examine
themselves whether or no they are such as have Faith and Grace in them, and so
like to have acceptance with him. Isa. 58.2, 3, 4, 5.

2. Add we must unto our own diligent enquiry fervent Prayers unto God, that he
would search and try us; as unto our sincerity, and discover unto us the true
frame of our hearts. Hereof we have an express example, Psalm. 139.23, 24.
Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts; and see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. This is the
only way whereby we may have the Spirit of God witnessing unto our sincerity,
with our own spirits. There is need of calling in divine Assistance in this
matter, both from the importance of it, and from its difficulty; God alone
knowing fully and perfectly what is in the hearts of men.

I no way doubt but that in the impartial use of these means, a man may come to
assured satisfaction in his own mind, such as wherein he shall not be deceived,
whether he does animate and quicken his thoughts of Spiritual things in Duties
with inward Vital Grace, or whether they are impressions on his mind, by the
occasion of the Duty.

A Duty this is of great Importance and necessity, now Hypocrisy has made so
great an in-rode on Profession, and Gifts have doflowred Grace in its principal
Operations. No Persons are in greater danger of walking at hazard with God,
than those who live in the exercise of Spiritual Gifts in Duties, unto their
own satisfaction and others. For they may countenance themselves with an
Appearance of every thing that should be in them in reality and power, when
there is nothing of it in them. And so it has fallen out. We have seen many
earnest in the Exercise of this Gift, who have turned vile and debauched
Apostates. Some have been known to live in sin and an indulgence of their
Lusts, and yet to abide constant in their Duties. Isa. 1.15. And we may hear
Prayers sometimes that openly discover themselves unto Spiritual sense, to be
the Labor of the Brain, by the help of Gifts in Memory and Invention, without
an Evidence of any mixture of Humility, Reverence or Godly fear; without any
acting of Faith and Love. They flow as Wine, yet smell and taste of the
unsavory Cask from whence they proceed. It is necessary therefore that we
should put our selves on the severest trial, lest we should be found not to be
spiritually minded in Spiritual Duties.

Gifts are gracious vouchsafements of Christ to make Grace useful unto our
selves and others; yea they may make them useful unto the Grace of others, who
have no Grace in themselves. But as unto our own souls they are of no other
advantage or benefit but to stir up Grace unto its proper Exercise; and to be a
vehicle to carry it on, in its proper use. If we do not always regard this in
their Exercise, we had better be without them. If instead hereof, they once
begin to impose themselves practically upon us, so as that we rest in spiritual
Light acting our Inventions, Memories and Judgments with a ready utterance, or
such as it is, there is no form of Prayer can be more prejudicial unto our
Souls. As Wine if taken moderately and seasonably helps the Stomach in
Digestion, and quickens the natural Spirits, enabling the Powers of Nature unto
their Duty, is useful and helpful unto it, but if it be taken in excess, it
does not help Nature but oppress it, and takes on it self to do what nature
should be assisted unto, it fills men's Carcasses with Diseases as well as their
Souls with sin. So whilst Spiritual Gifts are used and employed only to
excite, aid and assist Grace in its operations, they are unutterably useful.
But if they put themselves in the Room thereof, to do all that Grace should do;
they are hurtful and pernicious. We have need therefore to be very diligent in
this Enquiry, whether our Spiritual Thoughts, even in our Prayers, be not
rather occasioned from the Duty, than spring from a gracious Principle in our
Hearts, or are the actings of real saving Grace.

2. Where thoughts of Spiritual things in Prayer are Occasional only in the way
before described, such Prayers will not be a means of Spiritual Growth unto the
soul. They will not make the soul Humble, Holy, Watchful and Diligent in
universal Obedience. Grace will not thrive under the greatest constancy in such
Duties. It is an astonishing thing to see how under frequency of Prayer, and a
seeming fervency therein, many of us are at a stand as to visible thriving in
the Fruits of Grace; and it is to be feared, without any increase of strength
in the Root of it. Gods Hand is not shortened that he cannot save, nor his Ear
deafned that he cannot hear. He is the same as in the days of old, when our
Fathers cried unto him and were delivered, when they trusted in him and were
not confounded. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever;
Prayer is the same that it was, and shall lose nothing of its Prevalency
whilst, this World endures. Whence is it then that there is so much Prayer
amongst us, and so little success. I speak not with respect unto the outward
Dispensations of Divine Providence in Afflictions or Persecutions, wherein God
always acts in a way of Sovereignty, and oft-times gives the most useful answer
unto our Prayers by denying our Requests. I intend, that only whereof the
Psalmist gives us his Experience. Psalm. 138.3. In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthnedst me with strength in my soul. Where Prayers are
effectual, they will bring in spiritual strength. But the Prayers of many seem
to be very spiritual, and to express all conceivable supplies of Grace; and
they are persisted in with Constancy. And God forbid we should Judge them to be
Hypocritical and wholly Insincere. Yet is there a defect somewhere, which
should be enquired after. For they are not so answered, as that they who Pray
them, are strengthened with strength in their Souls. There is not that spiritual
thriving, that growth in Grace which might be expected to accompany such
Supplications.

I know that a man may pray often, pray sincerely and frequently for an
especial Mercy, Grace, or Deliverance from a particular Temptation; and yet no
spiritual Supply of strength unto his own experience come in thereby. So Paul
prayed thrice for the removal of his Temptation, and yet had the Exercise of it
continued. In such a case there may be no defect in Prayer, and yet the Grace
in particular aimed at not be attained. For God has other Holy Ends to
accomplish hereby on the Soul. But how Persons should continue in Prayer, in
general, according to the mind of God, so far as can be outwardly discovered,
and yet thrive not at all, as unto spiritual strength in their Souls, is hard
to be understood.

And, which is yet more astonishable, men abide in the Duty of Prayer, and that
in constancy, in their Families, and otherwise, and yet live in known sins.
Whatever spiritual thoughts such men have in and by their Prayers, they are not
spiritually minded. Shall we now say that all such Persons are gross
Hypocrites; such as know they do but mock God and Man; know that they have not
Desires nor Aims after the things which they mention in their own Prayers; but
do these things either for some corrupt end, or at best to satisfy their
Convictions? Could we thus resolve, the whole difficulty of the Case were taken
off. For such double minded Men have no Reason to think that they shall receive
any thing of the Lord, as James speaks, Chap. 1.7. Indeed they do not. They
never Act Faith with reference unto their own Prayers. But it is not so with
all of this sort. Some judge themselves Sincere, and in good Earnest in their
Prayers, not without some Hopes and Expectations of Success. I will not say of
all such Persons, that they are among the Number of them concerning whom the
Wisdom of God says, Because I called unto them, and they refused; they shall
call on me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, and shall not find
me. Prove. 1.18, 19, 20, 21. And although we may say unto such Persons in
general, Either leave your Sinning, or leave your Praying, from Psalm. 50.16,
17. and that with respect unto present Scandal, and certain Miscarriage in the
End if both be continued in; yet in particular I would not advise any such
Person to leave off his Praying until he had left his Sin. This were to advise
a sick Man to use no Remedies until he were well cured. Who knows but that the
Holy Spirit who works when and how he pleases, may take a Time to Animate
these lifeless Prayers, and make them a means of Deliverance from the Power of
this Sin. In the mean time the Fault and Guilt is wholly their own, who have
effected a Consistency between a way in Sinning and a Course in Praying. And it
arises from hence, that they have never labored to fill up their Requests
with Grace. What there has been of Earnestness or Diligence in them, has been
from a Force put upon them by their Convictions and Fears. For no man was ever
absolutely prevailed on by Sin, who prayed for Deliverance according to the
mind of God. Every Praying man that perishes was an Hypocrite. The
Faithfulness of God in his Promises will not allow us to Judge otherwise.
Wherefore the Thoughts that such Persons have of Spiritual things even in their
Duties, do not arise from within, nor are a natural Emanation of the Frames of
their Hearts and Affections.

3. Earnestness and appearing Fervency in Prayer, as unto the outward delivery
of the Words of it, yea though the mind be so affected as to contribute much
thereunto, will not of themselves prove, that the Thoughts of men therein do
arise from an Internal Spring of Grace. There is a Fervency of Spirit in
Prayer, that is one of the best Properties of it, being an earnest Acting of
Love, Faith and Desire. But there is a Fervency wherewith the mind it self may
be affected, that may arise from other Causes.

1. It may do so from the engagement of Natural Affections unto the Object of
their Prayer, or the things Prayed for. Men may be mighty Earnest and Intent in
their minds, in praying for a Dear Relation, or for Deliverance from Eminent
Troubles, or Imminent Dangers; and yet all this Fervor arise from the vehement
Actings of Natural Affections about the things prayed for, excited in an
especial manner by the present Duty. Hence God calls the earnest cries of some
for Temporal things, not a Crying unto him, but an Howling, Hosea 7.14. That
is, the cry of hungry Ravenous Beasts, that would be satisfied.

2. Sometimes it arises from the sharpness of Convictions, which will make men
even Roar in their Prayers for disquietment of Heart. And this may be where
there is no true Grace as yet received, nor it may be ever will be so. For the
perplexing Work of Convictions, goes before real Conversion; and as it
produces many other Effects and Changes in the mind, so it may do this of
great Fervency in Vocal Prayers, especially if it be accompanied with outward
Afflictions, Pains or Troubles. Psalm. 78.34, 35.

3. Oft-times the Mind and Affections are very little concerned in that Fervor
and Earnestness which appear in the outward Performance of the Duty. But in the
exercise of Gifts and through their own utterance, men put their Natural
Affections into such an Agitation, as shall carry them out into a great
Vehemence in their Expressions. It has been so with sundry Persons, who have
been discovered to be Rotten Hypocrites, and have afterward turned Cursed
Apostates. Wherefore all these things may be, where there is no gracious
Spring, or Vital Principle, Acting it self from within in Spiritual Thoughts.

Some it may be will design an Advantage by their Conceptions unto the Interest
of Profaneness and Scoffing. For if there may be these evils under the
Exercise of the Gift of Prayer, both in Constancy and with Fervency; if there
may be a total want of the Exercise of all true Grace with it and under it;
then it may be all that is pretended of this Gift and its Use, is but
Hypocrisy and Talk. But I say, (1.) It may be as well pretended, that because
the Sun shining on a Dunghill, does occasion offensive and noisome Steams,
therefore all that is pretended of its Influence on Spices and Flowers, causing
them to give out their Fragrancy, is utterly false. No man ever thought that
Spiritual Gifts did change, or renew the Minds and Natures of Men; where they
are alone they only help and assist unto the useful Exercise of Natural
Faculties and Powers. And therefore where the Heart is not savingly renewed, no
Gifts can stir up a saving Exercise of Faith. But where it is so, they are a
means to cause the Savor of it to flow forth. (2.) Be it so that there may be
some Evils found under the Exercise of the Gift of Prayer, what remedy for them
may be proposed? Is it that men should Renounce their use of it, and betake
themselves unto the Reading of Prayers only? (1.) The same may be said of all
Spiritual Gifts whatever, for they are all of them liable unto Abuse. And shall
we reject all the Powers of the World to come, the whole complexe of Gospel
Gifts, for the Commuication whereof the Lord Christ has promised to continue
his Spirit with his Church unto the end of the World, because by some they are
abused? (2.) Not only the same, but far greater evils may be found in and under
the Reading of Prayers, which needs no further Demonstration than what it gives
of it self every Day. (3.) It is hard to understand, how any benefit at all can
accrue unto any by this Relief, when the Advantages of the other way are
evident.

Wherefore the Enquiry remains, How we may know unto our own satisfaction, that
the Thoughts we have of Spiritual things in the Duty of Prayer, are from
Internal fountain of Grace, and so are an evidence that we are Spiritually
minded, whereunto all these things do tend. Some few things I shall offer
toward Satisfaction herein.

1. I take it for granted on the Evidence before given, that Persons who have
any Spiritual Light, and will diligently Examine and Try their own Hearts, will
be able to discern what real Actings of Faith, of Love, and Delight in God,
there are in their Duties; and consequently what is the Spring of their
Spiritual Thoughts. In general we are assured, that he that believes, has the
Witness in himself. 1 John 5.10. Sincere Faith will be its own Evidence. And
where there are Sincere Actings of Faith, they will evidence themselves, if we
try all things impartially by the Word. But if men do, as for the most part
they do, content themselves with the Performance of any Duty, without an
Examination of their Principles, Frames and Actings of Grace in them, it is no
wonder if they walk in all Uncertainty.

2. When the Soul finds a sweet Spiritual Complacency in and after its Duties,
it is an Evidence that Grace has been acted in its Spiritual Thoughts and
Desires. Jer. 31. The Prophet receives a long gracious Message from God,
filled up with Excellent Promises and Pathetical Exhortations unto the Church.
The whole is as it were summed up in the close of it. Ver. 25. For I have
satiated the weary Soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful Soul. Whereon
the Prophet adds, Upon this I awaked, and beheld, and my Sleep was sweet unto
me. God's gracious Message had so composed his spirits, and freed his mind from
Trouble, as that he was at quiet Repose in himself, like a man asleep. But
after the end of it, he stirrs up himself unto a Review and Consideration of
what had been spoken unto him: I awaked and beheld, or I stirred up my self,
and considered what had been delivered unto me; And says he, my Sleep was
sweet unto me; I found a gracious Complacency in, and Refreshment unto my Soul,
from what I had heard and received. So is it oft-times with a Soul that has
had real Communion with God in the Duty of Prayer. It finds it self both in it,
and afterward when it is awakened unto the consideration of it, spiritually
refreshed, it is sweet unto him.

This holy Complacency, this Rest and sweet Repose of mind, is the Foundation
of the Delight of Believers in this Duty. They do not pray only because it is
their Duty so to do, nor yet because they stand in need of it, so as that they
cannot live without it, but they have delight in it; and to keep them from it,
is all one as to keep them from their daily food and refreshment. Now we can
have no delight in any thing but what we have found some Sweetness, Rest and
Complacency in. Without any such Experience we may do or use any thing, but
cannot do it with delight. And it arises (1.) From the approach that is made
unto God therein. It is in its own Nature an Access unto God on a Throne of
Grace. Ephesians. 2.18. Heb. 10.19, 20. And when this Access is Animated by the
Actings of Grace, the Soul has a Spiritual Experience of a nearness in that
Approach. Now God is the Fountain and Center of all Spiritual Refreshment, Rest
and Complacency: And in such an Access unto him, there is a refreshing Taste of
them Communicated unto the Soul. Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9. How excellent is thy Loving
kindness, O God! therefore the children of men put their Trust under the shadow
of thy Wings. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of thy house:
and thou shall make them Drink of the River of thy pleasures. For with thee is
the fountain of Life: in thy Light we shall see Light. God is proposed in the
Excellency of his Loving Kindness, which is comprehensive of his Goodness,
Grace and Mercy. And so is he also as the Spring of Life and Light, all
Spiritual Powers and Joys. Those that believe, are described by their Trust
under the shadow of his Wings. In his Worship, the Fatness of his House, they
make their Approaches unto him. And the Fruit hereof is, that he makes them to
Drink of the River of his Pleasures, the satisfying, refreshing Streams of his
Grace and Goodness; they approach unto him as unto the Fountain of Life, so as
to Drink of that Fountain, in renewed Communications of Life and Grace; and in
the Light of God, the Light of his Countenance, to see Light, in satisfying
Joy. In these things does consist, and from them does arise that Spiritual
Complacency which the Souls of Believers do find in their Duties. (2.) From the
due Exercise of Faith, Love and Delight, the Graces wherein the Life of the new
Creature does principally consist. There is a suitableness unto our Natural
Constitution, and a secret Complacency of our Natures in the proper Actings of
Life Natural, for its own Preservation and Increase. There is so in our
Spiritual Constitution, in the proper Actings of the Powers of our Spiritual
Life unto its Preservation and Increase. These Graces in their due Exercise, do
Compose and Refresh the mind, as those which are Perfective of its State, which
quell and cast out whatever troubles it. Thence a blessed Satisfaction and
Complacency befalls the Soul. Herein he that believes has the witness in
himself. Besides, Faith and Love are never really Acted on Christ, but they
prepare and make meet the Soul to receive Communications of Love and Grace from
him; which it never fails of, although it be not always sensible thereof.
(3.) From the Testimony of Conscience, bearing witness unto our sincerity, both
in Aims, Ends and Performances of the Duty. Hence a gracious Repose of Mind and
great Satisfactoriness does ensue.

If we have no Experience of these things, it is evident that we walk at Random
in the best of our Duties; For they are among the principal things that we do
or ought to Pray for. And if we have not Experience of the Effects of our
Prayers in our Hearts, we neither have advantage by them, nor give Glory unto
God in them.

But yet here, as in most other Spiritual things, one of the worst of Vices is
ready to impose it self in the room and place of the best of our Graces. And
this is, Self-pleasing in the Performance of the Duty. This instead of a Grace
steeped in Humility, as all true Grace is, is a vile effect of Spiritual Pride,
or the offering of a Sacrifice unto our own Net and Drag. It is a glorying in
the Flesh; for whatever of Self any does glory in, it is but Flesh. When men
have had enlargements in their Expressions, and especially when they apprehend
that others are satisfied or affected therewith, they are apt to have a secret
Self-pleasing in what they have done, which before they are aware turns into
Pride and a noxious Elation of mind. The same may befall men in their most
Secret Duties, performed outwardly by the Aid of Spiritual Gifts. But this is
most remote from and contrary unto that Spiritual Complacency in Duty which we
speak of, which yet it will pretend unto, until it be diligently Examined. The
Language of this Spiritual Complacency is, I will go in the strength of the
Lord God, I will make mention of thy Righteousness, of thine only, Psalm. 71.16.
That of Spiritual Pride is; God I thank thee that I have done thus and thus; as
it was expressed by the Pharisee. That is in God alone, this is in Self. That
draws forth the Savor of all Graces: this immediately covers and buries them
all, if there be any in the S^ul. That fills the Soul eminently with Humility
and Self-abasement; this with a lifting up of the mind, and Proud Self-conceit.
That casts out all Remembrance of what we have done our selves, retaining only
a sense of what we have received from God, of the impressions of his Love and
Grace. This blots out all Remembrance of what we have freely received from God,
and retains only what we have done our selves. Wherever it is, there is no due
sense either of the Greatness or Goodness of God.

Some it may be will say, that if it be so, they for their parts are cut off.
They have no experience of any such Spiritual rest and complacency in God in or
after their Prayers. At the best they begin them with tears and end them in
sorrow; and sometimes they know not what is become of them, but fear that God
is not glorified by them, nor their own souls bettered.

I answer, (1.) There is great Spiritual Refreshment in that Godly sorrow which
is at work in our Prayers. Where the Holy Ghost is a Spirit of Grace and
Supplication he causes Mourning, and in that Mourning there is Joy. (2.) The
secret Encouragement which we receive by praying, to adhere unto God constantly
in Prayer, arises from some experience of this Holy Complacency, though we
have not a sensible evidence of it. (3.) Perhaps some of them who make this
complaint, if they would awaken and consider, will find that their souls, at
least sometimes, have been thus refreshed, and brought unto an holy Rest in
God. (4.) Then shall you know the Lord, if you follow on to know him. Abide in
seeking after this Complacency and satisfaction in God, and you shall attain it.

3. It is a sure Evidence that our Thoughts of Spiritual things in our
Supplications are from an internal Spring of Grace, and are not merely
occasioned by the Duty it self, when we find the daily fruit and advantage of
them; especially in the preservation of our Souls in an holy, humble watchful
frame.

Innumerable are the Advantages, Benefits and Effects of Prayer; which are
commonly spoken unto. Growth in Grace and Consolation is the substance of them.
Where there is continuance in Prayer, there will be Spiritual Growth in some
proportion. For men to be Earnest in Prayer and Thriftless in Grace, is a
certain Indication of prevalent corruptions, and want of being Spiritually
Minded in Prayer it self. If a man eats his daily food, let him eat never so
much, or so often, if he be not nourished by it, his Body is under the Power of
prevalent distempers. And so is his Spiritual Constitution, who thriveth not in
the use of the food of the New Creature. But that which I fix upon with respect
unto the present enquiry, is the Frame that it preserves the soul in. It will
keep it humble and upon a diligent watch as unto it is dispositions and actings.
He who prays as he ought, will endeavor to live as he prays. This none can do
who does not with diligence keep his heart unto the things he has prayed
about. To pray earnestly and live carelessly, is to proclaim that a man is not
Spiritually minded in his prayer. Hereby then we shall know what is the Spring
of those spiritual Thoughts, which our minds are exercised withal in our
supplications. If they are influenced unto a constant daily watch for the
preservation of that frame of Spirit, those dispositions and Inclinations unto
spiritual things which we pray for, they are from an internal Spring of Grace.
If there be generally an unsuitableness in our minds unto what we seem to
contend for in our Prayers, the Gift may be in exercise, but the Grace is
wanting. If a man be every day on the Exchange, and there talks diligently
and earnestly about Merchandise and the Affairs of Trade, but when he comes
home thinks no more of them, because indeed he has nothing to do, no interest
in them, he may be a very poor man notwithstanding his pretenses. And he may be
spiritually very poor who is on occasions fervent in prayer, if when he retires
unto himself, he is not careful and diligent about the matter of it.

4. When Spiritual Affections and due preparation of heart unto the Duty do
excite and animate the Gift of Prayer, and not the Gift make impressions on the
Affections, then are we Spiritually Minded therein. Gifts are Servants not
Rulers in the Mind; are bestowed on us to be serviceable unto Grace, not to
lead it, but to follow it, and to be ready with their Assistance on its
exercise. For the most part where they lead all, they are all alone. This is
the natural order of these things. Grace habitually inclines and disposes the
heart unto this Duty. Providence and Rule gives the occasions for its
exercise; Sense of Duty calls for preparation. Grace coming into actual
exercise, Gifts come in with their Assistance. If they lead all, all is out of
order. It may be otherwise sometimes. A Person indisposed and lifeless,
engaging into Prayer in a way of Obedience, upon conviction of Duty, may in and
by the Gift have his Affections excited, and Graces engaged unto its proper
Work. It may be so, I say; but let men take heed how they trust unto this Order
and Method. For where it is so, there may be little or nothing of the Exercise
of true Grace in all their fervor and Commotion of Affections. But when the
genuine Actings of Faith, Love, holy Reverence and gracious Desires, do stir up
the Gift unto its Exercise, calling in its assistance unto the expression of
themselves; then are the Heart and Mind in their proper Order.

5. It is so when other Duties of Religion are equally regarded and attended
unto with Prayer it self. He, all whose Religion lies in Prayer and Hearing,
has none at all. God has an equal respect unto all other Duties, and so must
we have also. So is it expressed as unto the Instance of Alms; Acts 10.31. And
James places all Religion herein, because there is none without it; Jam. 1.27.
I shall not value his Prayers at all, be he never so earnest and frequent in
them, who gives not Alms according to his Ability. And this in an especial
manner is required of us who are Ministers; that we be not like an hand set up
in cross Ways, directing others which way to go, but staying behind it self.

This digression about the Rise and Spring of Spiritual Thoughts in Prayer, I
judged not unnecessary, in such a time and season wherein we ought to be very
jealous, lest Gifts impose themselves in the room of Grace, and be careful that
they are employed only unto their proper End, which is to be serviceable unto
Grace in its Exercise, and not otherwise.

3. There is another Occasion of Thoughts of spiritual things, when they do not
spring from a living Principle within, and so are no evidence of being
spiritually minded. And this is the Discourse of others. They that fear the
Lord will be speaking one to another, of the things wherein, his Glory is
concerned, Mal. 3.16. To declare the Righteousness, the Glory of God, is the
Delight of his Saints. Psalm. 145. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Great is the Lord, and
greatly to be Praised, and his Greatness is unsearchable. One Generation shall
praise thy Works to another, and shall declare thy mighty Works. I will speak
of the Glorious honor of thy Majesty, and of thy wondrous Works. And men shall
speak of the might of thy terrible Acts; and I will declare thy Greatness. They
shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great Goodness, and shall sing of thy
Righteousness. The Lord is gracious and full of Compassion, slow to Anger and
of great Mercy. And accordingly there are some who are ready on all occasions
to be speaking or making mention of things Divine, Spiritual and Holy, and it
is to be wished that there were more of them. All the flagitious sins that the
World is filled withal, are not a greater evidence of the Degeneracy of
Christian Religion, than this is, that it is grown unusual, yea a shame or
scorn for men to speak together of the things of God. It was not so when
Religion was in its primitive Power and Glory; nor is it so with them who
really fear God, and are sensible of their Duty. Some I say there are who
embrace all occasions of Spiritual Communication. Those with whom they do
converse, if they are not Profligate, if they have any spiritual Light, cannot
but so far comply with what they say, as to think of the things spoken which
are spiritual. Often times the Track and Course of men's thoughts, lie so out of
the way, are so contrary unto such things, that they seem strange unto them,
they give them no Entertainment. You do but cross their way with such
Discourses, whereon they stand still a little and so pass on. Even the
Countenances of some men will change hereon, and they betake themselves unto an
unsatisfied silence, until they can divert unto other things. Some will make
such replies of empty words, as shall evidence their Hearts to be far enough
estranged from the things proposed unto them. But with others, such occasional
Discourses will make such Impressions on their minds, as to stir up present
thoughts of Spiritual things. But though frequent occasions hereof may be
renewed, yet will such Thoughts give no evidence that any man is spiritually
minded. For they are not genuine, from an internal Spring of Grace.

From these causes it is, that the Thoughts of Spiritual Things are with many,
as Guests that come into an Inn, and not like Children that dwell in the House.
They enter occasionally, and then there is a great stir about them, to provide
meet entertainment for them. Within a while they are disposed of, and so depart
unto their own occasions, being neither looked nor enquired after any more.
Things of another nature are attended unto; New Occasions bring in new Guests
for a season. Children are owned in the House, are missed if they are out of
the way, and have their daily Provision constantly made for them. So is it with
these occasional Thoughts about Spiritual things. By one means or other they
enter into the mind, and there are entertained for a season. On a sudden they
depart, and men hear of them no more. But those that are Natural and Genuine,
arising from a living spring of Grace in the Heart, disposing the mind unto
them, are as the Children of the House; They are expected in their places and
at their seasons. If they are missing, they are enquired after. The Heart calls
it self unto an Account whence it is that it has been so long without them,
and calls them over into its wonted converse with them.

CHAP. IV.
Other Evidences of Thoughts about Spiritual things, arising from an Internal
Principle of Grace, whereby they are an Evidence of our being Spiritually
Minded. The abounding of these Thoughts, how far, and wherein such an Evidence.

II. THe second Evidence that our Thoughts of Spiritual things do proceed from
an Internal Fountain of sanctified Light and Affections, or that they are Acts
or Fruits of our being Spiritually minded, is, that they abound in us, that our
minds are filled with them. We may say of them as the Apostle does of other
Graces; If these things are in you and abound, you shall not be barren. It is
well indeed, when our minds are like the Land of Egypt in the years of Plenty,
when it brought forth by handfulls; when they flow from the Well of Living
Water in us with a full Stream and Current. But there is a measure of
abounding, which is necessary to evidence our being Spiritually minded in them.

There is a double Effect ascribed here unto this Frame of Spirit; First Life,
and then Peace. The Nature and Being of this Grace depends on the former
Consideration of it, namely, its procedure from an Internal Principle of Grace,
the Effect and Consequence whereof is Life. But that it is Peace also, depends
on this Degree and measure of the Actings of this part of it in our Spiritual
Thoughts. And this we must consider.

It is the Character of all men in the state of depraved Nature and Apostasy
from God, that every Imagination of the Thoughts of their Hearts, is only evil
continually, Genesis 6.5. All Persons in that condition are not Swearers,
Blasphemers, Drunkards, Adulterers, Idolaters, or the like. These are the vices
of particular Persons, the effects of particular Constitutions and Temptations.
But thus it is with them, all and every one of them, all the Imaginations of
the Thoughts of their Hearts are evil, and that continually. Some as unto the
Matter of them, some as unto their End, all as unto their Principle; for out of
the evil Treasure of the Heart can proceed nothing but what is evil. That
infinite multitude of open sins which is in the World, does give a clear
Prospect or Representation of the Nature and Effects of our Apostasy from God.
But he that can consider the numberless number of Thoughts which pass through
the minds of every individual Person every day, all evil, and that continually,
he will have a farther Comprehension of it.

We can therefore have no greater Evidence of a change in us from this State
and Condition, than a change wrought in the course of our Thoughts. A
Relinquishment of this or that particular sin, is not an Evidence of a
Translation from this state. For as was said, such particular sins proceed from
particular Lusts and Temptations, and are not the immediate universal
Consequence of that Depravation of Nature which is equal in all. Such alone is
the vanity and wickedness of the Thoughts and Imaginations of the Heart. A
change herein is a blessed Evidence of a change of State. He who is cured of a
Dropsy, is not immediately healthy, because he may have the prevailing seeds
and matter of other Diseases in him, and the next day die of a Lethargy: But he
who from a state of Sickness, is restored in the Temperature of the Mass of
Blood and the Animal Spirits, and all the Principles of Life and Health, unto a
good Crasis and Temperature, his state of Body is changed. The Cure of a
particular sin may leave behind it the seeds of Eternal Death, which they may
quickly effect. But he who has obtained a change in this Character which
belongs essentially unto the state of depraved Nature, is spiritually
recovered. And the more the stream of our Thoughts is turned, the more our
minds are filled with those of a contrary Nature, the greater and more firm is
our Evidence of a Translation out of that depraved state and condition.

There is nothing so unaccountable as the Multiplicity of Thoughts of the minds
of men. They fall from them like the Leaves of Trees, when they are shaken with
the Wind in Autumn. To have all these Thoughts, all the several Figments of the
Heart, all the conceptions that are framed and agitated in the mind, to be evil
and that continually, what an Hell of Horror and Confusion must it needs be? A
deliverance from this Loathsome hateful state, is more to be valued than the
whole World. Without it neither Life, nor Peace, nor Immortality, or Glory, can
ever be attained.

The design of Conviction is to put a stop unto these Thoughts, to take off
from their Number, and thereby to lessen their Guilt. It deserves not the name
of Conviction of Sin, which respects only outward Actions, and regards not the
inward Actings of the mind. And this alone will for a season make a great
change in the Thoughts, especially it will do so when assisted by Superstition
directing them unto other Objects. These two in Conjunction are the rise of all
that Devotional Religion which is in the Papacy. Conviction labors to put some
stop and bounds unto thoughts absolutely evil and corrupt; and Superstition
suggests other Objects for them, which they readily embrace; but it is a vain
Attempt. The Minds and Hearts of men are continually Minting and Coining new
Thoughts and Imaginations. The cogitative Faculty is always at work. As the
streams of a mighty River running into the Ocean, so are the Thoughts of a
natural man, and through self they run into Hell. It is a fond thing to set a
Damme before such a River, to curb its streams. For a little space there may be
a stop made, but it will quickly break down all Obstacles, or overflow all its
bounds. There is no way to divert its Course, but only by providing other
Channels for its Waters, and turning them thereinto. The mighty Stream of the
evil Thoughts of men will admit of no Bounds or Dammes to put a stop unto them.
There are but two ways of Relief from them; the one respecting their moral
Evil, the other their natural Abundance. The first by throwing Salt into the
Spring, as Elisha cured the Waters of Jericho; that is, to get the Heart and
Mind seasoned with Grace; for the Tree must be made good before the Fruit will
be so. The other is, to turn their Streams into new Channels, putting new Aims
and Ends upon them, fixing them on new Objects; so shall we abound in Spiritual
Thoughts; for abound in Thoughts we shall whether we will or no.

To this Purpose is the Advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 18, 19. And be not
drunk with Wine wherein is Excess, but he filled with the Spirit, speaking to
your selves in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual Songs. When men are drunk with
Wine unto an Excess, they make it quickly evident, what Vain, Foolish,
Ridiculous Imaginations it fills their minds withal. In opposition hereunto,
the Apostle advises Believers to be filled with the Spirit, to labor for such
a Participation of him as may fill their Minds and Hearts, as others fill
themselves with Wine. To what End, unto what Purpose should they desire such a
participation of him, to be so filled with him? It is unto this end, namely,
that he by his Grace may fill them with Holy Spiritual Thoughts, as on the
contrary men Drunk unto an Excess, as filled with those that are Foolish, Vain
and Wicked. So the words of ver. 19. do declare, for he advises us to express
our abounding Thoughts, in such Duties as will give an especial vent unto them.

Wherefore, when we are Spiritually minded, we shall abound in Spiritual
thoughts, or Thoughts of Spiritual Things. That we have such Thoughts will not
sufficiently Evidence that we are so, unless we abound in them. And this leads
us unto the principal Enquiry on this Head; namely, what measure we ought to
assign hereof, how we may know when we abound in Spiritual Thoughts, so as that
they may be an Evidence of our being Spiritually minded.

I answer in general, among other Scriptures read over Psalm. 119. with
understanding. Consider therein what David expresses of himself, as unto his
constant Delight in, and continual Thoughts of the Law of God, which was the
only means of Divine Revelation at that season. Try your selves by that
Pattern; Examine your selves whether you can truly speak the same words with
him; at least if not in the same Degree of Zeal, yet with the same sincerity of
Grace. You will say, that was David. It is not for us, it is not our Duty to be
like unto him, at least not to be equal with him. But as far as I know, we must
be like him, if ever we intend to come to the place where he is. It will ruin
our Souls, if when we read in the Scripture, how the Saints of God express
their Experience in Faith, Love, Delight in God and constant Meditations on
him, we grant that it was so with them, that they were Good and Holy men, but
it is not necessary that it should be so with us. These things are not written
in the Scripture to show what they were, but what we ought to be. All things
concerning them were written for Admonition; 1 Cor. 10.11. And if we have not
the same Delight in God as they had, the same Spiritual mindedness in Thoughts
and Meditations of Heavenly things, we can have no Evidence that we please God
as they did, or shall go to that place whither they are gone. Profession of the
Life of God passes with many at a very low and easy Rate. Their Thoughts are
for the most part vain and earthly, their Communication unsavory, and
sometimes corrupt, their lives at best uneven and uncertain, as unto the Rule
of Obedience; yet all is well, all is Life and Peace. The Holy men of old, who
obtained this Testimany, that they Pleased God, did not so walk before him.
They meditated continually in the Law; thought of God in the night seasons;
spoke of his Ways, his Works, his Praise; their whole Delight was in him, and
in all things they followed hard after him. It is the Example of David in
particular that I have proposed. And it is a Promise of the Grace to be
administered by the Gospel, that he who is feeble shall be as David, Zech. 12.8.
And if we are not so in his being Spiritually minded, it is to be feared we are
not Partakers of the Promise. But that we may the better judge of our selves
therein, I shall add some few Rules unto this Direction by Example.

1. Consider, what proportion your Thoughts of Spiritual Things bears with
those about other things. Our principal Interest and Concern, as we profess,
lies in things Spiritual, Heavenly and Eternal. Is it not then a foolish thing
to suppose that our Thoughts about these things, should not hold some
proportion with those about other things, nay that they should not exceed them?
No man is so vain in earthly things, as to pretend that his Principal concern
lies in that whereof he thinks very seldom in comparison of other things. It
is not so with men in reference unto their Families, their Trades, their
occasions of Life. It is a truth not only consecrated by the Testimony of him
who is Truth, but evident also in the Light of Reason, That where our Treasure
is there will our Hearts be also. And the Affections of our Hearts do Act
themselves by the Thoughts of our minds. Wherefore, if our principal Treasure
be as we profess, in things Spiritual and Heavenly, and woe unto us if it be not
so, on them will our Affections and consequently our Desires and Thoughts be
principally fixed.

That we may the better Examine our selves by this Rule, we must consider of
what sorts men's other Thoughts are; and as unto our present purpose, they may
be reduced unto these heads.

1. There are such as are exercised about their Callings and lawful occasions.
These are numberless and endless; especially among a sort of men who rise early
and go to bed late, and eat the Bread of carefulness, or are particularly
industrious and diligent in their ways. These thoughts men approve themselves
in, and judge them their Duty, as they are in their proper place and measure.
But no Heart can conceive the Multitude of these Thoughts, which partly in
Contrivances, partly in Converse, are engaged and spent about these things. And
the more men are Immersed in them, the more do themselves and others esteem
them diligent and Praiseworthy. And there are some who have neither necessity
nor occasion to be engaged much in the Duties of any especial Calling, who yet
by their Words and Actions declare themselves, to be confined almost in their
thoughts unto themselves, their Relations, their Children, and their self
concerns, which though most of them are very Impertinent, yet they justify
themselves in them. All sorts may do well to Examine what proportion their
Thoughts of Spiritual things do bear unto those of other things. I fear with
most it will be found to be very small, with many next to none at all. What
evidence then can they have that they are Spiritually minded, that their
principal Interest lies in things above? It may be it will be asked, whether it
be necessary that men should think as much and as often about things Spiritual
and Heavenly, as they do about the lawful Affairs of their Callings. I say
more, and more often, if we are what we profess our selves to be. Generally it
is the best sort of men, as to the things of God and Man, who are busied in
their Callings, some of one sort, some of another. But even among the best of
these, many will continually spend the strength of their Minds and vigor of
their Spirits, about their Affairs all the day long; and, so they can pray in
the Morning and Evening, with some Thoughts sometimes of Spiritual things
occasionally administered, do suppose they acquit themselves very well. As if a
man should pretend that his great Design is, to prepare himself for a Voyage
unto a far Country, where is his Patrimony and his Inheritance: But all his
Thoughts and Contrivances are about some few Trifles, which if indeed he intend
his Voyage he must leave behind him; and of his main Design he scarce thinks
at all. We all profess that we are bound for Heaven, Immortality, and Glory:
but is it any Evidence we really design it, if all our Thoughts are consumed
about the Trifles of this World, which we must leave behind us, and have only
occasional Thoughts of things above? I shall elsewhere show, if God will, How
men may be Spiritually minded in their earthly Affairs. If some Relief may not
be thence obtained, I cannot tell what to say or answer for them, whose
Thoughts of Spiritual things do not hold Proportion with, yea exceed them which
they lay out about their Callings.

This whole Rule is grounded on that of our Savior, Math. 6.31, 32, 33, 34.
Take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or
wherewith we shall be clothed? But seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Take therefore no
thought for to morrow. When we have done all we can, when we have made the best
of them we are able, all earthly things, as unto our Interest in them, amount
to no more, but what we eat, what we drink, and wherewith we are clothed.
About these things our Savior forbids us to take any Thought, not absolutely,
but with a double Limitation. As first, that we take no such Thought about
them, as should carry along with it a disquietment of mind, through a distrust
of the Fatherly Care and Providence of God. This is the design of the Context.
Secondly, No Thought that for Constancy and Engagement of Spirit, should be
like unto those which we ought to have about Spiritual Things. Seek first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness. Let that be the chief and principal thing
in your Thoughts and Consciences. We may therefore conclude, that at least they
must hold an exceeding Proportion with them.

Let a man industriously engaged in the way of his Calling, try himself by this
Rule every Evening. Let him consider what have been his Thoughts about his
earthly Occasions, and what about Spiritual things; and thereon ask of himself
whether he be Spiritually minded or no. Be not deceived; as a man thinks, so
is he. And if we account it a strange thing, that our Thoughts should be more
exercised about Spiritual things, than about the Affairs of our Callings, we
must not think it strange if when we come to the trial, we cannot find that we
have either Life or Peace.

Moreover it is known, how often when we are engaged in Spiritual Duties, other
Thoughts will interpose, and impose themselves on our minds. Those which are
about men's secular Concernments will do so. The World will frequently make an
inroad on the ways to Heaven, to disturb the Passengers and wayfaring men.
There is nothing more frequently complained of, by such as are awake unto their
Duty, and sensible of their weakness. Call to mind therefore, how often on the
other hand Spiritual Thoughts do interpose, and as it were impose themselves on
your minds, whilst you are engaged in your earthly Affairs. Sometimes, no
doubt, but with all that are true Believers it is so. Or ever I was aware,
says the Spouse, my Soul made me as the Chariots of Amminadab, Cant. 6.12.
Grace in her own Soul surprised her into a ready willing Frame unto Spiritual
Communion with Christ, when she was intent on other Occasions. But if these
thoughts of Heavenly things so arising in us, bear no proportion with the other
sort, it is an Evidence what Frame and Principle is predominant in us.

2. There are a multitude of Thoughts in the minds of men, which are vain,
useless, and altogether unprofitable. These ordinarily through a dangerous
mistake are looked on as not sinful, because as it is supposed, the matter of
them is not so. And therefore men rather shake them off for their Folly, than
their Guilt. But they arise from a corrupt Fountain, and woefully pollute both
the Mind and Conscience. Wherever there are vain Thoughts, there is Sin. Jerem.
4.14. Such are those numberless Imaginations, whereby men fancy themselves to
be what they are not, to do what they do not, to enjoy what they enjoy not, to
dispose of themselves and others, at their pleasure. That our Nature is liable
unto such a pernicious folly, which some of tenacious Fancies have turned into
Madness, we are beholding alone to our cursed Apostasy from God, and the
vanity that possessed our minds thereon. Hence the Prince of Tyrus thought he
was a God, and sat in the Seat of God, Ezekiel. 28.2. So it has been with
others; And in those, in whom such Imaginations are kept unto some better order
and bounds, yet being traced unto their Original, they will be found to Spring
some of them immediately from Pride, some from sensual Lusts, some from the
Love of the World, all from self and the old Ambition to be as God, to dispose
of all things as we think meet. I know no greater Misery or Punishment in this
World, than the debasing of our Nature to such vain Imaginations; and a perfect
freedom from them is a part of the Blessedness of Heaven. It is not my present
work to show how sinful they are, let them be esteemed only fruitless,
foolish, vain and ludicrous. But let men examine themselves, what number of
these vain useless Thoughts night and day, do roave up and down in their minds.
If now it be apprehended too severe, that men's Thoughts of Spiritual things
should exceed them that are employed about their Lawful Callings, let them
consider what proportion they bear unto those which are altogether vain and
useless: Do not many give more time unto them, than they do unto holy
Meditations, without an endeavor to mortify the one, or to stir up and
enliven the other? Are they not more wonted to their seasons, than holy
Thoughts are? And shall we suppose that those with whom it is so, are
Spiritually minded?

3. There are Thoughts that are formally evil; they are so in their own Nature,
being corrupt contrivances to fulfill the desires of the flesh in the lusts
thereof. These also will attempt the minds of Believers. But they are always
looked on as professed Enemies to the Soul, and are watched against. I shall
not therefore make any comparison between them and Spiritual Thoughts, for they
abound only in them that are carnally minded.

2. The second Rule to this purpose is, That we would consider, whether
Thoughts of Spiritual things do constantly take possession of their proper
seasons. There are some times and seasons in the course of men's Lives, wherein
they retire themselves unto their own Thoughts. The most busied men in the
World have some times of Thinking unto themselves. And those who design no such
thing, as being afraid of coming to be wiser or better than they are, do yet
spend time therein whether they will or no. But they who are wise will be at
home as much as they can, and have as many seasons for such their Retirements
as is possible for them to attain. If that man be foolish who busieth himself
so much abroad in the concerns of others, that he has no time to consider the
state of his own House and Family; much more is he so, who spends all his
Thoughts about other things, and never makes use of them in an Enquiry, how it
is with himself and his own Soul. However men can hardly avoid, but that they
must have some seasons, partly stated, partly occasional, wherein they
entertain themselves with their own Thoughts: The Evening and the Morning, the
times of waking on the Bed, those of the necessary cessation of all ordinary
Affairs, of walking, journeying, and the like, are such seasons.

If we are Spiritually minded, if Thoughts of Spiritual things do abound in us,
they will ordinarily and that with Constancy possess these seasons, look upon
them as those which are their due, which belong unto them. For they are
expressly assigned unto them in the way of Rule, expressed in Examples and
Commands. See Psalm. 16.7, 8. Psalm. 92.2. Deuteronomy. 6.7. If they are usually given
up unto other ends and occasions, are possessed with Thoughts of another
Nature, it is an open Evidence that Spiritual Thoughts have but little Interest
in our minds, little prevalency in the conduct of our Souls. It is our Duty to
afford unto them stated times taken away from other Affairs that call for them.
But if instead thereof we rob them of what is as it were their own, which no
other things or business can lay any just claim unto, how dwells the Love of
Spiritual things in us? Most Professors are convinced that it is their Duty to
pray Morning and Evening, and it is to be wished that they were all found in
the Practice of it. But if ordinarily they judge themselves, in the performance
of that Duty, to be discharged from any further Exercise of Spiritual Thoughts,
applying them unto things worldy, useless, or vain, they can make no pretense
to be Spiritually minded.

And it must be observed, which will be found to be true, that if the seasons
which are as it were due unto such Meditations be taken from them, they will be
the worst employed of all the Minutes of our lives. Vain and Foolish Thoughts,
corrupt Imaginations, will make a common haunt unto the minds of men in them,
and habituate themselves unto an Expectation of Entertainment; whence they will
grow Importunate for Admission. Hence, with many, those precious moments of
time which might greatly influence their Souls unto Life and Peace if they were
indeed Spiritually minded, make the greatest provision for their trouble,
sorrow and confusion. For the vain and evil Thoughts which some persons do
accustom themselves unto in such seasons, are or ought to be a Burden upon
their Consciences more than they can bear. That which Providence tenders unto
their good is turned into a snare; and God does righteously leave them unto the
fruits of their own folly, who so despise his gracious Provision for their
good. If we cannot afford unto God our spare time, it is evident that indeed we
can afford nothing at all. Micah 2.1. They devise iniquity upon their beds. The
seasons proper for holy Contemplation, they make use of to fill their minds
with wicked Imaginations, and when the Morning is light they practice it;
walking all day on all occasions, suitably unto their Devices and Imaginations
of the Night. Many will have cause to complain unto Eternity, of those leisure
times which might have been improved for their advantage unto Eternal
Blessedness.

If we intend therefore to maintain a Title unto this Grace of being
Spiritually minded, if we would have any Evidence of it in our selves, without
which we can have none of Life or Peace, and what we pretend thereof is but an
effect of security, we must endeavor to preserve the claim and right of
Spiritual Thoughts unto such seasons, and actually put them in possession of
them.

3. Consider how we are affected with our Disappointments about these seasons.
Have we by Negligence, by Temptations, have we by occasional Diversions or
Affairs of Life been taken off from Thoughts of God, of Christ, of Heavenly
things, when we ought to have been engaged in them; how are we affected with a
review hereof? A carnal mind is well enough satisfied with the omission of any
Duty, so it have pretense of a necessary Occasion. If it has lost a temporal
Advantage, through Attendance unto a Spiritual Duty, it will deeply Reflect on
it self, and it may be like the Duty the worse afterward. But a gracious Soul,
one that is truly Spiritually-minded, will mourn under a review of such
Omissions, and by every one of them is stirred up unto more watchfulness for
the future. Alas, will it say, how little have I been with Christ this day? How
much time has passed me without a thought of him? How foolish was I, to be
wanting to such or such an Opportunity? I am in Arrears unto my self, and have
no rest until I be satisfied.

I say, if indeed we are Spiritually minded, we will duly and carefully call
over the consideration of those times and seasons, wherein we ought to have
Exercised our selves in Spiritual Thoughts; and if we have lost them, or any of
them, mourn over our own negligence. But if we can omit and lose such Seasons
or Opportunities from time to time, without regret or self-reflections, it is
to be feared that we wax worse and worse. Way will be made hereby for further
Omissions, until we grow wholly cold about them.

And indeed that woeful loss of time that is found amongst many Professors, is
greatly to be bewailed. Some lose it on themselves, by a continual track of
fruitless Impertinent Thoughts about their own concerns. Some in vain converse
with ohers, wherein for the most part they edify one another unto vanity. How
much of this time might, nay ought to be redeemed for holy Meditations? The
Good Lord make all Professors sensible of their loss of former seasons, that
they may be the more watchful for the future, in this great concernment of
their Souls. Little do some think what Light what Assurance, what Joy, what
readiness for the Cross or for Heaven, they might have attained, had they laid
hold on all just seasons of exercising their Thoughts about Spiritual things
which they have enjoyed, who now are at a loss in all, and surprised with every
fear or difficulty that does befall them.

This is the first thing that belongs unto our being Spiritually minded; for
although it does not absolutely or essentially consist therein, yet is it
inseparable from it, and the most undeceiving Indication of it. And thus of
abounding and abiding in Thoughts about Spiritual things, such as arise and
spring naturally from a living Principle, a Spiritual Frame and Disposition of
Heart within.

CHAP. V.
The Objects of Spiritual Thoughts, or what they are conversant about,
evidencing them in whom they are to be Spiritually minded. Rules directing unto
steadiness in the Contemplation of Heavenly things. Motives to fix our Thoughts
with Steadiness in them.

BEfore I proceed unto the next general Head, and which is the Principal thing,
the foundation of the Grace and Duty enquired after, some things must be spoken
to render what has been already insisted on, yet more particularly useful. And
this is, to enquire what are or what ought to be the special Objects of those
Thoughts, which under the Qualifications laid down, are the Evidences of our
being Spiritually minded. And it may be, we may be useful unto many herein, by
helping of them to fix their minds, which are apt to rove into all uncertainty.
For this is befallen us through the disorder and weakness of the faculties of
our Souls, that sometimes what the mind guides, leads and directs unto in
things Spiritual and Heavenly, our wills and Affections through their
Depravation and Corruption will not comply withal, and so the good designings
of the mind are lost. Sometimes what the Will and Affections are inclined unto
and ready for, the mind through its weakness and inconstancy, cannot lead them
to the accomplishment of; so to will is present with us, but how to perform
that will we know not. So, many are barren in this Duty, because they know not
what to fix upon, nor how to Exercise their Thoughts when they have chosen a
subject for their Meditations. Hence they spend their time in fruitless Desires
that they could use their Thoughts unto more purpose, rather than make any
Progress in the Duty it self. They tire themselves not because they are not
willing to go, but because they cannot find their way. Wherefore both these
things shall be spoken unto; both what are the proper Objects of our Spiritual
Thoughts, and how we may be steady in our Contemplations of them. And I shall
unto this purpose, first give some general Rules, and then some particular
Instances in way of Direction.

1. Observe the especial Calls of Providence and apply your minds unto Thoughts
of the Duties required in them and by them. There is a voice in all signal
Dispensations of Providence. The voice of the Lord cries unto the City, the
men of wisdom shall see thy Name; hear ye the rod and who has appointed it.
Mic. 6.9. There is a Call, a Cry in every Rod of God, in every chastising
Providence; and therein makes a Declaration of his Name, his Holiness, his
Power, his Greatness. This every wise substantial man will labor to discern
and so comply with the call. God is greatly provoked when it is otherwise.
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be
ashamed. Isa. 26.11. If therefore we would apply our selves unto our present
Duty, we are wisely to consider what is the voice of God, in his present
providential Dispensations in the World. Hearken not unto any who would give
another Interpretation of them, but that they are plain Declarations of his
Displeasure and Indignation against the sins of men. Is not his wrath in them
revealed from Heaven against the ungodliness of men, especially such as detain
the Truth in unrighteousness, or false Hypocritical Professors of the Gospel?
Does he not also signally declare the uncertainty and instability of Earthly
Enjoyments, from Life it self to a Shoo-latchet? As also, how vain and foolish
it is to adhere inordinately unto them. The fingers that appeared writing on
the Wall the Doom of Belshazzar, did it in Characters that none read, and words
that none could understand but Daniel. But the present Call of God in these
things is made plain upon Tables, that he may run who reads it. If the
Heavens gather blackness with Clouds, and it thunder over us, if any that are
on their Journey will not believe that there is a Storm a coming, they must
bear the severity of it.

Suppose then this to be the Voice of Providence, suppose there be in it these
Indications of the mind and will of God, what are the Duties that we are called
unto thereby? They may be referred unto two Heads.

1. A diligent search into our selves, and an holy Watch over our selves, with
respect unto those ways and sins which the displeasure of God is declared
against. That present Providence are Indications of Gods Anger and
Displeasure, we take for granted. But when this is done, the most are apt to
cast the Causes of them on others and to excuse themselves; so long as they see
others more wicked and prosligate than themselves, openly guilty of such
Crimes, as they abhor the Thoughts of, they cast all the wrath on them, and
fear nothing but that they shall suffer with them. But alas! When the storm
came on the Ship at Sea, wherein there was but one person that feared God; upon
an Enquiry for whose sake it came, the Lot fell on him. Jon. 1.7. The cause of
the present storm may as well be the secret sins of Professors, as the open
Provocations of ungodly men. God will punish severely those which he has
known. Amos 3.2. It is therefore certainly our Duty to search diligently, that
nothing be found resting in us, against which God is declaring his Displeasure.
Take heed of negligence and security herein. When our Savior foretold his
Disciples, that one of them should betray him, he who alone was guilty, was the
last that said, Master is it I. Let no ground of hopes you have of your
Spiritual condition and acceptance with God, no Sense of your sincerity in any
of your Duties, no visible difference between you and others in the World,
impose themselves on your minds to divert them from diligence in this Duty; The
voice of the Lord cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom will see his Name.

2. A diligent endeavor to live in an holy Resignation of our Persons, our
Lives, our Families, all our Enjoyments, unto the sovereign Will and Wisdom of
God; so as that we may be in a readiness to part with all things upon his call
without repining. This also is plainly declared in the voice of present
Providence. God is making Wings for men's Riches, he is shaking their
Habitations, taking away the visible Defenses of their Lives, proclaiming the
Instability and uncertainty of all things here below: And if we are not minded
to contend with him, we have nothing left to give us rest and peace for a
moment, but an holy Resignation of all unto his Sovereign Pleasure.

Would you now know what you should fix and exercise your Thoughts upon, so as
that they may be Evidences of your being Spiritually minded? I say, be
frequently conversant in them about these things. They lie before you, they
call upon you, and will find you a just employment. Count them part of your
business, allow them some part of your time, cease not until you have the
Testimony of your Consciences, that you have in sincerity stated both these
Duties in your minds, which will never be done without many Thoughts about
them. Unless it be so with you, God will be greatly displeased at the neglect
of his coming and call, now it is so plain and articulate. Fear the woeful Dooms
recorded, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Isa. 56.12 Chap. 66.4. to this purpose.
And if any calamity, public or private, do overtake you under a neglect of
these Duties, you will be woefully surprised, and not know which way to turn for
Relief. This therefore is the time and season wherein you may have an especial
trial and experiment whether you be Spiritually minded or no. It is the wisdom
of Faith to excite and draw forth Grace into Exercise according unto present
Occasions. If this Grace be habitually resident in you, it will put it self
forth in many Thoughts about these present Duties.

But alas! for the most part, men are apt to walk contrary to God in these
things, as the Wisdom of the flesh is contrary unto him in all things. A great
Instance we have with respect unto these Duties, especially the latter of them.
For, (1.) Who almost makes a diligent search into and trial of his heart and
ways, with respect unto the procuring causes of the Displeasure and Judgments
of God? Generally when the Tokens and Evidences of them do most abound, the
World is full of outrageous provoking sins. These visibly proclaim themselves
to be the causes of the coming of the Wrath of God on the Children of
Disobedience. Hence most men are apt to cast the whole Reason of present
Judgments upon them, and to put it wholly from themselves. Hence commonly there
is never less of self Examination, than when it is called for in a peculiar
manner. But as I will not deny, but that the open daring sins of the World, are
the procuring Cause of the Wrath of God against it in temporal Judgments; so
the wisest course for us, is to refer them unto the great Judgment of the last
Day. This the Apostle directs us unto; 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Our Duty it
is to consider on what accounts Judgment begins at the House of God, and to
examine our selves with respect thereunto.

Again, the other part of our present Duty in compliance with the voice of
Providence, is an humble Resignation of our selves and all our concernments
unto the will of God, sitting loose in our Affections from all earthly temporal
Enjoyments. This we neither do, nor can do, let us profess what we will, unless
our Thoughts are greatly exercised about the Reasons of it and Motives unto it.
For this is the way whereby Faith puts forth its efficacy unto the
Mortification of Self and all earthly Enjoyments. Wherefore without this we can
make no Resignation of our selves unto the will of God. But alas! how many at
present do openly walk contrary unto God herein? The Ways, the Countenances,
the Discourses of men do give Evidence hereunto. Their Love unto present
things, their contrivances for their increase and continuance do grow and
thrive under the Calls of God to the contrary. So it was of old; They did eat,
they drank, they married and gave in marriage, until the day that Noah entered
into the Ark. Can the generality of Professors at this day give Testimony unto
the Exercise of their Thoughts upon such things as should dispose them unto
this holy Resignation? That they meditate on the Calls of God, and thence make
themselves ready to part with all at his time and pleasure? How can persons
pretend to be Spiritually minded, the current of whose Thoughts lies in direct
contrariety unto the mind of God?

Here lies the ground of their self-deceivings; they are Professors of the
Gospel in a peculiar manner, they judge themselves Believers, they hope they
shall be saved, and have many Evidences for it. But one Negative Evidence will
render an hundred that are positive useless. All these things have I done,
says the young man; yet one thing thou want, says our Savior. And the
want of that one rendered his all things of no avail unto him. Many things you
have done, many things you do, many grounds of hope abide with you, neither
your selves nor others do doubt of your Condition. But are you Spiritually
minded? If this one thing be wanting, all the rest will not avail you, you have
indeed neither Life nor Peace. And what grounds have you to judge that you are
so, if the current of your thoughts lie in direct contrariety unto the present
Calls of God? If at such a time as this is, your love to the World be such as
ever it was, and perhaps be increased; if your desires are strong to secure the
things of this Life unto you and yours; if the daily contrivance of your minds
be not how you may attain a constant Resignation of your selves and your all
unto the Will of God, which will not be done without much Thoughtfulness and
Meditations on the Reasons of it and Motives unto it, I cannot understand how
you can judge your selves to be Spiritually minded.

If any therefore shall say, that they would abound more in Spiritual Thoughts,
only they know not what to fix them upon; I propose this in the first place, as
that which will lead them unto the due performance of present Duties.

Secondly, The special Trials and Temptations of men, call for the Exercise of
their Thoughts in a peculiar manner with respect unto them. If a man has a
bodily Disease, Pain or Distemper, it will cause him to think much of it
whether he will or no; at least if he be wise he will so do; nor will he always
be complaining of their smart, but enquire into their causes and seek their
removal. Yet are there some distempers, as Lethargies, which in their own
Nature take away all sense and thoughts of themselves; and some are of such a
slow secret Progress, as Hectic Fevers, that they are not taken notice of.
But both these are mortal. And shall men be more negligent about the Spiritual
Distempers of their Souls; so as to have multiplied Temptations, the cause of
all Spiritual Diseases, and take no Thought about them? Is it not to be feared,
that where it is so, they are such as either in their own Nature have deprived
them of Spiritual sense, or by their deceitfulness are leading on insensibly
unto death Eternal? Not to have our minds exercised about these things, is to
be stupidly secure, Prove. 23.34, 35.

There is I confess some difficulty in this matter, how to exercise our
Thoughts aright about our Temptations. For the great way of the prevalency of
Temptations is by stirring up multiplied Thoughts about their Objects, or what
they do lead unto. And this is done or occasioned several ways. (1.) From the
previous power of Lust in the Affections. This will fill the mind with
Thoughts. The heart will coin Imaginations in compliance therewith. They are
the way and means whereby Lust draws away the heart from Duty and enticeth unto
sin, Jam. 1.14. The means at least whereby men come to have eyes full of
Adultery; 2 Pet. 2.14. or live in constant Contemplation of the Pleasures of
Sin. (2.) They arise and are occasioned by renewed Representations of the
Object of Sin. And this is twofold; (1.) That which is real, as Achan saw the
Wedge of Gold and coveted it, Josh. 7.21. Prove. 23.31. Against this is that
Prayer of the Psalmist, Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and the
Covenant of Job, chap. 31.1. (2.) Imaginary, when the Imagination being tainted
or infected by Lust, continually represents the pleasure of sin and the actings
of it unto the mind. Herein do men make provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the
Lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. (3.) From the Suggestions of Satan, who uses all
his Wiles and Artifices to stir up thoughts about that sin whereunto the
Temptation leads. And Temptation seldom fails of its end, when it can stir up a
multitude of unprofitable Thoughts about its Object. For when Temptations do
multiply Thoughts about Sin, proceeding from some or all of these causes, and
the mind has wonted it self to give them Entertainment, those in whom they
are, do want nothing but opportunities and Occasions taking off the power of
outward restraints for the commission of actual sin. When men have so devised
mischief, they practice it when it is in the power of their hand, Mic. 2.1. It
is no way safe to advise such Persons to have many Thoughts about their
Temptations; they will all turn to their disadvantage.

I speak unto them only, unto whom their Temptations are their Affliction and
their Burden. And such Persons also must be very careful how they suffer their
Thoughts to be exercised about the Matter of their Temptation, lest it be a
snare, and be too hard for them. Men may begin their Thoughts of any Object
with Abhorrency and Detestation, and, if it be in case of Temptation, end them
in Complacency and Approbation. The deceitfulness of sin lays hold on something
or other that Lust in the mind stays upon with Delectation, and so corrupts the
whole frame of Spirit which began the Duty. There have been Instances wherein
Persons have entered with a Resolution to punish sin, and have been ensnared by
the occasion unto the Commission of the sin they thought to punish. Wherefore,
it is seldom that the mind of any one exercised with an actual Temptation, is
able safely to conflict with it, if it entertain abiding thoughts, of the
matter of it, or of the sin whereunto it leads. For sin has mill nocendi
Arts, and is able to transfuse its Poison into the affections from every thing
it has once made a bait of, especially if it has already defiled the mind
with pleasing Contemplations of it. Yea oftentimes a man that has some
Spiritual strength and therein ingageth unto the performance of Duties, if in
the midst of them the matter of his Temptation is so presented unto him, as to
take hold of his thoughts; in a moment, as if he had seen (as they say)
Medusa's Head, he is turned into a Stone; his spirits are all frozen, his
strength is gone, all actings of Grace do cease, his Armor falls from him, and
he gives up himself a Prey to his Temptation. It must be a new supply of Grace
that can give him any Deliverance. Wherefore, whilst Persons are exercised with
any Temptation, I do not advise them to be conversant in their thoughts about
the matter of it. For sometimes Remembrances of former satisfaction of their
Lusts, sometimes present surprizals, with the suitableness of it unto
corruption not yet mortified, sometimes the craft of Satan fixing their
Imagination on it, will be too hard for them, and carry them unto a fresh
compliance with that sin, which they would be delivered from.

But this season calls in an especial manner for the exercise of the Thoughts
of men, about the ways and means of Deliverance from the snare wherein they
are taken, or the danger they find themselves exposed unto. Think of the Guilt
of sin, that you may be humbled. Think of the Power of sin, that you may seek
strength against it. Think not of the Matter of sin, the things that are in the
World suited unto the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, lest you be more and more entangled. But the present Direction is, think
much of the ways of Relief from the power of your own Temptation, leading unto
sin. But this, men unless they are spiritually minded, are very loath to come
unto. I speak not of them that love their Shackles, that glory in their Yoke,
that like their Temptations well enough, as those which give the most
satisfactory entertainment unto their minds. Such men know not well what to do,
unless they may in their Minds converse with the Objects of their Lusts, and do
multiply Thoughts about them continually. The Apostle calls it making Provision
for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Their Principal trouble is, that
they cannot comply with them to the utmost by reason of some outward
restraints. These dwell near unto those Fools who make a mock of sin, and will
e're long take up their Habitation among them.

But I speak, as I said before, of them only whose Temptations are their
Afflictions, and who groan for Deliverance from them. Acquaint such persons
with the great, indeed only way of Relief in this Distress, as it is expressed,
Heb. 2.17, 18. He is a Merciful and Faithful High Priest in things
appertaining unto God; for in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he
is able to Succor them that are Tempted. And chap. 4.15, 16. For we have not
an High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, but
was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore
come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to
help in time of need. Let them know that their only way for their Deliverance
is by acting Faith in Thoughts on Christ, his Power to succor them that are
tempted, with the ways whereby he administreth a sufficiency of Grace unto that
end; retreating for Relief unto him on the urgency of Temptations, they can
hardly be brought unto a compliance therewithal. They are ready to say, Are
not Abana and Pharpar Rivers of Damascus better than all the Waters of Israel?
Is it not better to betake our selves and to trust unto our own Promises,
Resolutions and Endeavors, with such other ways of escape, as are in our own
power? I shall speak nothing against any of them in their proper place, so far
as they are warranted by Scripture Rule. But this I say, none shall ever be
delivered from perplexing Temptations unto the glory of God and their own
Spiritual Advantage, but by the acting and exercising of Faith on Christ Jesus,
and the sufficiency of his Grace for our Deliverance. But when men are not
Spiritually minded, they cannot fix their Thoughts on Spiritual things.
Therefore do men daily pine away under their Temptations, they get ground upon
them, until their Breach grow great like the Sea, and there be no healing of it.

I mention this only to show the weight and necessity of the Duty proposed. For
when men under the Power of Conviction are pressed with Temptation, they will
do any thing rather than betake themselves unto the only efficacious Relief.
Some will groan and cry out under their Vexation from the Torture they are put
unto in the conflict between their Temptations and Convictions. Some will
betake themselves unto the pretended Relief that any false Religion tenders
unto them. But to apply themselves in Thoughts of Faith unto Jesus Christ,
whose Grace alone is sufficient for all, that they will not be persuaded unto.

We are all of us liable unto Temptations. Those who are not sensible of it,
are under the Power of what the Temptation leads unto. And they are of two
sorts. First, Such as are extraordinary, when the hand of God is in them in a
peculiar manner for our Rebuke, It is true, God tempts none, as Temptation
formally leads unto sin. But he orders Temptations so far forth as they are
Afflictive and Chastisements. Thus it is when he suffers an especial corruption
within to fall in ^onjunction with an especial Temptation without, and to
obtain a prevalency thereby. Of these there is no doub^, but any man not
judicially hardened, may know both his Disease and the Remedy. But that
ordinary course of Temptations which we are exercised withal, needs a diligent
Attendance for their Discovery as well as for our Deliverance from them. And it
is to be feared, that many are kept in Spiritual weakness, useless, and in
darkness all their days through the Power of their Temptations, yet never know
what they are, or wherein they consist. These gray hairs are sprinkled on them,
yet they know it not; some approve themselves in those very things and ways
which are their Temptations. Yet in the exercise of due Watchfulness, Diligence
and Prudence, men may know both the Plague of their own hearts in their
prevailing Corruptions, and the ways whereby it is excited through Temptation,
with the occasions it makes use of, and the Advantages it takes. For Instance:
One may have an Eminency in Gifts, and usefulness or success in his labors,
which gives him great Acceptance with others. Such an one shall hardly avoid a
double Temptation. First of Spiritual Pride and self Exaltation. Hence the
Apostle will not admit a Novice, one unexperienced in the ways of Grace and
deceits of Sin, into the Office of the Ministry, lest he should be lifted up
with Pride, and fall into the condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.6. He himself
was not without danger hereof, 2 Cor. 12.17. The best of men can hardly
fortify their minds against the secret workings of Pride upon successes and
applause, unless they keep them constantly balanced with Thoughts of their own
vileness in the sight of God. And Secondly, Remisseness unto exact universal
Mortification, which they countenance themselves against, by their Acceptance
and Success above others in the Ministry. It were much to be desired that all
we who are Ministers, would be careful in these things; for although some of
us may not much please others, yet we may so far please our selves, as to
expose our Souls unto these Snares. And the effects of negligence herein do
openly appear unto the Disadvantage of the Gospel: Others are much conversant
in the World and the Affairs of it. Negligence as unto a Spiritual watch,
Vanity in Converse, Love of earthly things, with conformity unto the World,
will on all occasions impose themselves upon them. If they understand not their
Temptations herein, Spiritual Mindedness will be impaired in them continually.
Those that are Rich have their especial Temptations, which for the most part
are many, plausible and effectual; and those that are Poor have theirs also.
The Snares of some lie in their Constitutions, of others in their Society, of
most in the various Circumstances of Life. Those who are upon their Watch in
any due measure, who exercise any Wisdom or Observation concerning themselves,
may know wherein their Temptations do lie, what are the Advantages whereby they
perplex their Minds and endanger their Souls.

In these cases generally men are taught what are the ways and means of their
Deliverance and Preservation. Wherefore there are three things required unto
this Duty, and Spiritual Wisdom unto them all. (1.) To know what are the
especial Temptations from whence you suffer, and whereby the Life of God is
obstructed in in you. If this be neglected, if it be disregarded, no man can
maintain either Life or Peace, or is Spiritually minded. (2.) Know your Remedy,
your Relief, wherein alone it does consist. Many Duties are required of us unto
this end, and are useful thereunto. But know assuredly, that no one of them,
not all of them in conjunction will bring in Relief unto the glory of God and
your own Peace, without Application by Faith unto him who is able to succor
them that are Tempted. Wherefore, (3.) Herein lies your great Duty with respect
unto your Temptations, namely, in a constant exercise of your Thoughts on the
Love, Care, Compassion and tenderness of Christ, with his Ability to help,
succor and save them that do believe, so to strengthen your Faith and Trust in
him, which will prove assuredly successeful and Victorious.

The same Duty is incumbent on us with respect unto any urgent prevalent
general Temptation. There are Seasons wherein an hour of Temptation comes on
the earth to try them that dwell therein. What if a man should judge that now
it is such an hour, and that the Power of Darkness is put forth therein? what
if he should be persuaded that a general security, coldness, deadness and Decay
in Grace, especially as to the vigorous Actings of Zeal, Love, and Delight in
God, with an Indifferency unto Holy Duties, are the effects of this hour of
Temptation? I do not say determinately that so it is, let others judge as they
see cause. But if any one do so judge, undoubtedly it is his Duty to be
exercised in his Thoughts, how he may escape in this day of Trial, and be
counted worthy to stand before the Son of Man. He will find it his concernment
to be conversant in his mind with the Reasons and Motives unto watchfulness,
and how he may obtain such supplies of Grace as may effectually preserve him
from such Decays.

3. All things in Religion both in Faith and Practice are to be the Objects of
such Thoughts. As they are proposed or occurr unto our Minds in great variety
on all sorts of occasions, so we ought to give them entertainment in our
Meditations. To hear things, to have them proposed unto us, it may be, in the
way of a Divine Ordinance, and to let them slip out or flow from us, as Water
that is poured into a leaking Vessel, is the Ruin of many Souls. I shall
therefore choose out some Instances as was before proposed, of those things
which I judge that they who would be Spiritually minded, ought to abide and
abound in Thoughts concerning them.

1. It is our Duty greatly to mind the things that are above, eternal things,
both as unto their Reality, their present State, and our future enjoyment of
them. Herein consists the Life of this Grace and Duty. To be Heavenly Minded,
that is, to mind the things of Heaven, and to be Spiritually Minded is all one;
Or it is the effect of being Spiritually Minded, as unto its Original and
essence; or the first proper actings of it. It is the Cause of it, as unto its
growth and Degrees; and it is the Evidence of it in Experience. Nor do I
understand how it is possible for a Man to place his chief Interest in things
above, and not have many thoughts of them. It is the great Advice of the
Apostle on a supposition of our Interest in Christ and Conformity unto him,
Col. 3.1, 2. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above,
where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your Affections (or your
Thoughts) Mind much, the things that are above. It becomes those who through
the virtue of the Resurrection of Christ are raised unto Newness of Life, to
have their Thoughts exercised on the State of things above, with respect unto
the Presence of Christ among them. And the singular use of our Prospect into
these things, or our Meditations on them, he instructs us in, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17,
18. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. For our light Affliction which is but for a
Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Whilst
we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen,
for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal. Not to faint under the daily Decays of our outward man, and the
Approaches of Death thereby, to bear afflictions as things light and Momentary,
to thrive under all in the inward man, are unspeakable Mercies and Privileges.
Can you attain a better frame? Is there any thing that you would more desire,
if you are Believers? Is it not better to have such a mind in us, than to enjoy
all the Peace and security that the world can afford? One principal means
whereby we are made partakers of these things, is a due Meditation on things
unseen and Eternal. These are the things that are within the Vail, whereon we
ought to cast the Anchor of our Hope in all the Storms we meet withal, Heb.
6.19, 20. whereof we shall speak more afterward.

Without doubt the generality of Christians are greatly defective in this Duty,
partly for want of Light into them, partly for want of Delight in them; they
think little of an eternal Country. Wherever men are, they do not use to
neglect Thoughts of that Country wherein their Inheritance lies. If they are
absent from it for a season, yet will they labor to acquaint themselves with
the principal Concernments of it. But this Heavenly Country wherein lies our
Eternal Inheritance, is not regarded. Men do not as they ought exercise
themselves unto thoughts of things Eternal and Invisible. It were impossible if
they did so, that their Minds should be so earthly, and their Affections cleave
so as they do unto present things. He that looks steadily on the Sun, although
he cannot bear the luster of its beams fully, yet his sight is so affected with
it, that when he calls off his eyes from it, he can see nothing as it were of
the things about him, they are all dark unto him. And he who looks steadily in
his Contemplations on things above, eternal things, though he cannot comprehend
their Glory, yet a Vail will be cast by it on all the desirable Beauties of
Earthly things, and take off his Affections from them.

Men live and act under the Power of a Conviction, that there is a State of
Immortality and Glory to come. With a persuasion hereof they much relieve
themselves in their Sorrows, Sufferings and Temptations. Yet with many it is
only a Reserve when they can be here no more; But as unto daily Contemplation
of the Nature and Causes of it, or as unto any entrance into it by Faith and
Hope, the most are Strangers thereunto. If we are Spiritually minded, nothing
will be more natural unto us, than to have many Thoughts of Eternal things, as
those wherein all our own principal Concerns do lie, as well as those which are
excellent and glorious in themselves. The Direction thereon is, that we would
make Heavenly Things, the things of the future State of Blessedness and Glory,
a principal Object of our Thoughts; that we would think much about them, that
we would Meditate much upon them. Many are discouraged herein, by their
Ignorance, and Darkness, by their want of due conceptions and steady
apprehensions of Invisible Things. Hence one of these two things do befall
them, when they would Meditate on things above. (1.) The Glory of them, the
Glory of God in them, being essentially Infinite and Incomprehensible, does
immediately overwhelm them, and as it were in a moment, put them unto an utter
loss, that they cannot frame one Thought in their minds about them. Or, (2.)
They want Skill and Ability to conceive aright of Invisible things, and to
dispose of them in such order in their minds, as that they may sedately
exercise their Thoughts about them. Both these shall be afterward spoken unto.
At present I shall only say, that

Whosoever shall sincerely engage in this Duty according unto what he has, and
shall abide constant therein, he will make such a refreshing Progress in his
Apprehension of Heavenly Things, as he will be greatly satisfied withal. We
are kept in Darkness, Ignorance, and unsteadiness of Meditations about them,
not from the nature of the Things themselves, but from our own Sloth,
Negligence, and readiness to be turned aside by Apprehensions of Difficulties,
of the Lion in the way. Wherefore I shall consider two things. (1.) What are
the principal Motives unto this Duty of fixing our Thoughts on the things that
are above, and the Advantages which we receive thereby. (2.) Give some
Directions how and on what in particular we may exercise our Thoughts on those
things above.

(1.) Faith will be increased and strengthened by it. Invisible things are the
proper Objects of Faith. It is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
Wherefore in our Thoughts of them, Faith is in its proper exercise, which is
the principal means of its Growth and increase. And hereon two things will
ensue.

1. The Soul will come unto a more satisfactory abiding sense of the Reality of
them. Things of Imagination which maintain a value of themselves by Darkness,
will not bear a diligent search into them. They lose of their Reputation on
every serious Enquiry. If rational men would but give themselves the Liberty of
free Indagation by their own Thoughts, it would quickly cashiere the Fools
Paradise of Mahomet, the Purgatory of the Papists, and all such Creatures of
Imagination and Superstition. But where things are real and substantial, the
more they are enquired into, the more they evidence their being and
subsistence. It is not therefore every Profession of a Faith of a future state
of Blessedness that will reallize it in our Minds. And therefore for the most
part it is rather a Notion that men have of Heavenly things which they do not
contradict, than any solid satisfaction in, or spiritual sense of their
Reality. For these are things that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor will
enter into the Heart of man to conceive, whose existence, nature and real state
are not easily comprehended. But through the continual Exercise of holy
thoughts about them, the Soul obtains an entrance into the midst of them,
finding in them both durable substance and Riches. There is no way therefore to
strengthen Faith unto any degree, but by a daily Contemplation on the things
themselves. They who do not think of them frequently, shall never believe them
sincerely. They admit not of any collateral Evidence, where they do not
evidence themselves unto our Souls. Faith, as we said, thus exercised, will
give them a subsistence, not in themselves, which they have antecedent
thereunto; but in us, in our Hearts, in the Minds of them that do believe.
Imagination creates its own Object; Faith finds it prepared beforehand. It
will not leave a bare Notion of them in the Understanding, but give them a
spiritual subsistence in the Heart; as Christ himself dwells in our hearts by
Faith. And there are two things that will discover this subsistence of them in
us. (1.) When we find them in a continual Readiness to rise up in our Minds, on
all Occasions wherein the Thoughts and Remembrance of them are needful and
useful unto us. There are many seasons, some whereof shall be immediately
spoken unto, and many Duties wherein and whereunto the Faith and Thoughts of
things invisible and eternal are needful unto us, so as that we cannot fill up
those Seasons, nor perform those Duties in a due manner without them. If on all
such occasions they do from the inward frame of our minds present themselves
unto us, or through our acquaintance and familiarity with them, we recurre in
our Thoughts unto them, they seem to have a real subsistence given unto them in
our Souls. But if on such occasions wherein alone they will yield us help and
relief, we accustom our selves to other Thoughts, if those concerning them are
as it were out of the way, and arise not in our minds of their own accord, we
are yet strangers unto this effect of Faith. (2.) They are realized unto us,
they have a subsistence in us, when the Soul continually longs to be in them.
When they have given such a Relish unto our Hearts, as the first Fruits of
Glory, that we cannot but desire on all opportune Considerations, to be in the
full enjoyment of them, Faith seems to have had its effectual work herein upon
us. For want of these things do many among us walk in Disconsolation all their
Days.

2. It will gradually give the Heart an acquaintance with the especial nature
and use of these things. General Thoughts and Notions of Heaven and Glory, do
but fluctuate up and down in the Mind, and very little influence it unto other
Duties. But assiduous Contemplation will give the mind such distinct
Apprehensions of Heavenly things as shall duly affect it with the Glory of
them. The more we discern of the Glory and Excellency of them in their own
nature, of their suitableness unto ours, as our only proper Rest and
Blessedness, as the Perfection and complement of what is already begun in us by
Grace, of the restless tendency of all gracious Dispositions and Inclinations
of our Hearts toward their Enjoyment, the more will Faith be established in
its cleaving unto them; so in the Contemplation of these things consists the
principal food of Faith, whereby it is nourished and strengthened. And we are
not to expect much work, where there is not provision of proper Food for them
that labor. No wonder if we find Faith faint and weak in the work it has to
do, which often times is great and weighty, if we neglect to guide it daily unto
that which should administer strength unto it.

(2.) It will give Life and Exercise unto the Grace of Hope. Hope is a glorious
Grace, whereunto blessed Effects are ascribed in the Scripture, and an
effectual Operation unto the supportment and consolation of Believers. By it
are we purified, sanctified, saved. And to sum up the whole of its excellency
and efficacy, it is a principal way of the working of Christ as inhabiting in
us, Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory. Where Christ evidenceth his
Presence with us, he gives us an infallible hope of Glory; he gives us an
assured Pledge of it, and works our Souls unto an expectation of it. Hope in
general is but an uncertain Expectation of a future Good which we desire. But
as it is a Gospel Grace, all uncertainty is removed from it, which would hinder
us of the Advantage intended in it. It is an earnest Expectation proceeding
from Faith, Trust and Confidence, accompanied with longing desires of
Enjoyment. From a Mistake of its Nature it is, that few Christians labor after
it, exercise themselves unto it, or have the benefit of it. For to live by
Hope, they suppose inferres a State not only beneath the Life of Faith and all
assurance in believing, but also exclusive of them. They think, to hope to be
saved is a condition of men who have no grounds of Faith or Assurance. But this
is to turn a Blessed fruit of the Spirit, into a common Affection of nature.
Gospel Hope is a fruit of Faith, Trust and Confidence. Yea the height of the
actings of all Grace issues in a well grounded hope, nor can it rise any
higher, Romans 5. 2, 3, 4, 5.

Now the Reason why men have no more use of, no more benefit by this excellent
Grace, is because they do not abide in Thoughts and contemplation of the things
hoped for. The especial Object of Hope is Eternal Glory. Col. 1.27. Romans 5.2.
The peculiar use of it is, to support, comfort and refresh the Soul in all
Trials, under all weariness and Despondencies, with a firm expectation of a
speedy entrance into that Glory, with an earnest desire after it. Wherefore
unless we acquaint our selves by continual Meditation with the Reality and
Nature of this Glory; it is impossible it should be the Object of a vigorous
active Hope, such as whereby, the Apostle says, we are saved. Whithout this we
can neither have that Evidence of Eternal things, nor that valuation of them,
nor that preparedness in our minds for them, as should keep us in the exercise
of Gracious Hope about them.

Suppose sundry Persons engaged in a Voyage unto a most remote Country,
wherein all of them have an Apprehension that there is a place of Rest and an
Inheritance provided for them. Under this Apprehension they all put themselves
upon their Voyage, to possess what is so prepared. Howbeit some of them have
only a general Notion of these things, they know nothing distinctly concerning
them, and are so busied about other affairs, that they have no leisure to
inquire into them, or do suppose that they cannot come unto any satisfactory
knowledge of them in particular, and so are content to go on with general Hopes
and Expectations. Others there are who by all possible means acquaint
themselves particularly with the nature of the Climate whither they are going,
with the Excellency of the Inheritance and Provision that is made for them.
Their Voyage proves long and wearisome, their Difficulties many and their
Dangers great, and they have nothing to relieve and encourage themselves, but
the Hope and expectation of the Country whither they are going. Those of the
first sort will be very apt to despond and faint; their general hopes will not
be able to relieve them. But those who have a distinct Notion and Apprehension
of the State of things whither they are going, and of their incomparable
Excellency, have always in a readiness wherewith to cheer their minds and
support themselves.

In that Journey or Pilgrimage wherein we are engaged toward an Heavenly
Country, we are sure to meet with all kinds of dangers, difficulties and
Perils. It is not a general Notion of Blessedness that will excite and work in
us a spiritual refreshing Hope. But when we think and Meditate on future Glory
as we ought, that Grace which is neglected for the most part as unto its
benefit, and dead as unto its exercise, will of all others be most Vigorous and
active, putting it self forth on all occasions. This therefore is an inestimable
Benefit of the Duty exhorted unto, and which they find the Advantage of, who,
are really Spiritually minded.

3. This alone will make us ready for the Cross, for all sorts of Sufferings
that we may be exposed unto.

There is nothing more necessary unto Believers at this season, than to have
their minds furnished with provision of such things as may prepare them for the
Cross and Sufferings. Various Intimations of the mind of God, Circumstances of
Providence, the present State of things in the World, with the instant Peril of
the latter days, do all call them hereunto. If it be otherwise with them, they
will at one time or other be woefully surprised, and think strange of their
Trials, as if some strange thing did befall them. Nothing is more useful unto
this end, than constant Thoughts and contemplations of Eternal things and
future Glory. From thence alone can the Soul have in a readiness, what to lay
in the Balance against all sorts of Sufferings. When a Storm begins to arise
at Sea, the Mariners bestir themselves in the Management of the Tackling of the
Ship, and other Applications of their Art for their safety. But if the Storm
increase and come to extremity, they are forced to forego all other means and
betake themselves unto a Sheat-Anchor, to hold their Ship steady against its
violence. So when a Storm of Persecution and Troubles begins to arise, men have
various ways and considerations for their Relief. But if it once comes to
extremity, if Sword, Nakedness, Famine, and Death, are inevitably coming upon
them, they have nothing to betake themselves unto that will yield them solid
Relief, but the consideration and Faith of things Invisible and Eternal.

So the Apostle declares this State of things, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. the words
before insisted on. For which cause we faint not, but though our outward man
perish, yet the inward is renewed day by day. For our light affliction which is
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen are eternal. He lays all sorts of Afflictions in one Scale, and on
the consideration of them, declares them to be light and but for a moment. Then
he lays Glory in the other Scale, and finds it to be ponderous, weighty, and
Eternal; an exceeding weight of Glory. In the one is Sorrow for a little while,
in the other Eternal Joy. In the one Pain for a few moments, in the other
everlasting Rest; In the one is the loss of some few temporary things, in the
other the full fruition of God in Christ, who is all in all.

Hence the same Apostle casts up the account of these things, and gives us his
Judgment concerning them, Romans 8.18. For I reckon that the Sufferings of this
present time are not to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in
us; there is no comparison between them, as if one had as much Evil and Misery
in them, as the other has of Good and Blessedness; as though his State was any
way to be complained of, who must undergo the one whilst he has an interest
in the other; or as though to escape the one, he hazard the enjoyment of the
other.

It is inseparable from our Nature to have a fear of and aversation from great
distressing Sufferings, that are above the power of Nature to bear. Even our
Lord Jesus himself, having taken on him all the sinless Properties of our
Natures, had a fear and aversation, though holy and gracious with respect unto
his own. Those who through a stout-heartedness do contemn them before their
Approach, boasting in themselves of their Abilities to undergo them, censuring
such as will not unadvisedly engage in them, are such as seldom glorify God
when they are really to conflict with them. Peter alone trusted unto himself
that he would not forsake his Master, and seemed to take the Warning ill that
they should all do so; and he alone denied him. All Church Stories are filled
with Instances of such as having born themselves high before the Approach of
Trials, have shamefully miscarried when their Trials have come. Wherefore it is
moreover allowed unto us, to use all lawful means for the avoiding of them.
Both Rules and Examples of the Scripture give sufficient warranty for it. But
there are Times and Seasons wherein without any Tergiversation they are to be
undergone unto the Glory of God, and in the discharge of our Duty, confessing
Christ before men, as we would be owned by him before his Father in Heaven. All
things do now call us to prepare for such a season, to be Martyrs in
Resolution, though we should never really lose our lives by Violence. Nothing
will give us this Preparation, but to have our minds exercised in the
Contemplation of Heavenly things, of things that are Invisible and Eternal. He
who is thus Spiritually Minded, who has his Thoughts and Affections set on
things above, will have always in a Readiness what to oppose unto any
circumstance of his Sufferings.

Those views which such an one has had by Faith, of the increated Glories
above, of the things in Heavenly Places, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God, of the Glory within the Vail, whereby they have been realized and made
present unto his Soul, will now visit him every moment, abide with him
continually, and put forth their efficacy unto his supportment and refreshment.
Alas! what will become of many of us, who are grovelling continually on the
Earth, whose Bellies cleave unto the Dust, who are strangers unto the Thoughts
of Heavenly Things, when distressing troubles shall befall us? Why shall we
think that refreshing Thoughts of things above will then visit our Souls, when
we resisted their admittance in days of Peace? Do you come to me in your
distress, says Jepthe, when in the time of your Peace you drove me from you?
When we would thus think of Heavenly things to our Refreshment, we shall hardly
get them to make an abode with us. I know God can come in by the mighty Power
of his Spirit and Grace, to support and comfort the Souls of them who are
called and even surprised into the greatest of Sufferings. Yet do I know also
that it is our Duty not to Tempt him in the neglect of the ways and means which
he has appointed for the communication of his Grace unto us.

Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, as the Author and finisher of our Faith, for
the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross and despised the Shame, Heb.
12.2. His Mediatory Glory in the Salvation of the Church, was the Matter of the
Joy set before him. This he took the view and prospect of in all his
Sufferings, unto his Refreshment and Supportment. And his Example, as the
Author and finisher of our Faith, is more efficaciously instructive than any
other Rule or Precept. Eternal Glory is set before us also; It is the Design of
Gods Wisdom and Grace, that by the contemplation of it we should relieve our
selves in all our Sufferings, yea and rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory. How many of those blessed Souls now in the enjoyment of God and Glory,
who passed through fiery Trials and great Tribulations, were enabled to sing
and rejoice in the Flames by a Prepossession of this Glory in their Minds
through Believing? yea some have been so filled with them, as to take off all
sense of pain under the most exquisite Tortures. When Stephen was to be Stoned,
to encourage him in his Sufferings and comfort him in it, the Heavens were
opened, and he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God. Who can conceive
what contempt of all the Rage and madness of the Jews, what a neglect of all
the pains of Death this view raised his holy Soul unto? To obtain therefore
such views frequently by Faith, as they do who are truly Spiritually minded,
is the most effectual way to encourage us unto all our Sufferings. The Apostle
gives us the force of this encouragement in a comparison with Earthly things. 1
Cor. 9.25. Every man who striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all things;
Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. If men
when a corruptible Crown of vain Honor and Applause is proposed unto them,
will do and endure all that is needful for the Attainment of it, and relieve
themselves in their hardships with Thoughts and Imaginations of attaining it,
grounded on uncertain hopes; shall not we who have a Crown immortal and
invisible proposed unto us, and that with the highest assurance of the
enjoyment of it, cheerfully undergo, endure and suffer what we are to go
through in the way unto it?

4. This is the most effectual Means to wean the heart and affections from
things here below; to keep the mind unto an undervaluation, yea a Contempt of
them as occasion shall require. For there is a season wherein there is such a
contempt required in us of all Relations and enjoyments, as our Savior
calls, the hating of them; that is, not absolutely but comparatively, in
comparison of him and the Gospel, with the Duties which belong unto our
Profession, Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not Father and Mother,
and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he
cannot be my Disciple. Some I fear if they did but consider it, would be apt to
say, This is an hard saying, who can bear it? and others cry out with the
Disciples in another case, Lord who then can be saved? But it is the Word
whereby we must be judged, nor can we be the Disciples of Christ on any other
Terms. But here in an especial manner lies the wound and weakness of Faith and
Profession in these our days. The Bellies of men cleave unto the Dust, or
their Affections unto earthly things.

I speak not of those who by Rapine, Deceit and Oppression, strive to enrich
themselves; nor of those who design nothing more than the Attainment of
Greatness and Promotions in the world, though not by ways of open wickedness;
least of all of them who make Religion and perhaps their Ministry therein, a
Means for the attaining Secular ends and Preferments. No wise man can suppose
such persons, any of them, to be spiritually minded, and it is most easy to
disprove all their pretenses. But I intend only those at present, whose ways
and Means of attaining Riches, are lawful, honest and unblameable; who use
them with some moderation, and do profess that their Portion lies in better
things; so as it is hard to fasten a Conviction on them in matter of their
conversation. Whatever may seem to reflect upon them, they esteem it to be that
whose omission would make them foolish in their Affairs, or negligent in their
Duty. But even among these also, there is often times that inordinate Love unto
present things, that esteem and valuation of them, that concernment in them, as
are not consistent with their being Spiritually minded. With some their
Relations, with some their Enjoyments, with most both in Conjunction, are an
Idol which they set up in their hearts, and secretly bow down unto. About these
are their Hopes and Fears exercised, on them is their Love, in them is their
Delight. They are wholly taken up with their own concerns, count all lost that
is not spent on them, and all time misspent that is not engaged about them. Yet
the things which they do, they judge to be good in themselves, their hearts do
not condemn them as to the Matter of them. The Valuation they have of their
Relations and Enjoyments they suppose to be lawful, within the bounds which
they have assigned unto it. Their care about them is in their own minds but
their Duty. It is no easy matter, it requires much Spiritual Wisdom to fix
right boundaries unto our Affections and their actings about Earthly things.
But let men plead and pretend what they please, I shall offer one Rule in this
case which will not fail. And this is, that when men are so confident in the
good State and measure of their affections and their Actings toward earthly
things, as that they will oppose their engagements into them, unto known Duties
of Religion, Piety and Charity, they are gone into a sinful excess. Is there a
State of the Poor that requires their Liberality and Bounty? you must excuse
them, they have Families to provide for; when what is expected from them
signifies nothing at all, as unto a due provision for their Families, nor is
what would lessen their Inheritances or Portions one Penny in the issue. Are
they called to an Attendance on seasons of Religious Duties? they are so full
of Business, that it is impossible for them, to have leisure for any such
occasions; so by all ways declaring that they are under the power of a
prevalent predominant. Affection unto earthly things. This fills all places
with lifeless, sapless, useless Professors, who approve themselves in their
condition, whilst it is visibly unspiritual and withering.

The Heart will have something whereon in a way of Pre-eminence, it will fix it
self and its Affections. This in all its perpetual motions it seeks for rest
and satisfaction in; And every man has an Edge, the Edge of his Affections is
set one way or other, though it be more keen in some than others. And whereas
all sorts of things, that the Heart can fix upon or turn the Edge of its
Affections unto, are distributed by the Apostle into things above and things
beneath, things Heavenly and things Earthly, if we have not such a view and
prospect of Heavenly things as to cause our Hearts to cleave unto them and
delight in them, let us pretend what we will, it is impossible but that we
shall be under the power of a predominant Affection unto the things of this
World.

Herein lies the great Danger of Multitudes at this present season. For let men
profess what they will under the power of this frame, their Eternal state is in
hazard every moment. And Persons are engaged in it in great variety of Degrees.
And we may cast them under two Heads.

1. Some do not at all understand that things are amiss with them, or that they
are much to be blamed. They plead as was before observed, that they are all
lawful things which their hearts do cleave unto, and which it is their Duty to
take care of and regard. May they not delight in their own Relations,
especially at such a time when others break and cancel all Duties and bonds of
Relation in the service of and provision they make for their Lusts? May they
not be careful in good and honest ways of diligence about the things of the
world, when the most either lavish their time away in the pursuit of bestial
Lusts, or heap them up by deceit and Oppression? May they not contrive for the
promotion of their children in the world, to add the other hundred or thousand
pounds unto their Advancement, that they may be in as good condition as others,
seeing he is worse than an Infidel who provides not for his own family? By such
reasonings and secret Thoughts do many justify themselves in their earthly
mindedness. And so fixed they are in the Approbation of themselves, that if you
urge them to their Duty, you shall loose their acquaintance, if they do not
become your Enemies for telling them the Truth. Yea they will avoid one Duty
that lies not against their earthly Interest, because it leads unto another.
They will not engage in Religious Assemblies, or be constant unto their Duty in
them, for fear Duties of Charity should be required of them or expected from
them: On what Grounds such Persons can satisfy themselves that they are
Spiritually-minded, I know not. I shall leave only one Rule with Persons that
are thus minded. Where our Love unto the world, has prevailed by its
reasonings, pleas and pretenses, to take away our fear and jealousy over our
own hearts, lest we should inordinately love it, there it is assuredly
predominant in us.

2. Others are sensible of the evil of their hearts, at least are jealous and
afraid lest it should be found that their hearts do cleave inordinately unto
these things. Hence they endeavor to contend against this evil, sometimes by
forcing themselves unto such Acts of Piety or Charity as are contrary unto that
frame, and sometimes by laboring a change of the frame it self: Especially
they will do so when God is pleased to awaken them by Trials and Afflictions,
such as write Vanity and Emptiness on all earthly enjoyments. But for the most
part they strive not lawfully, and so obtain not what they seem to aim at.

This Disease with many is mortal; and will not be thoroughly cured in any but
by the due exercise of this part of Spiritual-mindedness. There are other
Duties required also unto the same end, namely, of the Mortification of our
Desires and Affections unto earthly things, whereof I have treated elsewhere.
But without this or a fixed contemplation on the Desirableness, Beauty and
Glory of Heavenly things, it will not be attained. Further to evince the Truth
hereof, we may observe these two things. First, If by any means a man do seem
to have taken off his Heart from the Love of present things, and be not at the
same time taken up with the Love of things that are Heavenly, his seeming
Mortification is of no advantage unto him. So persons frequently through
Discontent, Disappointments or dissatisfaction with Relations, or mere natural
Weariness, have left the world, the Affairs and cares of it, as unto their
wonted conversations in it, and have betaken themselves to Monasteries,
Convents, or other Retirements suiting their Principles, without any Advantage
to their Souls. Secondly, God is no such severe Lord and Master, as to require
us to take off our Affections from, and mortify them unto those things which
the Law of our Nature makes dear unto us, as Wives, Children, Houses, Lands and
Possessions, and not propose unto us somewhat that is incomparably more
excellent to fix them upon. So he invites the Elect of the Gentiles unto
Christ, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear,
forget also thine own People and thy Fathers house; that is, come into the
Faith of Abraham, who forsook his Country and his Fathers house to follow God
whither ever he pleased. But he proposes this for their encouragement, ver.
11. So shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty, for he is thy Lord, and
worship thou him. The Love of the Great King is an abundant satisfactory
Recompense for parting with all things in this world. So when Abraham's Servant
was sent to take Rebecka for a Wife unto Isaac, he required that she should
immediately leave Father and Mother, Brothers and all enjoyments, and go along
with him; But withal, that she might know her self to be no loser thereby, he
not only assured her of the Greatness of his Master, but also at present he
gave her Jewels of Silver, and Jewels of Gold, and Raiment, Genesis 24.53. And
when our Savior requires that we should part with all for his sake and the
Gospel, he promises an hundred Fold in lieu of them even in this Life, namely,
in an Interest in things Spiritual and Heavenly. Wherefore, without an
assiduous Meditation on Heavenly things, as a better, more noble and suitable
Object for our Affections to be fixed on, we can never be freed in a due manner
from an inordinate Love of the things here below.

It is sad to see some Professors who will keep up spiritual Duties in Churches
and in their Families, who will speak and discourse of Spiritual Things, and
keep themselves from the open Excesses of the world; yet when they come to be
tried by such Duties as entrench on their Love and adherence unto Earthly
Things, quickly manifest how remote they are from being Spiritually-minded in a
due manner. Were they to be tried, as our Savior tried the young man who made
such a profession of his conscientious and religious conversation; Go sell what
thou have, give to the poor, and follow me; something might be pleaded in
excuse for their Tergiversation. But alas! they will decline their Duty when
they are not touched unto the hundredth part of their enjoyments.

I bless God, I speak not thus of many of my own knowledge; and may say with
the Apostle unto the most unto whom I usually speak in this manner; But Beloved
we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation,
though we thus speak, Heb. 6.9. Yea, the same Testimony may be given of many in
this City, which the same Apostle gives unto the Churches of Macedonia, 2 Cor.
8.1, 2, 3. Understand the Grace of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia,
how that in a great Trial of Affliction, the Abundance of their Joy and their
Poverty abounded unto the Riches of their Liberality. For to their Power, and
beyond their Power, they were willing of themselves. There has been nothing
done amongst us, that may or can be boasted of, yet considering all
Circumstances, it may be there have not been more Instances of true Evangelical
Charity in any Age or Place for these many years. For them who have been but
useful and helpful herein, the Lord remember them for good, and spare them
according to the Multitude of his Mercies. It is true, they have not, many of
them, founded Colleges, built Hospitals, or raised works of State and
Magnificence. For very many of them are such, as whose deep Poverty
comparatively has abounded unto the Riches of their Liberality. The Basks and
Bellyes of multitudes of poor and needy Servants of Christ have been warmed and
refreshed by them, blessing God for them. Thank's be to God, says the Apostle
in this case, for his unspeakable Gift, 2 Cor. 9.15. Blessed be God who has
not left the Gospel without this Glory, nor the Profession of it without this
evidence of its Power and Efficacy. Yea God has exalted the Glory of
Persecutions and Afflictions. For many, since they have lost much of their
enjoyments by them, and have all endangered continually, have abounded in
Duties of Charity beyond what they did in the days of their fullness and
prosperity. So out of the Eater there has come forth meat. And if the world
did but know what Fruits in a way of Charity and Bounty, unto the Praise of God
and Glory of the Gospel, have been occasioned by their making many poor, it
would abate of their satisfaction in their successes.

But with many it is not so. Their Minds are so full of earthly things, they do
so cleave unto them in their Affections, that no sense of Duty, no Example of
others, no concernment of the Glory of God or the Gospel, can make any
impressions on them. If there be yet in them so much Life and Light of Grace,
as to design a Deliverance from this woeful condition, the means insisted on
must be made use of.

Especially this Advice is needful unto those who are Rich, who have large
Possessions, or abound in the Goods of this world. The Poor, the Afflicted, the
Sorrowful are prompted from their outward circumstances as well as excited by
inward Grace, frequently to remember and to think of the Things above, wherein
lies their only Reserve and Relief against the trouble and urgency of their
present condition. But the enjoyment of these things in abundance, is
accompanied with a twofold evil, lying directly contrary unto this Duty.

1. A Desire of increase and adding thereunto. Earthly enjoyments enlarge men's
Earthly Desires; and the Love of them grows with their income. A moderate stock
of Waters, sufficient for our use, may be kept within ordinary banks. But if a
Flood be turned into them, they know no bounds, but overflow all about them.
The increase of Wealth and Riches enlarges the Desires of men after them,
beyond all bounds of wisdom, sobriety, or safety. He that labors hard for his
daily bread, has seldom such earnest vehement Desires of an Addition unto what
he has, as many have who already have more than they know how to use, or
almost what to do withal. This they must have more, and the last Advantage
serves for nothing but to stir them up to look out for another. And yet such
men would on other Accounts be esteemed good Christians, and Spiritually
minded, as all Good Christians are.

2. They draw the Heart to value and esteem them, as those which bring in their
satisfaction, and make them to differ from those whom they see to be poor and
miserable. Now these things are contrary unto, and where they are habitually
prevalent, inconsistent utterly with being Spiritually minded. Nor is it
possible, that any who in the least degree are under their power, can ever
attain Deliverance, unless their Thoughts are fixed, and their Minds thereby
possessed with due apprehensions of invisible things and eternal Glory.

These are some few of those many Advantages which we may obtain by fixing our
Thoughts and Meditations, and thereby our Affections on the things that are
above. And there are some things which make me willing to give some few
Directions for the practice of this Duty. For whatever else we are and do, we
neither are nor can be truly Spiritually minded, whereon Life and Peace
depend, unless we do really exercise our Thoughts unto Meditations of Things
above. Without it all our Religion is but vain. And as I fear, men are
generally wanting and defective herein in point of Practice; so I do also, that
many through the Darkness of their Minds, the weakness of their Intellectuals,
and Ignorance of the nature of all things unseen, do seldom set themselves unto
the Contemplation of them. I shall therefore give some few Directions for the
Practice of this Duty.

CHAP. VI.
Directions unto the Exercise of our Thoughts on things above; things future,
invisible and eternal; On God himself, with the Difficultyes of it, and
Oppositions unto it, and the way of their Removal. Right Notions of future
Glory stated.

WE have treated in general before of the proper Objects of our Spiritual
Thoughts as unto our present Duty. That which we were last engaged in, is an
Especial Instance in Heavenly Things; Things future and invisible, with the
Fountain and Spring of them all in Christ and God himself. And because men
generally are unskilled herein, and great Difficulties arise in the way of the
Discharge of this Part of the Duty in hand, I shall give some especial
Directions concerning it.

1. Possess your Minds with right notions and apprehensions of things above,
and of the state of future Glory. We are in this duty to look at the things
which are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.16. It is Faith only whereby we have a prospect of
them; for we walk by Faith and not by sight. And Faith can give us no interest
in them, unless we have due apprehensions of them. For it does but assent and
cleave unto the Truth of what is proposed unto it. And the greatest part of
Mankind do both deceive themselves, and feed on Ashes in this matter. They
fancy a future Estate which has no foundation but in their own Imaginations.
Wherefore the Apostle directing us to seek and mind the things that are above,
adds for the guidance of our Thoughts, the consideration of the principal
concernment of them, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1,
2. He would lead us unto distinct Apprehensions of those Heavenly things,
especially of the presence of Christ in his Exaltation and Glory. Wherefore the
true Notion of these things which we are to possess our minds withal, may here
be considered.

All that have an Apprehension of a future State of Happiness do agree in this
matter, that it contains in it or is accompanied with a deliverance and freedom
from all that is evil. But in what is so, they are not agreed. Many esteem only
those things that are grievous, troublesome, wasting and destructive unto
Nature to be so; that is, what is poenal, in pain, sickness, sorrow, loss,
poverty, with all kind of outward Troubles, and Death it self, are evil.
Wherefore they suppose that the future state of Blessedness will free them from
all these things, if they can attain unto it. This they will lay in the
Balance against the Troubles of Life, and sometimes it may be against the
Pleasures of it, which they must forego. Yea Persons profane and profligate
will in words at least profess, that Heaven will give them rest from all their
Troubles. But it is no place of Rest for such Persons.

Unto all others also, unto Believers themselves, these things are evil, such
as they expect a Deliverance from in Heaven and Glory. And there is no doubt,
but it is lawful for us, and meet that we should contemplate on them, as those
which will give us a Deliverance from all outward Troubles, Death it self and
all that leads thereunto. Heaven is promised as Rest unto them that are
troubled. 2 These. 1.7. It is our Duty under all our. Sufferings, Reproaches,
Persecutions, Troubles and Sorrows, to raise up our minds unto the
contemplation of that state, wherein we shall be freed from them all. It is a
blessed Notion of Heaven, that God shall therein wipe away all tears from our
eyes, Rev. 7.17. or remove far from us all causes of sorrow. And it would be
unto our Advantage, if we did accustom our minds more unto this kind of Relief
than we do; If upon the Incursion of fears, dangers, sorrows, we did more
readily retreat unto Thoughts of that State wherein we shall be freed from them
all; even this most inferior consideration of it, would render the Thoughts of
it more familiar, and the thing it self more useful unto us. Much better it
were, than on such occasions to be exercised with heartless complaints,
uncertain hopes, and fruitless contrivances.

But there is that which unto them who are truly Spiritually minded, has more
evil in it than all these things together, and that is sin. Heaven is a state
of Deliverance from sin, from all sin, in all the causes, concomitants and
effects of it. He is no true Believer unto whom sin is not the greatest burden,
sorrow, and trouble. Other things, as the Loss of Dear Relations, or
extraordinary pains, may make deeper Impressions on the Mind by its natural
Affections at some seasons, than ever our sins did at any one time, in any one
Instance. So a man may have a greater Trouble in sense of pain, by a fit of the
Toothache, which will be gone in an hour, than in an Hectic Feavour or
Consumption, which will assuredly take away his Life. But take in the whole
course of our Lives, and all the actings of our souls in Spiritual Judgment as
well as natural Affection, and I do not understand how a man can be a sincere
Believer, unto whom sin is not the greatest Burden and sorrow.

Wherefore in the first place it belongs unto the true Notion of Heaven, that
it is a State wherein we shall be eternally freed from sin, and all the
concernments of it, but only the exaltation of the Glory of Gods Grace in
Christ, by the pardon of it. He that truly hates sin and abhorrs it, whose
principal Desire and Design of Life is to be freed from it so far as it is
possible; who walks in self Abasement through a sense of his many
Disappointments, when he hoped it should act in him no more, cannot as I judge
but frequently betake himself for Refreshment unto Thoughts of that state
wherein he shall be freed from it and triumph over it unto eternity. This is a
Notion of Heaven that is easily apprehended and fixed on the Mind, which we may
dwell upon, unto the great advantage and satisfaction of our Souls.

Frequent Thoughts and Meditations of Heaven under this notion, do argue a man
to be Spiritually minded. For it is a convincing Evidence that sin is a Burden
unto him, that he longs to be delivered from it and all its consequents; that
no Thoughts are more welcome unto him, than those of that state wherein sin
shall be no more. And although men are troubled about their sins, and would
desirously be freed from them, so far as they perplex their Minds, and make
their Consciences uneasy; yet if they are not much in the prospect of this
Relief, if they find not Refreshment in it, I fear their trouble is not such as
it ought to be. Wherefore, when men can so wrangle and wrestle with their
Convictions of sin, and yet take up the best of their Relief in hopes that it
will be better with them at some times or other in this world, without longing
Desires after that state wherein sin shall be no more, they can give no
evidence that they are Spiritually minded.

It is quite otherwise with sincere Believers in the exercise of this Duty. The
considerations of the Grace and Love of God, of the Blood of Christ, of the
Purity and Holiness of that good Spirit that dwells in them, of the Light,
Grace and Mercy which they have attained through the Promises of the Gospel,
are those which make the Remainders of sin most grievous and burdensome unto
them. This is that which even breaks their hearts, and makes some of them go
mourning all the day long, namely, that any thing of that which alone God
hates* should be found in them, or be remaining with them. It is in this
condition an Evidence that they are Spiritually minded, if together with
watchful endeavors for the universal mortification of sin, and utter excision
of it both root and branch, they constantly add these Thoughts of that blessed
State wherein they shall be absolutely and eternally freed from all sin, with
Refreshment, Delight, and Complacency.

These things belong unto our Direction for the fixing of our Thoughts and
Meditations on things above. This the meanest and weakest person who has the
least spark of Sincerity and Grace is capable of apprehending and able to
practice. And it is that which the sense they have of the evil of sin will put
them on every day, if they shut not their eyes against the Light of the
Refreshment that is in it. Let them who cannot arise in their minds unto fixed
and stable Thoughts of any other notion of these Invisible things, dwell on
this consideration of them, wherein they will find no small Spiritual Advantage
and Refreshment unto their Souls.

2. As unto the Positive Part of this glorious future State, the Thoughts and
apprehensions of men are very various. And that we may know as well what to
avoid, as what to embrace, we shall a little reflect on some of them.

1. Many are able to entertain no rational Conceptions about a future state of
Blessedness and Glory, no notions wherein either Faith or Reason is concerned.
Imagination they have of something that is great and glorious, but what it is
they know not. No wonder if such Persons have no delight in, no use of Thoughts
of Heaven. When their Imaginations have fluctuated up and down in all
uncertainties for a while, they are swallowed up in nothing. Glorious and
therefore desirable they take it for granted that it must be. But nothing can
be so unto them, but what is suitable unto their present Dispositions,
Inclinations and Principles. And hereof there is nothing in the true Spiritual
Glory of Heaven, or in the eternal enjoyment of God. These things are not
suited unto the Wills of their minds and of the flesh, and therefore they
cannot rise up unto any constant desires of them. Hence to please themselves,
they begin to imagine what is not. But whereas what is truly Heaven pleases
them not, and what does please them is not Heaven, nor there to be found, they
seldom or never endeavor in good earnest to exercise their Thoughts about it.

It were well if Darkness and Ignorance of the true nature of the future State
and eternal Glory, did not exceedingly prejudice Believers themselves, as unto
their Delight in them and Meditations about them. They have nothing fixed or
stated in their Minds, which they can betake themselves unto in their Thoughts
when they would contemplate about them. And by the way, whatever does divert
the minds of men from the power and life of Spiritual Worship, as do all
pompous Solemnities in the performance of it, does greatly hinder them as unto
right Conceptions of our future state. There was a Promise of Eternal Life
given unto the Saints under the Old Testament: But whereas they were obliged
unto a Worship that was carnal and outwardly pompous, they never had clear and
distinct Apprehensions of the future state of Glory; For Life and Immortality
were brought to Light by the Gospel. Wherefore, although no man living can see
or find out the infinite Riches of Eternal Glory; yet is it the Duty of all to
be acquainted with the Nature of it in general, so as that they may have fixed
Thoughts of it, Love unto it, earnest Desires after it, all under its own true
and proper Notion.

2. So great a Part of Mankind as the Mahumetans, unto whom God has given all
the principal and most desirable parts of the World to inhabit and possess, do
conceive the state of future Blessedness to consist in the full satisfaction of
their sensual Lusts and Pleasures. An Evidence this is, that the Religion which
they profess, has no power or Efficacy on their Minds to change them from the
Love of Sin, or placing their Happiness in fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh.
It does not at all enlighten their Minds to discern a Beauty in Spiritual
things, nor excite their Affections unto the Love of them, nor free the Soul to
look after Blessedness in such things as alone are suited unto its rational
Constitution. For if it did, they would place their Happiness and Blessedness
in them. Wherefore, it is nothing but an Artifice of the god of this World, to
blind the Eyes of men unto their Eternal Destruction.

3. Some of the Philosophers of old did attain an Apprehension that the
Blessedness of men in another world does consist in the Souls full satisfaction
in the Goodness and Beauty of the Divine Nature. And there is a Truth in this
Notion which contemplative men have adorned with excellent and rational
Discourses. And sundry who have been and are Learned among Christians, have
greatly improved this Truth, by the Light of the Scripture. From Reason they
take up with Thoughts of the Goodness, the Amiableness, the self-sufficiency,
the alsufficient satisfactoriness of the infinite Perfections of the Divine
Nature. These things shine in themselves with such a glorious Light, as that
there is no more required unto a perception of them, but that men do not
wilfully shut their eyes against it, through bestial Sensuality and Love of
Sin. From Reason also do they frame their Conceptions concerning the Capacity
of the Souls of men for the immediate Enjoyment of God, and what is suited
therein unto their utmost Blessedness. No more is required unto these things,
but a due consideration of the Nature of God and Man, with our Relation unto
him and dependence on him. By the Light of the Scripture they frame these
things into that which they call the Beatifical Vision, whereby they intend all
the ways whereby God in the highest and immediate Instances, can and does
communicate of himself unto the Souls of men, and the utmost Elevation of their
intellectual Capacities to receive those Communications. It is such an
Intellectual Apprehension of the Divine Nature and Perfections, with ineffable
Love, as gives the Soul the utmost Rest and Blessedness which its Capacities
can extend unto.

These things are so; and they have been by many both piously and elegantly
illustrated. Howbeit they are above the Capacities of ordinary Christians, they
know not how to manage them in their Minds, nor exercise their Thoughts about
them. They cannot reduce them unto present usefulness, nor make them
subservient unto the exercise and increase of Grace. And the Truth is, the
Scripture gives us another Notion of Heaven and Glory, not contrary unto this,
not inconsistent with it, but more suited unto the Faith and Experience of
Believers, and which alone can convey a true and useful sense of these things
unto our Minds. This therefore is diligently to be enquired into, and firmly
stated in our Thoughts and Affections.

4. The principal Notion which the Scripture gives us of the State of Heavenly
Blessedness, and which the meanest Believers are capable of improving in daily
practice, is, That Faith shall be turned into Sight, and Grace into Glory. We
walk now by Faith and not by Sight, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.7. Wherefore
this is the Difference between our present and our future state, that Sight
hereafter shall supply the room of Faith, 1 John 3.2. And if Sight come into
the place of Faith, then the Object of that Sight must be the same with the
present Object of our Faith. So the Apostle informs us; 1 Cor. 13.9.10, 12. For
we know in part, and when we Prophecy in part; but when that which is perfect
is come, that which is in part shall be done away. For now we see through a
Glass darkly, but then face to face. Those things which we see now darkly as in
a glass, we shall then have an immediate sight and full comprehension of; for
that which is perfect must come and do away that which is in part. What then
is the principal Present Object of Faith as it is Evangelical, into whose room
Sight must succeed? Is it not the Manifestation of the Glory of the infinite
Wisdom, Grace, Love, Kindness and Power of God in Christ, the Revelation of the
eternal Councels of his Will, and the ways of their Accomplishment unto the
eternal Salvation of the Church in and by him; with the glorious exaltation of
Christ himself? Wherefore, in the full satisfactory Representation of these
things unto our Souls, received by Sight or a direct immediate Intuition of
them, does the Glory of Heaven principally consist. We behold them now darkly
as in a glass; that is, the utmost which by Faith we can attain unto; in Heaven
they shall be openly and fully displayed. The infinite incomprehensible
Excellencies of the Divine Nature, are not proposed in Scripture as the
immediate Object of our Faith, nor shall they be so unto Sight in Heaven. The
Manifestation of them in Christ is the immediate Object of our Faith here, and
shall be of our Sight hereafter. Only through this Manifestation of them we are
lead even by Faith ultimately to acquiesce in them; as we shall in Heaven be
lead by Love perfectly to adhere unto them with Delight ineffable. This is our
immediate Objective Glory in Heaven, we hope for no other. And this if God will
I shall shortly more fully explain.

Whoever lives in the exercise of Faith, and has any experience of the Life,
Power and Sweetness of these Heavenly things, unto whom they are a Spring of
Grace and Consolation, they are able to meditate on the Glory of them in their
full enjoyment. Think much of Heaven, as that which will give you a perfect
view and comprehension of the Wisdom and Love and Grace of God in Christ, with
those other things which shall be immediately declared.

Some perhaps will be ready to say, that if this be Heaven they can see no
great Glory in it, no such Beauty as for which it should be desired. It may be
so, for some have no Instrument to take a view of Invisible things but carnal
Imaginations. Some have no Light, no Principle, no disposition of Mind or Soul,
whereunto these things are either acceptable or suitable. Some will go no
further in the consideration of the Divine Excellencies of God, and the
Faculties and actings of our Souls, than Reason will guide them, which may be
of use. But we look for no other Heaven, we desire none, but what we are lead
unto and prepared for by the Light of the Gospel; that which shall perfect all
the beginnings of Gods Grace in us; not what shall be quite of another nature
and destructive of them. We value not that Heaven which is equally suited unto
the Desires and Inclinations of the worst of men as well as of the best; for we
know that they who like not Grace here, neither do nor can like that which is
Glory hereafter. No man who is not acquainted experimentally in some measure,
with the Life, Power and Evidence of Faith here, has any other Heaven in his
aim, but what is erected in his own Imagination. The Glory of Heaven which the
Gospel prepares us for, which Faith leads and conducts us unto, which the Souls
of Believers long after, as that which will give full Rest, Satisfaction and
Complacency, is the full, open, perfect Manifestation of the Glory of the
Wisdom, Goodness, and Love of God in Christ, in his Person and Mediation, with
the Revelation of all his Councels concerning them, and the communication of
their effects unto us. He that likes it not, unto whom it is not desirable,
may betake himself unto Mahomets Paradise, or the Philosophers Speculations, in
the Gospel Heaven he has no Interest. These are the things which we see now
darkly as in a Glass, by Faith; in the view of them are our Souls gradually
changed into the likeness of God; and the comprehension of them is that which
shall give us our utmost conformity and likeness unto him whereof our natures
are capable. In a sense and experience of their Reality and Goodness given us
by the Holy Ghost, do all our spiritual Consolations and Joys consist. The
Effects produced by them in our Souls are the first fruits of Glory. Our Light,
Sense, Experience and Enjoyment of these things however weak and frequently
interrupted, our Apprehensions of them however dark and obscure, are the only
means whereby we are made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

To have the eternal Glory of God in Christ, with all the fruits of his Wisdom
and Love, whilst we are our selves under the full participation of the effects
of them, immediately, directly, revealed, proposed, made known unto us in a
divine and glorious Light, our Souls being furnished with a Capacity to behold
and perfectly comprehend them, this is the Heaven which according unto Gods
Promise we look for. But as was said, these things shall be elsewere more fully
treated of.

It is true, that there are sundry other things in particular that belong unto
this State of Glory. But what we have mentioned is the Fountain and Spring of
them all. We can never have an immeditate enjoyment of God in the Immensity of
his Nature, nor can any created understanding conceive any such things. Gods
communications of himself unto us, and our enjoyment of him, shall be in and by
the manifestation of his Glory in Christ. He who can see no Glory, who is
sensible of no Blessedness in these things, is a stranger unto that Heaven
which the Scripture reveals, and which Faith leads unto.

It may be enquired, what is the Subjective Glory, or what Change is to be
wrought in our selves that we may enjoy this Glory? Now that consists
principally as unto our Souls in the Perfection of all Grace, which is
initially wrought and subjectively resides in us in this world. The Grace which
we have here, shall not be done away as unto its essence and nature, though
somewhat of it shall cease as unto the manner of its Operation. What Soul could
think with Joy of going to Heaven, if thereby he must lose all his present
Light, Faith, and Love of God, though he be told that he should receive that in
lieu of them, which is more excellent, whereof he has no experience, nor can
understand of what nature it is. When the Saints enter into Rest, their Good
Works do follow them, and how can they do so, if their Grace do not accompany
them, from whence they proceed? The Perfection of our present Graces which are
here weak, and interrupted in their operations, is a principal Eminency of the
State of Glory. Faith shall be heightened into Vision as was proved before,
which does not destroy its Nature, but cause it to cease as unto its manner of
Operation toward things invisible. If a man have a weak small Faith in this
Life, with little Evidence, and no Assurance, so that he doubts of all things,
questions all things, and has no Comfort from what he does believe; if
afterward through supplies of Grace, he has a mighty prevailing Evidence of
the things believed, is filled with Comfort and Assurance; this is not by a
Faith or Grace of another kind than what he had before; but by the same Faith
raised unto an higher Degree of Perfection. When our Savior cured the Blind
man, and gave him hls sight; Mark 8. at first he saw all things obscurely and
imperfectly, he saw men, as Trees, walking; ver. 24. But on another application
of Virtue unto him, he saw all things clearly; ver. 25. It was not a sight of
another kind which he then received, than what he had at first; only its
imperfection whereby he saw men like Trees walking was taken away. Nor will our
perfect vision of things above, be a Grace absolutely of another kind from the
Light of Faith which we here enjoy; only what is imperfect in it will be done
away, and it will be made meet for the present enjoyment of things here at a
distance and invisible. Love shall have its Perfection also, and the least
Alteration in its manner of Operation of any Grace whatever. And there is
nothing that should more excite us to labor after a growth in Love to God in
Christ, than this, that it shall to all Eternity be the same in its Nature and
in all its Operations, only both the one and the other shall be made absolutely
perfect. The Soul will by it be enabled to cleave unto God unchangeably, with
eternal Delight, Satisfaction and Complacency. Hope shall be perfect in
Enjoyment, which is all the Perfection it is capable of. So shall it be as unto
other Graces.

This subjective Perfection of our Natures, especially in all the Faculties,
Powers, and Affections of our Souls and all their Operations, belongs unto our
Blessedness, nor can we be blessed without it. All the Objective Glory in
Heaven would not in our beholding and enjoyment of it (if it were possible)
make us blessed and happy, if our own Natures were not made perfect, freed from
all disorder, irregular motions and weak imperfect Operations. What is it then
that must give our Nature this subjective Perfection? It is that Grace alone
whose beginnings we are here made partakers of. For therein consists the
Renovation of the Image of God in us. And the perfect communication of that
Image unto us, is the absolute Perfection of our Natures; the utmost which
their capacity is suited unto. And this gives us the last thing to be enquired
into, namely by what means in our selves we shall eternally abide in that
state. And this is by the unalterable Adherence of our whole Souls unto God, in
perfect Love and Delight. This is that whereby alone the Soul reaches unto the
essence of God, and the infinite incomprehensible perfections of his Nature.
For the perfect nature hereof, Divine Revelation has left it under a vail, and
so must we do also. Nor do I designedly handle these things in this place, but
only in the way of a Direction how to exercise our Thoughts about them.

This is that notion of Heaven which those who are spiritually minded ought to
be conversant withal. And the true stating of it by Faith, is a discriminating
character of Believers. This is no Heaven unto any others. Those who have not
an experience of the Excellency of these things in their initial state in this
World, and their incomparable Transcendency unto all other things, cannot
conceive how heavenly Glory and Blessedness should consist in them. Unskilful
men may cast away rough unwrought Diamonds as useless Stones; they know not
what polishing will bring them unto. Nor do men unskilful in the Mysteries of
Godliness, judge there can be any Glory in rough unwrought Grace; they know not
what luster and beauty the polishing of the Heavenly hand will give unto it.

It is generally supposed that however men differ in and about Religion here,
yet they agree well enough about Heaven, they would all go to the same Heaven.
But it is a great Mistake, they differ in nothing more; they would not all go
to the same Heaven. How few are they who value that Heavenly State which we
have treated of; or do understand how any blessedness can consist in the
enjoyment of it? But this and no other Heaven would we go unto. Other notions
there may be, there are of it, which being but fruits and effects of men's own
Imaginations, the more they dwell in the contemplation of them, the more carnal
they may grow, at best the more superstitious. But spiritual Thoughts of this
Heaven, consisting principally in freedom from all sin, in the Perfection of
all Grace in the vision of the Glory of God in Christ, and all the excellencies
of the Divine Nature as manifested in him, are an effectual Means for the
improvement of spiritual Life, and the increase of all Graces in us. For they
cannot but effect an Assimilation in the Mind and Heart unto the things
contemplated on, where the Principles and Seeds of them are already inlaid and
begun. This is our first Direction.

Secondly, Having fixed right Notions and Apprehensions of Heavenly things in
our minds, it is our Duty to think and contemplate greatly on them, and our own
concernment in them. Without this all our Speculations concerning the nature of
eternal things, will be of no use unto us. And unto your Encouragement and
Direction, take these few short Rules relating unto this Duty. (1.) Here lies
the great Trial whether we are spiritually minded or no, by virtue of this
Rule; If we are risen with Christ, we will mind the things that are above, Col.
3.3. (2.) Here lies the great Means whereby we may attain further degrees in
that blessed frame of mind, if it be already formed in us, by virtue of that
Rule; Beholding the Glory of God as in a Glass, we are changed into the same
Image from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. (3.) Here lies the great Evidence
whether we have a real interest in the things above or no; whether we place our
Portion and Blessedness in them, by virtue of that Rule; Where our Treasure is,
there will our Hearts be also. Are they our Treasure, our Portion, our Reward,
in comparison whereof all other things are but loss and dung? we shall
assuredly be conversant in our minds about them. (4.) It cannot be imagined,
that a man should have in him a Principle cognate and suited unto things above,
of the same kind and nature with them, that his Soul should be under the
conduct of those habits of Grace, which strive and naturally tend unto
Perfection, laboring greatly here under the weight of their own weaknesses, as
it is with all who are truly Spiritually Minded, and yet not have his Thoughts
greatly exercised about these things, 1 John 3.3.

It were well if we would try our selves by things of so uncontrollable
Evidence. What can any object unto the Truth of these things, or the Necessity
of this Duty? If it be otherwise with us, it is from one of these two causes;
either we are not convinced of the Truth and Reality of them, or we have no
delight in them, because we are not spiritually minded. Do we think that men
may turmoyl themselves in earthly Thoughts all the day long, and when they are
freed of their Affairs, betake themselves unto those that are vain and useless,
without any stated converse with things above, and yet enjoy Life and Peace? We
must take other measures of things, if we intend to live unto God, to be like
him, and to come unto the enjoyment of him.

What is the matter with men that they are so stupid? They all generally desire
to go to Heaven, at least when they can live here no longer. Some indeed have
no other regard unto it, but only that they would not go to Hell. But most
would dye the Death of the Righteous, and have their latter end like his, yet
few there are who endeavor to attain a right Notion of it, to try how it is
suited unto their Principles and Desires; but content themselves with such
general notions of it as please their Imaginations. It is no wonder if such
Persons seldom exercise their Minds or Thoughts about it, nor do they so much
as pretend to be Spiritually minded. But as for those who are instructed in
these things, who profess their chiefest Interest to lie in them, not to abound
in Meditation concerning them, it argues indeed that whatever they profess,
they are earthly and carnal.

Again; Meditate and think of the Glory of Heaven, so as to compare it with the
opposite state of Death and eternal Misery. Few men care to think much of Hell,
and the Everlasting Torments of the Wicked therein. Those do so least, who are
in most danger of falling thereinto. They put far from them the evil day, and
suppose their Covenant with Death and Hell to be sure. Some begin to advance an
Opinion that there is no such Place, because it is their Interest and Desire
that there should be none. Some out of Profaneness make a Scoff at it, as
though a future Judgment were but a Fable. Most seem to think that there is a
Severity in thoughts about it, which it is not fit we should be too much
terrified withal. Some transient Thoughts they will have of it, but not suffer
them to abide in their minds, lest they should be too much discomposed. Or they
think it not consistent with the Goodness of Christ to leave any men in that
condition; whereas there is more spoken directly of Hell, its Torments and
their Eternity, by himself self (...) in all the Scripture besides. These
Thoughts ^^^ost proceed from an unwillingness to be troubled (...) their sins,
and are useful unto none. It is the height of Folly for men to endeavor the
hiding of themselves for a few Moments from that which is unavoidably coming
upon them unto Eternity; and the due consideration whereof, is a means for an
Escape from it. But I speak only of true Believers. And the more they are
conversant in their Thoughts about the future estate of Eternal Misery, the
greater Evidence they have of the Life and confidence of Faith. It is a
necessary Duty to consider it, as what we were by nature obnoxious unto, as
being Children of Wrath; what we have deserved by our Personal sins, as the
wages of sin is Death; what we are delivered from through Jesus the Deliverer
who saves us from the wrath to come; what expression it is of the Indignation
of God against sin, who has prepared this Tophet of Old; that we may be
delivered from sin, kept up to an Abhorrency of it, walking in Humility,
self-abasement, and the Admiration of Divine Grace. This therefore is required
of us, that in our Thoughts and Meditations, we compare the state of
Blessedness and Eternal Glory, as a free and absolute effect of the Grace of
God in and through Christ Jesus, with that state of Eternal Misery, which we
had deserved. And if there be any spark of Grace or of holy Thankfulness in our
Hearts, it will be stirred up unto its due exercise.

Some it may be will say, that they complained before that they cannot get
their minds fixed on these things. Weakness, Weariness, Darkness, Diversions,
Occasions do prevalently obstruct their abiding in such Thoughts. I shall speak
further unto this afterward, at present I shall only suggest two things. (1.)
If you cannot attain, yet continue to follow after; get your minds in a
perpetual endeavor after an abode in spiritual Thoughts. Let your minds be
rising toward them every hour, yea an hundred times a day, on all occasions,
on a continual sense of Duty; and sigh within your selves for deliverance, when
you find Disappointments, or not a continuance in them. It is the sense of that
Place; Romans 8.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. (2.) Take care you go not backwards and lose
what you have wrought. If you neglect these things for a season, you will
quickly find your selves neglected by them. So I observe it every day in the
hearing of the Word. Whilst Persons keep up themselves to a diligent Attendance
on it where they find it preached unto their Edification, they find great
Delight in it, and will undergo great Difficulties for the enjoyment of it: Let
them be diverted from it for a season, after a while it grows indifferent unto
them, any thing will satisfy them that pretends unto the same Duty.

CHAP. VII.
Especial Objects of Spiritual Thoughts on the Glorious State of Heaven, and
what belongs thereunto. First, of Christ himself. Thoughts of Heavenly Glory,
in opposition unto. Thoughts of Eternal Misery. The Use of such Thoughts.
Advantage in Sufferings.

IT will be unto our Advantage having stated right Notions of the Glory of the
blessed State above in our minds, to fix on some particulars belonging unto it,
as the especial Object of our Thoughts and Meditations. As, (1.) Think much of
him who unto us is the Life and Center of all the Glory of Heaven that is,
Christ himself. I shall be very brief in treating hereof, because I have
designed a peculiar Treatise on this Subject, of beholding the Glory of Christ
both here and unto Eternity. At present therefore a few things only shall be
mentioned, because on this occasion they are not to be omitted. The whole of
the Glory of the State above is expressed by being ever with the Lord; where he
is, to behold his Glory. For in and through him is the Beatifical manifestation
of God and his Glory made for evermore. And through him are all Communications
of inward Glory unto us. The present Resplendency of Heavenly Glory, consists
in his Mediatory Ministry, as I have at large elsewhere declared. And he will
be the means of all glorious communications between God and the Church unto
Eternity. Wherefore if we are Spiritually minded, we should fix our Thoughts on
Christ above, as the Center of all Heavenly Glory. To help us herein we may
consider the things that follow.

(1.) Faith has continual Recourse unto him on the account of what he did and
suffered for us in this world. For thereon, Pardon of sin, Justification and
Peace with God do depend. This arises in the first place from a sense of our
own wants. But Love of him is no less necessary unto us than Faith in him. And
although we have powerful Motives unto Love, from what he did and was in this
world, yet the formal Reason of our Adherence unto him thereby is what he is in
himself, as he is now exalted in Heaven. If we rejoice not at the Remembrance
of his present Glory, if the Thoughts of it be not frequent with us and
refreshing unto us, how dwells his Love in us?

(2.) Our Hope is that e're long we shall be ever with him. And if so, it is
certainly our Wisdom and Duty to be here with him as much as we can. It is a
vain thing for any to suppose that they place their chiefest happiness in being
for ever in the Presence of Christ, who care not at all to be with him here as
they may. And the only way of our being present with him here, is by Faith and
Love, acting themselves in Spiritual Thoughts and Affections. And it is an
absurd thing for men to esteem themselves Christians, who scarce think of
Christ all the day long. Yet some, as one complained of old, scarce ever think
or speak of him but when they swear by his Name. I have read of them who have
lived and dyed in continual Contemplation on him, so far as the Imperfection of
our present state will admit. I have known them, I do know them, who call
themselves unto a Reproof if at any time he has been many minutes out of their
Thoughts. And it is strange that it should be otherwise with them who love him
in sincerity; yet I wish I did not know more, who give evidences that it is a
rare thing for them to be exercised in serious Thoughts and Meditations about
him. Yea there are some who are not averse upon occasions to speak of God, of
Mercy, of Pardon, of his Power and Goodness, who if you mention Christ unto
them, with any thing of Faith, Love, Trust in him, they seem unto them as a
strange thing. Few there are who are sensible of any Religion beyond what is
natural. The things of the Wisdom and Power of God in Christ, are foolishness
unto them. Take some Directions for the Discharge of this Duty. (1.) In your
Thoughts of Christ be very careful that they are conceived and directed
according to the Rule of the Word, lest you deceive your own souls, and give up
the conduct of your Affections unto vain Imaginations. Spiritual Notions
befalling carnal minds, did once by the means of Superstition ruin the Power
of Religion. A Conviction men had that they must think much of Jesus Christ,
and that this would make them conformable unto him; but having no real
Evangelical Faith, nor the Wisdom of Faith to exercise it in their Thoughts and
Affections in a due manner, nor understanding what it was to be truly like
unto him, they gave up themselves unto many foolish Inventions and
Imaginations; by which they Thought to express their Love and conformity unto
him. They would have Images of him which they would embrace, adore, and bedew
with their tears. They would have Crucifixes as they called them, which they
would carry about them, and wear next unto their hearts, as if they resolved to
lodge Christ always in their bosoms. They would go in Pilgrimage to the place
where he dyed and rose again, through a thousand dangers; and purchase a
feigned Chip of a Tree whereon he suffered, at the price of all they had in the
world. They would endeavor by long Thoughtfulness, Fastings and Watchings, to
cast their Souls into Raptures and Ecstasies, wherein they fancied themselves in
his Presence. They came at last to make themselves like him, in getting
impressions of wounds, on their sides, their hands and feet. Unto all these
things and sundry others of an alike Nature and Tendency, did Superstition
abuse and corrupt the Minds of men, from a pretense of a Principle of Truth;
For there is no more certain Gospel Truth than this, that Believers ought
continually to contemplate on Christ, by the actings of Faith in their Thoughts
and Affections; and that thereby they are changed and transformed into his
Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. And we are not to forego our Duty, because other men have
been mistaken in theirs; nor part with practical fundamental Principles of
Religion, because they have been abused by Superstition. But we may see herein,
how dangerous it is to depart in any thing from the conduct of Scripture Light
and Rule, when for want thereof, the best and most noble Endeavors of the
minds of men, even to love Christ and to be like unto him, do issue in
Provocations of the highest nature.

Pray therefore that you may be kept unto the Truth in all things by a diligent
Attendance unto the only Rule thereof, and conscientious subjection of Soul
unto the Authority of God in it. For we ought not to suffer our Affections to
be entangled with the paint or Artificial Beauty of any way or means of giving
our Love unto Christ, which are not warranted by the Word of Truth. Yet I must
say, that I had rather be among them who in the actings of their Love and
Affections unto Christ do fall into some irregularities and excesses in the
manner of expressing it (provided their Worship of him be neither Superstitious
nor Idolatrous) than among those who professing themselves to be Christians, do
almost disavow their having any Thoughts of or Affection unto the Person of
Christ: But there is no need that we should foolishly run into either of these
extremes. God has in the Scripture sufficiently provided against them both. He
has both showed us the Necessity of our diligent acting of Faith and Love on
the Person of Christ; and has limited out the way and means whereby we may so
do; And let our Designs be what they will, where in any thing we depart from
his Prescriptions, we are not under the conduct of his Spirit, and so are sure
to lose all that we do.

Wherefore two things are required that we may thus think of Christ and
Meditate on him according to the mind and will of God. (1.) That the means of
bringing him to Mind, be what God has promised and appointed. (2.) That the
continued Proposal of him as the Object of our Thoughts and Meditations be of
the same kind. For both these ends, the superstitious minds of men invented the
ways of Images and Crucifixes, with their Appurtenances before mentioned. And
this rendered all their Devotion an Abomination. That which tends unto these
ends among Believers, is the Promise of the Spirit; and the Institutions of the
Word. Would you then think of Christ as you ought; take these two directions.
(1.) Pray that the Holy Spirit may abide with you continually to mind you of
him, which he will do in all in whom he does abide; For it belongs unto his
Office. (2.) For more fixed Thoughts and Meditations; take some express place
of Scripture, wherein he is set forth and proposed either in his Person,
Office, or Grace unto you, Gal. 3.1.

4. This Duty lies at the Foundation of all that blessed communion and
intercourse, that is between Jesus Christ and the Souls of Believers. This I
confess is despised by some and the very Notion of it esteemed ridiculous. But
they do therein no less than renounce Christianity, and turn the Lord Christ
into an Idol, that neither knows, sees, nor hears. But I speak unto them
who are not utter strangers unto the Life of Faith, who know not what Religion
is, unless they have real spiritual intercourse and communion with the Lord
Christ thereby. Consider this therefore as it is in particular exemplified in
the Book of Canticles. There is not one Instance of it to be found, which does
not suppose a continual Thoughtfulness of him. And in answer unto them, as they
are actings of Faith and Love wherein he is delighted, does he by his Spirit
insinuate into our Minds and Hearts, a gracious sense of his own Love, Kindness
and Relation unto us. The great variety wherein these things are mutually
carried on between him and the Church, the singular endearments which ensue
thereon, and blessed Estate in Rest and Complacency, do make up the substance
of that Holy Discourse. No Thoughts then of Christ, proceeding from Faith,
accompanied with Love and Delight, shall be lost: They that sow this seed shall
return with their sheaves; Christ will meet them with gracious Intimations of
his Acceptance of them, delight in them, and return a sense of his own Love
unto them. He never will be, he never was behind with any poor Soul in returns
of Love. Those gracious and blessed Promises which he has made of coming unto
them that believe in him, of making his abode with them, and of supping with
them, all expressions of a Gracious Presence and intimate Communion, do all
depend on this duty. Wherefore we may consider three things concerning these
Thoughts of Christ. (1.) That they are exceeding acceptable unto him, as the
best pledges of our Cordial Affection. Cant. 2.14. O my Dove that art in the
clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance
is comely. When a Soul through manifold discouragements and despondencies
withdraws, and as it were hides it self from him, he calls to see a poor
weeping, blubbered face, and to hear a broken voice, that scarce goes beyond
sighs and groans. (2.) These Thoughts are the only Means, whereby we comply
with the gracious intimations of his Love mentioned before. By them do we hear
his Knocking, know his Voice, and open the door of our Hearts to give him
entrance, that he may abide and sup with us. Sometimes indeed the Soul is
surprised into Acts of Gracious Communion with Christ, Cant. 6.11. But they are
not to be expected unless we abide in those ways and means which prepare and
make our Souls meet for the Reception and entertainment of him. Wherefore, (3.)
Our want of experience in the power of this Holy intercourse and communion with
Christ, arises principally from our Defect in this Duty. I have known one who
after a long Profession of Faith and Holiness, fell into great Darkness and
distress, merely on this account, that he did not experience in himself, the
Sweetness, Life, and Power of the Testimonies given concerning the real
Communications of the Love of Christ unto, and the intimation of his Presence
with Believers. He knew well enough the Doctrine of it, but did not feel the
Power of it; at least he understood there was more in it, than he had
experience of. God carried him by Faith through that Darkness; but taught him
withal, that no sense of these things was to be let into the Soul, but by
constant Thoughtfulness and Contemplations on Christ. How many blessed visits
do we lose, by not being exercised unto this Duty. See Cant. 5.1, 2, 3.
Sometimes we are busy, sometimes careless and negligent, sometimes slothful,
sometimes under the power of Temptations, so that we neither enquire after, nor
are ready to receive them. This is not the way to have our Joys abound.

Again, I speak now with especial respect unto him in Heaven. The Glory of his
Presence as God and Man eternally united, the Discharge of his Mediatory Office
as he is at the right hand of God, the Glory of his present acting for the
Church, as he is the Minister of the Sanctuary and the true Tabernacle which
God has fixed and not Man, the Love, Power and Efficacy of his Intercession,
whereby he takes care for the Accomplishment of the Salvation of the Church,
the approach of his Glorious coming unto Judgment, are to be the Objects of our
daily Thoughts and Meditations.

Let us not mistake our selves. To be spiritually minded is not to have the
Notions and Knowledge of spiritual things in our minds; it is not to be
constant, no not to abound in the performance of Duties, both which may be
where there is no Grace in the Heart at all. It is to have our Minds really
exercised with delight about Heavenly things, the things that are above,
especially Christ himself as at the right hand of God.

Again: So think of eternal things as continually to lay them in the Balance
against all the sufferings of this Life. This use of it I have spoken unto
somewhat before; and it is necessary it should be pressed upon all occasions.
It is very probable that we shall yet suffer more than we have done. Those who
have gone before us, have done so; it is foretold in the Scripture, that if we
will live Godly in Christ Jesus we must do so; we stand in need of it, and the
World is prepared to bring it on us. And as we must suffer, so it is necessary
unto the Glory of God, and our own Salvation, that we suffer in a due manner.
Mere sufferings will neither commend us unto God, nor any way advantage our own
Souls. When we suffer acording to the will of God, it is an eminent Grace, Gift
and Privilege, Psalm. 1.29. But many things are required hereunto. It is not
enough that men suppose themselves to suffer for Conscience sake, though if we
do not so, all our sufferings are in vain. Nor is it enough that we suffer for
this or that way of Profession in Religion, which we esteem to be true and
according to the Mind of God, in opposition unto what is not so. The Glory of
Sufferings on these accounts solely, has been much sullied in the days
wherein we live. It is evident that Persons out of a natural Courage,
accompanied with deep radicate persuasions, and having their minds influenced
with some sinister ends, may undergo things hard and difficult, in giving
Testimony unto what is not according to the Mind of God. Examples we have had
hereof in all Ages, and in that wherein we live in an especial manner. See 1
Pet. 4.14, 15, 16. We have had enough to take off all paint and appearance of
Honor from them who in their sufferings are deceived in what they profess. But
men may from the same Principles suffer for what is indeed according to the
Mind of God, yea may give their bodies to be burned therein, and yet not to his
Glory nor their own eternal Advantage. Wherefore we are duly to consider all
things that are requisite to make our sufferings acceptable unto God and
honorable unto the Gospel.

I have observed in many a frame of Spirit with respect unto sufferings, that I
never saw good event of when it was tried to the uttermost. Boldness,
confidence, a pretended contempt of hardships, and scorning other men whom they
suppose defective in these things, are the Garments or Livery they wear on this
Occasion. Such Principles may carry men out in a bad Cause, they will never do
so in a good. Evangelical Truth will not be honorably witnessed unto, but by
Evangelical Graces. Distrust of our selves, a due apprehension of the nature of
the evils to be undergone, and of our own frailty, with continual Prayers to be
delivered from them, or supported under them, and prudent care to avoid them
without an inroad on conscience, or neglect of Duty, are much better
preparations for an entrance into a state of Suffering. Many things belong unto
our Learning aright this first and last Lesson of the Gospel, namely, of
bearing the Cross, or undergoing all sorts of sufferings for the Profession of
it. But they belong not unto our present Occasion. This only is that which we
now press, as an evidence of our sincerity in our sufferings, and an effectual
means to enable us cheerfully to undergo them, which is to have such a
continual prospect of the future state of Glory, so as to lay it in the
Balance against all that we may undergo. For,

(1.) To have our Minds filled and possessed with Thoughts thereof, will give
us an Alacrity in our entrance into sufferings in a way of Duty. Other
considerations will offer themselves unto our Relief, which will quickly fade
and disappear. They are like a Cordial Water which gives a little Relief for a
Season, and then leaves the Spirits to sink beneath what they were before it
was taken. Some relieve themselves from the consideration of the Nature of
their Sufferings; they are not so great, but that they may conflict with them
and come off with safety. But there is nothing of that kind so small, which
will not prove too hard and strong for us, unless we have especial Assistance.
Some do the same from their Duration; they are but for ten days or six months,
and then they shall be free. Some from the Compassion and esteem of Men. These
and the like considerations are apt to occur unto the minds of all sorts of
Persons, whether they are spiritually minded or no. But when our Minds are
accustomed unto Thoughts of the Glory that shall be revealed, we shall
cheerfully entertain every way and path that leads thereunto; as suffering for
the Truth does in a peculiar manner. Through this Medium we may look cheerfully
and comfortably, on the loss of Name, Reputation, Goods, Liberty, Life it self;
as knowing in our selves that we have better and more abiding comforts to
betake our selves unto. And we can no other way glorify God by our Alacrity in
the entrance of sufferings, than when it arises from a prospect into and
valuation of those invisible things which he has promised, as an abundant
Recompense for all we can lose in this world.

2. The great Aggravation of Sufferings is their long continuance, without any
rational Appearance or hopes of Relief. Many who have entered into Sufferings
with much Courage and Resolution, have been wearied and worn out with their
continuance. Elijah himself was hereby reduced to pray that God would take away
his Life, to put an end unto his Ministry and Calamities. And not a few in all
Ages have been hereby so broken in their natural Spirits, and so shaken in the
exercise of Faith, as that they have lost the Glory of their Confession, in
seeking deliverance by sinful compliances in the denial of the Truth. And
although this may be done out of mere weariness, (as it is the Design of Satan
to wear out the Saints of the most High) with reluctance of Mind, and a Love
yet remaining unto the Truth in their Hearts, yet has it constantly one of
these two Effects. Some by the overwhelming sorrow that befalls them on the
account of their failure in Profession, and out of a deep sense of their
unkindness unto the Lord Jesus, are stirred up immediately unto higher Acts of
confession than ever they were before engaged in, and unto an higher
Provocation of their Adversaries, until their former troubles are doubled upon
them, which they frequently undergo with great satisfaction. Instances of this
nature occurr in all stories of great Persecutions. Others being cowed and
discouraged in their Profession, and perhaps neglected by them whose Duty it
was rather to restore them, have by the craft of Satan given place to their
Declensions, and become vile Apostates. To prevent these evils arising from the
Duration of sufferings without a prospect of Deliverance, nothing is more
prevalent than a constant Contemplation on the future Reward and Glory. So the
Apostle declares it; Heb. 11.35. When the Mind is filled with the Thoughts of
the unseen Glories of Eternity, it has in readiness what to lay in the
Balance against the longest continuance and Duration of sufferings, which in
comparison thereunto at their utmost extent are but for a Moment.

I have insisted the longer on these things, because they are the peculiar
Object of the Thoughts of them that are indeed Spiritually minded.

CHAP. VIII.
Spiritual Thoughts of God himself. The Opposition unto them and Neglect of
them, with their Causes and the way of their Prevalency. Predominant
Corruptions expelling due Thoughts of God, how to be discovered, etc. Thoughts
of God, of what nature, and what they are to be accompanied withal, etc.

I Have spoken very briefly unto the first particular Instance of the Heavenly
things, that we are to fix our Thoughts upon, namely, the Person of Christ. And
I have done it on the Reason before mentioned, namely, that I intend a peculiar
Treatise on that subject, or and Enquiry how we may behold the Glory of Christ
in this Life, and how we shall do so unto Eternity. That which I have reserved
unto the last place as unto the exercise of their Thoughts about, who are
Spiritually Minded, is that which is the absolute Foundation and Spring of all
spiritual things; namely, God himself. He is the Fountain whence all these
things proceed, and the Ocean wherein they issue; He is their Center and
Circumference wherein they all begin, meet and end. So the Apostle issues his
profound Discourse of the Councels of the Divine Will and Mysteries of the
Gospel, Romans 11.36. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom
be Glory for ever. All things arise from his Power, are all disposed by his
Wisdom into a tendency unto his Glory; of him, and through him, and to him are
all things. Under that consideration alone are they to be the Objects of our
Spiritual Meditations, namely, as they come from him, and tend unto him. All
other things are finite and limited; But they begin and end in that which is
immense and infinite. So God is All in All. He therefore is or ought to be the
only Supreme absolute Object of our Thoughts and Desires; other things are from
and for him only. Where our Thoughts do not either immediately and directly, or
mediately and by just consequence tend unto and End in him, they are not
Spiritual, 1. Pet. 1.21.

To make way for Directions how to exercise our Thoughts on God himself, some
things must be premised concerning a sinful defect herein, with the Causes of
it.

1. It is the great Character of a Man presumptuously and flagitiously wicked,
that God is not in all his Thoughts, Psalm. 10.4. That is, he is in none of
them. And of this want of Thoughts of God there are many Degrees; for all
wicked men are not equally so forgetful of him.

1. Some are under the power of Atheistical Thoughts: They deny, or question,
or do not avowedly acknowledge the very Being of God. This is the height of
what the enmity of the carnal Mind can rise unto. To acknowledge God, and yet
to refuse to be subject to his Law or Will, a Man would think were as bad if
not worse, than to deny the Being of God. But it is not so. That is a Rebellion
against his Authority, this and Hatred unto the only Fountain of all Goodness,
Truth and Being; and that because they cannot own it, but withal they must
acknowledge it to be infinitely righteous, holy and powerful, which would
destroy all their desires and security. Such may be the Person in the Psalm;
for the words may be read, All his Thoughts are that there is no God. Howbeit
the Context describes him as one who rather despises his Providence, than
denies his Being. But such there are whom the same Psalmist elsewhere brands
for Fools, though themselves seem to suppose that Wisdom was born and will dye
with them, Psalm. 14.1. Psalm. 53.1.

It may be never any Age since the Flood, did more abound with open Atheism,
among such as pretended unto the use and improvement of Reason, than that
wherein we live. Among the ancient civilized Heathen, we hear ever and anon of
a person branded for an Atheist; yet are not certain whether it was done justly
or no. But in all Nations of Europe at this day, Cities, Courts, Towns, Fields,
Armies, abound with Persons, who if any credit may be given unto what they say
or do, believe not that there is a God. And the Reason hereof may be a little
enquired into.

Now this is no other in general, but that men have decocted and wasted the
Light and Power of Christian Religion. It is the fullest Revelation of God,
that ever he made, it is the last that ever he will make in this World. If this
be despised, if men rebel against the Light of it, if they break the Cords of
it, and are senseless of its Power, nothing can preserve them from the highest
Atheism that the nature of man is capable of. It is in vain to expect Relief or
Preservation from inferior means, where the highest and most Noble is rejected.
Reason or the Light of Nature gives Evidences unto the being of God; and
Arguments are still well pleaded from them to the confusion of Atheists. And
they were sufficient to retain men in an Acknowledgment of the Divine Power and
Godhead, who had no other, no higher Evidences of them. But where men have had
the Benefit of Divine Revelation, where they have been Educated in the
Principles of Christian Religion, have had some Knowledge, and made some
Profession of them; and have through the Love of sin, and hatred of every thing
that is truly good, rejected all Convictions from them concerning the Being,
Power and Rule of God, they will not be kept unto a Confession of them, by any
considerations that the Light of nature can suggest.

There are therefore among others, three Reasons why there are more Atheists
among them who live where the Christian Religion is professed, and the Power of
it rejected, than among any other sort of men, even than there were among the
Heathens themselves.

1. God has designed to magnify his Word above all his Name, or all other
ways of the Revelation of himself unto the Children of Men, Psalm. 138.2. Where
therefore this is rejected and despised, he will not give the Honor unto
Reason or the Light of Nature, that they shall preserve the Minds of men from
any evil whatever. Reason shall not have the same Power and Efficacy on the
Minds of men, who reject the Light and Power of Divine Revelation by the Word;
as it has, or may have on them whose best guide it is, who never enjoyed the
Light of the Gospel. And therefore there is often times more common Honesty among
civilized Heathens and Mahumetans than amongst degenerate Christians. And from
the same Reason the Children of Professors are sometimes irrecoverably
profligate. It will be said, many are recovered unto God by Afflictions, who
have despised the Word. But it is otherwise; never any were converted unto God
by Afflictions who had rejected the Word. Men may by Afflictions be recalled
unto the Light of the Word, but none are immediately turned unto God by them.
As a good Shepherd, when a Sheep wanders from the Flock, and will not hear his
call, sends out his Dog, which stops him and bites him. Hereon he looks about
him, and hearing the call of the Shepherd returns again to the Flock, Job
33.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. But with this sort of Persons, it is the way of
God, that where the principal means of the Revelation of himself, and wherein
he does most glorify his Wisdom and his Goodness, is despised, he will not
only take off the Efficacy of inferior means, but judicially harden the Hearts
and blind the Eyes of men, that such means shall be of no use unto them. See
Isa. 6.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Acts 13, 40, 41. Romans 1.21, 28. 2 These. 2.11, 12.

2. The Contempt of Gospel Light and Christian Religion, as it is supernatural,
(which is the Beginning of Transgression unto all Atheists among us,) begets
in, and leaves on the mind such a depraved, corrupt habit, such a Congeries of
all Evils, that the Hatred of the Goodness, Wisdom and Grace of God can
produce; that it cannot but be wholly inclined unto the worst of Evils, as all
our Original vicious Inclinations succeeded immediately on our rejection and
loss of the Image of God. The best things corrupted, yield the worst Savor; as
Manna stank and bred worms. The Knowledge of the Gospel being rejected,
stinking Worms take the place of it in the Mind, which grow into Vipers and
Scorpions. Every Degree of Apostasy from Gospel Truth, brings in a
proportionate Degree of inclination unto wickedness into the Hearts and Minds
of men, 2 Pet. 2.21. And that which is total, unto all the evils that they are
capable of in this world. Whereas therefore Multitudes from their Darkness,
Unbelief, Temptation, Love of Sin, Pride and contempt of God, do fall off from
all subjection of Soul and Conscience unto the Gospel, either notionally or
practically, deriding or despising all supernatural Revelations; they are a
thousand times more disposed unto downright Atheism, than Persons who never
had the Light or Benefit of such Revelations. Take heed of Decays. Whatever
Ground the Gospel loses in our Minds, Sin possesses it for it self and its
own Ends.

Let none say, it is otherwise with them. Men grow Cold and Negligent in the
Duties of Gospel Worship, public and private; which is to reject Gospel Light.
Let them say and pretend what they please, that in other things, in their Minds
and Conversations, it is well with them; indeed it is not so. Sin will, sin
does one way or other, make an increase in them proportionate unto these
Decays; and will sooner or later discover it self so to do. And themselves if
they are not utterly hardened, may greatly discover it, inwardly in their
Peace, or outwardly in their Lives.

3. Where Men are resolved not to see, the greater the Light is that shines
about them, the faster they must close they Eyes. All Atheism springs from a
Resolution not to see things invisible and Eternal. Love of sin, a resolved
continuance in the practice of it, the effectual Power of vicious Inclinations,
in opposition unto all that is Good, make it the Interest of such men that
there should be no God to call them to an account. For a Supreme unavoidable
Judge, an Eternal Rewarder of Good and Evil, is inseparable from the first
notion of a Divine Being. Whereas therefore the most glorious Light and
uncontrollable Evidence of these things shines forth in the Scripture, men that
will abide by their interest to love and live in sin, must close their Eyes
with all the Arts and Powers that they have, or else they will pierce into
their Minds unto their Torment. This they do by downright Atheism, which alone
pretends to give them security against the Light of Divine Revelation. Against
all other convictions, they might take shelter from their, fears, under less
degrees of it.

It is not therefore unto the Disparagement but honor of the Gospel, that so
many avow themselves to be Atheists, in those places wherein the Truth of it is
known and professed. For none can have the least Inclination or Temptation
thereunto, until they have before hand rejected the Gospel, which immediately
exposes them unto the worst of Evils.

Nor is there any means for the Recovery of such Persons. The Opposition that
has been made unto Atheism with Arguments for the Divine Being and Existence
of God, taken from Reason and natural Light, in this and other Ages, has been
of good use to cast contempt on the pretenses of evil men, to justify
themselves in their folly. But that they have so much as changed the Minds of
any, I much doubt. No man is under the power of Atheistical Thoughts, or can be
so long, but he that is ensnared into them by his desire to live securely and
uncontroulably in sin. Such Persons know it to be their Interest, that there
should be no God, and are willing to take shelter under the bold Expressions
and Reasonings of them, who by the same means have hardened and blinded their
minds into such foolish Thoughts. But the most rational Arguments for the Being
of the Deity, will never prove an effectual cure unto a predominant Love of,
and habitual course in sin, in them who have resisted and rejected the Means
and Motives unto that End declared in divine Revelation. And unless the Love of
sin be cured in the Heart, Thoughts in the Acknowledgment of God, will not be
fixed in the Mind.

2. There are those of whom also it may be said, that God is not in all their
Thaughts, though they acknowledge his Essence and Being. For they are not
practically influenced in any thing by the Notions they have of him. Such is
the Person of whom this is affirmed; Psalm. 10.4. He is one who through Pride
and Profligacy with hardness in sin, regards not God in the Rule of the World,
ver. 4, 5, 11, 13. Such is the world filled withal at this day, as they are
described, Tit. 1.16. They profess that they know God, but in their Works deny
him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good work Reprobate. They
think, they live, they act in all things as if there were no God, at least as
if they never thought of him with fear and Reverence. And for the most part we
need not seek far for Evidences of their disregard of God; the Pride of their
countenances testify against them, Psalm. 10.4. And if they are followed
further, cursed Oaths, Licentiousness of Life, and hatred of all that is Good,
will confirm and Evidence the same. Such as these may own God in words, may be
afraid of him in dangers, may attend outwardly on his Worship; but they think
not of God at all in a due manner; he is not in all their Thoughts.

3. There are yet less Degrees of this disregard of God and forgetfulness of
him. Some are so filled with Thoughts of the World, and the Occasions of Life,
that it is impossible they should think of God as they ought. For as the Love
of God, and the Love of the World in prevalent Degrees are inconsistent, ( for
if a man loves this World, how dwells the Love of God in him?) so Thoughts
of God and of the World, in the like Degree are inconsistent. This is the state
of many who yet would be esteemed Spiritually minded. They are continually
conversant in their Minds about earthly things. Some things impose themselves
on them under the Notion of Duty: They belong unto their Callings, they must be
attended unto. Some are suggested unto their Minds from daily occasions and
occurrences. Common Converse in the world ingageth men into no other but wordly
Thoughts: Love and desire of earthly things, their enjoyment and increase,
exhaust the vigor of their Spirits all the day long. In the midst of a
multitude of Thoughts arising from these and the like occasions, whilst their
Hearts and Heads are reaking with the steam of them, many fall immediately in
their seasons unto the Performance of Holy Duties. Those times must suffice for
Thoughts of God. But notwithstanding such Duties, what through the want of a
due preparation for them, what through the fullness of their minds and
Affections with other things, and what through a neglect of Exercising Grace in
them, it may be said comparatively, that God is not in all their Thoughts.

I pray God, that this, at least as unto some Degrees of it, be not the
condition of many among us. I speak not now of men who visibly and openly live
in sin, profane in their Principles and profligate in their Lives. The Prayers
of such Persons are an Abomination unto the Lord; neither have they ever any
Thoughts of him, which he does accept: But I speak of them who are sober in
their Lives, industrious in their Callings, and not openly negligent about the
outward Duties of Religion. Such men are apt to approve of themselves, and
others also to speak well of them; for these things are in themselves
commendable and praiseworthy. But if they are traced home, it will be found as
to many of them, that God is not in all their Thoughts as he ought to be. Their
Earthly Conversation, their vain Communication, with their foolish Designs, do
all manifest that the vigor of their spirits, and most intense contrivances of
their Minds, are engaged into things below. Some refuse, transient, unmanaged
Thoughts are sometimes cast away on God, which he despises.

4. Where Persons do cherish secret predominant Lusts in their hearts and
lives, God is not in their Thoughts as he ought to be. He may be, he often is
much in the words of such Persons, but in their Thoughts he is not, he cannot
be in a due manner. And such Persons no doubt there are. Ever and anon, we hear
of one and another whose secret Lusts break forth into a discovery. They
flatter themselves for a season, but God often times so orders things in his holy
Providence, that their Iniquity shall be found out to be hateful. Some hateful
Lust discovers it self to be predominant in them. One is Drunken, another
Unclean, a third an Oppressor. Such there were ever found among Professors of
the Gospel, and that in the best of times; Among the Apostles one was a
Traitor, a Devil. Of the first Professors of Christianity, there were those
whose God was their Belly, whose end was Destruction, who minded earthly
things, Phil. 3.18, 19. Some may take Advantage at this Acknowledgment, that
there are such Evils among such as are called Professors. And it must be
confessed that great scandal is given hereby unto the world, casting both them
that give it, and them to whom it is given, under a most dreadful woe. But we
must bear the reproach of it, as they did of old, and commit the issue of all
things unto the watchful care of God. However it is Good in such a season to be
jealous over our selves and others, to exhort one another daily whilst it is
called to day, lest any be hardened through the Deceitfulness of sin. See Heb.
12.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And because those with whom it is thus, cannot be
spiritually minded; yet are there some Difficulties in the case, as unto the
predominancy of a secret Lust or Sin, I shall consider it somewhat more
distinctly.

1. We must distinguish between a Time of Temptation in some, and the ordinary
State of Mind and Affections in others. There may be a season wherein God in
his holy wise Orderings of all things toward us, and for his own Glory, in his
holy blessed Ends, may suffer a Lust or Corruption to break loose in the Heart,
to strive, tempt, suggest, and tumultuate, unto the great trouble and
disquietude of the Mind and Conscience. Neither can it be denied, but that
falling in conjunction with some vigorous Temptation, it may proceed so far as
to surprise the Person in whom it is into actual sin, unto his defilement and
amazement. In this case no man can say, he is tempted of God, for God tempeth
no man, but every man is tempted of his own Lust and enticed. But yet
Temptations of what sort soever they be, so far as they are afflictive,
corrective, or penal, are ordered and disposed by God himself. For there is no
evil of that nature, and he has not done it. And where he will have the Power
of any corruption to be afflictive in any Instance, two things may safely be
ascribed unto him.

1. He withholds the supplies of that Grace whereby it might be effectually
mortifyed and subdued. He can give in a Sufficiency of Efficacious Grace, to
repel any Temptation, to subdue any or all our Lusts and Sins. For he can and
does work in us to will and to do, according to his Pleasure. Ordinarily he
does so in them that believe; so that although their Lusts may rebel and war,
they cannot defile or prevail. But unto the continual supplies of this actual
prevailing Grace he is not obliged. When it may have a Tendency unto his holy
Ends, he may and does withhold it. When it may be a proud Soul is to be
humbled, a careless Soul to be awakened, an unthankful Soul to be convinced and
rebuked, a backsliding Soul to be recovered, a froward, selfish, passionate
Soul to be broken and meekened, he can leave them for a season unto the sore
exercise of a prevalent corruption, which under his holy guidance shall
contribute greatly unto his blessed Ends. It was so in the Temptation of Paul,
2 Cor. 11.7, 8, 9. If a man through disorder and excesses, is contracting many
habitual Distempers of Body, which gradually and insensibly tend unto his
Death; it may be an advantage to be cast into a violent feavour, which
threatens immediately to take away his Life. For he will hereby be thoroughly
awakened unto the consideration of his Danger, and not only labor to be freed
from his Feavour, but also for the future to watch against those Disorders and
Excesses which cast him into that condition. And sometimes a loose careless
Soul, that walks in a secure formal Profession, contracts many Spiritual
Diseases which tend unto Death and ruin. No Arguments or Considerations can
prevail with him, to awaken himself, to shake himself out of the Dust, and to
betake himself unto a more diligent and humble walking before God. In this
state, it may be, through the permission of God, he is surprised into some open
actual sin. Hereon through the vigorous actings of an enlightened Conscience,
and the stirrings of any sparks of Grace which yet remain, he is amazed,
terrifyed, and stirs up himself to seek after Deliverance.

2. God may and does in his Providence administer Objects and Occasions of men's
Lusts for their Trial. He will place them in such Relations, in such
Circumstances, as shall be apt to provoke their Affections, Passions, Desires
and Inclinations, unto those Objects that are suited unto them.

In this state any Lust will quickly get such Power in the Mind and Affections,
as to manage continual solicitations unto sin. It will not only dispose the
Affections toward it, but multiply Thoughts about it, and darken the mind as
unto those Considerations, which ought to prevail unto its Mortification. In
this condition it is hard to conceive how God should be in the Thoughts of men
in a due manner. However this state is very different from the habitual
Prevalency of any secret sin or corruption, in the ordinary course of men's
walking in the world, and therefore I do not directly intend it.

If any one shall enquire how we may know this Difference, namely, That is
between the occasional Prevalency of any Lust or Corruption in conjunction with
a Temptation, and the Power of sin in any Instance habitually and constantly
complied withal, or indulged in the Mind: I answer:

1. It is no great matter whether we are able to distinguish between them or
no. For the End why God suffers any corruption to be such a Snare and
Temptation, such a Thorn and Bryar, is to awaken the Souls of men out of their
security, and to humble them for their pride and negligence. The more severe
are their apprehensions concerning it, the more effectual it will be unto this
end and purpose. It is Good it may be that the Soul should apprehend more of
what is sinful in it, as it is a corruption, than of what is afflictive in it
as it is a Temptation. For if it be conceived as a predominant Lust, if there
be any spark of Grace remaining in the Soul, it will not rest until in some
measure it be subdued. It will also immediately put it upon a diligent search
into it self, which will issue in deep self-abasement, the principal End
designed. But,

2. For the Relief of them that may be perplexed in their Minds, about their
state and condition, I say, there is an apparent Difference between these
things. A Lust or Corruption arising up or breaking forth into a violent
Temptation, is the continual Burden, Grief, and Affliction of the Soul wherein
it is. And as the Temptation for the most part which befalls such a Person will
give him no rest from its reiterated solicitations; so he will give the
Temptation no Rest, but will be continually conflicting with it, and contending
against it. It fills the Souls with an Amazement at it self, and continual
self-abhorrency, that any such seeds of filth and folly should be yet remaining
in it. With them in whom any sin is ordinarily prevalent, it is otherwise.
According to their Light and renewed occasional convictions, they have trouble
about it, they cannot but have so, unless their Consciences are utterly seared.
But this Trouble respects principally, if not solely, its Guilt and Effects.
They know not what may ensue on their compliance with it, in this world and
another. Beyond this they like it well enough, and are not willing to part with
it. It is of this latter sort of Persons of whom we speak at present.

2. We must distinguish between the perplexing solicitation of any Lust, and
the conquering Predominancy of it. The Evil that is present with us, will be
soliciting and pressing unto sin of its own accord, even where there is no
such especial Temptation, as that spoken of before. So is the case stated, so
are the nature and Operations of it described, Romans 1. Gal. 5. And sometimes an
especial particular Lust, may be so warmed and fomented by men's constitutions
within, or be so exposed unto provoking, exciting occasions without, as to
bring perpetual trouble on the mind. Yet this may be where no sin has the
predominancy enquired after. And the Difference between the perplexing
solicitation of any corruption unto sin, and the conquering prevalency of it,
lies in this; that under the former, the Thoughts, contrivances and actings of
the mind, are generally disposed and inclined unto an opposition unto it, and a
conflict with it, how it may be obviated, defeated, destroyed, how an absolute
victory may be obtained against it. Yea Death it self is sweet unto such
Persons under this notion, as it is that which will deliver them from the
perplexing Power of their Corruptions, so is the state of such a Soul at large
represented, Romans 7. In the other case, namely, of its predominancy, it
disposes of the Thoughts actually for the most part, to make provision for the
flesh, and to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof. It fills the mind with pleasing
contemplations of its Object, and puts it on contrivances for satisfaction. Yea
part of the Bitterness of Death unto such Persons, is that it will make an
everlasting separation between them, and the satisfaction they have received in
their Lusts. It is bitter in the Thoughts of it unto a worldly minded Man,
because it will take him from all his enjoyments, his wealth, profits and
advantages. It is so unto the sensual Person, as that which finally determines
all his pleasures.

3. There is a difference in the Degrees of such a predominant Corruption. In
some it taints the Affections, vitiates the Thoughts, and works over the Will
unto Acts of a secret complacency in sin, but proceeds no farther. The whole
Mind may be vitiated by it, and rendered in the Multitude of its Thoughts, vain,
sensual, or worldly, according as is the nature of the prevailing Corruption.
Yet here God puts bounds unto the raging of some men's corruptions, and says to
their proud waves, thus far shall ye proceed, and no farther. He either lays a
restraint on their minds, that when Lust has fully conceived, it shall not
bring forth sin, or he sets an hedge before them in his Providence, that they
shall not be able in their circumstances, to find their way unto what perhaps
they do most earnestly desire. A woeful Life it is that such Persons lead. They
are continually tortured between their Corruptions and Convictions, or the Love
of sin, and fear of the Event. With others it pursues its course into outward
actual sins, which in some are discovered in this world, in others they are
not. For some men's sins go before them unto Judgment and some follow after.
Some fall into sin upon surprizal, from a concurrence of Temptation with
Corruption, and Opportunities; some habituate themselves unto a course in sin,
though in many it be not discovered, in some it is. But among those who have
received any Spiritual Light, and made Profession of Religion thereon, this
seldom falls out, but from the great Displeasure of God. For when men have long
given way unto the Prevalency of sin in their Affections, Inclinations and
Thoughts, and God has set many an hedge before them to give bounds unto their
Inclinations, and to shut up the womb of sin; sometimes by Afflictions,
sometimes by fears and dangers, sometimes by the Word; and yet the bent of
their Spirits is toward their sin; God takes off his hand of restraint,
removes his hindrances, and gives them up unto their own Hearts Lusts, to do
the things that are not convenient. All things hereon suits their Desires* and
they rush into actual sins and follies, setting their feet in the paths that go
down to the Chambers of Death. The uncontrollable Power of sin in such Persons,
and the greatness of Gods Displeasure against them, makes their condition most
deplorable.

Those that are in this State, of either sort, the first or the latter, are
remote from being Spiritually minded, nor is God in all their Thoughts as he
ought to be. For,

1. They will not so think and meditate on God. Their Delight is turned another
way. Their Affections which are the spring on their Thoughts, which feed them
continually, do cleave unto the things which are most adverse unto him. Love of
sin is gotten to be the Spring in them, and the whole stream of the Thoughts
which they choose and delight in, are toward the Pleasures of it. If any
Thoughts of God come in, as a faint Tide for a few minutes, and drive back the
other stream, they are quickly repelled and carried away with the strong
current of those which proceed from their powerful Inclinations. Yet may such
Persons abide in the Performance of outward holy Duties; or attendance unto
them. Pride of or satisfaction in their Gifts may give them Delight in their
own performances, and something in those of others they may be exceedingly
pleased withal; as it is expressly affirmed, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32. But in these
things they have no immediate real Thoughts of God, none that they delight in,
none that they seek to stir up in themselves, and those which impose
themselves on them they reject.

2. As they will not, so they dare not think of God. They will not, because of
the Power of their Lusts; they dare not, because of their Guilt. No sooner
should they begin to think of him in Good Earnest, but their sin would lose all
its desirable forms and appearances, and represent it self in the Horror of
Guilt alone. And in that condition all the Properties of the Divine Nature are
suited to increase the Dread and Terror of the sinner. Adam had heard Gods
voice before with Delight and satisfaction; But on the hearing of the same
voice after he had sinned, he hid himself and cried that he was afraid. There
is a way for men to think of God with the Guilt of sin upon them, which they
intend to forsake; but none for any to do it with the Guilt of sin which they
resolve to continue in. Wherefore of all these sorts of Persons it may be said,
that God is not in all their Thoughts, and therefore are they far enough from
being spiritually minded. For unless we have many Thoughts of God, we cannot be
so. Yea moreover there are two things required unto those Thoughts which we
have of God, that there may be an Evidence of our being so.

1. That we take delight in them, Psalm. 30.4. Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints
of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his Holiness. The Remembrance of
God, delights and refreshes the Hearts of his Saints, and stirrs them up
unto Thankfulness.

1. They rejoice in what God is in himself. Whatever is good, amiable or
desirable; whatever is holy just and powerful; whatever is gracious, wise and
merciful, and all that is so, they see and apprehend in God. That God is what
he is, is the matter of their chiefest Joy. Whatever befalls them in this
world, whatever Troubles and Disquietment they are exercised withal, the
Remembrance of God is a satisfactory Refreshment unto them. For therein they
behold all that is Good and Excellent, the infinite Center of all Perfections.
Wicked men would have God to be any thing but what he is. Nothing that God is
really and truly, pleases them. Wherefore they either frame false Notions of
him in their Minds, as Psalm. 50.21. Or they think not of him at all, at least
as they ought, unless sometimes they tremble at his Anger and Power. Some
Benefit they suppose may be had, by what he can do, but how there can be any
Delight in what he is, they know not. Yea all their trouble arises from hence,
that he is what he is. It would be a relief unto them, if they could make any
abatement of his Power, his Holiness, his Righteousness, his Omnipresence; But
his Saints, as the Psalmist speaks, give thanks at the Remembrance of his
Holiness.

And when we can delight in the Thoughts of what God is in himself, of his
infinite Excellencies and Perfections, it gives us a threefold evidence of our
being spiritually minded. (1.) In that it is such an Evidence that we have a
gracious Interest in those Excellencies and Perfections, whereon we can say
with rejoicing in our selves, this God, thus holy, thus powerful, thus just,
good and gracious, is our God, and he will be our guide unto Death. So the
Psalmist under the consideration of his own frailty and apprehensions of Death
in the midst of his years, comforts and refreshes himself with Thoughts of
Gods Eternity and Immutability, with his Interest in them, Psalm. 102.23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28. And God himself proposes unto us, his infinite Immutability as
the Ground whereon we may except safety and deliverance, Mal. 3.6. When we can
thus think of God and what he is with delight, it is I say an Evidence that we
have a gracious Covenant Interest, even in what God is in Himself; which none
have but those who are spiritually minded.

2. It is an Evidence that the Image of God is begun to be wrought in our own
Souls; and we approve of and rejoice in it more than in all other things
whatever. Whatever Notions men may have of the Divine Goodness, Holiness,
Righteousness and Purity, they are all but barren, jejune and fruitless, unless
there be a similitude and conformity unto them, wrought in their Minds and
Souls. Without this they cannot rejoice in the Thoughts and Remembrance of the
Divine Excellencies. Wherefore when we can do so, when such Meditations of God
are sweet unto us, it is an Evidence that we have some experience in our selves
of the excellency of the Image of those Perfections, and that we rejoice in
them above all things in this world.

3. They are so also, in that they are manifest, that we do discern and judge
that our Eternal Blessedness does consist in the full Manifestation, and our
Enjoyment of God in what he is, and of all his Divine Excellencies. This Men
for the most part take for granted, but how it should be so, they know not.
They understand it in some measure whose hearts are here deeply affected with
Delight in them; they are able to believe that the manifestation and Enjoyment
of the Divine Excellencies will give Eternal Rest, satisfaction and complacency
unto their Souls. No wicked man can look upon it otherwise than a Torment, to
abide for ever with Eternal Holiness, Isa. 33.14. And we our selves can have no
present prospect into the fullness of future Glory, when God shall be all in
all, but through the Delight and satisfaction which we have here in the
contemplation of what God is in himself, as the Center of all divine
Perfections.

I would therefore press this unknown, this neglected Duty on the minds of
those of us in an especial manner, who are visibly drawing nigh unto Eternity.
The Days are coming, wherein what God is in himself, that is as manifest and
exerted in Christ, shall alone be (as we hope) the Eternal Blessedness and
Reward of our Souls. Is it possible that any thing should be more necessary for
us, more useful unto us, than to be exercised in such Thoughts and
Contemplations. The Benefits we may have hereby are not to be reckoned, some of
them only may be named. As (1.) We shall have the best Trial of our selves, how
our hearts really stand affected toward God. For if upon Examination we find
our selves not really to delight and rejoice in God, for what he is in himself,
and that all Perfections are eternally resident in him, how dwells the Love
of God in us? But if we can truly rejoice at the Remembrance of his Holiness,
in the Thoughts of what he is, our Hearts are upright with him. (2.) This is
that which will effectually take off our Thoughts and Affections from things
here below. One spiritual view of the Divine Goodness, Beauty and Holiness,
will have more efficacy to raise the heart unto a contempt of all earthly
things, than any other Evidences whatever. (3.) It will increase the Grace of
being heavenly minded in us, on the Grounds before declared. (4.) It is the
best, I had almost said, it is the only Preparation for the future full
enjoyment of God. This will gradually lead us into his Presence, take away all
fears of Death, increase our longing after Eternal Rest, and ever make us groan
to be uncloathed. Let us not than cease laboring with our hearts, until
through Grace, we have a spiritually sensible Delight and Joy in the
Remembrances and Thoughts of what God is in himself.

2. In Thoughts of God, his Saints rejoice at the Remembrance of what he is,
and what he will be unto them. Herein have they regard unto all the holy
Relations that he has taken on himself toward them, with all the Effects of
his Covenant in Christ Jesus. To that purpose were some of the last words of
David, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure, this is all my
Salvation and all my desire. In the prospect he had of all the Distresses that
were to befall his Family, he triumphantly rejoices in the Everlasting
Covenant that God had made with him. In these Thoughts his Saints take delight,
they are sweet unto them and full of refreshment. Their Meditations of him are
sweet, and they are glad in the Lord, Psalm. 104.34. Thus is it with them that
are truly spiritually minded. They not only think much of God, but they take
Delight in these Thoughts, they are sweet unto them; and not only so, but they
have no solid Joy nor Delight, but in their Thoughts of God, which therefore
they retreat unto continually. They do so especially on great occasions, which
of themselves are apt to divert them from them. As suppose a Man has received
a signal Mercy, with the matter whereof he is exceedingly affected and
delighted. The minds of some men are apt on such occasions to be filled with
thoughts of what they have received, and their Affections to be wholly taken up
with it. But he who is Spiritually Minded, will immediately retreat unto
Thoughts of God, placing his Delight and taking up his satisfaction in him. And
so on the other side, great Distresses, prevalent Sorrows, strong Pains,
violent Distempers, are apt of themselves to take up and exercise all the
Thoughts of men about them. But those who are spiritually minded, will in and
under them all continually betake themselves unto Thoughts of God, wherein they
find relief and refreshment against all that they feel or fear. In every state,
their principal Joy is in the Remembrance of his Holiness.

2. That they be accompanied with Godly Fear and Reverence. These are required
of us, in all wherein we have to do with God, Heb. 12.28, 29. And as the
Scripture does not more abound with Precepts unto any Duty, so the Nature of
God and our own, with the infinite distance between them, make it indispensably
necessary even in the light of the natural Conscience, Infinite Greatness,
infinite Holiness, infinite Power, all which God is, command the uttermost
reverential fear that our nature are capable of. The want hereof is the spring
of innumerable evils, yea indeed of all that is so. Hence are blasphemous
abuses of the holy Name of God in cursed Oaths and Execrations; hence it is
taken in vain, in Ordinary Exclamations; hence is all Formality in Religion.

It is the spiritual Mind alone that can Reconcile those things which are
prescribe us as our Duty toward God. To delight and Rejoice in him always, to
triumph in the Remembrance of him, to draw nigh unto him with boldness and
confidence, are on the one hand prescribed unto us: And on the other it is so,
that we fear and tremble before him, that we fear that Great and dreadful Name
the Lord our God, that we have Grace to serve him with Reverence and Godly
Fear, because he is a consuming fire. These things Carnal Reason can comprehend
no consistency in; what it is afraid of, it cannot delight in; and what it
delights in, it will not long fear. But the Consideration of Faith (concerning
what God is in himself, and what he will be unto us,) gives these different
Graces their distinct Operations, and a blessed Reconciliation in our Souls.
Wherefore, all our Thoughts of God ought to be accompanied with an holy Awe and
Reverence, from a due sense of his Greatness, Holiness and Power. Two things
will utterly vitiate all Thoughts of God, and render them useless unto us.

(1.) Vain Curiosity. (2.) Carnal Boldness. It is inimaginable how the subtle
disquisitions and disputes of men, about the Nature, Properties and Councels of
God, have been corrupted, rendered sapless and useless by vain Curiosity, and
striving for an artificial Accuracy in the expression of men's apprehensions.
When the Wits and Minds of men are engaged in such Thoughts, God is not in all
their Thoughts, even when all their Thoughts are concerning him. When once men
are got into their Metaphysical Curiosities, and Logical Niceties in their
Contemplations about God and his Divine Properties, they bid farewell for the
most part unto all Godly Fear and Reverence. Others are under the power of
Carnal Boldness, that they think of God with no other respect, than if they
thought of Worms of the earth like themselves. There is no holy Awfulness upon
their Minds and Souls in the mention of his Name. By these things may our
Thoughts of God be so vitiated, that the heart shall not in them be affected
with a Reverence of him, nor any Evidence be given that we are spiritually
minded.

It is this holy Reverence that is the means of bringing in Sanctifying virtue
into our Souls, from God, upon our Thoughts of him. None that think of God with
a due Reverence, but he shall be sensible of Advantage by it. Hereby do we
sanctify God in our Access unto him, and when we do so, he will sanctify and
purify our hearts by those very Thoughts in which we draw nigh to him.

We may have many sudden, occasional, transient Thoughts of God, that are not
Introduced into our minds by a preceding Reverential Fear. But if they leave
not that fear on our hearts, in proportion unto their continuance with us, they
are of no value, but will insensibly habituate us unto a common bold frame of
Spirit, which he despises.

So is it in the case of Thoughts of a contrary nature. Thoughts of sin, of
sinful Objects may arise in our minds from the Remainders of Corruption; or be
occasioned by the Temptations and Suggestions of Satan; If these are
immediately rejected and cast out of us, the Soul is not more prejudiced by
their entrance, than it is Advantaged by their Rejection through the power of
Grace. But if they make frequent returns into the minds of men, or make any
abode or continuance in their soliciting of the Affections, they greatly defile
the Mind and Conscience, disposing the person unto the further entertainment of
them. So if our occasional Thoughts of God, do immediately leave us, and pass
away without much affecting our Minds; we shall have little or no Benefit by
them. But if by their frequent visits, and some continuance with us, they
dispose Souls unto an holy Reverence of God, they are a blessed means of
promoting our Sanctification. Without this, I say, there may be thoughts of God
unto no advantage of the Soul.

There is implanted on our Nature such a sense of a Divine Power and Presence,
as that on all sudden occasions and surprizals, it will act it self according
unto that sense and apprehension. There is Vox Naturae clamantis ad Dominum
Naturae: A voice in Nature it self, upon any thing that is suddenly too hard
for it, which cries out immediately unto the God of Nature. So men on such
occasions without any consideration are surprised into a calling on the Name of
God, and crying unto him. And from the same natural apprehension it is, that
wicked and profane persons, will break forth on all occasions into cursed
Swearing by his Name. So men in such ways have Thoughts of God without either
Reverence or Godly fear, without giving any Glory unto him, and for the most
part unto their own disadvantage. Such are all thoughts of God that are not
accompanied with holy Fear and Reverence.

There is scarce any Duty that ought at present to be more pressed on the
Consciences of men, than this of keeping up a constant holy Reverence of God in
all wherein they have to do with him, both in private and public, in their
inward Thoughts, and outward Communication. Formality has so prevailed on
Religion, and that under the most effectual means of its suppression, that very
many do manifest, that they have little or no Reverence of God, in the most
solemn Duties of his Worship; and less it may be in their secret Thoughts. Some
ways that have been found out to keep up a pretense and appearance of it, have
been and are destructive unto it.

But herein consists the very Life of all Religion. The fear of God is in the
Old Testament the usual expression of all the due respect of our Souls unto
him; and that because where that is not in exercise, nothing is accepted with
him. And thence the whole of our wisdom is said to consist therein, and if it
be not in a prevalent exercise in all wherein we have to do with him
immediately, all our Duties are utterly lost as to the Ends of his Glory and
the Spiritual Advantage of our own Souls.

CHAP. IX.
What of God or in God we are to think and meditate upon. His Being; Reasons of
it; Oppositions to it; the way of their Conquest. Thoughts of the Omnipresence,
and Omniscience of God, peculiarly necessary. The Reasons hereof. As also of
his Omnipotency. The Use and Benefit of such Thoughts.

THese things mentioned have been premised in General, as unto the nature,
manner and way of exercise of our Thoughts on God. That which remains is to
give some particular instances, of what we are to think upon in an especial
manner; and what we will be conversant withal in our Thoughts, if so be we are
Spiritually minded. And I shall not insist at present on the things which
concern his Grace and Love in Christ Jesus, which belong unto another head, but
on those which have an Immediate respect unto the Divine Nature it self, and
its holy essential Properties.

(1.) Think much of the Being and Existence of God. Herein lies the Foundation
of all our Relation and access unto him. Heb. 11.6. He that comes unto God,
must believe that he is. This is the first Object of Faith; and it is the first
Act of Reason; and being the sole Foundation of all Religion, it is our duty to
be exercised unto multiplied Thoughts about it, renewed on all occasions. For
many who are not direct Atheists, yet live without any solid well-grounded
Assent unto the Divine being; They do not so believe it as to be practically
influenced with the Consideration of it. It is granted, that the inbred Light
of Nature, in the due exercise of Reason, will give any Rational creature
satisfaction in the Being of God. But there is in the most an Anticipation of
any Thoughts of this nature by Tradition and Education, which has invited men
into an assent unto it, they know not how. They never called it into question,
nor have as they suppose any cause so to do. Nature it self startles at the
first Thoughts of denying of it, but if ever such persons on any urgent
occasions come to have real Thoughts about it, they are at a loss and fluctuate
in their minds, as not having any certain indubitable convicton of its truth.
Wherefore, as our Knowledge of the Divine Being is as to the Foundation of it
laid in the Light of Nature, the Operation of Conscience, and the due exercise
of Reason about the works and effects of infinite Power and Wisdom; so it ought
to be increased, and rendered useful by faith in Divine Revelations, and the
Experience of Divine power through them. By this Faith we ought to let in
frequent thoughts of the Divine being and Existence. And that on two Reasons
rendering the duty necessary in an Eminent manner, in this Age wherein we live.

1. The abounding of Atheism both Notional and Practical. The Reasons of it,
have been given before, and the matter of fact is evident unto any Ordinary
observation. And on two accounts with respect hereunto we ought to abound in
Thoughts of Faith concerning the Being of God. (1.) An especial Testimony is
required in us, in opposition to this cursed effect of Hell. He therefore who
is spiritually minded, cannot but have many Thoughts of the Being of God,
thereby giving Glory to him. Isai. 43.9, 10, 11, 12. Let all the Nations be
gathered together, and let the people be assembled: who among them can declare
this, and show us former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that
they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth. Ye are my
witnesses, says the Lord, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know
and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed,
neither shall there be after me. I, even I am the Lord, and beside me there is
no Savior. I have declared, and have saved, and I have showed, when there was
no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, that I
am God. Chap. 44.8. Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from
that time, and have declared it; ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God
besides me? yea, there is no God: I know not any. (2.) We shall have occasion
of them continually administered unto us. Those Atheistical impieties,
principles and practices which abound amongst us, are grievous provocations
unto all pious Souls. Without frequent retreat unto Thoughts of the Being of
God, there is no relief nor refreshment to be had under them. Such was the case
of Noah in the old World, and of Lot in Sodom, which rendered their Graces
illustrious.

2. Because of the unaccountable Confusions that all things are filled withal
at this day in the World. Whatever in former times has been a Temptation in
humane Affairs unto any of the People of God, it abounds at this day. Never had
men profane and profligate greater outward appearances to strengthen them in
their Atheism, nor those that are Godly greater Trials for their Faith, with
respect unto the visible State of things in the world. The Psalmist of old on
such an occasion was almost surprised into unbelieving complaints, Psalm. 73.2,
3, 4, etc. And such surprizals may now also befall us, that we may be ready to
say with him; Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
Innocence, for all the day long have I been plagued and chastened every
morning. Hence when the Prophet Habakkuk was exercised with Thoughts about such
a state of things as is at this day in the World, which he declares, Chap. 1.6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. he lays the foundation of his consideration in the fresh
exercise of Faith on the Being and Properties of God, v. 12, 13. And David
makes that his Retreat on the like occasion, Psalm. 11.3, 4, 5.

In such a season as this is, upon both the accounts mentioned, those who are
spiritually minded will much exercise their Thoughts about the Being and
Existence of God. They will say within themselves, Verily there is a Reward for
the Righteous, verily he is a God who judges in the earth. Hence will follow
such apprehensions of the Immensity of his Nature, of his eternal Power and
Infinite Wisdom, of his absolute Sovereignty, as will hold their Souls firm and
steadfast, in the highest storms of Temptation that may befall them.

Yet are there two things that the weaker sort of Believers may be exercised
with, in their Thoughts of the Divine Being and Existence, which may occasion
them some trouble.

1. Satan knowing the weakness of our Minds in the immediate Contemplation of
things infinite and incomprehensible, will sometimes take advantage to
insinuate blasphemous Imaginations in opposition unto what we would fix upon,
and relieve our selves withal. He will take that very time, trusting unto our
weakness and his own methods of subtilty, to suggest his Temptations unto
Atheism, by insnaring Enquiries, when we go about to refresh our Souls with
Thoughts of the Divine Being and Excellencies. But is there a God indeed? How
do you know that there is a God? and may it not be otherwise? will be his
language unto our minds. For from his first Temptation by way of an ensnaring
Question, Yea, and has God said it, ye shall not eat of every Tree of the
Garden? he proceeds still much in the same methods. So he did with our Savior
himself, If thou be the Son of God: Is there a God? how if there should be
none? In such a case the Rule is given us by the Apostle; Above all take the
shield of Faith, whereby ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
Wicked, Ephesians. 6.16. (...), of the wicked one, that is the Devil. And two ways
will Faith Act it self on this occasion.

(1.) By a speedy rejection of such Diabolical Suggestions with detestation. So
did our Savior in a case not unlike it; Get thee behind me Satan. Wherefore,
if any such Thoughts are suggested, or seem to arise in your minds, know
assuredly that they are no less immediately from the Devil, than if he
personally stood before you, and visibly appeared unto you; if he did so, there
is none of you but would arm your selves with an utter defiance of what he
should offer unto you. It is no less necessary on this occasion, when you may
feel him, though you see him not. Suffer not his fiery darts to abide one
moment with you, entertain no parley or dispute about them, reject them with
indignation, and strengthen your rejection of them with some pertinent
testimony of Scripture, as our Savior did. If a man have a Granado or
Fire-ball cast into his Clothes by his Enemy, he does not consider whether it
will burn or no, but Immediately shakes it off from him. Deal no otherwise with
these fiery darts, lest by their abode with you they inflame your Imagination
unto greater disturbance.

(2.) In case they utterly depart not upon this Endeavor for their exclusion
and casting out, return immediately without further dispute unto your own
Experience. When the Devil has asked you the Question, if you answer him, you
will be ensnared; but if thereon you ask your selves the Question, and apply
your selves unto your own experience for an answer unto it, you will frustrate
all his designs.

There are Arguments to be taken as was said from the Light of Nature, and
Reason in its proper exercise, sufficient to defeat all Objections of that
kind. But these are not our proper weapons in case of our own Temptation, which
alone is now under Consideration. It requires longer and more sedate reasonings
than such a state will admit of, nor is it a Sanctified medium for our Relief.

It is what is suited unto suggestions on the occasion of our Meditations that
we enquire after. In them we are not to argue on such Principles, but to take
the shield of Faith to Quench these fiery darts. And if on such occasions
Satan can divert us into long disputes about the Being of God, he has his
end, by carrying us off from the meditation on him which we did design, and
after a while he will prevail to make it a common road and trade, that no
sooner shall we begin to think of God, but immediately we must dispute about
his Being.

Therefore the way in this case for him who is really a Believer, is to retreat
immediately unto his own Experience, which will pour shame and contempt on the
suggestions of Satan. There is no Believer, who has knowledge and time to
exercise the wisdom of Faith in the consideration of himself and of Gods
dealings with him, but has a witness in himself of his eternal Power and
Godhead, as also of all those other Perfections of his Nature which he is
pleased to manifest and glorify by Jesus Christ. Wherefore on this suggestion
of Satan, that there is no God, he will be able to say, that he might better
tell me that I do not Live nor Breathe, that I am not fed by my Meat, nor
warmed by my Clothes, that I know not my self nor any thing else: For I have
spiritual sense and experience of the contrary; like him of old, who when a
cunning Sophister would prove unto him by Syllogisms that there was no such
thing as motion, he gave no answer unto his Arguments, but Rose up and walked.
How often, will he say, have I had experience of the power and presence of God
in Prayer; as though I had not only heard of him by the hearing of the ear, but
also seen him by the seeing of the eye? How often has he put forth his Power
and Grace in me by his Spirit and his Word with an uncontrollable Evidence of
his Being, Goodness, Love and Grace? How often has he refreshed my Conscience
with the sense of the pardon of sin, speaking that peace unto my Soul, which
all the world could not communicate unto me? In how many afflictions, dangers,
troubles has he been a present help and relief? what sensible Emanations of
Life and Power from him have I obtained in Meditation on his Grace and Glory?
As he who had been blind answered the Pharisees unto their ensnaring captious
questions; Be it what it will, One thing I know, that whereas I was blind now I
see. Whatever, says such a Soul, be in this Temptation of Satan, one thing I
know full well, that whereas I was dead, I am alive, whereas I was blind, now I
see, and that by an effect of divine power.

This shield of Faith managed in the hand of Experience, will quench the fiery
darts of Satan; and he will fall under a double defeat. (1.) His Temptations
will be repelled by the proper way of resistance, whereon he will not only
desist in his Attempt, but even fly from you. Resist the Devil, says the
Apostle, and he will fly from you. He will not only depart and cease to trouble
you, but will depart as one defeated and confounded. And it is for want of this
resistance lively made use of, that many hang so long in the Briars of this
Temptation. (2.) Recalling the Experiences we have had of God, will lead us
unto the exercise of all kind of Graces, which is the greatest disappointment
of our Adversary.

(2.) In Thoughts of the Divine Being and Existence, we are apt to be at a
loss, to be as it were overwhelmed in our minds, because the Object is too
great and Glorious for us to contemplate on. Eternity and Immensity, every
thing under the notion of Infinite, take off the mind from its distinct
actings, and reduce it as it were unto nothing. Hereon in some, not able to
abide in the strict Reasons of things, vain and foolish Imaginations are apt to
arise, and enquiries how can these things be, which we cannot comprehend?
Others are utterly at a loss, and turn away their Thoughts from them, as they
would do their eyes from the bright beams of the Sun. Two things are advisable
in this case.

1. That we betake our selves unto an holy Admiration of what we cannot
comprehend. In these things we cannot see God and Live; nay in life Eternal it
self they are not absolutely to be comprehended, only what is Infinite can
fully comprehend what is so. Here they are the Objects of Faith and Worship, in
them we may find rest and satisfaction, when enquiries and reasonings will
disquiet us, and it may be overwhelm us. Infinite Glory forbids us any near
approach but only by Faith. The Soul thereby bowing down it self unto Gods
adoreable Greatness, and Imcomprehensible Perfections, finding our selves to be
nothing and God to be all, will give us rest and peace in these things; Romans
11.33, 34, 35, 36. We have but unsteady Thoughts, of the greatness of the
World, and all the Nations and Inhabitants of it, yet are both it and these but
as the dust of the balance and the drop of the bucket, as vanity, as nothing,
compared with God: what then can our Thoughts concerning him issue in, but holy
Admiration?

2. In case we are brought unto a loss and disorder in our minds, on the
contemplation of any one Infinite Property of God, it is good to divert our
Thoughts unto the Effects of it, such as whereof we have, or may have
experience; for what is too great or high for us in it self, is made suitable
to our understandings in its Effects. So the Invisible things of God, are known
in and by the things that are seen. And there is indeed no Property of the
Divine Nature, but we may have an experience of it as unto some of its effects
in and upon our selves. These we may consider, and in the Streams taste of the
Fountain which we cannot approach. By them we may be led unto an holy
admiration of what is in it self Infinite, Immense, Imcomprehensible. I cannot
comprehend the Immensity of Gods Nature, it may be I cannot understand the
nature of Immensity; yet if I find by experience and do strongly believe, that
he is always present wherever I am, I have the Faith of it, and satisfaction
in it.

(2.) With Thoughts of the divine Being, those of his Omnipresence and
Omniscience ought continually to accompany us. We cannot take one step in a
walk before him, unless we remember that always and in all places he is
present with us, that the frame of our hearts and our inward Thoughts are
continually in his view no less than our outward Actions. And as we ought to be
perpetually under an awe of, and in the fear of God in these apprehensions, so
there are some seasons wherein our minds ought to be in the actual conception
and thoughts of them, without which we shall not be preserved in our Duty.

1. The first season of this nature, is when times, places, with other
occasions of Temptation and consequently of Sinning, do come and meet. With
some, Company does constitute such a season; and with some, Secrecy with
Opportunity do the same. There are those who are ready with a careless boldness
to put themselves on such Societies as they do know have been Temptations unto
them and occasions of sin; every such entrance into any society or company,
unto them who know how it has formerly succeeded, is their actual sin, and it
is Just with God to leave them to all the evil Consequents that do ensue.
Others also do either choose, or are frequently cast on such Societies; and no
sooner are they engaged in them, but they forget all regard unto God, and give
themselves up not only unto Vanity, but unto various sorts of excess. David
knew the Evil and Danger of such occasions; and gives us an account of his
behavior in them, Psalm. 39.1, 2, 3. I said, I will take heed to my ways, that
I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked
is before me. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from Good, and my
sorrow was stirred: My heart was hot within me, while I was musing, the fire
burned: then spoke I with my tongue. As for their evil words and ways he would
have no communication with them. And as unto Good discourse, he judged it
unseasonable, to cast Pearl before Swine. He was therefore silent as unto that
also, though it was a grief and trouble to him. But this occasioned in him
afterward those excellent Meditations which he expresses in the following
Verses. In the entrances of these occasions, if men would remember the presence
of God with them, in these places, with the holy severity of the Eye that is
upon them, it would put an awe upon their spirits, and embitter those
Jollities, whose Relish is given them by Temptation and Sin. He does neither
walk humbly nor circumspectly, who being unnecessarily cast on the Society of
men wicked or profane, (on such occasions wherein the ordinary sort of men give
more than ordinary liberty unto corrupt Communication or Excess in any kind,)
does not in his entrance of them call to mind the presence and all-seeing Eye
of God, and at his Departure from them, consider whether his Deportment has
been such as became that Presence, and his being under that Eye. But alas!
Pretenses of Business and necessary Occasions, Engagements of Trade, carnal
Relations, and the common course of communication in the world, with a
supposition that all sorts of Society are allowed for Diversion, have cast out
the Remembrance of God from the minds of most, even then when men cannot be
preserved from sin without it.

This has sullied the Beauty of Gospel Conversation amongst the most, and left
in very few any prevalent Evidence of being spiritually minded.

Wherefore, as unto them who either by their voluntary choice or necessity of
their Occasions, do enter and engage pomiscuously into all Societies and
Companies, let them know assuredly, that if they awe not their hearts and
spirits continually with the Thoughts and apprehensions of the Omnipresence and
Omniscience of God, that he is always with them, and his Eye always upon
them, they will not be preserved from Snares and sinful miscarriages.

Yea, such Thoughts are needful unto the best of us all, and in the best of our
societies, that we behave not our selves undecently in them at any time.

Again, unto some, Privacy, Secresy, and Opportunity, are occasions of
Temptation and Sin. They are so unto persons under Convictions not wholly
turned to God. Many a good Beginning has been utterly ruined by this occasion
and Temptation. Privacy and Opportunity have overthrown many such persons in
the best of their Resolutions. And they are so unto all persons not yet
flagitiously wicked. Cursed fruits proceed every day from these Occasions. We
need no other Demonstration of their Power and Efficacy in Tempting unto sin,
but the visible Effects of them. And what they are unto any, they may be unto
all, if not diligently watched against* So the Apostle reflects on the shameful
things that are done in the dark, in a concurrence of Secrecy and Opportunity.
This therefore gives a Just season unto Thoughts of the Omnipresence and
Omniscience of God, and they will not be wanting in some measure in them that
are spiritually minded.

God is in this place, the darkness is no darkness unto him, Light and Darkness
are with him both alike, are sufficient considerations to lay in the Balance
against any Temptation springing out of Secrecy and Opportunity. One Thought
of the actual presence of the holy God, and the open view of his all-seeing
eye, will do more to cool those Affections which Lust may put into a tumult on
such occasions, than any other consideration whatever. A speedy Retreat
hereunto upon the first perplexing Thought wherewith Temptation assaults the
Soul, will be its strong Tower, where it shall be safe.

2. A second Season calling for the Exercise of our minds in Thoughts of the
Omnipresence and Omniscience of God, is made up of our Solitudes and
Retirements. These give us the most genuine Trials whether we are spiritually
minded or no. What we are in them, that we are and no more. But yet in some of
them, as in Walking and Journeyings or the like, vain Thoughts and foolish
Imaginations are exceeding apt to solicit our minds. Whatever is stored up in
the Affections or Memory, will at such a time offer it self for our present
entertainment: And where men have accustomed themselves unto any sort of
things, they will press on them for the possession of their Thoughts, as it
were whether they will or no. The Psalmist gives us the way to prevent this
evil; Psalm. 16.7, 8. I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel, my reins
also instruct me in the night season. I have set the Lord always before me,
because he is at my Right hand. His Reins, that is, his Affections, and secret
Thoughts, gave him counsel and instructed him in all such seasons; But whence
had they that wisdom and faithfulness: In themselves they are the seat of all
Lusts and Corruptions, nor could do any thing but seduce him into an evil
frame. It was from hence alone that he set the Lord always before him.
Continual Apprehensions of the presence of God with him, kept his Mind, his
Heart and Affections, in that Awe and Reverence of him, as that they always
instructed him unto his Duty. But as I remember, I spoke somewhat as unto the
due management of our Thoughts in this Season before.

3. Times of great Difficulties, Dangers, and Perplexities of mind thereon, are
a season calling for the same Duty. Suppose a man is left alone in his Trials
for the Profession of the Gospel, as it was with Paul, when all men forsook
him, and no man stood by him. Suppose him to be brought before Princes, Rulers,
or Judges that are filled with Rage and armed with Power against him, all
things being disposed to affect him with dread and terror. It is the Duty of
such a one to call off his Thoughts from all things visibly present, and to fix
them on the Omnipresence and Omniscience of God. He sits amongst those Judges
though they acknowledge him not; He rules over them at his pleasure; He knows
the cause of the Oppressed, and justifies them whenever the world condemns; and
can deliver them when he pleases. With the Thoughts hereof did those holy
Souls support themselves when they stood before the fiery countenance of the
bloody Tyrant on the one hand, and the burning fiery Furnace on the other, Dan.
3.14. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out thine hand, O King; But if not, be it known
unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image
which thou have set up. Thoughts of the Presence and Power of God, gave them
not only comfort and supportment under: their distress, when they were alone
and helpless, but Courage and Resolution to defy the Tyrant to his face. And
when the Apostle was brought before Nero that Monster of cruelty and villainy,
and all men forsook him, he affirms, that the Lord stood by him, and
strengthened him, 2 Timothy 4.17. He refreshed himself with Thoughts of his
presence, and had the blessed fruit of it.

Wherefore, on such occasions, when the Hearts of men are ready to quake, when
they see all things about them filled with dread and Terror, and all help far
away, it is I say, their duty and wisdom, to abstract and take off their
Thoughts from all outward and present appearances, and to fix them on the
presence of God. This will greatly change the Scene of things in their minds;
and they will find that Strength and Power and Wisdom are on their side alone;
all that appears against them, being but vanity, folly, and weakness.

So when the Servant of Elisha saw the place where they were, compassed with an
Host, both Horses and Chariots that came to take them, he cried out for fear,
Alas my Master how shall we do? But upon the prayer of the Prophet, the Lord
opening the eyes of the young man, to see the Heavenly guard that he had sent
unto him, the mountain being full of Horses and Chariots of fire round about
Elisha, his fear and trouble departed, 2 Kings 6.15, 16, 17. And when in the
like Extremity God opens the Eye of Faith to behold his glorious Presence, we
shall no more be afraid of the dread of men. Herein did the Holy Martyrs
triumph of Old, and even despised their bloody Persecutors. Our Savior himself
made it the ground of his supportment on the like occasion, John 16.32. Behold,
says he to his Disciples, his only Friends, the hour comes, yea is now come,
that ye shall be scattered every one to his own, and leave me alone, and yet I
am not alone, because the Father is with me. Can we but possess our Souls with
the Apprehension, that when we are left alone in our trials and dangers, from
any countenance of Friends, or help of men, yet that indeed we are not alone,
because the Father is with us, it will support us under our despondencies, and
enable us unto our Duties.

4. Especial Providential warnings call for Thoughts of Gods Omnipresence and
Omniscience. So Jacob in his nightly Vision, instantly made this Conclusion;
God is in this place and I knew it not. We have frequently such warnings given
unto us. Sometimes we have so in the things which are esteemed accidental,
whence it may be we are strangely delivered. Sometimes we have so in the things
which we see to befall others, by Thunder, Lightning, Storms at Sea or Land.
For all the works of God, especially those that are rare and strange, have a
voice whereby he speaks unto us. The first thing suggested unto a spiritual
Mind in such seasons, will be, God is in this place, he is present that lives
and sees, as Hagar confessed on the like occasion, Genesis 16.13, 14.

(3.) Have frequent Thoughts of Gods Omnipotency, or his Almighty Power. This
most men it may be, suppose they need not much Exhortation unto; for none ever
doubted of it; who does not grant it on all occasions? Men grant it indeed in
general; for eternal Power is inseparable from the first notion of the Divine
Being. So are they conjoined by the Apostle, his eternal Power and Godhead,
Romans 1.20. Yet few believe it for themselves and as they ought. Indeed, to
believe the Almighty Power of God, with reference unto our selves and all our
Concernments Temporal and Eternal, is one of the highest and most Noble Acts of
Faith, which includes all others in it. For this is that which God at first
proposed alone as the proper Object of our Faith, in our entrance into Covenant
with him, Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty; That which Job arrived unto after his
long exercise and Trial: I know, says he, thou can do every thing, and no
Thought of thine can be hindered, Chap. 42.2. God has spoken once, (says the
Psalmist) twice have I heard this, that Power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11. It
was that which God saw it necessary frequently to instruct him in. For we are
ready to be affected with the Appearances of present power in Creatures, and to
suppose that all things will go according unto their wills, because of their
power. But it is quite otherwise; all creatures are poor feeble Ciphers that
can do nothing; Power belongs unto God, it is a flower of his Crown Imperial,
which he will suffer none to usurp; if the proudest of them go beyond the
Bounds and Limits of his present Permission, he will send Worms to eat them up,
as he did to Herod.

It is utterly impossible we should walk before God, unto his Glory, or with
any real peace, comfort or satisfaction in our own Souls, unless our minds are
continually exercised with Thoughts of his Almighty Power. Every thing that
befalls us, every thing that we hear of, which has the Least of Danger in it,
will discompose our Minds, and either make us tremble like the leaves of the
Forest that are shaken with the wind, or betake our selves to foolish or
sinful relief, unless we are firmly established in the Faith hereof. Consider
the Promises of God unto the Church which are upon Record, and as yet
unaccomplished; consider the present state of the Church in the world, with all
that belongs unto it; in all the fears and dangers they are exposed unto, in
all the evils they are exercised withal, and we shall quickly find, that
unless this Sheat-anchor be well fixed, we shall be tossed up and down at all
uncertainties, and exposed to most violent Temptations, Rev. 19.6. Unto this
end are we called hereunto by God himself, in his Answer unto the despondent
complaints of the Church in its greatest dangers and calamities. Isa. 40. 28,
29, 30, 31. Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the Everlasting God,
the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the Earth faints not, neither is weary?
There is no searching of his understanding. He gives power to the faint, and
to them that have no might, he increases strength. Even the youths shall faint
and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they
shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint.

Take one Instance, which is the continual concernment of us all. We are
obnoxious unto Death every moment. It is never the further from any of us
because we think not of it as we ought. This will lay our Bodies in the dust,
from whence they will have no more disposition nor power in themselves to rise
again, than any other part of the mould of the Earth. Their recovery must be an
act of external Almighty Power, when God shall have a desire to the work of his
hands; when he shall call, and we shall answer him out of the dust. And it will
transmit the Soul into an invisible world, putting a final End unto all
Relations, Enjoyments and Circumstances here below. I speak not of them who are
stout-hearted and far from Righteousness, who live and dye like Beasts, or
under the power of horrible Presumption, without any due Thoughts of their
future and Eternal state. But as unto others, what comfort or satisfaction can
any man have in his Life, whereon his All depends, and which is passing from
him every moment; unless he has continual Thoughts of the mighty power of God,
whereby he is able to receive his departing Soul, and to raise his Body out of
the dust?

Not to insist on more particulars; Thus is it with them who are Spiritually
minded, thus must it be with us all, if we pretend a Title unto that
Privilege. They are filled with Thoughts of God, in opposition unto that
Character of wicked men, that God is not in all their Thoughts. And it is
greatly to be feared, that many of us when we come to be weighed in this
Balance, will be found too Light. Men may be in the performance of outward
Duties, they may hear the Word with some delight, and do many things gladly,
they may escape the pollutions that are in the world through Lust, and not run
out into the same compass of Excess and Riot with other men; yet may they be
strangers unto inward Thoughts of God with delight and complacency. I cannot
understand how it can be otherwise with them whose minds are over and over
filled with earthly things, however they may satisfy themselves with pretenses
of their Callings and lawful Enjoyments, or not any way inordinately set on the
Pleasures or Profits of the world.

To walk with God, to live unto him, is not merely to be found in an Abstinence
from outward sins, and in the performance of outward Duties, though with
Diligence in the Multiplication of them. All this may be done upon such
Principles, for such Ends, with such a frame of heart, as to find no Acceptance
with God. It is our Hearts that he requires, and we can no way give them unto
him, but by our Affections, and holy Thoughts of him with delight. This it is
to be spiritually minded, this it is to walk with God. Let no man deceive
himself, unless he thus abound in holy Thoughts of God, unless our Meditation
of him be sweet unto us, all that we else pretend unto, will fail us in the day
of our Trial.

This is the first thing wherein we may Evidence our selves unto our selves, to
be under the conduct of the minding of the Spirit or to be spiritually minded.
And I have insisted the longer on it, because it contains the first sensible
Egress of the Spring of living waters in us, the first acting of spiritual Life
unto our own experience. I should now proceed unto the consideration of our
Affections, of whose frame and state these Thoughts are the only genuine
Exposition. But whereas there are, or may be some who are sensible of their own
weakness, and deficiency in the discharge of that part of this duty in being
spiritually minded, which we have passed through, and may fall under
discouragements thereon, we must follow him as we are able who will not Quench
the smoking Flax, nor break the bruised Reed, by offering something unto the
relief of them that are sincere, under the sense of their own weakness.

CHAP. X.
Sundry things tendered unto such as Complain that they know not how, that they
are not able to abide in holy Thoughts of God, and Spiritual or Heavenly
things; for their Relief, Instruction and Direction. Rules concerning stated
Spiritual Meditation.

SOme will say, yea many on all occasions do say, That there is not any thing
in all their Duty toward God wherein they are more at a loss, than they are in
this one, of fixing or exercising their Thoughts or Meditations on things
Heavenly or Spiritual. They acknowledge knowledge it a Duty; they see an
Excellency in it, with inexpressible usefulness. But although they often try
and attempt it, they cannot attain unto any thing, but what makes them ashamed
both of it and themselves. Their Minds they find are unsteady, apt to rove and
wander, or give entertainment unto other things, and not to abide on the Object
which they design their Meditation toward. Their Abilities are small, their
Invention barren, their Memories frail, and their Judgments to dispose of
things into right order, weak and unable. They know not what to think on for
the most part, and when they fix on any thing, they are immediately at loss as
unto any progress, and so give over. Hence other Thoughts, or Thoughts of other
things take advantage to impose themselves on them, and what began in spiritual
Meditation, ends in carnal Vanity. On these considerations, oft-times they are
discouraged to enter on the Duty, oft-times give it over so soon as it is
begun, and are glad if they come off without being losers by their Endeavors,
which often befalls them. With respect unto other Duties it is not so with them.
Unto such as are really concerned in these things, unto whom their want and
defect is a Burden; who mourn under it, and desire to be freed from it, or
refreshed in their conflict with it, I shall offer the things that ensue.

1. That sense of the Vanity of our Minds which this consideration duly
attended unto will give us, ought greatly to humble and abase our Souls. Whence
is it thus with us, that we cannot abide in Thoughts and Meditations of things
Spiritual and Heavenly? It is because they are such things as we have no great
concernment in? It may be they are things worthless, and unprofitable, so that
it is to purpose to spend our Thoughts about them: The Truth is, they alone are
worthy, useful and desirable, all other things in comparison of them, are but
Loss and dung. Or it is because the faculties and Powers of our Souls were not
originally suited unto the contemplation of them, and delight in them? This
also is otherwise; They were all given unto us, all created of God for this
End, all fitted with Inclinations and power to abide with God in all things
without aversation or weariness. Nothing was so natural, easy and pleasant
unto them, as steadiness in the contemplation of God and his works. The cause
therefore, of all this evil lies at our own doors. All this therefore and all
other Evils, came upon us by the entrance of sin. And therefore Solomon in his
Enquiry after all the Causes and Effects of Vanity, brings it under this Head;
Lo this only have I found, that God made man upright; but they have sought out
many Inventions, Eccles. 7.29. For hereby our Minds that were created in a
state of blessed Adherence unto God, where wholly turned off from him, and not
only so, but filled with Enmity against him. In this state that Vanity which is
prevalent in them, is both their Sin and their Punishment. Their sin in a
perpetual Inclination unto things vain, foolish, sensual and wicked. So the
Apostle describes it at large, Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19. Tit. 3.3. And their
punishment in that being turned off from the chiefest Good, wherein alone Rest
is to be found, they are filled with darkness, confusion and disquietment,
being like a troubled Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

By grace our Minds are renewed; that is changed and delivered from this frame;
but they are so partially only. The Principle of Vanity is no longer
predominant in us, to alienate us from the life of God, or to keep us in Enmity
against him. Those who are so renewed do not walk in the Vanity of their Minds
as others do, Ephesians. 4.17. They go up and down in all their ways and occasions
with a Stream of vain Thoughts in their Minds. But the remainders of it, are
effectually Operative in us, in all the actings of our minds toward God
affecting them with Uncertainty and Instability. As he who has received a
great wound in any principal part of his Body, though it may be so cured, as
that death shall not immediately ensue thereon; yet it may make him go weak and
lame all his days, and hinder him in the Exercise of all the powers of Life.
The Vanity of our Minds is so cured, as to deliver us from spiritual death; but
yet such a wound, such a weakness does remain, as both weakens and hinders us
in all the operations of Spiritual life. Hence those who have made any progress
in Grace, are sensible of their Vanity, as the greatest Burden of their Souls,
and do groan after such a complete Renovation of their Minds, as whereby they
may be perfectly freed from it. This is that which they principally regard in
that complaining desire, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from this body of death? Yea they groan under a sense of it every day; nor
is any thing such a trouble unto them, observing how it defeats them in their
designs to contemplate on Heavenly things; how it frustrates their best
Resolutions to abide in the spiritual actings of Faith and Love; how they are
imposed on by it with the Thoughts of things which either in themselves or in
their consequences they most abhor; nothing are they so afraid of, nothing is
so grievous and burdensome unto them, nothing do they more groan for
deliverance from. When there is War in any place, it behooves them that are
concerned, to have an Eye and regard unto all their Enemies, and their Attempts
against them. But if they are Vigilant and diligent in their Oppositition unto
those that are without, that visibly contend with them, and in the mean time
Neglect such as traitorously act within among themselves, betraying their
Councels, and weakening their Strength, they will be undoubtedly ruined. Wise
men do first take care of what is within, as knowing if they are there
betrayed, all they do against their open Enemies is to no purpose. In the
warfare wherein we are engaged, we have Enemies of all sorts that openly and
visibly in various Temptations fight against our Souls. These it is our Duty to
watch against, to conflict with, and to seek a conquest over. But it is this
internal vanity of mind, that endeavors in all things to betray us, to weaken
us in all our Graces, or to hinder their due operations; and to open the doors
of our Hearts unto our cursed Enemies. If our principal Endeavor be not to
discover, suppress and destroy this Traitor, we shall not succed in our
spiritual warfare.

This therefore being the original cause of all that disabilty of mind as unto
steadiness in holy Thoughts and Meditations whereof you do complain, when you
are affected therewith, turn unto the consideration of that from whence it does
proceed. Labor to be humbled greatly, and to walk humbly under a sense of the
Remainders of this Vanity of mind. So some wholesome Fruits may be taken from
this bitter Root; and Meat may come out of this Eater. If when you cannot abide
in holy Thoughts of God, and your Relation unto him, you reflect on this cause
of it to your further Humiliation and self-abasement, your Good designs and
purposes are not lost. Let such an one say; I began to think of God, of his
Love and Grace in Christ Jesus, of my Duty toward him; and where now in a few
minutes do I find my self? I am got into the Ends of the earth, into things
useless and earthly; or am at such a loss as that I have no mind to proceed in
the work wherein I was engaged. O wretched man that I am, what a cursed Enemy
have I within me! I am ashamed of my self, weary of my self, loath my self, who
shall deliver me from this Body of Death? Such Thoughts may be as useful unto
him as those which he first designed.

True it is we can never be freed absolutely from all the Effects of this
Vanity and Instability of Mind in this world. Unchangeable cleaving unto God,
always, in all the Powers and Affections of our Minds, is reserved for Heaven.
But yet great degrees may be attained in the conquest and expulsion of it, such
as I fear few have experience of; yet ought all to the labor after. If we
apply our selves as we ought to the increase of Spiritual Light and Grace; if
we labor diligently to abide and abound in Thoughts of spiritual things, and
that in Love to them, and delight in them; if we watch against the
entertainment and approbation of such Thoughts and things in our minds, as
whereby this vain frame is pleased and confirmed; there is, though not an
absolute perfection, yet a blessed degree of Heavenly Mindedness to be
attained, and therein the nearest approach unto Glory, that in this world we
are capable of. If a man cannot attain an Athletick Constitution of Health, or
a strength like that of Sampson; yet if he be wise he will not omit the use of
such means as may make him to be useful in the ordinary Duties of Life. And
although we cannot attain Perfection in this matter, which yet is our Duty to
be continually pressing after; yet if we are wise, will be endeavoring such a
cure of this spiritual distemper, as we may be able to discharge all the duties
of the Life of God. But if men in all other things, feed the Vanity of their
own Minds, if they permit them to Rove continually after things foolish,
sensual and earthly; if they wilfully supply them with Objects unto that End,
and labor not by all means for the Mortification of this evil frame; in vain
shall they desire or expect to bring them at any time, on any occasion, to be
Steady in the Thoughts of Heavenly things. If it be thus with any, as it is to
be feared it is with many, it is their duty to mind the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the first place, Make the Tree Good, and then the Fruit will be Good,
and not before. When the power of Sanctifying Grace has made the Mind
habitually Spiritual and Heavenly, Thoughts of such things will be natural unto
it, and accompanied with delight. But they will not be so until the God of
Peace have Sanctified us in our whole Spirits, Souls and Bodies; whereby we may
be preserved blameless unto the comeing of Jesus Christ.

2. Be always sensible of your own Insufficincy to raise in your Minds or to
managed spiritual Thoughts, or Thoughts of things spiritual and Heavenly in a
due manner. But in this case men are apt to suppose, that as they may, so they
can think of what they please. Thoughts are their own, and therefore be they of
what sort they will, they need no assistance for them. They cannot think as
they ought, they can do nothing at all. And nothing will convince them of their
folly, until they are burdened with an experience of the contrary, as unto
Spiritual things. But the advice given is expressly laid down by the Apostle
in the Instance of himself. 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. He
speaks principally of Ministers of the Gospel, and that of such as were most
eminently furnished with Spiritual Gifts and Graces, as he declares v. 6. And
If it be so with them, and that with respect unto the work and Duties of their
Calling, how much more is it so with others, who have not their Graces nor
their Offices? Wherefore if men without regard unto the present actual Grace of
God, and the supplies of his Spirit, do suppose that they can of themselves,
exercise their Minds in spiritual Thoughts, and so only fret at themselves when
they fall into disappointment, not knowing what is the matter with them, they
will live in a lifeless barren frame all their days.

By the strength of their natural Abilities, men may frame Thoughts of God, and
heavenly things in their Minds, according unto the knowledge they have of them.
They may Methodize them by Rules of Art, and express them elegantly unto
others. But even while they do so, they may be far enough from being
spiritually minded. For there may be in their Thoughts, no actings of Faith,
Love or holy Delight in God, or any Grace at all. But such alone are things
which we enquire after, they are such only as wherein the Graces of the Spirit
are in their proper Exercise. With respect unto them we have no sufficiency in
our selves, all our sufficiency must be of God. There is no Truth among persons
of Light and Knowledge more generally granted in the notion of it than this,
that of our selves we can do nothing; and none more neglected in daily
practice. Men profess they can do nothing of themselves, and yet go about their
Duties as if they could do all things.

3. Remember that I have not at present treated of solemn stated Meditation.
Concerning which other Rules and Instructions ought to be given. By solemn or
stated Meditation, I intend the Thoughts of some Subject Spiritual and Divine,
with the fixing, forcing and ordering our Thoughts about it, with a design to
affect our own Hearts and Souls with the matter of it, or the things contained
in it. By this design it is distinguished from the study of the Word, wherein
our principal aim is to learn the Truth, or to declare it unto others. And so
also from Prayer, whereof God himself is the immediate Object. But in
Meditation it is the affecting of our own Hearts and Minds with Love, Delight
and Humiliation. At present I have only showed what it is to be Spiritually
minded, and that in this Instance of our Thoughts as they proceed from the
habitual frame of our hearts and affections; or of what sort the constant
course of our Thoughts ought to be, with respect unto all the occasions of the
Life of God. This persons may be in a readiness for, who are yet unskilful in,
and unable for stated Meditation. For there is required thereunto such an
Exercise of our Natural Faculties and Abilities, as some through their weakness
and Ignorance are incapable of. But as unto what we have hitherto insisted on,
it is not unattainable by any in whom is the Spirit of Faith and Love. For it
is but the frequent actings of them that I intend. Wherefore, do your Hearts
and Affections lead you unto many Thoughts of God, and Spiritual Things? do
they spring up in you, as water in a well of living Waters? Are you ready on
all occasions to entertain such Thoughts, and to be conversant with them, as
opportunity does offer it self? Do you labor to have in a readiness what is
useful for you with respect unto Temptations and Duties? Is God in Christ, and
the things of the Gospel, the ordinary Retreat of your Souls? Though you should
not be able to carry on an orderly stated Meditation in your minds, yet you may
be spiritually minded.

A man may not have a Capacity and Ability to carry on a great Trade of
Merchandise in the world. The knowledge of all sorts of Commodities, and
Seasons, of the World and Nations of it, with those Contrivances and Accounts
which belong unto such Trade may be above his comprehension, and he may quickly
ruin himself in undertaking such an Employment. Yet may the Abilities of this
man serve him well enough to carry on a retail Trade in a private Shop, wherein
perhaps he may thrive as well, and get as good an Estate as any of those whose
greater Capacities lead them forth unto more large and hazardous Employments.
So it may be with some in this case. The natural Faculties of their minds are
not sufficient to enable them unto Stated Meditation. They cannot cast things
into that method and order which is required thereunto; nor frame the
conceptions of their minds into words significant and expressive; yet as unto
frequency of Thoughts of God, and a disposition of Mind thereunto, they may
thrive and be skilful beyond most others of greater natural Abilities. Howbeit,
because even Stated Meditation is a necessary Duty, yea the principal way
whereby our spiritual Thoughts do profitably act themselves, I shall have
regard thereunto in the following Direction; wherefore,

4. Whatever Principle of Grace we have in our minds, we cannot attain unto a
ready exercise of it in a way of spiritual Meditation or otherwise, without
great Diligence, nor without great Difficulty.

It was showed at the entrance of this Discourse, that there is a Difference in
this Grace, between the Essence, Substance or Reality of it, which we would not
exclude men from, under many failings or infirmities; and the useful Degrees of
it, wherein it has its principal exercise. As there is a difference in Life
natural, and its actings, in a weak deseased sickly Body, and in that which is
of a Good Constitution and in a vigorous health. Supposing the first, the
Reality of this Grace, be wrought in us, or implanted in our Minds by the holy
Ghost, as a principal part of that new Nature which is the workmanship of God,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works; yet unto the growth and improvement of
it, as of all other Graces, our own diligent Care, Watchfulness, and spiritual
striving in all holy Duties are required. Unless the most fruitful Ground be
manured, it will not bring forth an useful Crop. Let not any think that this
frame of a Spiritual mind, wherein there is a disposition unto and a readiness
for all holy Thoughts of God, of Christ, of spiritual, and heavenly things, at
all times and on all occasions, will befall him and continue with him he knows
not how. As good it is for a poor man to expect to be rich in this world
without Industry, or a weak man to be strong and healthy without Food and
Exercise; as to be spiritually minded without an earnest endeavor after it. It
may be enquired what is requisite thereunto? And we may name some of those
things without which such an holy frame will not be attained. As,

1. A continual watch is to be kept in and on the Soul against the Incursions
of vain Thoughts and Imaginations, especially in such seasons wherein they are
apt to obtain Advantage. If they are suffered to make an inroad into the mind,
if we accustom our selves to give them entertainment, if they are wont to lodge
within, in vain shall we hope or desire to be spiritually minded. Herein
consists a principal part of that duty which our Savior so frequently, so
emphatically charge on us all; namely to Watch, Mark 3.37. Unless we keep a
strict watch herein, we shall be betrayed into the hands of our spiritual
enemies; for all such Thoughts are but making provision for the flesh to
fulfill its desires in the lusts thereof, however they may be disappointed as
unto actual sin. This is the substance of the advice given us in charge, Prove.
4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the Issues of Life.

2. Careful Avoidance of all societies and businesses of this life, which are
apt under various pretenses to draw and seduce the mind unto an earthly or
sensual frame. If men will venture on those things which they have found by
Experience, or may find by Observation, that they seduce and draw off their
Minds from an Heavenly frame unto that which is contrary thereunto, and will
not watch unto their avoidance, they will be filled with the fruit of their own
ways. Indeed the Common Converses of Professors among themselves and others,
walking, talking and behaving themselves like other men, being as full of the
world as the world is of it self, has lost the Grace of being
Spiritually-minded within, and stained the Glory of Profession without. The
Rule observed by David will manifest how careful we ought to be herein, Psalm.
39.1, 2, 3. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue:
I will keep my Mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before me. I was dumb
with silence, I held my peace even from good, and my sorrow was stirred. My
heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned; then spoke I with
my Tongue: Which place was spoken unto before.

3. An holy Constraint put on the Mind to abide in the Duty of Spiritual
Thoughts and Meditations, pressing it continually with the Consideration of
their Necessity and Usefulness. The Mind will be apt of it self to start aside
from Duties? purely Spiritual, through the mixture of the Flesh abiding in it.
The more inward and purely Spiritual any Duty is, which has no outward
Advantages; the more prone will the Mind be to decline from it. It will be so,
more from private Prayer than Public, more from Meditation than Prayer. And
other things will be apt to draw it aside by Objects without, and various
stirrings of the Affections within. An holy Constraint is to be put upon it,
with a sudden Rejection of what rises up to its diversion or disturbance.
Wherefore, we are to call in all constraining Motives, such as the
Consideration of the Love of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14. to keep the Mind steady unto
its Duty.

4. Diligent use of Means to furnish the Soul with that Light and Knowledge of
Heavenly things, which may administer continual matter of holy Thoughts and
Meditations from within our selves. This has been spoken unto at large before.
And the want hereof is that which keeps many from the least Proficiency in
these Duties. As a man may have some skill or ability for a Trade, yet if he
have no Materials to work upon, he must sit still and let his Trade alone. And
so must men do as unto the work of Holy Meditation: whatever be the Ability of
the natural Faculties, their Inventions or Memories, if they are not furnished
with Knowledge of things Spiritual and Heavenly, which are the subject matter
of such Meditations, they must let their work alone. Hence the Apostle prays
for the Colossians, that the Word of God might dwell in them richly in all
Wisdom, Chap. 3.16. That is, that they might abound in the knowledge of the
mind of Christ, without which we shall be unfit for this Duty.

5. Vnweariedness in our Conflict with Satan, who by various Artifices and the
Injection of fiery darts labors continually to divert us from these Duties. He
is seldom or never wanting unto this occasion. He who is furnished in any
measure with spiritual Wisdom and Understanding, may find him more sensibly at
work in his Craft and Opposition with respect unto this Duty, than any other
way. When we stand thus before the Lord, he is always at our right hand to
resist us. And oft-times his Strength is great. Hence, as was observed,
oft-times men design really to exercise themselves in holy Thoughts, but end in
vain Imaginations, and rather take up with Trifles than continue in this Duty.
Steadiness in the Resistance of him on these Occasions, is one great part of
our Spiritual Warfare. And we may know that he is at work by his Engines and
Methods. For they consist in his Suggestions of vain, foolish or corrupt
Imaginations. When they begin to rise in our Minds, at such times as we would
engage them in Spiritual Meditation, we may know assuredly from whence they are.

6. Continual watchful Care, that no root of Bitterness spring up and defile
us, that no Lust or Corruption be predominant in us. When it is so, if Persons
in compliance with their Convictions do endeavor sometimes to be exercised in
these Duties, they shall labor in the very fire, where all their Endeavors
will be Immediately consumed.

7. Mortification unto the World in our Affections and Desires, with Moderation
in our Endeavors after the Needful things of it, are also necessary hereunto;
yea to that Degree, that without them no man can in any sense be said to be
Spiritually-minded. For otherwise our Affections cannot be so preserved under
the Power of Grace, as that Spiritual things may be always Savoury unto us.

Some it may be will say, That if all these things are required thereunto, it
will take up a man's whole Life and Time to be Spiritually-minded. They hope
they may attain it at an easier rate, and not forgo all other Advantages and
Sweetnesses of Life, which a strict Observation of these things would cast them
upon.

I answer; that however it may prove an hard Saying unto some, yet I must say
it, and my heart would reproach me if I should not say, that if the principal
part of our time be not spent about these things, whatever we suppose, we have
indeed neither Life nor Peace. The First Fruits of all were to be offered unto
God, and in Sacrifices he required the Blood, and the Fat of the Inwards. If
the best be not his, he will have nothing. It is so as to our Time. Tell me, I
pray you, how you can spend your Time and your Lives better, or to better
purpose; and I shall say, Go on and prosper. I am sure some spend so much of
their time so much worse, as it is a shame to see it. Do you think you came
into this World, to spend your whole Time and Strength in your Employments,
your Trades, your Pleasures, unto the Satisfaction of the Will of the Flesh and
of the Mind? Have you Time enough to Eat, to Drink, to Sleep, to Talk
unprofitably, it may be corruptly, in all sorts of unnecessary Societies, but
have not enough to Live unto God, in the very Essentials of that Life which
consists in these things? Alas! you came into the World under this Law; It is
appointed to all men once to die, and after that is the Judgment; and the End
why your Life here is granted unto you, is that you may be prepared for that
Judgment. If this be neglected, if the principal part of your Time be not
improved with respect unto this End, you will fall under the Sentence of it
unto Eternity.

But men are apt to mistake in this matter. They may think that these things
tend to take them off from their Lawful Employments and Recreations, which they
are generally afraid of, and unwilling to purchase any frame of Mind at so dear
a rate. They may suppose that to have men spiritually minded, we would make
them Mopes, and to disregard all the Lawful Occasions of Life. But let not any
be mistaken; I am not upon a design that will be easily, or it may be honestly
defeated. Men are able to defend themselves in their Callings and Enjoyments,
and to satisfy their Consciences against any Persuasions to the contrary. Yet
there is a Season wherein we are obliged to part with all we have, and give up
our selves wholly to follow Christ in all things; Math. 19.21. And if we
neglect or refuse it in that season, it is an Evidence that we are Hypocrites.
And there was a time when Superstition had so much Power on the Minds of men,
that multitudes were persuaded to forsake, to give up all their Interest in
Relations, Callings, Goods, Possessions, and betake themselves unto tedious
Pilgrimages, yea hard Services in War, to comply with that Superstition; and it
is not the Glory of our Profession, that we have so few Instances of men
parting with all, and giving up themselves unto Heavenly Retirement. But I am
at present on no such Design; I aim not to take men out of their lawful Earthly
occasions, but to bring spiritual Affections and Thoughts into the management
of them all. The things mentioned will deprive you of no Time you can lay a
claim unto; but Sanctify it all.

I confess he must be a great Proficient in Spirituality, who dares venture on
an absolute Retirement, and he must be well satisfied that he is not called
unto an usefulness among men inconsistent therewith: Unto them it may prove a
disadvantage: Yet this also is attainable if other Circumstances do concur. Men
under the due Exercise of Grace and the Improvement of it, may attain unto that
fixedness in Heavenly-mindedness, that Inconcernment in all things here below,
as to give themselves up entirely and continually unto Heavenly Meditation,
unto a blessed Advancement of all Grace, and a near approach unto Glory. And I
would hope it was so with many of them in ancient times, who renounced the
World, with all Circumstances of Relations, State, Inheritances, and betook
themselves unto Retirement in Wildernesses, to abide always in Divine
Contemplation. But afterward when Multitudes whose minds were not so prepared,
by a real growth in all Grace and Mortification unto the World, as they were,
betook themselves under the same pretenses unto a Monastical Retirement; the
Devil, the World, sensual Lusts, Superstition, and all manner of Evils pursued
them, found them out, possessed them, unto the unspeakable damage and Scandal
of Religion.

This therefore is not that which I invite the common sort of Believers unto.
Let them that are able and free, receive it. The Generality of Christians have
Lawful Callings, Employments and Businesses, which ordinarily they ought to
abide in. That they also may live unto God in their Occasions, they may do well
to consider Two things.

1. Industry in men's Callings is a thing in it self very Commendable. If in
nothing else, it has an Advantage herein, that it is a means to preserve men
from those Excesses in Lust and Riot, which otherwise they are apt to run into.
And if you consider the two sorts of men, whereinto the Generality of Mankind
are Distributed, namely of them who are industrious in their Affairs, and those
who spend their time so far as they are able in Idleness and Pleasure; the
former sort are far more amiable and desirable. Howbeit it is capable of being
greatly abused. Earthly-mindedness, Covetousness, devouring things holy as to
Times and Seasons of Duty, Uselesness, and the like pernicious Vices do invade
and possess the Minds of men. There is no Lawful Calling that does absolutely
exclude this Grace of being Spiritualy-minded in them that are engaged in it,
nor any that does include it. Men may be in the meanest of Lawful Callings and
be so, and men may be in the best and highest and not be so. Consider the
Calling of the Ministry: The Work and Duty of it calls on those that are
employed in it, to have their Minds and Thoughts conversant about spiritual and
heavenly things. They are to study about them, to meditate on them, to commit
them unto Memory, to speak them out unto others. It will be said, Surely such
men must needs be Spiritually-minded. If they go no further than what is
mentioned, I say they must needs be so, as Printers must needs be Learned, who
are continually conversant about Letters. A man may with great Industry engage
himself in these things, and yet his mind be most remote from being Spiritual.
The Event does declare that it may be so, and the Reasons of it are manifest.
It requires as much, if not more Watchfulness, more Care, more Humility, for a
Minister to be Spiritually minded in the Discharge of his Calling, than to any
sort of men in theirs: And that, as for other Reasons, so because the
commonness of the exercise of such Thoughts, with their design upon others in
their expression, will take off their Power and Efficacy. And he will have
little benefit by his own Ministy, who endeavors not in the first place an
Experience in his own heart of the Power of the Truths which he does teach unto
others. And there is Evidently as great a failing herein among us, as among any
other sort of Christians, as every occasion of Trial does Demonstrate.

2. Although Industry in any honest Calling be allowable, yet unless men labor
to be Spiritually-minded in the exercise of that Industry, they have neither
Life nor Peace. Hereunto all the things before mentioned, are necessary; I know
not how any of them can be abated, yea more is required than is expressed in
them. If you burn this Roll, another must be written, and many like things must
be added unto it. And the Objection from the expense of Time in the Observance
of them, is of no force. For a man may do as much work whilst he is
Spiritually minded, as whilst he is Carnal. Spiritual Thoughts will no more
hinder you in your Callings than those that are vain and earthly, which all
sorts of men can find leisure for in the midst of their Employments. If you
have filled a Vessel with Chaff, yet you may pour into it a great deal of
water, which will be contained in the same space and Vessel. And if it be
necessary that you should take in much of the Chaff of the world into your
minds, yet are they capable of such measures of Grace as shall preserve them
sincere unto God.

Fifthly, This frame will never be preserved, nor the Duties mentioned be ever
performed in a due manner, unless we dedicate some part of our Time peculiarly
unto them. I speak unto them only concerning whom I suppose that they do daily
set apart some portion of Time unto holy duties, as Prayer and Reading of the
Word, and they find by experience that it succeeds well with them. For the most
part if they lose their Seasons, they lose their Duties. For some have
complained, that the urgency of Business, and multiplicity of Occasions driving
them at first from the fixed time of their Duties, has brought them into a
course of neglecting Duty it self. Wherefore it is our wisdom to set apart
constantly some part of our time, unto the exercise of our thoughts about
spiritual things in the way of Meditation. And I shall close this discourse
with some Directions in this particular unto them who complain of their
disability for the discharge of this duty.

(1.) Choose and separate a fit time or Season, a time of freedom from other
Occasions and diversions. And because it is our duty to redeem time with
respect unto holy Duties, such a season may be the more useful, the more the
purchase of it stands us in. We are not at any Time to serve God with what
costs us naught, nor with any Time that comes within the same Rule. If we will
allow only the Refuse of our Time unto this duty, when we have nothing else to
do, and it may be through weariness of Occasions are fit for nothing else, we
are not to expect any great success in it. This is one pregnant reason why men
are so cold and formal, so lifeless in spiritual duties, namely, the Times and
Seasons which they allot unto them. When the Body is wearied with the labor
and occasions of the day, and it may be the mind in its natural faculties
indisposed, even by the means of necessary refreshment, men think themselves
meet to Treat with God about the great concernments of his Glory, and their own
Souls. This is that which God condemns by the Prophet, Mal. 1.8. And if you
offer the blind for Sacrifice is it not evil? and if you offer the lame and
sick is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Governor will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy person? Both the Law of Nature, and all the Laws of holy
Institutions, do require that we should serve God with the best that we have,
as all the fat of the Inwards was to be offered in Sacrifice. And shall we
think to offer that Time unto God, wherein we are unmeet to appear before an
earthly Ruler? Yet such in my account are the Seasons, especially the evening
seasons, that most men choose for the duties of their holy Worship. And you may
do well to consider that beyond the day and time which he has taken unto
himself by an Everlasting Law, how little of the Choice of your time you have
offered unto God as a Free-will-offering, that you may be excited to future
diligence. If therefore you seriously intend this Duty, choose the Seasons for
it wherein you are most fit, when even the natural vigor of your spirits is
most free and active. Possibly some will say, this may be such a time as when
the occasions of the world do call most earnestly for your attendance unto
them. I say that is the Season I would recommend. And if you can conquer our
minds to redeem it for God at that rate, your endeavors in it will be
prosperous. However, trust not to times that will offer themselves. Take them
not up at hazard. Let the time it self be a free will Offering to God, taken
from the Top of the heap, or the Choicest part of your useful Time.

(2.) Preparation of Mind unto a due Reverence of God and spiritual things, is
required previously hereunto. When we go about this duty, if we rush into
thoughts of heavenly things without a due reverential preparation, we shall
quickly find ourselves at a loss. See the Rule, Eccles. 5.1, 2. Grace to serve
God with reverence and Godly fear, is required in all things wherein we have to
do with him, as in this duty we have in an immediate and especial manner.
Endeavor therefore in the first place to get your hearts deeply affected with
an awful reverence of God, and an holy regard unto the heavenly nature of the
things you would meditate upon. Hereby your Minds will be composed, and the
roots of other thoughts, be they vain or earthly, which are apt to arise and
divert you from this duty, will be cast out. The principles of these contrary
Thoughts are like Jacob and Esau, they struggle in the same womb, and
oftentimes Esau will come first forth, and for a while seem to carry the
Birthright. If various thoughts do conflict in our Minds, some for this world,
and some for another, those for this world may carry it for a season. But where
a due Reverence of God has cast out the Bondwoman and her Children, the
workings of the Flesh in its vain Thoughts and Imaginations, the Mind will be
at liberty to exercise it self on spiritual things.

(3.) Earnest Desires after a renewed sense and relish of Spiritual things are
required hereunto. If we engage into this duty merely on a conviction of the
necessity of it, or set our selves about it because we think we ought to do so,
and it will not be well done utterly to neglect it, we may not expect to be
successeful in it: But when the Soul has at any time tasted that the Lord is
gracious, when its Meditations on him have been sweet, when Spiritual things
have had a Savor and Relish in the mind and Affections, and hereon it comes
unto this duty with earnest desires to have the like tastes, the like
experience, yea to have them increased; then is it in the way of an hopeful
progress. And this also will make us persevere in our endeavors to go through
with what we undertake; namely, when we do know by former Experience what is to
be attained in it, if we dig and search for it as Treasure.

If you shall think that the right discharge of this duty may be otherwise
attained; if you suppose that it deserves not all this Cost and charge about
it; Judge by what is past, whether it be not advisable to give it over and let
it alone. As good lie quietly on the ground, as continually attempt to rise,
and never once effect it. Remember how many successeless attempts you have made
upon it, and all have come to nothing, or that which is as bad as nothing. I
cannot say that in this way you shall always succeed; But I fear you will
never have success in this duty, without such things as are of the same nature
and use with it.

When after this Preparation, you find your selves yet perplexed and entangled,
not able comfortably to persist in Spiritual Thoughts, unto your Refreshment,
take these two Directions for your Relief.

1. Cry and Sigh to God for Help and Relief. Bewail the darkness, weakness and
instability of your Minds, so as to groan within your selves for Deliverance.
And if your designed Medi^^ions do issue only in a renewed gracious sense of
your own Weakness and Insufficiency, with Application unto God for Supplies of
Strength, they are by no means lost as unto a Spiritual account. The thoughts
of Hezekiah in his Meditations did not seem to have any great Order or
consistency, when he so expressed them; Like a Crane or a Swallow so did I
chatter; I did mourn as a Dove: Mine eyes failed with looking upwards; O Lord,
I am oppressed, undertake for me; Isa. 38.14. When the Soul labors sincerely
for Communion with God, but sinks into broken confused thoughts under the
weight of its own weakness, yet if he looks to God for relief, his chattering
and Mourning will be accepted with God, and profitable unto himself.

2. Supply the Brokenness of your Thoughts with Ejaculatory Prayers, according
as either the Matter of them, or your defect in the Management of them does
require. So was it with Hezekiah in the Instance before mentioned; where his
own Meditations were weak and broken, he cries out in the midst of them, O
Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. And Meditation is properly a Mixture of
Spiritual Apprehension of God and heavenly things, in the Thoughts and
Conceptions of the Mind, with Desires and Supplications thereon.

It is good and profitable to have some special designed Subject of Meditation
in our Thoughts. I have at large declared before what things are the proper
Objects of the Thoughts of them that are Spiritually-minded. But they may be
more peculiarly considered as the matter of designed Meditation. And they may
be taken out of some especial spiritual Experience that we have lately had, or
some Warnings we have received of God, or something wherewith we have been
peculiarly affected in the Reading or Preaching of the Word, or what we find
the present posture and Frame of our Minds and Souls to require; or that which
supplies all most frequently, the Person and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. If
any thing of this nature be peculiarly designed, antecedently unto this Duty,
and a Season be sought for it with respect thereunto, the Mind will be fixed
and kept from wandering after variety of Subjects, wherein it is apt to lose it
self, and brings nothing to Perfection.

Lastly, Be not discouraged with an Apprehension, that all that you can attain
unto in the discharge of this duty is so little, so contemptible, as that it is
to no purpose to persist in it. Nor be wearied with the difficulties you meet
withal in its performance. You have to do with him only in this matter, who
will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; whose will it
is, that none should despise the day of small things. And if there be in this
Duty a ready Mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and not
according to what he has not. He that can bring into this Treasure only the
Mites of broken Desires and Ejaculatory Prayers, so they be his best, shall not
come behind them who cast into it out of their greater abundance in Ability and
Skill. To faint and give out because we cannot arise unto such a height as we
aim at, is a fruit of Pride and Unbelief. He who finds himself to gain nothing
by continual Endeavors after holy fixed Meditations, but only a living active
sense of his own Vileness and Unworthiness, is a sufficient gainer by all his
Pains, Cost and Charge. But ordinarily it shall not be so; Constancy in the
Duty will give Ability for it. Those who conscientiously abide in its
Performance, shall increase in Light, Wisdom and Experience, until they are
able to manage it with great Success. These few plain Directions may possibly
be of some use unto the weaker sort of Christians, when they find a disability
in themselves unto the discharge of this Duty, wherein those who are
Spiritually minded ought to be peculiarly exercised.

PART II.
CHAP. XI.
The Seat of Spiritual-Mindedness in the Affections. The Nature and use of
them. The Ways and Means used by God himself, to call the Affections of Men
from the World.

IN the Account given at the entrance of this Discourse, of what it is to be
Spiritually Minded, it was reduced unto there Heads.

The First, was the Habitual Frame, Disposition, and Inclination of the Mind in
its Affections.

The Second, was the Usual Exercise of the Mind in its Thoughts, Meditations,
and Desires about Heavenly Things.

Whereunto, Thirdly was added, the Complacency of Mind in that Relish and
Savor which it finds in Spiritual Things, so thought and meditated on.

The Second of these has hitherto alone been spoken unto, as that which leads
the way unto the others, and gives the most sensible Evidence of the state
enquired after. Therein consists the Stream, which rising in the Fountain of
our Affections, runs into a Holy Rest and Complacency of Mind.

The first and last I shall now handle together, and therein comprehend the
Account of what it is to be Spiritually Minded.

Spiritual Affections, whereby the Soul adhears unto Spiritual Things, taking
in such a Savor and Relish of them, as wherein it finds Rest and Satisfaction,
is the peculiar Spring and Substance of our being Spiritually Minded. This is
that which I shall now further explain and confirm.

The great contest of Heaven and Earth is about the Affections of the poor
Worm, which we call Man. That the World should contend for them, is no wonder.
It is the best that it can pretend unto. All things here below, are capable of
no higher Ambition, than to be possessed of the Affections of Men. And as they
^y under the Curse, it can do us no greater Mischief, than ^y ^ prevailing in
this Design. But that the Holy God should as it were engage in the Contest, and
strive for the Affections of Man, is an effect of Infinite Condiscention and
Grace. This he does expressly; My Son says he, give me thy Heart, Prove. 23.26.
It is our Affections he asks for, and comparatively nothing else; to be sure
he will accept of nothing from us without them. The most fat and costly
Sacrifice will not be accepted, if it be without a Heart. All the ways and
methods of the Dispensation of his Will, by his Word, all the Designs of his
effectual Grace, are suited unto, and prepared for this end, namely, to recover
the Affections of man unto himself. So he expresses himself concerning his
Word. Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now Israel, What does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to Fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his Ways, and to Love, and to
Serve the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul. And as unto
the Word of his Grace, he declares it unto the same purpose, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And
the Lord thy God will Circumcise thy Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed; to Love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul.

And on the other side, all the Artifices of the World, all the Paint it puts
on its Face, all the great Promises it makes, all the false Appearances, and
Attires it clothes it self withal by the help of Satan, have no other end but,
to draw, and keep the Affections of Men unto it self. And if the World be
preferred before God, in this address which is made unto us, for our
Affections, we shall justly perish with the World unto Eternity; and be
rejected by him whom we have rejected, Prove. 1.24, 25, 31.

Our Affections are upon the Matter our all. They are all we have to give or
bestow; the only Power of our Souls, whereby, if we may give away our selves
from our selves, and become another. Other Faculties of our Souls, even the
most noble of them, are suited to receive in unto our own advantage; by our
Affections we can give away what we are, and have. Hereby, we give our Hearts
unto God, as he requires. Wherefore unto him we give our Affections, unto whom
we give our All, our selves, and all that we have; and to whom we give them
not, what ever we give, upon the matter, we give nothing at all.

In what we do unto, or for others; whatsoever is good, valuable, or
praiseworthy in it, procceds from the Affections wherewith we do it. To do any
thing for others without an animating Affection, is but a contempt of them, for
we Judge them really unworthy, that we should do any thing for them: To give to
the Poor upon their importunity, without Pity or Compassion; To supply the
wants of Saints without Love, and Kindnesss, with other actings and Duties of
the like Nature, are things of no value, things that recommend us neither unto
God nor men. It is so in general with God and the World. Whatsoever we do in
the Service of God, whatever duty we perform on his Command, whatever we
undergo, or suffer for his Namesake, if it proceed not from the cleaving of
our Souls unto him by our Affections, it is despised by him, he owns us not. As
if a Man would give all the Substance of his House for Love, it would utterly
be coutemned, Cant. 5. It is not to be bought nor purchased with Riches; So if
a man would give to God all the Substance of his House without Love, it would
in like manner be despised. And however, on the other hand, we may be diligent,
industrous, and sedulous in and about the things of this World, yet, if it have
not our Affections, we are not of the World, we belong not unto it. They are
the Seat of all Sincerity, which is the Jewel of divine and humane
Conversation, the Life and Soul of every thing that is good and praiseworthy,
whatever Men pretend, as their Affections are, so are they. Hypocrisy is a
deceitful Interposition of the Mind, on various Reasons and Pretenses, between
Men's Affections and their Profession, whereby a Man appears to be what he is
not. Sincerity is the open avowment of the Reality of Men's Affections, which
renders them good and useful.

Affections are in the Soul, as the Helm in the Ship, if it be laid hold on by
a Skilful Hand, he turns the whole Vessel which way he pleases. If God has
the Powerful Hand of his Grace upon our Affections, he turns our Souls unto a
compliance with his Institutions, Instructions, in Mercy, Affections, Trials,
all sorts of Providence, and holds them firm against all Winds and Storms of
Temptations, that they shall not hurry them on pernicious Dangers. Such a Soul
alone is tractable and pliable unto all Intimations of Gods Will.

All others are stubborn and obstinate, stout Hearted and far from
Righteousness. And when the World has the Hand on our Affections, it turns the
Mind, with the whole Industry of the Soul unto its Interest and Concerns. And
it is vain to contend with any thing that has the Power of our Affections in
its disposal, it will prevail at last.

On all these Considerations, it is of the highest importance to consider a
right how things are stated in our Affections, and what is the prevailing bent
of them. Iron sharpneth Iron, so a Man sharpeneth the Countenance of his
Friend, says the wise Man, Prove. 27.17. Every man has his Edge, which may be
sharpened by outward helps and advantages. The predominant Inclination of a
Man's Affections, is his Edge. According as that is set, so he cutteth and
works; that way, he is sharp and keen, but blunt unto all other things.

Now because it must be, that our affections are either Spiritual or Earthly in
a Prevailing degree, that either God has our hearts, or the World; that our
edge is toward Heaven, or toward things here below: before I came to give an
account of the Nature and Opperations of Spiritual Affections, I shall consider
and propose some of those Arguments and Motives which God is pleased to make
use of, to call off our Affections from the desirable things of this World;
For as they are wightly and cogent, such as cannot be neglected without the
greatest contempt of Divine Wisdom and Goodness; So they serve to press and
enforce those arguments and motives, that are proposed unto us to set our
Affections on things that are above, which is to be Spiritually minded.

First, He has in all manner of Instances powered Contempt on the things of
this World, in comparison of things Spiritual and Heavenly. All things here
below were at first made beautiful and in order; and were declared by God
himself to be exceeding good; and that not only in their being and nature, but
in the use whereunto they were designed. They were then desirable unto men,
and the enjoyment of them would have bin a blessing without danger of
Temptation. For they were the Ordinance of God to lead us unto the knowledge of
him, and love unto him. But since the entrance of sin, weherby the World fell
under the Curse, and into the power of Satan, the things of it in his managment
are become effectual means to draw off the heart and the Affections from God.
For, it is the World and the things of it as sum'd up by the Apostle, 1 John
2.15, 16, that alone strive for our Affections to be the Object of them. Sin
and Satan do but woe for the World to take them off from God. By them does the
God of this World, Blind the Eyes of them that believe not, and the principle
way whereby he works in them, is by promises of satisfaction unto all the
lusts of the minds of men with a proposal of whatever is dreadful and terrible
in the want of them. Being now in this State and condition, and used unto this
end, through the Craft of Satan, and the folly of the minds of men: God has
showed by various Instances, that they are all vain, empty, unsatisfactory, and
every way to be despised in comparison of things Eternal.

First. He did it most eminently and signally in the Life, Death, and Cross of
Christ. What can be seen or found in this World, after the Son of God has
spent his Life in it, not having where to lay his Head; and after he went out
of it on the Cross. Had there bin ought of real worth in things here below;
certainly he had enjoyed, if not Crowns and Empires which where all in his
Power, yet such Goods and Posessions as men of sober reasonings, and moderate
affeons do esteem a competency. But things were quite otherwise disposed, To
manifest that there is nothing of value, or use in these things, but only to
support nature unto the performance of service unto God, wherein they are
serviceable unto eternity: He never attained, he never enjoyed more then daily
supplies of Bread out of the Stores of Providence, and which alone he has
Instructed us to Pray for, Math. 8.20. In his Cross the World proclaimed all
its good qualities and all is Powers, and has given unto them that believe,
its naked Face to view and contemplate. Nor is it now one jot more comely, than
it was when it had gotten Christ on the Cross. Hence is that inference and
Conclusion of the Apostle; Gal. 6.14. But God forbid that I should glory, save
in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World is Crucified unto me,
and I unto the World. Since I have believed, since I have had a Sense of the
Power and Virtue of the Cross of Christ, I have done with all things in this
World; it is a dead thing unto me, nor have I any affection for it. This is
that which made the difference between the Promises of the Old Covenant and the
New. For they were many of them about temporal things, the good things of this
World, and this Life. Those of the New, are mostly of things Spiritual and
Eternal. God would not call off the Church wholly from a regard unto these
things, until he had given a Demonstration of their Emptiness, Vanity, and
Insufficiency in the Cross of Christ. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.

Whither so fast my Friend? What means this rising so early, and going to Bed
late, eating the Bread of Carefulness? Why this Diligence, why these
Contrivances, why these savings and hoardings of Riches, and Wealth? To what
end is all this Care and Council? Alas, says one, it is to get that which is
enough in and of this World, for me and my Children, to prefer them, to raise
an Estate for them, which if not so great as others, may yet be a Competency,
to give them some satisfaction in their Lives, and some Reputation in the
World. Fair Pretenses, neither shall I ever discourage any from the exercise of
Industy in their Lawful Callings. But yet I know, that with many, this is but a
pretense and covering for a shameful Engagement of their Affections unto the
World. Wherefore, in all these things, be persuaded sometimes to have an Eye to
Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; behold, how he is set before us in
the Gospel, poor, despised, reproached, persecuted, nailed to the Cross, and
all by this World. Whatever be your Designs and Aims, let his Cross continually
interpose between your Affections and this World. If you are Believers, your
hopes are within a few days to be with him for evermore. Unto him you must
give an Account of your selves, and what you have done in this World: will it
be accepted with him to declare what you have saved of this World, what you
have gained, what you have preserved, and embraced your selves in, and what you
have left behind you? was this any part of his Employment and Business in this
World; has he left us an Example for any such Course. Wherefore, no man can
set his Affections on things here below, who has any regard unto the pattern
of Christ, or is any measure influenced with the Power and Efficacy of his
Cross. My Love is Crucified, said an Holy Martyr of old; he whom his Soul Loved
was so, and in him his Love unto all things here below. Do you therefore find
your Affections ready to be engaged unto, or too much entangled with the things
of this World; are your Desires of increasing them, your hopes of keeping them,
your Fears of loosing them, your Love unto them, and Delight in them, operative
in your Minds, possessing your Thoughts, and influencing your Conversations.
Turn aside a little, and by Faith contemplate the Life and Death of the Son of
God; a blessed Glass will it be, where you may see what contemptible things
they are which you perplex your selves about. Oh! that any of us should love or
esteem the things of this World, the Power, Riches, Goods or Reputation of it,
who have had a Spiritual view of them in the Cross of Christ.

It may be, it will be said that the Circumstances mentioned, were necessary
unto the Lord Christ, with respect unto the especial Work he had to do, as the
Savior and Redeemer, of the Church. And therefore it does not thence follow,
that we ought to be poor, and want all things as he did. I confess it does not;
and therefore, do all along make an allowance for honest Industry in our
Callings. But this follows unavoidably hereon; that what he did forego and
trample on, for our Sake; that ought not to be the Object of our Affections,
nor can such Affections prevail in us, if he Dwell in our Hearts by Faith.

Secondly, He has done the same in his Dealings with the Apostles, and
generally with all that have been most dear unto him, and instrumental unto the
Interest of his Glory in the World, especially since Life and Immortality were
brought to Light by the Gospel. He had great work to do by the Apostles, and
that of the greatest use unto his Interest and Kingdom. The laying of the
Foundations of the glorious Kingdom of Christ in the World, was committed unto
them. Who would not think that he should provide for them, if not
Principalities or Popedoms, yet at least, Arch-Bishopricks, and Bishoprics,
with other good Ecclesiastical Dignities and Preferments? Hereby, might they
have been made meet to converse with Princes, and had been freed from the
Contempt of the Vulgar: But Infinite Wisdom did otherwise dispose of them, and
their Concerns in this World. For, as God was pleased to exercise them with the
common Afflictions and Calamities of this Life; which he makes use of, to take
off the Sweetness of present Enjoyments; so they lived and died in a Condition
of Poverty, Distress, Persecution, and Reproach. God set them forth as Examples
as unto other ends, namely of Light, Grace, Zeal, and Holiness in their Lives,
so to manifest, of how little Concernment unto our own Blessedness, or an
Interest in his Love, is the abundance of all things here below; as also, that
the want of them all may consist with the highest Participation of his Love and
Favor. 1 Cor. 4.9.11, 12, 13. For I think that God has set forth us the
Apostles Last, as it were appointed to Death. For we are made a Spectacle unto
the World, and unto Angels, and to Men. Even unto this present Hour, we both
hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffetted, and have no certain
Dewlling Place; and labor working with our own hands; being reviled, we bless;
being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat; we are made as the
Filth of the World, and are the offscouring of all things unto this Day. And
if the Consideration thereof be not of weight with others, undoubtedly, it
ought to be so with them who are called to Preach the Gospel, and are the
Successors to the Apostles. There can be nothing more uncouth, absurd, and
shameful, nothing more opposite unto the Intimation of the Wisdom and Will of
God in his dealings with those first and most honorable Dispensers of it, than
for such Persons to seek and follow greedily after secular Advantages, in
worldly Powers, Riches, Wealth, and Honor. Hence there has been in former
Ages, and Endeavor to separate such Persons as were by any means dedicated
unto the Ministry of the Gospel, from all Secular Dignities and Revenues. Yea,
some maintained, that they were to enjoy nothing of their own, but were to live
on Alms, or the free Contributions of the People. But this was quickly
Condemned as Heresy in Wickliff and others. Yet another sort set up, that would
pretend thereunto, as unto themselves, though they would not obliege all others
unto the same Rule. This produced some Swarms of begging Friars, whom they of
the Church, who were in Possession of Wealth and Power, thought meet to laugh
at and let alone; of late Years, this Contest is at an End. The Clergy have
happily gotten the Victory, and esteem all due unto them, that they can by any
ways obtain; nor is there any greater Crime, than for a Man to be otherwise
minded. But these things are not our present Concernment. From the Beginning it
was not so. And it is well if in such a way, Men are able to maintain the
Frame of Mind enquired after, which is Life and Peace.

Thirdly, God continues to cast Contempt on these things, by giving always
incomparably the greatest Portion of them unto the vilest Men, and his own
avowed Enemies. This was a Temptation under the Old Covenant, but is highly
instructive under the New. None will Judge those things to be of real Value,
which a Wise Man casts out daily unto Swine, making little or no use of them in
his Family. Those Monsters of Men, Nero, and Heliogabalus had more Interest in,
and more Power over the things in this World, than ever had the best of Men.
Such Villans in Nature, so pernitius unto humane Society, that their not Being
was the Interest of Mankind; but yet more of the World poured on them, then
they knew either how to Enjoy, Possess, Use, or Abuse. Look on all the
principal Treasures and Powers of this World, as in the Hand of one of these
Monsters, and there disposed of by Divine Providence, and you may see at what
rate God values them.

At this Day, the greatest, most noble, wealthy and Fruitful Parts of the
Earth, are given unto the Great Turk, with some other Eastern Potentates,
either Mahumetans or Pagans, who are prepared for Eternal Destruction. And if
we look nearer home, we may see in whose Hands is the Power of the Chiefest
Nations of Europe, and unto what end it is used. The utmost of what some
Christian Professors among our selves are intent and designing upon, as that
which would render them wondrous happy in their own Apprehensions, put Hundreds
of them together, and it would not answer the VVast made by the forementioned
Beasts every Day.

Does not God proclaim herein, that the things of this World are not to be
valued or esteemed? if they were so, and had a real worth in themselves, would
the Holy and Righteous God make such a Distribution of them. The most of those
whom he Loves, who enjoy his Favor, not only comparatively have the meanest
Share of them, but are exercised with all the Evils that the Destitution and
want of them can be accompanied withal? His open and avowed Enemies in the mean
time, have more than they know what to do withal. Who would set his Heart and
Affections on those things which God pours into the Bosoms of the vilest
Men, to be a Snare unto them here, and an Aggravation of their Condemnation for
ever; It seems, you may go and take the World, and take the Curse, Death and
Hell along with it, and what will it profit a Man to gain the whole World and
loose his own Soul. What can any Man do on the Consideration hereof, who will
not forego all his Hopes and Expectations from God, but retreat unto the Faith
of things Spiritual and Eternal, as containing an Excellency in them
incomparably above all that may be enjoyed here below.

Fourthly, He does continue to give perpetual Instances of their uncertainty
and unsatisfactoriness in the utter Disappointment of Men that have had
Expectations from them. The ways hereof are various, and the Instances so
multiplied, as that most men in the World, unless they are like the Fool in the
Gospel, who had his Soul take its ease for many Years, because his Barns were
full, live in perpetual Fears and Apprehensions, that they shall speedily loose
whatever they enjoy; or are under the Power of a stupid Security. But as unto
this Consideration of them, there is such an Account given by the Wiseman, as
unto which nothing can be added, or which no Reason or Experience is able to
contradict, Eccl. 12. By these and the like ways does God cast contempt on all
things here below; discouerng the Folly and Falseness of the Promises which the
World makes use of to allure our Affections unto it self. This therefore is to
be laid as the Foundation in all our Considerations, unto what or whom we shall
cleave by our Affections, that God has not only declared the Insufficiency of
these things, to give us that Rest and Happiness which we seek after, but also
poured Contempt upon them, in his Holy, Wise Disposal of them in the World.

Secondly, God has added unto their Vanity, by shortning the Lives of Men,
reducing their Continuance in this world unto so short and uncertain a Season,
as it is impossible they should take any solid Satisfaction in what they enjoy
here below. So it is expressed by the Psalmist. Behold thou have made my Days
as an handbreadth, and my Age is nothing before these. Hence he draws two
Conclusions.

First, That every Man at his best Estate, is but vanity.

Secondly, That every Man walks in a vain show; surely they are disquieted in
vain, he heapeth up Riches, and knows not who shall gather them. Psalm. 39.5,
6. The uncertainty and shortness of the Lives of Men, render all their
Endeavors and Contrivances about Earthly things, both vain and foolish. When
Men lived eight or nine hundred Years, they had opportunity to suck out all the
Sweetness that was in Creature Comforts, to make large Provisions of them, and
to have long Projections about them. But when they had so, they all issued in
that Violence, Oppression, and Wickedness, which brought the Flood on the World
of Ungodly Men. And it still so abides, the more of, and the longer men enjoy
these things, the more without the Sovereign Preservative of Grace, will they
abound in Sin, and Provocations of God. But God has reduced the Life of Man
unto the small pittance of seventy Years; casting what may fall out of a longer
continuance into Travel and Sorrow. Besides, that Space is shortened with the
most, by various and innumerable Incidencies and Occasions. Wherefore in these
seventy Years, consider how long it is before men begin to have a taste or gust
of the things of this Life; how many things fall in cross, to make us weary of
them before the end of our Days, how few among us, not one of a thousand,
attain that Age, what is the uncertainty of all men living, as to the
continuance of their Lives unto the next Day* and we shall see that the holy,
wise God, has left no such Season for their enjoyment, as might put a value
upon them. And when on the other hand it is remembered, that this Man who is of
such short continuance in this world, is yet made for Eternity, Eternal
Blessedness or Misery, which State depends wholly on his Interest on things
above, and setting his Affections on them, they must forfeit all their reason,
as well as bid Defiance unto the Grace of God, who give them up unto things
below.

Thirdly. God has openly and fully declared the Danger that is in these
things, as unto their Enjoyment and Use; and what Multitudes of Souls miscarry,
by an inordinate adherence unto them. For they are the matter of those
Temptations, whereby the Souls of Men are ruined for ever; the Fuel that
supplys the Fire of their Lusts until they are consumed by it.

Men under the Power of Spiritual Convictions, fall not into Sin, fail not
eternally, but by means of Temptation; That is the mire wherein this Rush does
grow. For others who live and die in the madness and wildness of Nature,
without any restraint in their Minds from the Power of Convictions, they need
no external Temptations, but only Opportunities to exert their Lusts. But for
those who by any means are convinced of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, so as
to design the ordering of their Lives, with respect unto the Sense they have of
them, they fall not into actual Sin, but upon Temptations. That, whatever it
be, which causes, occasioneth, and prevails on a convinced Person, unto Sin,
that is Temptation. Wherefore this is the great means of the Ruin of the Souls
of men.

Now, though there are many Principles of Temptation, many Causes that actually
concur unto its Efficacy, as Sin, Satan, and other Men, yet the Matter of
almost all ruinous Temptations is taken out of this World, and the things of
it. Thence does Satan take all his Darts: Thence do evil Men derive all the
ways and means whereby they corrupt others, and from thence is all the fuel of
Sin, and Lust taken. And which adds unto this evil, all that is in the World,
contributes its utmost thereunto. All that is in the World, is the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. 1 John 2.16. It is not a
direct formal annumeration of the things that are in the World, nor a
Distribution of them under several Heads, but it is so of the principal Lusts
of the Minds, of Men, whereunto all the things in the World are subservient.
Wherefore, not only the Matter of all Temptations is taken out of the World,
but every thing that is in the World is apt and fit to abused unto that end.
For it were easy to show that there is nothing desirable or valuable in this
whole world, but it is reducible unto a Subserviency unto one or other of These
Lusts, and is applicable unto the Interest and Service of Temptations and Sins.

When men hear of these things, hey tare apt to say, let the Dream be unto them
that are openly wicked, and the Interpretation of it unto them that are
profligate in Sin. Unto unclean Persons, Drunkards, Oppressors, proud ambitious
Persons, it may be it is so; but as unto them, they use the things of this
World with a due moderation, so as they are no Snare unto them. But to own they
are used unto what end soever, if the Affections of men are set upon them, one
way or other, there is nothing in the World, but is thus a Snare and
Temptation. However we should be very crreful how we adhere unto, or under
value that which is the cause and means of the ruin of multitudes of Souls. By
the warnings given us hereof, does God design, as unto the use of means, to
teach us the vanity and danger of fixing our Affections on things below.

Fourthly, Things are so ordered in the holy wise Dispensation of Gods
Providence, that it requires much Spiritual Wisdom to distinguish between the
use and the abuse of these things, between a lawful care about them, and an
inordinate cleaving unto them. Few distinguish aright here, and therefore in
these things will many find their great mistake at the last Day. The
Disappointments that they will fall under, as to what concerns their earthly
enjoyments and the use of them, wherewith they were entrusted, see Mat. 25.34.
to the end of the Chapter.

It is granted that there is a lawful use of these things, a lawful Care and
Industry about them. So it is also acknowledged, it cannot be denied, that
there is an abuse of them springing from an inordinate Love, and cleaving unto
them. But here men deceive themselves, taking their Measures by the most
crooked uncertain Rules. Some make their own Inclinations the Rule and measure
of what is so lawful and allowable, some the Examples of others; some the
Course of the World, some their own real or pretended necessities. They confess
that there is an inordinate love of those things and an abuse of them, in
excesses of various sorts, which the Scripture plainly affirms, and which
Experience gives open Testimony unto. But as unto their State and
Circumstances, their Care, Love and Industry are all allowable. That which
influenceth all these Persons, is Self-Love, which inveterate corrupt
Affections, and false Reasonings do make an Application of unto these Occasions.

Hence we have men approving of themselves as just Stewards of their
Enjoyments, whilst others judge them hard, covetous, earthly-minded; no way
laying out what they are entrusted withal unto the Glory of God, in any due
Proportion. Others also think not amiss of themselves in this kind, who live in
palpable excesses, either of Pride of Life, or Sensual Pleasures, vain Apparel
and the like. So in particular, most men in their Feastings and Entertainments,
walk in direct Contempt of the Rules which our Savior gives in that case; Luke
14.12.13.14. and yet approve themselves therein.

But what if any of us should be mistaken in our Rule and Application of it
unto our Conditions? Men at Sea may have a fair Gale of Wind wherewith they may
sail freely and smoothly for a Season, and yet instead of being brought into a
Port, be cast by it at last on destructive Shelves or Rocks.

And what if that which we esteem allowable Love, Care and Industry, should
prove to be the Fruit of earthly Affections, inordinate and predominant in us;
what if we miss in our measures, and that which we approve of in our selves,
should be disapproved of God; we are cast for ever, we belong unto the World,
and with the World we shall perish.

It may be said, that if it be so difficult to distinguish between these
things, namely the lawful use of things here below, and their abuse, the
allowable Industry about them, and the inordinate Love of them, on the
Knowledge whereof our Eternal Conditions depends, it is impossible but men must
spend their time in solicitous anxiety of Mind, as not knowing when they have
aright discharged their Duty.

Ans. (1) I press these things at present no further, but only to show how
dangerous a thing it is for any to incline in his Affections unto the Things of
this World, wherein an excess is ruinous, and hardly discoverable. Surely, no
Wiseman will venture freely and frequently unto the edge of such a Precipice.
He will be jealous of his Measures, lest they will not hold by the Rule of the
Word. And a due Sense hereof is the best preservative of the Soul, from
cleaving inordinately unto these things below. And when God in any Instance, by
Afflictions, or otherwise, shows unto Believers their Transgression herein, and
how they have exceeded, Job. 38.8, 9. it makes them careful for the future.
They will now or never be diligent, that they fall not under that peremptory
Rule. 1 John 2.14.

Secondly, Where the Soul is upright and sincere, there is no need in this case
of any more Solicitousness or Anxiety of Mind, than there is unto or about
other Duties. But when it is byased and acted by self-Love, and its more strong
Inclinations unto things present, it is impossible men should enjoy Solid
Peace, or be freed from severe reflections on them by their own Consciences, in
such Seasons wherein they are awakened unto their Duty, and the Consideration
of their State; nor have I any thing to tender for their Relief. With others it
is not so, and therefore I shall so far digress in this place, as to give some
directions unto those who in sincerity would be satisfied in this lawful use
and enjoyment of earthly things; so as not to adhere unto them with inordinate
Affections.

First, Remember always that you are not Proprietors, nor absolute Possessors
of these things, but only Stewards of them. With respect unto men, you are or
may be just Proprietors of what you enjoy, with Respect unto him who is the
great Possessor of Heaven and Earth, you are but Stewards. This Stewardship we
are to give an account of, as we are taught in the Parable, Luke 16.1, 2. This
rule always attended unto, will be a Blessed Guide in all Instancss and
Occasions of Duty.

But if a man be left in Trust with Houses and large Possessions, as a Steward
for the right Lord, Owner, and Proprietor of them, if he fall into a pleasing
Dream, that they are all his own, and use them accordingly, it will be a woeful
Surprisal unto him, when he shall be called to account for all he has received
and laid out, whether he will or no. And when indeed he has nothing to pay. It
will scarce be otherwise with them at the great Day, who forget the trust which
is committed to them, and suppose they may do what they will, with what they
call their own.

Secondly, There is nothing in the ways of getting, enjoying or using of these
things, but gives its own Evidence unto Spiritual Wisdom, whether it be within
the bounds of Duty or no. Men are not lightly deceived herein, but when they
are evidently under the Power of corrupt Affections, or will not at all attend
unto themselves and the Language of their own Consciences. It is a man's own
Fault alone, if he know not wherein he does exceed.

A due Examination of our selves in the Sight of God, with respect unto these
things, the Frame and Actings of our Minds in them, will greatly give check
unto our corrupt Inclinations, and discover the Folly of those Reasonings,
whereby we deceive our selves into the Love of Earthly things; or justify our
selves therein, and bring to Light the Secret Principle of Self-Love, which is
the Root of all this evil.

Thirdly, If you would be able to make a right Judgment in this Case, be sure
that you have another Object for your Affections, which has a predominant
Interest in your Minds, and which will Evidence it self so to have on all
Occasions. Let a Man be never so observant of himself, as unto all Outward
Dutys required to him, with respect unto these earthly things; let him be
liberal in the Disposal of them on all Occasions, let him be watchful against
all Intemperance and Excesses in the use of them; yet if he has not another
Object for his Affections, which has a prevailing Influence upon them, if they
are not set upon the Things that are above, one way or other, it is the World
that has the Possession of his Heart. For the Affections of our Minds will,
and must be placed in chief, on things below, or things above; there will be a
predominant Love in us; and therefore, although all our Actions should testify
another Frame, yet if God, and the things of God be not the Principal Object of
our Affections, by one way or other, unto the World we do belong; this is that
which is taught us so expressly by our Savior, Luke 16.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And I
say unto you, make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness,
that when you fail, they may receive you into everlasting Habitations. He that
is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: and he that is
unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore you have not been
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, Who will commit to your trust the true
Riches? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is anothert Man's, who
shall give you that which is your own? No Servant can serve two Masters; for
either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the
one, and despise the other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Fourthly, Labor continually for the Mortification of your Affections unto the
things of this World. They are in the State of corrupted Nature, set and fixed
on them, nor will any Reasonings or Considerations effectually divert them, or
take them off in a due manner, unless they are mortifyed unto them by the Cross
of Christ. Whatever Change be otherwise wrought in them* it will be of no
Advantage unto us. It is Mortification alone, that will take them off from
earthly things unto the Glory of God. Hence the Apostle having given us that
Charge, Set your Affections on things above, and not on things below on the
Earth, Col. 3.2. Adds this, as the only way and means whereby we may do so,
Mortify therefore your Members that are on the Earth. v. 5. Let no man think
that his Affections will fall off from earthly things of their own accord. The
keenness and sharpness of them, in many things, may be abated by the decay of
their natural Powers in Age, and the like. They may be mated by frequent
Disappointments, by Sicknesses, Pains and Afflictions, as we shall see
immediately; or they may be willing unto a Distribution of earthly Enjoyments,
to have the Reputation of it, wherein they still cleave unto the World, but
under another shape and appearance. They may be startled by Convictions, so as
to do many things gladly, that belong unto another Frame. But or one pretense
or other, under one appearance or other, they will for ever adhere and cleave
unto earthly things, unless they are mortified unto them, through Faith in the
Blood and Cross of Christ. Gal. 6.14. Whatever thoughts you may have of your
selves in this matter, unless you have the Experience of a work of
Mortification on your Affections, you can have no refreshing ground of
Assurance, that you are in any thing Spiritually-Minded.

Fifthly, In all Instances of Duty belonging unto your Stewardship of earthly
things, attend diligently unto the Rule of the Word: without this, the Grace
exhorted unto, may be abused. So of old, under a pretense of a relinquishment
of the things of this World, because of the danger in adhering unto them, their
own, Superstition, and the Craft of other men prevailed with many, to part with
all they had unto the Service of others, not better, it may be, not so good as
themselves. This Evil wholly arose from want of attendance unto the Rule of
Truth, which gives no such Direction in ordinary Cases. But there is not much
seen in these days, of an Excess in that kind. But on the other hand, in all
Instances of Duties of this nature, most men's Minds are habitually influenced
with Pretenses, Reasonings, and Considerations, that turn the Scales as unto
what they ought to do in proportion in this Duty, on the side of the World. If
you would be safe, you must in all Instances of Duty, as in works of Charity,
Piety, and Compassion, give Authority in and over your Souls, unto the Rule of
the Word. Let neither Self nor Unbelief, nor the Custom and Example of others
be heard to speak; but let the Rule alone be attended unto, and to what that
speaks, yield, Obedience.

Unless these things are found in us, none of us, no man living, if it be not
so with him, can have any refreshing Evidence or Assurance, that he is not
under the Power of an inordinate, yea, and predominant Love unto this World.

And indeed to add a little further on the Occasion of this Digression, it is a
sad thing to have this Exception made against the State of any Man, on just
Grounds; yea, but he loves the World. He is sober and industrious, he is
constant in Dutys of Religion, it may be, an earnest Preacher of them, a man of
sound Principles, and blameless as unto the Excesses of Life; but he loves the
World. The Question is, how does this appear? it may be, what you say, is but
one of those evil Surmises which all things are filled withal. Wherefore, I
speak it not at all to give countenance unto the rash Judging of others, which
none are more prone unto, than those, who one way or other are eminently guilty
themselves. But I would have every man judge himself, that we be none of us
Condemned of the Lord. It notwithstanding the things mentioned, any of us do
center in Self, which is supplied and filled with the World, if we preffer Self
above all other things, do aim at the Satisfaction of Self in what we do well
or ill, are useless unto the only Good and Blessed Ends of these earthly
things, in supplying the wants of others, according unto the Proportions
wherewith we are entrusted; it is to be feared, that the World, and the things
that are in it, have the Principal Interest in our Affections.

And the danger is yet greater with them who divert on the other Extreme. Such
are they, who in Pride of Life, Vanity in Apparel, Excess in Drinking,
pampering the Flesh every day, tread close on the heels of the World, if they
do not also fully keep Company with it. Altogether in vain is it for such
Persons to countenance themselves with an Appearance of other Graces in them,
or the sedulous Performance of other Dutys. This one Rule will eternally
prevail against them; If any man love the World, the Love of the Father is not
in him. And by the way, let men take heed how they walk in any Instance against
the known Judgment and Practice of the wiser, or more experienced sort of
Christians, to their Regret and Sorrow, if not unto their Offense and Scandal,
or in any way whereunto they win the Consent of their own Light and Conscience,
by such Reasonings and Considerations, as will not hold weight in the Balance
of the Sanctuary. Yet thus, and no otherwise is it with all them, who under a
Profession of Religion, do indulge, unto any Excesses wherein they are
conformed unto the World.

Fifthly, God makes a Hedge against the Excess of the Affections of men,
rational and any way enlightened, unto the things of this World, by suffering
the Generality of men to carry the use of them, and to be carried by the abuse
of them, into Actings so filthy, so abominable, so ridiculous as Reason it self
cannot but abhor. Men by them transform themselves into Beasts and Monsters, as
might be manifested by all sorts of Instances; hence the Wiseman prayed
against Riches, lest he should not be able to manage the Temptations wherewith
they are accompanied; Prove. 30.8.9.

Lastly, to close this matter, and to show us what we are to expect, in case we
set our Affections on things here below, and they have thereby a predominant
Interest in our Hearts, God has positively determined and declared, that if it
be so, he will have nothing to do with us, nor will accept of those Affections
which we pretend we can, and do spare for him, and Spiritual things. If we
abstain from open Sins, if we abhor the Lewdness and Uncleanness of men in the
World, if we are constant in religious Dutys, and give our selves, up to walk
after the most strict sort in Religion, like Paul in his Pharisaism, may we
not, will some say or think, find acceptance with God, though our Hearts cleave
inordinately unto the things of this World? I say, God has preremptorily
determined the contrary; and if other Arguments will not prevail with us, he
leaves us at last unto this, Go love the World and the things of it, but know
assuredly? you do it unto the eternal Loss of your Souls. 1 John 2.15. Jam. 4.
These few Instances have I given of the Arguments and Motives whereby God is
pleased to deter us from fixing our Affections on things here below. And they
are most of them such only, as he makes use of in the Administation of his
Providence. There are two other Heads of things, that offer themselves unto our
Consideration.

First, The Ways, Means, Arguings, and Enticements which the World makes use
of, to draw, keep, and secure the Affections of Men unto it self.

Secondly, The Secret, Powerful Efficacy of Grace, in taking off the Heart from
these things, turning and drawing it unto God, with the Arguments and Motives
that the holy Spirit makes use of, in and by the Word unto this End; and
wherein we must show what is the Act of conquering Grace, wherein the Heart is
finally prevailed on, to choose and adhere unto God in Love immutable. But
these things cannot be handled in any measure, according to their nature and
importance, without such length of Discourse, as I cannot not here divert unto.
I shall therefore proceed unto that which is the proper and peculiar Subject
before us.

CHAP. XII.
What is required in, and unto our Affections, that they may be Spiritual. A
threefold work on the Affections described.

TO declare the Interest of our Affections in this Frame of being
Spiritually-Minded, and what they contribute thereunto, I shall do these three
things.

First, Declare what is required hereunto, that our Affections may be
Spiritual, wherein lies the Foundation of the whole Duty.

Secondly, What are their Actings when they are so Spiritual.

Thirdly, What are the means whereby they may be kept and preserved in that
Frame, with sundry other things of the like nature How our Affections are
concerned in, or do belong unto the Frame of Mind enquired after, has been
before declared. Without Spiritual Affections, we cannot be Spiritually-Minded.
And that they may be of this use, three things are required.

First, Their Principle.

Secondly, Their Object.

Thirdly, The way and manner of their Application unto their proper Object, by
Virtue of that Principle.

First, As unto the Principle acting in them, that our Affections may be
Spiritual, and the Spring of our being Spiritually-Minded, it is required that
they be changed, renewed, and in-laid with Grace, Spiritual and Supernatural.
To clear the Sense hereof, we must a little consider, what is their State by
Nature, and then, by what means they may be wrought upon, as unto a Change, or
a Renovation. For they are like unto some things, which in themselves, and
their own Nature, are poisonous; but being corrected, and receiving a due
Temperament, from a mixture of other Ingredients, become Medicinal, and of
excellent Use.

First, By nature, our Affections all of them are depraved and corrupted.
Nothing in the whole Nature of Man, no Power or Faculty of the Soul is fallen
under greater Disorder and Depravation by the Entrance of Sin, than our
Affections are. In and by them is the Heart wholly gone and turned off from
God, Tit. 3.3. It were a long work to set forth this Depravation of our
Affections, nor does it belong unto our present Design. Some few things I shall
briefly observe concerning it, to make way unto what is proposed concerning
their Change.

First, This is the only Corruption and Depravation of our Nature, by the Fall
evident in and unto Reason, or the Light of Nature it self. Those who were wise
among the Heathen, both saw it and complained of it. They found a weakness in
the Mind, but saw nothing of its darkness and depravation, as unto things
Spiritual. But they were sensible enough of this Disorder and Tumult of the
Affections in things moral, which renders the Minds of men like a troubled Sea,
whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. This greatly aggravates the neglect of them
who are not sensible of it in themselves, seeing it is discernable in the Light
of Nature.

Secondly, They are as depraved, the Seat and Subject of all Lusts, both of the
Flesh and of the Spirit. Yea, Lust or evil Concupiscence is nothing but the
irregular Motion and Acting of our Affections, as depraved, defiled, corrupted,
Romans 7.9. Hence, no one Sin can be mortifyed without a Change wrought in the
Affections.

Thirdly, They are the Spring, Root, and Cause of all actual Sin in the World,
Mat. 15.9. The evil Heart in the Scripture, is the corrupt Affections of it,
with the Imaginations of the Mind whereby they are excited and acted. Genesis 6.5.
These are they, which at this time fill the whole World with Wickedness,
Darkness, Confusion and Terror. And we may learn what is their Force and
Efficacy from these Effects. So the nature of the Plague is most evident, when
we see thousands dying of it every week.

Fourthly, They are the way and means whereby the Soul applies it self unto all
sinful Objects and Actings. Hence are they called our Members, our earthly
Members; because, as the Body applies it self unto its Operations by its
Members, So does the Soul apply it self unto what belongs unto it, by its
Affections. Romans 6.13. Col. 3.5.

Fifthly, They will not be under the Conduct of the Mind, its Light, or
Convictions. Rebellion against the Light of the Mind, is the very form whereby
their Corruption acts it self, Job. 24.13. Let the Apprehensions of the Mind,
and its Notions of Good and Evil be what they will, they reject them, and lead
the Soul in pursuit of their Inclinations. Hence, no natural Man whatsoever,
does in any measure answer the Light of his Mind, or the Convictions of his
Understanding; but he sees and approves of better things following those that
are worse. And there is no greater Spiritual Judgment, than for men to be
given up unto, themselves, and their own evil Affections, Romans 1.26.

Many other Instances might be given of the greatness of that Depravation which
our Affections are fallen under by Sin; these may suffice as unto our present
purpose.

In general, this Depravation of our Affections by nature, may be reduced unto
two Heads.

First, An utter Aversation from God and all Spiritual things. In this lies the
Spring of all that Dislike of God and his Ways, that the Hearts of Men are
filled withal. Yea, they do not only produce an Aversation from them, and
Dislike of them, but they fill the Mind with an Enmity against them. Therefore,
Men say in their Hearts unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
Knowledge of thy Ways; What is the Almighty that we should serve him? Or what
profit should we have if we Pray unto him? Job. 21.14, 15. see Romans 1.28. Chap.
8. 7, 8.

Secondly, An inordinate cleaving unto things vain, earthly, and sensual;
causing the Soul to engage into the pursuit of them, as the Horse rushes into
the Battle.

Whilst our Affections are in this State and Condition, we are far enough from
being Spiritually-Minded, nor is it possible to engage them into an Adherence
unto, or Delight in Spiritual things.

In this State, they may be two ways wrought upon, and yet not so renewed, as
to be serviceable unto this End.

First, There may be various temporary Impressions made on them, sometimes
there is so by the Preaching of the Word. Hereon Men may hear it with joy, and
do many things gladly. Sometimes it is so by Judgments, Dangers, Sicknesses,
Apprehensions of the approach of Death, Psalm. 34, 78.35, 37. These things take
men off for a season from their greedy Delight in earthly things, and the
pursuit of the Interest of Lust in making Provision for the Flesh. On many
other Occasions, by great variety of Causes, there may be temporary Impressions
made on the Affections, that shall seem for a season, to have turned the stream
of them. And thereon we have many, who every day will be wholly as it were for
God, resolved to forsake Sin, and all the Pleasures of it; but the next return
unto all their former Excesses. For this is the Effect of those Impressions,
that whereas Men ordinarily are predominantly acted by Love, Desire, and
Delight, which lead them to act according unto the true natural Principles of
the Soul: now they are for a Season acted by Fear, and Dread, which put a kind
of Force on all their Inclinations. Hereon they have other thoughts of Good and
Evil, of Things Eternal and Tmporal, of God and their own Duty for a season.
And hereon, some of them may, and do persuade themselves, that there is a
Change in their Hearts and Affections, which there is not; like a Man who
persuades himself that he has lost his Ague, because his present Fit is over.
The next trial of Temptation carries them away again unto the World and Sin.

There are sometimes sudden Impressions made on Spiritual Affections, which are
always of great Advantage to the Soul, renewing its Engagements unto God and
Duty. So was it with Jacob, Genesis 28.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. So is it often with
Believers in hearing the Word, and other Occasions. On all of them they renew
their cleavings unto God with Love and Delight. But the Effect of these
Impressions on unrenewed Affections, are neither Spiritual nor durable. Yea,
for the most part, they are but Checks given in the Providence of God, unto the
raging of their Lusts. Psalm. 9.20.

Secondly, They are liable unto an habitual Change. This the Experience of all
Ages gives Testimony to. There may be an habitual Change wrought in the
Passions and Affections of the Mind, as unto the inordinate and violent pursuit
of their Inclinations, without any gracious Renovation of them. Education,
Philosophy, or Reason, long Afflictions, Spiritual Light and Gifts have wrought
this Change. So Saul upon his Call to be King, became another Man. Hereby,
Persons naturally passionate and furious have been made sedate and moderate;
and those who have been sensual, have become temperate; yea, and haters of
Religion, to be Professors of it. All these things, and many more of the like
nature have proceeded from a Change wrought upon the Affections only; whilst
the Mind, Will and Conscience have been totally unsanctified.

By this Change, where it is alone, no man ever became Spiritually-Minded. For
whereas there are two parts of the Depravation of our Affections, that whereby
they are turned off from God, and that whereby they inordinately cleave unto
other things; their Change principally, if not only, respects the latter. They
are brought into some Order with respect unto present things. The Mind is not
continually tossed up and down by them, as the Waves of the Sea, that are
troubled and cast up mire and dirt. They do not carry those in whom they are
into vicious sensual Actions, but they allow them to make Virtue in Moderation,
Sobriety, Temperance, Fidelity, and Usefulness in several Ways, to be their
Design. And it is admirable to think what Degrees of Eminency in all sorts of
Moral Virtues upon this one Principle of moderating the Affections, even many
among the Heathens attained unto. But as unto their Aversation from God and
Spiritual things, in the true Spiritual Notion of them, they are not cured by
this Change. At least this Change may be, and yet this latter not be wrought.

Again, This Alteration does but turn the Course or Stream of Men's Affections,
it does not change the Nature of them. They are the same in their Spring and
Fountain, as ever they were, only they are habituated unto another Course than
what of themselves they are inclined unto. You may take a young Whelp of the
most fierce and savage Creatures, as of a Tygar, or a Wolf, and by custom or
usage, make it as tame and harmless as any domestic Creature, a Dog or the
like. But although it may be turned unto quite another way or course of acting,
than what it was of it self inclined unto, yet its nature is not changed. And
therefore, frequently on Occasion, Opportunity, or Provocation it will fall
into its own savage Inclination. And having tasted of the Blood of Creatures,
it will never be reclaimed. So is it with the depraved Affections of men with
respect unto their Change; their streams are turned, they are habituated unto a
new Course, their Nature is not altered, at least not from rational unto
Spiritual, from earthly unto heavenly. Yet this is that which was most
beautiful and desirable in nature, the Glory of it, and the utmost of its
Seize. He who has by any means proceeded unto such a moderation of his
Affections, as to render him kind, benign, patient, useful, preferring public
Good before private, inordinate, and temporate in all things, will rise up in
Judgment against those, who professing themselves to be under the Conduct of
the Light of Grace, do yet by being morose, angry, selfish, wordly, manifest
that their Affections are not subdued by the Power of that Grace. Wherefore,
that we may be Spiritually-minded, there is yet another work upon our
Affections required, which is their internal Renovation, whereby not only the
Course of their Actings is changed, but their Nature is altered, and
Spiritually renewed. I intend that which is expressed in that great Evangelical
Promise, Isai. 17.6, 7, 8, 9. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, the Leopard
shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf and the young Lion and the Fatlings
together, and a little Child shall lead them, and the Cow and the Bear shall
feed, their young ones shall lie down together, and the Lion shall eat Straw
like the Ox, and the sucking Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the
weaned Child shall put his Hand on the Cockatrice Den. They shall not hurt nor
destroy in all my holy Mountain. A Change and Alteration is promised in the
Natures, Principles, and first Inclinations of the worst and most Savage
Sinners, who pass under the Power of Gospel Grace.

This is that which is required of us in a way of Duty, Ephesians. 4.13. And be ye
renewed in the Spirit of your Minds. There is a Renovation of the Mind it self,
by the Communication of Spiritual Saving Light and Understanding thereunto,
whereof I have treated elsewhere at large, see Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. But
the Spirit of the Mind, that whereby it is enlivened, lead and disposed unto
its Actings, that is to be renewed also. The Spirit of the Mind is in this
Place opposed unto the Old Man, which is corrupt according to deceitful Lust,
or depraved Affections, v. 22. These therefore are that Spirit of the Mind
which incline, bend, and lead it to act suitably unto its Inclinations, which
is to be renewed. And when our Affections are inclined by the saving Grace of
the holy Spirit, then are they renewed, and not else. No other Change will give
them a Spiritual Renovation. Hereby those things which are only natural
Affections in themselves, in them that believe, become Fruits of the Spirit.
Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, etc. They continue the
same as they were in their Essence, Substance, and natural Powers, but are
changed in their Properties, Qualities, Inclinations, when ever a new Nature is
given unto them. So the Waters at Marah were the same Waters still, before and
after their Cure. But of themselves, and in their own nature, they were bitter,
so as that the People could not drink them; in the casting of a Tree into them,
they were made sweet and useful, Exodus 15.25, 26. So was it with the Waters of
Jerico, which were cured by casting Salt into them, 2 King. 19, 20, 21. Our
Affections continue the same as they were on their Nature and Essence, but they
are so cured by Grace, as that their Properties, Qualities, and Inclinations
are all cleansed or renewed. The Tree or Salt that is cast into these Waters
whereby the Cure is wrought, is the Love of God above all, proceeding from
Faith in him by Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XIII.
The Work of the Renovation of our Affections. How differenced from any other
Impression on, or Change wrought in them, and how it is Evidenced so to be. The
first Instance in the Universality accompanying of Affections Spiritually
renewed. The Order of the Exercise of our Affections with Respect unto their
Objects.

THat which is our Concernment herein, is to enquire of what Nature that Work
is which has been on our own Affections, or in them, and how it differs from
those, which whatever they do or effect, yet will not render us nor themselves
Spiritual.

And we ought to use the best of our Diligence herein; because the great means
whereby Multitudes delude and deceive their own Souls, persuading themselves
that there has been an effectual Work of the Grace of the Gospel in them, is
the Change that they find in their Affections which may be on many Occasions,
without any Spiritual Renovation.

First, As unto the temporary and Occasional Impressions in the Affections
before mentioned, whether from the Word, or any other divine warning by
Afflictions or Mercies, they are common to all sorts of Persons. Some there
are, whose Consciences are seared with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. who thereon
being past feeling (senseless of all Calls, Warnings, and rebukes) do give
themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with Greediness,
Ephesians. 4.19. Such Persons having hardened themselves in a long Course of Sin, and
being given up unto a Reprobate Mind, or Vile Affections in a way of Judgment,
have it may be no such Impressions on their Affections on any Occasion, as to
move them with a sense of things Spiritual and Eternal. They may be terrified
with Danger, sudden Judgments, and other Revelations of the Wrath of God from
Heaven against the Ungodliness of Men; but they are not drawn to take shelter
in thoughts of Spiritual things. Nothing but Hell will awaken them unto a due
Consideration of themselves and things Eternal.

It is otherwise with the generality of Men who are not profligate and impudent
in Sinning. For although they are in a natural Condition, and a course of Sin,
in the neglect of known Duties, yet by one means or other, most frequently, by
the preaching of the Word, their Affections are stirred toward Heavenly Things.

Sometimes they are afraid, sometimes they have hopes and desires about them.
These put them on Resolutions, and some temporary Endeavors to change their
Lives, to abstain from Sin, and to perform holy Duties. But as the Prophet
complains, their Goodness is as the morning Cloud, and as the early Dew, so
passes it away. Yet by means hereof, do many poor ignorant Souls deceive
themselves, and cry Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace. And they will
sometimes so express how they are affected with Complaints of themselves as
unto their long neglect of Spiritual things that others may entertain good
hopes concerning them; but all comes to nothing in the Trial.

There is no difficulty unto Spiritual Light to distinguish between these
occasional Impressions on the Affections, and that Spiritual Renovation of them
which we enquire after. This alone is sufficient to do it, that they are all of
them temporary and evanid. They abide for a while only, as our Savior speaks,
and every Occasion defeats all their Efficacy. They may be frequently renewed,
but they never abide. Some of them immediately pass away, and are utterly lost
between the place where they hear the Word and their own habitations; and in
vain shall they enquire after them again, they are gone for ever. Some have a
larger Continuance, endure longer in the Mind, and produce some outward
Effects; None of them will hold any Trial, or Shock of Temptation.

Yet I have somewhat to say unto those who have such Impressions on their
Affections, and warning by them.

(1) Despise them not, for God is in them. Although he may not be in them in a
way of Saving Grace, yet he is in them in that which may be preparatory
thereto. They are not common humane accidents, but especial Divine Warnings.

(2) Labor to retain them, or a Sense of them upon your Hearts and
Consciences. You have got nothing by loosing so many of them already. And if
you proceed in their neglect, after a while you will hear of them no more.

(3) Put no more in them than belongs unto them. Do not presently conclude that
your State is good, because you have been affected at the hearing of the Word,
or under a sickness, or in a danger. Hereon many think that now all is well
with them, wherewith they please themselves, until they are wholly immersed in
their former security.

Secondly. We may consider the Difference that is between the Habitual Change
of the Affections before described, and that Renovation by Grace which renders
them Spiritual. And this is of great Concernment unto us all to enquire into it
with Diligence. Multitudes are herein deceived, and that unto their Ruin. For
they resolve their present Peace into, and build their hopes of Eternal Life on
such a Change in themselves, as will not abide the Trial. This Difference
therefore is to be examined by Scripture Light, and the Experience of them that
do believe. And

1. There is a double Universality with respect unto the Spiritual Renovation
of our Affections.

(1) That which is subjective with respect unto the Affections themselves. And

(2) That which is Objective with respect unto Spiritual things.

First, Sanctification extends it self unto the whole Spirit, Soul and Body, 1
These. 5.23. When we say that we are Sanctified in part only, we do not say that
any Part, Power or Faculty of the Soul is unsanctifyed, but only that the work
is not absolutely perfect in any of them. All Sin may retain Power in some one
Affection, as Anger, fear, or Love as unto actual Irruptions and Effects more
than in all the rest. As one Affection may be more eminently Sanctified in some
than in others. For it may have advantages unto this End from Men's natural
Tempers, and various outward Circumstances. Hence some find little Difficulty
in the Mortification of all other Lusts or corruptions, in Comparison of what
they meet withal in some one inordinate Affection or Corruption. This it may be
David had regard unto, Psalm. 18.23. I have known Persons shining examplarily in
all other Graces, who have been scarce free from giving great Scandal by the
excess of their Passions and easy Provocations thereunto. And yet they have
known that the setting themselves unto the sincere vigorous Mortification of
that disorder, is the most eminent Pledge of their Sincerity in other things.
For the Trial of our self denial lies in the things that our natural
Inclinations lie strongest toward. Howbeit as was said, there is no Affection
where there is this Work of Renovation, but it is sanctified and renewed; none
of them is left absolutely unto the Service of Sin and Satan, And therefore
whereas by reason of the advantages mentioned, Sin does greatly contend to use
some of them unto its Interest and Service in a peculiar manner, yet are they
enabled unto, and made meet for gracious Actings, and do in their proper
Seasons, put forth themselves accordingly. There is no Affection of the Mind
from whence the Soul and Conscience has received the greatest Damage, that
was as it were the Field wherein the Contest is managed between Sin and Grace,
but has its Spiritual Use and Exercise, when the Mind is renewed.

There are some so inordinately subject to Anger and passion therein, as if
they were absolutely under the Power and Dominion of it; yet do they also know
how to be angry, and sin not in being angry at Sin in themselves and others.
Yea what Indignation, yea what Revenge, 2 Cor. 7.7. Yea, God is pleased
sometimes to leave somewhat more than ordinary of the Power of Corruption in
one Affection, that it may be an Occasion of the Continual Exercise of Grace in
the other Affections. Yet are they all sanctified in their Degree, that which
is relieved as well as that which does relieve. And therefore as the remainder
of Sin in them that believe is called the old Man, which is to be crucified in
all the Members of it, because of its adherence unto the whole Person in all
its Powers and Faculties; So the Grace implanted in our natures, is called the
New Man, there being nothing in us that is not seasoned and affected with it.
As nothing in our Natures escaped the taint of Sin, so, nothing in our Natures
is accepted from the Renovation that is by Grace. He in whom any one Affection
is utrerly unrenewed, has no one graciously renewed in him. Let men take heed
how they indulge to any depraved Affection, for it will be an unavoidable
Impeachment of their Sincerity. Think, not to say with Naaman, God be merciful
unto me in this thing, in all others I will be for him.

He require the whole Heart, and will have it or more. The chief work of a
Christian is to make all his Affections in all their Operations subservient
unto the Life of God, Romans 6.17. And he who is wise will keep a continual Watch
over those wherein he finds the greatest Reluctance thereunto. And every
Affection is originally sanctified according unto the use it is to be of, in
the Life of Holiness and Obedience.

To be entire for God, to follow him wholly, to cleave unto him with purpose of
Heart, to have the Heart circumcised to love him, is to have all our Affections
renewed and sanctified, without which we can do none of them. When it is
otherwise, there is a double Heart, an Heart and a Heart which he abhors, Their
Heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty, Hosea 10.2.

So it is in the other Change mentioned. What ever is or may be wrought upon
our Affections when they are not Spiritually renewed; That very change as unto
the Degree of it, is not universal; it does not affect the whole Mind in all
its Powers and Affections, until a vital prevailing Principle and habit of
Grace is implanted in the Soul, Sin will not only radically adhere unto all the
Faculties, Powers and Affections but it will under any Change that may befall
them refer the Rule and Dominion in some of them unto it self. So was it with
the young Man that came unto our Lord Jesus Christ to know what he should do to
obtain Eternal Life, Mark. 10.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Thus there are many who in other things are reduced unto Moderation, Sobriety
and Temperance yet there remains in them the Love of Money in a predominant
Degree, which to them is the Root of all evil, as the Apostle Speaks, some seem
to be Religious, but they bridle not their Tongues through Anger, Envy, Hatred,
and the like, their Religion is in vain.

The most of Men in their several ways of Profession, pretend not only unto
Religion, but unto zeal in it, yet set no Bounds unto their Affections unto
earthly Enjoyments. Some of old who had most eminently in all other things
subdued their Passions and Affections, were the greatest Enemies unto, and
Persecutors of the Gospel.

Some who seem to have had a mighty Change wrought in them by a Superstitious
Devotion, do yet walk in the Spirit of Cain toward all the Disciples of
Christ, as it is with the principal Devotionists in the Church of Rome; and
elsewhere we may see some go soberly about the Persecution and Destruction of
other Christians. Some will cherish one Secret Lust or other, which they cannot
but know to be pernicious unto their Souls. Some love the Praise, of Men, which
will never permit them to be truly Spiritually Minded; so our Savior
testifyeth of some, that they could not believe, because they loved the Praise
of Men. This was the known Vice of all the ancient Philosophers. They had many
of them on the Principles of Reason, and by severe Exercise subdued their
Affections unto great Moderation about Temporary things. But in the mean time
were all of them Slaves to vain glory, and the praise of men, until by the
public Observation of it, and some Contradictions in their Lives unto their
Pretenses unto Virtue, they lost that also among wise and considerative Men.
And generally if men, not Spiritually renewed, were able to search themselves,
they would find that some of their Affections are so far from having any change
wrought in them, as that they are a quiet Habitation for Sin, where it
exercises its Rule and Dominion.

Secondly. There is an Universality that is Objective in Spiritual things, with
respect unto the Renovation of our Affections, that is, Affections Spiritually
renewed do fix themselves upon, and cleave unto all all Spiritual things in
their proper places, and unto their proper Ends. For the Ground and Reason of
our adherence unto any one of them, are the same with respect unto them all.
That is their Relation unto God in Christ. Wherefore when our Affections are
renewed, we make no choice in Spiritual things, cleaving unto some, and
refusing others, making use of Naamans restraint, but our adherence is the same
unto them all in their proper places and Degrees. And if by reason of Darkness
and Ignorance, we know not any of them to be from God, as for Instance, the
Observation of the Lords Day, it is of unspeakable Disadvantages unto us. An
equal respect is required in us unto all Gods Commands. Yet there are various
Distinctions in Spiritual things. And thereon a man may, and ought to value one
above another, as unto the Degrees of his Love and Esteem, although they are to
be sincere with respect unto them all.

First. God himself, that is, as revealed in and by Christ, is in the first and
chiefest place the proper and adequate Object of our Affections, as they are
renewed. He is so for himself, or his own Sake alone. This is the Spring, the
Center, and chief Object of our Love. He that loves not God for himself, that
is, for what he is in himself, and what from himself alone, he is, and will be
unto us in Christ, which Considerations are inseparable, he has no true
Affection for any Spiritual thing whatever. And not a few do here deceive
themselves, or are deceived, which should make us the more strict and diligent
in the Examination of our selves. They suppose that they love Heaven and
Heavenly things, and the Duties of Divine Worships, which Persuasion maybe fall
them on many Grounds and Occasions, which will not endure the Trial. But as
unto God himself, they can give no Evidence that they have any Love to him,
either on the account of the Glorious Excellencies of his Nature, with their
natural Relation unto him, and Dependence on him, nor on the account of the
Manifestation of himself in Christ, and the Exercise of his Grace therein. But
whatever be pretended, there is no Love unto God, whereof these things are not
the formal Reason, that proceed not from these Springs. And because that all
men pretend that they love God, and defy them that think them so vile as not
so to do, though they live in open Enmity against him, and hatred of him, it
becomes us strictly to examine our selves on what grounds we pretend so to do.
It is because indeed we see an Excellency, a Beauty, a desirableness in the
glorious properties of his Nature, such as our Souls are refreshed and
satisfied with the thoughts of by Faith, and in whose Enjoyment our Blessedness
will consist, so that we always rejoice at the Remembrance of his Holiness; It
is our great Joy and Satisfaction that God is what he is; is it from the
glorious Manifestation that he has made of himself and all his Holy
Excellencies in Christ, with the communication of himself unto us in and by
him? If it be so indeed, then is our Lord generous and gracious, from the
Renovation of our Affections But if we say we love God, yet truly know not
why, or upon Principles of Education, and because it is esteemed the highth of
Wickedness to do otherwise, we shall be at a Loss when we are called unto our
Trial. This is the first object of our Affections.

Secondly. In other Spiritual things, renewed Affections do cleave unto them
according as God is in them. God alone is loved for himself, all other things
for him, in the measure and Degree of his presence in them. This alone gives
them pre-eminence in renewed Affections; for Instance, God is in Christ, in the
humane nature of the man Christ Jesus, in a way and manner, singular, in
concern a like, incomprehensible, so as he is in the same kind in nothing else.
Therefore is the Lord Christ even as unto his humane Nature, the Object of our
Love and Affections in such a way and Degree, as no other thing, Spiritual or
Eternal but God himself is or ought to be; all other Spiritual things become so
from the Presence of God in them, and from the Degree of that Presence have
they their Nature and Use. Accordingly are they, or ought to be the Object of
our Affections, as unto the degree of their Exercise. Evidence of the Presence
of God in things and Persons, are the only attractives of renewed Affections.

Thirdly, In those things which seem to stand in an equality as unto what is of
God in them, yet on some especial Occasions and Reasons, our Love may go forth
eminently unto one more than another. Some particular Truth, with the Grace
communicated by it, may have been the means of our Conversion unto God, of our
Edification in an especial manner, of our Consolation in Distress; it cannot
be, but that the Mind will have a peculiar respect unto, and valuation of such
Truths, and the Grace administered by them. And so it is as unto Duties. We may
have found such a lively Intercourse and Communion with God in some of them, as
may give us a peculiar Delight in them.

But notwithstanding these Differences, Affections Spiritually renewed, do
cleave unto all Spiritual Things, as such. For the true formal Reason of their
so doing, is the same in them all, namely God in them; only they have several
ways of acting themselves toward them, whereof I shall give one Instance.

Our Savior distributes Spiritual things into those that are Heavenly, and
those that are Earthly, that is comparatively so, Joh. 3.12. If I have told you
earthly things, and you believe not; how shall ye believe if I tell you of
Heavenly Things.

The Heavenly Things, are the deep and misterious Councels of the Will of God.
These, renewed Affections cleave unto with Holy Admiration and satisfactory
Submission, captivating the Understanding unto what it cannot comprehend. So
the Apostle declares it, Romans 11.33, 34, 35, 36. O the depth of the Riches both
of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearcheable are his Judgments, and
his Ways past finding out! for who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who has
been his Councellor? Or who has first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again? For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things, to whom be Glory for ever, Amen. What the Mind cannot comprehend, the
Heart does admire and adore, delighting in God, and giving Glory unto him in
all.

The Earthly Things intended by our Savior in that place, is the Work of God
upon the Souls of Men in their Regeneration, wrought here in the Earth. Toward
these the Affections act themselves with Delight, and with great Thanksgiving.
The Experience of the Grace of God in and upon Believers is sweet unto their
Souls. But one way or other they cleave unto them all, they have not a
prevailing Aversation unto any of them. They have a regard unto all Gods
Precepts, a delight in all his Councels, a Love to himself and all his Ways.

Whatever other Change is wrought on the Affections, if they be not Spiritually
renewed, it is not so with them. For as they do not cleave unto any Spiritual
Things, in their own true proper nature, in a due manner because of the
Evidences of the Presence of God in them, so there are always some of them,
whereunto those whose Affections are not renewed, do maintain an Aversation and
an Enmity. And although this Frame does not instantly discover it self, yet it
will do so upon any especial Trial. So was it with the Hearers of our Savior,
Joh. 6. There was a great Impression made on their Affections, by what he
taught them concerning the Bread of God, that came down from Heaven, and gave
Life unto the World. For they cried thereon, Lord evermore give us of this
Bread, v. 34. But when the Mystery of it was further explained unto them, they
liked it not, but cried, This is a hard Saying, who can bear it, v. 60; and
thereon fell off both from him and his Doctrine, although they had followed him
so long as to be esteemed his Disciples, v. 66.

I say therefore whenever Men's Affections are not renewed, whatever other
Change may have been wrought upon them, as they have no true delight in any
Spiritual things, or truths, for themselves and in their own Nature, so there
are some Instances, wherein they will maintain their natural Enmity and
Aversation unto them. This is the first difference between Affections
Spiritually renewed, and those which from any other Causes may have some kind
of Change wrought in them.

CHAP. XIIII.
The second Difference between Affections Spiritually renewed and those who
have been only Changed by Light and Conviction. Grounds and Reasons of Men's
Delight in Duties of Divine Worship, and of their Diligence in their
Performance whose Minds are not Spiritually Minded.

THe second Difference lies herein, That there may be a Change in the
Affections, wherein Men may have Delight in the Duties of Religious Worship,
and Diligence in their Observance; but it is the Spiritual Revovation of the
Affections that gives Delight in God through Christ, in any Duty of Religious
Worship whatever.

Where the truth of the Gospel is known and publicly Professed; there is great
variety in the Minds, Ways, and Practices of Men about the Duties of Religious
Worship. Many are profane in their Minds and Lives, who, practically at least,
despise, or wholly neglect the Observance of them. These are stout hearted, and
far from Righteousness, Tit. 1.16. Some attend unto them formally and
Coursorily, from the Principles of their Education, and it may be out of some
Convictions they have of their necessity. But many there are who in the Way
they choose and are pleased withal, are diligent in their Observance, and that
with great Delight, who yet give no Evidence of the Spiritual Renovation of
their Minds. Yea, the way whereby some express their Devotion in them, being
Superstitious and Idolatrous, is inconsistent with that or any other Saving
Grace. This therefore we must diligently enquire into, or search into the
grounds and reasons of Men's delight in Divine Worship, according unto their
Convictions of the way of it, and yet continue in their Minds altogether
unrenewed. And

(1) Men may be greatly affected with the Outward Part of Divine Worship, and
the manner of the performance thereof, who have no delight in what is internal,
real, and Spiritual therein, Joh. 5.35. He was a burning and a shining Light;
and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in this Light. So, many were
delighted in the preaching of Ezekiel because of his Eloquence and Elegancy of
his Parables, Chap. 33.31, 32. This gave them both delight and diligence in
hearing, whereon they call themselves the People of God, though they continued
to live in Sin; their Hearts went after Covetousness. The same may befall many
at present, with reference unto the Spiritual Gifts of those by whom the Word
is dispensed. I deny not but that Men may be more delighted, more satisfied
with the Gifts, the Preaching of one than another, and yet be sincere in their
delight in the Dispensation of the Word; for they may find more Spiritual
Advantage thereby, than by the Gifts of others, and things so prepared as to be
suited unto their Edification more than elsewhere. But that which at present we
insist on, has respect only unto some outward Circumstances pleasing the Minds
of men, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4.

This was principally evident under the Old Testament, whilst they had carnal
Ordinances and a worldly Sanctuary. Often times under that Dispensation the
People were given up unto all sorts of Idolatry and Superstition. And when they
were not so, yet were the Body of them carnal and unholy, as is evident from
the whole tract of Gods dealings with them by his Prophets, and in his
Providence. Yet had they great delight in the Outward Solemnities of their
Worship, placing all their trust of Acceptance with God therein. They who did
truly and really believe, looked, through them all unto Christ, whom they did
foresignify; without which, the things were a Yoke unto them, and a Burden
almost insupportable, Act. 15. But those who were Carnal, delighted in the
things themselves, and for their Sakes rejected him who was the Life and
Substance of them all. And this proved the great means of the Apostasy of the
Christian Church also. For to maintain some Appearance of Spiritual Affections,
men introduced Carnal Incitations of them, into Evangelical Worship; such as
singing with Music and pompous Ceremonies. For they find such things needful
to reconcile the Worship of God unto their Minds and Affections; and through
them they appear to have great delight therein. Could some men but in their
thoughts separate Divine Service, from that Outward Order, those Methods of
Variety, Show, and Melody, wherewith they are affected, they would have no
Delight in it, but look upon it as a thing that must be endured. How can it be
otherwise conceived of among the Papists: they will with much earnestness, many
Evidences of Devotion, sometimes with difficulty and danger repair unto their
Solemn Worship. And yet when they are present, understand not one Word whereby
their Minds might be excited unto the real actings of Faith, Love, and Delight
in God. Only Order, Ceremony, Music, and other Incentives of Carnal
Affections, make great Impression on them Affections Spiritually renewed are
not concerned in these things. Yea, if those in whom they are, should be
engaged in the use of them they would find them means of diverting their Minds
from the proper work of Divine Worship, rather than an advantage therein. It
will appear so unto themselves, unless they are content to loose their
Spiritual Affections, acting themselves in Faith and Love, embracing in their
stead a Carnal Imaginary Devotion. Hence, two Persons may at the same time
attend unto the same Ordinances of Divine Worship, with equal delight on very
distinct Principles; as if two men should come into the same Garden planted and
adorned with all variety of Herbs and Flowers; one ignorant of the nature of
them, the other a skilful Herbalist. Both may be equally delighted, the one
with the colors and smell of the Flowers, the other with the consideration of
their various natures, their uses in Pyhsical Remedies, or the like. So it may
be in the hearing of the Word. For Instance, one may be delighted with the
outward Administration, another with its Spiritual Efficacy at the same time.
Hence Austin tells us, that singing in the Church was laid aside by Athanasius
at Alexandria; not the Peoples singing of Psalms, but a kind of singing in the
reading of the Scripture and some Offices of Worship which began then to be
introduced in the Church. And the reason he gave why he did it was, that the
modulation of the Voice and musical June, might not divert the Minds of men
from that Spiritual Affection which is required of them in Sacred Duties. What
there is of real Order in the Worship of God, as there is that Order which is
an Effect of Divine Wisdom, it is suited and useful unto Spiritual Affections,
because proceeding from the same Spirit, whereby they are internally renewed.
Beholding your Order, Col. 2.5. Every thing of Gods Appointment is both helpful
and delightful unto them. None can say with higher raptures of Admiration, How
amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord! Psalm. 84.1, 2. then they whose Affections
are renewed. Yet is not their Delight terminated on them, as we shall see
immediately.

Secondly, Men may be delighted in the Performance of Outward Duties of Divine
Worship, because in them they comply with, and give some kind of Satisfaction
unto their Convictions. When Conscience is awakened unto a Sense of the
necessities of such Duties, namely of those wherein Divine Worship does
consist, it will give the Mind no rest or peace in the neglect of them. Let
them be attended unto in the Seasons which Light, Conviction, and Custom call
for, it will be so far satisfied, as that the Mind shall find present Ease and
Refreshment in it. And when the Soul is wonted unto this Relief, it will not
only be diligent in the performance of such Duties, it will not only not omit
them, but it will delight in them, as those which bring them in great
Advantage. Hence many will not omit the Duty of Prayer every Morning, who upon
the matter are resolved to live in Sin all the day long. And there are but few
who sedulously endeavor to live and walk in the frame of their Hearts and Ways
answerable unto their own Prayers; yet all that is in our Prayers beyond our
Endeavors to answer it in a conformity of Heart and Life, is but the Exercise
of Gifts in answer to Convictions. Others find them an allay of Troubles in
them, like that which sick Persons may find by drinking cold Water in a Fever,
whose Flames are assuaged for a season by it. They make them as an Antidote
against the Poison and Sting of Sin, which alayeth its rage, but cannot expel
its Venom.

Or these Duties are unto them, like the Sacifices for Sin under the Law. They
gave a guilty Person present Ease. But as the Apostle speaks, they made not men
perfect. They took not away utterly a Conscience condemning for Sin. Presently
on the first Omission of Duty, a sense of Sin again returned on them and that
not only as the Fact, but as the Person himself was condemned by the Law. Then
were the Sacrifices to be repeated for a renewed Propitiation. This gave that
Carnal People such delight and satisfaction in those Sacrifices, that they
trusted unto them for Righteousness, Life and Salvation. So it is with Persons
who are constant in Spiritual Duties merely from Conviction. The performance of
those Duties gives them a present Relief and Ease, though it heal not their
Wound, it asswageth their pain, and dispelleth their present Fears. Hence are
they frequent in them, and that often times, not without delight; because they
find ease thereby. And their Condition is somewhat dangerous, who upon the
sense of the guilt of any Sin, do betake themselves for relief unto their
Prayers; which having discharged, they are much at ease in their Minds and
Consciences, although they have obtained no real sense of the Pardon of Sin,
nor any strength against it.

It will be said, Do not all men, the best of men, perform all Spiritual Duties
out of a Conviction of their Necessity? do they not know it would be their Sin
to omit them, and so find Satisfaction in their Minds upon their performance; I
say they do; but it is one thing to perform a Duty out of conviction of a
necessity, as it is Gods Ordinance, which Conviction respects only the Duty it
self; another thing to perform it, to give satisfaction unto Convictions of
other Sins, or to quiet Conscience under its trouble about them, which latter
we speak unto. This begins and ends in self, self-Satisfaction is the sole
Design of it. By it men aim at some Rest and Quietness in their own Minds,
which otherwise they cannot attain. But in the performance of Duties in Faith,
from a Conviction of their necessity as Gods Ordinance, and their Use in the
way of his Grace, the Soul begins and ends in God. It seeks no Satisfaction in
them, nor finds it from them, but in and from God alone by them.

Thirdly, The principal reason why Men whose Affections are only changed, not
Spiritually renewed, do delight in holy Duties of Divine Worship, is, because
they place their Righteousness before God in them, whereon they hope to be
accepted with him. They know not, they seek not after any other Righteousness
but what is of their own working out. Whatever Notions they may have of the
Righteousness of Faith, of the Righteousness of Christ, that which they
practically trust unto, is their own; and it discovers it self so to be in
their own Consciences on every Trial that befalls them. Yea, when they cry unto
the Lord, and pretend unto Faith in Christ, they quickly make it evident that
their principal trust is resolved into themselves. Now in all that they can
plead in a way of Duties or Obedience, nothing carries a fairer pretense unto
a Righteousness, than what they do in the Worship of God, and the Exercise of
the Acts of Religion toward him. This is that which he expects at their hands,
what is due unto him, in the Light of their Consciences; the best that they can
do to please him, which therefore they must put their trust in or nothing. They
secretly suppose not only that there is a Righteousness in these things which
will answer for it self, but such also as will make Compensation in some
measure for their Sins; and therefore whereas they cannot but frequently fall
into Sin, they relieve themselves from the reflection of their Consciences by a
Multiplication of Duties, and Renewed Diligence in them.

It is inconceivable what Delight and Satisfaction men will take in any thing
that seems to contribute so much unto a Righteousness of their own. For it is
suitable unto, and pleases all the Principles of Nature as corrupt, after it
is brought under the Power of a Conviction concerning Sin, Righteousness and
Judgment.

This made the Jews of old so pertinaciously adhere unto the Ceremonies and
Sacrifices of the Law, and to prefer them above the Gospel, the Kingdom of God,
and the Righteousness thereof, Romans 10.3, 4. They looked and sought for
Righteousness by them. Those who for many Generations were kept up with great
difficulty unto any tolerable Observance of them, when they had learned to
place all their hopes of a Righteousness in them, would, and did adhere unto
them, unto their temporal and eternal Ruin. Romans 9, 31, 32, 33. And when men
were persuaded that Righteousness was to be attained by Works of Munificence
and supposed Charity, in the dedication of their Substance unto the Use of the
Church; they who otherwise were covetous, and greedy, and oppressing, would
lavish Gold out of the Bag, and give up their whole Patrimony with all their
ill gotten Goods to attain it, so powerful an Influence has the Desire of
self Righteousness upon the Minds of Men. It is the best Fortification of the
Soul against Christ and the Gospel, the last Reserve whereby it maintains the
Interest of self against the Grace of God.

Hence I say, those that place their Righteousness, or that which is the
principal Part of it, in the Duties of Religious Worship, will not only be
diligent in them, but often times abound in a Multiplication of them. Especially
will they do so, if they may be performed in such a way and manner, as pleases
their Affections with a show of Humility and Devotion, requiring nothing of the
Exercise of Faith, or sincere Divine Love therein. So is it with many in all
kinds of Religion, whether the way of their Worship be true or false, whether
it be appointed of God, or rejected by him. And the declaration hereof is the
subject of the Discourse of the Prophet, Isaiah, 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. Also, Mich. 6.7, 8.

Fourthly, The Reputation of Devotion in Religious Duties, may insensibly
affect the unrenewed Minds of Men with great diligence and delight in their
performance. However Men are divided in their Apprehension and Practice about
Religion; however different from, and contrary unto each other, their ways of
Divine Worship are; Yet it is amongst all sorts of men, yea, in the secret
thoughts of them who outwardly contemn these things, a matter of Reputation to
be devout, to be diligent, to be strict in and about those Duties of Religion,
which according to their own Light and Persuasion they judge incumbent on them.
This greatly affects the Minds of Men, whilst Pride is secretly predominant in
them, and they love the Praise of Men more than the Praise of God.

Especially, will this Consideration prevail on them, when they suppose that
the Credit and Honor of the way which they profess, in competition with
others, depends much on their Reputation as to their strictness, in Duties of
Devotion. For then, will they not only be diligent in themselves, but zealous
in drawing others unto the same Observances. These two Principles their own
Reputation, and that of their Sect, constituted the Life and Soul of Pharisaism
of old. According as the Minds of men are influenced with these Apprehensions,
so will a love unto, and a delight in those Duties whereby their Reputation is
attained, thrive and grow in them.

I am far from apprehending that any Men are, (at least I speak not of them who
are) such vile Hypocrites, as to do all that they do in Religion to be seen and
praised of Men, being influenced in all public Duties thereby, which some
among the Pharisees were given up unto. But I speak of them who being under the
Convictions and Motives before mentioned, do also yet give admittance unto this
corrupt end of desire of Reputation, or the Praise of Men. For every such end
being admitted and prevalent in the Mind, will universally influence the
Affections unto a delight in those Duties, whereby that end may be attained,
until the Person with whom it is so, be habituated unto them with great
Satisfaction.

Fifthly, I should in the last place insist on Superstition. As this is an
undue Fear of the Divine Nature, Will, and Opperations, built on false Notions
and Apprehensions of them, it may befall the Minds of Men in all Religions,
true and false. It is an Internal Vice of the Mind. As it respects the outward
Way and Means of Religious Service, and consists in the devout Performance of
such Duties, as God indeed accepts not, but forbids; so it belongs only to
Religion as it is false and corrupt. How in both respects it will engage the
Minds of Men into the performance of Religious Duties, and for the most part
with the most scrupulous diligence, and sometimes with prodigious attempts to
exceed the measures of humane Nature in what they do design, is too long a work
here to be declared. It may suffice to have mentioned it among the Causes and
Reasons why men whose Affections are not Spiritually renewed, may yet greatly
delight in the diligent performance of the Outward Duties of Religion. Our
design in these things is the discovery of the true nature of this Grace and
Duty of being Spiritually-Minded. Hereunto we have declared that it is
necessary that our Affections be Spiritually, and Supernaturally renewed. And
because there may be a great Change wrought on the Affections of Men, with
respect unto Spiritual things, where there is nothing of this Supernatural
Renovation; our present enquiry is, what are the Differences that are between
the actings of the Affections, of the one sort and of the other; whether
Spiritually renewed, or Occasionally changed. And wherein the great Exercise of
them consists in the Duties of Religious Worship; I have declared what are the
grounds and reasons, whence Men of unrenewed Minds do delight often times in the
Duties of Divine Worship, and are diligent in the performance of them.

From these and the like Considerations it may be made manifest that the
greatest part of the Devotion that is in the World, does not spring from the
Spiritual Renovation of of the Minds of Men, without which it is not accepted
with God. That which remains to give in Instance, farther Evidence unto the
Discovery we are in the pursuit of, is what are the grounds and reasons whereon
those whose Minds and Affections are Spiritually renewed, do delight in the
Institutions of Divine Worship; and attend unto their Observance with great
heed and diligence. And because this is an Enquiry of great Importance, and is
of great use to be stated in other cases, as well as that before us; I shall
treat of it by it self in the ensuing Chapter, that the Reader may the more
distinctly comprehend it, both in the Nature of the Doctrine concerning it, and
in the place it holds in our present Discourse.

CHAP. XV.
Delight of Believers in the Holy, Institutions of Divine Worship. The Grounds
and Reasons thereof. The Evidence of being Spiritually-Minded thereby, etc.

THat all true Believers whose Minds are Spiritually renewed have a singular
Delight, in all the Institutions and Ordinances of Divine Worship is fully
evident both in the Examples of the Saints in the Scripture, and their own
Experience, which they will never forego. For this has been the greatest Cause
of their suffering Persecution; and Martydom it self in all Ages. of the
Primitive Christians under the Power of the Pagan* Emperors, or the Witnesses
for Christ under the Antichristian Apostasy, would, or could have omitted the
Observance If them (according to the Advice and practice of the Gnostics) they
might have escaped the rage of their Adversaries. But they loved not their
Lives, in comparison unto that delight which they had in the Observance of the
Commands of Christ, as unto the Duties of Evangelical Worship. David gives us
frequently an Instance hereof in himself, Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3, 4. As the Heart
pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God. My Soul
thirsts for God, for the living God: When shall I come and appear before God.
My tears have been my Meat day and night, while they continually say unto me,
Where is thy God? When I remember these things, I pour out my Soul in me; for I
had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the House of God; with the
voice of Joy and Praise, with a multitude that kept Holy Day. Psalm. 63.1, 2, 3,
4, 5. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my Soul thirsts for
thee, my Flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no Water is:
To see thy Power and thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in thy Sanctuary.
Because thy Loving Kindness is better than Life: my Lips shall praise thee.
Thus will I bless thee while I live. I will lift up my hands in thy Name. My
Soul shall be satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, and my Mouth shall praise
thee with joyful Lips. Psalm. 84.1, 2, 3, 4. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O
Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord:
my Heart cries out for the Living God. Yea, the Sparrow has found an house,
and the Swallow a Nest for her self, where she may lay her Young, even thy
Alters, O Lord of Hosts, my King and my God. Blessed are they that dwell in thy
House: they will be still praising thee. Selah.

But a greater than David is here. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, did upon all
Occasions declare his Delight in, and Zeal for all the Ordinances of Divine
Worship, which was then in force by Virtue of Divine Institution and Command
For although he severely reproved and rejected, whatever men had added
thereunto under the Pretense of a Supererogating Strictness or outward Order,
laying it all under that dreadful Sentence; Every Plant which my Heavenly
Father has not Planted shall be plucked up, and so cast into the Fire; yet as
unto what was of Divine Appoinment, his delight therein was singular, and
exemplary unto all his Disciples. With respect hereunto was it said of him,
that the Zeal of God's House had eaten him up, by reason of the Affliction
which he had in his Spirit, to see the Worship of it neglected, polluted, and
despised. This caused him to cleanse the Temple, the Seat of Divine Worship,
from the Pollutors and Pollutions of it, not long before his Sufferings, in the
Face and unto the high provocation of all his Adversaries. So with earnest
desire he longed for the Celebration of his last Passover. Luke 22.15. With
desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. And it is
a sufficient Evidence of the Frame of Spirit and Practice of his Disciples
afterward. In reference to the Duties of Evangelical Worship by his
Appointment; that the Apostle gives it as an assured Token of an unsound
Condition, and that which tends to final cursed Apostasy, when any fall into
a neglect of them, Heb. 10.25, 26, 27.

These things are manifest and unquestionable. But our present enquiry is only,
what it is which Believers do so delight in, in the Ordinances and Institutions
of Divine Gospel Worship, and what it is that ingageth their Hearts and Minds
into a diligent Observance of them; as also how, and wherein they do exercise
their Love and Delight. And I say in general, that their Delight in all
Ordinances of Divine Worship, as is evident in the Testimonies before produced,
is in Christ himself, or God in Christ. This alone is that which they seek
after, cleave unto, and are satisfied withal. They make use of the Streams,
but only as means of Communication from the Spring. When men are really renewed
in the Spirit of their Minds it is so. Their regard unto Ordinances and Duties
of divine Worship, is as they are appointed of God a Blessed means of Communion
and Intercourse between himself in Christ, and their Souls. By them does Christ
Communicate of his Love and Grace unto us; in and by them do we act Faith and
Love on him. It is the Treasure hid in the Field, which when a man has found,
he purchases the whole Field; but it is that he may enjoy the Treasure which
is hid therein, Mat. 13.14. This Field is the Gospel, and all the Ordinances of
it. This men do purchase sometimes at a dear rate, even with the loss of all
they enjoy. But yet if they obtain nothing but the Field, they will have little
cause to rejoice in their bargain. It is Christ the Treasure alone, that Pearl
of Price that will eternally enrich the Soul. The Field is to be used only, as
to find and dig up the Treasure that is in it. It is I say Christ alone that in
the preaching of the Gospel, renewed Affections do cleave unto as the Treasure*
and unto all other things, according as their Relation is unto him, or they
have a participation of him. Wherefore, in all Duties of Religion, in all
Ordinances of Worship, their Enquiry is after him whom their Souls do love,
Cant. 1.7.

But yet we must treat more particularly and distinctly of these things. Those
whose Affections are Spiritually renewed, do love, adhere unto, and delight in
Ordinances of Divine Service, and Duties of Worship; on the grounds and reasons
ensuing.

First. In general they do so, as they find Faith, and Love, and Delight in God
through Christ, excited and acted in and by them. This is their first and
immediate End in their Institution. It is a pernicious mistake to suppose that
any external Duties of Worship, as hearing the Word, Prayer, or the Sacraments,
are appointed for themselves, or accepted for themselves.

Such thoughts the Jews of Old had concerning their Sacrifices; namely, that
they were appointed for their own Sakes, and were acceptable Service unto God,
merely on their own Account. Wherefore, God to deliver them from this
pernicious Mistake, affirms ofttimes, that he never appointed them at all; that
is for any such End, Jer. 7.22, 23. Isa. 1.12, 13, 14, etc. And now under the
Gospel; Sundry things destructive to the Souls of men, have proceeded from such
a Supposition. Some hereon have always satisfied and contented themselves with
the external Observance of them, without desiring or endeavoring any holy
communion with God in them, or by them. This constitutes the State and
Condition mentioned, Rev. 3.1. And by following this tract, the generality of
Christians do wander out of the Way; they cannot leave them, nor do know how to
use them unto their Advantage until they come wholly unto that woeful State,
Isai. 29.13. And some to establish this Deceit, have taught that there is much
more in the Outward Work of these Duties, than ever God put into them, and that
they are sanctified merely by Virtue of the Work wrought.

But all the Duties of the Second Commandment as are all Instituted Ordinances
of Worship, are but means to express and exercise those of the First, as Faith,
Love, Fear, Trust and Delight in God. The end of them all is that through them,
and by them, we may act those Graces on God in Christ, Where this is not
attended unto, when the Souls of Men do not apply themselves unto this Exercise
of Grace in them, let them be never so Solemn as to their Outward Performance,
be attended unto with Diligence, be performed with earnestness and delight,
they are neither acceptable unto God, nor beneficial unto themselves, Isai.
1.11. This therefore is the first general Spring of the Love of Believers, of
them whose Affections are Spiritually renewed, unto the Ordinances of Divine
Worship, and their delight in them. They have Experience that in and by them,
their Faith and Love are excited unto a gracious Exercise of themselves on God
in Christ. And when they find it otherwise with them, they can have no rest in
their Souls. For this end are they ordained, sanctified and blessed of God, and
therefore, are effectual means of it, when their Efficacy is not defeated by
Unbelief.

And those who have no Experience hereof in their attendance unto them, do as
has been said, fall into pernicious Extremes. Some continue their Observance
with little regard unto God, in Cursed Formality. So they make them a means of
their ruin by Countenancing of them in their Security.

Others utterly reject them, at least the most Solemn of them, and therein both
the Wisdom, and Grace and Authority of God by whom they are appointed. Because
through the Power of their own Unbelief they find nothing in them.

This being the immediate end of all Divine Institutions, this being the only
way whereby we may give Glory unto God in their Observance, which is their
ultimate End in this World; and this being the Design in general of Believers
in that Obedience they yield unto the Lord Christ in their diligent Observation
of them; We may consider how, in what way, and by what means those whose
Affections are Spiritually renewed, do and ought to apply their Minds and Souls
unto their Observance. And we may consider herein: first, What they do design;
and then what they endeavor to be found in the Exercise and Practice of, in
their use and Enjoyment.

First. They come unto them with this Desire, Design, and Expectation, namely,
to be enabled, directed and excited by them, unto the Exercise of Divine Faith
and Love. When it is not so with any, where there is not this Design, they do
in various degrees take the Name of God in vain, in their Observance. These are
Approximationes Dei, The ways of drawing nigh unto God as they are every where
called in Scripture. To suppose that a drawing nigh unto God may consist merely
in the Outward Performance of Duty. Whatever be its Solemnity, is to reject
all due Reverence of him. Forasmuch, says the Lord, as this People draw near
me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do honor me, but have removed their
Hearts far from me, therefore I will proceed against them, Isaiah 29.13. The
Mouth and Lips are put by a Synechdoche, for all the means of outward worship
and honor. These men may use, diligently attend unto, whilst their Hearts are
far from God, that is, when they do not draw nigh to him by Faith and Love. But
all this Worship is rejected of God with the highest Tokens of his displeasure
and Indignation against it.

First. Our Souls then have no way of approach unto God in Duties of Worship,
but by Faith; no way of adherance or cleaving unto him, but by Love; no way of
abiding in him, but by Fear, Reverence, and Delight. When ever these are not in
Exercise, Outward Duties of Worship are so far from being a means of such an
Approach unto him, as that they set us at a greater Distance from him, than we
were before, at least are utterly useless and fruitless unto us. So indeed they
are unto the most who come unto them, they know not why, and behave themselves
under them, they care not how: Nor is there any evil in the Hearts and ways of
Men whereof God complains more in his Word, as that which is accompanied with
the highest Contempt of him. And because these Ordinances of Divine Worship are
means which the Wisdom and Grace of God has appointed unto this end, namely,
the Exercise and Increase of Divine Faith and Love, and therefore does Sanctify
and Bless them thereunto. I do not believe that they have any Delight in the
Exercise of these Graces, nor do design growth in them, by whom these great
means of them are despised or neglected.

And although I have seen those Valleys of public Worship forsaken, either on
Pretenses of higher Seize in Faith, Light and Love, than to stand in need
of them any more, or on a Foolish Opinion, that they cease upon the
Dispensation of the Spirit, which is given unto us to make them useful and
effectual, or on some Provocations that have been given unto some Men, or which
they have taken unto themselves, which they have thought they could revenge by
a neglect of Public Administrations, or through Slavish Peace and Negligence
in times of Difficulty, as is the manner of some, who forsake the Assemblies of
the Saints, Heb. 16.25. Yet, I never saw but it issued in a great decay, if not
in an utter loss of all exercise of Faith and Love, and sometimes in open
Profaneness. For such Persons Contemn, the way and means which God in his
infinite Wisdom and Goodness has appointed for their Exercise and Increase;
and this shall not prosper. We may therefore do well to consider, that the
principal way whereby we may Sanctify the Name of God, in all Duties of his
Worship, and obtain the Benefit of them to our own Souls; is by a
Conscientious Approach unto them with an holy Desire and Design to be found in
the Exercise of Faith and Love on God in Christ, and to be helped and guided
therein by them.

To be under an Efficacious Influence from this Design, is the best Preparation
for any Duty. So David expresses his Delight in the Worship of God. How
amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs; yea, even
faints for the Courts of the Lord: my Heart and my Flesh cries out for the
Living God, Psalm. 84.1, 2. He longed for the Tabernacle, and the Courts of it,
but it was the Enjoyment of God himself, the Living God that he desired and
sought after. This was that which made him so servent in his Desires after
those Ordinances of God. So he expresses it, Psalm. 63.2. To see thy Power and
thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. David had had great
Communion with, and Delight in God by Faith and Love in the Solemn Duties of
his Worship. And this was that which inflamed him with Desires after renewed
Opportunities unto the same End.

Secondly. This Design is not general, unactive, useless and sloathful. But
such Persons diligently endeavor in the use of these Ordinances, and
attendance unto them, to be found in the Exercise of these Graces. They have
not only an Antecedent Design to be so, but a diligent actual Endeavor after
it, not suffering their Minds by any thing to be diverted from the pursuit of
that Design, Ecc. 5.1. Whatever is not quickened and enlivened hereby; they
esteem utterly lost. Neither Outward Administrations, nor Order will give them
Satisfaction when these things are wanting in themselves. Without the Internal
Actings of the Life of Faith, external Administrations of Ordinances of
Worship, are but dead things. Nor, can any Believer obtain real Satisfaction in
them, or Refreshment by them, without an Inward Experience of Faith and Love in
them, and by them. And it is that, which if we are wise, we shall continually
attend unto the Consideration of. A watchful Christian will be careful lest he
loose any one Duty, by taking up the Carcass of it. And the danger of so doing,
is not small. Our Affections are renewed but in part. And as they are still
liable to be diverted, and seduced from Spirituality in Duty, even by things
earthly and carnal, through the Corruption that remains in them; So there is
a Disposition abiding in them, to be pleased with those external things in
Religious Duties, which others, as we have showed before, who are no way
graciously renewed do satisfy themselves withal. The Grace and Oratory of the
Speaker in preaching of the Word; especially in these days wherein the Foppery
of fine Language, even in Sacred things, is so much extolled; the Order and
Circumstances of other Duties, with Inclination and Love unto a Party, are apt
to insinuate themselves with great Complacency into our Affections, so far as
they are unrenewed. And these things discover the true Grounds whence it is
that the Ordinances of Divine Worship are so useless, as they are to many who
seem to attend unto them with Diligence. They may be referred unto these three
Heads.

(1) They do not come unto them, as the means appointed of God for the
Exercise of Faith and Love unto Christ, so as to make it their Design in their
Approaches to them, without which, all that is spoken of Advantage in and by
other Duties, is utterly lost.

(2) They do not in and under them labor to stir up Faith and Love unto their
due Exercise.

(3) They suffer their Minds to be diverted from the Exercise of these Graces,
partly by occasional Temptations, partly by attendance unto what is Outward
only in the Ordinances themselves.

Spiritual Affections find no place of Rest in any of these things; such
Proposals of God in Christ, of his Will, and their own Duty, as may draw out
their Faith, Love, Godly Fear and Delight into their due Exercise, is that
which they enquire after, and acquiesce in.

Two things alone does Faith regard in all Duties of Worship as unto the
Outward Administration of it. The one absolutely, the other comparatively; both
with respect unto the End mentioned, or the Exercise, Growth, and Increase of
Grace in us. The first is, that they may be of Divine Appointment. Where their
Original and Observance is resolved into Divine Authority, there and there
alone will they have a Divine Efficacy. In all these things, Faith has regard
to nothing but Divine Precepts and Promises. Whatever has regard to any thing
else, is not Faith, but Fancy. And therefore these uncommanded Duties in
Religion, which so abound in the Papal Church, as that if not the whole, yet
all the principal Parts of their Worship consist in them, are such as in whose
Discharge it is impossible Faith should be in a due Exercise. That which it
has comparative respect unto, is the Spiritual Gifts of them unto whom the
Administration of the Ordinances of the Gospel, in the public Worship of the
Church is committed. With respect unto them, Believers may have more Delight
and Satisfaction in the Ministry of one than of another, as was touched before.
But this is not because one is more learned than another, or more Elegant than
another, has more ability of Speech than another, or fervency in utterance
than another, is more fervent or earnest in his Delivery; but because they find
the Gifts of one more suited, and more Effectual to stir up Faith and Love unto
an holy Exercise in their Minds and Hearts, then what they find in some others.
Hence they have a peculiar value for, and delight in the Ministry of such
Persons, especially when they can enjoy it in due Order, and without the
Offense of others. And Ministers that are wise, will in Holy Administrations
neglect all other tings, and attend unto this alone, how they may be helpful
unto the Faith, and Love, and Joy of Believers, so far as they are the Object
of their Ministry.

This is the first reason and ground whereon Affections Spiritually-Renewed,
cleave unto Ordinances of Divine Worship, with Delight and Satisfaction;
namely, because they are the means appointed and Blessed of God, for the
Exercise and Increase of Faith and Love, with an Experience of their Efficacy
unto that End.

Secondly, The Second is, Because they are the means of the Communication of a
Sense of Divine Love, and Supplies of Divine Grace unto the Souls of them that
do believe. So far as our Affections are renewed, this is the most principal
attractive to cleave unto them with Delight and Complacency.

They are, as was observed before, the ways of our approaching unto God. Now we
do not draw nigh to God, as himself speaks, as a dry Hearth, or a barren
Wilderness, where no Refreshment is to be obtained. To make a Pretense of
Coming unto God, and not with Expectation of receiving good and great things
from him, is to despise God himself, to overthrow the nature of the Duty, and
deprive our own Souls of all Benefit thereby. And want hereof, is that which
renders the worship of the most, useless and fruitless unto themselves. We are
always to come unto God, as unto an Eternal Spring of Goodness, Grace, and
Mercy, of all that our Souls do stand in need of, of all we can desire in order
unto our Everlasting Blessedness, and all these things, as unto Believers, may
be reduced unto the two Heads before mentioned.

First, They come for a Communication of a Sense of his Love in Jesus Christ.
Hence does all our Peace, Consolation, and Joy, all our Encouragement to do,
and suffer according to the Will of God, all our Supportments under our
Sufferings, solely depend; In these things do our Souls live; and without them
we are of all Men the most miserable.

It is the Holy Spirit who is the immediate efficient Cause of all these things
in us. He sheds abroad the Love of God in our Hearts, Romans 5.5. He witnesses
our Adoption unto us, Chap. 8.15, 16. And thereby an Intrest in the Love of the
Father, in God as he is Love. But the Outward Way and means whereby he
communicates these things unto us, and effects them in us, is by the
Dispensation of the Gospel, or the Preaching of it ordinarily. He does the same
work also in Prayer, oft-times in other Holy Administrations. For this end, for
a Participation of this Grace, of these Mercies, do Believers come unto God by
them. They use them as means to draw Water from the Wells of Salvation, and to
receive in that Spiritual Sense of Divine Love, which God by them will
communicate.

So Christ, by his Word, knocks at the Door of the Heart, if it be opened by
Faith, he comes in and Suppeth with men, giving them a gracious Refreshment,
by the Testimony of his own Love, and the Love of the Father, Rev. 3.20. Joh.
14.23. This Believers look for in, and this they do in various measures receive
by the Ordinances of Divine Worship. And although some through their Fears and
Temptations, are not sensible hereof, yet do they secretly receive these
blessed gracious Supplies whereby their Souls are held in Life, without which
they would pine away and perish. So he deals with them, Cant. 4.5, 6. These
are the Gardens and Galleries of Christ wherein he gives us of his Love, Cant.
7.12. Those who are humble and sincere, know how often their Souls have been
refreshed in them, and how long sometimes the Impressions they have received of
Divine Grace and Love have continued with them unto their unspeakable
Consolation. They remember what they have received in the Opening and
Application of the exceeding great and precious Promises, that are given unto
them, whereby they are gradually more and more made Partakers of the Divine
Nature; how many a time they have received Light in Darkness, Refreshment under
Despondencies, Relief in their Conflicts, with dangers and temptations, in and
by them. For this Cause do Affections that are Spiritually renewed cleave unto
them. Who can but love and delight in that which he has found by experience,
to be the way and means of Communicating unto him the most invaluable Mercy,
the most inestimable Benefit, whereof in this Life he can be made partaker? He
who has found an hidden Treasure, although he should at once take away the
whole of it; yet will esteem the place where he found it. But if it be of that
nature, that no more can be found or taken of it at once, but what is
sufficient for the present Occasion, yet is so full and boundless, as that
whenever he comes again to seek for it, he shall be sure to obtain present
Supply, he will always value it, and constantly apply himself unto it. And
such is the Treasure of Grace and divine Love, that is in the Ordinances of
divine Worship.

If we are Strangers unto these things, if we have never received Efficatious
Intimations of Divine Love unto our Souls, in and by the Duties of Divine
Worship, we cannot love them and delight in them as we ought. What do men come
to hear the Word of God for? What do they pray for? What do they expect to
receive from him? Do they come unto God as the Eternal Fountain of Living
Waters? as the God of all Grace, Peace, and Consolation? Or do they come unto
his Worship without any Design as unto a dry and empty show? Do they fight
uncertainly with these things as men beating the Air? or do they think they
bring something unto God, but receive nothing from him? that the best of their
Business is to please him in doing what he commands, but to receive any thing
from him they expect not, nor do ever examine themselves whether they have done
so or no? It is not for Persons who walk in such ways, ever to attain a due
Delight in the Ordinances of Divine Worship.

Believers have other Designs herein, and among the rest, this in the First
place, that they may be a fresh made Partakers of Refreshing Comforting Pledges
of the Love of God in Christ; and thereby of their Adoption, of the Pardon of
their Sins, and acceptance of their Persons. According as they meet with these
things, in the Duties of Holy Worship, public, or private, so will they love,
value, and adhere unto them. Some Men are full of other Thoughts and
Affections, so as that these things are not their principal Design or Desire,
or are contented with that measure of them which they suppose themselves to
have attained; or at least are not sensible of the need they stand in, to have
fresh Communications of them made unto their Souls; supposing that they can do
well enough without a renewed Sense of Divine Love every Day; some are so
Ignorant of what they ought to design, to look after, in the Duties of Gospel
Worship, as that it is impossible they should have any real Design in them.
Many of the better sort of Professors are too negligent in this matter. They do
not long and pant in the Inward man, after renewed Pledges of the Love of God;
They do not consider how much need they have of them, that they may be
encouraged and strengthened unto all other Duties of Obedience; they do not
prepare their Minds for their Reception of them, nor come with Expectation of
their Communication unto them; they do not rightly fix their Faith on this
Truth, namely, that these Holy Administrations and Duties, are appointed of God
in the first place, as the ways and means of conveying his Love and a Sense
of it unto our Souls. From hence springs all that Luke-warmness, Coldness, and
Indifferency in and unto the Duties of holy Worship, that are growing among us.
For if Men have lost the Principal Design of Faith in them, and dis-esteem the
chiefest Benefit which is to be obtained by them, whence should Zeal for them,
delight in them, or diligence in attendance unto them arise? Let not any please
themselves under the Power of such decays; they are Indications of their
Inward Frame, and those infallible. Such Persons will grow cold, careless, and
negligent, as unto the Duties of public Worship, they will put themselves
neither to Charge nor Trouble about them; every Occasion of Life diverts them,
and finds ready Entertainment in their Minds; And when they do attend upon
them, it is with great Indifferency and Unconcernedness. Yet would they have it
thought, that all is still well within, as ever it was; they have as good a
respect unto Religion as any. But these things openly discover an ulcerous
Disease in the very Souls of Men, as evidently as if it were written on their
Foreheads; what ever they pretend unto the contrary, they are under the Power
of woeful Decays from all due regard unto Spiritual and Eternal Things. And I
would avoid the Society of such Persons, as those who carry an infectious
Disease about them, unless it were to help on their Cure.

But herein it is that Affections Spiritually renewed do manifest themselves.
When we do delight in, and value the Duties of Gods Worship, because we find by
Experience, that they are, and have been unto us means of communicating a
Sense and renewed Pledges of the Love of God in Christ, with all the Benefits
and Privileges which depend thereon; then are our Affections renewed in and by
the Holy Ghost.

Secondly. They come for Supplies of Internal, Sanctifying, strengthening Grace.
This is the second great Design of Believers in their Approaches unto God in
his Worship. The want hereof as unto Measures and Degrees they find in
themselves, and are sensible of it. Yea, therein lies the great Burden of the
Souls of Believers in this World. All that we do in the Life of God, may be
referred unto two Heads.

First, The Observance of all Duties of Obedience. And,

Secondly, The Conflict with, and Conquest over Temptations. About these
things, are we continually exercised. Hence the great thing which we desire,
labor for, and pant after, is Spiritual Strength and Ability for the Discharge
of our selves in a due manner with respect unto these things. This is that
which every true Believer groaneth after in the inward Man, and which he
prefers infinitely above all Earthly Things. So he may have Grace sufficient
in any competent measure for these ends, let what will befall him, he desires
no more in this World. God in Christ is the only Fountain of all this Grace.
There is not one Dram of it to be obtained but from him alone. And as he does
communicate it unto us of his own Sovereign Goodness and Pleasure, so the
ordinary way and means whereby he will do it, are the Duties of his Worship,
Isaiah 40.28, 29, 30, 31. Have thou not known? Have thou not heard that the
Everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth faints not,
neither is weary? There is no searching of his Understanding. He gives Power
to the faint, and to them that have no Might he increases Strength. Even the
Youths shall faint and be weary, and the Young Men shall utterly fail. But they
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength: they shall mount up with
Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk, and not
faint.

All Grace and Spiritual Strength is originally seated in the nature of God, v.
28. But what relief can that afford unto us who are weak, feeble, fainting. He
will act suitably unto his nature, in the Communication of this Grace and
Power, v. 29. But how shall we have an Interest in this Grace, in these
Opperations: wait on him in the Ordinances of his Worship, v. 31. The Word as
Preached, is the Food of our Souls whereby God administreth Growth and Strength
unto them, Joh. 17.17. -- 1 Pet. 2.23. Desire, says he the sincere Milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby. But what Encouragement have we thereunto,
if so be, says he, you have tasted that the Lord is gracious. If in and by
the Dispensation of this Word, you have had Experience of the Grace, the
Goodness, the Kindness of God unto your Souls, you cannot but desire it and
delight in it. And otherwise, you will not do so. When men have fate some good
while under the Dispensation of the Word, and in the enjoyment of other
Ordinances, without tasting in them and by them, that the Lord is gracious,
they will grow weary of it and them. Wherefore, Prayer is the way of his
Appointment for the Application of our Souls unto him, to obtain a
Participation of all needful Grace, which therefore he has proposed unto us in
the Promises of the Covenant, that we may know what to ask, and how to plead
for it. In the Sacraments the same Promises are sealed unto us, and the Grace
represented in them effectually exhibited. Meditation confirms our Souls in the
Exercise of Faith about it, and is the especial Opening of the Heart unto the
Reception of it. By these means I say, does God communicate all Supplies of
renewing, strengthening, and sanctifying Grace unto us, that we may live unto
him in all Holy Obedience, and be able to get the Victory over our Temptations.
Under this Apprehension do Believers approach unto God in the Ordinances of his
Worship. They come unto them as the means of Gods Communication unto their
Souls. Hence they cleave unto them with Delight, so far as their Affections are
renewed. So the Spouse testifyeth of her self; I sat down under his Shadow
with great Delight, Cant, 2.3. In these Ordinances is the protecting refreshing
Presence of Christ. This she rested in with great Delight.

As they come unto them with these Designs and Expectations, so they have
Experience of the Spiritual Benefits and Advantages which they receive by them,
which more and more engages them unto them in their Affections and Delights.
All these things, those who have a Change wrought in their Affections, but not
a Spiritual Renovation, are Strangers unto. They neither have the Design before
mentioned in coming to them, nor the Experience of this Efficacy now proposed
in their Attendance on them. But these Benefits are great; as for Instance,
when Men find the worth and Effect of the Word Preached on their Souls in its
enlightening, refreshing, strengthening, transforming Power; when they find
their Hearts warmed, their Graces excited and strengthened, the Love of God
improved, their Disponding Spirits under Trials and Temptations relieved, their
whole Souls gradually more and more Conformed unto Christ: when they find
themselves by it extricated out of Snares, Doubts, Fears, Temptations, and
brought unto Satisfaction and Rest, they cannot but delight in the Dispensation
of it, and rejoice in it as the Food of their Souls. And it is a great
Hinderance unto the Increase of Spiritual Life, and Obstruction unto
Fruitfulness, Thrnkfulness, and Consolation, when we are negligent in our
Meditation about the Benefits that we receive by the Word, and the Advantages
which we have thereby. For whilst it is so with us, we can neither value the
Grace of God, in granting us this Inestimable Privilege, nor perform any Duty
with respect unto it, in a right manner. This renders it an especial Object of
our Affections as Spiritually renewed. That Secret Love unto, and Heavenly
Delight in the Statutes and Testimonies of God, which David expresses, Psalm
119. arose from the Spiritual Benefit and Advantage which he received by them,
as he constantly declares. And the sole Reason on the other hand, why men grow
so careless, negligent, and cold in their Attendance unto the Preaching of the
Word, is because they have no Experience of any Spiritual Benefit, or Advantage
by it. They have been brought unto it by one means or another, mostly by
conviction of their Duty. Their Minds have been variously affected with it,
unto a Joy in the hearing of it, and readiness unto sundry Duties Of Obedience.
But after a while, when a sense of those Temporary Impressions is worn off,
finding no real Spiritual Benefit by it, they loose all delight in it, and
become very indifferent as unto its Enjoyment. The Frame which such Persons at
length arrive unto is described, Mal. 1.13. and 3.14. And none can give any
greater Evidence of the Decay of all manner of Grace in them, or of their being
destitute of all Saving-Grace, than when they apostatize from some degree of
Zeal for, and Delight in the Dispensation of the Word of God, with such a
cursed Indifferency, as many are overtaken withal. It cannot be otherwise. For
seeing this is a way and means of the Exercise of all Grace, it will not be
neglected, but where there is a Decay of all Grace; however Men may please
themselves with other Pretenses. And when they are thus ensnared, every foolish
Prejudice, every Provocation, every wanton Opinion and Imagination will confirm
them in, and increase their gradual Backsliding.

And as it is with Believers, as unto the hearing of the Word in general, so it
is as unto the Degrees of Advantage which they find by it. When Men have
enjoyed the Dispensation of the Word in a peculiar manner, Spiritual and
Effectual, if they can be content to forego it, for that which is more cold and
lifeless, provided it possesses the same time, and outward Form with the
other, it is no great Evidence that their Souls do prosper. It is therefore
those alone, who having a sense of the Efficacy of the Word on their Souls and
Consciences unto all the holy Ends of it, who cleave unto it with Spiritual
Love and Delight. They continually remember what holy Impressions it has made
on them, what Engagements it has brought their Souls into, what encouragements
unto Faith and Obedience it has furnished them withal, and long after renewed
Sense of its Enjoyments. When we do not find in our selves this Foundation of
Spiritual delight in the Dispensation of the Gospel, we can have no great
Evidence that our Affections are renewed.

So also it is in the Duties of Prayer and Meditation. When the Soul of a
Believer has had Experience of the Communion which it has had with God in
them, or either of them; of the Spiritual Refreshment which it has had from
them, of the Benefits and Mercies which are obtained by them, in recovery from
Temptations, Snares, Despondencies, in Victory over Sin and Satan, in
Spiritual Impressions, working it unto an holy watchful Frame, which has abode
with it in other VVayes and Occasions, with the like Advantages wherewith
fervent and Effectual Prayer, and sincere Heavenly Meditation are accompanied,
it cannot but have Love unto them, and Delight in them; But if indeed we have
no Experience of these things, if we find not these Advantages in and by these
Duties; they cannot but be a Burden unto us, nor do serve unto any other End
but to satisfy Convictions. He who had the benefit of a serene and wholesome
Air, in a recovery from many Diseases and Distempers, with the Preservation of
his Health so obtained, will love it and prize it, and so will he these Duties,
who has been Partaker of any of these Saving Mercies and Privileges wherewith
they are accompanied. Some have been delivered from the worst of Temptations,
and the nearest Approach of their Prevalency (as to destroy themselves) by a
sudden Remembrance of the Frame of their Souls, and the Intimations of Gods
Love, in such or such a Prayer, at such a time. Some have had the same
Deliverance from Temptations unto Sin, when they have been carried away under
the Power of their Corruptions, and all Circumstances have concurred under the
Apprehensions of it, a Sudden Thought of such a Prayer or Meditation with the
Engagement they made of themselves therein unto God, has caused all the
weapons of Sin to fall out of its hands, and all the Beauties of its
Allurements to disappear.

When others have been under the Power of such Dispondencies and
Disconsolations, as that no present tenders of Relief can approach unto them,
they have been suddenly raised and refreshed by the Remembrance of the intimate
Love and Kindness between Christ and their Souls, that has evidenced it self
in former Duties. Multitudes in Fears, Distresses and Temptations, have found
Relief unto their Spirits, and Encouragement unto their Faith in the
Remembrance of the Returns they have had unto former Supplications in the like
Distresses. These are Grounds of Spiritual Delight in these Duties.

Heartless, Lifeless, wordy Prayer, the Fruit of Convictions and Gifts, or of
Custom and outward Occasions however multiplied, and whatever Devotion they
seem to be accompanied withal, will never engage Spiritual Affections unto
them. When these things are absent, when the Soul has not Experience of them,
Prayer is but a lifeless Form, a dead Carcass, which it would be a torment unto
a Soul Spiritually alive to be tied unto. There may be a Season indeed, when
God will seem to hide himself from Believers in their Prayers, so as they shall
neither find that Life in themselves which they have done formerly, nor be
sensible of any gracious Communications from him, but this is done only for a
time, and principally to stir them up unto that Fervency and Preseverance in
Prayer, as may recover them into their former, or a better Estate than yet they
have attained unto. The like may be said concerning all other Duties of
Religion, or Ordinances of Divine Worship.

Fourthly, Believers whose Affections are Spiritually renewed do delight
greatly in the duties of Divine Worship, because they are the great instituted
way whereby they may give Glory unto God. This is the first and principal End
of all Duties of Religion as they respect divine Appointment, namely, to
ascribe and give unto God the Glory that is his due. For in them all,
Acknowledgement is made of all the glorious Excellencies of the divine Nature,
our dependence on him, and relation unto him. And this is that which in the
first place, Believers design in all the Duties of divine Worship. And the
Pattern set us by our Blessed Savior in the Prayer he taught his Disciples
directs us thereunto. All the first Requests of it concern immediately the
Glory of God, and the Advancement thereof. For therein also all the Blessedness
and Safety of the Church is included. Those who fail in this design, do err in
all that they do, they never tend unto the mark proposed unto them. But this is
that which principally animates the Souls of them that believe in all their
Duties; this their universal Relation unto him, and Love in that Relation makes
necessary. Wherefore that way and means whereby they may directly and solemnly
ascribe and give Glory unto God, is precious and delightful unto them. And such
are all the duties of divine Worship. These are some of the things wherein the
respect of Affections Spiritually renewed, unto Ordinances and Duties of divine
Worship, does differ from the Actings of Affections toward the same Object
which are not so santifyed and renewed.

There are yet other things accompanied with the same Evidence of the
difference between Affections Spiritually renewed, and those which have only a
general Change wrought in them, by Convictions and some outward Occasions,
which must in one or two Instances more be insisted on, with the Consideration
of such Cases as derive from them. For my design herein, is not only to declare
when our Minds are Spiritually renewed, but also what is the nature and
operation of our Affections, whereby we are constituted and denominated,
Spiritually-Minded, which is the Subject of our whole Enquiry. Herein then we
shall proceed.

CHAP. XVI.
Assimulation unto things Heavenly and Spiritual in Affections Spiritually
renewed. This Assimulation the Work of Faith. How, and whereby. Reasons of the
want of Growth in our Spiritual Affections, as unto this Assimulation.

WHen Affections are Spiritually renewed, in their Exercise, or fixing of
themselves on Spiritual things; There is an Assimulation wrought in them, and
in the whole Soul unto those Spiritual and Heavenly things by Faith. But when
there is a Change in them only, from other Causes and Occasions, and not from
Renewing Grace, there is an Assimulation effected of Spiritual and Heavenly
Things unto themselves, unto those Affections, by Imagination.

This must somewhat at large be spoken unto, as that which gives the most
eminent Distinction between the Frames of Mind, whose difference we enquire
into. And to that end we shall cast our consideration of it into the ensuing
Observations.

First, Affections Spiritually renewed are in all their Actings, in their whole
Exercise, under the Guidance and Conduct of Faith. It is Faith which in its
Spiritual Light, has the leading of the Soul in the whole Life of God; we live
here by Faith, as we shall do hereafter by Light. If our Affections deviate or
decline in the least from the Guidance of the Faith, they degenerate from their
Spirituality, and give up themselves unto the Service of Superstition. Next
unto corrupt secular Interest in the management of crafty selfish Seducers,
this has been the great inlet of all Superstition and false Worship into the
World. Blind Affection groping in the dark after Spiritual Things, having not
the Saving Light of Faith to conduct them; have seduced the Minds of Men into
all manner of Superstitions, Imaginations, and Practices, continuing to do so
at this day. And wherever they will lead the way, when Faith goes not before
them to discover both way and end, they that lead, and the Mind that is led,
must fall into one Snare and Pit or another.

Wherefore Affections that are Spiritually renewed, move not, act not, but as
Faith discovers their Object, and directs them unto it. It is Faith that works
by Love, we can love nothing sincerely with divine Love, but what we believe
Savingly with Divine Faith. Let our Affections unto any Spiritual Things be
never so vehement, if they spring not from Faith, if they are not guided by it,
they are neither accepted with God, nor will promote the Interest of
Spirituality and Holiness in our own Souls. Heb. 11.6. Mat. 6.22, 23. And this
is the reason whence we often times see great and plausible Appearances of
Spiritual Affections, which yet endure only for a Season. They have been
awakened, excited, acted by one means or another outward or inward; but not
having the Light of Faith to guide them unto their proper Object, they either
wither and dye, as unto any appearing of Spiritual Motions* or else keep the
Mind tossed up and down in perpetual disquietment, without rest or Peace. The
foolish Man wearieth himself, because he cannot find the way to the City. So
was it with them who on the account of their Attendance unto the Doctrine of
Christ, are called his Disciples, Joh. 6. Having preached unto them about the
Bread which came down from Heaven, and gives Life unto them that feed, they
were greatly affected with it, and cried out, Lord, evermore, give us of this
Bread, v. 34. But when he proceeded to declare the Mystery of it, they having
not Faith to discern and apprehend it, their Affections immediately decayed,
and they forsook both him and his Doctrine, verse. 66.

We may consider one especial Instance of this nature. Persons every day fall
under great and effectual Convictions of Sin, and of their danger or certain
Misery thereby. This stirs up and acts all their Affections, especially their
Fears, Hopes, Desires, Sorrow, Self-Revenge, according as their Condition calls
for them. Hence sometimes they grow restless in their Complaints, and turn
themselves every way for relief, like men that are out of the way, and
bewildred in the night. But in this State and Condition tell them of the only
proper way and means of their Relief, which, let the World say what it will, is
Christ and his Righteousness alone, with the Grace of God in him, and they
quickly discover that they are strange things unto them, such as they do not
understand, nor indeed approve. They cannot see them, they cannot discern them,
nor any Beauty in them for which they should be desired.

Wherefore after their Affections have been tossed up and down for a season,
under the Power and Torment of this Conviction, they come unto one or other of
these Issues with them. For either they utterly decay, and the Mind loses all
sense of any Impressions from them, so as that they wonder in themselves,
whence they were so foolish as to be tossed and troubled with such melancholy
Fancies, and so commonly prove as bad a sort of Men as live upon the Earth; or
they take up in a formal legal Profession wherein they never attain to be
Spiritually-Minded. This is the best end that our Affections toward Spiritual
things not guided by the Light of Faith, do come unto.

Secondly, Faith has a clear prospect into, and Apprehension of Spiritual
things, as they are in themselves, and in their own nature. It is true, the
Light of it cannot fully comprehend the nature of all those things which are
the Objects of its Affections, For they are infinite and incomprehensible, such
as are the Nature of God, and the Person of Christ; and some of them, as future
Glory, are not yet clearly revealed: But it discerns them all in a due manner,
so as that they may in themselves, and not in any corrupt Representation, or
Imagination of them, be the Object of our Affections. They are as the Apostle
speaks, Spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. which is the reason why the natural
man cannot receive them, namely, because he has not Ability Spiritually to
discern them. And this is the principal end of the Renovation of our Minds, the
principal quality and effect of Faith, namely, the Communication unto our
Minds, and the acting in us, of a Spiritual Saving Light, whereby we may see
and discern Spiritual things as they are in their own Nature, Kind, and proper
Use, see Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
Knowledge of him. The Eyes of your Understanding being enlightened: that ye know
what is the hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his
Inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding Greatness of his Power to
usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty Power. 2 Cor. 4.6.
God shines in our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of his Glory in
the Face of Jesus Christ. The End God designs, is to draw our Hearts and
Affections unto himself. And unto this end, he gives unto us a glorious
internal Light, whereby we may be enabled to discern the true nature of the
things that we are to cleave unto with Love and Delight. Without this we have
nothing but false Images of Spiritual things in our Minds: not always as unto
the Truth or Doctrine concerning them, but as unto their Reality, Power and
Efficacy. This is one of the principal Effects of Faith, as it is the principal
part of the Renovation of our Minds, namely, to discover in the Soul and
represent unto the Affections things Spiritual and Heavenly, in their Nature,
Beauty, and genuine Excellency. This attracts them if they are Spiritually
renewed and causes them to cleave with Delight unto what is so proposed unto
them. He that believes in Christ in a due manner, who thereon discovers the
Excellency of his Person, and the Glory of his Mediation, will both love him,
and on his Believing rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory. So is, it
in all other Instances; the more steady is our view by Faith of Spiritual
things the more firm and constant will our Affections be in cleaving unto them.
And wherever the Mind is darkened about them, by Temptation or Seduction from
the Truth, there the Affections will be quickly weakened and impaired. Wherefore,

Thirdly, Affections thus lead unto, and fixed on Spiritual and Heavenly things
under the Light and Conduct of Faith, are more and more renewed, or made in
themselves more Spiritual and Heavenly. They are in their cleaving unto them,
and delight in them, continually changed and Assimulated unto the things
themselves: becoming more and more to be what they are namely, Spiritual and
Heavenly.

This Transformation is wrought by Faith, and is one of the most excellent
Faculties and Operations, see 2 Cor. 3.18. And the means whereby it works
herein, are our Affections. In them as we are Carnal, we are conformed unto
this World; and by them as Sanctified, are we transformed in the renewing of
our Minds, Romans 12.2. And this Transformation is the Introduction of a new Form
or Nature into our Souls, diverse from that wherewith we were before endued. So
is it described, Isaiah 11.6, 7, 8, 9. A Spiritual Nature they were changed
into. And it is twofold.

First, Original and Radical as to the Substance or Essence of it, which is the
Effect of the first Act of Divine Grace upon our Souls, when we are made new
Creatures. Herein our Affections are passive, they do not transform us, but are
transformed.

Secondly, Gradual as unto its Increase; and therein Faith works in and by the
Affections.

Whenever the Affections do cleave intensely unto any Object, they receive an
Impression from it, as the Wax does from the Seal when applied unto it, which
changes them into its own likeness. So the Apostle affirms of sensual unclean
Persons; they have Eyes full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. Their Affections are so
wholly possessed and filled with their lustful Objects, as that they have
brought forth their own likeness upon their Imaginations. That blots out all
others, and leaves them no Inclinations but what they stir up in them. When men
are filled with the Love of this World, which carries along with it all their
other Affections, their Hopes, Fears, and Desires, unto a constant Exercise
about the same Object, they become Earthly-Minded. Their Minds are so changed
into the Image of the things themselves, by the effectual working of the
corrupt Principles of Sin, Self-Love and Lust, as if they were made up of the
Earth, and therefore have no Savor of any thing else.

In like manner when by Faith men come to embrace Heavenly things, through the
effectual Working of a Principle of Spiritual Life and Grace in them, they are
every day more and more made Heavenly. The Inward Man is renewed day by Day.
Love is more sincere and ardent, Delight is more ravishing and sensible,
Desires are more enlarged and intense, and by all a Taste and Relish of Heavenly
things is heightened into refreshing Experience see Romans 5.2, 3, 4, 5.

This is the way whereby one Grace is added unto another, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. in
Degrees. Great is the Assimulation between renewed Affections and their
Spiritual Objects, that by this means may be attained.

The Mind hereby becomes the Temple of God wherein he dwells by the Spirit;
Christ also dwells in Believers, and they in him. God is Love, and he that
dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16.

Love in its proper Exercise, gives a mutual Inhabitation unto God and
Believers. In brief, he whose Affections are set upon Heavenly things in a due
manner, will be Heavenly-Minded. And in the due Exercise of them, will that
Heavenly Mindedness be increased. The Transformation and Assimulation that is
wrought, is not in the Object or Spiritual things themselves, they are not
changed neither in themselves, nor in the Representation made of them unto our
Minds; But the Change is in our Affections which are made like unto them.

Two Cases deriving from this Principle and Consideration, may be here spoken
unto, and shall be so; the first in this, and the other in the following
Chapter. The one is concerning the Slowness and Imperceptibility of the Growth
of our Affections in their Assimulation unto Heavenly things, with the Causes
and Reasons of it. The other is, the Decays that frequently befall Men in their
Affections unto Spiritual things instead of growing and thriving in them, with
the Reasons and Causes thereof.

First, This Progress and Growth of our Affections into Spirituality and
Heavenliness, into Conformity unto the things they are set upon, is oft-times
very slow, and some times imperceptible. Yea, for the most part, it is a hard
thing to find it Satisfactorily in our selves or others. Our Affections stand
like Shrubs in the Wilderness, which see not when good comes, and are not like
Plants in a Garden enclosed, which is watered every day. But it is not so
without our Folly and our Sin.

The Folly that keeps many in this Condition, consists herein; The generality
of Christians are contented with their present measures, and design little
more, than not to lose the ground they have gained. And a pernicious Folly it
is that both ruins the Glory of Religion, and deprives the Souls of Men, of
Peace and Consolation. But so it is, Men have some grounds of Persuasion, or at
least they hope, and suppose they have such grounds, that they are passed from
Death unto Life, that they are in a State of Grace and Acceptance with God.
This State they will endeavor to preserve by a diligent Performance of the
Dutys it requires, and the avoidance of such Sins, whereby they might make a
forfeiture of it. But as for earnest watchful Endeavors and Diligence to
thrive in this State, to grow in Grace, to be changed from Glory to Glory into
the Image of Christ, to press forwards toward the mark of the High-Calling,
and after Perfection to lay hold upon Eternal Life, to be more holy, more
humble, more righteous, more Spiritually-minded, to have their Affections more
and more transformed into the likeness of things above; they are but few, that
sincerely and diligently apply themselves unto it, or unto the means of these
things. The Measures which they have attained unto, give Satisfaction unto the
Church, and Reputation in the World, that they are Professors, and some so
speak Peace unto their own Souls. To be more holy and heavenly, to have their
Affections more taken up with the things above, they suppose somewhat
inconsistent with their present Occasions and Affairs. By this means has
Religion lost much of its Glory, and the Souls of Men have been deprived of the
principal Advantages of it in this World.

Such Persons are like unto men who live in a Country whereni they are not only
pressed with Poverty, and all sorts of Misery; but are also obnoxious unto
grievous Punishments, and Death it self, if they are taken in it. In this
Condition they are told and assured of another Country, wherein so soon as they
are arrived, they shall be freed from all Fear of danger of Punishment, and if
they pass further into it, they shall meet with Riches, Plenty and a fair
Inheritance provided for them. Hereon they betake themselves unto their Voyage
to obtain an entrance into it, and Possession of it. But no sooner do they come
within the Borders, and so are free from Danger, or fear of Punishment and
Death, but they sit down and will go no further, to enjoy the good things of
the Country whereunto they are come. And it falls out with many of them, that
through their Sloth, Negligence, and Ignorance, they take up short of the true
Bounds and Limits of the Country of Liberty and Peace which they aimed at,
whereby Danger and Death surprise them unawares. This ruin could not have
befallen them, had they industriously endeavored to enter into the heart of
the Country, and have possessed the good things thereof. At best, being only in
the Borders, they lead a poor Life all their days, exposed to wants and danger.

So it is in this case. Men falling under the Power of Convictions, and those
restless Fears wherewith they are accompanied, will stir up themselves, and
enquire how they may fly from the Wrath to come, how they may be delivered from
the State of Sin, and the Eternal Misery which will ensue thereon.

In the Gospel not only Mercy and Pardon are proposed unto them on their
believing, which is the first entrance into the Heavenly Country; But Peace,
and Joy, and Spiritual Strength upon their Admission into it, and a progress
made in it by Faith and Obedience. But many when they have attained so far, as
that they have some hopes of Pardon and Freedom from the Curse, so as to
deliver them from their tormenting Fears, will endeavor to preserve those
hopes, and keep that State; but will not pass on to a full Enjoyment of the
precious things of the Gospel, by Growth in Grace and Spiritual Affections. But
how many of them fall under woeful Mistakes. For supposing themselves to be in a
Gospel State, it proves in the Issue, that they never entered into it. They were
not it may be far from the Kingdom of Heaven, in the same Sense as it was
spoken of him who never came thither. There is no way to secure an Interest in
the Gospel, as to Pardon and Mercy, Safety and Deliverance, but by a Growth in
Grace, Holiness, and Spirituality, which gives an entrance into the choicest
Mercies and Privileges of it.

This Folly of Men in taking up with their Measures, endeavoring only to
maintain that State and Condition which they hope they have attained, is the
great reason why their Affections do not daily grow up into Spirituality,
through an Assimulation unto Heavenly things. And a Folly it is, attended with
innumerable Aggravations. As for Instance.

First, It is contrary and destructive unto the genuine and principal Property
of Gospel Grace. For it is every where compared by our Savior unto things
which from small Seeds and Beginings, do grow up by a continual Increase unto
large measures, as to a grain of Mustard Seed, a little leaven, and the like.

That Grace in whose nature it is not to thrive and grow, may Justly be
suspected, and ought diligently to be examined by them who take care of their
own Souls and would not be eternally deceived.

Secondly, It is contrary unto the most excellent or invaluable Evangelical
Promises recorded in the Old Testament and the New; and which are amongst the
principal Supportments of the Faith, Hope, and Comfort of Believers. God has
given them unto us, to encourage us unto an Expectation of such Supplies of
Grace, as shall cause us to thrive and grow against all Opposition, unto the
utmost of our Continuance in this World. And they are so multiplied as that
there is no need to mention any of them in particular; God evidencing thereby
how great is the Grace, and how precious which he so often promises, and of
what Consideration it is of unto our selves, see Psalm. 92.13, 14, 15. Isai.
40.28, 29, 30, 31. Wherefore the Folly of taking up with present measures of
Grace, Holiness, and Spirituality, is attended with two unspeakable Evils.

First, A Signal Contempt of the Love, Grace, Faithfulness, and Wisdom of God,
in giving of us such Promises of Grace, to make us to increase, thrive, and
grow. How can it be done more effectually, than by such a neglect of his
Promised Grace.

Secondly, An Evidence that such Persons love not, care not for Grace or
Holiness for their own Souls, but merely to serve their turn at present as they
suppose; nor do desire the least of Grace or Privilege by Christ, without
which they can have any hopes to get to Heaven. This sufficiently discovers men
to be wholly under the Power of Self-Love, and to center therein; for if they
may have so much Grace and Mercy, as may save them, they care for no more.

Thirdly, It is repugnant unto the Honor of Gospel Grace, as though it would
carry us so far, and no farther in the way to Glory. For it must be known that
this sort of Persons who sit down in their present Measures and Seize
either really have no true Grace at all, or that which is of the lowest,
meanest, and most imperceptible size and degree. For if any one has attained
any considerable Growth in Faith and Love, in the Mortification of Sin, in
Heavenly-Mindedness, it is utterly impossible but that ordinarily he will be
pressing forward toward farther Seize, and farther Degrees of Spiritual
Strength in the Life of God. So the Apostle declares it in his own Example,
Phil. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. What thoughts can these Persons have concerning the
Glory, Power, and Efficacy of Gospel Grace, which they suppose they have
received. If they measure them by the Effects which they find in themselves,
either as unto the Mortification of Sin, or Strength unto, and Delight in
Duties of Holiness, or as unto Spiritual Consolation, they can see no
Excellency nor Beauty in them. For they do not manifest themselves but in their
Success, as they transform the Soul daily into the Image of Christ.

Fourthly, It is that which has lost the Reputation and Glory of the Religion
in the World, and therein the Honor of the Gospel it self. For the most of
Professors do take up with such Measures as put no luster upon it, as give no
Commendation unto the Religion they profess. For their measures allow them such
a Conformity unto the World, in their Ways, Words and Actions, in their
Gestures, Apparel, and Attire, as that they are no way visibly to be
distinguished from it. Yea, the Ground and Reason why the most do rest in their
present measures, is because they will not be further differenced from the
World. This has greatly lost the Glory, Honor, and Reputation of Religion
amongst us. And on the other side, if all visible Professors would endeavor
continually to grow and thrive in Spirituality of Mind, and Heavenlyness of
Affections, with Fruits suited thereunto, it would bring a Conviction on the
world, that there is a Secret Invisible Power, accompanying the Religion they
profess, transforming them daily into the Image and Likeness of God.

Fifthly, Whatever is pretended unto the contrary, it is inconsistent with all
solid Peace of Conscience. For so such thing is promised unto any who live in
such a Contempt of Divine Promises; nor is it attainable but by the diligent
Exercise of all those Graces which lie neglected under this Frame. Few men are
able to judge whether they have real, eternal, abiding Peace or no, unless it
be in Case of Trials and Temptations. At other Seasons, general Hopes and
Confidences do, or may supply the want of it in their Minds. But when any Fear,
Danger, Trial, or Word of Conviction befalls them, they cannot but enquire and
examine how it is with them. And if they find their Affections cold, dead,
earthly, carnal, withering, not spiritual or heavenly, there will be an end of
their supposed Peace, and they will fall into woeful Disquietments, and they
will then find that the Root of all this Evil lies in this Frame and
Disposition. They have been so far satisfied with their present measures or
seize in Religion, as that the utmost of their Endeavors have been, but
to preserve their Station, or not to forfeit it by open Sins, to keep their
Souls alive from the severe Reflections of the Word and their Reputation fair
in the Church of God. Spiritually to thrive, to prosper in their Souls, to wax
fat and flourishing in the Inward Man, to bring forth more fruit as Age
increases, to press toward Perfection, are things they have not designed nor
pursued.

Hence it is that so many among us, are visibly at an unthrifty stand in the
World; that where they were one Year, there they are another, like Shrubs in
the Wilderness, not like the Plants in the Garden of God, not as Vines planted
in a very fruitful Hill. Yea, though many are sensible themselves, that they
are cold, lifeless, and fruitless, Yet will they not be convinced, that there
is a necessity of making a daily progress in Spirituality and
Heavenly-Mindedness, whereby the Inward man may be renewed day by day, and
Grace augmented with the Increase of God. This is a work as they suppose for
them who have nothing else to do; not consistent with their Business, Callings,
and Occasions; not necessary as they hope unto their Salvation, nor it may be,
to be attained by them, if they should set themselves about it. This
Apprehension of Imagination, upon the beginning of the Declension, and decay of
Christian Religion in the many, Cast of all Holiness and Devotion unto a sort
of men who undertook to retire themselves utterly out of the World, amongst
whom also the Substance of Religion was quickly lost, and a Cloud, or Meteor of
Superstition embraced in the Room of it. But this Folly is ominous unto the
Souls of men.

Those who have made the greatest Progress in the Conformity of their
Affections unto things Spiritual and Heavenly, know most of its Necessity,
Excellency, and Desireableness; yea, without some Progress in it, these things
will not be known. Such will testify that the more they attain herein, the more
they see there is yet to be attained, and the more they do desire to attain
what is behind. Forgetting those things which are behind, they reach forth unto
the things that are yet before them; like men running in a Race, whose Prize
and Reward is yet before them. Phil. 3.13, 14. It is a comely thing to see a
Christian weaned from the World, minding Heavenly Things, green and flourishing
in Spiritual Affection. And it is the more lovely, because it is so rare. The
generality of them take up with those measures, which neither glorify God, nor
bring in durable Peace into their own Souls.

That which men pretend, and complain of herein, is the difficulty of the Work.
They can as they suppose preserve their present Station, but to press forward
to grow in Grace, to thrive in their Affections, this is too hard for them. But
this Complaint is unequal and unjust and adds unto the guilt of their Sloth. It
reflects upon the Words of our Savior, that his Yoke is easy, and his Burden
Light, that his Commandments are not grievious. It expersseth Unbelief in the
Promises of God, tendering such Supplies of Grace as to render all the ways of
Wisdom easy, yea, Mercy and Peace. It is contrary unto the Experience of all
who have with any Sincerity and Diligence engaged in the ways of Gospel
Obedience. And the whole cause of the pretended Difficulty lies in themselves
alone; which may be reduced unto these two Heads.

First, A Desire to retain some thing, or things, that is, or are inconsistent
with such a Progress. For unless the Heart be ready on all Occasions, to esteem
every things as Loss and Dung, so as we may win Christ, the work will be
accomcompanied with insuperable Difficulties. This is the first Principle of
Religion, of Gospel Obedience, that all things are to be despised for Christ.
But this Difficulty arises not from the thing it self, but from our
Indisposition unto it, and unfitness for it. That which is an easy pleasant
Walk unto a found and healthy Man, is a toilsome Journey to him that is
diseased and infirm. In particular, whilst Men will retain an inordinate
respect unto the World, the Vanities, the Pleasures, the Profits, the
Contentments of it; whilst Self-Love, putting an undue Valuation on our
Persons, our Relations, our Enjoyments, our Reputations, does cleave unto us,
we shall labor in the Fire when we engage in this Duty; or rather we shall not
at all sincerely engage in it; wherefore the Apostle tells us, that in this
case, we must cast off every weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset us,
if we intend to run with Joy the Race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1.

Secondly, It is because Men dwell continually upon the Entrances of Religion
in the first and lowest Exercise of Grace; some are always beginning at
Religion, and the beginning of things are always difficult. They design not to
be Complete in the whole Will of God, nor to give all Graces their perfect
Work. They do not with use, habituate Grace unto a readiness in all the Actings
of it, which the Apostle commends in them that are perfect or complete, Heb.
5.14. Hence he calls such Persons Babes, and Carnal, comparatively unto them
that are strong men and Spiriual. Such Persons do not obliege themselves unto
the whole Work, and all the Duties of Religion, but only what they Judge
necessary unto them in their present Circumstances. In particular, they do not
attempt a thorow-work in the Mortification of any Sin, but are hewing and
hacking at it, as their Convictions are urgent, or abate, the Wounds whereof in
the Body of Sin, are quickly healed. They give not any Grace its perfect Work,
but are always making Essays, and so give over.

Whilst it is thus with any, they shall always be deluded with the
Apprehensions of insuperable Difficulties, as to the Growth of their Affections
in Spirituality and Heavenliness. Remove these things out of the way as the
ought to be removed, and we shall find all the Paths wherein we are to walk
toward God, to be Pleasantness and Peace.

This is the first Cause whence it is, that there may be Affections truly
Spiritual and graciously renewed in some Persons, who yet do not thrive in an
Assimulation and Conformity unto Heavenly things. Men take up with their
present measures; and thereon pretend either necessary Occasion, or
Discouragements from Difficulties in attempting Spiritual Growth in the inward
Man. But they may thank themselves, if as they bring no honor unto Christ, so
they have no solid Peace in their own Souls.

Secondly, As the Evil proceeds from Folly, so it is always the Consequent
of Sin, of many Sins, of various sorts. Let us not dwell on heartless
Complaints, that we do not find our Affections lively and heavenly; that we do
not find the Inward Man to thrive or grow. Let us not hearken after this or
that Relief or Comfort under this Consideration, as many things are usually
insisted on unto that purpose. They may be of use, when Persons are under
Temptations, and not able to make a right Judgment of themselves. But in the
Course of our ordinary walking with God, they are not to be attended, not
retired unto. The general Reason of this evil State, is our own sinful
Carelessness, Negligence and Sloth, with perhaps an Indulgence unto some known
Lust or Corruption. And we do in vain seek after refreshing Cordials, as though
we were only Spiritually faint, when we stand in need of Launcings and
Burnings, as nigh unto a Lethargy. It would be too long to give Instances of
these Sins, which fail not effectually to obstruct the thriving of Spiritual
Affections. But in general, when men are careless as unto that continual Watch
which they ought to keep over their Hearts; whilst they are negligent in holy
Duties, either as unto the seasons of them, or the manner of their Performance;
when they are Strangers unto holy Meditation, and self-Examination; whilst
they inordinately pursue the things of the World, or are so tender and
delicate, as that they will not undergo the hardship of an heavenly Life,
either as unto the Inward or Outward Man; much more when they are vain in their
Conversation, corrupt in their Communication, especially if under the
Predominant Influence of any particular Lust, it is vain to think of thriving
in Spiritual Affections. And yet thus it is with all who ordinarily, and in
their constant Course are thriftless herein.

CHAP. XVII
Decays in Spiritual Affections, with the Causes and Danger of them. Advice
unto them who are sensible of the Evil of Spiritual Decays.

IT must be acknowledged, that there is yet that which is worse than what we
have yet insisted on, and more opposite unto the Growth of Affections in
Conformity unto Heavenly things, which is the proper Character of those that
are Spiritually renewed. And this is their Spiritual Decay manifesting it self
in sensible and visible Effects.

Some there are, yea many, who upon the Beginning of a Profession of their
Conversion unto God, have made a great appearance of vigorous, active,
Spiritual Affections; yea, it is so with most, it may be, all who are really so
converted. God takes notice of the Love of the Youth in his People, of the Love
of their Espousals.

In some, this vigiour of Spiritual Affections is from the real Power of Grace,
exerting its Efficacy on their Hearts and in their Minds. In others, it is from
other Causes, as for Instance, Relief from Conviction by Spiritual
Illumination, will produce this Effect. And this falls out unto their Advantage
of such Persons that generally a Change is wrought in their younger days. For
then their Affections in their natural Powers are active, and bear great sway
in the whole Soul. Wherefore the Change that is made, is most eminent in them,
be it what it will. But as men Increase in Age, and thereon grow up in Carnal
Wisdom, and a great valuation of Earthly things, with their Care about them and
Converse in them, they abate and decay in their Spiritual Affections every day.
They will abide in their Profession, but have lost their first Love.

It is a shame and folly unutterable, that it should be so with any who make
Profession of that Religion, wherein there are so many incomparable
Excellencies to endear and engage them to it more and more; but why should we
hide what Experience makes manifest in the Sight of the Sun; and what
multitudes proclaim concerning themselves? Wherefore I look upon it as a great
Evidence, if not absolutely of the Sincerity of Grace, yet of the Life and
Growth of it, when men as they grow up in age, do grow in an Undervaluation of
present things, in contempt of the World, in Duties of Charity and Bounty, and
decay not in any of them. But I say, it is usual that the Entrances of Men's
Profession of Religion and Conversation unto God, are attended with vigorous
active Affections toward Spiritual things. Of them who really and sincerely
believed, it is said that on their believing, they rejoiced with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory. And of those who only had a work of Conviction
on them, improved by temporary Faith, that they received the Word with Joy, and
did many things gladly.

In this State do many abide and thrive, until their Affections be wholly
transformed into the Image and likeness of things above. But with many of all
sorts it is not so; they fall into woeful Decays as unto their Affections about
Spiritual things, and consequently in their whole Profession and Conversation,
their Moisture becomes as the drought in Summer. They have no Experience of the
Life and Actings of them in themselves, nor any Comfort, or Refreshment from
them; they honor not the Gospel with any Fruits of Love, Zeal, or Delight, nor
are useful any way unto others by their Example. Some of them have had seeming
Recoveries, and are yet again taken into a lifeless Frame: Warnings,
Aflictions, Sicknesses, the Word have awakened them, but they are fallen again
into a dead Sleep; so as that they seem to be Trees whose Fruit withers,
without Fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the Roots.

Some things must be spoken unto this woeful Condition in general, as that which
is directly opposite unto the Grace and Duty of being Spiritually Minded; and
contrary unto, and obstructive of the Growth of Spiritual Affections in an
Assimulation unto Heavenly things. And what shall be spoken may be applied unto
all the Degrees of these Decays, though all of them are not alike dangerous or
perilous.

First, There may be a time of Temptation, wherein a Soul may apprehend in it
self not only a Decay in, but an utter Loss of all Spiritual Affections, when
yet it is not so. As Believers may apprehend and Judge that the Lord has
forsaken and forgotten them when he has not done so, Isaiah 49.14, 15. So they
may under their Temptations apprehend, that they have forsaken God, when they
have not done so: As a man in the Night may apprehend he has lost his way, and
be in great Distress, when he is in his proper Road. For Temptation brings
Darkness and Amazement, and leads into Mistakes and a false Judgment in all
things. They find not, it may be, Grace working in Love, Joy, and Delight as
formerly, nor that Activity of Heart and Mind in Holy Duties which Spiritual
Affections gave unto them. But yet it may be, the same Grace works in Godly
Sorrow, by Mourning, Humiliation, and Self-Abasement, no less effectually, nor
less acceptably unto God. Such as these I separate from the present
Consideration.

Secondly, There may be a Decay in Affections themselves as unto their actings
toward any Objects whatever; at least as unto the outward Symptoms and Effects
of them, and on this ground, their Opperations toward Spiritual things may be
less sensible. So men in their younger days may be more ready to express their
Sorrow by tears, and their Joy by sensible Exaltation and Motion of their
Spirits, than in riper Years. And this may be so, when there is no Decay of
Grace in the Affections as renewed. But

(1) When it is so, it is a Burden unto them in whom it is. They cannot but
mourn and have a Godly-Jealousy over themselves, least the Decays they find,
should not be in the Outward, but the Inward, not in the natural, but the
Spiritual Man. And they will labor that in all Duties, and at all times it may
be with them, as in Days of old, although they cannot attain Strength in them
that vigor of Spirit, that Life, Joy, Peace, and Comfort which any have had
Experience of.

Secondly, There will be in such Persons, no Decays in Holiness of Life, nor
as unto Diligence in all Religious Duties. If the Decay be really of Grace in
the Affections, it will be accompanied with a proportionable Decay in all other
things, wherein the Life of God is concerned. But if it be only as unto the
sensible Actings of natural Affections, no such Decay will ensue.

Thirdly, Grace will in this case more vigorously act it self in the other
Faculties and Powers of the Soul, as the Judgment and the Will in their
Approbation of, and firm adherence unto Spiritual things. But

Fourthly, When men find, or may find their Affections yet quick, active, and
intent on other things, as the lawful Enjoyments and Comforts of this Life, it
is in vain for them to relieve themselves, that the Decays they find, are in
their Affections as natural, and not as they ought to be gracious. If we see a
man in his old age grow more in Love with the things of this World, and less in
Love with the things of God, it is not through the weakness of nature, but
through the strength of Sin.

On these, and it may be, some other the like Occasions, there may be an
Apprehension of a Decay in Spiritual Affections, when it may not be so, at
least not unto the Degree that is apprehended. But when it is so really, as it
is evidently with many, I had almost said with the most in these Days, it is a
woeful Frame of Heart, and never enough to be lamented. It is that which lies in
direct Contradiction unto that Spiritual-Mindedness which is Life and Peace. It
is a Consumption of the Soul which threatens it with Death every day.

It belongs not unto my Design to treat of it in particular; yet I cannot let
it pass without some remarks upon it, it being an Evil almost epidemical among
Professors, and prevalent in some unto such a Degree, as that they seem to be
utterly forsaken of all Powers of Spiritual Life.

Now besides all that Folly and Sin which we before discovered as the Causes of
the want of the Growth of our Affections in Spirituality and Heavenliness,
which in this case of their Decay are more abominable, there is a
multiplication of Evils wherewith this State of Heart and Mind is accompanied.
For

First, It is that which of all things, the Lord Christ is most displeased with
in Churches or Professors. He pitties them in their Temptations, he suffers
with them in their Persecution, he interceeds for them on their Surprizal but
threatens them under their Spiritual Decays Rev. 2.4, 5. Chap. 3.2. This he
cannot bear with, as that which both reflects Dishonor upon himself, and which
he knows to be ruinous unto those in whom it is. He will longer bear with them
who are utterly dead, than with those who abide under these Decays, Rev. 3.15,
16. This is the only Case wherein he threatens to reject and cast off a
Professing Church, to take away his Candlestick from it, unless it be that of
False Worship and Idolatry. He that spoke thus unto the Churches of old, speaks
now the same unto us; for he lives for ever, and is always the same, and his
Word is living and unchangeable. There is not one of us who are under this
Frame, but the Lord Christ by his Word and Spirit testifyeth his displeasure
against us; and if he be against us, who shall plead for us. Consider what he
says in this Case, Revel. 2.5. Chapter 3.3. O who can stand before these
dreadful Intimations of his Displeasure! The Lord help us to mind it, least he
in whom we profess to place our only trust, be in our Trial found our greatest
Enemy. Take heed of such sins as Christ himself our only Advocate has put a
mark upon, as those which he will not save us in.

Secondly, It is that wherewith above all things the Holy Spirit is grieved.
His work it is to give Grace an Increase and Progress in our Souls. He begins
it, and he carries it on. And there can be no greater grief unto a wise and
gracious Worker, than to have his work decay and go backward under his hand.
This is the Occasion of those Complaints of God which we find in the Scripture,
of the unprofitableness and backsliding of Men after the use of means and
remedies for their Fruitfulness and Cure. What, says he, could I have done
more for my Vineyard than I have done? Why then, when I looked for Grapes, did
it bring forth wild Grapes. Can any thing be apprehended to be such a just
matter of Grief and Complaint unto the Holy Spirit, to see and find those whom
he had once raised up unto Holy and Heavenly Affections, so as that their
Delights were in, and their Thoughts much upon the things that are above, to
become Earthly or sensual, to have no sensible Actings of any of his Graces in
them which is the State of them who are under the Power of Spiritual Decays.
And this is the only cause wherein God speaks unto men in the way of complaint
and Expostulation; and uses all sorts of Arguments to convince them of their
Folly herein.

When a wise, tender, and careful Parent, has been diligent in the use of all
means for the Education of his Child, and he for some time has given good
hopes of himself, finds him to slacken in his diligence, to be careless in his
calling, to delight in evil Company, how solicitous is his heart about him, how
much is he grieved, and affected with his miscarriage. The heart of the Spirit
of God is infinitely more tender toward us, than that of the most affectionate
Parent can be toward an only Child. And when he with Cost and Care has
nourished, and brought us up unto some Growth and Progress in Spiritual
Affections, wherein all his Concerns in us do lie, for us to grow cold, dull,
earthly-Minded, to cleave unto the Pleasures, or Lusts of this World, how is he
grieved, how is he provoked. It may be this Consideration of grieving the Holy
Spirit, is of no great weight with some; they should have little Concernment
herein, if they could well free themselves in other Respects; but let such
Persons know, it is impossible for them to give a greater Evidence of a
profligate hardness in Sin.

Thirdly, This is that which in an especial manner provokes the Judgments of
God against any Church, as was intimated before When in the Order of Profession
and Worship, any Church has a Name to live, but as to the Power of Grace
acting in the Affections, is dead: when it is not so cold as to forsake the
external Institutions of Worship, nor so hot as to enliven their Duties with
Spiritual Affections, the Lord Christ will not long bear with them; yea,
Judgment, will suddenly break out toward such an House of God.

Fourthly, It is absolutely inconsistent with all Comfortable Assurance of the
Love of God. Whatever Persons under the Power of such a Frame, pretend unto of
that kind, it is sinful Security, not gracious Assurance or Peace. And
constantly as Professors grow cold and decay in their Spiritual Affections,
Stupidity of Conscience, and Security of Mind do grow also upon them. It is so,
I say, unless they are sometimes surprised or overtaken with some greater Sin,
which reflects severely on their Consciences, and casts them for a time under
Troubles and Distresses. But that Peace with God, and a comfortable Assurance
of Salvation, should be consistent with an habitual Decay in Grace, especially
in those Graces which should act themselves in our Affections, is contrary to
the whole Tenor and Testimony of the Scripture; and the Supposition of it
would be the Bane and Poison of Religion. I do not say that our Assurance and
Peace with God, do arise wholly from the Actings of Grace in us; there are
other Causes of them, whereinto they are principally resolved: But this I say,
under an habitual Declension, or Decay of Grace in the Spirituality of our
Affections, no man can keep or maintain a gracious Sense of the Love of God, or
of Peace with him. And therefore there is no Duty more severely to be pressed
on all at this Day, than a diligent Examination and Trial of the grounds of
their Peace; least it should be with any of them as it was with Luodicen, who
was satisfied in her good State and Condition, when it was most miserable, and
almost desperate. Yea, I must say, that it is impossible that many Professors,
whom we see and converse withal, should have any solid Peace with God. Do men
gather Figs from Thorns, or Grapes from Thistles? It is a Fruit that will not
grow on a vain, earthly, selfish Frame of Mind and Conversation. And therefore
such Persons whatever they pretend, are either asleep in a sinful Security, or
live on most uncertain Hopes, which probably may deceive them. Nothing can be
so ruinous unto our Profession as once to suppose it is an easy Matter, a thing
of Course, to maintain our Peace with God. God forbid but that our utmost
Diligence, and continued Endeavors to thrive in every Grace should be required
thereunto. The whole Beauty and Glory of our Religion depends hereon. To be
Spiritually-Minded is Life and Peace.

5. Such a decay as that described, is a dangerous Symtom of an Evil State and
Condition, and that those in whom it is, will at last be found to be but
Hypocrites. I know such Persons will, or may have pretended Evidences unto the
contrary, and that they are well enough satisfied of, and with their own
Sincerity in many things; so as that it is impossible to fix upon the the Sense
and Conviction of being but Hypocrites. But this Apprehension arises from a
false notion of Hypocrisy. No man they suppose is an Hypocrite, but he that
generally, or universally pretends himself in Religion to be what he is not,
and what he knows himself not to be, or at least, might easily do so. And it is
true, that this is the broadest Notion of Pharisaical Hypocrisy. But take an
Hypoerite for him, who under Light, Profession, Gifts, Duties, does habitually
and willingly fail in any Point of sincerity, he is no less a perishing
Hypocrite than the former, and it may alter the Case with them. I do not say
that every one in whom there is this prevalent Decay in Spiritual Affections,
is an Hypocrite; God forbid: I only say that where it continues without Remedy,
it is such a Symtome of Hypocrisy, as that he who is wise, and has a care of
his Soul, will not rest until he has searched it unto the bottom. For it
seems as if it were thus with such Persons* They have had a false or imperfect
Work in that Conversion unto God which they have professed. Conviction of Sin,
Communication of Spiritual Light and Gifts, Alteration upon the Affections,
Change of Socicty and Conversation, have made it up. Now it is the nature of
such a Work greatly to flourish for a Season, in all the principal Parts and
Duties of Profession. But it is in its Nature also gradually to decay, until it
be quite withered away. In some it is lost by the Power of some vigorous
Temptations, and particular Lusts indulged unto, ending in Worldliness and
Sensuality; but in the most it decays gradually, until it has lost all its
Savor and Sap, see Joh. 15.3. Wherefore, whilst men find this Decay in
themselves, unless they are fallen under the Power of a destructive Security,
unless they are hardened through be Deceitfulness of Sin, they cannot but think
it their Duty to examine how things stand with them, whether they ever
effectually closed with Christ, and had the Faith of Gods Elect, which works by
Love; seeing it is with them, as though they had only a work of another nature.
For a Saving Work in its own nature, and in the diligent use of Means, Thrives,
and Grows, as the whole Scripture testifyeth: but it is this false and
imperfect working, that has no Root, and is thus subject to withering.

Sixthly, Persons in such an Estate are apt to deceive themselves with false
Hopes and Notions, whereby the Deceitfulness of Sin does put forth its Power,
to harden them unto their Ruin. Two ways there are whereby this pernicious
Effect is produced. The one by the prevalency of a particular Lust or Sin, the
other by a neglect of Spiritual Duties, and a vain Conversation in the World,
under which the Soul pines away and consumes.

As unto the first of these, there are three false Notions, whereby the
Deceitfulness of Sin, deludes the Souls of Men.

The First is, that it is that one Sin alone wherein they would be indulged.
Let them be spared in this one thing, and in all other they will be exact
enough. This is the Composition that Naaman would have made in the Matters of
Religion, 2 Kings 5.18. And it is that which many trust unto. Hence it has by
the Event been made to appear, that some Persons have lived long in the
Practice of some gross Sins, and yet all the while used a Semblance of great
diligence in other Duties of Religion. This is a false Notion whereby poor
Sinners delude their own Souls. For suppose it possible that a man should give
himself up unto any Lust, or be under the Power of it, and yet be observant of
all other Duties, yet this would give him no Relief as unto the Eternal
Condition of his Soul. The Rule is peremptory unto this purpose, Jam. 2.10, 11.
One Sin willingly lived in, is as able to destroy a Man's Soul, as a thousand.
Besides, it is practically false. There is no man that lives in any one known
Sin, but he really lives in more, though that only bears the chiefest Sway.
With some such Persons, these Sins appear unto others, who observe their Frame
and Spirit, though they appear not to themselves; In some they are manifest in
themselves, although they are hidden from others, 1 Timothy 5.24. But let no man
relieve himself with thoughts that it is but one Sin, whilst that one Sin
keeps him in a constant Neglect of God. Hence,

Secondly, They deceive themselves hereby, for they Judge that although they
cannot as yet shake off their Sin, yet they will continue still to love God,
and abound in the Duties of his Worship. They will not become Haters of God and
his Ways, and Persecutors for all the World, and therefore hope that
notwithstanding this one Zoar, this lesser Sin, which their Constitution and
their Circumstances engage them in, that it may be well with them at the last.
This also is a false Notion, a mere Instrument in the hand of Sin to act its
Deceit by. For no man that willingly lives in any Sin, can love God at all, as
is evident in that Rule, 1 John 2.15. It is but a false Pretense of Love to
God, that any man has, who lives in any known Sin. Where God is not loved
above all, he is not loved at all: And he is not so where men will not part
with one Cursed Lust for his Sake. Let not your Light deceive you, nor your
Gifts, nor your Duties, nor your Profession; if you live in Sin, you love not
God.

Thirdly, They determine that at such or such a Season on time, after such
Satisfaction given unto their Lusts or Pleasures, they will utterly give over,
so as that Iniquity shall not be their Ruin. But this is a false Notion also,
an effectual Instrument of the Deceitfulness of Sin. He that will not now give
over, who will not imediately upon the Discovery of the Prevalency of any Sin,
and warning about it, endeavor sincerely and constantly its Relinquishment,
say what he will, and pretend what he will, he never intends to give over; nor
is it probable in an ordinary way, that ever he will do so. When men's Decays
are from the Prevalency of particular Sins, by these and the like false Notions
do they harden themselves unto Ruin.

For those who are pining away under Hectical Consumption, a general Decay of
the vital Spirits of Religion, they have also false Notions, whereby they
deceive themselves. As

First, that although they have some Cause to mistrust themselves, yet indeed
their Condition is not so bad as some may apprehend it, or as they are warned
it is. And this arises from hence, that they have not as yet been overtaken
with any enormous Sin, which has filled their Consciences with Terror and
Disquietment. But this is a false Notion also; for every Decay is dangerous,
especially, such as the Mind is ready to plead for, and to countenance it self
in.

Secondly, They are prone to suppose that this Decay does not arise from
themselves, and the Evil of their own Hearts; but from their Circumstances,
Business, present Occasion, and State of Life, which when they are freed from,
they will at least return unto their former Love, and Delight in Spiritual
things. But this is a false Notion also, by virtue of that Rule, Heb. 3.12. Let
men's Circumstances and Occasions of Life be what they will, all their
Departures from God, are from an Evil Heart of Unbelief.

Thirdly, They judge it no hard matter to retrive themselves out of this State,
but that which they can easily do, when there is an absolute Necessity of it.
But this is a false Notion also. Recovery from backsliding is the hardest task
in Christian Religion, and which few make either comfortable, or honorable
work of.

In this State, I say, men are apt by such false reasonings to deceive
themselves unto their eternal Ruin; which makes the consideration of it the
more necessary.

Wherefore, I say, lastly upon the whole, that who so find themselves under the
Power of this wretched Frame, who are sensible in themselves, or at least make
it evident unto others, that they are under a Decay in their Spiritual
Condition; if they rest in that State, without groaning, laboring,
endeavoring for deliverance from it, they can have no well grounded hopes in
themselves of Life and Immortality; yea, they are in those Paths which go down
unto the Chambers of Death.

I cannot let this pass without something of advice unto them who find
themselves under such decays, are sensible of them, and would be delivered
from them, and I shall give it in a few Words.

First, Remember former things, call to mind how it was with you in the Spring
and vigor of your Affections, and compare your present State, Enjoyment, Peace
and Quiet with what they were then. This will be a great Principle of Return to
God, Hos. 2.7. And to put a little weight upon it, we may consider.

First, God himself makes it on his part a ground and reason of his Return unto
us, in a way of Mercy, and of the Continuance of his Love, Jer. 2.2. Even when
a People are under manifold Decays, whilst yet they are within the Bounds of
Gods Covenant and Mercy, he will remember their first Love with the Fruits and
Actings of it in Trials and Temptations, which moves his Compassion toward
them. And the way to have God thus remember it, is for us to remember with
Delight and longing of Soul that it were with us as in those Days of old, when
we had the Love of Espousals for God in Christ, Jeremiah 31.18, 19, 20.

Secondly, It is the way whereby the Saints of old have refreshed and
encouraged themselves under their greatest Despondencies. So does the Psalmist
in many places, as for Instance, Psalm. 42.6. O my God, my Soul is cast down
within me: therefore will I remember thee from the Land of Jordan, and of the
Hermonites, from the Hill Missar. David in the time of his Persecution by Saul,
when he wandered up and down in Deserts, Wildernesses, and Solitudes, had under
his Fears, Distresses, and Exercise, great, holy, Spiritual Communion with God,
as many of his Psalms composed on such Occasions do testify. And the greater
his distresses were, the more fervent were his Affections in all his Adresses
unto God. And he was never in greater than when he escaped out of the Cave at
Adullam, and went thence unto Mizpheh of Moab, to get shelter for his Parents,
1 Samuel 22.13. Then was he in the Land of the Hermonites, the Hill Hermon, being
the boundary eastward of the Israelites Possession next to Moab, Deuteronomy. 3.8, 9.
There no doubt David had a blessed Exercise of his Faith, and of all his
Affections toward God, wherein his Soul found great Refreshment. Being now in
great Distress and Disconsolation of Spirit, among other things under a Sense
that God had forgotten him, verse. 9. He calls to mind the blessed Experience he
had of Communion with God in the Land of the Hermonites, wherein he now found
Support and Refreshment. So at other times, he called to remembrance the Days
of old, and in them his Song in the Night, or the sweet Refreshment he had in
Spiritual Converse with God in former times. I have known one in the depth of
distress and darkness of Mind, who going through Temptation to destroy himself,
was re^^eved and delivered in the instant of Ruin, by a sudden Remembrance
that at such a time, and in such a place, he had prayed fervently with the
engagement of all his Affections unto God.

Wherefore you that are sensible of these Decays, or ought so to be, take the
Advice of our Savior, Remember whence you are fallen; call to mind the former
days; consider if it were not better with you than now; when in your lying
down, and your rising up, you had many thoughts of God, and of the things of
God, and they were sweet and precious unto your Souls? when you rejoiced at the
Remembrance of his Holiness? When you had Zeal for his Glory, Delight in his
Worship, and were glad when they said, Let us go to the House of God together?
When you poured forth your Souls with Freedom, and enlarged Affections before
him, and were sensible of the Visits and Refreshments of his Love? Remember
what Peace, what Tranquillity of Mind, what Joy you had whilst it was so with
you. And consider what you have gotten since you have forsaken God, in any
Measure or Degree. Dare to deal plainly with your selves. Is not all wherein
you have now to do with God, either Form, Custom, and Selfishness, or attended
with Trouble, Disquietment, and Fears? Do you truly know, either how to live,
or how to die? Are you not sometimes a Terror unto yourselves? It must be so,
unless you are hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. What have all your
Lovers done for you, that you have entertained in the room of God in Christ,
and Spiritual things? Speak plainly, have they not defiled you, wounded you,
weakened you, and brought you into that Condition, that you know not what you
are, nor to whom ye do belong? What are your thoughts when you are most awake,
when you are most your selves? Do you not sometimes part within your selves,
and say, O that it were with us as in former Days.

And it you can be no way affected with the Remembrance of former things; then
one of these two great Evils, you are certainly under. For either, (1) you
never had a true and real Work on your Souls, whatever you professed; and so
never had true and real Communion with God in any Duties. You had only a
temporary Work, which excited your Affections for a season, which now it is
worn off, leaves no sweet Remembrance of it self upon your Minds. Had your
Faith and Love been sincere in what you did, it were impossible but that the
Remembrance of their Actings in some especial Instances, should be sweet and
refreshing unto you. Or else,

(2) You are hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin, and there is no way
left to give a Sense or Impression of Spiritual things upon your Minds. You
have truly nothing left in Religion, but the Fear of Hell, and trouble of
Duties. I speak not to such at present.

As unto those unto whom this Frame is a Burden; there is no more effectual
means to stir them unto Endeavors for Deliverance, than a continual
Remembrance of former things, and Experiences they have had of holy Intercourse
and Communion with God. This will revive, quicken, and strengthen the things
that are ready to dye, and beget a Self-Abhorrency in them, in consideration of
that woeful Frame and temper of Mind, which by their Sins and Negligence they
have brought themselves into.

2dly. Consider that as there are many things dreadfully pronounced in the
Scripture against Backsliding and Backsliders in heart, as it is with you, yet
also there are especial Calls and Promises given and proposed unto those in
your Condition. And know assuredly, that upon your Compliance or Noncompliance
with them, depends your everlasting Blessedness or Woe.

Consider both Call and Promise in that Word of Gods Grace, Jer. 3.12, 13, 14.
Go and proclaim these Words toward the North, and say, Return thou Backsliding
Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine Anger to fall upon you: for I
am merciful, faith the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Only
acknowledge thine Iniquity that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy
God, and have scattered thy ways to the Strangers under every green Tree, and
ye have not obeyed my Voice, says the Lord. Turn, O backsliding Children,
says the Lord, for I am married unto you: and I will take you one of a City,
and two of a Family, and I will bring you to Zion. Add thereunto this blessed
Promise, Hos. 14.4. I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for
mine anger is turned away from them. If you design to live and not die, it must
be by yielding Obedience unto this Call, and pleading this Promise before God,
mixing it with Faith. Your Return must be by the Word, Isai. 57.18, 19. Here
lies your great Encouragement and Direction, herein lies your only Relief. As
you value your Souls, defer not the Duty you are called unto one moment. You
know not how soon you may be without the reach of Calls and Promises. And he
that can hear them without stirring up himself in Sincerity to comply with
them, has made already a great Progress toward that length.

(3) As unto those who on these and the like Considerations, do not only
desire, but will endeavor also to retrieve themselves from this Condition, I
shall give no advice at present but this; be in good earnest. As the Prophet
speaks in another Case; if you will return, return and come, make through work
of it. You must do so at one time or another or you will perish. Why not now?
Why is not this the best Season? Who knows but it may be the only time you will
have for it? It were easy to multiply all sorts of Arguments unto this purpose.
Trifling Endeavors, Occasional Resolutions and Attempts like the early Cloud,
and morning Dew, shifting with Warnings and Convictions, by renewed Duties
until their Impressions are worn out, will ruin your Souls. Unless there be
universal Diligence and Permanency in your Endeavors, you are undone. Then
shall ye know the Lord, if you follow on to know him.

But now to return. These things I say, through our Sloth, Negligence, and Sin
may befall us, as unto our Spiritually renewed Affections. Their Progress in
Conformity unto Spiritual and Heavenly things, may be slow, imperceptible, yea,
totally obstructed for a season; and not only so, but they may fall under
Decays, and the Soul therein be guilty of backsliding from God. But this is
that which they are capacitated for by their Renovation; this is that whereby
the Grace wherewith they are renewed does lead unto; this is that which in the
diligent use of means, they will grow up unto, whereon our Comfort and Peace do
depend; namely, an holy Assimulation unto those Spiritual and heavenly things
which they are set and fixed on, wherein they are renewed and made more
Spiritual and Heavenly every day.

CHAP. XVIII.
IT remains only as unto this Head now spoken unto, that we briefly consider
what is the State of Spiritual Affections thus daily exercised and improved.
And this we shall do by showing,

(1) What is their Pattern.

(2) What is their Rule.

(3) What is their Measure, or whereunto they may attain.

First, The Pattern which we ought continually to bear in our Eyes, whereunto
our Affections ought to be conformed is Jesus Christ, and the Affections of his
holy Soul. The Mind is the Seat of all our Affections; and this is that we
ought continually to design and endeavor, namely, that the same Mind be in us,
that was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. To have our Minds so affected with
Spiritual things, as was the Mind of Christ, is the principal Part of our Duty
and Grace. Nor do I think that any man can attain any considerable Degree in
Spiritual Mindedness, who is not much in the Contemplation of the same Mind in
Christ, 2 Cor. 3.18. To this purpose ought we to furnish our Minds with
Instances of the holy Affections that were in Christ, and their blessed
Exercise on all Occasions. The Scripture makes a full Representation of them
unto us, and we ought to be conversant in our Meditations on them. What
glorious things are spoken of his Love to God, and his Delight in him, whence
also he delighted to do his Will, and his Law was in the midst of his Bowels;
Psalm. 40.8 Seated in the throne of his Affections. What Pity and Compassion
had he for the Souls of men, yea for whole humane Kind, in all their
Sufferings, Pains, and Distresses? How were all his Affections always in
Perfection of Order under the Conduct of the Spirit of his Mind? Thence was his
Self-denial, his Contempt of the World, his Readiness for the Cross, to do or
suffer according to the Will of God. If this Pattern be continually before us,
it will put forth a transforming Efficacy, to change us into the same Image.
When we find our Minds liable unto any Disorders, cleaving inordinately unto
the things of this World, moved with intemperate Passions, vain and frothy in
Conversation, darkened, or disturbed by the Fumes of distempered Lusts, let us
call things to an account, and ask of our selves, whether this be the Frame of
Mind that was in Christ Jesus; This therefore is an Evidence that our
Affections are Spiritually renewed, and that they have received some Progress
in an Assimulation unto heavenly things; namely, when the Soul is delighted in
making Christ their Pattern in all things.

Secondly, The Rule of our Affections in their utmost Spiritual Improvement is
the Scripture. And two things are respected in them.

(1) Their Internal Actings.

(2) Their Exercise in outward Ways and Means whereby they are expressed. Of
them both the Scripture is the entire Rule. And with respect unto the former,
it gives us one general Law or Rule that is comprehensive of all others;
namely, that we Love the Lord our God with all our hearts, Souls, Minds and
Strength. The Actings of all our Affections toward God in the utmost Degree of
Perfection is required of us; that in all Instances we prefer and value him
above all things; that we inseperably cleave unto him, and do nothing whatever
at any time, that is not influenced and directed by the Love of God. This
Perfection, as we shall see immediately, is not attainable absolutely in this
Life; But it is proposed unto us as that which the Excellency of Gods Nature
requires, and which the Faculties and Powers of our nature were creared for,
and which we ought in all things to design and aim at. But the indispensible
Obligation of this Rule is, that we should always be in a sincere Endeavor to
cleave unto God continually in all things, to prefer him above all, and delight
in him as our chiefest Good. When this Frame and Disposition is habitually
fixed in our Minds, it will declare and act it self in all Instances of Duties
on all Occasions of Trial, when other things put in for a predominant Interest
in our Affections, as they do every day. And if it be not so with us, we shall
be at a continual Loss in all our Ways. This is that which makes us lifeless
and heartless in Duties, careless in Temptations or Occasions of them,
forgetful of God, when it is impossible we should be preserved from Sin without
a due Remembrance of his Holiness. In brief, the want of a Predominant Love
unto God, kept in continual Exercise, is the Spring of all that unprofitable
Profession of Religion that the World is filled withal.

Secondly, There are Outward Ways and Duties whereby our Spiritual Affections
are expressed. The Rule of them also is the Scripture. The way marked out
therein, is the only Channel wherein the Stream of our Spiritual Affections
does take its Course unto God. The Graces required therein, are to act
themselves by: the Duties it prescribes, ar^ those which they stir up and
enliven; the Religious Worship it appoints is that wherein they have their
Exercise. Where this Rule has been neglected, men's Religious Affections have
grown irregular, yea wild and ungovernable. All the Superstitions that the
World is filled withal, owe their original principally unto men's Affections set
at loose from the Rule of the word There is nothing so fond, absurd, and
foolish, but they have imbondaged the ^ouls of Men unto, nothing so horrid and
difficult but they have engaged them in. And having once taken unto themselves
this Liberty, the corrupt Minds of men are a thousand times more satisfied,
than in the regular exercise of them according to the Word of God. Hence they
will rejoice in such Penances as are not without their Austeritys; in such
outward Duties of Devotion, as are troublesome and chargeable; in every thing
that has a Show of Wisdom in Will Worship, and humility, and neglect of the
Body. Hence will all their Affections be more sensibly moved by Images and
Pictures, and a melting Devotion be stirred up in them, than by all the Motives
and Incentives which God proposes unto them to draw their Affections unto
himself. Nothing is more extravagant than the Affections of Men, tinctured with
some Devotion, if they forsake the Rule of the Scripture.

Thirdly, There is considerable concerning them, the measure of their
Seize, or what through due Exercise and holy Diligence they may be raised
unto. Now this is not absolute Perfection. Not as though I had already
attained, or were already perfect, but I follow after, as the Apostle speaks,
Phil. 3.12. But there is that attainable, which those who pretend highly unto
Perfection, seem to be Strangers unto. And the State of our Affections under a
due Exercise on heavenly things, and in their Assimulation unto them, may be
fixed in these three things.

(1) An habitual Suitableness unto Spiritual things, upon the proposal of them.
The ways whereby Spiritual things are proposed unto our Minds are various.
They are so directly in all Ordinances of Divine Worship; they are so
indirectly and in just consequence, by all the especial Providence wherein we
are concerned, by our own thoughts and stated Meditations; they are so by the
motions of the Holy Spirit, when he causes us to hear a lord behind us saying,
this is the Way, walk in it; by holy Converse with others; by all sorts of
occurrences. And as the ways of their Proposal are various, so the Times and
Seasons wherein a Representation of them is made unto us, are comprehensive of
all, at least are not exclusive of any times and seasons of our Lives. Be the
way of their Proposal what it will, and when ever be the season of it, if our
affections are duly improved by Spiritual Exercises, they are suited unto
them, and will be ready to give them Entertainment. Hence, or for want hereof
on the other hand are ^ergiversations and Shiftings in Duties, Proneness to
comply with Diversion, all to keep off the Mind from closing with, and
receiving of those Spiritual things which it is not suited unto. Wherefore as
unto the solemn way of proposing Spiritual things unto our Minds which is in
and by the Ordinances of Divine Worship, when men have a prevalent loathness to
engage in them, or when they are satisfied with an outward Attendance on them,
but not enabled unto a vigorous stirring up of the inward man unto an holy
affectionate converse with Spiritual and heavenly things, it is because they
are carnal. When men can receive the fiery Darts of Satan in his Temptations
into their Bosoms, and suffer them to abide there, yea, foster and cherish them
in thoughts of the Lusts that they kindle, but quickly quench the Motions of
the Spirit, stirring them up unto the embracing of heavenly things; they are
carnal, and carnally-Minded. When Providence of Concernment in Afflictions,
Trials, Deliverances, do not engage the Mind into thoughts of Spiritual things,
and excite the Affections unto the Entertainment of them, Men are carnal and
earthly, When every Lust, Corruption, or Passion, as Anger, Envy, Displeasure
at this or that Person or thing, can divert the Mind from compliance with the
Proposal of Spiritual things that is made unto it, we are carnal.

It is otherwise when our Affections are conformed unto things Spiritual and
Heavenly. Upon every Proposal of this the Mind finds a suitableness unto it
self, like that which a well disposed Appetite finds unto savoury Meat. As the
full Soul loathes the Honeycomb, so a Mind under the Power of Carnal Affections,
has an Aversation unto all Spiritual Sweetness. But Spiritualized Affections
desire them, have an appetite unto them, readily receive them on all Occasions,
as those which are natural unto them, as milk is unto newborn Babes.

(2) Affections so disposed constantly, find a Gust, a pleasant Taste, a Relish
in Spiritual things. They do in them taste that the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet.
2.3. To taste of Gods Goodness, is to have an Experience of a savoury Relish and
Sweetness, in Converse and Communion with him. And Persons whose Affections are
thus renewed, and thus improved do taste a sweet Savor in all Spiritual things
Some of them, as a sense of the Love of Christ, are sometimes as it were too
hard for them, and overpower them, until they are sick of Love, and do rejoice
with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Neither is there any of them however
condited with Afflictions or Mortifications, but it is sweet unto them, Prove.
27.7. Every thing that is wholesome Food, that is good Nourishment, though it be
but bitter Herbs, is sweet to him that is hungry And when by our Affections we
have raised up in us a Spiritual Appetite unto heavenly things, however any of
them in their own nature, or in their Dispensation may be bitter to Flesh and
Blood, as are all the Doctrines of the Cross, they are all sweet unto us, and
we can taste how gracious the Lord is in them. When the Soul is filled with
earthly things, the Love of this World, or when the Appetite is lost by
Spiritual Sickness, or vitiated and corrupted by any prevalent Sin, heavenly
things are unsavory and sapless, or as Job speaks, like the white of an Egg
wherein there is no taste. There may be in the Dispensation of the Word a Taste
or pleasing Relish given unto the Fancy; there may be so unto the notional
Understanding, when the Affections find no Complacency in the things
themselves. But unto them who are Spiritually Minded unto the Degree intended,
they are all sweet, savoury, pleasant; the Affections taste them immediately, as
the Palate does Meat.

(3) They are a just Repository of all Graces, and therein the Treasury of the
Soul. There are Graces of the Spirit whose formal direct Residence is in the
Understanding and the Will, as faith it self. And therein are all other Graces
radically comprised, they grow from the Root. Howbeit the most of them have
their principal Residence in the Affections. In them are they preserved secure
and ready for Exercise on all Occasions. And when they are duly Spiritual,
there is nothing that tends to their Growth or Improvement, to their cherishing
or quickening, which they stand in need of continually, and which God has made
Provision for in his Word, but they reaedily receive it, lay it up, keep and
preserve it. Hereby they come to be filled with Grace, with all Graces; for
there is room in them for all the Graces of the Spirit to inhabit; and do
readily comply with the Light and Direction of Faith unto their Exercise. When
Faith discerns and determines that there is any thing to be done or suffered in
a way of Duty unto the Glory of God, the Affections thus disposed, do not shut
up or stifle the Graces that are in them, but chcarefully offer them unto their
proper Exercise.

There are some of those things, which our Affections conformed unto Heavenly
things, will attain unto. And thus it is with Affections Spiritually renewed,
by being fixed on things Spiritual and Heavenly, they are more and more
conformed unto them, made like them, and become more spiritual and heavenly
themselves.

It is not thus with them whose Affections have only an Occasional Change
wrought upon them by the means before described, but are not Spiritually
renewed. Yea, on the contrary, such Persons do design to debate Spiritual
things, to bring down heavenly things into a Conformity with their Affections,
which however changed, are not Spiritual, but Carnal. To evince this, we may
observe.

(1) These Affections are under the Light and Conduct of such Notions in the
Mind and Understanding, as do not give a clear distinct Representation of them
in their own nature unto them. For where they are not themselves Spiritually
renewed, there the Mind it self is Carnal and unrenewed. And such a Mind
discerns not the things of God, nor can do so, because they are spiritually
discerned. They cannot be discerned aright in their own Beauty and Glory, but
in and by a spiritual saving Light which the Mind is devoid of. And where they
are not thus represented, the Affections cannot receive, or cleave unto them as
they ought, nor will ever be conformed unto them.

(2) Those Notions in such Persons are oft-times variously influenced and
corrupted by Fancy and Imagination. They are merely puffed up in their Fleshly
Minds; that is, they are filled with vain, foolish, proud Imaginations about
spiritual things, as the Apostle declares, Col. 2.18, 19. And the work of Fancy
in a fleshly mind, is to raise up such Images of Spiritual things as may render
them suitable unto natural unrenewed Affections.

(3) This in the Progress of it produces Superstition, False Worship, and
Idolatry. For they are all of them an Attempt to represent Spiritual things in
a way suited unto carnal unrenewed Affections; hence men suppose themselves to
be excited by them unto Love, Joy* Fear, Delight, in the things themselves,
when they all respect that false Representation of them, whereby they are
suited unto them as Carnal. These have been the Spring of all false Worship and
Idolatry in the Christian World.

First, The Mind and Affections have been changed and tinctured with Devotion
by some of the means we have before insisted on. Herein they will one way or
other be exercised about Spiritual things, and are ready to receive impressions
from any thing that Superstition can impose upon them.

Secondly, They are by Error and false Information, set at liberty from the
only Rule of their Actings and Exercise, that is the Word of God. Men
satisfied themselves, that so their Affections were engaged about things
Spiritual and Heavenly, it was no matter at all, whether the way of their
Exercise was directed by the Scripture or no. Having thus lost their Guide and
their Way every Ig^u Fatuus, every wandering Meteor, allures them to follow its
Conduct into Foolish Superstitions. Nothing almost is so ridiculous, nothing so
Horrid and difficult, that they will not embrace under the notion of things
Spiritual and Heavenly.

Thirdly, The carnal Minds of men, having no Proper Distinct apprehensions and
notions of Spiritual things in their own Nature, do Endeavor to present them
under such ^otions and Images as may suit them unto their carnal unrenewed
Affections. For it is implanted a most indel^bly upon them, that the end of all
Knowledge of Spiritual things is to propose them unto the Embraces of the
Affections. It were easy to manifest that from these three corrupt Springs,
arose that Flood of Idolatry and False-Worship which spread it self over the
Church of Rome, and with whose Machinations the Minds of men are yet too much
replenished.

Fourthly, Where it is not thus, yet carnal Affections do variously debase
Spiritual things, to bring them into a Conformity with themselves. And this may
proceed so far, until men think wickedly, that God is altogether like unto
them. But I shall not insist on these things any farther.

Lastly, Where Affections are Spiritually renewed, the Person o^ Christ is the
Center of them, but where they are changed only, they tend unto an End in Self.
Where the new man as ^ut on, Christ is all in all, Col. 3.10, 11. He is the
Spring, by his Spirit, that gives them Life, Light, and Being; and he is the
Ocean that receives all their S^^eg^^^. God, even the Father presents not
himself in his Beauty and Amiableness as the Object of our Affections, but as
he is in Christ, acting his Love in him, 1 John 4.8, 9. And as unto all other
Spiritual things, renewed Affections cleave unto them, according as they derive
from Christ, and lead unto him; for he is unto them all and in all. It is he
whom the Souls of his Saints do love for himself, for his own Sake, and all
other things of Religion in and for him. The Air is pleasant and useful, that
without which we cannot live or breath. But if the Sun did not enlighten it,
and warm it with its Beams, if it were always one perpetual Night, and cold,
what Refreshment could be received by it? Christ is the Sun of Righteousness,
and if his Beams do not quicken, animate and enlighten the best, the most
necessary Duties of Religion, nothing desirable would remain in them. This is
the most certain Character of Affections Spiritually renewed. They can rest in
nothing but in Christ: they fix on nothing but what is amiable by a
Participation of his Beauty, and in whatever he is, therein do they find
Complacency. It is otherwise with them whose Affections may be changed, but are
not renewed. That Truth is, and it may be made good by all sorts of Instances,
that Christ in the Mystery of his Person, and in the Glory of his Mediation,
are the only things that they dislike in Religion. False Representations of him
by Images and Pictures they may embrace, and delight in false Notions of his
present Glory; Greatness and Power, may affect them; a Worship of their own
devising they may give unto him, and please themselves in it. Corrupt Opinions
concerning his Office and Grace, may possess their Minds, and they may contend
for them* but those who are not Spiritually renewed, cannot love the Lord Jesus
Christ in Sincerity: yea, they have an inward Secret Aversation from the
Mystery of his Person and his Grace. It is Self which all their Affections
center in, the ways whereof are too long here to be declared.

This is the first thing that is required to render our Affections in such a
State and Condition, as that from and by them we may be Spiritually-Minded,
namely, That they themselves are Spiritually and savingly renewed.

The things that remain will admit of a speedy dispatch as I suppose.

CHAP. XIX.
THE Second thing required that we may be Spiritually Minded, as unto the
Interest of our Affections therein, is the Object of them about which they are
conversant, and whereunto they do adhere. What this is materially, or what are
the Spiritual things which our Affections are to be set upon, has been
declared already under the Consideration of the Object of our Thoughts and
Meditations, for they are the same. Yea, as has been intimated, the fixing of
our Affections upon them, is the Spring and cause of our Thoughts about them.
But that which we shall now enquire into, is the true Notion and Consideration
of Spiritual and Heavenly things, which renders them the formal proper Object
of Spiritual Affections, and is the reason of their Adherance unto them. For as
was intimated before, men may have false Notions of Spiritual things, under
which they may like them and embrace them with unrenewed Affections. Wherefore
we shall enquire into some of those Considerations of Heavenly things, under
which Affections Spiritually renewed do satisfactorily cleave unto them with
Delight and Complacency.

(1.) And the First is, that as they comprehend God in Christ, and all other
things, as deriving from him, and tending unto him, they have an infinite
Beauty, Goodness, and Amiableness in them, which are powerfully attractive of
Spiritual Affections, and which alone are able to fill to them, to satisfy
them, to give them Rest and Acquiescency. Love is the most ruling and prevalent
Affection in the whole Soul* But it cannot be fixed on any Object, without an
Apprehension true or false, of an Amiableness and Desirableness in it from a
suitable Goodness unto all its Desires.

And our Fear so far as it is Spiritual, has divine Goodness for its Object,
Hos. 3.5. Unless this be that which draws our Hearts unto God, and the things
of God, in all Pretense of Love unto him, men do but Frame Idols to themselves
according to their own Understanding, as the Prophet speaks, Hos. 13.2.
Wherefore that our Affections may cleave unto Spiritual things in a due manner
three things are required.

(1) That we apprehend, and do find a Goodness, a Beauty, and thence an
Amiableness, and Desirableness in them* ^^ech. ^.17. Many pretend to love God
and Spiritual things, but they know not why. Why they love other things they
know well enough but why they love God they cannot tell. Many are afraid of
him, and suppose they ought to love him, and therefore pretend so to do though
indeed they know they do not, they do but flatter him with their lips when
their hearts are far from him. Some are much affected with the Benefits and
Mercies they receive from him, and suppose that they love him on that account.
But this love is no other but what the Devil falsely charged Job withal, Chap.
1.8, 9, 10, 11. Some have Delight in the outward Modes and Rites of Divine
Worship, wherewith they satisfy themselves that they love God and Spiritual
things, when they only please their own Imaginations and Carnal Minds. Many
have a Traditional Apprehension that they ought to love God, they know no
reason why they should not, they know it will be ill for them if they do not,
and these take it for granted that they do. How few are there, who have that
Spiritual discerning and apprehension of the divine Excellencies, that view of
the Excellency of the Goodness and Love of God in Christ, as thereby alone to
be drawn after him, and to delight in him, yet is this the ground of all
sincere real love unto God. Two things are required that we may apprehend an
amiable Goodness in any thing, and cleave unto it with sincere Affection.

First, A real Worth or Excellency in it self.

Secondly, A suitableness therein unto our Condition, State, and Desires after
Rest and Blessedness. The first of these is in God, from what he is in himself;
the latter is from what he is unto us in Christ; from both he is the only
suitable Object unto our Affections. Under this Apprehension do we love God for
himself, or for his own sake; not exclusively unto our Advantage therein. For a
desire of Union and Enjoyment, which is our only Advantage, is inseparable from
this Love.

It may be some cannot say that a distinct Apprehension of these things, was
the first Foundation and Cause of their Love to God; yet are they satisfied
that they do love him in Sincerity with all their souls. And I say, it may be
so. God sometimes calls the skirt of his own Love, over the heart of a poor
sinner, and efficaciously draws it unto himself, without a distinct
Apprehension of these things by a mere sense of the Love it has received. So
Elijah passed by Elisha, and cast his Mantle upon him as a transient Act. But
there was such a Communication of Virtue thereby, that he ran after him, and
would not be deferred, though Elijah said, go back again, for what have I done
unto thee, 1 Kings 19.19, 20. When God has so cast his Love on any soul, it
follows after him with all its Affections. And whereas God may seem at some
times to say, go back again, for what have I done unto thee; its Answer is,
Lord, whether shall I go, I cannot leave thee, my Heart is given up unto thee,
and shall never be taken from thee.

But I say unto such and to all others, that if we would have refreshing
Evidences of our Love unto God, that it is sincere, if we would have it thrive
and flourish, befervent and constant, we are to exercise our selves unto the
Contemplation of the Divine Goodness, and the Suitableness of it unto our souls
in and by Jesus Christ. Nor can we cleave unto any spiritual things whatever,
with sincere Affections, but under these Notions of it.

First, That it has a real Worth or Excellency in it self.

Secondly, That it is suitable and desirable unto us. And it is to be bewailed
to see how many walk at random in Profession, that know neither what they do,
nor where they go.

Secondly, As we must see a Goodness and Probableness in Spiritual things
absolutely, so as that we may fix our Affections on them in a due manner, so we
must see it comparatively with respect unto all other things, which gives them
a preference in our Affections before and above them all. The Trial of Love
lies in the prevailing Degree; on more or less. If we love other things,
Father, Mother, Houses, Lands, Possessions more than Christ, we do not love him
at all. Nor is there any Equality allowed in this matter, that we may equally
love temporal and Spiritual things. If we love not Christ more than all those
things, we love him not at all. Wherefore that our Affections may cleave unto
them in a due manner, we must see an Excellency in things Spiritual and
heavenly, rendering them more desirable than all other things whatever.

With what loving Countenances do men look upon their temporal Enjoyments; with
what tenacious Embraces do they cleave unto them? They see that in them which
is amiable, which is desirable and suitable unto their Affections. Let them
pretend what they please, if they see not a greater Goodness, that which is
more amiable, more desirable in Spiritual things, they love them not in a due
manner; it is temporal things that has the Rule of their Affections. Our
Psalmist preferrs Jerusalem before his chiefest Joy, Psalm. 137.6. Another
affirms that the Law of Gods Mouth was better to him than Thousands of Gold and
Silver, Psalm. 119.72. More to be desired are the Statutes of the Lord than
Gold, yea, than much fine Gold, sweeter also than Honey, or the Honeycomb,
Psalm. 19.1. For Wisdom is better than Rubies, and all things that may be
desired are not to be compared unto it, Prove. 8.11. This is the only stable
Foundation of all divine Affections. A spiritual view and Judgment of a
Goodness, an Excellency in them, incomparably above whatever is in the most
desirable things of this World are required thereunto. And if the Affections of
many pretending highly to them, should come to be weighed in this Balance, I
fear they would be found light and wanting. However it is the Duty of them who
would not be deceived in this matter, which is of Eternal importance, to
examine what is that Goodness and Excellency which is in Spiritual things,
which they desire in them, upon the account whereof they do sincerely value and
esteem them above all things in this World whatever. And let not any deceive
themselves with vain Words and Pretenses whilst their Esteem and Valuation of
present Enjoyments, does evidently engage all their Affections, their Care,
their Diligence, their Industry, so as that a man of a discerning Spirit may
even feel them turned into self, whilst they are cold, formal, negligent about
spiritual things, we must say, How dwells the Love of God in them? Much more
when we see men not only giving up the whole of their time and strength, with
the vigor of their Spirits, but sacrificing their Consciences also unto the
attaining of Dignities, Honors, Preferments, Wealth, and Ease in the World,
who know in their own Hearts that they perform Religious Duties with respect
unto temporal Advantages, I cannot conceive how it is possible they should
discern and approve of a Goodness and Excellency in Spiritual things, above all
others.

A due Consideration is required hereunto, that all Spiritual things do proceed
from, and are resolved into an infinite Fountain of Goodness, so as that our
Affections may absolutely come unto Rest and Complacency, and find full assured
Satisfaction in them. It is otherwise as unto all temporal things. Men would
very fain have them to be such, as might give absolute Rest and Satisfaction
unto all their Affections. But they are every one of them so far from it, that
all of them together cannot compose their Minds in Rest and Peace for one hour.
They gain sometimes a Transport of Affections, and seem for a season to have
filled the whole Soul, so as it has no leisure to consider their Emptiness and
Vanity. But a little Composure of Men's thoughts, show that they are but a
Diversion in a Journey or Labor, they are no Rest. Hence are they called
broken Cisterns that will hold no Water. Let a man prize them at the highest
rate that it is possible for a rational Creature to be reduced into the
thoughts of, whereof there have been prodigious Instances; let him possess them
in abundance beyond whatever any man enjoyed in this World, or his own
Imagination could before hand reach unto; let him be assured of the utmost
peaceable Continuance in the Enjoyment of them; that his and their natures are
capable of; yet would he not dare to pretend, that all his Affections were
filled and Satisfied with them, that they afforded him perfect Rest and Peace.
Should he do so, the working of his Mind every Day would convince him of his
Falsehood and his Folly.

But all Spiritual things derive from, and lead unto that which is infinite,
which is therefore able to fill all our Affections, and to give them full
Satisfaction with Rest and Peace. They all lead us to the Fountain of living
Waters, the Eternal Spring of Goodness and Blessedness.

I do not say that our Affections do attain unto this f^ll Rest and
Satisfaction in this Life. But what they come short of therein, arises not
from any defect in the things themselves to give this Rest and Satisfaction, as
it is with the whole World; but from the weakness of our Affections themselves
which are in part only renewed, and cannot take in the full measures of Divine
Goodness, which in another World they will receive. But whilst we are here,
the more we receive them into our Minds and Souls, the more firmly we adhere
unto them, the nearer Approaches we make unto our Rest and Center.

Secondly, Spiritual things are to be considered as they are filled with Divine
Wisdom. I speak not of himself whose Essential Wisdom is one of the most
amiable Excellencies of his holy nature; but of all the Effects of his Will and
Grace by Jesus Christ. All Spiritual Truths, all Spiritual and Heavenly things
whereby God reveals and communicates himself unto the Souls of Men, and all
the ways and means of our approach unto him in Faith and Obedience through
Christ Jesus, I now intend. All these are filled with Divine Wisdom, see 1 Cor.
2.7. Ephesians. 3.10. Chap. 1.8, 9. Now Wisdom in it self, and in all the Effects of
it, is attractive of rational Affections. Most men are brutish in them and
their Actings, for the most part, pouring them out on things fleshly, sensual
and carnal. But where they are at all reduced under the Conduct of Reason,
nothing is so attractive of them, so suited unto them, which they delight in,
as that which has at least an appearance of Wisdom. A wise and good man does
command the Affections of others, unless it be their Interest to hate and
oppose him, as commonly it is. And where there is true Wisdom in the Conduct of
civil Affairs, sober Men cannot but approve of it, like it, delight in it, and
men of Understanding do bewail the Loss of it, since Craft, Falsehood,
Treachery, and all sorts of Villainy have driven it out of the world. So is
Divine Wisdom attractive of divine gracious Affections. The Psalmist declares
his Admiration of, and Delight in the Works of God, because he has made them
all in Wisdom, Psalm. 104.24. Those Characters of divine Wisdom which are upon
them, which they are filled with, draw the Souls of Men into a delightful
Contemplation of them. But all the Treasures, all the Glory of this Wisdom, are
laid up, and laid forth, in the great Spiritual things of the Gospel, in the
Mystery of God in Christ, and the Dispensation of his Grace and Goodness unto
us by him. The Consideration hereof fills the Souls of Believers with holy
Admiration and Delight, and thereon they cleave unto them with all their
Affections. When we see there is Light in them, and all other things are in
Darkness, that Wisdom is in them, in them alone, and all other things are
filled with Vanity and Folly, then are our Souls truly affected with them, and
do rejoice in them with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Unto the most, this Wisdom of God is Foolishness. It was so of old as the
Apostle testifies, 1 Cor. 1. And so it continues yet to be. And therefore is
the Mystery of the Gospel despised by them; they can see neither Form nor
Comeliness in it for which it should be desired. Nor will ever any man have
sincere Spiritual Affections unto Spiritual things, who has not a Spiritual
View of the Wisdom of God in them.

This is that which attracts our Souls by holy Admiration unto unspeakable
Delight. And the Reason why Men do so generally decline from any Love unto the
Gospel, and lose all Satisfaction in the Mystery of it, is because they are not
able to discern that infinite Wisdom which is the Spring, Life, and Soul of it.
When our Minds are raised unto the admiration of this Wisdom in Divine
Revelations, then will our affections cleave unto the things that are revealed.

Thirdly, The acting of our affections in their adherence unto spiritual things
is perfective of our present State and Condition. That which of all other
things does most debase the nature of Man, wherein it makes the nearest
approaches unto Brutality, yea, whereby it becomes in some Respects more vile
than the nature of Beasts, is the giving up of the Affections unto things
sensual, unclean, base, and unworthy of its more noble Principles. Hence are
men said to debase themselves unto Hell, Isai. 57.9. And their Affections do
become vile; so as that their being under the Power of them, is an Effect of
Revenging Justice punishing men for the worst of Sins, Romans 1.26. There is
nothing more vile, nothing more contemptible, nothing more like to Beasts in
Baseness, and to Hell in Punishment, then is the Condition of them who have
enslaved their nature unto brutish sensual Affections. I say vile Affections
fixed on, and cleaving unto sensual Objects, do debase the nature of man, and
do both corrupt and enslave all the more noble Faculties of it; the very
Consciences and Minds of Men are defiled by them. If you see a Man whose
Affections are set inordinately on any thing here below, it is easy to discern
how he goes off from his native Worth, and debaseth himself therein.

But the fixing of Spiritual Affections on Spiritual Objects is perfective of
our present State and Condition. Not that we can attain Perfection by it; but
that therein our Souls are in a Progress toward Perfection. This may be
granted; look how much vile Affections fixed on, and furiously pursuing things
carnal and sensual, do debase our Natures beneath its rational Constitution,
and make it degenerate into Bestiality; so much Spiritual Affections fixed on,
and cleaving unto things Spiritual and Heavenly, do exalt our Nature above its
mere natural Capacity, making an approach unto the State of Angels, and of Just
men made perfect. And as brutish Affections when they have the Reins, as they
say, on their Necks, and are pursued with Delight and Greediness, do darken the
Mind, and disturb all the rational Powers of the Soul, ( for Whordom, and Wine,
and new-Wine do take away the Heart, as the Prophet speaks and Wickedness
alters the Understanding) So holy Affections fixed on Spiritual things, do
elevate, raise, and enlighten the Mind with true Wisdom and Understanding. For
the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from Iniquity, that is
Understanding. And again, as the Power of vile Affections fill the Soul and
Conscience with tumult, disorder, Fear, and Shame where Men are not utterly
Profligate so as that the Minds, Thoughts, and Consciences of Persons under
their Power, is a very Hell for Confusion and Troubles; so Spiritual Affections
duly Exercised on their proper Objects, do preserve all things in order in the
whole Soul, they are Life and Peace. All things are quiet and secure in the
Mind, there is Order and Peace in the whole Soul, in all its Faculties, and all
their Operations, whilst the affections are in a due prevailing manner fixed
upon the things that are above. Hence many Persons after great turmoilings in
the World, after they have endeavored by all means to come to rest and
satisfaction therein, have utterly renounced all Concernments in Earthly
things, and betaken themselves unto the Contemplation of things above, and that
only. Many I confess of them were mistaken as to the practical part of their
Devotions, having various Superstitions imposed on their Minds by the craft of
others; but they missed it not in the Principle, that Tranquillity of Mind was
attainable only in setting our affections upon things above. Jam. 4.1. From
whence come Wars and Fightings among you, come they not hence, even of your
Lusts that were in your Members. Whence are all the Disorders in your Minds,
your Vexations and Disquietments, your Passions breaking forth sometimes into
unseemly Brawlings? are they not from hence? The Question is put unto your
selves, and your own Consciences, namely, from your Lusts, that is the
disorderly affections that tumultuate in you. Do but search your selves, and
you will quickly see whence all your Troubles and Disquietments do arise. Your
Lusts, or corrupt and inordinate affections do war in you, continually
inclining you to things earthly or sensual. Hence many are best and most at
quiet when they are in the World, worst when at home in their Families; but
never are they in such Confusion, as when they are forced to retire into
themselves.

The due Exercise of our Affections on heavenly things, has quite another
Tendency and Effect. It so unites the Mind unto them, it so brings them unto
it, and gives them such a Subsistence in it, as that all the Powers and
Faculties of it are in a progress toward their Perfection, see 2 Cor. 7.1.
True Wisdom and Understanding with soundness of Judgment, in eternal things,
in the Mind, Holiness in the Affections themselves, Liberty in the Will, Power
in the Heart, and Peace in the Conscience, do in their measures all ensue
hereon. Whatever tastes we may have of these things, whatever temporary
Experience we have of them, they will not flourish in us, they will not abide
with us in any Constancy, unless we are thus Spiritually Minded.

Fourthly, In the future Enjoyment of the present Object of our Spiritual
Affections, does our Eternal Blessedness consist. All men who are convinced of
a future eternal Condition, do desire when they depart hence to enter in
Blessedness and Glory. Howbeit what that Blessedness, even as unto the general
nature of it is, they know nothing at all; and if they did, they would not know
how to desire it. For Heaven or Blessedness is nothing but the full Enjoyment
of what we are here to love and delight in above all, of that which is the
Object of our Affections as Spiritually renewed. Herein have they neither
Interest nor Concern. But this is that which gives Life unto the Affections of
Believers; they know that in the Enjoyment of God in Christ, their eternal
Blessedness does consist. How this is their Happiness and Glory, how it will
give them an everlasting overflowing Satisfaction and Rest, they understand in
the first Fruits of it which they here receive. And this is the ultimate Object
of their Affections in this World, and they go forth unto all other Spiritual
things in order thereunto. The more therefore their affections are fixed on
them, the more they are kept up unto that due Exercise, the nearer Approaches
they make unto this blessed State. When their Minds are Possessed with this
Persuasion, when it is confirmed in them by daily Experience of that Sweetness,
Rest and Satisfaction which they find in cleaving unto God with fervent Love
and Delight, in vain shall any other Objects rise up in Competition to draw
them off unto themselves. The more we love God, the more like we are unto him,
and the more near the Enjoyment of him.

CHAP. XX.
HAving considered the nature of Spiritual Affections as renewed by Grace, and
those Notions of their Objects under which they cleave unto them, it remains
only that we enquire into the way of the Souls Application of it self unto
those Objects by its Affections, which belong also unto our being
Spiritually-Minded. And I shall give an account hereof in some few particulars,
with brief Observations on them.

First, It is required that our adherence unto all Spiritual things with Love
and Delight be firm and stable. The Affections are the Powers and Instruments
of the Soul whereby it makes Application unto any thing without it self, and
cleaves unto it. This is their nature and use with reference unto things
Spiritual. Transient Thoughts of Spiritual things, with vanishing Desires, may
rise out of present Convictions, as they did with them who cried out unto our
Savior, Lord give us evermore of this Bread, and immediately left him. Such
Occasional Thoughts and Desires are common unto all sorts of Men, yea, the
worst of them, let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my End be as his.
Fading Satisfaction with joy and delight, do often befall men in their
Attendance on the Word, who yet never come to have it rooted in their Hearts.

There are sundry things wanting unto the sincerity of these Affections.

(1) Those in whom they are, never had a clear Spiritual view of the things
themselves, in their own Nature which they pretend to be affected withal.

(2) They have not a sincere Love unto them, and delight in them, for their own
sakes, but are only affected with some outward Circumstances and Concernments
of them.

(3) They find not a suitableness in them unto the ruling Principles of their
Minds. They do not practically, they cannot truly say, the Yoke of Christ is
easy, and his Burden is light; his Commandments are not grievous; or with the
Psalmist, Oh! how do I love thy Law.

(4) Their Affections are transient, unstable, vanishing, as unto their
Exercise and Operations. They are on and off, now pleased, and anon displeased;
earnest for a little while, and then cold and indifferent. Hence the things
which they seem to effect, have no transforming Efficacy upon their Souls; they
dwell not in them, in their Power.

But where our Affections unto Spiritual things are sincere, where they are the
true genuine Application of the Soul, and adherence unto them, they are firm
and stable; Love and Delight are kept up unto such a constant Exercise, as
renders them immovable, this is that which we are exhorted unto, 1 Cor. 15,
58. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your Labor is
not in vain in the Lord. Transient Affections with their occasional Operations,
deceive Multitudes, often times they are pregnant in their Actings, as those that
are most sincere: and many Effects in Joys, in Mournings, in Complaints, they
will produce, especially when excited by any outward Affliction, Sickness, and
the like. But their Goodness is like the early Cloud, or morning Dew. Let none
therefore please themselves with the Operations of transient Affections with
respect unto Spiritual things, be they never so urgent, or so pleasant, or so
frequent in their returns; those that are sincere, are at all times firm and
stable.

(2) That the Soul do find a Spiritual Relish and Savor in the things which it
so adheres unto. The Affections are the Palate of the Soul, whereby it tastes of
all things which it receives or refuses; and it will not long cleave unto any
thing which they find not a Savor and Relish in. Something was spoken before
of that Sweetness which is in Spiritual things; and the taste of them consists
in a gracious Sense of their Suitableness unto the Affections, Inclinations and
Dispositions of the Mind. Hence they have no Relish unto Men of Carnal Minds.
Whoever therefore would know whether his Affections do sincerely adhere unto
Spiritual things, let him examine what Relish, what Sweetness, what Savor he
finds in them. When he is pleased with them as the Palate with suitable and
proper Food, when he finds that he receives Nourishment by them in the inward
man; then does he adhere unto them in a due manner.

This Spiritual Taste is the Ground of all Experience, it is not what we have
heard or understood only, but what we have tried and tasted, whereof we have
Experience. This makes us long for what we have formerly enjoyed, and
strengthens Faith, as unto what we pray for and expect.

In every darkness, in every damp of Spirit, under every apprehension of
Dreadness, or the withdrawing of the sense of Divine Love, the Soul knows
what it wants, and what it does desire. Oh! says such an one, that it were now
with me as in former days; I know he who then gave me such refreshing Tastes of
his own Goodness, who made every thing of himself sweet and pleasant unto me,
can renew this work of his Grace toward me; he can give me a new Spiritual
Appetite and Relish, and he can make all Spiritual things Savoury unto me again.

As a man under a Languishing Sickness, or when he is chastened with strong
pain, so as that his Soul abhors Bread, and his daily Meat; can remember
what Appetite he had, with what Gust and Relish he was wont to take in his Food
in the days of his Health, which makes him to know that there is such a
Condition, and to desire a return unto it: So is it with a Sin sick Soul; It
can find no relish, no gust, no sweetness in Spiritual things; He finds no
Savor in the Bread of the Word, nor any refreshment in the Ordinances of the
Gospel, which yet in themselves are daily Meat, a Feast of fat things, and of
Wine well refined. Yet does it remember former Days, when all these things were
sweet unto him. And if he have any spark of Spiritual Life yet remaining, it
will stir him up to seek with all diligence after a Recovery. How is it with
you who are now under Spiritual Decays; who find no Taste nor Relish in
Spiritual things; unto whom the Word is not savoury, nor other Ordinances
powerful? call to mind how it has been with you in former days; and what ye
found in these things; if so be, says the Apostle, that you have tasted that
the Lord is gracious. If you have not, it is to be feared that you have never
yet had the least sincere Love unto Spiritual things; for where that is, it
will give a Spiritual Relish of them. If you have, how is it you can give your
selves Rest one Moment, without an Endeavor after the healing of your
backsliding.

(3) It is required that our Affections be so set on Spiritual things, so as to
be a continual Spring of Spiritual thoughts and Meditations. No man can be so
forsaken of Reason, as to suppose that he has any sincere affections for what
he thinks little on, or not at all; or that he can have a true Affection for
any thing which will not stir up, and ingenerate in him continual Thoughts
about it. Let men try themselves as unto their Relations, or their Enjoyments,
or the Objects of their predominant Lusts, and they will find how things are
stated in their own Minds. And therefore whereas all men pretend to love God
and Christ, and the ways of God, and yet know in their own Hearts, that they
little think of them, or meditate upon them, both their Pretense and Religion
is vain. Where our Affections are duly placed on Heavenly things, so as that
we are indeed Spiritually Minded, they will be a constant Spring of Spiritual
Thoughts and Meditation. But this also has been before spoken unto.

Fourthly, When our Affections are thus applied unto Spiritual things, they
will be prevalent and victorious against Solicitations unto the contrary, or
Allurements to draw them off unto any other Objects. The work of all our
Spiritual Adversaries, is to solicit and tempt our Affections, to divert them
from their proper Object. There are some Temptations of Satan that make an
immediate Impression on the Mind and Conscience. Such are his Injection of
diabolical Blasphemous Thoughts concerning God, his Being, Nature, and Will;
and the Distresses which he reduces men unto in their Consciences, through
Darkness, and Misrepresentations of God and his Goodness. But the high Road and
constant Practice of all our Spiritual Adversaries, is by the Solicitation of
our Affections unto Objects that are in themselves, or in the Degree of our
Affections toward them, evil and sinful. Of the first, are all sensual
Pleasures of the Flesh, in Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Gluttony, Chambering, and
Wantonness, with all sorts of Sensual Pleasures. Of the latter is all our
inordinate Love unto Self, our Families, and the whole World, or the things of
it. Unto this end, every thing in the whole World, that may make Provision for
Lust, is made use of. Herein consists the nature and efficacy of most of those
Temptations which we have to conflict withal. Solicitations they are of our
Affections to draw them off from things Spiritual and Heavenly, and to divert
them unto other things. Hereby do our Enemies endeavor to beguile us, as the
Serpent beguiled Eve; with fair and false Representations of other Beloveds,
that our hearts be not preserved, as a chaste Virgin, in all their Affections
for Christ.

And it is almost incredible how apt we are to be beguiled by the specious
Pretenses wherewith we are solicited.

That our Affections in the Degree treated about, suppose of Love unto the
World and the things of it, are lawful and allowable, is one of the Sophismes
and Artifices wherewith many are deluded. Hereon, provided they run not out
into scandalous Excesses, they approve of themselves in such a Worldly Frame of
Mind, and acting according unto it, as renders them fruitless, useless,
senseless, and is inconsistent with that prevailing adherence of Affections
unto Spiritual things, that ought to be in us. Others are deluded by a
pretense, that it is in one Instance only they would be spared, it is but this
or that Object, they would give out the Embraces of their Affections unto, in
all other things they will be entire for God; the Vanity of which Pretense we
have spoken unto before. Others are ruined by giving place unto their
Solicitations, with respect unto any one Affection whatever. As suppose it be
that of Fear. In times of danger for Profession, multitudes have lost all their
Affections unto Spiritual things, through a Fear of losing that which is
temporal, as their Lives, their Liberties, their Goods, and the like. When,
once Satan or the World have gotten as it were, the mastery of this Affection,
or a prevalent Interest in it, they will not fail to draw all others into a
defection from Christ and the Gospel. He that loves his Life shall lose it.

Wherefore, it is no ordinary nor easy thing to preserve our Affections pure,
entire, and steady, in their vigorous adherence unto Spiritual things, against
all these Solicitations. Watchfulness, Prayer, Faith in Exercise, and a daily
Examination of our Selves are required hereunto. For want of a due attendance
unto the these things, and that with respect unto this end, namely, the
Preservation of our Spiritual Affections in their Integrity, many, even before
they are aware die away as to all Power and vigor of Spiritual Life.

Fifthly, Affections thus fixed upon things Spiritual and Heavenly, will give
great Relief against the remainders of that Vanity of Mind which Believers
themselves are often times perplexed withal. Yea, I do not know any thing that is
a greater Burden unto them, nor which they more groan for Deliverance from. The
Instability of the Mind, its readiness to receive Impressions from things vain
and useless, the irregularity of their Thoughts, are a continual Burden unto
many. Nothing can give the Soul any relief herein, nothing can give bounds unto
the endless vanity of foolish Imaginations, nothing can dry up the Springs from
whence they arise, or render the Soil wherein they grow, barren as unto their
Production and maintenance, but only the Growth of Spiritual Affections, with
their continual vigorous Actings on Heavenly things. For hereby the Heart and
Mind will be so united unto them, (that which the Psalmist prayers for, Psalm.
86.11.) as that they will not be ready to depart from them, and give
Entertainment unto vain, empty, foolish Imaginations. Thoughts of other things,
greater and better than what this World can contain, will be continually
arising in the Mind, not to be laid aside by any solicitations of Vanity. For
he that is wise cannot but know and consider, that the spiritual things which
it exercises its Thoughts about, have Substance in them, are durable,
profitable, always the same, that the Advantage, Peace, Rest, Riches, and
Reward of the Soul lies in them; but other Imaginations which the foolish Mind
is apt to give Entertainment unto, are vain, empty, fruitless, and such as end
in Shame and Trouble.

Again, the Vanity of the Mind in an Indulgence unto foolish Imaginations
arises from, or is animated and increased by that Gust and Relish which it
finds in earthly things, and Enjoyments of them, whether lawful or unlawful.
Hence on all Occasions, yea, in holy duties, it will be ready to turn aside,
and take a taste of them, and sometimes to take up with them; like a tippling
Traveller, who though he be engaged in a Journey on the most earnest Occasion,
yet he cannot but be bibbing here and there as he passes by, and it may be, at
length, before he comes to his Journeys end, lodges himself in a nasty
Alehouse. When men are engaged in important Duties, yet if they always carry
about them, a strong Gust and Relish of earthly things, they will ever and anon
in their thoughts divert unto them, either as unto such real Objects as they
are accustomed unto, or as unto what present Circumstances do administer unto
Corrupt Affections, or as to what they fancy and create in their own Minds. And
sometimes, it may be, after they have made them a few shorter visits, they take
up with them, and lose wholly the Work they were engaged in. Nothing, as was
said, will give relief herein, but the vigorous and constant Exercise of our
Affections on Heavenly things. For this will insensibly take off that Gust and
Relish which the Mind has found in things present, earthly and sensual, and
make them as a sapless thing unto the whole Soul. They will so place the Cross
of Christ in particular on the Heart, as that the World shall be crucified unto
it, losing all that brightness, beauty and Savor, which it made use of to
solicit our Minds unto Thoughts and Desires about it.

Moreover, this Frame of Spirit alone will keep us on our Watch against all
those ways and means whereby the Vanity of the mind is excited and
maintained. Such are the wandering and roving of the outward Senses. The Senses,
especially that of the Eye, are ready to become purveyors to make Provisions
for the Vanity and Lusts of the Mind. Hence the Psalmist prays, Turn away mine
Eyes from beholding Vanity. If the Eyes rove after vain Objects, the mind will
ruminate upon them; and another affirms that he had made a Covenant with his
Eyes, to preserve them from fixing on such Objects, as might solicit Lust or
corrupt Affections. And it were an useful labor, would this place admit of it,
to discover the ready serviceableness of the outward Senses and Members of the
Body, unto Sin and Folly, if not watched against, Romans 6.13, 19. Of the same
nature is the incessant Working of the Fancy and Imagination, which of it self
is evil continually, and all the day long. This is the Food of a vain Mind, and
the vehicle or means of conveyance for all Temptations from Satan and the
World. Besides, sundry Occasions of Life and Conversation, are usually turned,
or abused unto the same end, exciting and exercising of the Vanity of the Mind.
Wherever our Affections are fixed on Spiritual things, our Minds will
constantly be under a Warning or Charge to keep diligent watch against all
these things, whereby that Vanity, which it so abhors, which it is so
burdened withal, is maintained and excited. Nor without this Prevalency in the
Mind, will ever a Work of Mortification be carried on in the Soul, Col. 3.2, 4,
5.

CHAP. XXI.
HAving declared wherein this Duty of being Spiritually-Minded does consist,
that which remains in compliance with the Text, from whence the whole is
educed, is to manifest how it is Life and Peace, which is affirmed by the
Apostle. This shall be done with all brevity, as having passed through that
which was principally designed.

And two things are we to enquire into.

(1) What is meant by Life and Peace.

(2) In what Sense to be Spiritually Minded, is both of them.

(1) That Spiritual Life whereof we are made Partakers in this World, is
threefold, or there are three Gospel Privileges or Graces so expressed.

(1) There is the Life of Justification. Therein the Just by Faith do live; as
freed from the Condemnatory Sentence of the Law. So the Righteousness of one
comes on all that believe unto the Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. It gives
unto Believers a Right and Title to Life; for they that receive the abundance
of Grace, and the Gift of Righteousness shall reign in Life by one Christ
Jesus, verse. 17. This is not the Life here intended, for this Life depends
solely on the Sovereign Grace of God, by Jesus Christ, and the Imputation of
his Righteousness unto us, unto Pardon, Right to Life and Salvation.

(2) There is a Life of Sanctification. As Life in the foregoing sense in
opposed unto Death spiritual as unto the the Guilt of it, and the condemnatory
Sentence of Death wherewith it was accompanied; so in this it is opposed unto
it, as unto its internal Power on, and Efficacy in the Soul, to keep it under
an Impotency unto all Acts of Spiritual Life, yea, an Enmity against them. This
is that Life wherewith we are quickened by Christ Jesus, when before we were
dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. Of this Life, the Apostle treats
directly in this place; for having in the first four verses of the Chapter
declared the Life of Justification in the nature and Causes of it; in the
following, he treats of Death spiritual in Sin, with the Life of
Sanctification, whereby we are freed from it.

And to be Spiritually-Minded is this Life in a double Sense.

(1) In that it is the principal Effect and Fruit of that Life. The Life it
self consists in the Infusion and Communication of a Principle of Life, that is
of Faith and Obedience, unto all the Faculties and Powers of our Soul, enabling
us to live unto God. To be Spiritually-Minded, which is a Grace whereunto many
Duties do concur, and that not only as to the Actings of all Grace in them, but
as unto the Degrees of their Exercise, cannot be this Life formally. But it is
that wherein the Power of this Principle of Life, does in the first and
chiefest place put forth it self. All Actings of Grace, all Duties of Obedience
internal and external, do proceed from this Spring and Fountain. Nothing of
that kind is acceptable unto God, but what is influenced by it, and is an
Effect of it, but it principally puts forth its Virtue and Efficacy, in
rendering our Minds Spiritual, which if it effect not, it works not at all, that
is, we are utterly destitute of it. The next and immediate Work of the
Principle of Life in our Sanctification, is to renew the Mind, to make it
Spiritual; and thereon gradually to carry it on unto that Degree which is here
called, being Spiritually-Minded.

(2) It is the proper Adjunct and Evidence of it. Would any one know whether he
be Spiritually alive unto God, with the Life of Sanctification and Holiness?
The Communication of it unto him, being by an Almighty Act of creating Power,
Ephesians 2.10. It is not easily discernable, so as to help us to make a right
Judgment of it, from its Essence or Form. But where things are in themselves
indiscernable, we may know them from their proper and inseparable Adjuncts,
which are therefore called by the Names of the Essence or the Form it self.
Such is this being Spiritually-Minded with respect unto the Life of
Sanctification; it is an inseparable Property and Adjunct of it, whereby it
infallibly evidenceth if self unto them in whom it is. In these two respects it
is the Life of Sanctification.

(3) Life is taken for the Comforts and Refreshments of Life; So speaks the
Apostle, 1 These. 3.8. Now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord, now our Life
will do us good, we have the Comforts, the Refreshments, and the Joys of it.
Non est vivere, Sed valere vita. The Comforts and Satisfactions of Life, are
more Life than Life it self. It is Life, that is, that which makes Life to be
so, bringing in that Satisfaction, those Refreshments unto it, which make it
pleasant and desirable. And I do suppose this is that which is principally
intended in the Words of the Apostle; it is Life, a cheerful joyous Life, a
Life worth the living. In Explication and Confirmation whereof, it is added,
that it is Peace also.

Peace is twofold, (1) General and absolute, that is Peace with God through
Jesus Christ, which is celebrated in the Scripture, and which is the only
Original Spring and Fountain of all Consolation unto Believers; that which
virtually contains in it every thing that is good, Useful, or desirable unto
them. But it is not here precisely intended. It is not so.

(1) As to the immediate ground and Cause of it, which is our Justification,
not our Sanctification, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with
God. So Christ alone is our Peace, as he who has made Peace for us by the
Blood of the Cross, Ephesians. 2.14, 15. Hereof our being Spiritually-Minded is no
way the cause or reason, only it is an Evidence and Pledge of it, as we shall
see.

(2) Not as unto the formal nature of it. Peace with God through the Blood of
Christ, is one thing; and Peace in our Minds through an holy Frame in them, is
another. The former is communicated unto us by an immediate Act of the Holy
Spirit dwelling in us, Romans 5.5. The latter is an Effect on our Minds begun,
and gradually carried on, by the Duties we have before at large declared. The
immediate Actings of the holy Spirit, in sealing us, witnessing unto our
Adoption, and being an Earnest of Glory, are required unto the former; Our own
Sedulity and Diligence in Duties and the Exercise of all Grace, are required
unto the latter.

(2) Peace is taken for a peculiar Fruit of the Spirit, consisting in a
gracious Quietness and Composure of Mind, in the midst of Difficulties,
Temptations, Troubles, and such other things as are apt to fill us with Fears,
Despondencies, and Disquietments. This is that which keeps the Soul in its own
Power, free from Transports by Fears or Passions, on all the abiding Grounds of
Gospel Consolation. For although this be a peculiar especial Grace, yet it it
that which is influenced and kept alive by the Consideration of all the Love of
God in Christ, and all the Fruits of it.

And whereas Peace includes in the first Notion of it, an inward Freedom from
Oppositions and Troubles, which those in whom it is are outwardly exposed unto,
there are two things from which we are secured by this Peace which is an Effect
of being Spiritually Minded.

The first is Offenses. There is nothing of whose Danger we are more warned in
the Gospel, than of Offenses. Woe to the World, says our Savior, because of
Offenses. All Ages, all Times and Seasons, are filled with them, and they p^ove
pernicious and destructive to the Souls of many. Such are the Scandalous
Divisions that are among Christians; the endless Differences of Opinions, and
diversity of practices in Religion and the Worship of God; the Falls and Sins
of Professors, the fearful ends of some of them; the Reproaches that are cast
on all that engage into any peculiar way of Holiness and strictness of Life,
with other things of the like nature, whereby the souls of innumerable Persons
are disquieted, subverted, or infected, are to be reckoned unto this Head.
Against any hurtful or noxious Influence on our Minds from these things,
against Disquietments, Dejections of Spirit, and Disconsolations, are we
secured by this Peace. So the Psalmist assures us, Psalm. 119.165. Great Peace
have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. The Law, or the
Word of God, is the only way of the Revelation of God and his Will unto us; and
the only outward Way and Rule of our Converse and Communion with him.
Wherefore, to love the Law, is the principal part of our being heavenly Minded,
yea virtually that which comprehends the whole. For such as do so, nothing,
none of the things before mentioned, nor any other of the like nature, shall be
an Offense, a stumbling Block, or cause of falling into sin. And the reason is,
because they have such an Experience in themselves of the Truth, Power,
Efficacy and Holiness of the Gospel, as that the Miscarriages of Men, under a
Profession of it, shall never be unto them an Occasion of falling, or being
offended at Christ. And I look upon it as a sign of a very evil Frame of Heart,
when men are concerned in the Miscarriages of some that have made Profession,
whereby they are, it may be, damaged in their Outward Concerns, so as that they
are surprised into Reflections on that Religion which they profess, professing
the same themselves.

(2) The second is Afflictions, Persecutions and Sufferings of all Sorts. It is
known by all (It were well, if it were not so well known) what Disquietments,
Dejections and Disconsolations these things are apt to fill the Minds of Men
withal; What Fears, Troubles, Sorrows, they reflect upon them. Against all
these Effects of them, this Peace intended, gives us Security. It makes us to
preserve a peaceable, yea, a joyous Life in our Conflict with them, see Joh.
16.33.

Both these, as here joined together, Life and Peace, do comprize an holy Frame
of Heart and Mind, wherein the Souls of Believers do find Rest, Quietness,
Refreshment and Satisfaction in God, in the midst of Temptations, Afflictions,
Offen^es and Sufferings. It is the Souls Composure of it self in God, in his
Love in Christ Jesus, so as not greatly to be put out of Order, to be cast down
with any thing that may befall it, but affords men Cheerfulness and
Satisfaction in themselves, though they walk sometimes in the Valley of the
Shadow of Death. Such Persons have that in them, abiding with them, as will
give them Life and Peace under all Occurrences.

(2) Our next enquiry is, how this Spiritual Mindedness is Life and Peace, or
what it contributes unto them, how it produces the Frame of Heart and Mind so
expressed. And this it does several ways.

(1) It is the only means on our part, of retaining a Sense of Divine Love.
The Love of God in a gracious Sense of it, as shed abroad in our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost, is the first and only Foundation of all durable Comforts; Such as
will support and refresh us under all Oppositions and Distresses, that is, of
Life and Peace in our Souls in any Condition. This God communicates by an Act
of Sovereign Grace, for the most part without any Preparation for it in our
selves. He creates the Fruit of the Lips, Peace, Peace. But although Divine
Love be in it self unchangeable, and always the same; yet this Sense of it may
be lost, as it was in David, when he prayed that God would restore unto him the
Joys of his Salvation, Psalm. 51.12. And so many others have found it by woeful
Experience. To insist upon all that is required on our parts, that we may
retain a gracious refreshing Sense of Divine Love, after it is once granted
unto us, belongs not unto my present purpose. But this I say, there is not any
thing wherein we are more concerned, for to be careful and diligent in, than as
unto what belongs to that end. For men who by a mere Act of Sovereign Grace,
have tasted herein of the Goodness of God, who have had the Consolation and
Joys of it, to be negligent in the keeping and preserving it in their Souls, is
a Provocation that they will at one time or other be sensible of. There is
nothing does more grieve the Holy Spirit, than to have his especial Work,
whereby he Seals us unto the Day of Redemption, neglected or despised. And it
argues a mighty Prevalency of some Corruption or Temptation, that shall cause
men willingly, and by their own Sloth, to forfeit so inestimable a Grace, Mercy
and Privilege. And it is that which there are but few of us, who have not
reason to bewail our Folly in. Every Intimation of Divine Love, is an
inestimable Jewel, which if safely treasured up in our Hearts, adds unto our
Spiritual Riches; and being lost, will at one time or another affect us with
Sorrow.

And I am afraid that many of us are very negligent herein, unto the great
prejudice of our Souls and Spiritual State. Many such Intimations are given us
by the Holy Ghost through the Word, which we take little notice of, either we
know not the Voice of Christ in them, or do not hearken unto him in a due
manner, or refuse a Compliance with him, when we cannot but know that he speaks
unto us, see Cant. 5.2, 3. Or if we recieve any Impressions of a gracious Sense
of Divine Love in them, we quickly lose them, not knowing how much the Life of
our Souls is concerned therein; and what use of them we may have in our
following Temptations, Trials, and Duties.

Now the great means of retaining a Sense of the Love of God, which is the only
spring of Life and Peace unto our Souls, is this Grace and Duty of being
Spiritually-Minded. This is evident from the very nature of the Duty. For

(1) It is the Souls preserving of it self in a Frame meet to receive and
retain this sense of Gods Love. What other way can there be on our part, but
that our Minds which are so to receive it and retain it, are Spiritual and
Heavenly, always prepared for that holy Converse and Communion with himself,
which he is pleased to grant us through Jesus Christ. And,

(2) It will fix our Thoughts and Affections upon the Grace and Love of God,
communicating such an inestimable Mercy unto us, as is a Sense of his Love,
which is the only means for the Preservation of a Relish of it in our Hearts.
He who is in this Frame of Mind, will remember, call over, and ruminate upon
all such gracious Pledges of divine Favor; as David is often remembering and
calling over what he received in such Places, as in the Land of the Hermonites,
and at the Hill Missar, Psalm. 42. This is the great way whereby this Treasure
may be preserved.

(3) A Person so minded, and he alone, will have a due Valuation of such
Intimations and Pledges of Divine Love. Those who are full of other things,
whose Affections cleave unto them, do never esteem Heavenly Mercies and
Privileges, as they ought* The full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb. And God is
well pleased, when an high Valuation is put upon his kindness; as he is greatly
provoked by the contrary Frame; which indeed nothing but infinite Patience
could bear withal. It is an high Provocation of God, when men are regardless
of, and unthankful for Outward temporal Mercies; when they receive them and use
them as if they were their own, that they were Lords of them, at least, that
they are due unto them. Much more is he provoked with our regardlesness of the
least of those Mercies, which are the peculiar purchase of the Blood of his
Son, and the Effects of his Eternal Love and Grace. He alone who is
spiritually-Minded, valueth, prizeth, and lays up these ininestimable Jewels
in a due manner.

(4) Such Persons only know how to use and improve all Communications of a
sense of Divine Love. These things are not granted unto us to lie by us,
without any use of them. They are gracious Provisions wherewith we are
furnished to enable us unto all other Duties, Conflicts, and Trials. On all
Occasions are they to be called over for our Spiritual Relief and
Encouragement. Hereby are they safely retained. For in the due improvement of
them, they grow more bright in our Minds every day, and are ready for use, in
which posture they are safely preserved. But these things will yet be farther
manifest in the Instances that ensue.

(2) This Frame of Mind casts out all Principles, and Causes of Trouble and
Disquietment, which are inconsistent with Life and Peace. There are in us by
nature Principles of Contrariety and Opposition unto Spiritual Life and Peace,
with sundry things, whose Abode and Prevalency in us, is inconsistent with
them. I shall give only one or two Instances hereof.

(1) It will cast out all Filthiness and Superfluity of naughtiness from our
Minds. Without this, we can receive no Benefit by the means of Grace, nor
perform any Duty in a right manner, Jam. 1.27. This is that which stands in
direct immediate Opposition and Contrariety unto our being spiritually Minded,
so as they can have no Consistency in the same Person. And they Expel on
another like heat and Cold. And where there is this Filthyness and Superfluity
of Naughtiness, there is neither Life nor Peace. Unclean Lusts of the Flesh, or
of the Spirit, working, tumultuating, acting themselves in the Minds of Men,
will not suffer either the Life of Holiness to flourish in them, or any solid
Peace to abide with them. The Soul is weakened by them as unto all Spiritual
Actings, and made like a troubled Sea that cannot rest, whose Waters cast up
mire and dirt. Where they are absolutely predominant, there is an Hell within,
of Darkness, Confusion and Enmity against God, preparing men for an Hell of
Punishment without unto Eternity. And according as they remain, or have any
Prevalency in us, so are Spiritual Life and Peace impaired and obstructed by
them. Now the very nature of this Grace and its universal Exercise is suited to
the casting out of all the Relics of this Filthiness and Supersfluity of
Naughtiness. It brings in a Principle into the Mind directly contrary unto that
from whence they do proceed. All the Actings of it, which we have described,
lie in direct tendency unto the Extirpation of these Causes of Filthiness which
ruin Life and Peace; nor will they by any other way be cast out. If the Mind
be not Spiritual, it will be carnal; if it mind not Things above, it will not
fix it self inordinately on things below.

(2) That Disorder which is by nature in the Affections and Passions of the
Mind, which is directly opposite unto spiritual Life and Peace, is cast out, or
cured hereby. It is a blessed Promise of the times of the New Testament, of the
Kingdom and Rule of Christ, that through the Efficacy of Gospel Grace, The Lion
shall lie down with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid, Isaiah 11.6.
Persons of the most intemperate and outrageous Passions, shall be made meek and
lovely. Where this is not in some measure effected, according unto the Degrees
of the Prevalency of such Passions in us, we have not been made Partakers of
Evangelical Grace. It were an easy Task to demonstrate how the Disorder of our
Affections and Passions is destructive of Spiritual Life and Peace. The
Contrariety that is in them, and Contradiction unto one another, their
Violence, Impetuousness, and Restlesness, their readiness to receive and take
in Provocations on all Occasions, and frequently on none at all, but what
Imagination presents unto them, are sufficient Evidences hereof. Can we think
that Life and Peace do inhabit that Soul, wherein Anger, Wrath, Envy, Excess in
Love unto earthly things, no dwell? and on all Occasions exert themselves;
there, where there is a continual Tumult, Fighting and Rebellion, as there is
where the Passions of the Mind are not under the Conduct of Reason, nor of
Grace?

The Nature and principal Effect of this spiritual Mindedness, is to bring all
the Affections and Passions of our Minds into that holy Order wherein they were
created. This was that uprightness wherein God made us; namely the whole
blessed Order of all the Powers, Faculties, and Affections of our Souls, in all
their Operations, in order unto our living unto God. And this is restored unto
us by this Grace, this Duty of being Spiritually Minded. And wherein it falls
short of that Perfection which we had originally; (for the remainders of that
Disorder which befell us by Sin, will still in part continue) it is recompensed
by the Actings of that new Principle of Gospel Grace which is exercised in it.
For every Act of of our Affections toward God, in the Power of Grace, exceeds,
and is of another nature, above that we could do, or attain unto, in the State
of nature uncorrupted. Hereby are Life and Peace brought into our Souls, and
preserved in them.

(3) It is that whereby our Hearts and Minds are taken off from the World, and
all inordinate Love thereunto. Where this is in prevalent Degree, there is
neither Life, nor Peace. And every excess in it, both weakens Spiritual Life,
and disturbs, yea, destroys all solid Spiritual Peace. I have occasionally
spoken unto it before, as also the way whereby our minding of the things that
are above in a due manner, does deliver and preserve our Souls from the Snares
of it. And if we diligently examine our selves, we shall find, that in our
inordinate Affections, and cleaving unto these things, the principal Causes why
we thrive no more in the power of Spiritual Life, and whence we meet with so
many Disquietments and Dejections of Spirit unto the disturbance of our Prace
and Rest in God, is from hence. For there is no Grace which is not impaired by
it in its nature, or not obstructed by it in its Exercise. Wherefore, to be
Spiritually Minded is Life and Peace, because it subdues and expells that
inordinate Love unto present things, which is destructive of them both, and
inconsistent with them.

(4) It preserves the Mind in a due and holy Frame in the Performance of all
other Duties. This also is indispensibly required, unto the Preservation of
Life and Peace, especially unto the improvement of them. They will not abide
much less thrive and flourish in any Persons who are negligent in holy Duties,
or do not perform them in a due manner. And there are four things which impede
or hinder us from such an attendance unto Holy Duties, as may be advantageous
unto our Souls; against all which we have relief by being Spiritually Minded.

(1) Distractions.

(2) Despondencies.

(3) Weariness.

(4) Unreadiness of Grace for Exercise.

(1) Distraction of Mind and Thoughts, has this evil Effect, which many
complain of, few take the right way of Deliverance from. For this Evil will not
be cured by attendance unto any particular Directions, without a change of the
whole Frame of our Minds. Nothing can give us Relief herein, but a prevalent
Delight in being exercised about things Spiritual and Heavenly. For hence arise
all our Distractions; the want of fixing our minds on Spiritual things with
Delight, makes them obnoxious to be diverted from them on all occasions, yea to
seek occasions for such Diversions. It is this frame alone, namely, of
Spiritual Mindedness, that will give us this Delight. For thereby the Soul is
transformed into the likness of Spiritual things; so as that they are suited
unto it, and pleasant unto our Affections. The mind and the things themselves
are thereby so fitted unto each other, that on every occasion they are ready
for mutual Embraces, and not easily drawn off by any cause or means Of the
Distractions so complained of, yea, they will all be prevented hereby.

(2) Despondencys in Duties arise from the frequent Incursions of the Guilt of
Sin. The remembrance hereof frequently sollicites the Minds of Persons in their
first entrances into Duty, unless they are under especial actings of Grace,
stirring them up unto earnestness and fervency in what they undertake. At other
seasons it renders men Lifeless and Heartless, so as that they know not whether
they had best Pray or no, when Duty and Opportunity call them thereunto. To be
Spiritually Minded* we have manifested in many Instances is the great
Preservative against these disheartening incursions of sin. It is the Souls
watch and guard against them, whence ever they arise or proceed. No lust or
corruption can be Prevalent in a Spiritual mind. And this is the Principal
cause of such Incursions of Sin, as affect the Soul with a disheartening sense
of Guilt. No Affections can abide in any sinful Disorder, where the Mind is so
affected. This also gives sin an entrance unto a distracting sense of Guilt.
But the fool Cure hereof lies in this Grace and Duty. The like may be said of
all other ways, means, and Occasions of such Incursions of Sin.

(3) Weariness in, and of Spiritual Duties, abate their tendency unto the
Improvement of Life and Peace in us. This Evil arises from the same Cause with
that or Distraction before mentioned. And it is oft-times increased by the
Weakness and Indispositions of the Flesh, or of the outward man. Sometimes the
Spirit is willing, but through the weakness of the Flesh, it is disappointed.
The principal cure hereof lies in that Delight which spiritual Mindedness gives
unto the Soul in Spiritual things. For where there is constant Delight in any
thing, there will be no weariness, at least, not such as shall hinder any from
cleaving firmly unto the things wherein he does delight. Whilst therefore we
are exercised in a delight in Spiritual things, weariness cannot prevalently
assault the Mind. And it is the only Relief against that Weariness which
proceeds from the Indispositions of the outward man. For as it will preserve
the Mind from attending too much unto their Solicitations, crying spare thy
self, by filling and possessing the Thoughts with other things; so it will
offer an holy Violence unto the Complaints of the Flesh, silencing them with a
sense of, and delight in holy Duties-

(4) The Unreadiness of Grace for its due and proper Exercise, is another
thing which defeats us of the Benefit of holy Duties. The Seasons of them are
come, sense of Duty carries men unto an Attendance unto them, and the
performance of them. But when they should enter upon them, those Graces of
Faith, Love, Fear, and Delight, wherein the Soul and Being of them do consist,
are out of the way, unready for a due Exercise; so as that men take up and
satisfy themselves with the mere outward Performance of them The Heart and Mind
have been taken up with other things, due Preparation has been wanting; men
come unto them with reaking Thoughts of earthly Occasions; and it is no easy
matter in, or immediately out of, such a Frame, to stir up Grace unto a due
Exercise. But herein lies the very Life of being Spiritually Minded. The
nature of it consists in the keeping and preserving all Grace in a Readiness
for its Exercise as our Occasions require.

And this is an effectual way whereby this Grace come to be Life and Peace. For
they cannot be attained, they cannot be preserved, without such a constancy and
Spirituality in all holy Duties, as we shall never arive at, unless we are
Spiritually Minded.

Lastly; this frame of mind brings the Soul unto, and keeps it at its nearest
approaches, unto Heaven and Blessedness, wherein lie the eternal springs of
life and Peace. According unto the Degrees of this Grace in us, such are those
of our approaches unto God. Nearness unto him, gives us our initial conformity
unto him, by the Renovation of his Image in us, as our Presence with him, will
give us Perfection therein; for when we see him we shall be like unto him. He
therefore alone as he is in Christ being the fountain of Life and Peace, by our
drawing nigh unto him, and by our Likeness of him, will they thrive and
flourish in our Souls.

FINIS.

