Gospel Grounds and Evidences OF THE FAITH OF GOD's Elect: SHOWING I. The
Nature of true saving Faith, in securing of the Spiritual Comfort of Believers
in this Life, is of the highest importance. II. The Way wherein true Faith does
evidence it self in the Soul and Consciences of Believers, unto their
Supportment and Comfort, under all their Conflicts with Sin, in all their
Trials and Temptations. III. Faith will evidence it self, by a diligent,
constant endeavor to keep it self and all Grace in due exercise, in all
Ordinances of Divine Worship, Private, and Public. IV. A peculiar way whereby
true Faith will evidence it self, by bringing the Soul into a State of
Repentance.


Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your selves, know ye
not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates,

2 Cor. 13. 5 By JOHN OWEN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by John Astwood for William Marshal, at the Bible in
Newgate-street; where you may be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's, Dr.
Beverly's and Mr. Caryl's Works. 1695.

To the Reader.
AS Faith is the first vital Act that every true Christian puts forth, and the
Life which he lives is by the Faith of the Son of God, so it is his next and
great concern to know that he does believe, and that believing he has Eternal
Life; that his Faith is the Faith of God's Elect, and of the Operation of God,
without some distinct believing knowledge of which, he cannot so comfortably
assure his Heart before God concerning his Calling and Election, so far as to
carry him forth in all the ways of Holiness, in doing and suffering the Will of
God with necessary Resolution and Cheerfulness, the doing of which in a right
manner, according to the Tenor of the Gospel, is no small part of spiritual
Skill; whereunto two things are highly requisite: First, That he be well
acquainted with the Doctrine of Christ, and knows how to distinguish the Gospel
from the Law; and, Secondly, That he be very Conversant with his own Heart,
that so by comparing his Faith, and the Fruits thereof, with the said Doctrine
of Christ, he may some to see that as he has received Christ, so he walks in
him; all his reasonings concerning himself being taken up from the Word of God,
so that what Judgment he passes upon himself, may be a Judgment of Faith, and
Answer of a good Conscience toward God; for all Trials of Faith must at last
be resolved into a Judgment of Faith, before which is made, the Soul still
labors under staggerings, and uncertainties.

The design of this ensuing Treatise is to resolve this great Question, Whether
the Faith we profess unto, be true or no? the Resolution of which, upon an
Impartial Enquiry, must needs be very grateful and advantageous to every one
that has but tasted that the Lord is gracious. That the late Reverend,
Learned, and Pious Dr. Owen was the Author, there needs be no doubt; not only
because good Assurance is given by such as were entrusted with his Writings,
but also in that the Style and Spirit running through the other of his Practical
Writings is here very manifest, and accordingly with them is recommended to the
serious perusal of every diligent Enquirer unto the Truth of his Spiritual
Estate and Condition.

Isaac Chauncy.

Evidences of the Faith of GOD's Elect.
THE securing of the Spiritual Comforts of Believers in this Life, is a matter
of the highest Importance unto the Glory of God, and their own Advantage by the
Gospel. For God is abundantly willing that all the Heirs of Promise should
receive strong Consolation, and he has provided ways and means for the
Communication of it to them; and their Participiation of it is their Principal
Interest in this World, and is so esteemed by them. But their effectual
Refreshing Enjoyment of these Comforts is variously opposed by the Power of the
Remainders of Sin, in Conjunction with other Temptations. Hence notwithstanding
their Right and Title unto them by the Gospel, they are oft-times actually
destitute of a Gracious sense of them, and consequently of that Relief which
they are s^ited to afford in all their Duties, Trials and Afflications. Now the
Root whereon all real Comforts do grow, whence they spring and arise, is true
and saving Faith; the Faith of Gods Elect. Wherefore they do ordinarily answer
unto, and hold proportion with the Evidences which any have of that Faith in
themselves; at least they cannot be maintained without such Evidences.
Wherefore that we may be a little useful unto the Establishment or Recovery of
that Consolation which God is so abundantly willing that all the Heirs of
Promise should enjoy, I shall enquire, What are the principal Acts and
Operations of Faith, whereby it will evidence its Truth and Sincerity in the
midst of all Temptations and storms that may befall Believers in this World:
And I shall insist on such alone as will bear the severest Scrutiny by
Scripture and Experience. And,

THE Principal Genuine Acting of saving Faith in us, inseparable from it, yea,
essential to such acting, consists in the Choosing, Embracing, and Approbation
of Gods way of saving Sinners, by the Mediation of Jesus Christ, relying
thereon, with a renuntiation of all other ways and means pretending unto the
same End of Salvation.

THIS is that which we are to explain and prove.

SAVING Faith is our Believing the Record that God has given us of his Son, 1
John 5. 10. And this is the Record that God has given unto us, Eternal Life,
and this Life is in his Son, verse 11. This is the Testimony which God gives,
that great and sacred Truth which he himself bears witness unto, namely, That
he has freely prepared Eternal Life for them that believe, or provided a way
of Salvation for them. And what God so prepares he is said to give, because of
the Certainty of its Communication. So Grace was promised and given to the
Elect in Christ Jesus before the World began, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 1. 2. And that
is so to be communicated unto them in and by the Mediation of his Son Jesus
Christ; that it is the only way whereby God will give Eternal Life unto any,
which is therefore wholly in him, and by him to be obtained, and from him to be
received. Upon our Acquiescency in this Testimony, on our Approbation of this
way of saving Sinners, or our Refusal of it, our Eternal Safety or Ruin does
absolutely depend. And it is reasonable that it should be so: For in our
receiving of this Testimony of God, We set to our seal that God is true, Joh.
3. 33. We ascribe unto him the Glory of his Truth, and therein of all the other
Holy Properties of his Nature, the most Eminent Duty whereof we are capable in
this World: And by a Refusal of it, what lies in us, we make him a Liar, as in
this Place, v. 10. which is virtually to renounce his Being.

AND the Solemnity wherewith this Testimony is entered is very remarkable, ver.
7. There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost; and these three are one. The Trinity of Divine Persons acting
distinctly in the Unity of the same Divine Nature, do give this Testimony: And
they do so by these distinct Operations, whereby they act in this way and work
of God's saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, which are at large declared in the
Gospel. And there is added hereunto a Testimony that is immediately applicatory
unto the Souls of Believers, of this Sovereign Testimony of the Holy Trinity;
and this is the witness of Grace and all sacred Ordinances: There are three
that bear witness on Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these
three agree in one; ver. 8. They are not all essentially the same in one and
the same Nature, as are the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, yet they all
absolutely agree in the same Testimony; and they do it by that especial
Efficacy which they have on the Souls of Believers to assure them of this
Truth. In this Record, so solemnly, so gloriously given and proposed, Life and
Death are set before us. The Receiving and Embracing of this Testimony, with an
Approbation of the way of Salvation testified unto, is that Work of Faith which
secures us of Eternal Life. On these Terms there is Reconciliation and
Agreement made and established between God and Men, without which Men must
perish for ever.

SO our Blessed Savior affirms, This is Life eternal, that we may know thee
[Father.]: the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17. 3.
To know the Father as the only true God, to know him as he has sent Jesus
Christ to be the only way and means of the Salvation of Sinners, and to know
Jesus Christ as sent by him for that end, is that Grace and Duty which enstates
us in a Right unto Eternal Life, and initiates us in the Possession of it: And
this includes that Choice and Approbation of the way of God for the saving of
Sinners whereof we speak.

BUT these things must be more distinctly opened.

1. THE Great fundamental Difference in Religion is concerning the way and
means whereby Sinners may be saved. From Men's different Apprehensions hereof
arise all other Differences about Religion: And the first thing that engages
men really into any Concernment in Religion, is an Enquiry in their Minds how
Sinners may be saved, or what they shall do themselves to be saved: What shall
we do? What shall we do to be saved? What is the way of Acceptance with God? is
that Enquiry which gives Men their first Initiation into Religion: See Acts 2.
37. of Chap. 16. 30. Micah 6. 6, 7, 8.

THIS Question being once raised in the Conscience, an Answer must be returned
unto it: I will consider, says the Prophet, what I shall answer, when I am
reproved, Hab. 2. 1. And there is all the Reason in the World that Men consider
well of a Good Answer hereunto, without which they must perish for ever: For if
they cannot answer themselves here, how do they hope to answer God hereafter?
Wherefore without a sufficient Answer always in Readiness unto this Enquiry, no
Man can have any Hopes of a Blessed Eternity.

NOW the real Answer which Men return unto themselves is according to the
Influence which their Minds are under from one or other of the two Divine
Covenants, that of Works, or that of Grace. And these two Covenants taken
absolutely, are inconsistent, and gives Answers in this Case that are directly
contradictory to one another: So the Apostle declares, Romans 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
The one says, the man that does the Works of the Law, shall live by them; this
is the only way whereby you may be saved: The other wholly waves this Return,
and puts it all on Faith in Christ Jesus. Hence there is great Difference, and
great Variety in the Answers which men return to themselves on this Enquiry;
for their Consciences will neither hear nor speak any thing, but what complys
with the Covenant whereunto they do belong. These things are reconciled only in
the Blood of Christ; and how the Apostle declared Romans 8. 3. The greatest part
of Convinced Sinners seem to adhere to the Testimony of the Covenant of Works,
and so perish for ever. Nothing will stand us instead in this matter, nothing
will save us, but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the
Resurection of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 3. 21.

2. THE way that God has prepared for the saving of Sinners is a Fruit and
Product of Infinite Wisdom, and powerfully Essicacious unto its End. As such it
is to be received, or it is rejected. It is not enough that we admit of the
Notions of it as declared, unless we are sensible of Divine Wisdom and Power in
it, so as that it may be safely trusted unto. Hereon upon the Proposal of it,
falls out the eternally distinguishing Difference among Men. Some look upon it,
and embrace it as the Power and Wisdom of God: Others really reject it, as a
thing foolish and weak, not meet to be trusted unto; hereof the Apostle gives
an Account at large, 1 Cor. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And this is
mysterious in Religion; the same Divine Truth, is by the same way and means, at
the same time, proposed unto sundry Persons, all in the same Condition, under
the same Circumstances, all equally concerned in that which is proposed
therein: Some of them hereon do receive it, embrace it, approve of it, and
trust unto it for Life and Salvation; others despise it, reject it, value it
not, trust not unto it. To the one it is the Wisdom of God, and the Power of
God; to the other Weakness and Foolishness, as it must of necessity be one or
the other, it is not capable of a middle State or Consideration. It is not a
good way, unless it be the only way; it is not a safe, it is not the best way,
if there be any other; for it is eternally inconsistent with any other. It is
the Wisdom of God, or it is downright Folly. And here after all our Disputes,
we must resort unto eternal Sovereign Grace, making a Distinction among them
unto whom the Gospel is proposed, and the Almighty Power of actual Grace in
Curing that Unbelief which blinds the minds of Men, that they can see nothing
but Folly and Weakness in Gods way of the saving of Sinners: And this Unbelief
works yet in the most of them unto whom this way of God is proposed in the
Gospel: They receive it not as an Effect of Infinite Wisdom, and as powerfully
Essicacious unto its proper End. Some are profligate in the Service of their
Lusts, and regard it not; unto whom may be applied that of the Prophet, Hear ve
Despisers, and wonder, and perish: Some are under the Power of Darkness and
Ignorance, so as that they apprehend not, they understand not the Mystery of
it: For the Light shines into Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not.
Some are blinded by Satan as he is the God of this World, by filling their
Minds with Prejudice, and their Hearts with the Love of present things, that
the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, cannot
shine into them. Some would mix with it their own Works, Ways and Duties, as
they belong unto the first Covenant, which are eternally irreconcible unto this
way of God, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 10. 3, 4. Hereby does Unbelief
eternally ruin the Souls of Men; they do not, they cannot approve of the way of
God for saving Sinners, proposed in the Gospel, as an Effect of Infinite Wisdom
and Power which they may safely trust unto, in Opposition unto all other ways
and means, pretending to be useful unto the same End. And this will give us
Light into the Nature and Actings of saving Faith, which we Enquire after.

3. THE whole Scripture, and all Divine Institutions from the Beginning, do
testify in general that this way of God for the saving Sinners is by
Commutation, Substitution, Atonement, Satisfaction and Imputation. This is the
Language of the first Promise, and all the Sacrifices of the Law founded
thereon. This is the Language of the Scripture: There is a way whereby Sinners
may be saved, a way that God has found out and appointed. Now it being the Law
wherein Sinners are concerned, the Rule of all things between God and them
should seem to be by what they can do or suffer with Respect unto that Law: No,
says the Scripture, it cannot be so; For by the Deeds of the Law no man living
shall be justified in the sight of God, Psalm. 142. 2. Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16.
Neither shall it be by their Personal Answering of the Penalty of the Law which
they have broken: For they cannot do so, but they must perish eternally: For,
If thou Lord should mark Iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? Psalm. 130. 3.
There must therefore be, there is another way, of a different Nature and Kind
from these, for the saving of Sinners, or there is no due Revelation made of
the mind of God in the Scripture. But that there is so, and what it is, is the
main Design of it to declare: And this is by the Substitution of a Mediator
instead of the Sinners that shall be saved, who shall both bear the Penalty of
the Law which they had incurred, and fulfill that Righteousness which they
could not attain unto.

THIS in general is Gods way of saving Sinners, whether Men like it or no: For
what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for Sin condemned Sin in the
flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 3,
4. See also Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. He made him to be sin for us, who knew
no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

HERE Unbelief has prevailed with many in this latter Age to reject the Glory
of God herein: But we have vindicated the Truth against them sufficiently
elsewhere.

4. THERE are sundry things previously required, to give us a clear View of the
Glory of God in this way of saving Sinners: Such are, a due Consideration of
the Nature of the Fall of our first Parents, and of our Apostasy from God
thereby. I may not stay here to show the Nature or Aggravations of them:
Neither can we conceive them aright, much less express them. I only say, that
unless we have due Apprehensions of the Dread and Terror of them, of the
Invasion made on the Glory of God, and the Confusion brought on the Creation by
them, we can never discern the Reason and Glory of rejecting the Way of
Personal Righteousness, and the establishing this way of a Mediator for the
saving of Sinners. A due Sense of our present infinite Distance from God, and
the Impossibility that there is in our selves of making any Approaches unto
him, is of the same Consideration; so likewise is that of our utter Disability
to do any thing that may answer the Law, or the Holiness and Righteousness of
God therein; of our universal Unconformity in our Natures, Hearts, and their
Actings unto the Nature, Holiness and Will of God: Unless, I say, we have a
sense of these things in our Minds, and upon our Consciences, we cannot believe
aright, we cannot comprehend the Glory of this new way of Salvation. And
whereas Mankind has had a general Notion, though no distinct Apprehension of
these things, or of some of them, many amongst them have apprehended that there
is a Necessity of some kind of Satisfaction or Atonement to be made, that
Sinners may be freed from the Displeasure of God: But when God's way of it was
proposed unto them, it was, and is generally rejected, because the Carnal Mind
is Enmity against God: But when these things are fixed on the Soul by sharp and
durable Convictions, they will enlighten it with due Apprehensions of the Glory
and Beauty of God's way of saving Sinners.

5. THIS is the Gospel, this is the Work of it, namely, a divine Declaration of
the way of God for the saving of Sinners, through the Person, Mediation, Blood,
Righteousness and Intercession of Christ. This is that which it reveals,
declares, proposes and tendreth unto Sinners; there is a way for their
Salvation. As this is contained in the first Promise, so the Truth of every
word in the Scripture depends on the Supposition of it. Without this there
could be no more Intercourse between God and us, than is between Him and
Devils. Again, it declares, that this way is not by the Law or its Works; by
the first Covenant, or its Conditions; by our own Doing or Suffering; but it is
a new way found out in, and proceeding from Infinite Wisdom, Love, Grace and
Goodness; namely, by the Incarnation of the Eternal Son of God, his Susception
of the Office of a Mediator, doing and suffering in the Discharge of it
whatever was needful for the Justification and Salvation of Sinners, unto his
own eternal Glory: See Romans 3. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Chap. 8. 3, 4. 2 Cor. 5. 19,
20, 21. etc.

MOREOVER, the Gospel adds, that the only way of obtaining an Interest in this
Blessed Contrivance of saving Sinners, by the Substitution of Christ, as the
Surety of the Covenant, and thereon the Imputation of our sins to him, and of
his Righteousness unto us, is by Faith in him.

HERE comes in that Trial of Faith which we Enquire after: This way of saving
Sinners heing proposed, offered and tendered unto us in the Gospel, true and
saving Faith receives it, approves of it, rests in it, renounceth all other
Hopes and Expectations, reposing its whole Confidence therein.

FOR it is not proposed unto us merely as a Notion of Truth, to be assented to
or denied, in which Sense all believe the Gospel that are called Christians;
they do not esteem it a Fable: But it is proposed unto us as that which we
ought practically to close withal, for our selves to trust alone unto it for
Life and Salvation. And I shall speak briefly unto two things.

1. HOW does saving Faith approve of this way? on what Accounts, and unto what
Ends. 2. HOW it does evidence and manifest it self hereby unto the Comfort of
Believers.
First, IT approves of it, as that which every way becomes God to find out, to
grant and propose: So speaks the Apostle, Heb. 2. 10. It became him in bringing
many Sons to Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through
Sufferings. That becomes God, is worthy of him, is to be owned concerning him,
which answers unto his infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Grace, Holiness and
Righteousness, and nothing else. This Faith discerns, judges and determines
concerning this way, namely, that it is every way worthy of God, and answers
all the holy Properties of his Nature: This is called the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

THIS Discovery of the Glory of God in this way is made unto Faith alone, and
by it alone it is embraced. The not discerning of it, and thereon the want of
an Acquiescency in it, is that Unbelief which ruins the Souls of Men. The
Reason why Men do not embrace the way of Salvation tendered in the Gospel, is
because they do not see, nor understand, how full it is of Divine Glory, how it
becomes God, is worthy of him, and answers all the Perfections of his Nature.
Their Minds are blinded, that the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the Image of God, does not shine into them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And so they deal
with this way of God, as if it were Weakness and Folly.

HEREIN consists the Essence and Life of Faith. It sees, discerns and
determines, that the way of Salvation of Sinners by Jesus Christ proposed in
the Gospel, is such as becomes God and all his divine Excellencies to find
out, appoint and propose unto us. And herein does it properly give Glory to
God, which is its peculiar Work and Excellency, Romans 4. 20. Herein it rests,
and refreshes it self.

IN particular, Faith herein rejoices in the manifestation of the infinite
Wisdom of God. A View of the Wisdom of God, acting it self by his Power in the
Works of Creation, (for in Wisdom he made them all) is the sole Reason of
Ascribing Glory unto him in all natural Worship, whereby we glorify him as
God; and a due Apprehension of the infinite Wisdom of God, in the new Creation,
in the way of saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, is the foundation of all
Spiritual, Evangelical Ascription of Glory to God.

IT was the Design of God in a peculiar way to manifest and glorify his Wisdom
in this Work. Christ crucified is the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, 1
Cor. 1. 24. And all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid in him, Col.
2. 3. All the Treasures of Divine Wisdom are laid up in Christ, and laid out
about him, as to be manifested unto Faith in and by the Gospel. He designed
herein to make known his manifold Wisdom, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10.

WHEREFORE, according to our Apprehension and Admiration of the Wisdom of God
in the Constitution of this way of Salvation is our Faith, and no otherwise:
Where that does not appear unto us, where our Minds are not affected with it,
there is no Faith at all.

I cannot stay here to reckon up the especial Instances of Divine Wisdom
herein. Somewhat I have attempted toward it in other Writings; and I shall
only say at present, that the foundation of this whole work and way, in the
Incarnation of the Eternal Son of God, is so glorious an Effect of infinite
Wisdom, as the whole blessed Creation will admire to Eternity. This of it self
bespeaks this way and work divine. Herein the Glory of God shine in the face of
Christ Jesus. This is of God alone; this is that which becomes him, that which
nothing but infinite Wisdom could extend unto. Whilst Faith lives in a due
Apprehension of the Wisdom of God in this, and the whole Superstruction of this
way, on this foundation it is safe.

GOODNESS, Love, Grace and Mercy, are other Properties of the Divine Nature,
wherein it is gloriously amiable. God is Love: There is none good but he: Grace
and Mercy are among the principal Titles which he every where assumes to
himself; and it was his Design to manifest them all to the utmost in this work
and way of saving Sinners by Christ, as is every where declared in the
Scripture; and all these lie open to the Eye of Faith herein: It sees infinite
Goodness, Love and Grace, in this way, such as becomes God, such as can reside
in none but him, which it therefore rests and rejoices in, 1 Pet. 1. 8. In
Adherence unto, and Approbation of this way of Salvation, as expressive of
these Perfections of the Divine Nature, does Faith act it self continually.

WHERE Unbelief prevails, the Mind has no view of the Glory that is in this
way of Salvation, in that it is so becoming of God and all his holy Properties,
as the Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And where it is so, whatever is
pretended, Men cannot cordially receive it and embrace it; for they know not
the Reason for which it ought to be so embraced: They see no Form nor
Comeliness in Christ, who is the Life and Center of this way, no Beauty for
which he should be desired, Isa. 5^. 2. Hence, in the first Preaching of it, it
was unto the Jews a Stumbling Block, and unto the Greeks Foolishness; For by
reason of their Unbelief they could not see it to be what it is, the Power of
God, and the Wisdom of God, and so it must be esteemed, or be accounted Folly.

YEA, from the same Unbelief it is, that at this day the very Notion of the
Truth herein is rejected by many, even all those who are called Socinians, and
all that adhere unto them, in the Disbelief of Supernatural Mysteries: They
cannot see a Suitableness in this way of Salvation unto th Glory of God, as no
Unbeliever can; and therefore those of them who do not oppose directly the
Doctrine of it, yet do make no use of it, unto its proper End. Very few of them
comparatively who profess the Truth of the Gospel, have an Experience of the
power of it unto their own Salvation.

BUT here true Faith stands invincibly, hereby it will evidence its Truth and
Sincerity in the midst of all Temptations, and the most dismal Conflicts it
has with them; yea, against the perplexing Power and Charge of Sin thence
arising: From this strong hold it will not be driven; whilst the Soul can
exercise Faith herein, namely, in steadily Choosing, Embracing and Approving of
Gods way of saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, as that wherein he will be
eternally glorified, because it is suited unto, and answers all the Perfections
of his Nature, is that which every way becomes him, it will have wherewith to
relieve it self in all its Trials. For this is Faith, this is saving Faith,
which will not fail us; that Faith which works in the Soul a gracious
Persuasion of the Excellency of this way, by a sight of the Glory, of the
Wisdom, Power, Grace, and Love, and Goodness of God in it, so as to be
satisfied with it, as the best, the only way of coming unto God, with a
Renunciation of all other ways and means unto that End, will at all times
evidence its Nature and Sincerity.

AND this is that which gives the Soul Rest and Satisfaction, as unto its
Entrance into Glory upon it Departure out of this World. It is a great thing to
apprehend in a due manner, that a Poor Soul that has been Guilty of many Sins,
leaving the Body it may be under great Pain, Distress and Anguish, it may be by
outward Violence, should be immediately admitted and received into the Glorious
Presence of God, with all the holy. Attendants of his Throne, there to enjoy
Rest and Blessedness for evermore. But here also Faith discerns and approves of
this great, of this ineffable divine Opperation, as that which becomes the
infinite Greatness of that Wisdom and Grace which first designed it, the
glorious Efficacy of the Mediation of Christ, and the Excellency of the
Sanctification of the Holy Spirit, without any Expectation from any thing in it
self, as a Cause meritorious of an Admission into this Glory: Neither did ever
any man know what it is, or desire it in a due manner, who looked for any
Desert of it in himself, or conceived any Proportion between it and what he is
or has done in this World. Hence some of those who have not this Faith have
invented another State after Men are gone out of this world, to make them meet
for Heaven, which they call Purgatory: For, on what Grounds a man should expect
an Entrance into Glory on his Departure out of this World, they understand not.

LET them who are exercised with Temptations and Dejections, bring their Faith
unto this Trial. And this is the Case in various Degrees of us all. First then,
Examine strictly by the Word whether this be a true Description of the Nature
and Acting of saving Faith. Sundry things are supposed or asserted in it; as,
(1.) That the way of saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, is the principal Effect of
Divine Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Love and Grace. (2.) That the Design of the
Gospel is to manifest, declare and testify that so it is, and so to make known
the Glory of God therein. (3.) That saving Faith is that Act, Duty and Work of
the Soul, whereby we receive the Record of God concerning these things, do
ascribe the Glory of them all unto him, as discovering it in the way of Life
proposed unto us. (4.) That hereon it proceeds unto a Renunciation of all other
Ways, Means, Hopes, Reliefs, in Opposition unto this way, or in Conjunction
with it, as unto Acceptance with God in Life and Salvation. I say, in the first
place Examine these things strictly by the Word, and if they appear to be (as
they are) Sacred, Evangelical, Fundamental Truths, be not moved from them, be
not shaken in them by any Temptation whatever.

AND in the next place, bring your Faith to the Trial on these Principles: What
do you judge concerning Gods way of saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, as proposed
in the Gospel? are you satisfied in it, that it is such as becomes God, and
answers all the glorious Attributes of his Nature? Would you have any other way
proposed in the room of it? Can you, will you commit the eternal Welfare of
your Souls unto the Grace and Faithfulness of God in this way, so as that you
have no Desire to be saved any other way? Does the Glory of God in any measure
shine forth unto you in the Face of Jesus Christ? Do you find a secret Joy in
your Hearts, upon the Satisfaction you take in the proposal of this way unto
you by the Gospel? Do you in all your Fears and Temptations, in all Approaches
of Death, renounce all other Reserves and Reliefs, and betake your whole
Confidence unto this way alone, and the Representation of God made therein?
Herein lies that Faith, and its Exercise, which will be an Anchor unto your
Souls in all their Trials.

AND this is the first and principal Ground, or Reason, whereon Faith, divine
and saving, does accept, Embrace and Approve of the way of Gods saving Sinners
by Jesus Christ; namely, because it is such as does become him, and every way
answer unto all the holy Properties of his Nature, which are manifested and
glorified therein. And where Faith does approve of it on this Ground and
Reason, it does evidence it self to be truly Evangelical, unto the Supportment
and Comfort of them in whom it is.

Secondly, IT does so approve of this way, as that which it finds suited unto
the whole Design, and all the Desires of an Enlightened Soul. So when our Lord
Jesus Christ compares the Kingdom of God (which is this way of Salvation) unto
a Treasure, and a precious Pearl, he affirms that those who found them had
great Joy, and the highest Satisfaction, as having attained that which suited
their Desires, and gave Rest unto their Minds.

A Soul Enlightened with the Knowledge of the Truth, and made sensible of its
own Condition by Spiritual Conviction, has two predominant Desires and Aims,
whereby it is wholly regulated; the one is, that God may be glorified, and the
other, that it self may be eternally saved. Nor can it forgo either of these
Desires, nor are they separable in any Enlightened Soul. It can never cease in
either of these Desires, and that to the highest Degree. The whole World cannot
dispossess an Enlightened Mind of either of them. Profligate Sinners have no
Concernment in the former; no nor yet those who are under Legal Convictions; if
they have therewithal received no Spiritual Light. They would be saved, but for
the Glory of God therein, he may look to that himself, they are not concerned
in it. For that which they mean by Salvation, is nothing but a freedom from
eternal Misery; this they would have, whether God be or no; of what is
Salvation truly, they have no Desire.

BUT the first Beam of spiritual Light and Grace, enstates an indefatigable
Desire of the Glory of God in the Minds and Souls of them in whom it is:
Without this the Soul knows not how to desire its own Salvation: I may say, it
would not be saved in a way wherein God should not be glorified: For, without
that, whatever its state should be, it would not be that which we call
Salvation; the Exaltation of the Glory of God belongs essentially thereunto, it
consists in the beholding and Enjoyment of that Glory. This Desire therefore is
immovably fixed in the Mind and Soul of every enlightened Person; he can admit
of no Proposal of Eternal Things that is inconsistent with it.

BUT moreover, in every such Person there is a Ruling Desire of his own
Salvation: It is natural unto him, as a Creature made for Eternity; it is
inseparable from him, as he is a convinced Sinner. And the clearer the Light of
any one is in the Nature of this Salvation, the more is this Desire heightened
and confirmed in him.

HERE then lies the Enquiry, namely, How these two prevalent Desires may be
reconciled and satisfied in the same Mind? For, as we are Sinners, there seems
to be an Inconsistency between them: The Glory of God in his Justice and
Holiness, requires that Sinners should dye and perish eternally; so speaks the
Law, this is the Language of Conscience, and the Voice of all our Fears:
Wherefore, for a Sinner to desire in the first place, that God may be
glorified, is to desire that himself may be damned.

WHICH of these Desires shall the Sinner cleave unto, unto whether of them
shall it give the Pre-eminence? shall he cast off all Hopes and Desires of his
own Salvation, and be content to perish for ever? This he cannot do, God does
not require it of him; he has given him the contrary in Charge, whilst he is
in this World. Shall he then desire that God may part with and lose his Glory,
so as that one way or other he may be saved? Bring himself unto an
Unconcernment, what becomes of it? This can be no mere in an Enlightened Mind,
than it can cease to desire its own Salvation. But how to reconcile these
things in himself a Sinner finds not.

HERE therefore the Glory of this way represents it self unto the Faith of
every Believer: It not only brings these Desires into a perfect Consistency and
Harmony, but makes them to increase and promote one another. The Desire of
Gods Glory increases the Desire of our own Salvation, and the Desire of our
own Salvation enlarges and inflameth the Desire of glorifying God therein and
thereby. These things are brought into a perfect Consistency and mutual
Subserviency in the Blood of Christ, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. For this way is that
which God has found out, in infinite Wisdom to glorify himself in the
Salvation of Sinners. There is not any thing wherein the Glory of God does or
may consist, but in this way, is reconciled unto, and consistent with the
Salvation of the chiefest of Sinners. There is no Property of his Nature, but
is gloriously exalted in and by it: An Answer is given in it, unto all the
Objections of the Law, against the Consistency of the Glory of God and the
Salvation of Sinners. It pleads his Truth in his Threatenings, in the Sanction
of the Law, with the Curse annexed; it pleads his Righteousness, Holiness, and
Severity, all engaged to destroy Sinners; it pleads the Instance of God's
dealing with the Angels that sinned, and calls in the Witness of Conscience to
testify the Truth of all its Allegations: But there is a full and satisfactory
Answer given unto this whole Plea of the Law, in this way of Salvation. God
declares in it, and by it, how he has provided for the satisfaction of all
these things, and the Exaltation of his Glory in them, as we shall see
immediately.

HERE true Faith will fix it self in all its Distresses: Whatever, says the
Soul, be my State and Condition, whatever be my Fears and Perplexities,
whatever Oppositions I meet withal, yet I see in Jesus Christ, in the Glass of
the Gospel, that there is no Inconsistency between the Glory of God and my
Salvation; that otherwise insuperable Difficulty laid by the Law, in the way of
my Life and Comfort, is utterly removed. Whilst Faith keeps this Hold in the
Soul, with a constant Approbation of this way of Salvation by Christ, as that
which gives a Consistency unto both its governing Desires, that it shall not
need forgo either of them, so as to be contented to be damned, than God may be
glorified, as some have spoken; or to desire Salvation, without a due Regard
unto the Glory of God, it will be an Anchor to stay the Soul in all its Storms
and Distresses. Some Benefit which will certainly ensue hereon, we may briefly
mention.

1. THE Soul will be hereby preserved from ruining Despair, in all the
Distresses that may befall it. Despair is nothing but a prevalent Apprehension
of mind, that the Glory of God and a man's Salvation are inconsistent; that God
cannot be Just, True, Holy, or Righteous, if he in whom that Apprehension is,
may be saved. Such a Person does conclude that his Salvation is impossible,
because one way or other it is inconsistent with the Glory of God; for nothing
else can render it impossible. Hence arises in the Mind an utter Dislike of
God, with revengeful* Thoughts against him, for being what he is. This cuts off
all Endeavors of Reconciliation; yea, begets an Abhorrency of all the means of
it, as those which are weak, foolish and insufficient. Such are Christ and his
Cross unto Men under such Apprehensions; they judge them unable to reconcile
the Glory of God and their Salvation. Then is a Soul in an open Entrance into
Hell. From this cursed Frame and Ruin, the Soul is safely preserved by Faiths
maintaining in the Mind and Heart a due Persuasion of the Consistency and
Harmony that is between the Glory of God and its own Salvation. Whilst this
Persuasion is prevalent in it, although it cannot attain any Comfortable
Assurance of an especial Interest in it, yet it cannot but Love, Honor, Value,
and Cleave unto this way, adoring the Wisdom and Grace of God in it, which is
an Act, an Evidence of saving Faith. See Psalm. 130. 3, 4. Yea,

2. IT will preserve the Soul from heartless Dispondencies. Many in their
Temptations, Darknesses, Fears, Surprizals by Sin, although they fall into
ruining Desperation, yet they fall under such desponding Fears and various
Discouragements, us keep them off from a vigorous Endeavor after a Recovery:
And hereon, for want of the due Exercise of Grace, they grow weaker and darker
every day, and are in danger to pine away in their sins. But where Faith keeps
the Soul constant unto the Approbation of Gods way of saving Sinners, as that
wherein the Glory of God and its own Salvation are not only fully reconciled,
but made inseparable, it will stir up all Graces unto a due Exercise, and the
diligent Performance of all Duties, whereby it may obtain a Refreshing Sense of
a personal Interest in it.

3. IT will keep the Heart full of Kindness toward God, whence Love and
gracious Hope will spring. It is impossible but that a Soul overwhelmed with a
sense of Sin, and thereon ^illed with Self-Condemnation, but if it has a View
of the Consistency of the Glory of God with its Deliverance and Salvation,
through a free Contrivance of infinite Wisdom and Grace, it must have such
Kindness for him, such gracious Thoughts of him, as will beget and kindle in it
both Love and Hope, as Mic. 7. 18, 20. Psalm. 85. 8. 1 Timothy 1. 15.

4. A Steady Continuance in the Approbation of Gods way of Salvation, on the
Reason mentioned, will lead the Mind into that Exercise of Faith, which both
declares its Nature, and is the Spring of all the saving Benefits which we
receive by it. Now this is such a Spiritual Light into, and Discovery of the
Revelation and Declaration made in the Gospel, of the Wisdom, Love, Grace and
Mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and the way of the Communication of the Effect of
them unto Sinners by him, as that the Soul finds them suited unto, and able for
the pardon of its own sins, its Righteousness and Salvation, so as that it
places its whole Trust and Confidence for these Ends therein.

THIS being the very Life of Faith, that Act and Exercise of it whereby we are
justified and saved, and whereby it evidenceth its truth and sincerity against
all Temptations, I shall insist a little on the Explanation of the Description
of it now given: And there are three things in it, or required unto it:

1. A Spiritual Light into, and Discovery of the Revelation and Declaration
made in the Gospel, of the Wisdom, Love, Grace and Mercy of God in Christ
Jesus. It is not a mere Assent unto the Truth of the Revelation, or the
Authority of the Revealer; this indeed is supposed and included in it, but it
adds thereunto a spiritual Discerning, Perception and Understanding of the
things themselves revealed and declared, without which, a bare Assent unto the
Truth of the Revelation is of no Advantage: This is called the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. The
Increase whereof, in all Believers, the Apostle does earnestly pray for, Ephesians.
1, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. So we discern spiritual Things in a spiritual manner;
and hence arises the full Assurance of Understanding, to the Acknowledgement
of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, Col. 2. 2. Or a
spiritual Sense of the Power, Glory and Beauty of the Things contained in this
Mystery: So, to know Christ, as to know the Power of his Resurrection, and the
Fellowship of his Sufferings, Phil. 3. 10.

FAITH affects the mind with an ineffable Sense, Taste, Experience and
Acknowledgment of the Greatness, the Glory, the Power, the Beauty of the Things
revealed and proposed in this way of Salvation. The Soul in it is enabled to
see and understand, that all the things belonging unto it are such as become
God, his Wisdom, Goodness and Love, as was before declared: And a spiritual
Light enabling hereunto, is of the Essence of saving Faith; unless this be in
us, we do not, we cannot give Glory to God, in any Assent unto the Truth: And
Faith is that Grace which God has prepared, sitted and suited, to give unto
him the Glory that is his Due; in the Work of our Redemption and Salvation.

2. UPON this spiritual Light into this Revelation of God and his Glory, in
this way of saving Sinners, the Mind by Faith finds and sees, that all things
in it are suited unto its own Justification and Salvation in particular, and
that the Power of God is in them, to make them effectual unto that End. This is
that Act and Work of Faith, whereon the whole blessed Event does depend; it
will not avail a man to see all sorts of Viands and Provisions, if they be no
way suited unto his Appetite, nor meet for his Nourishment: Nor will it be unto
a Man's spiritual Advantage, to take a View of the Excellency of the Gospel,
unless he find them suited unto his Condition: And this is the hardest Task and
Work that Faith has to go through with.

FAITH is not an especial Assurance of a Man's own Justification and Salvation
by Christ that it will produce, but not until another step or two in its
Progress be over; but Faith is a satisfactory Persuasion, that the way of God
proposed in the Gospel, is fitted, suited, and able to save the Soul in
particular, that does believe, not only that it is a blessed way to save
Sinners in general, but that it is such a way to save him in particular: So is
this matter stated by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all Acceptance, or Approbation, that Christ Jesus came into the
World to save sinners, whereof I am chief. His Faith does nor abide here, nor
confine it self unto this, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save
sinners; that this is the holy and blessed way of God, for the Salvation of
Sinners in general; but he puts in for his own particular Interest in that way;
it is God's way, fitted and suited, and able to save me, who am the chiefest of
Sinners.

AND this, as was said, is the greatest, and the most difficult Work of Faith:
For, we suppose concerning the Person who is to believe,

(1.) THAT he is really and effectually convinced of the Sin of Nature, of our
Apostasy from God therein, the Loss of his Image, and the direful Effects that
ensue thereon. (2.) That he has due Apprehensions of the Holiness and Severity
of God, of the Sanction and Curse of the Law; with a right understanding of the
Nature of Sin, and its Demerit. (3.) That he have a full Conviction of his own
actual sins, with all their Aggravations, from their Greatness, their Number,
and all sorts of Circumstances. (4.) That he has a Sense of the Guilt of
secret or unknown sins, which have been multiplied by that continual proneness
unto sin, which he finds working in him. (5.) That he seriously consider, what
it is to appear before the Judgment. Seat of God, to receive a Sentence for
Eternity, with all other things of the like nature, inseparable from him as a
Sinner.

WHEN it is really thus with any man, he shall find it the hardest in the
World, and clogged with the most Difficulties, for him to believe that the way
of Salvation proposed unto him, is suited, fitted, and every way able to save
him in particular; to apprehend it such, as none of his Objections can rise up
against, or stand before. But this is that, in the second place, that the Faith
of God's Elect will do: It will enable the Soul to discern and satisfy it
self, that there is in this way of God, every thing that is needful unto its
own Salvation. And this it will do, on a spiritual Understanding, and due
Consideration of (1.) The Infiniteness of that Wisdom, Love, Grace and Mercy,
which is the Original of Sovereign Cause of the whole way, with the ample
Declaration and Confirmation made of them in the Gospel. (2.) Of the
unspeakable glorious way and means for the procuring and communicating unto us
of all the Effects of that Wisdom, Grace and Mercy, namely, the Incarnation and
Mediation of the Son of God, in his Oblation and Intercession. (3.) Of the
great Multitude and Variety of precious Promises, engaging the Truth,
Faithfulness and Power of God, for the Communication of Righteousness and
Salvation from those Springs, by that means. I say, on the just Consideration
of these things, with all other Encouragements wherewith they are accompanied,
the Soul concludes by Faith that there is Salvation for it self in particular,
to be attained in that way.

3. THE last Act of Faith in the order of Nature, is the Souls Acquiescency in
and trust unto this way of Salvation for its self, and its own Eternal
Condition, with a Renuntiation of all other ways and means for that End. And
because Jesus Christ in his Person, Mediation and Righteousness, is the Life
and Center of this way, as he in whom alone God will glorify his Wisdom, Love,
Grace and Mercy; as he who has purchased, procured and wrought all this
Salvation for us, whose Righteousness is imputed unto us for our Justification,
and who in the Discharge of his Office does actually bestow it upon us, he is
the proper and immediate Object of Faith, in this Act of Trust and Affiance.
This is that which is called in the Scripture believing in Christ, namely, the
trusting unto him alone for Life and Salvation, as the whole of Divine Wisdom
and Grace is administered by him unto those Ends. For this we come unto him, we
receive him, we believe in him, we trust him, we abide in him, with all those
other ways whereby our Faith in him is expressed.

AND this is the second Ground or Reason whereon Faith does close with, embrace
and approve of God's way of saving Sinners; whereby it will evidence it self,
unto the Comfort of them in whom it is, in the midst of all their Trials and
Temptations.

Thirdly, FAITH approves of this way, as that which makes the Glory of God in
the giving, and the Sanction of the Law, to be as eminently conspicuous, as if
it had been perfectly fulfilled by every one of us in our own Persons. The Law
was a just Representation of the Righteousness and Holiness of God; and the End
for which it was given, was, that it might be the means and Instrument of the
Eternal Exaltation of his Glory in those holy Properties of his Nature. Let no
man imagine that God has laid aside this Law, as a thing of no more use; or,
that he will bear a Diminution of that Glory, or any part of it, which he
designed in the giving of it. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but no Jot or
Little of the Law shall do so. No Believer can desire, or be pleased with his
own Salvation, unless the Glory of God designed by the Law be secured. He
cannot desire that God should forgo any part of his Glory that he might be
saved. Yea, this is that on the Account whereof he principally rejoices in his
own Salvation, namely, that it is that wherein God will be absolutely,
universally and eternally glorified.

NOW in this way of saving Sinners by Jesus Christ, by Mercy, Pardon, and the
Righteousness of at other, of all which the Law knows nothing, Faith does see
and understand how all that Glory which God designed in the giving of the Law,
is eternally secured and preserved entire, without Eclipse or Diminution. The
way whereby this is done is declared in the Gospel; See Romans ^. 24, 25, 26.
Chap. 8. 2, 3, 4. Chap. 10. 3, 4. Hereby Faith is enabled to answer all the
Challenges and Charges of the Law, with all its Pleas for the Vindication of
divine Justice, Truth and Holiness: It has that to offer which gives it the
utmost. Satisfaction in all its Pleas for God: So is this Answer managed, Romans
8. 32, 33, 34.

AND this is the first way, whereby the Faith of Gods Elect does evidence it
self in the minds and Consciences of them that do believe, in the midst of all
their Contests with Sin, their Trials and Temptations, to their Relief and
Comfort, namely, the closing with, and Approbation of Gods way of saving
Sinners by Jesus Christ, on the Grounds and Reasons which have been declared.

The Second Evidence of the Faith of God's Elect.
THE second way whereby true Faith does evidence it self in the Souls and
Consciences of Beleivers, unto their Supportment and Comfort under all their
Conflicts with sin, in all their Trials and Temptations, is by a constant
Approbation of the Revelation of the Will of God in the Scripture, concerning
our Holiness, and the Obedience unto himself which he requires of us. This
Faith will never forgo, whatever Trials it may undergo, whatever Darkness the
mind may fall into: This it will abide by in all Extremities. And that it may
appear to be a peculiar Effect or work of saving Faith, some things are to be
premised and considered:

1. THERE is in all men by Nature a Light, enabling them to judge of the
Difference that is between what is morally good, and what is evil, especially
in things of more than ordinary Importance. This Light is not attained or
acquired by us; we are not taught it, we do not learn it: It is born with us,
and inseparable from us: It prevents Consideration and Reflection, working
naturally, and in a sort necessarily, in the first Actings of our Souls.

AND the discerning Power of this Light as to the Moral Nature of Men's Actions,
is accompanied inseparably with a Judgment that they make concerning
themselves, as unto what they do of the one kind or other, and that with
respect unto the superior Judgment of God about the same things: This the
Apostle expressly ascribes unto the Gentiles, who had not the Law, Romans 2. 14,
15. The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature the things contained in
the Law; these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the
Work of the Law written in their Hearts, their Consciences also bearing
Witness, and their Thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing one another.
This is a most exact Description of a natural Conscience, in both the Powers of
it; it discerns that good and evil which is commanded and forbidden in the Law,
and it passes an acquiting or condemning Judgment and Sentence, according to
what Men have done.

WHEREFORE, this Approbation of Duties in things moral, is common unto all Men.
The Light whereby it is guided may be variously improved, as it was in some of
the Gentiles: And it may bestisled in some, until it seem to be quite
extinguished, until they become like the Beasts that perish: And where the
discerning power of this Light remains, yet through a continual Practice of
sin, and obduracy therein, the judging power of it as unto all its Efficacy may
be lost: So the Apostle declares concerning them who are judicially hardened
and given up unto sin, Romans 1. 32. These knowing the Judgment of God, that they
which commit such things are worthy of Death, not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them. They still discern what is evil and sinful, and
know what is the Judgment of God concerning such things; but yet the Love of
sin and Custom in sinning, do so far prevail in them, as to contemn both their
own Light and Gods Judgment, so as to delight in what is contrary unto them:
These the Apostle describes, Ephesians. 4. 19. Being past feeling (all sense of
Convictions) they give themselves over nnto Lasciviousness, to work all
Uncleanness with greediness; such as the World is filled withal at this Day.

THIS is not that Approbation of Obedience which we enquire after: It is in
some measure in the worst of Men, nor has it any likeness unto that Duty of
Faith which we treat of, as will immediately appear.

2. THERE is a farther Knowledge of Good and Evil by the Law, and this is also
accompanied with a Judgment acquiting or condemning: For the Law has the same
judging Power and Authority over Men that their own Consciences have; namely,
the Authority of God himself. The Law is to sinners as the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil, it opens their Eyes, to see the Nature of what they have done:
For by the Law is the Knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. and so is the Knowledge of
Duty also; for it is the adequate Rule of all Duty. There is, I say, a
Knowledge and Conviction of Duty and Sin, communicated unto Men by the Law, and
those far more clear and distinct than what is or can be found in Men, from the
mere Light of Nature; for it extends to more Instances, that being generally
lost where it is alone, as unto many important Duties and Sins: And it
declares the Nature of every sin and duty, far more clearly than Natural Light
of it self can do.

AND this Knowledge of good and evil by the Law, may be so improved in the
Minds of Men, as to press them unto a Performance of all known Duties, and an
Abstinence from all known sins, with a Judgment on them all. But yet herein
does not consist that Approbation of Holiness and Obedience which Faith will
produce. For,

1. AS unto Approbation or Condemnation of Good or Evil: That which is by the
Law is particular, or has Respect unto particular Duties and Sins, according
as Occasion does present them; and extends not unto the whole Law absolutely,
and all that is required in it. I do not not say, it is always partial: There
is a Legal Sincerity, that may have respect unto all known Duties and Sins,
though it be very rare. Hardly shall we find a Person merely under the Power of
the Law, who does not evidence an Indulgence unto some Sin, and a Neglect of
some Duties: But such a thing there may be; it was in Paul, in his Phariseisme;
He was, touching the Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless, Phil. 3. 6.
He allowed not himself in any known sin, nor in the Neglect of any known Duty,
nor could others charge him with any Defect therein; he was blameless: But
where this is, still this Approbation or Condemnation is particular; that is,
they do respect particular Duties and Sins, as they do occurr; there is not a
respect in them unto the whole Righteousness and Holiness of the Law, as we
shall see; wherefore a man may approve of every Duty in its season, as it is
offered unto him, or when at any time he thinks of it by an Act of his fixed
Judgment, and so on the contrary, as unto sin, and yet come short of that
Approbation of Holiness and Righteousness which we enquire after.

2. IT is not accompanied with a Love of the things themselves that are good,
as they are so, and an Hatred of the contrary: For the Persons in whom it is,
do not, cannot delight in the Law of God in the inward Man, as Romans 7. 22. so
as to approve of it, and all that is contained in it, cleaving to them with
Love and Delight. They may have a Love for this or that Duty, and an Hatred of
the contrary, but it is on various Considerations, suited unto their
Convictions and Circumstances; but it is not on the Account of its formal
Nature, as good or evil. Wherefore,

3. NO Man without the Light of saving Faith, can constantly and universally
approve of the Revelation of the Will of God, as unto our Holiness and
Obedience.

TO make this evident, which is the Foundation of our present Discovery of the
acting of saving Faith, we must consider, (1.) What it is that is to be
approved. (2.) What this Approbation is, or wherein it does consist.

1. THAT which is to be approved is the Holiness and Obedience which God
requires in us, our Natures and Actions, and accepts from us, or accepts in
us. It is not particular Duties, as they occur unto us, taken alone, and by
themselves; but the universal Correspondence of our Natures and Actions unto
the Will of God. The Scripture gives us various Descriptions of it, because of
the Variety of Graces and gracious Operations which concur therein. We may
here mention some of its principal Concerns, having handled the Nature of it at
large elsewhere: For it may be considered, (1.) As unto its Foundation, Spring
and Causes, and this is the universal Renovation of our Natures unto the Image
of God, Ephesians. 4. 24. or the Change of our whole Souls in all their Faculties and
Powers into his Likeness, whereby we become new Creatures, or the Workmanship
of God, created in Jesus Christ unto good Works, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 2. 10.
Wherein we are originally and formally sanctified throughout in our whole
Spirit, Soul and Body, 1 These. 5. 23. It is the whole Law of God written in our
Hearts, transforming them into the Image of the divine Holiness, represented
therein: And this, next unto the Blood of Christ and his Righteousness, is the
principal Spring of Peace, Rest and Complacency, in and unto the Souls of
Believers: It is their Joy and Satisfaction, to find themselves restored unto a
Likeness and Conformity unto God, as we shall see farther immediately. And
where there is not some gracious Sense and Experience hereof, there is nothing
but Disorder and Confusion in the Soul: Nothing can give it a sweet Composure,
a Satisfaction in it self, a Complacency with what it is, but a spiritual sense
of this Renovation of the Image of God in it.

2. IT may be considered as unto its permanent Principle in the Mind and
Affection: and this because of its near Relation unto Christ, its Conjunction
with him and Derivation from him, is sometimes said to be Christ himself; hence
we live, yet not so much we as Christ lives in us, Gal. 2. 20. For without him
we can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. For he is our Life, Col. 3. 4. As it resides in
Believers, it is a permanent principle of spiritual Life, Light, Love and
Power, acting in the whole Soul, and all the Faculties of the mind, enabling
them to cleave unto God, with purpose of Heart, and to live unto him in all the
Acts and Duties of spiritual Life: This is that whereby the Holy Ghost is in
them a Well of Water, springing up into Everlasting Life, Joh. 4. 14. It is the
Spirit that is born of the Spirit; it is the divine Nature, whereof we are made
partakers by the Promises: It is a Principle of victorious Faith and Love, with
all Graces any way requisite unto Duties of Holy Obedience; as to the matter or
manner of their Performance, enabling the Soul unto all the Acts of the Life of
God, with Delight, Joy and Complacency.

THIS it is in its Nature, however as unto Degrees of its Operation and
Manifestation it may be very low and weak in some true Believers, at least for
a Season: But there are none who really are so, but there is in them a
spiritually vital Principle of Obedience, or of living unto God, that is
participant of the Nature of that which we have described; and if it be
attended unto, it will evidence it self in its Power and Operations unto the
Gracious Refreshment and Satisfaction of the Soul wherein it is; and there are
few who are so destitute of those Evidences, but that they are able to say,
whereas I was blind, now I see, though I know not how my Eyes were opened;
whereas I was dead, I find motions of a new Life in me, in breathing after
Grace, in hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, though I know not how I
was quickened.

3. IT may be considered as unto its Disposition, Inclinations and Motions;
these are the first Actings of a vital Principle: As the first Actings of Sin
are called the Motions of sin, working in our Members, Romans 7. 5. Such Motions
and Inclinations unto Obedience do work in the minds of Believers, from this
principle of Holiness: It produces in them a constant, invariable Disposition
unto all Duties of the Life of God: It is a new Nature, and a Nature cannot be
without suitable Inclinations and Motions: And this new spiritual Disposition
consists in a constant Complacency of Mind in that which is good, and according
to the Will of God, in an Adherence by Love unto it, in a Readiness and
Fixedness of Mind with Respect unto particular Duties: In Brief, it is that
which David describes in the 119th. Psalm throughout, and that which is
siguratively foretold concerning the Efficacy of the Grace of the Gospel, in
Changing the Natures and Dispositions of those that are Partakers of it, Isa.
11. 6, 7, 8.

THIS every Believer may ordinarily find in himself, for although this
Disposition may be variously weakened, opposed, interrupted by in-dwelling Sin,
and the Power of Temptation; though it may be impaired by a neglect of the
stirring up, and exercise of the Principle or spiritual Life, in all requisite
Graces, on all Occasions, yet it will still be working in them, and will fill
the mind with a constant Displacency with it self, when it is not observed,
followed, improved. No Believer shall ever have Peace in his own Mind, who has
not some Experience of an universal Disposition unto all Holiness and Godliness
in his Mind and Soul: Herein consists that Love of the Law, of which it is
said, those in whom it is have great Peace, and nothing shall offend them,
Psalm. 119. 165. It is that wherein their Souls find much Complacency.

4. IT may be considered with Respect unto all the Acts, Duties and Works,
internal and external, wherein our actual Obedience does consist: Being on the
Principles mentioned, made free from Sin, and becoming the Servants of God,
Believers herein have their Fruit unto Holiness, whereof the end is everlasting
Life, Romans 6. 22. This I need not stay to describe. Sincerity in every Duty,
and Universality with respect unto all Duties, are the Properties of it.

THIS is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, 1 Thessal. 4. 3. That
Holiness, without which none shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. That good and
acceptable and perfect Will of God which we are to approve, Romans 12. 2.

OUR next Enquiry is, what is that Approbation of this way of Holiness which we
place as an Evidence of saving Faith? And I say, it is such as arises from
Experience, and is accompanied with Choice, Delight, and Acquiescency: It is
the Acting of the Soul in a delightful Adherence unto the whole Will of God: It
is a resolved Judgment of the Beauty and Excellency of that Holiness and
Obedience which the Gospel reveals and requires, and that on the Grounds which
shall be immediately declared, and the Nature thereof therein more fully opened.

THIS Approbation cannot be in any unregenerate Person, who is not under the
Conduct of saving Faith, who is destitute of the Light of it: So the Apostle
assures us, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is Enmity against God, for it is not
subject unto the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Whatever Work it may have
wrought in it, or upon it, yet whilst it is carnal or unrenewed, it has a
radical Enmity unto the Law of God, which is the frame of Heart which stands in
direct Opposition unto this Approbation. It may think well of this or that
Duty, from its Convictions, and other Considerations, and so attend unto their
Performance, but the Law it self, in the universal Holiness which it requires,
it does utterly dislike; those in whom it is, are alienated from the Life of
God, through the Ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4. 18. This Life of God is
that Holiness and Obedience which he requires of us in their Principles and
Duties: And to be alienated from it, is to dislike and disapprove of it; and
such is the frame of Mind in all unregenerate Persons.

HAVING thus prepared the way, I return unto the Declaration and Confirmation
of the Assertion, namely,

THAT true and saving Faith, in all Storms and Temptations, in all Darknesses
and Distresses, will evidence it self, unto the Comfort and Supportment of them
in whom it is, by a constant, universal Approbation of the whole Will of God,
concerning our Holiness and Obedience, both in general, and in every particular
Instance of it.

WE may a little Explain it:

1. FAITH will not suffer the Mind on any Occasion or Temptation to entertain
the least Dislike of this way of Holiness, or of any thing that belongs unto
it. The Mind may sometimes through Temptations fall under Apprehensions that
one shall be eternally ruined, for want of a due Compliance with it; this makes
it displeased with it self, but not with the Obedience required, Romans 7. 10,
11, 12. The Commandment which was ordained to Life, I found to be unto Death;
but the Law is holy, and the Commandment is holy, and just, and good. However
it be with me whatever becomes of me, though I dye and perish, yet the Law is
holy, just, and good. It dislikes nothing in the Will of God, though it cannot
attain unto a Compliance with it. Sometimes the Conscience is under
Perplexities and Rebukes for Sin; sometimes the Mind is burdened by the
Tergiversation of the Flesh unto Duties that are cross unto its Inclinations
and Interests, sometimes the World threatens the utmost Dangers unto the
Performance of some Duties of Religion, but none of these are able to provoke
the Soul that is under the Conduct of Faith to dislike, to think hard of any of
those ways and Duties whence these difficulties arise. And,

2. AS it will not dislike any thing in this way of Holiness, so it will not
desire on any Occasion, that there should be any Alteration in it, or any
Abatement of it, or of any thing required in it. Naaman the Syrian liked well
of the Worship of the true God in general, but he would have an Abatement of
Duty, as to one Instance, in compliance with his earthly Interest, which
discovered his Hypocrisy. Such Imaginations may befall the Minds of Men, that
if they might be excused in this or that Instance unto Duties that are
dangerous and troublesome, like Profession in the Times of Persecution, or
might be indulged in this or that sin, which either their Inclinations are very
prone unto, or their secular Interest do call for, they should do well enough
with all other things. Accordingly the Practice of many does answer their
Inclination and Desire; they will profess Religion and Obedience unto God, but
will keep back part of the Price, will hide a Wedge in their Tents, through
Indulgence unto some Corruption, or Dislike of some Duties in their
Circumstancees: They would give unto themselves the measure of their Obedience,
and according as Men's Practice is, so do they desire that things indeed should
be, that that Practice should please God which pleases them: This Faith
abhorrs; the Soul that is under the Conduct of it, is not capable of any one
Desire that any thing were otherwise than it is in the will of God, concerning
our Holiness and Obedience, no more than it can desire that God should not be
what he is. No, though any Imagination should arise in it, that by some Change
and Abatement in some instances it might be saved, which now is uncertain
whether that be so or no, it will admit of no such Composition, but will choose
to stand or fall unto the entire Will of God.

WE shall therefore in the next place proceed to enquire, on what Grounds it is
that Faith does thus approve of the whole Will of God, as unto our Holiness and
Obedience; as also, how it evidenceth it self so to do: And these Grounds are
two; tho one respecting God, the other our own Souls.

1. FAITH looks on the Holiness required of us, as that which is suited unto
the Holiness of God himself; as that which it is meet for him to require, on
the Account of his own Nature, and the infinite Perfections thereof; the Rule
is, Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy: I require that of you which
becomes and answers my own Holiness; because I am holy, it is necessary that
you should be so; if you are mine in a peculiar manner, your Holiness is that
which becomes my Holiness to require.

WE have before declared what this Gospel Holiness is, wherein it does consist,
and what is required thereunto; and they may be all considered either as they
are in us, inherent in us, and performed by us, or as they are in themselves,
in their own Nature, and in the Will of God. In the first way, I acknowledge
that by reason of our Weaknesses, Imperfections, and partial Renovation only,
as to degrees in this Life, with our manifold Defects and Sins, they make not a
clear Representation of the Holiness of God: However they are the best Image of
it, even as in the meanest of Believers that this World can afford; but in
themselves, and their own Nature, as it lies in the Will of God, they make up
the most glorious Representation of himself that God ever did or will grant in
this World; especially, if we comprize therein the Exemplification of it, in
the humane Nature of Christ himself; for the Holiness that is in Believers is
of the same Nature and Kind with that which was and is in Jesus Christ, though
his exceed theirs inconceivably in Degrees of Perfection.

WHEREFORE, we are required to be holy, as the Lord our God is holy; and
perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect; which we could not be, but that in
our Holiness and Perfection there is a Resemblance and Answerableness unto the
Holiness and Perfection of God: And if a due Sense hereof were continually upon
our Hearts, it would influence us into greater Care and Diligence in all
Instances of Duty and Sin* than for the most part we do attain unto and
preserve. If we did on all Occasions sincerely and severely call our selves to
an Account, whether our Frames, Ways and Actions, bear a due Resemblance unto
the Holiness and Perfections of God, it would be a spiritual Preservative on
all Occasions.

FAITH, I say then, discerns the Likeness of God in this Holiness, and every
Part of it, sees it as that which becomes him to require, and thereon approves
of it, reverencing God in it all; and it does so in all the parts of it, in all
that belongs unto it.

1. IT does so principally in the inward form of it, which we before described;
in the new Creature, the new Nature, the Reparation of the Image of God that is
in it: In the Beauty hereof, it continually beholds the Likeness and Glory of
God; For it is created (...), according unto God, after him, or in his Image,
in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. The new Man is renewed after
the Image of him that created him, Col. 3. 10.

WHEN God first created all things, the Heavens and the Earth, with all that is
contained in them, he left such Footsteps and Impressions of his infinite
Wisdom, Goodness and Power, on them, that they might signify and declare his
Perfection, his Eternal Power and Godhead; yet did he not, he is not said to
have created them in his own Image: And this was, because they were only a
passive Representation of him in the Light of others, and not in themselves;
nor did they represent at all that wherein God will be principally glorified
among his Creatures, namely, the universal Rectitude of his Nature in
Righteousness and Holiness: But of Man, it is said peculiarly and only, that he
was made in the Image and Likeness of God; and this was, because in the
Rectitude of his Nature he represented the Holiness and Righteousness of God,
which is the only use of an Image: This was lost by Sin: Man in his fallen
Condition does no more represent God, there is nothing in him that has any
thing of the Likeness or Image of God in it, all is dead, dark, perverse and
confused; this new Nature whereof we speak, is created of God for this very
end, that it may a blessed Image and Representation of the Holiness and
Righteousness of God. Hence it is callled the Divine Nature, whereof we are
partakers, 2 Pet. 1. 4. And he that cannot see a Representation of God in it,
has not the Light of Faith and Life in him.

HEREON, I say, Faith does approve of the Form and Principle of this Holiness,
as the Renovation of the Image of God in us; it looks upon it as that which
becomes God to bestow and require, and therefore that which has an
incomparable Excellency and Desirableness in it: Yea, when the Soul is ready to
faint under an Apprehension, that it is not partaker of this holy Nature,
because of the Power of sin in it, and Temptations on it, it knows not whether
it self be born of God or no, as is the Case with many; yet where this Faith
is, it will discern the Beauty and Glory of the new Creation in some measure,
as that which bears the Image of God, and thereon does it preserve in the Soul
a Longing after it, or a further Participation of it.

BY this Work or Act of it, does Faith discover its Sincerity, which is that
which we enquire after; whilst it has an Eye open to behold the Glory of God
in the new Creature, whilst it looks on it as that wherein there is a
Representation made of the Holiness of God himself, as that which becomes him
to require in us, and thereon approves of it as excellent end desirable, it
will be an Anchor unto the Soul in its greatest storms: For this is a Work
beyond what a mere Enlightened Conscience can arise unto: That can approve or
disapprove of all the Acts and Effects of Obedience and Disobedience, as unto
their Consequents, but to discern the spiritual Nature of the New Creature, as
representing the Holiness of God himself, and thereon constantly to approve of
it, is the Work alone.

2. IT does the same with respect unto the internal Acts and Effects of this
New Creature, or Principle of New Obedience: The first thing it producoth in us
is a Frame of Mind Spiritual and Heavenly; they that are after the Spirit are
spiritually-minded, Romans 8. 5, 6. It looks on the opposite Frame, namely, of
being Carnally minded, as vile and loathsome; it consisting in a Readiness and
Disposition of Mind to actuate the Lusts of the Flesh; but this spiritual Frame
of Mind is a just Constellation of all the Graces of the Spirit, influencing,
disposing, and making ready the Soul for the Exercise of them on all Occasions,
and in all Duties of Obedience; this is the inward Glory of the Kings Daughter,
which Faith sees and approves of, as that which becomes God to require in us;
whatever is contrary hereunto, as a sensual, carnal, worldly frame of Mind, it
looks on as vile and base, unworthy of God, or of those who design the
Enjoyment of him.

3. IT does the same with respect unto all particular Duties internal and
external, when they are enlivened and filled up with Grace: In them consists
our walking worthy with God, Col. 1. 10. 1 Thessal. 2. 12. Such a Walk as is
meet for God to accept that whereby and wherein he is glorified The contrary
hereunto, in the Neglect of the Duties of Holiness, or the Performance of them,
without the due Exercise of Grace, Faith looks on as unworthy of God, unworthy
of our high and holy Calling, unworthy of our Profession, and therefore does
constantly condemn and abhor.

ALL this, as we observed before, Faith will continue to do constantly under
Temptations and Dissertions: There are Seasons wherein the Soul may be very
weak, as unto the Powers, Effects and Duties of this spiritual Life; such the
Psalmist oftentimes complains of in his own Case, and it is evident in the
Experience of most; few there are who have not found at one time or another
great Weakness, Decays, and much Deadness in their spiritual Condition: And
sometimes true Beleivers may be at a Loss as unto any Refreshing Experience of
it in its Operations. They may not be able to determine in the Contest whether
Sin or Grace have the Dominion in them: Yet even in all these Seasons Faith
will keep up the Soul unto a constant high Approbation of this way of Holiand
Obedience, in its Root and Fruits, in its Principle and Effects, in its Nature,
Disposition, and Duties: For when they cannot see the Beauty of these things in
themselves, they can see it in the Promises of the Covenant, in the Truth of
the Gospel, wherein it is declared, and in the Effects of it in others.

AND great Advantage is to be obtained by the due Exercise of Faith herein. For,

1. IT will never suffer the Heart to be at Rest in any sinful way, or under
any such spiritual Decays as shall estrange it from the pursuit of this
Holiness. The Sight, the Conviction of its Excellency, the Approbation of it,
as that which in us and our measure answers the Holiness of God, will keep up
the Mind unto Endeavors after it, will rebuke the Soul in all its Neglects of
it; nor will it allow any Quiet or Peace within, without an Endeavor after a
comfortable. Assurance of it. That Soul is desparately sick which has lost an
abiding sense of the Excellency of this Holiness, in its Answerableness unto
the Holiness and Will of God. Fears and Checks of Conscience are the whole of
its Security against the worst of sins, and they are a Guard not to be trusted
unto in the room of the Peace of God. This is one great difference between
Believers and those that have not Faith: Fear of the Consequents of sin, with
an Apprehension of some Advantages which are to be obtained by a sober Life and
the Profession of Religion, do steer and regulate the Minds of Unbelievers, in
all they do toward God or for Eternity; but the Minds of Believers are
influenced by a View of the Glory of the Image and Likeness of God in that
Holiness and all the parts of it which they are called unto: This gives them
Love unto it, Delight and Complacency in it, enabling them to look upon it as
its own Reward: And without these Affections none will ever abide in the ways
of Obedience unto the End.

2. WHERE Faith is in this Exercise, it will evidence it self unto the Relief
of the Soul in all its Darknesses and Temptations. The Mind can never conclude
that it wholly is without God and his Grace, whilst it constantly approves of
the Holiness required of us. This is not of our selves, by Nature we are
ignorant of it. This Life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. where we can
see nothing of it; hereon we are alienated from it, and do dislike it;
alienated from the Life of God through the Ignorance that is in us, Ephesians. 4.
18. And most men live all their days in a Contempt of the principal Evidences
and Duties of this Life of God, and of the Principle of it, which they look on
as a Fable: Wherefore the Mind may have great Satisfaction in a sight of the
Beauty and Approbation of this Holiness, as that which nothing can produce but
sincere and saving Faith.

Secondly, FAITH approves of this way of Holiness and Obedience, as that which
gives that Rectitude and Perfection unto our Nature whereof it is capable in
this World. It is the only Rule and Measure of them; and whatever is contrary
thereunto, is perverse, crooked, vile and base. Some Men think that their
Nature is capable of no other Perfection but what consists in the Satisfaction
of their Lusts; they know no other Blessedness, nothing that is suitable to
their Desires but the Swinge of Nature, in the Pursuit of its corrupt Lusts and
Pleasures: So are they described by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 19. The Business of
their Lives is to make Provision for the flesh, to fulfill it in the Lusts
thereof: They walk in the Lusts of the flesh, fulfilling (so far as they are
able) the Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind, Ephesians. 2. 3. They neither know
nor understand what an Hell of Confusion, Disorder, and base Degeneracy from
their Original Constitution, their Minds are filled withal; this Perfection is
nothing but the next Disposition unto Hell, and it does manifest its own
vileness unto every one who has the least Ray of Spiritual Light.

SOME among the Heathen placed the Rectitude of Nature in Moral Virtues and
Operations, according unto them, and this was the utmost that natural Light
could could ever rise up unto: But the Uncortainty and Weakness hereof are
discovered by the Light of the Gospel.

IT is Faith alone that discovers what is good for us, in us, and unto us,
whilst we are in this World: It is in the Renovation of the Image of God in us,
in the Change and Transformation of our Nature into his Likeness; in acting
from a gracious Principle of a Divine Life, in Duties and Operations suited
thereunto, in the participation of the Divine Nature by the Promises, that the
Good, the Perfection, the Order, the present Blessedness of our Nature do
consist.

HEREBY are the Faculties of our Souls exalted, elevated, and enabled to act
primigenial Powers, with respect unto God, and our Enjoyment of him, which is
our utmost End and Blessedness. Hereby are our Affections placed on their
proper Objects, (such as they were created meet for, and in closing wherewith
their Satisfaction, Order, and Rest does consist) namely, God and his Goodness,
or God as revealed in Jesus Christ by the Gospel; hereby all the Powers of our
Souls are brought into a blessed Frame and Harmony in all their Operations,
whatever is dark, perverse, unquiet, vise and base, being cast out of them; but
these things must be a little more distinctly explained.

1. THERE is in this Gospel-Holiness, as the Spring and Principle of it, a
spiritual saving Light, enabling the Mind and Understanding to know God in
Christ, and to discern spiritual things in a spiritual saving manner; for
herein God shines into our Hearts, to give us the Knowledge of his Glory in the
Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Without this, in some Degree, whatever
pretense there may be, or Appearance of Holiness in any, there is nothing in
them of what is really so, and thereon accepted with God. Blind Devotion, that
is, an Inclination of Mind unto Religious Duties destitute of this Light, will
put Men on a Multiplication of Duties, especially such as are of their own
Invention, in a show of Wisdom in Will Worship, Humility, and neglecting of the
Body, as the Apostle speaks Col. 1. 23. wherein there is nothing of
Gospel-Holiness.

THE new man is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that created him,
Col. 3. 10. That this saving Light and Knowledge is the Spring and Principle of
all real Evangelical Holiness and Obedience, the Apostle declares in that
Description which he gives us of the whole of it, both in its Beginning and
Progress, Col. 1. 9, 10, 11. We desire that you may be filled with the
Knowledge of his Will, in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding: That you
might walk worthy of the Lord, in all pleasing, being fruitful in every good
Work, and increasing in the Knowledge of God, strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious Power, unto all patience and longsuffering with
joyfulness. It is a blessed Account that is here given us of that
Gospel-Holiness which we enquire after, in its Nature, Original, Spring,
Progress, Fruits and Effects: And a serious Consideration of it as here
proposed, a View of it in the Light of Faith, will evidence how distant and
different it is from those Schemes of Moral Virtues which some would substitute
in its room; it has a Glory in it which no unenlightned Mind can behold or
comprehend; the foundation of it is laid in the Knowledge of the Will of God,
in all Wisdom and Spiritual-Understanding; this is that spiritual saving Light
whereof we (...), the Increase hereof is prayed for in Believers by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Even that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Glory, would give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
Knowledge of him; the Eyes of your Understanding being enlightened, that you may
know what is the Hope of his Calling, and what is the Riches of the Glory of
his Inheritance in the Saints; which here is called increasing in the Knowledge
of God, ver. 10. The singular Glory of this saving Light in its Original, its
Causes, Use and Effects, is most illustriously here declared, and this Light is
in every true Believer, and is the only immediate Spring of all Gospel-Holiness
and Obedience: For, The new man is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him
that created him, Col. 3. 10.

THIS Light, this Wisdom, this spiritual Understanding thus communicated unto
Believers, is the Rectitude and Perfection of their Minds in this World: It is
that which gives them Order, and Peace, and Power, enabling them to act all
their Faculties in a due manner, with respect unto their Being and End: It is
that which gives Beauty and Glory to the inward man, and which constitutes a
Believer an Inhabitant of the Kingdom of Light; whereby we are delivered from
the Power of Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of the Son of God's
Love, Col. 1. 13. Or, out of Darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.

THAT which is contrary hereunto, is that Ignorance, Darkness, Blindness, and
Vanity, which the Scripture declares to be in the Minds of all unregenerate
Persons; and they are really so, where they are not cured by the glorious
working of the Power and Grace of God beforementioned.

NOW Faith discerns these things as the spiritual man discerns all things,
1 Cor. 2. 15. It sees the Beauty of this heavenly Light, and judges that it is
that which gives Order and Rectitude unto the Mind; as also that which is
contrary unto it is vile, base, horrid, and to be ashamed of. As for those who
love Darkness more than Light, because their Deeds are evil, it knows them to
be strangers unto Christ and his Gospel.

2. Again, there is required unto this Holiness a Principle of Spiritual Life
and Love unto God: This guides, acts, and rules in the Soul, in all its
Obedience, and it gives the Soul its proper order in all its Operations: That
which is contrary hereunto is Death, and Enmity against God. Faith judges
between these two Principles and their Operations; the former in all its
Actings it approves of as lovely, beautiful, desirable, as that which is the
Rectitude and Perfection of the Will; and the other it looks on as deformed,
froward, and perverse.

3. THE like may be said of its Nature and Operations in the Affections, as
also of all those Duties of Obedience which proceed from it, as it is described
in the place beforementioned.

IT remains only, that we show by what Acts, Ways, and Means, Faith does
evidence this its Approbation of Gospel-Holiness, as that which is lovely and
desirable in it self, and which gives all that Rectitude and Perfection unto
our Minds, which they are capable of in this World. And it does so,

1. BY that Self-displacency and Abasement which it works in the Mind on all
Instances and Occasions, where it comes short of this Holiness: This is the
chief Principle and Cause of that holy Shame which befalls Believers on every
Sin and Miscarriage, wherein they come short of what is required in it, Romans 6.
21. The things whereof ye are now ashamed: Now when by the Light of Faith you
see how vile it is, and unworthy of you, what a Debasement of your Souls there
is in it, you are ashamed of it. It is true, the principal Cause of this holy
Shame, is a sense of the Unsuitableness that is in sin unto the Holiness of
God, and the horrible Ingratitude and Disingenuity that there is in sinning
against him: But it is greatly promoted by this Consideration, that it is a
thing unworthy of us, and that wherein our Natures are exceedingly debased. So
it it said of provoking Sinners, that they debase themselves even unto Hell,
Isa. 57. 9. or make themselves as vile as Hell it self, by ways unworthy the
Nature of men. And this is one Ground of all those severe Self-reflections
which accompany godly Sorrow for sin, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

AND hereby does Faith evidence it self and its own Sincerity, whilst a man is
ashamed of, and abased in himself for every sin, for every thing of sin,
wherein it comes short of the Holiness required of us, as that which is base
and unworthy of our Nature, in its present Constitution and Renovation; though
it be that which no Eye sees but God's and his own, he has that in him which
will grow on no Root but sincere Believing. Wherefore, whatever may be the
disquieting Conflicts of sin in and against our Souls, whatever Decays we may
fall into, which be the two Principles of Darkness and Fears in Believers,
whilst this inward holy Shame, and Self-abasement, on the Account of the
Vileness of sin, is preserved; Faith leaves not it self without an Evidence in
us.

2. IT does the same by a spiritual Satisfaction which it gives the Soul in
every Experience of the transforming Power of this Holiness, rendering it more
and more like unto God. There is a secret Joy and spiritual Refreshment rising
in the Soul from a sense of its Renovation unto the Image of God, and all the
Actings and Increases of the Life of God in it augment this Joy; herein
consists its gradual Return unto its primitive Order and Rectitude, with a
blessed Addition of supernatual Light and Grace by Christ Jesus: It finds it
self herein coming home to God from its old Apostasy, in the way of approaching
to Eternal Rest and Blessedness: And there is no Satisfaction like unto that
which it receives therein.

THIS is the second way wherein Faith will abide firm and constant, and does
evidence it self in the Soul of every Believer; however low and mean its
Seize be, in this spiritual Life, and the Fruits of it, though it be
overwhelmed with Darkness and a sense of the Guilt of sin, though it be
surprised and perplexed with the Deceit and Violence thereof, yet Faith will
continue here firm and unshaken. It sees that Glory and Excellency in the
Holiness and Obedience that God requires of us, as it is a Representation of
his own glorious Excellencies, the Renovation of his Image, and the Perfection
of our Natures thereby, as it constantly approves of it, even in the deepest
Trials which the Soul can be exercised withal; and whilst this Anchor holds
firm and stable, we are safe.

The Third Evidence of the Faith of God's Elect.
THirdly, FAITH will evidence it self by a diligent, constant Endeavor, to
keep it self and all Grace in due Exercise, in all Ordinances of Divine
Worship, private and public.

THIS is the Touchstone of Faith and spiritual Obedience, the most intimate
and difficult part of this Exercise: Where this is not, there is no Life in the
Soul. There are two things whereby Men do or may deceive themselves herein;
(1.) Abounding in the outward Performance of Duties, or a Multiplication of
them; hereby Hypocrites have in all Ages deceived themselves, Isa. 58. 2, 3.
And it was the Covering that the Church of Rome provided for their Apostasy
from the Gospel: An Endless Multiplication of Religious Duties was that which
they trusted to, and boasted in; and we may find those daily that pretend a
Conscience, as unto the constant Observation of outward Duties, and yet will
abstain from no sin that comes in the way of their Lusts. And Men may and do
oft-times abide constant in them, especially in their Families, and in public;
yea, multiply them beyond the ordinary Measure, hoping to countenance
themselves in other Lusts, and Neglects thereby. (2.) Assistance of Gifts in
the Performance of them; but as this may be, where where there is not one Dram
of Grace, saving Grace, so when rested in it, is a most powerful Engine to keep
the Soul in Formality, to ruin all Beginning of Grace, and to bring an
incurable hardness in the whole Soul.

WHEREVER Faith is in sincerity it will constantly labor, endeavor, and
strive to fill up all Duties of Divine Worship with the living, real,
heart-acting of Grace; and where it does not so, where this is not attained, it
will never suffer the Soul to take any Rest or Satisfaction in such Duties, but
will cast them away as a defiled Garment: He that can pass through such Duties
without a sensible Endeavor for the real Exercise of Grace in them, and
without Self-abasement on the performance of them, will hardly find any other
clear Evidence of saving Faith in himself.

THERE are three Evils that have followed the Ignorance, or Neglect, or
Weariness of this Exercise of Faith, which have proved the Ruin of multitudes.

1. THIS has been the Occasion and Original of all false Worship in the World,
with the Invention of those Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies wherein it
consists: For Men having lost the Exercise of Faith in the Ordinances of
Worship that are of Divine Institution, they found the whole of it to be
useless and burdensome unto them: For without this constant Exercise of Faith
there is no Life in it, nor Satisfaction to be obtained by it; they must
therefore have something in it, or accompanying of it, which may entertain
their Minds, and engage their Affections unto it: If this had not been done, it
would have been utterly deserted by the most. Hereon were invented Forms of
Prayer in great Diversity, with continual Diversions and Avocations of the Mind
from what is proposed: Because it cannot abide in the pursuit of any thing
spiritual, without the Exercise of Faith: This gives it some Entertainment by
the mere Performance, and makes it think there is something where indeed is
nothing; hereunto are added outward Ceremonies of Vestments, Postures, and
Gestures of Veneration unto the same end; there is no other Design in them all,
but to entertain the Mind and Affections with some Complacency and Satisfaction
in outward Worship, upon the loss or want of that Exercise of Faith which is
the Life and Soul of it in Believers: And as any Persons do decay herein, they
shall find themselves insensibly sinking down into the use of these lifeless
Forms, or that Exercise of their natural Faculties and Memory, which is not one
Jot better: Yea, by this means some from an Eminency in Spiritual Gifts, and
the performance of Duties by virtue of them, have sunk into an Ave-Mary, or a
Credo, as the best of their Devotion.

2. THIS has caused many to turn aside, to fall off from, and forsake the
solemn Ordinances of Divine Worship, and to betake themselves unto vain
Imaginations for Relief, in Trembling, Enthusiastical Singing and seigned
Raptures; from hence have so many forsaked their own Mercies to follow after
lying Vanities, they kept for a while unto the Observance of the divine
Institutions of Worship, but not having Faith to exercise in them, by which
alone they are Life and Power, they became useless and burdensome unto them;
they could find neither Sweetness, Satisfaction, nor Benefit in them. It is not
possible that so many in our days, if ever they had tasted of the old Wine,
should so go after new; if ever they had Experience of that Savor, Power, and
Life, which is in the Ordinances of Divine Worship, when acted and enlivened by
the Exercise of Faith, should forsake them for that which is nothing: They went
out from us, but they were not of us; for had they been of us, they would have
continued with us: Had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory. This therefore is the true Reason why so many in our days, after they
have for a season abode under and in the Observation of the Gospel Ordinances
of Worship, have fallen off from them, namely, not having Faith to exercise in
them, nor endeavoring after it, they did really find no Life in them, nor
Benefit by them.

SOME on the same Ground fall into Profaneness, pretending to take up with a
natural Religion, without any instituted Worship at all. Of this sort of
Persons we have multitudes in the days wherein we live, having nothing of the
Light of Faith, they can see no Form or Comeliness in Christ, nor any thing
that belongs unto him; by these means are Souls every day precipitated into
ruin.

HEREIN therefore, I say, true Faith will evidence it self, in all Darknesses
and Distress whatsoever: It will always endeavor to keep it self and all other
Graces in a due and constant Exercise in all Duties of Worship, private and
public; it may soemtimes be weakened in its Actings and Operations, it may be
under Decays, it may be as a Sleep, and that not only as unto particular Duties
and Seasons, but as unto the inward habitual frame of the Mind; but where it is
true and genuine, it will shake it self out of this dust, cast off the sin that
does so easily beset us, and stir up it self with all Might and Contention unto
its Duty: And there is no more dangerous State for a Soul, than when it is
sinking down into Formality, and neglect of the Exercise of Faith, in a
multitude of Duties; then is it assuredly ready to dye, if it be not dead
already.

IF we are Wise therefore, we will watch, and take care that we lose not this
Evidence of Faith; it will stand us in stead, when it may be all other things
seem to be against us; some have been relieved by the Remembrance of this
Exercise of Faith, when they have been at the door of Desperation; such or such
a Season they had Experience of the work of Faith in Prayer, has been their
Relief, an Experience hereof is a Jewel, which it may be of no great use whilst
it lies by you locked up in a Cabinet, but which you will know the worth of, if
ever you come to need Bread for your Lives.

IT is therefore worth while to enquire what we ought to do, or what means we
ought to use that we may keep up Faith unto its due Exercise in all the parts
of Divine Worship, so as that it may give us a comforting Evidence of it self
in times of Temptation and Darkness? And unto this End the ensuing Directions
may be of use.

1. LABOR to have your Hearts always affected with a due Sense of the infinite
Perfections of the Divine Nature in all our Approaches unto him, especially of
his Sovereign Power, Holiness, Immensity, and Omnipresence; and this will
produce in us also a Sense of infinite Distance from him. As this is necessary,
from the Nature of the things themselves, so the Scripture gives us such
Descriptions of God as are suited to ingenerate this frame in us; this is that
which Joshuae aimed to bring the People unto, when he designed to engage them
in the Service of God in a due manner, Josh. 24. 19, 20, 21, 22. That which the
Apostle requires in us, Heb. 12. 28, 29. And unto the same End glorious
Descriptions and Appearances of God are multiplied in Scripture: If we fail
herein, if we do not on all Occasions fill our Minds with reverential Thoughts
of God, his Greatness, and his Holiness, Faith has no foundation to stand upon
in its Exercise in the Duties of Worship: This is the only inlet into the due
Exercise of Grace; where it is wanting, all holy Thoughts and Affections are
shut out of our minds; and where it is present, it is impossible but that there
will be some gracious working of Heart in all our Duties; if we are empty
hereof in our Entrance of Duties, we shall be sure to be filled with other
things, which will be cloggs and hindrances unto us: But Reverential Thoughts
of God in our Approaches unto him, will cast out all superfluity of
Naughtiness, and dissipate all carnal, formal frames, which will vitiate all
our Duties. Keep your Hearts therefore under this Charge in all your Accesses
unto God, and it will constantly open a door unto that Exercise of Faith which
we enquire after.

HEREON, and herewith we shall be affected with a sense of our infinite
Distance from him, which is another means to stir up Faith unto its due
Exercise in Reverence and Godly Fear: So Abraham was affected, Genesis 18. 27.
which the wise man directs us unto, Eccles. 5. 2.

CARNAL Boldness in the want of these things ruins the Souls of Men, rendering
all their Duties of Worship unacceptable unto God, and unprofitable unto
themselves.

AFFECT your Hearts with a due sense of Unsuitableness of our best Duties unto
his Holiness and Majesty, and of his infinite Condescension in the Acceptance
of them. Suppose there is in any of our Duties the best and the most lively
Exercise of Grace that we can attain unto, the most Fervency in Prayer, with
the most diligent Attendance of our minds, the most Humility and contrite
Trembling in hearing the Word, the most devout Affection of our Minds in other
parts of Worship; alas! what is all this to God, how little does it answer his
infinite Holiness! See Job 4. 18, 19. Chap. 15. 15, 16. Our Goodness extends
not unto him, Psalm. 16. There are no measures, there is no proportion between
the Holiness of God and our best Duties. There is Iniquity in our holy things,
they have need of Mercy and Pardon, of Cleansing and Justification by the Blood
of Christ no less than our Persons: And an infinite Condescension it is in God
to take any notice of us or them. Yea, it is that which we must live in all
holy Admiration of, all our days.

NOW if it be thus with our best Duties, in our best Frames, what an Outrage of
Sloth and Negligence is it, if we bring the Carcass of Duties unto God, for
want of stirring up Faith unto its due Exercise in them! how great is this
folly, how unspeakable is the Guilt of this Negligence! Let us therefore keep a
sense hereof upon our Hearts, that we may always stir up our selves unto our
best in Duties of Religious Worship. For,

3. A Negligence herein, or the want of stirring up Faith unto a due Exercise
in all Duties of worship, is the highest affront we can put upon God, arguing a
great Regardlesness of him; whilst it is so with us, we have not, we cannot
have a due Sense of any of the divine Perfections, of the divine Nature, we
turn God what lies in us into an Idol, supposing that he may be put off with
the out side and appearance of things. This the Apostle cautioneth us against,
Heb. 4. 12, 13. and which God detests, Isa. 29. 13. And he pronounces him a
Deceiver, and Cursed, who offers unto him the lame and blind while he has a
Male in the flock, Mal. 1. 14. Yet thus is it with us in some degree, whenever
we are negligent in stirring up Faith into its proper Exercise in holy Duties:
That alone renders them the Male of the flock, without it they are lame and
blind, a corrupt thing.

IT is a sad thing for Men to lose their Duties, to be at charge and trouble in
the Multiplication of them, and Attendance unto them to no purpose: Oh how much
more sad is it, when they are all Provocations of the Eyes of God's Glory? when
they tend to increase the Formality and Hardness of their Hearts, toward the
ruin of their Souls?

STAND in awe therefore, and sin not, commune with your own Hearts; cease not,
until on all Occasions you bring them into that Exercise of Faith wherein you
may glorify God, as God, and not deal with him as an Idol.

4. UNTO the same End, keep your Souls always deeply affected with a sense of
the things about which you are to treat with God in all the Duties of his
Worship. They are referred unto two Heads (1.) Those which concern his Glory.
(2.) Those which concern our own Souls: Without a constant due Sense of those
things on our Hearts, Faith will not act it self aright in any of our Duties:
Without this intimate Concern and deep Sense, we know not whether we need Faith
in our Prayers, or have an Exercise of it; Formality will drown all. The best
of our Prayers is but an Expression unto God of what Sense we have of those
things; if we have none, we Pray not at all, whatever we say or do; but when
these things dwell in our Minds, when we think on them continually, when our
Hearts cleave unto them, Faith will be at Work in all our Approaches to God.
Can you not Pray? charge your Hearts with these things, and you will learn so
to do.

5. WATCH diligently against those things which ye find by Experience are apt
to obstruct your fervency in Duties: Such are Indispositions through the flesh,
or weariness of the flesh, distracting foolish Imaginations, the Occasions of
Life revolving in our Minds, and the like. If such Impediments as these be not
removed, if they be not watched against, they will influence the mind, and
suffocate the Exercise of Faith therein.

6. ABOVE all, the principal Rule herein is, that we would always carefully
remember the Concernment of Christ in these Duties, with Respect unto his
Office: He is the high Priest over the House of God; through him, and under his
Conduct are we always to draw nigh to God, and his Work it is to present the
Prayers and Supplications of the Church to God. Now we have no way to come unto
Christ for his Assistance in the discharge of his Office on our Behalf but by
Faith; and in all our Duties of holy Worship we make a Profession of our doing
so, of our coming unto God by him as our high Priest; if we endeavor not
therein to have Faith in Exercise, how do we mock, or make a show to him of
doing that which indeed we endeavor not to do. There can be no greater
Contempt of Christ in his Office, nor greater Undervaluation of his Love: But a
due Consideration hereof, namely, of the Concernment of Christ in all our
Duties, with respect unto the Office which he discharges for us in Heaven, is
that which directly leads Faith into its proper Exercise: For through him, and
that in discharge of his Office, we believe in God. And when the Mind is
exercised with due Thoughts of him, if there be any thing of true saving Faith
in the Heart, it will act it self unto a blessed Experience.

THESE things may be of use to stir us up, and guide us unto that Exercise of
Faith in all holy Duties, an Experience whereof abiding in the Soul, will
evidence the Truth of it, unto our Supportment and Comfort in all Temptations
and Distresses.

SOME it may be will say, that their Gift in Prayer is mean and weak, that they
cannot express themselves with Earnestness and Fervency, and so know not
whether there be any Faith in Exercise in their Prayers or no. I answer, there
is nothing at all herein, for Grace may be very high where where Gifts are very
low, and that frequently.

AND it may be others will complain of the meaness of their Gifts on whom they
attend in Prayer, which is such as they cannot accompany them in the Exercise
of any Grace. I answer, (1.) There is no doubt but that there is a great
Difference in the spiritual Gifts of Men in this matter, some being much more
effectual unto Edification than others. (2.) Take care that you are called in
Providence and Duty to join with them whom you intend, that you do not first
voluntarily choose that which is unto your Disadvantage, and then complain of
it. (3.) Be their Gifts never so mean, if Grace in their own Hearts be
exercised by it, so it may be in ours; where there is no Evidence thereof, I
confess the Case is hard. (4.) Let the mind be still fixed on the matter or
things uttered in Prayer, so as to close with and act Faith about what is a
real Object of it, and it will find its proper work in that duty.

The Fourth Evidence of the Faith of God's Elect.
I Come in the next place to instance in a peculiar way whereby true Faith will
evidence it self, not always, but on some Occasions; and this is by bringing
the Soul into a state of Repentance. And three things must be spoken unto. (1.)
In general, what I intend by this state of Repentance. (2.) What are the Times
and Occasions, or who are the Persons wherein Faith will act it self unto this
End. (3.) What are the Duties required unto such a state.

1. BY this state of Repentance I do not understand merely the Grace and Duty
of Evangelical Repentance: For this is absolutely inseparable from true Faith,
and no less necessary unto Salvation than it self. He that does not truly and
really repent of sin, whatever he profess himself to believe, he is no true
Believer. But I intend now somewhat that is peculiar, that is, not common unto
all, whereby on some Occasions Faith does evidence its Power and Sincerity.

NEITHER yet do I mean a Grace, Duty or State that is of another kind or nature
from that of Gospel-Repentance, which is common to all Believers. There are not
two kinds of true Repentance, nor two different states of them that are truly
penitent: All that I intend, is an eminent Degree of Gospel-Repentance, in the
Habit or Root, and in all the Fruits and Effects of it. There are various
Degrees in the Power and Exercise of Gospel-Graces, and some may be more
eminent in one, and some in another; as Abraham and Peter in Faith, David and
John in Love. And there may be Causes and Occasions for the greater and higher
Exercise of some Graces and Duties at one time than at another; for we are to
attend unto Duties according unto our Circumstances, so as we may glorify God
in them, and Advantage our own Souls: So the Apostle James directs us, Chap. 5.
13. Is any afflicted? let him pray: Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. Several
States, and various Circumstances in them, call for the peculiar Exercise of
several Graces, and the diligent Performance of several Duties. And this is
that which is here intended, namely, a peculiar, constant, prevalent Exercise
of the Grace and Duties of Repentance in a singular manner: What is required
hereunto, shall be afterward declared.

2. As unto the Persons in whom this is required, and in whom Faith will
evidence it self by it, they are of various sorts.

1. SUCH as have been by the power of their Corruptions and Temptations
surprised into great sins: That some true Believers may be so, we have
Presidents both in the Old Testament and in the New: Such I mean as
Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Theft, Premeditated Lying, Oppression in
Dealing, and sailing in Profession in the time of Persecution: This latter in
the Primitive Church was never thought recoverable, but by Faith acting it self
in a state of Repentance. Such Sins will have great Sorrows, as we see in
Peter, and the incestuous Corinthian, who was in danger to be swallowed up of
overmuch Sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 1. Where it has been thus with any, true Faith will
immediately work for a Recovery by a through Humiliation and Repentance, as it
did in Peter: And in case that any of them shall lie longer under the power of
sin, through want of effectual Convictions, it will cost them dear in the
Issue, as it did David; but in this Case, for the most part Faith will not rest
in the mere joynting again the Bone that was broken, or with such a Recovery as
gives them Peace with God and their own Consciences, but by a just and due
Remembrance of the Nature of their Sin, its Circumstances and Aggravations, the
shameful Unkindness toward God that was in it, the Grief of the Holy Spirit,
and Dishonor of Christ by it, it will decline and dispose the Soul to a humble
contrite Frame, to a mournful Walking, and the universal Exercise of Repentance
all its Days.

AND indeed where it does not so, Men's Recovery from great Sins are justly to
be questioned, as unto their Sincerity. For want hereof it is that we have so
many palliated Cures of great sins, followed with fearful and dangerous
Relapses; if a man subject to great Corruptions and Temptations has by them
been surprised into great actual sin, and been seemingly recovered through
Humiliation and Repentance, if he again break the yoke of this stated
Repentance whereof we speak, he will quickly again be ovorcome, and perhaps
irrecoverably. Herein he alone that walks softly, walks safely.

2. IT is necessary for such as have given Scandal and Offense by their
Miscarriages; this will stick very close unto any who has the least spark of
saving Faith. It is that which God is in a peculiar manner provoked with in the
sins of his People, as in the Case of David, 2 Samuel 12. 14. So also Ezekiel. 36.
20. Romans 2. 24. This keeps alive the Remembrance of sin, and sets it before Men
continually, and is a spring in a gracious Soul of all Acts and Duties of
Repentance; it was so in David all his days, and probably in Mary Magdalen
also. Where it has been thus with any, Faith will keep the Soul in an humble
and contrite frame, watchful against Pride, Elation of Mind, Carelessness and
Sloth; it will recover godly Sorrow and Shame, with Revenge, or
Self-reflection, in great Abasement of Mind, all which things belong to the
state of Repentance intended. They that can easily shake of a Sense of Scandal
given by them, have very little of Christian Ingenuity in their Minds.

3. IT is so unto such as have perplexing Lusts and Corruptions which they
cannot so subdue but that they will be perplexing and desiling of them: For
where there are such, they will in Conjunction with Temptations frequently
disquiet, wound and desile the Soul: This brings upon it weariness and Outeries
for Deliverance, Romans 7. 24. In this State Faith will put the Soul on Prayer,
Watchfulness, Diligence, in Opposition unto the Deceit and Violence of sin. But
this is not all, it will not rest here, but it will give the Mind such a Sense
of its distressed, dangerous Condition, as shall fill it constantly with godly
Sorrow, Selfabasement, and all Duties of Repentance. No man can hold out in
such a Conflict, nor maintain his Peace on right Grounds, who does not live in
the constant Exercise of Repentance, indeed who does not endeavor in some
measure to come up unto that State of it which we shall afterward describe:
For Men who have untameable Corruptions working continually in their Minds, by
Imaginations, Thoughts, and Affections, to think to carry it in a general way
of Duties and Profession, they will be mistaken, if they look either for
Victory or Peace: This sort of men are of all others most peculiarly called
unto this State and Duty.

4. SUCH as would be found Mourners for the sins of the Age, Place, and Time
wherein they live, with the Consequents of them, in the Dishonor of God, and
the Judgments which will ensue thereon. There are times wherein this is an
especial and eminent Duty, which God does highly approve of: Such are they
wherein the visible Church is greatly corrupted, and open Abominations are
found amongst Men of all sorts, even as it is at this day; then does the Lord
declare how much he values the Performance of this Duty, as he testifies Ezekiel.
9. 4. They alone shall be under his especial Care in a day of public Distress
and Calamity: A Duty wherein it is to be feared that we are most of us very
defective. Now the frame of Heart required hereunto cannot be attained, nor the
Duty rightly performed, without that state of Repentance and Humiliation which
we enquire into; without it we may have transcient Thoughts of these things,
but such as will very little affect our Minds: But where the Soul is kept in a
constant spiritual Frame, it will be ready for this Duty on all Occasions.

5. IT becomes them, who having passed through the greatest part of their
Lives, do find all outward things to issue in Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, as
it was with Solomon when he wrote his Ecclesiastes. When a Man recounts the
various Scenes and Appearances of things which he has passed through in his
Life, and the various Conditions he has been in, he may possibly find that
there is nothing steady but Sorrow and Trouble. It may be so with some, I say,
with some good Men, with some of the best Men, as it was with Jacob: Others may
have received more satisfaction in their Course; but if they also will look
back, they shall find how little there has been in the best of their
transcient Comforts, they will see enough to make them say, there is nothing in
these things, it is high Time to take off all Expectations from them: Such
persons seem to be called unto this especial Exercise of Repentance and
Mourning for the Remainder of their Lives.

6. SUCH as whose Hearts are really wounded and deeply affected with the Love
of Christ, so as that they can hardly bear any longer absence from him, nor
delight in the things wherein they are detained and kept out of his presence:
This frame the Apostle describes, 2 Cor. 5. 2, 4, 6, 8. They live in a groaning
Condition, thoroughly sensible of all the Evils that accompany them in this
absence of the Bridegroom; and they cannot but continually reflect upon the
Sins and Follies which their Lives have been and are filled withal, in this
their Distance from Christ: Whereas therefore their Hearts are filled with
inflamed Affections toward him, they cannot but walk humbly and mournfully
until they come unto him. It may be said, that those who have Experience of
such Affection unto the Lord Jesus, cannot but have continual matter of Joy in
themselves, and so of all Men have least need of such a state of constant
Humiliation and Repentance. I say, it is so indeed, they have such matter of
Joy, and therewith Christ will be formed in them more and more every day. But I
say also, there is no Inconsistency between spiritual Joy in Christ, and godly
Sorrow for Sin. Yea, no man in this Life shall ever be able to maintain solid
Joy in his Heart, without the continual working of godly Sorrow also: Yea,
there is a secret Joy and Refreshment in godly Sorrow, equal unto the chiefest
of our Joys, and a great spiritual Satisfaction.

THESE several Sorts of Persons, I say, are peculiarly called unto that
Exercise of Faith in Repentance which we enquire after.

BEFORE I proceed to show wherein this state I intend does consist, and what is
required thereunto, which is the last thing proposed, I shall premise some
Rules for the right judging of our selves with respect unto them. As,

1. FAITH will evidence its Truth, (which is that we enquire after) in its
sincere endeavor after the things intended, though its Seize as unto
some of them be but mean and low: Yea, a sense of its coming short in a full
answering of them or Compliance with them, is a great Ingredient in that state
called unto: If therefore Faith keep up this design in the Soul, with a sincere
pursuit of it, though it fail in many things, and is not sensible of any great
Progress it makes, it will therein evidence its Sincerity.

2. WHEREAS there are sundry things, as we shall see, required hereunto, it is
not necessary that they should be found all equally in all who design this
State and Frame. Some may be more eminent in one of them, some in another; some
may have great Helps and Furtherances unto some of them in a peculiar manner,
and some great Obstructions in the Exercise of some of them. But it is
required, that they be all radically in the Heart, and be put forth in Exercise
sometimes on their proper Occasions.

3. THIS state in the Description of it will sufficiently distinguish it self
from that Discontent of Mind whereon some withdraw themselves from the
Occasions of Life, rather condemning others than themselves on mere Weariness
of the Disappointments of the World, which has cast some into crooked Paths.

THE first thing required hereunto is Weanedness from the World: The Rule of
most men is, that all things are well enough with them, with respect unto the
World, whilst they keep themselves from known particular sins, in the use of
the things of it; whilst they do so in their own Apprehensions, they care not
how much they cleave unto it, are even swalowed up in the Businesses and
Occasions of it. Yea, some will pretend unto, and make an Appearance of a
Course of Life more than ordinarily strict, whilst their Hearts and Affections
cleave visibly to this world, and the things of it. But the Foundation of the
Work of Faith we enquire into must be laid in Mortification, and Weanedness
from the World.

IN Ancient Times, sundry Persons designed a strict Course of Mortification and
Penitence, and they always laid the Foundation of it in a Renunciation of the
World, but they fell most of them into a threefold Mistake, which ruined the
whole Undertaking. For,

1. THEY fell into a Neglect of such natural and moral Duties as were
indispensibly required of them: They forsook all Care of Duties belonging unto
them in their Relations, as Fathers, Children, Husbands, Wives, and the like,
betaking themselves into Solitudes, and hereby also they lost all that
Political and Christian Usefulness which the Principles of Humane Society and
of our Religion do oblige us unto: They took themselves unto a Course of Life
rendering the most important Christian Duties, such as respect other Men of all
sorts, in all fruits of Love, utterly impossible unto them: They could be no
more useful nor helpful in the Places and Circumstances wherein they were set
by Divine Providence; which was a way wherein they could not expect any
Blessing from God. No such thing is required unto that Renunciation of the
World which we design; with nothing that should render Men useless unto all men
does Christian Duties interfere. We are still to use the World whilst we are in
it, but not abuse it: As we have Opportunity, we must still do good unto all.
Yea, none will be so ready to the Duties of Life, as those who are most
mortified to the World: Thoughts of Retirement from Usefulness, unless a great
Decay of outward strength, are but Temptations.

2. THEY engaged themselves into a number of Observances no where required of
them; such were their outward Austerities, Fastings, Choice of Meats, Times of
Prayer, whereunto at length Self-maceration and Disciplines were added. In a
Scrupulous Superstitious Obervance of these things, their whole design at
length issued, giving rise and Occasion unto innumerable Evils. Faith directs
to no such thing, it guides to no Duty, but according to the Rule of the Word.

3. AT length they began to engage themselves by Vow, into such peculiar Orders
and Rules of a pretended Religious Life as were by some of their Leaders
presented unto them, and this ruined the whole.

HOWEVER, the Original Design was good, namely, such a Renuntiation of the
World as might keep it and all the things of it from being an hindrance unto
us, in an humble Walk before God, or any thing that belongs thereunto: We are
to be crucified unto the World, and the World unto us, by the Cross of Christ,
we are to be so in a peculiar manner, if we are under the Conduct of Faith, in
a way of Humiliation and Repentance: And the things ensuing are required
hereunto.

1. THE Mortification of our Affections unto the desirable things of this Life;
they are naturally keen and sharp, set upon them, and do tenaciously adhere
unto them: Especially they are so when things have an Inlet into them by
nearness of Relation, as Husbands, Wives, Children, and the like. Persons are
apt to think they can never love them enough, never do enough for them; and it
is granted, they are to be preferred above all other earthly things; but where
they fill and possess the Heart, where they weaken and obtund the Affections
unto things Spiritual, Heavenly, and Eternal, unless we are mortified unto
them, the Heart will never be in a good Frame, nor is capable of that degree in
the Grace of Repentance which we seek. It is so with the most as unto all other
useful things in this World, as Wealth, Estates, and Peace: Whilst they are
conversant about them, as they suppose in a lawful manner, they think they can
never overvalue them, nor cleave too close unto them.

BUT here we must begin, if we intend to take any one Step into this holy
Retirement. The Edge of our Affections and Desires must be taken off from these
things: And hereunto three things are necessary.

1. A constant, clear View and Judgment of their Uncertainty, Emptiness, and
Disability to give any Rest or Satisfaction. Uncertain Riches, uncertain
Enjoyments, perishing Things, passing away, yea, Snares, Burdens, Hindrances,
the Scripture represents them to be, and so they are. If the Mind were
continually charged home with this consideration of them, it would daily abate
its Delight and Satisfaction in them.

2. A constant Endeavor for Conformity unto Christ crucified, it is the Cross
of Christ whereby we are crucified unto the World and all things in it. When
the Mind is much taken up with Thoughts of Christ as dying, how and for what he
dyed, if it has any Spark of saving Faith in it, it will turn away the Eyes
from looking on the desirable things of this World, with any delightful
friendly Aspect. Things will appear unto it as dead and discolored.

3. THE fixing of them steadily on things spiritual and eternal, whereof I have
discoursed at large elsewhere: The whole of this Advice is given us by the
Apostle, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

HEREIN Faith begins its Work, this is the first Lesson it takes out of the
Gospel; namely, that of Self-denial, whereof this Mortification is a principal
part. Herein it labors to cast off every Burden, and the Sin that does so
easily beset us. Unless some good Degree be attained here, all further Attempts
in this great Duty will be fruitless. Do you then, any of you, judge your
selves under any of those Qualifications before mentioned, which render this
Duty and Work of Faith necessary unto you? sit down here at the Threshold, and
reckon with your selves, that unless you can take your Hearts more off from the
World, unless your Affections and Desires be mortified and crucified, and dead
in you, in a sensible degree and measure, unless you endeavor every day to
promote the same frame in your Minds, you will live and dye Strangers to this
Duty.

2. THIS Mortification of our Affections toward these things, our Love,
Desire, and Delight. will produce a Moderation of Passions about them, as Fear,
Anger, Sorrow, and the like; such will Men be stirred up unto, in those
Changes, Losses, Crosses, which these things are subject unto. They are apt to
be tender and soft in those things; they take every thing to Heart, every
Affliction and Disappointment is aggravated, as if none almost had such things
befall them as themselves: Every thing puts them into a Commotion: Hence are
they often surprised with Anger about Trifles, influenced by Fear in all
Changes, with other turbulent Passions; hence are Men morose, peevish, froward,
apt to be displeased, and take offense on all Occasions; the subduing of this
Frame, the casting out of these Dispositions and perverse Inclinations, is part
of the Work of Faith. When the Mind is weaned from the World and the things of
it, it will be sedate, quiet, composed, not easily moved with the Occurences
and Occasions of Life: It is dead unto them, and in a great measure inconcerned
in them; this is that Moderation of Mind wherein the Apostle would have us
excel, Phil. 4. 5. For he would have it so eminent as that it might appear unto
all Men, that is, who are concerned in us, as Relations, Families, and other
Societies; this is that which principally renders us useful and exemplary in
this World; and for the want whereof many Professors fill themselves and others
with Disquietments, and give Offense unto the World it self. This is required
of all Believers, but they will be eminent in it in whom Faith works this
Weanedness from the World, in order unto a peculiar Exercise of Repentance.

3. THERE is required hereunto an Unsollicitousness about present Affairs and
future Events: There is nothing given us in more strict Charge in the
Scripture, than that we should be careful in nothing, sollicitous about
nothing, take no thought for to morrow, but to commit all things unto the
sovereign Disposal of our God and Father, who has taken all these things into
his own Care. But so it is come to pass, through the Vanity of the minds of
Men, that what should be nothing unto them is almost their all. Care about
things present, and Sollicitousness about things to come, in private and
public Concerns, take up most of their Thoughts and Contrivances: But this
also will Faith subdue on this Occasion, where it tends unto the Promotion of
Repentance, by weanedness from the World. It will bring the Soul into a
constant, steady, universal Resignation of it self unto the Pleasure of God,
and Satisfaction in his Will. Hereon it will use the World as if it used it
not, with an absolute Inconcernment in it, as unto what shall fall out. This is
that which our Savior presses so at large, and with so many divine
Reasonings, Mat. 6. 25, to the 34.

4. A constant Preferrence of the Duties of Religion before and above the
Duties and Occasions of Life: These things will continually interfere, if a
diligent Watch be not kept over them, and they will contend for preferrence;
and their Success is acording to the Interest and Estimation which the things
themselves have in our Minds: If the Interest of the World be there prevalent,
the Occasions of it will be preferred before Religious Duties; and they shall
for the most part be put off unto such Seasons wherein we have nothing else to
do, and it may be sit for little else. But where the Interest of spiritual
Things prevails, it will be otherwise, according to the Rule given us by our
Blessed Savior; Seek first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof,
etc. Mat. 6. 33.

I confess this Rule is not absolute, as unto all Seasons and Occasions, there
may be a Time wherein the Observation of the Sabbath must give place to the
pulling an Ox or an Ass out of a Pit; and on all such Occasions the Rule is,
that Mercy is to be preferred before Sacrifice. But in the ordinary Course of
our Walking before God, Faith will take Care that a due Attendance unto all
Duties of Religion be preferred to all the Occasions of this Life; they shall
not be shuffled off on trifling Pretenses, nor cast into such unseasonable
seasons as otherwise they will be. There also belongs unto that Weanedness from
this World which is necessary unto an Eminency in degrees of Humiliation and
Repentance, Watching unto Prayer.

5. WILLINGNESS and Readiness to part with all for Christ and the Gospel, this
is the animating Principle of the great Duty of taking up the Cross, and
Self-denial therein: Without some measure of it in Sincerity, we cannot be
Christ's Disciples: But in the present Case there is an Eminent Degree, which
Christ calls the hating of all things in comparison of him, that is required;
such a Readiness as rejects with Contempt all arguing against it, such as
renders the World no Burden unto it in any part of our Race; such as
establishes a determinate Resolution in the Mind, that as God calls, the World
and all the Concernments of it should be forsaken for Christ and the Gospel.
Our Countenances and Discourses on Difficulties do not argue that this
Resolution is prevalent in us, but so it is required in that work of Faith
which we are in the Consideration of.

2. A second thing that belongs hereunto, is a peculiar Remembrance of Sin, and
Converse about it in our Minds, with Self-displicency and Abhorrency. God has
promised in his Covenant, that he will remember our Sins no more; that is, to
punish them; but it does not thence follow that we should no more remember
them, to be humbled for them. Repentance respects Sin always; wherever
therefore that is, there will be a continual calling Sin to remembrance; says
the Psalmist, My Sin is ever before me.

THERE is a threefold Calling our past Sins unto remembrance:

1. WITH Delight and Contentment; thus is it with proffligate Sinners, whose
Bodies are grown unserviceable unto their youthful Lusts; they call over their
former Sins, roll them over in their Minds, express their Delight in them by
their Words, and have no greater Trouble but that for the want of Strength or
Opportunity they cannot still live in the Practice of them; this is to be old
in Wickedness, and to have their Bones filled with the Sins of their Youth: So
do many in this Age, delight in filthy Communication, unclean Society, and all
Incentives of Lust: A fearful Sign of being given over unto a Reprobate Mind,
an Heart that cannot repent.

2. THERE is a remembrance of Sin unto Disquietment, Terror and Despair: Where
Men's Consciences are not seared with an hot Iron, Sin will visit their Minds
ever and anon with a troublesome remembrance of it self, with its Aggravating
Circumstances. For the most part Men hide themselves from this Visitor, they
are not at home, not at leisure to converse with it, but shift it off like
insolvent Debtors, from day to day, with a few transient Thoughts and Words.
But sometimes it will not be so put off, it will come with an Arrest, or a
Warrant from the Law of God, that shall make them stand and give an Account of
themselves: Hereon they are filled with Disquietments, and some with Horror and
Despair, which they seek to pacify and divert themselves from, by farther
emerging themselves in the Pursuit of their Lusts, the Case of Cain, Genesis 4.
13, 16, 17.

3. THERE is a calling former Sins to remembrance, as a Furtherance of
Repentance, and so they are a threefold Glass unto the Soul, wherein it has a
trebble Object.

1. IT sees in them the depravation of its Nature, the evil Quality of that
Root which has brought forth such Fruit: And they see in it their own Folly,
how they were cheated by Sin and Satan; they see the Unthankfulness and
Unkindness toward God wherewith they were accompanied: This fills them with
holy Shame, Romans 6. 21. This is useful and necessary unto Repentance. Perhaps
if Men did more call over their former Sins and Miscarriages than they do, they
would walk more humbly and warily than they do for the most part. So David in
his Age prays for a renewed Sense of the Pardon of the sins in his Youth, Psalm.
25. 7.

2. THE Soul sees in them a representation of the Grace, Patience, and
pardoning Mercy of God: Thus and thus was it with me, God might justly have
cast me off for ever; he might have cut me off in the midst of these sins, so
as that I should have had no leisure to have cried for Mercy; and perhaps some
of them were Sins long continued in. O the infinite Patience of God that spared
me! the infinite Grace and Mercy of God that forgave unto me these provoking
Iniquities! This Frame is expressed Psalm. 103. 3, 4.

3. THE Soul sees herein the efficacy of the Mediation and Blood of Christ, 1 John 2. 2. Whence is it that I have deliverance from the Guilt of these sins?
that way was made for the advancing of Grace in the Pardon of them? Whence is
it that my Soul and Conscience are purged from the stain and filth of them?
Here the whole Glory of the Love and Grace of Christ in his Mediation, with the
Worth of the Atonement that he made, and the Ransom that he paid, with the
Efficacy of his Blood to purge us from all our sins, is represented unto the
Mind of the Believer: So out of the Eater comes forth Meat, and hereby a
Reconciliation is made between the deepest Humiliation, and a refreshing Sense
of the Love of God, and Peace with him.

THIS therefore a Soul which is engaged into the Paths of Repentance will
constantly apply it self unto: And it is Faith alone whereunto we are beholding
for the Views of these things in sin; in no other Light will they be seen
therein: Their Aspect in any other is horrid and terrifying, suited only to
sill the Soul with Dread and Horror, and Thoughts of Flying from God: But this
View of them is suited to stir up all Graces unto an holy Exercise.

3. HEREON Godly Sorrow will ensue; this indeed is the very Life and Soul of
Repentance, so the Apostle declares it, 2 Cor. 7. 9, 10, 11. And it comprizeth
all that is spoken in the Scripture about a broken Heart and a contrite Spirit,
which expresses it self by Sighs, Tears, Mourning, yea, watering our Beds with
Tears, and the like. David gives so great an Instance in himself hereof, and
that so frequently repeated, as that we need no other Exemplification of it. I
shall not at large insist upon it, but only show (1.) What it does respect: And
(2.) Wherein it does consist, (3.) How Faith works it in the Soul. (1.) What it
does respect: And it has a twofold Object:

1. SUCH past sins as by reason of their own Nature or their Aggravations, have
left the greatest Impressions on Conscience: It respects indeed in general all
past and known Sins that can be called to remembrance, but usually in the
course of Men's Lives there have been some sins whose Wounds on various Accounts
have been most deep and sensible, these are the especial Objects of this Godly
Sorrow; so was it with David in the whole Course of his Life, after his great
fall, he still bewailed his Miscarriage therein: The like respect he had unto
the other sins of his Youth; and none have been so preserved, but they may fix
on some such Provocation as may be a just Cause of this Sorrow all their days.

2. IT respects the daily Incursions of Infirmities in Failings, Negligences in
our Frames or Actions, such as the best are subject to; these are a matter of
continual Sorrow and Mourning to a gracious Soul that is engaged in this Duty
and way of Repentance.

(2.) WHEREIN it does consist; and the things following do concur therein:

1. SELF-JUDGING; this is the Ground and Spring of all Godly Sorrow, and
thereon of Repentance, turning away the Displeasure of God, 1 Cor. 11. 31. This
the Soul does continually with reference unto the Sins mentioned; it passes
Sentence on it self every day: This cannot be done without Grief and Sorrow;
for although the Soul finds it a necessary Duty, and is thereon well pleased
with it, and yet all such Self-reflection; are like Afflictions, not joyous but
grievous.

2. THE immediate Effect hereof is constant Humiliation: He that so judges
himself, knows what frame of Mind and Spirit becomes him thereon: This takes
away the Ground from all Pride, Elation of Mind, Self-pleasing; where this
Self-judging is constant they can have no place: This is that Frame of Mind
which God approves so highly, and has made such Promises unto; the Humble are
every where proposed as the especial Object of his own Care, his Respect is to
them that are of a broken Heart, and of a contrite Spirit: And this will grow
on no other Root. No man by his utmost Diligence on any Argument or
Consideration shall be able to bring himself into that humble frame wherein God
is delighted, unless he lay the Foundation of it in continual Self-judging, on
the Account of former and present sins. Men may put on a Fashion, Frame, and
Garb of Humility; but really humble they are not; where this is wanting, Pride
is in the Throne, in the Heart, though Humility be in the Countenance and
Deportment: And herein does this godly Sorrow much consist.

3. THERE is in it a real Trouble and Disquietment of Mind, for Sorrow is an
Afflictive Passion; it is contrary to that Compose which the Mind would
constantly be at. Howbeit this Trouble is not such as is opposed unto spiritual
Peace and Refreshment, for it is an Effect of Faith, and Faith will produce
nothing that is really inconsistent with Peace with God, or that shall impeach
it; but it is opposite unto other Comforts. It is a Trouble that all earthly
things cannot take off and remove. This Trouble of his mind in his Sorrow for
Sin, David on all Occasions expresses unto God; and sometimes it rises to a
great and dreadful Height, as it is expressed Psalm. 88. throughout. Hereby the
Soul is sometimes overwhelmed, yet so as to relieve it self by pouring out its
Complaint before the Lord, Psalm. 102. 1.

4. THIS inward Frame of Trouble, Mourning, and Contriteness, will express it
self on all just Occasions, by the outward Signs of Sighs, Tears, and mournful
Complaints, Psalm. 31. 10. So David continually mentions his Tears on the like
Account, and Peter on the review of his Sin wept bitterly; as Mary washed the
Feet of Christ with her Tears, as we should all do, a Soul filled with Sorrow
will run over and express its inward Frame by these outward signs. I speak not
of those Self-whole jolly Professors which these days abound with, but such as
Faith engages in this Duty will on all Occasions abound in these things. I
fear there is amongst us too great a Pretense, that Men's natural Tempers and
Constitutions are incompliant with these things: Where God makes the Heart,
soft and godly Sorrow does not only sometimes visit it, but dwell in it, it
will not be wholly wanting in these Expressions of it; and what it comes short
of one way, it may make up in another; whatever the Case be as to Tears, it is
certain that to multiply Sighs and Groans for sin, is contrary to no Man's
Constitution, but only to sin ingrafted in his Constitution.

5. THIS Godly Sorrow will constantly incite the Mind unto all Duties, Acts and
Fruits of Repentance whatever; it is never barren nor heartless, but being both
a Grace and a Duty, it will stir up the Soul unto the Exercise of all Graces,
and the Performance of all Duties that are of the same kind: This the Apostle
declares fully, 2 Cor. 7. 11.

THIS therefore is another thing which belongs unto that state of Repentance
which Faith will bring the Soul unto, and whereby it will evidence it self on
the Occasions beforementioned: And indeed if this Sorrow be constant and
opperative, there is no clearer Evidence in us of saving Faith. They are
blessed who thus mourn: I had almost said, it is worth all other Evidences, as
that without which they are none at all; where this Frame is not in some good
measure, the Soul can have no pregnant Evidence of its good Estate.

4. ANOTHER thing that belongs to this state, is outward Observances becoming
it; such are Abstinence unto the due Mortification of the Flesh; not in such
things or ways as are hurtful unto Nature, and really obstructive of greater
Duties: There have been great Mistakes in this matter, most men have fallen
into Extremes about it, as is usual with the most in like Cases; they did
retain in the Papacy, from the Beginning of the Apostasy of the Church, from
the Rule of the Scripture, an Opinion of the Necessity of Mortification unto a
Penitent State; but they mistook the Nature of it, and placed it for the most
part in that which the Apostle calls the Doctrine of Devils, when he foretold
Believers of that Hypocritical Apostasy, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3. Forbiding to marry,
engaging one sort of men by Vows against the use of that Ordinance of God for
all men, and enjoining Abstinence from Meats in various Laws and Rules, under
pretense of great Austerity, was the Substance of their Mortification: Hereunto
they added Habits, Fasting, Disciplines, Rough Garments, and the like,
pretended self-macerations innumerable. But the Vanity of this Hypocrisy has
been long since detected, but therewithal most men are fallen into the other
Extreme: Men do generally judge that they are at their full Liberty in and for
the Use of the things esteemed Refreshments of Nature; yea, they judge
themselves not to be obliged unto any Retrenchment, in Garments, Diet, with the
free use of all things in themselves lawful, when they are under the greatest
necessity of Godly Sorrow, and express Repentance. But there is here a no less
pernicious Mistake than in the former Excess, and it is that which our Lord
Jesus Christ gives us in Charge to watch against, Luke 22. 34, 35, 36.

THIS therefore, I say, is required unto the state we enquire after; those
things which restrain the Satisfaction of the Appetite, with an Aversation of
the joyous Enticements of the World, walking heavily and mournfully, expressing
an humble and afflicted frame of Spirit, are necessary in such a Season. The
Mourners in Zion are not to be ashamed of their Lot and State, but to prosess
it in all suitable outward demonstration of it; not in fantastical Habits and
Gestures, like sundry Orders of the Monks; not in affected Forms of Speech and
uncouth Deportments, like some among our selves; but in such ways as naturally
express the inward Frame of Mind enquired after.

5. THERE is required hereunto a firm watch over Solitudes and Retirements of
the Night and Day, with a continual readiness to conflict Temptations in their
first Appearance, that the Soul be not surprised by them; the great design in
the Exercise of this Grace, is to keep and preserve the Soul constantly in an
humble and contrite frame, if that be lost at any time, the whole design is for
that Season disappointed: Wherefore Faith engages the mind to watch against
two things; (1.) The times wherein we may lose this Frame. (2.) The means
whereby. And,

(1.) FOR the times; there are none to be so diligently watched over as our
Sollitudes and Retirements by night or by day: What we are in them, that we are
indeed, and no more; they are either the best or the worst of our times,
wherein the Principle that is predominant in us will show and act it self;
hence some are said to devise Evil on their Beds, and when the Morning is light
they practice it, Mich. 2. 1. Their Sollitude in the Night serves them to think
on, contrive, and delight in all that Iniquity which they intend by day to
practice, according to their Power. And on the other side, the Work of a
gracious Soul in such Seasons is to be seeking after Christ, Cant. 3. 1. To be
meditating of God, as the Psalmist often expresses it. This therefore the
humble Soul is diligently watchful in, that at such Seasons vain Imaginations
which are apt to obtrude themselves on the mind, do not carry it away, and
cause it to lose its Frame, though but for a Season; yea, these are the times
which it principally lays hold on for its improvement: Then does it call over
all those Considerations of Sin and Grace which are meet to affect it and abase
it.

(2.) FOR the means of the Loss of an humble frame, they are Temptations; these
labor to possess the mind either by sudden surprizals, or continued
Solicitations. A Soul engaged by Faith in this Duty is aware always of their
Deceit and Violence; it knows that if they enter into it, and do entangle it,
though but for a season, they will quite cast out or deface that humble,
contrite, broken frame, which it is its duty to preserve: And there is none who
has the least grain of spiritual Wisdom, but may understand of what sort these
Temptations are which he is obnoxious unto; here then Faith sets the Soul on
its Watch and Guard continually, and makes it ready to combat every Temptation
on its first Appearance, for then it is weakest and most easily to be subdued;
it will suffer them to get neither time, nor ground, nor strength: So it
preserves an humble Frame, delivers it frequently from the Jaws of this
Devourer.

6. ALTHOUGH the Soul finds Satisfaction in this Condition, though it be never
sinfully weary of it, nor impatient under it; yea, though it labor to grow and
thrive in the Spirit and Power of it, yet it is constantly accompanied with
deep Sighs and Groanings for its deliverance: And these groanings respect both
what it would be delivered from, and what it would attain unto; between which
there is an Interposition of some sighs and groans of Nature, for a continuance
in its present state.

1. THAT which this Groaning respects Deliverance from, is the remaining Power
of sin; this is that which gives the Soul its Distress and Disquietment:
Occasionally indeed its Humility, Mourning, and Self-Abasement are increased by
it, but this is through the Efficacy of the Grace of Christ Jesus: In its own
Nature it tends to hurt and ruin; this the Apostle emphatically expresses in
his own Person, as bearing the place and state of other Believers, To. 7. 24.

AND this constant groaning for deliverance from the power of sin, excites the
Soul to pursue it unto its destruction: No Effect of Faith, such as this is, is
heartless or fruitless, it will be opperative toward what it aims at; and that
in this case is the not being of sin; this the Soul groans after, and therefore
contends for; this is the Work of Faith, and Faith without Works is dead;
wherefore it will continually pursue sin unto all its Retirements and Reserves.
As it can have no rest from it, so it will give neither Rest nor Peace unto it;
yea, a constant design after the not being of sin, is a blessed Evidence of a
saving Faith.

2. THAT which it looks after, is the full Enjoyment of Glory, Romans 8. 23. This
indeed is the Grace and Duty of all Believers, of all who have received the
first Fruits of the Spirit; they all in their measure groan, that their very
Bodies may he delivered from being the subject and seat of sin, that they may
be redeemed out of that Bondage: It is a Bondage to the very Body of a Believer
to be instrumental unto sin: This we long for its perfect deliverance from,
which shall complete the Grace of Adoption in the whole person: But it is most
eminent in those who excel in a state of Humiliation and Repentance; they, if
any, groan earnestly; this they sigh, breath, and pant after continuually; and
their Views of the Glory that shall be revealed, gives them refreshment in
their deepest Sorrows; they wait for the Lord herein more than they that wait
for the morning. Do not blame a truly penitent Soul, if he longs to be
dissolved: The Greatness and Excellency of the Change which he shall have
thereby, is his present Life and Relief.

3. BUT there is a Weight on this Desire, by the Interposition of Nature, for
the Continuation of its present Being, which is inseparable from it: But Faith
makes a Reconciliation of these repugnant Inclinations, keeping the Soul from
Weariness and Impatience; and this it does by reducing the mind unto its proper
Rock: It lets it know that it ought not absolutely to be under the Conduct of
either of these Desires. First, it keeps them from Excess, by teaching the Soul
to regulate them both by the Word of God; this it makes the Rule of such
Desires and Inclinations, which whilst they are regulated by, we shall not
offend in them: And it mixeth a Grace with them both that makes them useful,
namely, constant Submission to the Will of God; this Grace would have, and this
Nature would have; but says the Soul, the Will and Sovereign Pleasure of God
is my Rule: Not my Will, holy Father, but they Will be done: We have the
Example of Christ himself in this matter.

7. THE last thing I shall mention, as that which compleats the state
described, is abounding in Contemplations of things heavenly, invisible and
eternal: None have more holy and humble thoughts than truly penitent Souls,
none more high and heavenly Contemplations; you would take them to be all
sighs, all mourning, all dejection of Spirit; but none are more above, none
more near the high and lofty one: As he dwells with them, Isa. 57. 15. so they
dwell with him in a peculiar manner, by these Heavenly Contemplations. Those
who have lowest thoughts of themselves, and are most filled with
Self-abasement, have the clearest Views of Divine Glory. The Bottom of a Pit or
Well gives the best Prospect of the Heavenly Luminaries: And the Soul in its
deepest Humiliations, has for the most part the clearest Views of things
within the Vail.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed of Dr. Owens, and Sold by William Marshal at the Bible in
Newgate-street.
1. THe true Nature of a Gospel Church. 2. A Treatise of the Dominions of Sin
and Grace. 3. A Brief and Impartial Account of the Nature of the Protestant
Religion. 4. A Brief Instruction in the Worship of God. 5. An humble Testimony
unto the Goodness and Severity of God. 6. A Discourse of Temptations. 7. The
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. 8. Meditations and Discourses on the
Glory of Christ. 9. Two Discourses concerning the Holy Spirit and his Work, the
one of the Spirit as a Comforter, the other as he is the Author of spiritual
Gifts, which is an Addtion to the Folio. In Octavo bound 2 s. 10. A Guide to
Church Fellowship and Order according to the Gospel Institution, wherein these
following particulars are distinctly handled: (1.) The Necessity of Believers
to join themselves in Church Order. (2.) The subject matter of the Church. (3.)
A Continuation of a Church state. (4.) What sort of Churches and Disciples of
Christ may and ought to join themselves unto, as unto entire Communion. Drice
bound 6 d.
Where you may be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's other Books that are in
Print, at the Bible in Newgate-street.

Books written by other Authors and Effigies sold as above.
Caryl's Exposition on the Book of Job. Two Volumes Pool's Synopsis in Latin.
Five Volumes. With the Index's. Pool's Synopsis on the New Testament. In Two
Volumes, in Latin, with the Index, is sold very Cheap, for 20 s. in Quires,
and 30 s. Bound. Index's of the Old and New Testament, to be sold alone. Price.
5 s. Clark's Martyrology. Dr. Manton's Effigies, Price 6 d. Dr. Owen's
Effigies, Price 6 d. Mr. Caryl's Effigies, Price 6 d. Mr. Bunyan's Effigies,
Price 6 d. With several other Ministers Effigies.

