Imprimatur,

March 12. 1678/9. Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

A true and lively REPRESENTATION OF POPERY: SHOWING That Popery is only
New-modell'd PAGANISM, AND Perfectly destructive of the great Ends and Purposes
of God in the Gospel.

Jer. 10.2. Learn not the way of the Heathen --

Gal. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

LONDON, Printed by R. Everingham for W. Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1679.

A true and lively Representation of Popery.
THAT there is but one true way to Salvation, is readily acknowledged by all
that profess themselves Christians; but whether this way lie on the right hand
or on the left, whether through the Church of Rome, or in the Reformed
Religion, that is made a Question. And though the Romanists, with confidence
enough, vainly arrogate this to themselves, as if there were no way to Heaven
but by associating and joining in Communion with their Church, and will hardly
(unless in a good mood) allow a dying Protestant to be saved; yet I doubt not
but I have sufficiently made it appear, by such evident and clear
Demonstrations, as are within the sphere and comprehension of an ordinary
Capacity, not only that the Reformed Religion is hugely agreeable and
subservient to those Grand purposes of God in the Gospel for the Salvation of
Mankind, but that Popery is infinitely prejudicial and destructive of them. And
although (considering the various Artifices and subtle Stratagems the Popish
Emissaries make use of, not only in gaining, but confirming their new
Proselytes) I cannot hope to recover such as are already ensnared by them; yet
I may reasonably suppose that these few sheets, if they chance to fall into the
hands of some one or other who desires impartially to seek and embrace the
Truth wherever he meets with it, or by what hand soever it be brought to him,
may be so fully persuaded and satisfied of the Goodness of the Protestant
Religion, and of the gross Impiety and Wickedness of the Popish, as that
whatever censure he pass upon this, yet of the other he may say, that God is in
it of a truth.

1. I consider therefore that the great End and Design of the Christian
Religion is to form in men the sacred life and nature of God; for so S. Peter
assures us, That those glorious and inestimable Promises, which God through
Christ was pleased to make to the World, were designed to recover men from
their Sins and Corruptions into a participation of the Divine Nature. 2 Pet.
1.4.
And that we may not conceive and think this to be a mere airy Notion and an
insignificant sound of Words, our blessed Savior himself expresses it by the
name of The new Birth; Except a man be born again -- And his Holy Apostle S.
Paul styles it the New Creature: Joh. 3.3.
All which being of a like signification and respect denote a certain state and
condition of life, Gal. 6.15.
to which men are brought by the Power and Grace of God in the Gospel, whereby
their hearts and minds are tuned into an universal Consent to Gods holy will.
That state of sin and misery into which all men by their first Prevarication
and Rebellion are involved, is nothing of the true nature of our Souls, but an
Extraneous and Adventitious thing, a mere Usurpation upon the Lords
Inheritance, whereby the minds and spirits of Mankind are preternaturally
forced against their proper bent and inclination; and God by the Gospel comes
to free them from this heavy Pressure and Bondage, and quickens and invigorates
their decayed Powers, with a strong and potent endeavor toward a Restitution
and Freedom. And this Conatus or Effort whereby they endeavor to throw off
their uneasy load, is expressed and decypher'd in the Holy Scriptures by the
Name of Spirit, as in Romans 8.1. where the Apostle puts an opposition between
the Flesh and the Spirit, and says they are two several Laws and States of
Being, the one tending wholly to the abasing, and dishonouring, and captivating
the Soul to vile and low purposes, and making it drudge like a Slave to promote
an Animal and sensual life; but the other being nothing but a Law of Holiness
and Righteousness, and consequently connatural to it, endeavors the freeing it
from all that violence and force used upon it. And this very same active and
enlivening Principle shall be so far quickened and invigorated by the assistance
of God's Holy Spirit, that it shall at last through his benign and powerful
Influence break into a Flame, and consume all Terrestrial Dregs and
Encumbrances, and immortalize these our dull and sluggish Bodies. So the Divine
Apostle tells us, If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell
in you; Romans 8.11.
he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal Bodies
by the Spirit that dwells in you. Now that this blessed frame and temper of
mind may be raised and renewed in us, God sent his Son into the World; and he
incites and encourages us to the attaining of so desirable a State by mighty
and stupendous Promises, suited and adapted to our best and highest
Capacities: and that we may not think the participation of the Divine Nature,
or the new Creature, that is, that constitution of mind and soul which the
Gospel came to implant in us, to be a thing which we can have no rational Idea
or Conception of; I shall give such a brief and comprehensive Character of it,
as that Eternal Wisdom has legibly engraven in the frame and contexture of the
Christian Religion. Thus therefore I conceive of it; That it is a Holy
Principle of Life and Power implanted in the Soul by the Spirit of God,
bringing every Thought, Word and Action into conformity and obedience to the
Divine Will, and begetting such a natural and genuine sense of what is Holy and
Righteous, that it is as hard for a man truly possessed of this excellent
nature to act contrary to it, as to suffer a Discission of his bodily life; and
though we bear this precious Treasure in Earthen Vessels, and it be surrounded
with the frailties and infirmities of flesh and blood, yet does it fill our
minds with comfortable hopes and assurance that our mighty Savior and
Redeemer, who expressed the greatness of his love by dying for us, will
perfectly release and set it free from the heavy pressure of those Earthly
Bodies, and at last Crown it with such a body of Light and Glory, as he himself
is possessed of in the highest Heavens, This is indeed the main end and scope
of the appearing of the Grace of God to the World; and that the Son of God
might take possession of his own Inheritance, and effectually and fully
accomplish the recovery of Mankind from the cruel Bondage of Sin and Satan into
this so desirable a state of Liberty and Freedom, wherein their souls act with
the greatest ease and pleasure, and constancy, and delight, he designed by the
promulgation of the Gospel.

2. In the first place, the utter Extirpation and rooting Idolatry out of the
World. For this is a sin so heinous, and so derogatory to the Perfections of
the Divine Nature, that however it may be subtilized and refined by the crafty
Patrons of it, yet it does most certainly thwart and cross that glorious
purpose of God in making men like to himself: And the reason of it is, because
it sinks men's minds too much into Body and Matter, and so instead of purging
their Souls from the gross affections and allurements of the Flesh, it
depresses and debases their thoughts to the lowest degree of Sensuality. Now
that when the Evangelical Dispensation should take place upon Earth, all
Idolatry was to be extirpated and destroyed, the Prophets of old have clearly
testified, Isai. 2.17, 18, 20. -- The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day,
and the Idols he shall utterly abolish: In that day a man shall cast his Idols
of Silver, and his Idols of Gold, which they made each one for himself to
worship, to the Moles, and to the Bats. That this Prophecy respects the times
of the Messiah, is acknowledged by the Jews themselves, and may receive a
further confirmation from the second and third Verses: And it shall come to
pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords House shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills,
and all Nations shall flow unto it -- For out of Zion shall go forth the Law,
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; i. e. That in the days of the Gospel
(which is frequently denoted in Scripture by the last times) the worship of the
true God shall take place, and be established among all Nations; and that this
Evangelical Dispensation which should be carried and propagated over all the
world, should begin from Jerusalem, where the Apostles of our Lord Jesus
received their full and complete Inauguration into this Office of preaching the
Gospel, by the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them; and then in that day all
the false Gods and Images of the Heathens shall be utterly thrown asitle, and
men shall honor and worship the true God only, and that in Spirit, and in
Truth And again; Zephan. 2.11. The Lord will be terrible unto them, for he will
famish all the Gods of the Earth, and men shall worship him every one from his
place, even all the Isles of the Heathen; i.e. God will abolish and destroy all
the Idols and false Deities of the Heathen, and all Nations shall be reduced to
the worship of the true God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, every one in his
own Land; so that men shall not need to go up to Jerusalem, or be obliged to
worship God here or there, but (as Christ speaks) the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit, and in Truth. And more plainly yet in Zech. 13.2.
And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord of Hists, that I will cut
off the names of the Idols out of the Land, and they shall no more be
remembered; and also I will cause the Prophets and the unclean Spirit to pass
out of the Land. And that this unclean Spirit, which solicited mankind to
spiritual whoredom and fornication, was chased out of all those parts of the
world where the Gospel was preached by the Apostles and their immediate
Successors, is evident; not only from Ecclesiastical story, but from the
complaints of the Heathen, that since the Religion of Jesus prevailed, their
Oracles were silent, and their Sacrifices were offered in vain to their
fantastic Deities. And that this was a main design of the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus, he himself assures us in his discourse with the Woman of Samaria, Joh.
4.21, 22, 23, 24. where when the Woman told our Savior, that the Samaritans
worshipped in Mount Ephraim at Shiloh, but that the Jews taught that God was to
be worshipped only at Jerusalem; v. 20. He replies, Woman, believe me, the hour
comes when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the
Father. Ye worship ye know not what; we know what we worship, for Salvation is
of the Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit, and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit, and in Truth. The most genuine Interpretation of which-seems to be
given by that pious and learned Person Mr. Mede, viz. that the Samaritans who
worshipped in the Temple of Mount Gerizim, though they worshipped the true God,
yet it was under the visible representation of a Dove, and circumcised their
Children in the name thereof; therefore (says Christ) ye worship ye know not
what; i.e. ye worship the God of Israel indeed, but it is under a Corporeal
Representation, which is an argument you do not know him; but God must be
worshipped in Spirit, and in Truth; that is, conceiving him as a Spirit, and
not under any visible shape. Therefore Idolatry is a belying God, and Idols are
termed lies, Amos 2.4. -- Their lies caused them to err. -- And Jer. 16.19.
Surely our Fathers have inherited lies, the Chaldee, have worshipped a lie.

Our blessed Lord and Savior coming into the world to correct what was amiss,
and to reform the manners of mankind, and to introduce a more spiritual
Religion than the Jewish was, it is not to be thought but he would in the first
place design the Eradication of Idolatry, which so much debases the soul of
man, and dishonours the Supreme Deity, by representing him in a gross and
material way, and likewise by giving his Incommunicable Excellencies and
Perfections to a Creature. Sure it is, the Primitive Christians retained so
clear and vigorous a sense of the heynousness of this sin, and the perfect
inconsistency of it with the spirituality of their Religion, that they chose
rather to endure all manner of torments, and die a thousand deaths, than in the
least manner pollute their souls with so gross an immorality. Pertinent
hereunto is that observation which is made, that in the first part of the
Jewish Talmud, which was made about 200 years after Christ, there is no
accusation or complaint brought against the Christians for this Idolatry of
Image Worship: but in the second part, which was finished about the year 500.
when the Church of Christ began to Paganize, there, and in all the Commentaries
of the Rabbis published in the Tenth or Eleventh Age, the Jews call the
Christian Churches the Houses of Idolatry.

It being plain then that Christ Jesus came to eradicate Idolatry, which both
spoiled the nature of the soul by sinking it into matter, and fearfully
dishonored the true and ever-living God; I come now to show wherein the Pagan
Idolatry chiefly consisted, which was in these two things: 1. In worshipping
other inferior Gods together with the true God; these lower sort of Gods being
looked upon as a kind of middle Beings or Mediators between the Supreme God and
them: And 2. In worshipping both the supreme and subordinate Gods in Images and
Statues: That the Pagans acknowledged the true God, the Maker of Heaven and
Earth; but that their Error was in worshipping more subordinate Beings
together with him, and both the Supreme and Inferior Gods in Images, Statues,
or Symbols, is the constant Opinion of the Jews, who being the only Nation
before Christianity that opposed the Heathen Polytheism and Idolatry, were most
likely to understand the ground and bottom of it. I find two quotations cited
by an eminently learned Person out of two Jewish Rabbis, which do give us
fully and excellently the sense and notion of the Jews concerning the Pagan
Idolatry. The first is out of Maimonides; You know that whoever commits
Idolatry, he does it not as supposing that there is no other God besides that
which he worships, for it never came into the minds of any Idolaters, nor never
will, that that Statue which is made by them of Metal, or Stone, or Wood, is
that very God who created Heaven and Earth; but they worship those Statues and
Images only as the representation of something which is a Mediator between God
and them. The other is one Moses Albelda; The Idolaters first argued thus (says
he) in respect of God; that since he was of such transcendent Perfection above
men, it was not possible for men to be united to, or have communion with him,
otherwise than by means of certain middle Beings or Mediators; as it is the
manner of Earthly Kings to have Petitions conveyed to them by the hands of
Mediators and Intercessors. Secondly, they thus argued likewise in respect of
themselves, that being Corporeal, so that they could not apprehend God
abstractly, they must needs have something sensible to excite and stir up their
Devotion, and fix their Imagination upon. The very same cover (as I shall show
afterward) with which the Papists would palliate their Polytheism and
Idolatry: For the Devil has only shifted the Scene, and that Apostasy of the
sons of men which he could no longer uphold under open and broad-fac'd
Paganism, he still successfully manages under the unmeet cover of the plausible
name of Christianity. But we need not rely upon these Testimonies altogether,
since S. Paul affirms the same of the Heathens, that they were not unacquainted
with the knowledge of the true God; but that their great miscarriage consisted
in worshipping many inferior Gods, and then in worshipping the true God, and
all those other created and dependent Deities in Statues and Images: That God
left not himself without witness in the most barbarous parts of the world, but
furnished all mankind with such a knowledge of himself, as might and ought to
have kept them from all sorts of Idolatry, if they had been faithful to the
light and natural inscriptions of their own souls, appears from Romans 1.21. When
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, because they fell into Polytheism
and Idolatry. And also v. 19. That which might be known of God was manifest
within them, God having showed it unto them. The (...) i. e. that of God which
is knowable, his Eternal Power and Godhead, with the Attributes belonging
thereunto, is made manifest to all mankind from his works. In which places it is
evident, that the Pagan Nations were never destitute of the knowledge of the
true God; and that this knowledge was not some obscure glimmering, but such a
clear knowledge of his Eternal Power and Godhead, as might have kept them (had
it not been their own fault) from Polytheism and Idolatry.

Now that the Heathens* worshipped many subordinate and inferior Gods together
with the true God; that is, that they joined Creature-worship with the worship
of the Creator, the same Apostle says expressly, V. 25.
they worshipped the Creature more than the Creator: which words are not so to
be understood, as if the Pagans transferred their Religious worship wholly upon
the Creature, the Creator in the mean time being altogether passed by; but
thus, They worshipped the Creature (...), besides the Creator; or else, They
worshipped the Creature above or more than the Creator: as (...) is used
comparatively, so as to signify excess; as Luke 13.2. and 4. Think ye that
these Galileans were sinners (...), above all the Galileans? and sinners (...),
above all men? According to either of which Interpretations it is supposed,
that the Pagans did worship the true God, the Creator of the world, though they
worshipped the Creature also besides him, or (perhaps in some sense) above him,
and more than him also. Which latter Interpretation I have the rather added,
because it suits so well with that egregiously Paganical practice of the Romish
Church in their worship of the Virgin Mary, to whom they put up ten prayers for
one directed to God Almighty.

Another instance we have in Act. 17. where S. Paul tells the Athenians, that
as he beheld their sacred Monuments, he found an Altar with this Inscription,
To the unknown God; and upon this adds, whom therefore you ignorantly worship
(that is, under the name of the unknown God) him declare I unto you, the God
that made the world, and all things in it, the Lord of Heaven and Earth. From
whence it is evident; 1. That by the unknown God, was meant the true God, the
Creator of all things. 2. That those Pagans did religiously worship the true
God. Afterward the Apostle citing a passage out of Aratus, censures their
sottishness, in giving Religious worship to an Image made of Gold or Silver,
representing the true and ever-living God in some Corporeal Symbol.

3. Secondly, this Divine Nature which God intended to form in men by the
Gospel, consisting in a very great measure in the purity and holiness of their
spirits, our Lord Jesus does by all means discountenance all manner of sin and
evil, faithfully declaring to all the world the Mind and Pleasure of God
herein; and assuring us, that whoever will be happy, must likewise be holy:
That the Christian Dispensation, which is Gods last and only Method which he
has made known for the salvation of Mankind, is so far from palliating men's
Corruptions, or giving them a liberty and indulgence to sin, that it most
strictly prohibits all, even the least kind of vice and iniquity, and commands
an Universal Holiness to run through all our Actions. And that we may not
expose and betray our selves to ruin and misery, by vain conceits and
imaginations; either that an External and Pharisaical Righteousness will be
sufficient, or if it must be otherwise, that yet we are not bound up to such
strict Measures as the common Preachers of Religion persuade us; we are to
consider that our Lord Jesus going on with that great Work of the Efformation
of the sacred Life and Nature of God in Men's Souls, it would not be in any wise
suitable and agreeable with his Design to make them only externally righteous
and holy, without an inward change of Mind and Disposition; and therefore
expressly informs all his Followers and Disciples, That except their
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Which is as much as to say, that
he has set the seize of rational Souls at a higher Pitch, than ever was,
or could be warranted by the Doctrines and Practice of the Scribes and
Pharisees; and now requires not only an abstinence from the outward and gross
Acts of Sin, but a hearty and sincere Purgation of the Soul from all Vice, and
the Reduction of all its Powers and Faculties into an Universal Compliance to
God's holy Will. By which likewise that false and carnal Liberty, which some
would assume to themselves, is wholly destroyed, and we are taught that
Religion gives no allowance, or toleration to any the least evil: that without
Holiness no Man shall ever see the Lord; and that the Promise of seeing God is
only made to the Pure in Heart. Nor can we understand less by this Holiness and
Purity of Heart, than such a vital Frame and Temper of Spirit, as does not only
exclude all gross Defilements and Pollutions of the Flesh, but likewise all
secret Mixtures and Combinations of Hypocrifie, and all those other more
spiritual Sins, whose Acts have no such intimate Conjunction and Commerce with
the Body. Nay, so far is the Gospel of the Son of God from countenancing, or
giving any Dispensation to Sin, that it strictly commands us to abstain from
all appearance of Evil. For he came into the World to cleanse our Minds from
all irregular and disorderly Lusts and Passions, and to redeem us from all
Iniquity; that is, not only from this or that particular Vice, but from all
manner of Evil; to the end he might purify unto himself a Peculiar People,
zealous of good works, as we read, Tit. 2.14. Sin and Evil is not a mere
fantastic Being, an aerie Notion or sound of Words, but a real Nature and
state of Defilement and Pollution; and while the Soul is under its Dominion, it
is then said in Scripture to be clothed in filthy Garments: But the true
Clothing of the Soul is Righteousness and Holiness, Zech. 3.3, 4.
and this is compared by the Spirit of God to fine Linen, Rev. 19.8.
clean and white.

4. Lastly, the Flower and Summity of that Divine Nature which our Lord and
Savior came to beget in Mankind being an Universal Love and Charity, it is
certain he does not only teach it by his Commands and Example; but he condemns
the contrary state and temper of Mind; as directly opposite to the Excellency
and Perfections of the Nature of God. There is no one thing that ever our
Savior so earnestly pressed upon his Disciples as Love. It is his new, and his
old, and last Command, that we love one another; and he proposes his own
Example for our Imitation -- Love one another, as I have loved you. Now, How is
that? Surely, Joh. 13.34.
with a Love stronger than the Bands of Death, which made him give his Life a
Ransom for the World. And this alone he tells us shall be the Badge and
Cognizance, by which his followers shall be known: By this shall all Men know
that ye are my Disciples, if if ye have love one to another. v. 35.
For indeed there is nothing makes us more God-like, nor is there any thing
that so fully expresses the Nature of the Supreme Being as Love; God is Love,
says St. John. Love is the Firstborn of Heaven, and the joy of Angels and holy
Souls, whose pure minds never shine with so great a splendour and glory, as when
they are irradiated with the powerful Influence of so sacred a Being. Behold
the grand Exemplar of Charity, the Son of God himself made a Man; and consider
him in all his abasements, his solitudes and sufferings, from the first moment
of his Birth to his dying on the Cross, and we shall find very powerful and
strong Emanations of dear Compassion and Benignity to the World. He was so far
from grieving or paining or injuring any, that he went about every day doing
them good, freeing them from their miseries, and easing them of their sorrows.
He never did the least hurt or harm to any Man living, but rebuked the
indiscreet Zeal of his Disciples, who would have burned the Samaritans with
Fire from Heaven for denying to their Lord an Hospitable entertainment; adding
that he came not to destroy, but to save the lives of Men. This is the Grand
Law of the whole Creation, that consolidates and holds together all the parts
of Heaven and Earth, and makes them conspire in a sweet and universal Harmony
and Consent; and permeating and touching humane souls by a vital Energy,
impregnates and fills them with a sacred life: which life is no steril and
inactive Principle, but diffuses it self in acts of dear kindness and benignity
to all capable subjects, and especially to Man, a Creature most dear to God
himself; for whom every one that thoroughly partakes of this spirit of love,
will be ready to offer up even his own life; according as the Beloved Apostle
speaks, Hereby perceive we the love of God, 1 John 3.16.
because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for
the Brethren.

5. Having seen the Grand Ends and Purposes of God in the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, I shall now manifest how perfectly all these are frustrated and
destroyed by those Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, which are
either established by Papal Laws and Statutes, or countenanced, approved and
maintained with great vigor and industry by the Members of that Church: by
which it will likewise appear, that the old Polytheism and Idolatry of the
Heathens is really revived, established and practiced there, though in another,
and newer Garb and Dress.

In the first* place then I have declared, that the great End and Design of God
in the Evangelical Dispensation, was to form his own blessed Nature in the
hearts of men, to consummate his Holy Image, and to regenerate them by his own
Spirit. And would you think that any Company or Society of men, that profess to
be the Servants of Christ Jesus, to advance his Crown and Dignity, and to seek
the Amplification and Enlargement of his Kingdom, should yet be so treacherous
as to undermine this Grand Purpose, and maintain such Doctrines as do directly
evacuate and destroy, and are clearly repugnant to the Mind and Will of God in
the Gospel? Behold then such as are taught and allowed by the most eminent and
leading men in the Romish Church; I shall instance only in these three, which
are so notorious, and so diametrically opposite to the very end and intent of
God in the Gospel, as if by those the Devil had plotted the utter extirpation
and subversion of that blessed Nature which ought of right to have the
Sovereign Rule and Dominion over all Intellectual Beings. 1. The Doctrine of
the Direction of the Intention. 2. The Doctrine of Probability. 3. That of
Sacerdotal Absolution upon Confession at the hour of Death.

The first of these, viz. the Direction of the Intention, serves to so many
excellent purposes for the propagation of all manner of Vice, and the bringing
into act all the secret machinations and contrivances of evil, with the safety
and security of Conscience, that at first sight it looks like a Devilish
Engine, framed on purpose for the destruction of the true and living Nature of
God in men's souls. For if this Doctrine be true (and if it be not, let them
look to it that teach and uphold it) there is no Vice so heinous, no Sin so
great, but a man may salva Conscientia with a good and honest Conscience commit
it, if he have but the wit to direct his Intention aright; Ex. gr. If a certain
company of men here plotted to kill the King, and some of them be apprehended
and brought before a Civil Magistrate who has Power to take the business into
Examination, the rest that remain yet undiscovered may lawfully kill both the
Magistrate and the Witnesses that informed against their Associates, always
provided they direct their Intention aright; for that secures the Action from
being Criminal: that is, they must not kill them upon pure Revenge, for that is
forbidden by the Law of God, but may dispatch them to preserve their
Reputation, or to free a whole Order and Society of men from an indelible
disgrace that is likely to be cast upon them: and now the sin is vanished, and
the Conscience clean and white, as in the day of Innocence. But in such an
affair as this, or something else of like nature, care must be taken that the
Action be managed with the greatest secrecy; for though the inner man be
secure, yet the outer is not; and though the Fathers Conscience be entire and
sound, yet his Neck may be broken by the force of a Humane Law, that takes no
notice of this Admirable Invention of the Direction of the Intention. In like
manner this superpolitick device shall sanctify and hallow Fornication,
Adultery, Theft, or whatever other enormous wickedness a sensual person thinks
fit to run into; by which all endeavors and hopes of attaining to a new Birth
unto Righteousness are utterly stifled and cut off, and the new Creature in the
Scripture shall be no more than an empty sound. For surely that Person can give
but a poor sign of the Renovation of his Mind, and the change of his Soul by
the Spirit of Holiness and Righteousness, that can allow himself in any of
those forementioned gross sins, let his Intention be what it will. And though
perhaps it may be said, that this is no Doctrine of the Romish Church, yet it
is a Doctrine which is taught and practiced by the greatest Casuists and most
flourishing Order that that Church abounds withal: Nay, it is a thing that
seems to pervade and run through the whole Body of their Religion; forasmuch as
no Sacrament can be valid and efficacious, if the Priests intention be either
wanting, or otherwise employed. And since this is so, I see no reason why this
Engine should not be turned, and made to do execution upon themselves: For
supposing this to be true, it evidently follows, that no man can be assured
that amongst those many Millions which make up the Romish Hierarchy, there is
so much as one true Priest, and consequently no man can have any certainty that
ever any Sacrament is rightly and duly administered: for this depends upon the
man's being a true Priest; and that no man can know, and be sure of, unless he
first be certain that he was rightly and duly baptized; nor can he have any
assurance of this, unless he be likewise certain that he was baptized with due
Intention; that is, that the Minister of his Baptism was not a secret Jew, or
Moor, or Atheist, but a Christian in heart as well as Profession; (otherwise
believing the Sacrament to be nothing, in giving it he could intend to give
nothing) and that he neither out of negligence nor malice omitted his
Intention. But suppose the man be a true Priest, yet when he consecrates the
Sacrament, I am not sure he will do it with Intention; for there is a story of
a Priest that was burnt in France for compacting with the Devil, to give no
Sacraments with Intention.

2. The Doctrine of Probability is likewise a neat and excellent Device to set
forward the Trade of Sin and Wickedness: For thus Emanuel Sa, A man may do what
he conceives lawful, according to a probable Opinion, though the contrary be
more safe. And agreeable to this is the Assertion of the Jesuit Knot in Mr.
Chillingworth, That for the avoiding of sin, we are not always bound to take
the safest way, but may follow the Opinion of any probable Doctors. Which
impious Doctrine is loaded with so many mischievous and fatal consequences, as
render that new Birth unto Righteousness, without which our Savior says no man
shall enter into Heaven, perfectly useless and unnecessary. For 1. From hence
it will follow, that a man may resolve not to use his utmost care and endeavor
to avoid sin, without any hazard or danger of his damnation: And if this
Doctrine be once thoroughly reduced to practice in the lives of men, a deluge
and flood of wickedness will as certainly break in and overflow the World, as
the waters once drowned it when God broke up the Storehouses of Heaven and
Earth: For this casts a fatal damp upon all endeavors after Holiness and
Righteousness, and men's Zeal and Contention for a better state of life cools
like the air by intervening showers, and all those Motives and Exhortations
which are used in the Gospel to excite and stir up our drowsy souls to a
watchful and diligent prosecution of the War against sin are rebated and made
ineffectual, and the Fire of Hell is no more to be valued than a painted flame.

Mr. Chillingworth, discoursing upon this Doctrine, of probability, says, Chap.
7.
He knew a young Scholar in Doway, Licensed by a great Casuist, to swear a
thing as upon his certain knowledge, whereof he had yet no knowledge but only a
great presumption, because (forsooth) it was the opinion of one Doctor he might
do so. Cardinal Bellarmine teaches, That want of Power to maintain a Rebellion,
was the only Reason that the Primitive Christians did not rebel against the
Persecuting Emperors. To whom agrees Aquinas, when he says, Ecclesiam
tolerasse ut fideles obedirent Juliano Apostatae, quia sui novitate nondum
habebant vires compescendi Principes terrenos, i. e. That the Church suffered
the faithful to obey Julian the Apostate, because by their late rise they had
not sufficient strength to repress Earthly Princes. Here are two Probable
Doctors, and the conclusion from thence is, that when ever they find themselves
to have a Party strong enough, they may (having the Opinion of such Probable
Doctors on their side) attempt the Murder of their natural Prince, and
introduce their Religion, though with the Blood of thousands of innocent
Persons: And this they may do, although themselves should think it unlawful,
because Bellarmine and Aquinas, Men of approved Virtue and Learning among them,
have determined for the lawfulness of it. 2. From hence it will follow, that a
Man may forsake the more safe and infallible Direction of Gods Word, and the
clear Evidence of Reason and Conscience, and take up with the Opinion of some
one Man, who perhaps speaks unadvisedly and carelessly; or it may be out of
design and set purpose to deceive: and by this means all the severe Duties of
Religion shall be evacuated, and the Precepts of the Gospel made to comply with
the Vices and corrupt Inclinations of Men, and all as it pleases our Probable
Doctor: which certainly is the most unreasonable and unrighteous Usurpation
upon the understandings of Mankind that ever was; as if the generality of Men
were made only to be imposed upon: Nay, by this means the best and wholsomest
Laws in the Christian World shall be rescinded, if there be but a Probable
Doctor to dispute their Obligation.

These horrid and impious Consequences will yet appear more plain and evident
by those Instances; First, we are commanded in the holy Scriptures to love the
Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength;
and the truth and sincerity of our love is evidenced by avoiding of Sin, and by
keeping his Commandments. But now if a Man may forsake the plain and easy
direction of God in the sacred Writings, and rest in the Opinion of a Probable
Doctor, he need not much trouble his Head about the love of God. See the
Mystery of Jesuitism.
Hurtado de Mendoza (as he is cited by Father Escobar) says, A Man is bound but
once every year to have an actual affection for God. Coninck supposes we are
bound to it once in three or four years: Henriquez, once in five years: But
Filiutius thinks a Man is not obliged every five years. And if we do not think
our selves fairly dealt withal yet, Father Syrmond will make a full amends, and
he assures us we need not love God at all; For we are not so much commanded
(says he) to love God, as not to hate him. Secondly, we are injoined a speedy
and sincere Repentance in the holy Scriptures, to turn from our Sins and
Impieties unto God, while it is called to day, that is, to make use of the
present time which is only ours. But if throwing the Scripture aside, we may
without danger follow the Guidance of any Probable Doctor, then a Man is bound
to repent only three times a year, at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide; for
so Scotus says: But if you are unwilling to undergo this burdensome and
afflictive Duty so often, you need perform it but once a year; and for this you
have the Authority of Scotus and Medina. And if you think this too much, hear
what Reginaldus says, The time when a Man is bound to repent, is, at the
Article of imminent Death; for the mean while there is no Precept commanding
that a Sinner should not persevere in enmity against God: there is no Negative
Precept forbidding such a Perseverance.

How directly repugnant those Doctrines are to that Grand Positive end of the
Gospel, the Replantation of the sacred Image and Nature of God in the Souls of
Men, every pious Christian, who earnestly desires the Recovery of the World
from the Bondage and slavery of Sin, cannot but see; and that those Champions
which the Dark Kingdom set out to defend and maintain the Pagan Worship (which
quickly vanished and disappeared in all places where Christianity shone in its
Native luster and brightness) were not half so successful in their Attempts,
nor such dangerous Enemies of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, as those Popish
Agents, who by speaking Lies in Hypocrisy do really Debauch and Paganize the
World again, and make Men twofold more the Children of Hell, than if they had
been perfect Strangers to the very name of a Christian.

3. Another Doctrine which undermines the Grand Purpose of God Almighty in
regenerating and renewing the World by the Gospel, is that of Sacerdotal
Absolution upon Confession at the hour of death: For thus the Doctors of the
Church of Rome teach, That though a man live and die without the practice of
Christian Virtues, and with the habits of many damnable sins unmortified, yet
if he in the last moment of his life have any sorrow for his sins, Vid.
Chilligw. Chapter 7.
and join Confession with it, he shall certainly be saved: Which is a Doctrine,
that instead of reforming and bettering the World (which certainly was intended
by the manifestation of the Gospel) opens a door to all imaginable
licentiousness and wickedness. Our blessed Savior assures us, that except a
man be born again, he shall not enter into Heaven: Now certain it is, that
Divine Generations, as well as Natural, are not instantaneous, but require time
for their full maturity and perfection; and as sure is it, that an Act of
Attrition, accompanied with Sacerdotal Absolution, can never work a change or
Renovation of the mind; and consequently, it must be as horrid a Cheat as ever
was put upon the poor deluded Sons of Adam, to persuade them that this is
enough for their Salvation, though otherwise they die without the practice of
Christian Virtues, and with the habits of many damnable sins unmortified. For,
to speak the plain truth, this kind of Absolution looks more like a Charm or
Spell, used by superstitious people to fright away evil spirits, than any thing
of sober truth, having neither Reason nor Scripture to countenance or abett it.
And though men may deceive and befool one another, yet those unhappy people,
whose sad Fate it is to be sent out of the world with no better hopes of
Salvation, than what an Act of Attrition with Priestly Absolution is able to
give them, will find the Scene of Affairs quite altered there, and those grim
Officers of the Infernal Kingdom will infallibly challenge and seize their own,
notwithstanding the fairest dismission by all the arts and devices of a
treacherous Ghostly Father. Consider all you that have any care for your
Eternal Interest and Salvation, how grossly you are abused by these Holy
Impostors and Factors for the Devils Kingdom! Can the Absolution of your Priest
work a real change in your Dispositions and Natures? or can those few words
effect a Mortification of your vicious habits, and withal superinduce the
contrary Virtues? Will this Charm procure a safe passage through the Guards of
the invisible Regions? or shall your Wonder-working Priest give you an entrance
into Heaven, when the express Declarations of Christ Jesus exclude you thence?
No wonder that Papists have their Priests in such high esteem and Veneration;
no marvel they declare they cannot live without them, when they are endued with
such an Omnipotency as to change the settled order of things, to alter the
Decrees of Heaven, and cancel the fixed Laws of life and death, by shutting
them out of the presence of God, whom Christ Jesus is ready to receive, and
intromitting others that he has declared shall be for ever banished thence. But
be not deceived, God is not mocked; for whatever a man sows, that shall he also
reap: He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

6. Hitherto in general I have showed the opposition of the Popish Doctrines to
the Grand End and Purpose of God in the Gospel; I shall now descend to the
particulars aforementioned; the first of which was this, that in order to the
replantation of the Divine Nature in the souls of men, Almighty God designed
the utter extirpation of Idolatry. Now though the Church of Rome endeavors by
many fine shows and specious pretenses to free her self from the imputation of
so foul and horrid a Crime, yet he that impartially weighs things, shall find
her no less guilty than was the Pagan World before the coming of Christ. And if
this do not evidently appear to every candid and ingenious Reader, I am well
assured, that it is not from the weakness or inconclusiveness of the Arguments,
but from some partial and preconceived Opinion, or some other prejudice his
mind labors under, and is prepossessed and preingaged withal: for this I do
confidently affirm, that there is no truth of greater usefulness and
concernment to Reformed Christendom, nor any that can more clearly and
irrefragably justify the necessity of our separation from that Church than
this.

That I may therefore make a clear and demonstrative proof of this Charge which
I have laid against the Romish Church, I must a little recur to what I have
said of the Pagan Idolatry, which mainly consisted in these two things: 1. In
that they worshipped (besides one Supreme God) other Inferior Beings, not as
independent and self-existent, but as so many created Deities: and these were
worshipped by them upon these two accounts, either as thinking that the honor
done to them redounded to the Supreme, or else that they might be their
Mediators and Intercessors, Orators and Negotiators with him. 2. In that they
worshipped both the supreme God, and likewise their subordinate Deities in
Images and Statues.

This Foundation being laid, it will be no difficult task to draw the parallel
between the ancient Paganish Idolatry, and that now practiced in the Church of
Rome. That the Saints and Angels are worshipped both publicly and privately in
the Romish Church, needs no other testimony than the daily practice of Papists,
who express a greater fervor and zeal in their Invocation of the Saints, than
of God himself: so that as a learned Person observes, Sir Edwin Sands Europ.
Spec.
for one prayer to God, they put up ten to the Virgin Mary. Nay, so mad are
they after this extravagant humor, that Cassander ingeniously confesses, that
some, and those no bad men, have made choice of some certain Saints as their
Patrons, and place their trust and confidence in their Merits and
Intercessions, more than in the Merits of Christ; Cassand. Consult. do Invoc.
Sanct.
and so laying aside the Mediation of Christ, they have substituted the Saints,
and especially the Virgin Mary in his room. And hence Cardinal Hosius is not
ashamed to say, We ought to believe in the Saints. They build Temples and
Altars to the Saints, and prostrate themselves with the most humble devotion
before their Images. They swear by the Saints, not only in their common speech,
but in their more solemn Oaths, and to them they direct their Vows likewise.

Now upon the same accounts that the Pagans worshipped their inferior Deities,
do the Papists adore and worship the Saints and Angels. 1. Because the honor
done to them redounds to God himself: It is for the Majesty and Grandeur of the
supreme God to have a multitude of inferior Deities under him, says Plotinus:
It is not only suitable with the bountiful and noble disposition of God not to
grant many graces and favors but by the Intercession of the Saints, but
likewise for his glory that the world should know this, Answer to certain
Questions propounded by King James.
says Fisher the Jesuit; which he further illustrates by this similitude,
because (says he) it is impossible to honor and praise the Boughs, without
honoring and praising the Root; therefore when the Saints and Angels are
invocated and adored, it is for the honor of the supreme God, the Root and
Spring of all things. 2. They make them Mediators and Intercessors between God
and them; which was the office and employment of the Mediae Potestates, or
middle Deities of the Heathen; and the ground or reason of this is given by S.
Austin, because they excel us Mortals in Merits. De Civ. Dei, lib. 8. c. 22.
And that the Papists urge the Merits of their Saints, is evident from diverse
of their public forms of prayer: The Saints are in high grace and favor with
God, and for this reason we poor Mortals implore their Intercession, say the
Romanists, as we make use of a Courtier to deliver a Petition to an Earthly
Prince. After this manner Celsus argues, when he would persuade the Christians
to the worship of Demons, that they ought to seek their favor as the
Ministers of the Great God: To whom Origin replies, Origin contr. Celsum, l. 8.
that the Christians allow indeed an honor and reverence to the blessed Angels
as Gods Ministers in a sound sense, but they are taught to give Religious
Worship only to God, and to his Son, his Word and Image, by whom they offer up
their Supplications to God the Lord of all, beseeching him who is the
Propitiation for our sins, that he would be pleased, as our High Priest, to
offer up our Prayers, and Sacrifices, and Intercessions to the great God. And
again, God alone is to be adored, and our Prayers are only to be offered to the
only begotten Word of God, the Firstborn of every Creature, who as our
High Priest offers our Supplications to his God, and our God, to his Father,
and the Father of all those that live according to his Word. But if the favor
of many be to be sought for, we learn from the Scriptures, that thousand
thousands minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before
him, who afford their friendly assistance to those that humbly invoke the
Supreme God, and earnestly contend after Salvation, disdaining not to be
officious to them that worship the same God with themselves: For as the Shadow
follows the Body as it moves; so when any person has God propitious to him, at
the same time all the Angels and blessed Spirits are likewise his Friends. In
like manner Lactantius says, that God has his Ministers, whom we call Angels,
verum hi neque Dii sunt, neque Deos se vocari aut coli volunt; quippe qui nihil
praeter jussum ac voluntatem Dei fatiant; i. e. but these are neither Gods, nor
would they be called Gods, nor worshipped; forasmuch as they only execute the
Will and Command of God.

Add to this, that the Papists make their Saints particular Presidents and
Regents of Countries, Cities, Religious Orders, of Beasts, and of the Elements,
Fire, Water, etc. and appoint to them distinctly and by name several
Opitulations. So Caecilius in Minutius Felix says of the Heathens, that each
particular Nation had its own Municipal Gods which they worshipped: And
Arnobius tells the Gentiles, Lib. 2. adver. Gentes.
that with them Dii certi certas habent tutelas, licentias, potestates, neque
eorum ab aliquo id quod ejus non sit potestatis ac licentiae postulant; i. e.
Certain Gods have certain Guardianships, Licenses and Powers; neither do they
ask from any of them that which is not in their power and gift. Accordingly the
Papists have distributed several Offices to several Saints, whose assistance
they implore for those particular things to which they are appointed: as for
example, S. Apollonia for the Toothache, S. Otilia for Bleer-Eyes, S. Rochus
for the Pox, S. Blasius for the Squinancy, S. Petronella for Fevers, S.
Wendeline for Sheep and Oxen, S. Anthony for Hogs, S. Nicholas is the Patron of
Mariners, S. Clement of Bakers, S. Luke of Painters, and S. Afra and Magdalen
of Whores. For S. Austin says, that Varro maintained, C. D. l. 4. c. 22.
it was profitable to know the power and working of every God in particular,
that men might be able to sue unto them according to their several Offices for
every distinct or particular benefit, lest otherwise they might ask water of
Bacchus the God of Wine, or Wine of the Nymphs the Goddesses of the Water. And
this is so plain and evident, that it could not but extort this honest
Confession from Ludovicus Vives, one of their own; In Com. C. D. l. 8. c. 27.
Multi Christiani, etc. Many Christians err in a good matter, in that they
worship He* and She-Saints after the same manner that they worship God: nor can
I see in many things what difference there is between their Opinion of the
Saints, and that which the Heathens thought of their Gods: For what other
account did the Pagans make, or in what did they do honor to their inferior
Deities, which Papists do not express to their Saints? Did the Pagans
consecrate Temples to their Demons? so do the Papists to their Saints: Do they
appropriate several offices and employments to their inferior Gods? the same
do Papists to their Saints: Have they Altars built to them? so have the Saints:
Do the Heathens offer Sacrifice to their Deities? so do Romanists to the
Saints: Had they Images erected to them? so have the Saints: Were the Demons
invoked before their Images? so are the Saints: Did they make Vows to the
Demons? so do Papists to their Saints: Do they make those Middle Powers
Mediators and Intercessors between the Supreme God and them? it is no more than
what Papists ascribe to the Saints. Now what these Mediae Potestates, or Middle
Powers were, we learn from Apuleius, that they are inter terricolas, De Deo
Socratis.
calicolasque Vectores, hinc precum, inde donorum, qui ultro citroque portant,
hinc petitiones, inde suppetias, ceu quidam utrinque Interpretes and
Salutigeri; i. e. a kind of Carriers between the Inhabitants of Heaven and
Earth, that traveling to and fro, carry from hence Prayers, and bring from
thence Blessings, from hence Requests and Petitions, from thence supplies and
aids; or a certain kind of Interpreters, or Messengers, and Internuncii between
both. And it is a great sign, that the more understanding Papists were long ago
sensible of this, because in their Expurgatory Indices they take special care
that such expressions as these should be blotted and razed out of those Authors
that speak against their wicked Practices, viz. that God alone is to be adored,
that the Saints are to be honored, but not Religiously worshipped; that Angels
are not to be honored with Religious Worship.

And because when Protestants cite such notoriously blasphemous and idolatrous
forms of prayer, allowed in the Popish Church, wherein they beg of their
Saints, and especially of the Virgin Mary, no less Boons than remission of
sins, preservation from the assaults of the Devil, a safe conduct through the
hazards of the World to eternal life, comfort and assistance at the hour of
death, and the possession of Eternal Glory in the life to come: The Vulgar
Papists amongst us are taught, that these forms of prayer are no more than an
Ora pro nobis, and all one as to say Holy Apostle, or Blessed Lady, pray for
us; (which yet is Idolatry) it is certain that many of them are made in other
expressions, and likewise are direct Addresses to such and such Saints, upon
account of what is peculiar for them to help them in. The prayer to S. Agnes is
not Ora pro nobis, but te exoro precibus, I pray you to keep me in the right
Faith, or grant you that all may serve God in perfect charity. And the prayer
to S. Brigit is, By your safe guidance bring us to the reward of everlasting
life. Can any man in his right senses say, that this is no more, then O Brigit
pray for us. The Belgic Expurgatory Index commands these words to be razed out
of Fabricius (which are not much unlike this subterfuge of our Jesuits) O all
ye Saints pray to God for me, is all one as to say, I wish all the Saints would
pray to God for me; adding this reason, for in very deed we invoke the Saints,
not only wishing, but requiring their prayers; which cannot be excused from
Idolatry.

The account which Chemnitius gives of the Introduction of this piece of
Paganism into the Christian Church, is to this purpose; That in the Primitive
Church, until two hundred years after Christ, Exam. Council. Trident. p. 3.
this Doctrine and Practice was utterly unknown: then about the year 370. it
began to be spoken of in Public Assemblies by Basil, Nyssen, and Nazianzen,
upon occasion of their Panegyrical Orations, at the same time when by the same
Persons Monkery was brought out of Egypt and Syria into Greece. But
notwithstanding this, it was not generally and universally received in those
times, for about the year 400. S. Chrysostom interposed and labored against
it. Afterward he shows out of Nicephorus, that Petrus Gnapheus (condemned for
Heresy in the fifth Universal Synod) was the first Author among the Grecians,
of mixing Intercessions to the Virgin Mary with Divine Prayers: And moreover,
that in S. Austin's days, Invocation of Saints was not used in the common
Service of the Western Church, but that it was brought in about the time of
Pope Gregory the First.

Nor can this Paganish Idolatry be palliated and excused by that poor
Subterfuge of distinguishing religious worship into Latria and Dulia, the first
of which is proper only to God, the other to Creatures; that is, to Saints and
Angels. First, because the true Object of religious worship is but one, for God
is one; and therefore whatever Creature is worshipped with religious worship,
though inferior to that which is given to the Supreme God, is ipso facto by
this made a God, so far as it is possible for a Creature to be made a God. 2.
The words Latria and Dulia are promiscuously used in Scripture, to denote the
worship due to God alone, as 1 These. 1.9. Ye turned to God from Idols, (...),
to serve the living, and true God: Which had been a Derogation if the Apostle
had used a word that had signified any thing less than Divine worship.

I shall conclude this Particular with a Passage which I find cited out of
Athanasius his fourth Oration against the Arrians; (...), etc. Why therefore do
not these Arrians holding this, reckon themselves amongst the Pagans, or
Gentiles, since they do in like manner worship the Creature, besides the
Creator? For though the Pagans worship one uncreated, and many created Gods;
but these Arrians only one uncreated, and one created, to wit, the Son, or
Word of God: yet will not this make any real difference betwixt them; because
the Arrians one created, is one of those many Pagan Gods, and those many Gods
of the Pagans, or Gentiles, have the same nature with this one, they being
alike Creatures. Wherefore these wretched Arrians are Apostates from the truth
of Christianity, they betraying Christ more than the Jews did; and wallowing,
or tumbling in the filth of Pagan Idolatry, worshipping Creatures and different
kinds of Gods. In which Passage of this Father these things are observable; 1.
That the Arrians are charged with Pagan Idolatry in the same words which St.
Paul used against the Heathens, That they did worship the Creature, besides, or
in the room of the Creator: for the Arrians constantly declared that they gave
less worship to Christ the Son, or Word of God, he being by them accounted but
a Creature, than they did to the Father the Creator. 2. That the Pagan
Polytheism and Idolatry consisted in worshipping one only uncreated and
independent, and many created Gods. 3. That the worship of the true God is not
enough to excuse from Idolatry, if any Creature be worshipped with religious
worship together with him: for then the Pagans cannot be charged with the guilt
of Idolatry. 4. That the Fathers of the Nicene Council (if we may credit
Athanasius) affirmed, that to give religious worship to any created Being
whatsoever, though inferior to that worship which is given to the Supreme God,
is absolutely Idolatry: and therefore the distinction of religious worship into
Latria and Dulia, as it was perfectly unknown to them, so was it invented of
late merely to palliate and hide the odious Turpitude of Pagan Idolatry.
Because it is certain that the Arrians gave much an inferior worship to
Christ, the Son, or Word of God, whom they contended to be a mere Creature,
made in time, mutable and defectible, than they did to that eternal God who was
the Creator of him. Now if the Arrians, who zealously contended for the Unity
of the Godhead, were nevertheless by those Fathers condemned as guilty of
Pagan Idolatry, for bestowing but an inferior kind of religious worship upon
Christ, the Son, or Word of God himself, as he was supposed by them to be a
Creature; then certainly cannot Papists be excused from that guilt, who bestow
religious worship upon these other Creatures, Angels, and Souls of Men, though
inferior to what they give to the Supreme Omnipotent God the Creator of all.
Because the Son, or Word of God, however conceived by these Arrians to be a
Creature, yet was looked upon by them as the first, the most glorious, and
excellent of all Creatures; and that by which, as an Instrument, all other
Creatures, as Angels, and Souls were made: And therefore if it were Idolatry in
them to give an inferior kind of religious worship to this Son, and Word of
God himself, according to their Hypothesis, then can it not possibly be
accounted less to bestow the same upon those other Creatures made by him, as
Angels, and Men deceased.

I confess there are many Pious and Learned Men, both of our own, and other
Nations, who cannot be induced to believe that the Romanists are Paganically
Idolatrous in this Particular: The Grounds, and Reasons of this their Dissent
seem to be these three especially, which are laid down by Curcellaeus: 1. In
the Romish Church (says he) the one Supreme God, the Maker, In Epist. ad
Adrian Tatium.
and Governor of Heaven and Earth, is acknowledged, and adored; and the Saints
are worshipped with an inferior degree of honor as the Friends of God, and
such as are in great favor with him. But the Pagans were ignorant of the true
God, and substituted the Sun and Moon, the Souls of dead Men and Demons, in
his place, and worshipped them as Gods. 2. There is no doubt but the Saints and
Martyrs, whom the Roman Catholics worship, are worthy of some veneration of
the Mind, for their excellent Virtues, and constancy in Persecutions. But to
worship the Stars that have neither sense nor reason, is ridiculous: And no
honor can be due to the Memory of Impious and Flagitious Kings, such as
Jupiter was: And as for Demons, they ought to be detested by all good Men, as
haters of God and Virtue. 3. The Romanists indeed attribute to their Saints a
knowledge in some sense and measure Divine, by which they hear our Prayers, and
take notice of our wants and necessities; although the Scripture deny all such
knowledge to the Dead, as Eccles. 9.5, 6. Job 14.21. But this does somewhat
lessen their Error, that they profess that the Saints have not this knowledge
of themselves, but from the Gift of God. But now the Heathens err inexcusably,
while they ascribe to their false Gods an independent Knowledge and Power,
which is only competible to the Supreme God. Thus far Curcellaeus. To which I
reply.

To the first, That it is a vulgar Error to suppose the Pagans ignorant of the
true God, or that they did not worship the Supreme God, the Maker of Heaven and
Earth; as not only appears from the Texts of Scripture cited already, but is
clearly and evidently demonstrated, by a Person of singular Learning, Dr.
Cudworth's true Intellectual System of the Universe, l. 1. c. 4. p. 462.
who from Plutarch, Heraiscus, Asclepiades, and others, affirm these two to be
Fundamental Points of the Pagan Theology: First, that there is one
Self-originated Deity, who was the (...), or Maker of the whole World.
Secondly, That there are besides him, other Gods also to be religiously
worshipped (that is, Intellectual Beings superior to Men) which were
notwithstanding all made, or created by that one. To the Supreme God they gave
the highest worship, but to those subordinate Deities they gave a lesser, or
inferior kind of religious worship: that is, they adored and worshipped the
Supreme God, as the first Cause and Original of all things; but their inferior
Deities as Mediators, and Intercessors for them with the Supreme Numen. And
where I pray lies the difference now between the Papist and the Pagan, save
that the Dii Medioxumi of the Heathens are changed into Saints and Angels by
the Papists? And if it be said that the Pagans substituted these Subordinate
Gods in the room of the Supreme God, and worshipped them above, or more than
him, I shall readily grant it; and do likewise affirm the same of the Papists,
who by giving religious worship to Saints and Angels, do really substitute them
in the place of the true God, and worship them above, or more than him, for so
Sir Edwin Sands tells us, that for one Prayer put up to God, Europ. spec.
there are ten offered to the Virgin Mary. So that the Church of Rome are not
so much the worshippers of the Man Christ Jesus, as of the Woman his Mother.
But that the Pagans did so worship their inferior Deities, as wholly to pass
by, and neglect the Supreme, I utterly deny.

To the second I say, That it is true the Saints and Martyrs are worthy of some
regard and veneration, but not of religious worship, which to give them is
downright Idolatry: but the honor and reverence which we pay to the Saints
departed consists, 1. In making an honorable mention of their Names, as being
great and glorious Lights in their times. 2. in setting before our Eyes their
Virtues, and praying to God to give us Grace to follow their good Examples,
that with them we may be partakers of his Heavenly Kingdom. And whereas it is
said, that it was ridiculous in the Heathen to worship the Stars that have
neither sense nor reason; I find them utterly disclaiming this latter part,
forasmuch as they looked upon all the World, and the several parts thereof, to
be animated at least with one great Soul: and they that worshipped the Sun, did
not do it as supposing the Sun to be nothing but a dead and lifeless thing, but
as animated with some Intellectual Being. For to deny the Worlds Animation and
to be an Atheist, or to deny a God, was looked upon by them as one and the same
thing; because all the Pagans who asserted Providence, held the World also to
be animated; and Epicurus denied the Worlds Animation upon no other Reason, but
because he Atheistically endeavored to exclude a Providence. And though the
Poets have introduced many absurd and impure Fables into their Religion,
concerning Jupiter; yet certain it is that by Jupiter the Heathens understood
the Supreme God, the true Etymon of Jupiter being not Juvans Pater, a helping
Father, (as Cicero would have it,) but Jovis Pater, Jove the Father of Gods and
Men; which Jovis is the very Hebrew Tetragrammaton, only altered by a Latin
Termination. And Jupiter, Pluto, See Dr. Cudworth, Intellect. Syst. l. 1. c. 4.
p. 451.
Neptune, Juno, Minerva, etc. in the Pagan Theology are nothing but the
Polyonymy of one and the same Supreme Being in the various actings and
manifestations of himself in the several things and parts of the world. But if
Jupiter were an impious King, and the Heathens worshipped him after his death,
I do not doubt but to find many such Saints in the Roman Calendar. Lastly, for
the Demons worshipped by the Pagans, it is evident, they looked upon them under
another notion, and did not conceive them to be haters of God and Virtue, but
Mediators and Intercessors, and such who did negotiate Affairs between Mortals
and the Supreme God: So that this Argument, like the former, proceeding upon a
false supposition, leaves no other difference but what arises from the change
of names between Papist and Pagan; but the Popish Saints are exactly like the
Demons of the Heathen.

To the third, which extenuates the error of Papists in their Invocation of
Saints, because they ascribe the Omniscience of the Saints, whereby they hear
their Suppliants throughout all the World, to God as his gift; I reply, that
the same may be said of the subordinate Gods of the Heathens, who were
altogether as Omniscient as the Romish Saints: Nor did the Pagans ever look
upon their Middle Gods as so many particular independent and self-originated
Beings, but were acknowledged to be the Creatures of the Supreme God, and made
by him what they were fancied to be by their Devotionists; and all the honor
conferred upon these subordinate Deities, was judged by the Pagans to redound
to the Supreme.

7. Having now dispatched the first part, wherein I affirmed the Pagan
Polytheism and Idolatry to consist; namely, in worshipping many inferior
created Deities together with the Supreme God, and drawn the Parallel fully and
exactly between this Heathenish worship, and that now practiced in the Church
of Rome; I shall with the same clearness and evidence demonstrate the second
Part, viz. that Papists do egregiously Paganize in worshipping both the Supreme
God, and their other Inferior Deities, in Images and Statues. And let not any
man be mistaken, and think, that because Papists do not call Angels and the
Souls of men departed Gods, or Inferior Deities, but Saints, that therefore
the case is quite different between them and the Pagans; for by giving
Religious worship to them, they do for that very reason make them Gods, whether
they call them so or not: for neither did the Heathens believe their inferior
Deities to be so many self-existent and independent, but created, Beings, made
by the Supreme God; but by performing Religious worship to them, they made them
Gods, so far as any Creature can be made a God; and upon this account they are
called Gods in Scripture: so that I cannot free the Romish Church from
Polytheism and Idolatry, any more than the Pagan World, who by all Christian
VVriters has been justly branded with that heinous Impiety.

That the Pagans worshipped the Supreme God, and likewise their subordinate
Deities in Images and Statues, I think is so evident as not to be denied;
however, I shall offer something toward the proof of it: And first, that the
Heathens worshipped the true God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth in an Image,
appears from the story of the Inhabitants of Thebais, who worshipped the Maker
of World under the name of Cneph, in an Image or Statue of humane form, and a
blackish sky-colored complexion, holding in his hand a Girdle and a Scepter,
and wearing upon his head a Princely Plume, and thrusting forth an Egg out of
his mouth; and by this Cneph Plutarch says, De Iside.
they understood (...), an unmade and Eternal Deity. But it is most apparent
from that sacred History (which I touched upon before) in Act. 17.29. Forasmuch
then as we are his Offspring, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like
unto Gold or Silver, or Stone graven by art or man's device. In which words
there are these things employed: 1. That the Athenians worshipped God in an
Image or Statue; for had they not done so, it had been impertinent, and beside
the Apostles scope, to have declaimed against Image Worship as here he does. 2.
That this God to whom they built an Altar, and gave Religious worship, was the
true God: For that that Jupiter whom Aratus invokes in his Phenomenon, and from
whence S. Paul cited that passage -- For we are his Offspring -- was the
Supreme God, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, we are informed from Theon the
Scholiast, (...). We must understand (says he) here by Jupiter, the Maker of
the World. And so S. Paul says, that he of whom Aratus speaks, We are his
Offspring, and whom the Athenians ignorantly worshipped under the name of the
unknown God, he it is that is the Maker and Lord of Heaven and Earth; and
therefore it was a very non-sensical and ridiculous thing to endeavor to
represent this Supreme Numen by an Image of Gold or Silver, or any other
material. To this purpose there is a famous passage in Sophocles, cited by
diverse of the Ancient Fathers, where after having asserted one only God, the
Maker of Heaven and Earth, he condemns all Image Worship, and affirms, (...)
(...), etc.


Those vain Mortals to be deceived and err in their hearts, who graving Images
of God out of Stone, Wood, Gold, or Ivory, offer Sacrifices and other
Solemnities to them, to the infinite damage of their Souls, and suppose this to
be true Religious worship.

And that the Heathens worshipped their minor Gods, or inferior Deities,
whether Demons or Heroes, in Images and Statues, is so plain and obvious, that
it needs no farther proof. Though here the cunning Sophisters of the Romish
Church (not being able to deny the thing it self) have invented many shifts and
elusions; and they tell us, that the Pagans worshipped the dead Images and
Statues, and accounted those inanimate and senseless Figures of Gold, or Silver,
or Wood and Stone, to be the very Gods to whom they paid their Religious
worship.

But that this is utterly false, and made use of by the Bigots of the Popish
Church, merely that their conformity and agreement with the Idolatry of the
Heathens might not appear, I shall show:

1. In that it is such a piece of sottishness and contradictious nonsense as
is not incident to Humane Nature, that any persons who are endued with any
measure and competency of Reason and Understanding should so far degenerate and
fall from it, as to take Gold, or Silver, or some other Material, and frame it
into an Image or Statue, and then devoutly court it, and pay the most solemn
Devotion and Religious worship to it, by invoking and imploring its assistance,
as hoping to receive great benefits thereby, and yet at the same time think it
to be nothing but a dead and senseless lump, or piece of matter; this, I say, is
so opposite to the very Constitutive Principles and Intellectual Furniture of
the Soul of Man, that I cannot imagine any number of people to be guilty of
such a perfect piece of stupidity. But these Images of the Heathens, which were
designed for Religious worship, were first consecrated with certain Prayers and
Ceremonies, by which they supposed some Invisible Power superior to men was
conveyed into them, and was ready there to assist and help all Supplicants to
them; so that the Image was not worshipped for it self, as if it were nothing
but a dead and lifeless Trunk or Stock, but with respect to the Demon, or
Invisible Power, which they imagined, after the performances of certain sacred
Ceremonies, was incorporated and dwelt in it. And there is no doubt but that
there were many wicked Spirits who industriously waited to minister to the sins
of fond mankind, and did (to use the words of Minutius Felix) sub Statuis and
Imaginibus consecratis delitescere, lurk under the shades and covertures of
those consecrated Statues to delude abused Mortals.

2. The Heathens constantly disclaimed such a worship as this, and tell us,
that they knew well enough the value and power of the Image before which they
prostrate themselves, that it is but a dead and lifeless thing in it self, mere
Gold, or Silver, or Wood, or Stone, but that they worship the Gods in these
Images. So the Pagans in Arnobius, Thou art deceived, and grossly mistaken; for
we [the Heathen] do not believe the substance of Brass, L. 6. Adv. Gent.
or Silver, or Gold, or any other thing of which these Statues are made, to be
in themselves Gods; but we worship the Gods in these. But if nothing will serve
the turn, but that the Heathens must be thought such stupid and blockish
people, as to invocate and adore the very Stocks and Stones as Gods, yet have
our Adversaries the Papists no such advantage, if their own Polydore Virgil be
of any credit with them: To this height of madness is it come (says he) that
this piece of Piety little differs from Impiety; for there are a great many of
the more rude and stupid sort of people, who worship Images of Stone, Wood,
Marble, Brass, or such as are with various colors painted on Walls, not as
Figures, but as if those Images had some sense in them, and place their trust
and confidence in them, more than in Christ, or those Saints to whom they are
dedicated.

Having removed this Objection, let us now proceed to draw the Parallel; which
I shall do, by considering the reasons and grounds the Pagans insisted upon,
and by which they maintained the worship of their Gods in Images and Statues,
which were these, 1. They declared that in the Adoration of Images, the worship
was not terminated upon the Image as upon the ultimate Object, but directed and
referred to the God and his Attributes, whom they adored in and by such an
Image; as in the place cited even now out of Arnobius. 2. They affirmed,
concerning their Images, that they were Symbolical Representations of the Gods
they worshipped. 3. They used Images in their Religious worship, as sensible
helps to excite and quicken their Devotion, and fix their Imagination upon. For
these we have the testimony of Plutarch in his Book De Iside, Vid. Orig. contr.
Celsum, lib. 7. p. 362. where he reprehends the Grave Philosophers for adoring
Images, and using them as conspicuous Symbols, to raise their Imaginations to
the contemplation of the Intelligible Deity.
(...), etc. No inanimate thing ought to be esteemed for a God, but they who
bestow these things upon us, and afford us a continual supply thereof for our
use, have been therefore accounted by us Gods; which Gods are not different to
different Nations, as if the Barbarians and the Greeks, the Southern and the
Northern Inhabitants of the Globe, had not any the same, but all other
different Gods: But as the Sun, and the Moon, and the Heaven, and the Earth,
and the Sea, are common to all, though called by several names in several
Countries; so one Reason ordering these things, and one Providence dispensing
all, and the inferior subservient Ministers thereof having had several names
and honors bestowed upon them by the Laws of several Countries, have been every
where worshipped throughout the whole World: And there have been also different
Symbols consecrated to them, the better to conduct and lead on men's
understandings to divine things; though this has not been without some hazard
or danger of casting men upon one or other of these two inconveniences, either
Superstition or Atheism. From which Testimony of Plutarch we have these things
observable: 1. That all Nations agreed in the worshipping of one Supreme and
Universal Numen, Reason and Providence governing all things. 2. They agreed in
worshipping his subservient Ministers (the Instruments of Providence) appointed
by him over all the parts of the World; which being honored under several
Names, and with different Rites and Ceremonies, according to the Laws of the
Respective Countries, caused all that diversity of Religions that was amongst
them. 3. That the Pagans did not worship the very Images or Statues for Gods,
but only as symbolical representations of their Gods. 4. That these Images or
Symbols were to conduct and lead on men's Understandings (as sensible helps) to
Divine things. 5. That Image Worship (in the judgment of Plutarch) was an
Inlet and occasion of Superstition and Atheism.

Thus far what the Pagans declared concerning their Images; Behold now an
admirable and sweet harmony and consent between the Image Worship of the
Heathens, and that now practiced in the Romish Church. 1. They likewise with
the Pagans declare, that the Religious worship given to the Image is not
terminated there, but referred to the Prototype, as to its ultimate Object. So
the Council of Trent, after having declared that due honor and reverence be
given to Images, adds this as one reason of it, because the honor exhibited to
them, Council. Trident. Sess. 9.
is referred to the Prototypes which they represent: so that through those
Images which we kiss, and before which we bare our heads, and prostrate our
selves, we adore Christ, and worship the Saints, whose similitude they bear;
which is so like the Apology of the Pagan in Arnobius, that I think it worth
the while to produce it entire; Sed erras (inquit) and laberis, Lib. 6. Contr.
Gentes.
nam neque nos era, neque auri argentique materias, neque alias quibus signa
conficiunt, eas esse per se Deos, and Religiosa decernimus Numina: sed eos in
his colimus, eosque veneramur quos dedicatio infert sacra and fabrilibus
efficit inhabitare simulachris; i. e. Thou art deceived, and grossly mistaken;
for we [the Heathen] do not believe the substance of Brass, or Gold, or any
other thing of which these Statues are made, to be in themselves Gods; but we
worship the Gods in these, and pay Religious Veneration to those Deities which
by Consecration are brought to inhabit and dwell in those Images or Statues. So
that the Pagans arguing after the same manner as the Council of Trent, or
rather that Council giving the same reason for Image Worship with the Pagans,
and establishing the same thing upon the same grounds that they did, it must
needs be guilty of the same Crime of Idolatry likewise: For if the Heathens in
worshipping the Images and Statues of their Gods, were declared by the express
Sentence of God Almighty, to be heynously guilty of Idolatry, though in the
mean time they never worshipped those Images or Statues for themselves, but in
reference to their Prototypes; it is a clear consequence, that the Popish
Image Worship, established upon the same grounds and reasons with the Pagan,
will necessarily fall under the same condemnation. To this purpose there is a
pretty story in an Italian, who wrote Commentaries of the Affairs of India;
When the poor Barbarians of Nova Hispania, Pietro Martire Hist. delle Ind. l.
20. c. 11.
in the Kingdom of Mexico, had one day of a sudden found their Idols taken down
and broken, they sent four Principal Persons of their Country to Alfonsus
Zuasus the Licentiate, who had commanded it: they complaining of the injury,
supposed also, and told him, they did believe it to be done without his consent
or knowledge, as knowing that the Christians had Idols and Images of their own,
whom they valued, and adored, and worshipped; and looking up, and espying the
Image of S. Sebastian, whom Alfonsus had in great Veneration, hanging by his
Bedside, they pointed at him with their finger, saying, The same regard which
he had to the Image of S. Sebastian, the same they had to theirs. The Governor
being troubled with this quick and not barbarous discourse, turned him about a
little, and at last told them, that the Christians did not worship Images for
their own sakes, but as they represented Holy Persons dwelling in Heavenly
places; and to demonstrate that, took down the Image of S. Sebastian, and broke
it in pieces. They replied, that it was just so with them; and that they were
not so stupid as to worship the Images for their own regards, but as they
represented the Sun, and Moon, and all the Lights of Heaven. Alfonsus being yet
more troubled, was forced to say, that the object was different, though the
manner was not; that the Christians did by their Images pass honor to the
great Creator of the World, but they did it to Creatures, to evil Spirits, and
false Gods. But neither in this was there any difference between Alfonsus and
the poor Indians, since another Author, Josephus Acosta, affirms of the same
Indians, that they acknowledged the great and Supreme God, and their
worshipping of false Gods was equally true of Papists; for by giving Religious.
worship to a good Angel, or Saint, that Angel, or Saint, is ipso facto made a
false God; and being so is all one with the Demons of the Heathens.

Now this Reference to the Prototype, whether it be in Virtue of that
Similitude the Images have with those Persons they represent, or whether it be
considered only as the Image is a Symbolical Presence at large, it being not
regarded whether the Symbol or Image have any Personal Similitude with the
Party it represents or not, but only as the Devotionist takes an occasion from
that to direct his intention to the worship of Christ, or any Saint; let it be
(I say) how it will, yet it will no more excuse a Papist than a Pagan from
Idolatry. For the giving religious worship to any Creature, whether to Saints
and Angels, or Demons and Heroes, is a making or having other Gods before the
true and everliving God; and this being so expressly forbidden by the God of
Israel, it is most certain that all erecting Images to be bowed to, or
worshipped, in reference to these, is forbidden also. But I am fallen upon the
second Branch of the Parallel before I was aware, that is, that as the Images of
the Pagans, so likewise of the Papists, are Symbolical Representations of the
Gods they worship. That the Image of Christ, or of the Virgin Mary, or of this
or that Saint, should be like the carnal Figure of those Persons while they
lived on Earth, is extremely uncertain: suppose now a devout Papist bowing down
and worshipping the Image of the Blessed Virgin; if this worship be given with
respect to the Personal Similitude the Image has with the Party it represents,
it will certainly fall upon some other perhaps wicked Person, and not upon the
holy Virgin. The Picture of the beautiful Curtizan Phryne was placed upon a
high Pillar at Delphos, and according to the Features and Lineaments of this,
as of the most exquisite Beauty, was drawn the Picture of the Goddess Venus;
and therefore it is certain that the Strumpet Phryne, and not the Goddess, will
be the ultimate object of the religious worship given to the supposed Picture
of Venus: This (I say) will follow upon account of Personal Similitude. But
that they account them symbolical Representations, and worship Images as the
Israelites worshipped the Golden Calf with reference to Jehovah, and intended
it as the Symbol of his presence, is manifest from the Images they make of God,
wickedly representing the sacred, and ever-to-be-adored Trinity, under the
Figure of an old Man in sacerdotal Vestments, with a tripple Crown, and a young
Man and a Dove; and this is proposed not only to be gazed upon, but to be
worshipped. So Cajetan; Images of the Trinity are painted in the Roman Church,
In 3. p. Tho. 9.25. ar. 3.
not only that they may be showed or looked on, as the Cherubims of old time
were in the Temple, but that they may be adored. 3. The Papists (agreeably to
the Pagans) affirm, that they use Images in their religious worship, as
sensible helps to excite and stir up their Devotion and fix their Imaginations
upon. When the Council of Nice had established the worship of the Images of
Christ, the Virgin Mary and all the Saints, according to the Excellency and
Venerability of their Prototypes, they add this Reason (as Photius says) (...),
etc. For even by these are we carried up into a certain Unitive and Conjunctive
Vision, and thereby are vouchsafed that divine and supernatural Conjunction, or
Contact with the highest of all desirables. As if by the worshipping of Images
the Souls of Men were transported beyond themselves, and carried up in
Ecstatical Raptures to an Union with God himself. Which is no more than what
Pope Adrian, who influenced that Council, writes to the Empress Irene and her
Son Constantine; In the whole Christian World (says he) the holy Images are
honored, or worshipped by Believers; Ut per visibilem vultum ad invisibilem
Divinitatis Majestatem men's nostra spirituali affectu rapiatur, i. e. That by
that sensible Figure our Mind may be carried by a spiritual affection to the
invisible Majesty of the Divinity. By which Testimonies it is clear as the
Meridian Light, that the Romanists worship Images as helps to quicken and draw
up their affections in a more inflamed and vigorous manner to the Deity they
adore.

And though the great Sticklers for Image Worship, use many Niceties, and raise
a Cloud of Dust by their subtle Distinctions to blind the Eyes of the People,
that they may not see to the bottom of this their gross Idolatry, yet can they
never clear themselves from that foul and detestable Crime. For though the
Council of Trent express no particular, but only with great caution define that
due honor and worship be given to Images: yet by referring us to the second
Council of Nice, it is plain that the Council of Trent decreed the same that
the Nicene Council had done before; and the Nicene Synod decreed such worship
to be due to Images, as the Council of Franefort said was not due, but
condemned by the Scriptures and the constant Practice of the Primitive Church.
To this purpose there is a Story in Roger Hoveden, P. 1. Annal. An. 792.
a Native Historian of the Affairs of Britain: Charles the French King (says
he) sent a Synodal into Britain, directed unto him from Constantinople, in the
which Book many things (out alas) inconvenient, and repugnant to right Faith,
were found; especially it was confirmed almost by the unanimous consent of all
the Eastern Doctors, no less than three hundred or more, That Images ought to
be worshipped; which thing the Church of God does altogether detest and abhor.
Against which Synodal Book Albinus wrote an Epistle marvellously confirmed by
Authority of Divine Scripture, and carried the same to the French King,
together with the foresaid Book, in the name of our Bishops and Princes. And
not only in Britain, but in other places, this abominable Practice of
Image Worship was condemned by the best and wisest Men, of the best times and
ages. The Council of Eliberis in Spain, forbad the use of Pictures in Churches,
for this reason, Eliber. Can. 36.
Lest that which is worshipped, or adored, be painted upon the Walls. To the
same purpose the fourth Council at Constantinople cites the same words of
Epiphanius against placing Images in Churches. Thus another Synod at
Constantinople consisting of 338 Bishops under Constantius Copronymus, An. Dom.
753.
forbad all religious use of Images, in Churches, or out of them. And so much
of their Decree as prohibited the worship of Images, was again confirmed by the
Council of Francfort, where the Bishops of Italy, France, and Germany were
assembled by the command of the Emperor Charles the Great, to that purpose. To
these we may add the Council of Mentz, and the second Council of Sens, in which
Image Worship was opposed and cautioned against. And a Greek Historian informs
us, that when Frederick 1. the Emperor, who led his Army to the Conquest of
the Holy Land, Njcetas Chron. l. 2. An. Dom. 1180.
entered into Armenia, the Christians of those Parts did lovingly receive them,
because the worship of Images was not admitted amongst them, as amongst other
Northern People. And lastly, for the Doctrine and Practice of the first and
best ages of the Church, it was very remarkable what is told by Aelius
Lampridius in the Life of Alexander Severus, That when Adrian the Emperor had
commanded Churches to be built without Images, it was supposed he intended them
for the service of Christ: Than which (says that learned Bishop Dr. Tailor)
there needs no greater, Ductor dubit. l. 2. c. 2.
or clearer Instance of the Doctrine and Practice of the holy Primitives.

But I had almost forgotten the Popish Consecration of Images, which runs
exactly Parallel with that of the Heathens. Of the Pagans it is reported that
they consecrated the Statues and Images of their Gods with certain Prayers and
Ceremonies, (before they paid any Religious Veneration to them,) by virtue
whereof they supposed some extraordinary Powers, or Virtues, were acquired and
resided in them. Vid. Minut. Fell.
Such were all those Telesmatical Images which were consecrated to certain
purposes, viz. to stop the rage and fury of Fire, or sudden Inundations; or to
hinder the sudden Incursions of Enemies: To which last purpose I remember Mr.
Gregory cites a Story of certain Telesmatical Statues, or Images, hid in the
Ground upon the Borders of Thrace, which when upon some occasion they were
dug up, the Barbarians soon after over ran the whole Country. Of this nature
was the Trojan Palladium, and those Images of the Jebusites in which they
reposed such confidence, that they derided David, as thinking that so long as
those consecrated Statues remained in the City, it was impossible it should be
taken: Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in
hither; thinking David cannot come in hither. 2 Samuel 5.6.
The wit of Man certainly cannot find any difference between the Consecration
of those Images of the Pagans, and the Dedication of the Golden, or Wooden
Images of the Papists: For thus runs the Prayer at the Consecration of the
Image of the Virgin Mary, Sanctify, O God, this Image of the Blessed Virgin,
that it may bring saving help to thy faithful People, that Thunders and
Lightnings may be driven away the sooner; that immoderate Rains, or Floods, and
Civil wars, or the Invasion of Heathens may at the Presence of this be
suppressed. In a word, it is very plain from their public and authorized
Practice, that the Papists consecrrate their Images, they hope in them, they
expect Gifts and Graces from them, they Clothe them and Crown them, they erect
Altars and Temples to them, they kiss them and bow the Head and Knee before
them, they light up Tapers and Lamps to them, which is a direct consumptive
Sacrifice; and (as Irenaeus says of the Gnostick Heretics, Lib. 1. c. 24.
who had gotten the Images, or Pictures of Christ, Pythagoras, Plato, and other
Philosophers,) Reliquam observationem circa eas similiter ut gentes faciunt,
they do to their Images as the Heathens do to theirs.

I know nothing now that can by any Papist be brought, with any show of reason,
to invalidate what I have here said, unless it be that common subterfuge, that
they are indeed forbidden to make or worship the Image of any false God, but
that they are not interdicted the worshipping of the true God, or his Saints,
in Images and Statues. The vanity and foolery of which Plea, though it have
been already demonstrated by diverse learned Persons, yet I shall here reply
something to it, partly to gratify the sincere and unprejudiced Reader, and
withal, to render my Discourse upon this Point more unexceptionable and entire.

First therefore, I say, that the second Commandment in the Decalogue forbids
both the making of an Image to the true God, and likewise the worshipping of
Images, in reference to Saints and Angels. And whereas the Papists do grant,
that the Precept binds strongly as to the Prohibition of the worship of the
Images of false Gods, I shall take the advantage of this their Concession, and
make use of it to overthrow, even out of their own mouths, their Doctrine of
worshipping Images, in reference to Saints and Angels. Thus therefore I argue;
There is no more than one God, and the rest no otherwise made Gods, than by
giving Religious worship to them; of which erecting consecrated Images to them,
and bowing to them, is one Mode: And therefore these Saints and Angels to whom
Religious worship is given by a Law, do ipso facto become Gods, but not true
Gods, but false Gods; and therefore the worshipping of their Images is strictly
forbidden in this second Commandment, by the full confession of Papists
themselves, who say the Images of false Gods are here prohibited.

Secondly, I say, that the True and Ever-living God has so strictly forbidden
the worshipping of himself by any Image whatever, that represents any thing
within the comprehension of the whole Creation; that when the Israelites
worshipped the Golden Calf (which was intended for a symbolical representation
of the true God) they so far provoked his wrath by this their heinous Crime of
Idolatry, that notwithstanding there fell thousands of them by the Sword, yet
God threatens to remember that very transgression upon them in future Ages: so
that it is commonly said by the Jews, that in every Plague and Captivity that
fell upon them, there was an Ounce of the Calf, God continuing to punish this
sin in all their Posterities, that continued to provoke him with the like.

Now that this Golden Calf was not the Image of a false God, as suppose the
Egyptian Osiris, or some other particular and inferior Deity, but designed for
the symbolical presence of the true and ever-living God, appears from the whole
History of it, in which there are so many pregnant proofs, that this Cherub or
Calf was intended for a Symbol of the presence of the true God, that none but a
humoursome and prejudiced mind can understand it otherwise. 1. The first thing
that offers it self is the occasion of this Idolatry, which arose from the
absence of Moses; for he staying in the Mount for forty days, they took it for
granted they should never hear any more tidings of him; so we read, v. 1. And
when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the Mount, the
people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us
Gods which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us
up out of the Land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. Here we plainly
see, that when after many days expectation of Moses, they heard no tidings of
him, they solicit Aaron to make them Gods to go before them, that is, to bring
them onward to the promised Land, as Moses had hitherto done. 2. When the
people had thus wrought on the timorous nature of Aaron, and he, according to
their desire, had framed the Golden Cherub of the Earrings they brought him,
they no sooner saw it, but they cry out, These be thy Gods, O Israel, which
brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt; or, as it is related in Nehem. 9.18.
This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt. Now let any man but of an
ordinary understanding consider, whether if this Molten Image were the
representation of a false God, as suppose the Egyptian Isis, Serupis, or
Osinis, the Israelites could be so weak and sottish as to say of it, that that
was it which brought them out of Egypt, especially when the execution done upon
all the Tutelar Deities of Egypt was yet fresh in their minds, who were notable
to save themselves, or protect their charge, when God destroyed all the
Firstborn in the Land. 3. The people of Israel acknowledge that the Cherub or
Calf that Aaron made, was the symbolical presence of that God that brought them
out of Egypt: now they never thought that it was either Serapis, or Osiris, or
any other Egyptian Deity, that brought them out of Egypt, but the true God, the
Creator of Heaven and Earth, whose presence they lately saw in such terrible
Majesty upon Mount Sinai. 4. When Aaron had finished the matter of their sin,
he makes a Proclamation throughout the Camp, To morrow is a Feast of the Lord,
v. 5. not to the Idol, or false God, but to Jehovah the true God; whereas if
this Golden Calf had been the symbol of some Egyptian God, and the people had
fallen into Paganish Idolatry, it had been very improper for Aaron to have
proclaimed this his Sacrifice a Feast to the Lord. 5. Neither here nor
afterward, when Aaron relates the whole proceeding to Moses when he came down
from the Mount, is there any mention of any thing that may give the least
suspicion or intimation that this graven Image was the symbol or representation
of a false God, but much to evince the contrary; forasmuch as here is no name
of any particular false God (which yet is usual in Scripture, when in other
places it relates their lapse into Polytheism and Idolatry) but a Solemn Feast
proclaimed to the Lord Jehovah: And although this Calf was only intended by
them to be a Symbol of the presence of the true God, yet being directly
contrary to his Command, and having Divine Worship given to it, it became a
perfect piece of gross and soul Idolatry.

Another instance of the like nature we have in the Idolatry practiced by
Jeroboam; for that the Calves which he placed in Dan and Bethel, and built
Altars, and sacrificed to them, were Hieroglyphics or symbolical
representations of the true God, and not the Images of false Gods, is plain and
evident. 1. In that there is no mention of Jeroboam's worshipping the Gods of
Egypt, or any other adjoining Paganish Nation; whereas when Solomon in his old
Age was drawn away by his Wives to commit Idolatry, there is a particular
account and enumeration of the false Gods he adored, as Ashtoreth the Goddess
of the Zidonians, Chemosh the God of the Moabites, and Milcom the God of the
Children of Ammon; but of Jeroboam it is only said, that he made two Calves of
Gold, and said to the people, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem: 1
Kin. 12.28, 29.
Behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt: And
he set the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan. 2. The sin of Ahab, which was
the Introduction of Polytheism, and the height of Pagan Idolatry, (and
therefore is signally called in Scripture, the way of Ahab) is accounted
greater in Gods sight than the sin of Jeroboam; which is a plain sign, that the
way of Jeroboam was not the worshipping false Gods (for that is called the way
of the House of Ahab) but the worshipping the true God in an Image. Thus it is
written of Jehoram the Son of Ahab, 2 Kings 3.2, 3. And he wrought evil in the
sight of the Lord, but not like his Father, and like his Mother; for he put
away the Image of Baal that his Father had made: Nevertheless he cleaved unto
the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, which made Israel to sin, he departed
not therefrom. 3. In that the object of his Idolatry was a Golden Calf, it
seems to be the very same prevarication that Aaron was led into by the
Israelites, soon after the delivery of the Law or ten Commandments upon Mount
Sinai: and that these Calves, as well as that made by Aaron, were designed for
symbols of the presence of the true God; and that being a violation of the
express Command of God, and so interpreted by him in the severe punishment of
the sin, so likewise were these, and both alike Idolatry. 4. The same form of
words is used by Jeroboam at the Dedication of these Calves, that was
afore-time made use of by the Israelites, when Aaron made the Molten Calf:
These be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt.
Now they knew, and never thought otherwise, that it was neither Chemosh, nor
Milcom, nor Ashtoreth, nor Dagon, nor any other Pagan Deity, but the true God
who delivered them from the Egyptian Bondage. 5. Jeroboam continues the same
Feasts and way of worship which were at Jerusalem; and therefore it is most
likely, he designed still the worship of the true God in these Calves, which
were set up as symbols of his presence. 6. It was not agreeable to the
Political end or reason which Jeroboam propounded to himself, to establish that
part of Pagan Idolatry which consisted in Polytheism; for his only aim was, to
hinder the people, by this Project, from going up to do Sacrifice in Jerusalem,
lest by that they should be tempted to return to the obedience of their natural
Prince: for thus he expresses his own fears, And Jeroboam said in his heart,
now shall the Kingdom return to the House of David: 1 Kin. 12.26, 27.
If this people go up to do Sacrifice in the House of the Lord at Jerusalem,
then shall the heart of this people turn again unto their Lord, even unto
Rehoboam King of Judah; and they shall kill me, and go again to Rehoboam King
of Judah. Now if this worship which he established had been the worship of
strange and foreign Gods, it would no ways have comported with his end, which
was to assure the ten Tribes to himself. 7. Jeroboam only argues against the
place, and not any thing against the way or manner of worship performed at
Jerusalem: for he only tells them, it was too much for them to go up to
Jerusalem, but if they would hearken to him, they might worship God as well in
another place as there, for he placed an Image at Bethel, and another at Dan,
which being symbols or visible representations of the presence of the true God
that brought them out of Egypt, they might sacrifice and perform their other
Divine Rites and Ceremonies to them, and not trouble themselves any further. 8.
To which may be added, in the last place, that it is the most unlikely and
improbable thing in the World, that Jeroboam, at his very first entrance upon
the Kingdom, should establish the very same Idolatry for which the Kingdom was
rent from the house of Solomon; for when the Prophet Ahijah tells Jereboam that
the Lord would rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and give ten Tribes
to him, and make him King over Israel, the reason is given, 1 Kings 11.33.
Because they had forsaken God, and worshipped Ashtoreth the Goddess of the
Zidonians, Chemosh the God of the Meabites, and Milcom the God of the Children
of Ammon. And therefore it is very childish and ridion lous to imagine, that
Jeruboram would introduce that very Idolatry at his first coming, for the
practice of which God had threatened to pull the Kingdom out of the hand of his
Master. These two Examples do sufficiently and fully instruct us in the s^ose
and meaning of God in the second Commandment, that he forbid all worship of
himself by an Image, and that the making of designing any such Image, though
for his honor, is palpable and gross Idolatry.

8. I might now likewise, for a conclusion of this Argument, bring another
instance of the grossest Idolatry that ever was committed by men, solemnly
practiced by the Romists Church, and enjoined by their Council of Trent; and
that is, their worshipping of the Bread in the Sacrament, which they can the
Adoration of the Host, than which (besides the Idolatry involved in it) I
cannot find any Rite or Custom so barbarous in the whole Pagan Superstition,
unless I should bring in the Cannibals or Man-Eaters: And if the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation prove false (as there is nothing more certain) then by the
testimony of Costerus the Jesuit, there never was the like piece of Idolatry
practiced in the World before: Take his own words: Enchirid. Contr. c. 12.
For the errors of those (says he) were more tolerable, who worship some
Golden or Silver Statue, or some Image of any other Materials for their God, as
the Heathen worshipped their Gods; or a Red Cloth hung upon the top of a Spear,
as is reported of the Laplanders, or some live-Animal, as of old the Egyptians
did, than of these that worship a bit of Bread, as hitherto the Christians have
done all over the world for so many hundred years, if the Doctrine of
Transubstantion be not true, From this Testimony then we are informed, that if
Transubstantiation be a Fiction, then the Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry,
and so gross a piece of Idolatry, as a man can find no instance in Paganism to
liken it to. And that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is a ridiculous
Figment, a thing without Sense or Reason imposed upon the World, I refer to
those learned Authors who have on purpose discovered the falsity of it.

9. I have shown that Almighty God by sending his Son, our Savior Christ
Jesus, into the World, designed the replantation of his own blessed Nature and
Image in men's Souls: And that this might be the more fully and effectually
accomplished, he determined likewise to root out and extirpate all Idolatry,
which both debased the Majesty of the Great God, and rendered men's Minds low,
contemptible, and abject: and having in the general discovered some of those
Doctrines averred and maintained in the Church of Rome, which directly
overthrow this great Purpose of making men Partakers of a Divine and Godlike
Spirit; I shall now produce some other instances, and show how the practice of
the Romish Church destroys those other two branches of the Divine Life, that
is, Purity or Holiness, and Love and Charity.

And for the first of these, that is, Purity and Holiness, it is wholly
evacuated by such Doctrines and Practices as minister to the Vices of men, and
reconcile Heaven and Salvation with the most licentious courses of sin and
wickedness, such as enervate all the Arguments used in the Gospel to promote a
strict and holy Conversation, and are apt to give allowance and encouragement
to a wicked life.

1. To this end and purpose the Doctrine of Purgatory is hugely subservient;
which besides that it is a Politic Device to squeeze and drain men's Money from
them, and so enrich the Clergy, though with the Damnation of the Laity, it is
likewise fitted for the cherishing and pampering men's carnal lusts and
affections, and gives them hope of Salvation upon no difficult terms, though
they have not been so careful in providing for it in this lifetime, as Christ
in his holy Gospel has commanded and enjoined them to be. For since the worst
of men amongst Christians (if they take any care, and use any competent
circumspection) may be dismissed from these Earthly Regions with fair hopes and
assurances, (if not of going directly to Heaven) yet at least of an entrance
into Purgatory (wherever it be, whether in a Torrid or Frozen Zone) it must
needs be a wonderful gratification to their Animal Faculties, and Sensitive
Lives, to indulge and please them to the full, and yet escape the torments of
Hell at the last. We have seen that if a wicked man live and die without the
practice of Christian Virtues, and with the habits of many damnable sins
unmortified, yet if at the last moment and conclusion of his life, he have but
an act of Attrition, and confess to his Ghostly Father, (who is bound upon this
to absolve him) he shall certainly be saved; which is encouragement enough to
vicious persons to go on in sin, and venture the odds of a surprise, or sudden
death, upon such easy terms: But if a man be so careless and wretchedly
stupid, as not to mind the making satisfaction for mortal sins in this life, so
long as he is assured by an Infallible Priesthood it may be done in the next,
the worst that can happen to him between Death and Judgment, is only the state
of Purgatory; that is, he must undergo some strange torment, God knows where,
in Fire, or Hail, or Snow, or Ice. And this truly is a sad and uncomfortable
condition, but still there is some hope left, and the redemption from this
Dismal Prison prevents all despair of lying for ever under this severe
Restraint. Therefore this good natured Church of Rome bids them take heart, and
tells them that there is an Expiation of Sin after Death by the Prayers of the
living. It is the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, That the Souls in Purgatory
are delivered thence fidelium suffragiis, potissimum vero acceptal ili Altaris
saorificio, Sess. 25.
i. e. by the Suffrages of the faithful, but especially by the acceptable
Sacrifice of the Altar. And giving Directions to Bishops, the Council says, Let
Bishops take care that the Suffrages of the faithful now living, i. e. the
Sacrifices of Masses, Prayers, Alms-deeds, and other Works of Piety, which
according to the Constitution of the Church ought to be performed for the
faithful deceased, that they be done piously and devoutly, etc. And they
Anathematize every one that shall say, The Sacrifice of the Mass is a waked
Commemoration of that Sacrifice on the Cross, and not Propitiatory: or that it
only profits him that receives it, and ought not to be offered for the Living
and the Dead, Sess. 22. Can. 3.
for Sins, Punishments, Satisfactions, and other Necessities. There is no great
danger then that a Man should lie long in Purgatory, if he have either Money or
Friends, for either of these ways a Man may escape.

Amongst the rest of the Indulgences conferred upon the Con-fraternity of the
Rosary this is one, That every time they recite the whole Rosary for the
departed, they gain the delivery of a Soul out of Purgatory. And though Charity
grow cold, and there be little to be done for Love, yet Money that answers all
things, will open the Gates of Purgatory, and deliver whoever the Donor
pleases: De Miss. l. 3. c. 10.
for some Monks have taught, (as the learned. Mornay relates,) that the Souls
which are in Purgatory do leap at the sound of the Money when it is cast into
the Basin for them; so comfortable a thing is Gold. The poor Sinner indeed is
in the worst condition, who has few Friends and less Money; and truly for ought
I can see such a one living obscurely may dye without much regard or concern,
and being quickly forgotten may ly the whole time in Purgatory, which is not
ten years say Dominicus Soto, and Thomas Zerula. But for those who are of
Ability to purchase Masses and Sacrifices, by leaving round sums of Money at
their Death, they need not fear the staying so much as a day in Purgatory: So
that it need not be said, How hard, but how easy, is it for a Rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?

And is not this excellent Doctrine, and very well fitted for the encouragement
of a wicked Life? Skin for Skin; and all that a Man has will he give for his
Life; and he were a very Foor that would not part with some of his Estate to be
freed from the punishment of his sins, and be made happy for ever. But alas our
Ministers cannot give us such excellent encouragements as these, nor can they
with safe Consciences tell us that Money will open the Gates of Paradise; but
they tell us in sober sadness that if we live bad Lives, we shall certainly and
unavoidably be miserable. They have no ways of freeing Men from Hell and
Damnation, but only by persuading them in their Life time to be truly penitent
and sincere; nor will they promise and secure any that their sins are pardoned
upon any other terms than that godly sorrow that works repentance never to be
repented of.

2. But if this Provision be too narrow, and scanty for a Course of Debauchery
and Licentiousness, his Holiness, like a most kind and indulgent Father, will
give his Children no cause of complaint; but as well out of a prudent regard to
his own Coffers, as an earnest desire to give his Sons as ample a liberty to
follow all the extravagant and enormous motions of Flesh and Blood as Heart can
wish, he grants many Indulgences and Dispensations for sin and wickedness. And
though we squeamish and fainthearted Protestants who check at every Sin, may
think strange that Christ's Vicar (as he calls himself) should act so contrary
to the Interest of his Supreme Lord; yet the Plenitude of the Pope's Power will
warrant this, and much more. For his Power (as Du Ranchin, who was no
Protestant, speaks) has neither Banks nor Bottom; and his Jurisdiction extends
over all the World, even as low as Hell and Purgatory, and as high as Heaven,
taking hold of great and small, Review of the Council of Trent, l. 2. c. 10.
Clerks and Laics, things sacred and profane: And afterward he gives diverse
Instances of the fullness of the Pope's Power out of their own Authors, viz.
That the Pope is a God upon Earth, that God and he have one and the same
Consistory; that he can go against all Councils and Statutes; that he can make
wrong to be right: To whom no Man may say, Why do you so? Whose Power may not
be disputed without incurring the Crime of Sacrilege, forasmuch as he is the
Cause of Causes, and the just Cause; and for that it it is to be presumed that
whatsoever pleases him is just and reasonable.

Now he that has but Faith enough to believe those vast Prorogatives of his
Holiness, need never question the Validity of his Indulgences and Dispensations
for Sin. And that we may not think this unlimited Power to be only the fawning
of his Parasites and Court-flatterers, Clement the VI. in his Bull of altering
the Jubilee gives us a Specimen of it, where among other things he ordains,
That if a Man be going to Rome upon Devotion, in the year of Jubilee, and
happen to dye by the way, he shall be totally acquitted and absolved of all his
sins. And he afterward adds, Howsoever we command the Angels of Paradise, that
they convey his Soul into the glory of Paradise, being totally absolved from
the pains of Purgatory. Well spoken brave Head of this Church! we will trust
thee for finding out an easy way to Heaven at any time.

In Rome there are so many Churches, Altars, and Crosses that have such an
inexhaustible stock of Indulgences granted to them by several Popes, that a Man
cannot miss a full Remission and Pardon of all his sins.

And that we may not think our holy Father the Pope has forgotten his Children
in England, or any other place far distant from Rome, he has provided Pardon
and Salvation for these at as easy a Rate as can be desired; By Grant from
Pope John the XX. every bowing of the Head at the naming of Jesus gets twenty
years pardon: And to grace the Ceremony the more, Sir Edwin. Sands says,
Europae spec.
he has heard sundry of their famous Divines teach in the Pulpit, That Christ
himself on the Cross bowed his Head on the right side, to reverence his own
Name that was written over it.

Again, The saying of the Beads over with a Medal, or other Trinket of the Pope
's Benediction appendant* gets a Plenary Indulgence; and delivers what Soul out
of Purgatory one pleases.

And now one would imagine that his Holiness had given ample satisfaction to
all his dearly beloved Children; but because some are apt to be querulous and
complaining, out of his abundant Charity he has been pleased to rate and set a
Price upon most Sins, that they may know before they act any Villainy what an
Absolution will cost: The Book is called Taxa Cancellariae Apostolice, The Tax
of the Apostolical Chancery, and was set forth by Pope Leo the X. Of which Book
in the first place hear Du Ranchin's censure, Review of the Council of Trent,
l. 2. c. 4.
who speaking of the dishonest Arts and Tricks the Popes use to get Money,
refers those that desire further Information, to a Book Entitled Taxa
Cancellaria Apostolica, Printed at Paris 1520. And yet (says he) this is
nothing in Comparison of the Penitentiary Tax printed with the same Book, where
every Sin, every Crime, how heinous soever, has his Price set; so that to have
a License and Impunity for sinning, there needs no more than to be rich; to
have a Pasport to Paradise, both for himself and his misdeeds. But (that which
might make Rome blush, if there were any shame in her Brow) these Pardons and
Indulgences are denied to the Poor and Indigent, who are not of Means
sufficient, to raise these Criminal and Incestuous Impositions. So that we live
not in those days when it was harder for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, than for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle; for now the
Kingdom of Heaven belongs to them, and not to those beggarly Creatures that
have nothing but a Staff and a Wallet.

Take likewise the Complaint of Claudius Espencaus, a famous Doctor of Sorbon,
cited by the same Author: Comment. in Ep. ad. Tit.
There is a Book publicly set to every Man's view (says he) which sells as well
now as ever, Entitled Taxa Cancellariae Apostolicae, which is prostitute and
set out for gain, like a common whore, whence more naughtiness is learned than
from all the Summists, and Summaries of all Vices. There is License granted for
many of them, and Absolution for all; but only to such as will buy them. I
forbear the names, For (as one says) they are very fearful, even the sound of
them. It is strange that in these times, in this Sohism, that Index and
Inventory of so many unclean and abominable Villainies, so Infamous that I am
confident there is not a more scandalous Book in all Germany, Switzerland, or
any other place which has separated from the Church of Rome, was not
suppressed: Yea, it is so far from being suppressed by the Treasurers of the
Church of Rome, that the Licenses and Impunities for those so many, and such
horrible Crimes, are renewed; and for the most part confirmed by the Faculties
of the Legates, which come from thence into these Quarters, with Power to
restore to their former Estate all things that were utterly lost; and so to
legitimate all Bastards, Whoresons, and such as were begot by any unlawful
Conjunction; to allow People Marriage with such as they had formerly committed
Adultery with, to absolve such as were perjured, Simoniacal, Falsifiers,
Robbers, Usurers, Schismatics, Heretics recanting; yea, and even to admit
them to Orders, Honors, Dignities, and all sorts of Benefices; to dispense
with casual, not wilful Murderers, howbeit the forecited Tax does not except
wilful Parricides, Killers of Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Children, or
Wife; Sorcerers, Enchanters, Concubine-keepers, Adulterers, Incestuous with
Parents or Kindred, Sodomites, Sinners against Nature, abusers of themselves
with Beasts, etc. O that Rome would from henceforth have some shame, and cease
to set out such a shameless Catalogue of all manner of wickedness. This Passage
is warily commanded to be blotted out in their Spanish Expurgatory Index.

Dr. Peter de Moulin says, That this Book was Reprinted at Paris by Tossanus
Dionysius in S. James 's Street, De Monar. Temp. Pont. Romans
at the wooden Cross, the King's Privilege, and the Pope's Bull being annexed
to it. And the Lord Morney speaking of these Books, faith, They are no less
commonly used among the Pope's Brokers, than Calendars with Husbandmen, Mystr.
Iniq.
or the Book of Customs and Entries among Merchants.

This Sink of wickedness; which I have here discovered, cannot but be extremely
offensive to the tender senses of every true Christian, therefore I shall
hasten as fast as I can from it, only citing a Passage out of Dr. Ranchin, with
a pleasant Story relating to it. Review of the Council of Trent. l. 5. c. 1.
It is ordinary (says he) with the Popes to grant a plenary Pardon of all
Sins, with this Expression, [Be they never so he ynous,] not only at the great
Jubilee, but also in particular Bulls: And he instances in that of Pope Sixtus
the V. An. 1588. granted to the Catholics of France. But that (says he) which
is yet more to be condemned in them, is, that the Popes de not only give
remission of sins already committed, but also of such as are to be committed,
which is a means to obligex all the have Rascals in the World unto him, and to
give them occasion to redouble their Crimes and Misdemeanors; to rob with four
hands, to kill Father and Mother, to set upon their Lords and Masters, to
violate the Authority of their Princes, and usurp their Dominions: For provided
they can make their Party stronger, and that they be devout toward the H. See,
there will be no want of an Indulgence; yea even without that, always provided
they pay their Rent.

The story is this: In the time of Pope Leo the Tenth, Tetzelius, a Friar, was
sent into Germany with a great number of Pardoris to advance Money for his
Holiness: This Factor highly commended his Wares where ever he came, and
affirmed, that he could pardon all sins, both past, and to come: whereupon a
German Gentleman bought such a one of him, and afterward robbed the Pardoner:
Tetzelius was highly offended, and threatened him with Bell, Book, and Candie:
But the Gentleman answered, That he had bought his Pardon for it; declaring,
that was the Sin he determined to commit, when he made that Purchase. To which
the poor Friar knew not what to reply.

10. The last great end and purpose of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus was (as I
have shown) to diffuse and propagate an Universal Love and Charity: but how far
removed from this excellent temper and spirit the Romish Church is, their
practice is a sufficient witness: For he that shall consider how they brand us
of the Reformation with the odious name of Heretics, and how impiously
diligent they have been to exadicate and extirpate the Reformed Religion out of
the world, persecuting it in all places where their Power extends with all
imaginable cruelty; and withal remembers, that (as the often-cited Author tells
us) it is a Maxim of the Jesuits, That if any manexamine the Doctrine of the
Pope by the Rule of Gods Word, Du Rauchin Review, l. 5. c. 7.
and seeing that it is different, chance to contradict it, let him be rooted
out with Fire and Sword: He, I say, that deeply reflects upon these things,
will find that Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations, and that their
tender mercies are like those of the wicked. Our blessed Savior once rebuked
the indiscreet zeal of his Disciples, when they would have called for Fire from
Heaven to consume the ungrateful Samaritans, and tells them, that he came not
to destroy mend liver, but to save them: But the Romish Church, as if she had
owned no other Lord but him who was a Murderer from the beginning, thinks it
not enough to call for Fire from Heaven, but searches Earth and Hell too to
destroy harmless and innocent persons. The good Shepherd (said the meek Lamb of
God) lays down his life for his sheep: But the proud and bloody Bishop of Rome,
with his Idolatrous Clergy, are so far from this Divine Spirit, that they drive
them to the Shambles, and out their throats without any remorse; witness those
many barbarous Massacres and Butcheries of men, for no other reason, but
because they could not bow the knee to Baal, and join with an Idolatrous Church
against the express Command of the Living God. The barbarous Murders of the
Albigenses and Waldenses remain a lasting Monument of unparalleled Popish
Cruelty; of whom Reinerius, an Inquisitor of the Church of Rome, thus writes;
Contr. Haret. c. 4.
Among all the Sects which have formerly been, none is more pernicious to the
Church, than that of the Leonists; and that for these three Reasons. 1. Because
it is of longer continuance than any other, for same say it has lasted ever
since Pope Sylvester, others say ever since the Apostles. 2. Because no Sect is
more general than this, for there is scarce any Country in which it is not
found. 3. That whereas other Sects deter and affright men with the horridness
of their blasphemies against God, this Sect of the Leonists makes a great show
of godliness, because they live righteously before men, and believe all things
rightly touching God, and concerning all other Articles of the Creed, only they
speak evil of the Roman Church and Clergy, in which thing the Laity is very
forward to credit and believe them. Which Testimony being of one of their own
Party, is a clear Evidence against this Bloody Church, that the only Crime of
these Persons, was their so freely declaring against the Idolatry and
Corruptions of the Romish Church; and therefore that the inhumane Butcheries of
them was a gross and heinous Murder in the sight of God.

The Parisian Massaore comes next to be considered, of which Thuanus says,
Nullum similis saevitae exemplum in tota Antiquitate reperiri; i. e. the most
Ancient Records cannot furnish us with an Example of the like cruelty; Hist l.
52, 53.
it was cloaked over with shows of the greatest Amity in the World, namely, of
a Marriage between the Houses of Valois and Bourbon, to which all the chief of
the Protestants were most lovingly invited: There, after the jollity of Mirth,
and Caresses of Entertainment, in the dead time of the Night, the whole City
was in Arms about them; they fell upon all the Protestants, Houses and
Lodgings; they butchered them without distinction, Men, Women, and Children,
till the Channels ran down with blood into the River: thirty thousand persons
were there murdered, says Thuanus, and as many more about that time in diverse
places of France, says Natales Comes.

This Cruelty was celebrated by the Romanists in France, Hist. l. 25. Circiter
Sexaginta millia hominum variis in locis per illud tempus trucidata fuisse
dicta sunt in Gallia.
as one of the most glorious Actions the World has been acquainted with; great
rejoycings at Court for it, and Public Thanks given unto God: But the greatest
joy was at Rome, an account of which take from Thuanus, a Roman Catholic, and
a most Authemick Historian: He tells us the Pope had an account of the Massacre
from his Legate at Paris, that he read his Letter in the Consistoby of
Cardinals, that there it was decreed, that they should go directly to S.
Mark's, L. 53.
and there solemnly give Thanks to Almighty God for so great a Blessing
conferred upon the Roman See, and the Christian World: That soon after a
Jubilee should be publish through the whole Christian World, and these Causes
were expressed for it, To give thanks to God for destroying in France the Enemies
of the Truth, and of the Church. In the Evening the Guns were fired at S.
Angeto, and Bonefires were made, and nothing was omitted of all those things
that use to be performed in the greatest Victories of the Church. Some days
after there was a Procession to S. Lewis, with the greatest resort of Nobility
and People: First went the Bishops and Cardinals, then the Switzers, then the
Ambassadors of Kings and Princes; then under a Canopy went his Holiness
himsell, with the Emperor's Ambassador bearing up his Train for him, etc. Over
the Church-door was an Inscription set up, in which the Cardinal of Lorrain, in
the name of the King of France, congratulated his Holiness, and the College of
Cardinals, etc. for the plainly stupendous effects, and altogether incredible
events of their Counsels given him, and of their Assistances sent him, and of
their twelve years Wishes and Prayers. And the better to perpetuate the memory
of this Massacre, the Pope caused it to be painted about his great Hall in the
Lateran, and there recorded in Marble.

To these bloody Catalogues a considerable Accession has been made since by the
Papists in Ireland; who in times of as great peace and liberty as ever that
Nation enjoyed; and in the name of that blessed and gracious King, The Lord
Orory's Answer to Welsh, p. 29. says, within few Months about two hundred
thousand.
under whom they enjoyed these, like inhumane Butchers, cut the throats of
above a hundred thousand of his Protestant Subjects, of all Sexes and Ages; an
action of so horrid an aspect, as will make the names of all that had to do in
it look black and detestable to mankind throughout all Generations: That Sea of
Blood which has there been cruelly and barbarously shed, is enough to drown
any man in Eternal, both infamy and misery, whom God shall find the malicious
Author, or Instigator of its Effusion, Icon Basil. c. 12. And how far his
Holiness was concerned in it, appears by his Nuncio whom he sent to promote and
bless the Cause.

I have now finished what I intended to say in this short Discourse, with no
other design, than that of doing Honor to God, and vindicating the abused
Glory of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, by showing how far the Romish
Church is degenerated from his Gospel, who is indeed the Prince and Head of the
Catholic Church; whom I humbly beseech to open the Eyes of all deluded
Persons, that they may come to the knowledge of the Truth, and be saved. Amen.

FINIS.
Book's Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
H. Mori Opera Theologica, Fol.

-- His Reply to a late Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry, with an
Appendix, in Octavo.

-- His Remarks in answer to the Lord Hales of Gravitation and Non-gravitation
of Fluids, in Oct.

Mr. Falkner's Libertas Ecolesiastica, in Oct.

-- His Christian Loyalty, in Oct.

Mr. Sherlock's Discourse of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our Union and
Communion with him, etc. To which is annexed a Defense, and Continuation; with
a particular respect to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and the Charge
of Socinianism and Relagianism, in Oct.

Mr. Hotchkis's Discourse concerning the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
to us, and our Sins to him, etc. in two Parts, in Oct.

Mr. Allen's Answer to Mr. Fergusson, about Justification, in Oct.

-- His Mystery of Iniquity unfolded, etc. in Oct.

-- His Christians Justification stated, in Oct.

-- His Friendly Advice to the Non-Conformists, beginning with the Anabaptists,
in Oct.

Mr. Hallywel's Account of Familism against the Quakers, in Oct.

-- His Discourse of the Excellency of Christianity, in Oct.

-- His Sacred Method of saving Humane Souls by Jesus Christ, in Oct.

Dr. Goodall's Vindication of the College of Physicians, against a Pamphlet
called, The Cornerstone, in Oct.

Dr. Grew's Anatomy of Trunks, with 19 Figures, in Oct.

(...)
