SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT UNION AMONG PROTESTANTS, AND THE Preservation of the
Interest OF THE Protestant Religion In this Nation.

LONDON, Printed by T.S. An. Dom. 1680.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT UNION AMONG Protestants, etc.
1. THE Prostestant Religion, introduced into this Nation, by the Apostolical
way and means of the Holiness and laborious Preaching of its Professors,
confirmed with the Martyrdom of multitudes of all sorts, being now thoroughly
fixed in the Minds of the Body of the People, and confirmed unto them by Laws
and Oaths, is become the principal Interest of the Nation, which cannot be
shaken or overthrown, without the Ruin of the Government, and Destruction of
the People. Nothing therefore less being included in the Attempts of the
Papists, with all their Interest in Europe, for the reintroducing of their
Religion amongst us, the Nation has been constantly filled for an hundred
years with fears, jealousies, and apprehensions of dangers, to the great
disturbance of the Government, and disquietment of the Subjects; nor can it be
otherwise whilst they know that there is a pregnant Design for their total
subversion, together with the Ruin of the Protestant Religion in other places,
which would have ensued thereon. But,

2. This Religion so received and approved by the People, as the only true way
to salvation, (accompanied with an Abhorrency of the superstition, Idolatry and
Heresies of the Church of Rome, partly on the general account of their own
nature, and partly on particular Reasons and Provocations from the Attempts of
those that belong unto that Church, for the Ruin of them and their Religion)
and jointly professed in the same confession of Faith, has been preserved by
the means of a Faithful laborious Ministry, under the care, protection and
outward Government of the Supreme Power, as the greatest Bullwark of the
Protestant Religion in Europe.

3. The only Weakness in it, as the Interest of the Nation, (before it was
infested with Novel Opinions) was the differences that have been amongst many
of the Professors of it, from the very first beginning of the Reformation, and
which are continued unto this day.

4. These differences though consisting now in many Particulars of less moment,
arose originally, solely from the Constitution of an Authoritative National
Church State. For some would have it to be of one sort namely, Episcopal, some
of another, namely, Presbyterian; some would have it of a divine Original,
others of an Humane, which must be the Judgment of the King and Parliament, who
know it to be what they have made it, and nothing else; and some judge it a
mere Usurpation on the Power of the Civil Government, and the Liberties of the
People.

5. It is therefore acknowledged that the Body of Christian People in this
Nation professing the Protestant Religion, with a Detestation of Popery; having
the Gospel preached unto them, and the Sacraments duly administered, under the
Rule of the King, are the Church of England. But as unto an Authoritative
National Church, consisting solely in the Power and Interest of the Clergy,
wherein the People, either as Christians, Protestants or Subjects of the
Kingdom are not concerned; such as is at present established, farther enquiry
may be made about it.

6. There is a threefold Form of such a Church, at present contended for. The
first is Papal, the second Episcopal, and the third Presbyterian.

7. The first Form of an Authoritative National Church State amongst us, as in
other places, was Papal: And the sole use of it here in England, was to
embroyl, our Kings in their Government, to oppress the People in their Souls,
Bodies, and Estates, and to fell us all, as branded slaves, unto Rome. These
things have been sufficiently manifested. But in other places especially in
Germany, whilst otherwise they were all of one Religion, in Doctrine and
Worship, all conform to the Church of Rome; yet in bloody contests merely about
this Authoritative Church State, many Emperors were ruined, and an hundred set
Battles fought in the Field.

8. At the Reformation this Church State, was accommodated, (as was supposed)
unto the Interest of the Nation, to obviate the evils suffered from it, under
the other Form, and render it of use unto the Religion established. Yet
experience manifests that, partly from its Constitution, partly from the
Inclinations of them by whom it is managed, other evils have accompanied or
followed it, which until they are removed, the weakness of the Protestant
Interest through mutual Divisions, will remain among us. And among others, they
are these.

1. An Encroachment on the Civil Rights and Government of the Nation, in the
Courts and Jurisdictions pretended to belong or to be annexed unto this Church
State over the Persons, Goods, and Liberties of the Subjects, (yea in some
cases their Lives.) It is the undoubted Right and Liberty of the People of this
Nation, that no actual Jurisdiction should be exercised over their Persons,
Estates, or Liberties, in a way collateral unto, and independent on the
Publicks Administration of Justice unto all, derived from the Sovereign Power,
and executed by known Officers, Rules and Orders, according unto the Laws of
the Realm. If this be taken from them, all other Pretenses of securing the
Liberty and Property of the Subjects, are of no advantage unto them. For
whilst they have Justice in legal public Courts, duly administered unto them,
they may be oppressed and ruined (as many are so every day) by this pretended
Collateral irregular Power and Jurisdiction over their Persons, Good and
Liberties; from which it seems to be the Duty of the Parliament to deliver
them. And it is the Right of the Kings of this Nation, that no external Power
over the Subjects be exercised but in their name, by virtue of their
Commission, to be granted and executed according unto the Laws of the Land.
This Right of Kings, and this Liberty of Subjects also, are so sacred, as that
they ought not to be entrenched on by any pretense of Church or Religion. For
what is of God's own appointment will touch neither of them. But the
administration of this Jurisdiction as it is exercised with a side wind Power,
distinct, different from and in some things contrary unto the public Justice
of the Nation, (wherein all the Subjects have an equal Interest) and by the
Rules of a law foreign unto that of the Kingdom, is a great cause of the
continuation of Divisions among Protestants, unto the weakening of the Interest
of Religion itself.

2 It is accompanied with the Prosecution and troubling of Peaceable Subjects,
in their Liberties and Estates; not for any error in the Christian Faith, not
for any Declension from the Protestant Religion or compliance with Popery, not
for any Immoralities, but merely and solely for their noncompliance with, and
submission unto those things which are supposed necessary for the preservation
of their Church State, which is of itself altogether unnecessary. For the whole
complex of the imposed conformity in Canonical Obedience, Ceremonies, Rites and
Modes of Worship, has no other end but the sustentation and preservation
thereof; being things otherwise, that belong not to Christian Religion. This
began, this will perpetuate our Divisions, which will not be healed whilst it
is continued. And whilst the two Parties of Papists and Protestants, are at
this day contending as it were for life, soul, and being, (the long continued
Design of the former, under various pretenses, and by great variety of
Attempts, being come unto its fatal Trial, as unto its Issue:) It will not be
thought meet by wise men, whose entire Interest in Religion and the Liberties
of the Nation are concerned, in this contest to continue the Body of
Protestants in Divisions, with mutual Animosities, and the distrust of
Multitudes, on such unnecessary Occasions.

3. Whereas by virtue of this State and Constitution, sundry Persons are
interested in Honors, Dignities, Power and wealth, in all which they have an
immediate, (and not merely legal) Dependence on the King, since their
Separation from the Pope; they have constantly made it their business to
promote absolute Monarchical Power, without respect unto the true Constitution
of the Government of this Nation, which in sundry Instances has been
disadvantageous to Kings themselves, as well as an Encumbrance to the People in
Parliament. For although their Constitution does really entrench upon the Kings
legal Power, in the Administration of their Jurisdiction, yet to secure their
own Interests, and to make a seeming compensation for that Encroachment, many
of them have contended for that absolute Power in the King, which he never
owned, nor assumed unto himself.

9. The Evils and Inconveniences of this Constitution, of an Authoritative
National Church State, have been greatly increased and propagated in this
Nation, as unto the heightening of Divisions among Protestants, by the
endeavors that have been to confirm and continue this State in an
extraordinary way; such were the Oath called, etc. and the late Oath at Oxford,
whereon many ^ober peaceable Protestant Ministers have been troubled, and some
utterly ruined; which has much provoked the Indignation of the People, against
those who occasioned that Law, and for whose sake it was enacted; and increased
the suspicion that those who manage these things, would have men believe, that
their State and Rule, is as sacred as the Crown, or Religion itself, unto the
great disparagement of them both; which things are effectual engines to expel
all Peace and Union among Protestants.

10* Those who are for the Presbyterian Form of an Authoritative National
Church State, do indeed cut off, and cast away most of those things which are
the matter of contest between the present dissenting Parties, and so make a
nearer approach toward a firm Union among all Protestants than the other do;
yet such an Authoritative Church State in that form, is neither proper for, nor
possible unto this Nation, nor consistent with that Pre-eminence of the Crown,
that Liberty of the Subjects, and freedom of the Consciences of Christians,
which are their due. But this being not much among us pretended unto, it need
not further be spoken of.

11. It is evident therefore that whilst the Evils enumerated, are not
separated from the present Authoritative National Church Constitution, but the
powers of it are put in execution, and the ends of it pursued, it is altogether
vain to expect Peace and Union among Protestants in England; it neither has
been so, nor ever will be so, fire and faggot will not be able to effect it.
Who shall reconcile the endless differences that are, and have been about the
Power, Courts, and Jurisdictions of this Church State, whether they be
agreeable unto the Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the Subjects. The fixed
Judgment of many that they have no legal Authority at present, nor any Power
given them by the Law of the Land, whereon they dare not submit unto them, is
no less chargeable, dangerous and pernicious unto them, than are their uncouth
Vexations and illegal Proceedings unto them who are unwillingly forced to
submit unto them. And whatever may be expected, the People of this Nation will
never be contented that their Persons, Goods, or Liberties, shall be made
Subject unto any Law, but the Public Royal Law of the Kingdom administered in
legal Courts of Justice. Who shall undertake that all Christians or Protestants
in this Nation shall ever submit their consciences and practices, to a
multitude of Impositions no way warranted in the Scriptures? Or how any of the
other evils that are the causes of all our Divisions shall be removed, cannot
easily be declared.

12. If it shall be said that if this Authoritative National Church State
should be removed, and no other of another form, set up in the room of it; or
be divested of the Powers claimed at present by it, it will be impossible to
preserve the Protestant Religion amongst us, to keep Uniformity in the
Profession of it, and Agreement amongst its Professors; It is answered, (1)
Nothing ought to be removed but what is a real Cause, or unnecessary Occasion
at least, of all the difformity and disorder that is amongst us, and is likely
so to continue* (2) That whilst we have a Protestant King, and a Protestant
Parliament, Protestant Magistrates and Protestant Ministers, with the due care
of the Nation that they may so continue, and a Protestant confession of Faith
duly adhered unto, I shall not, under the blessing of the Holy Providence,
fear the Preservation of the Protestant Religion and Interest in England,
without any recourse unto such a Church Power, as fills all with Divisions.
This I say is that Church of England which is the principal Bullwark of the
Protestant Religion and Interest in Europe; namely, a Protestant King, a
Protestant Parliament, Protestant Magistrates, Protestant Ministers, a
Protestant confession of faith established by Law, with the cordial agreement
of the Body of the People in all these things; esteeming the Protestant
Religion and its Profession their chief Interest in this world. To suppose that
a few men, having obtained Honors, Dignities, and Revenues unto themselves,
exercising a Power and Authority (highly questionable whether legal or no) unto
their own advantage, oppressive unto the People, and by all means perpetuating
Differences among Protestants, are that Church of England, which is justly
esteemed the Bullwark of the Protestant Religion, is an high and palpable
mistake. The Church of England as unto its National Interest in the
Preservation of the Protestant Religion, is not only separable from it, but
weakened by it. Yea, if there be such a National Constitution, as in its own
nature, and by the secular advantages which it supplies men withal, enclines
them to prefer their own Interest above that of the Protestant Religion in
general, it will always endanger that Religion in any Nation. For hereon they
will judge when they are pressed, on any occasion or circumstance of Affairs,
that it is better to preserve their own Interest, by virtue of some
Dispensations securing unto them their Power and secular advantages, than to
venture all by a rigid contest for the Protestant Religion.

Nor is it morally possible that ever Popery should return into this, or any
other Nation, but under the Conduct of such a Church Constitution; without this
it has no prevalent engine, but mere force, war and oppression.

But if the Interest of Popery can possess this Church State, either by the
Inclinations of them or the greater number of them, who have the management of
it, or by their Dependence, as unto their Interest, on the supreme Authority,
if that happen in any age to give countenance thereunto, the whole Nation will
quickly be insensibly influenced, and betrayed into Popery as it were, they
know not how. Hence have been such National Conversions to and fro in England,
as have been in no other places or Countries in the World. For the Care of the
publicks Preservation of Religion, being, as it is supposed, entrusted in this
Church State and the Managers of it, if by any means it be possessed by Popery,
or influenced by a Popish Prince, the Religion of the whole Nation will be lost
immediately.

For as unto all other Ministers who have the immediate Guidance of the People
they will suppose that they can do nothing of themselves in this mattter. but
are only obliged unto the conduct of the Church State itself. And having their
station therein alone, and depending thereon, they may easily be either seduced
by their Interest, or excluded from their Duty by the Power of that Church
State whereunto they are Subject. By this means the whole Interest of the
Protestant Religion in this Nation as unto its Preservation* depends on such a
State as being the concernment of a few, and those such as have an especial
Interest of their own, distinct from that of the Protestant Religion in
General, may be easily possessed by Popery, and probably would be so, if they
should have a Popish Prince to influence them.

But whereas the People are now possessed and fully persuaded of the Truth of
Protestant Religion, if there be no public Machine or Engines insensibly to
turn about the whole Body of them, but they must be dealt withal individually
or parochially, it will, as was said, be morally impossible, that ever Popery
should become the Religion of this Nation, any other way, but by the
Destruction or Killing of the present Inhabitants.

Allow that the Church State supposed, may in those who have the Trust, and
Power of it, be seduced, corrupted, or any way induced or disposed unto the
Interest of Popery, as it may be; It is possible some individual Persons may be
found, that for the sake of Truth, will expose their Lives to the stake or
otherwise. So did many in the days of Queen Mary, though now esteemed by not a
few, foolish Zealots for their pains. But the body of the People through their
various legal Relations unto this Church State, deserting the care of their own
Preservation, by their Trust in the conduct thereof, whereunto they are
unavoidably compelled, will quickly be inveagled so as not to be able to
extricate themselves. But set them at Liberty, so as that every Parliament,
every Magistrate, every Minister, every good Christian, may judge that that the
Preservation of their Religion is their own Duty in all their capacities, and
Popery with all its Arts will know neither how to begin, nor how to proceed
with them.

If then there were no such Church State as being in the Management of a few,
is seduceable, and not difficult to be possessed by the Interest of Popery,
whereby the whole Nation would be at once betrayed; the Protestant Religion is
now so firmly seated in the Minds of the People, so countenanced by Law, so
esteemed by all to be the Principal Interest of the Nation, that the wit of all
the Jesuits of the world, knows not how to attaque it, much less endanger it;
which if there be need, shall be further demonstrated.

13. Nor is it a Matter of Art or difficulty to declare a way for the security
of the Protestant Religion, with the Rights of the Government, and Liberties of
the Subjects, with the due Freedom of Conscience, without any such
Church State; but it is what the Principles of Religion, common Prudence, and
the honest Interest of the Nation do direct unto; as to instance in the things
that are most material unto that end.

1. Let a solemn Renunciation of Popery, suited unto the General Principles of
the Protestant Religion, be established by Law, to be made publicly by every
Person, that is to partake of the Rights and Privileges already confirmed unto
that Religion, or which afterward shall be so; to be renewed as occasion shall
require.

2. Let there be one solemn stated Confession of the Christian Protestant
Faith, such as is the Doctrine of the Articles of the Church of England,
especially as explained in the public authorized writings of the Church in the
Days of Queen Elizabeth and King James, before the Inroad of Novel Opinions
among us; to be subscribed by all enjoying a public Ministry

3. Let the Magistrate assume unto himself the exercise of his just Power, in
the Preservation of the public Peace in all Instances; in the Encouragement
and Protection of the Professors of the Protestant Religion; in securing unto
all men their Legal Rights, already granted unto them, in their several places
and stations, in the Punishment of all Crimes cognoscible by humane Judgment;
in deposing of men from their Enjoyments or Privileges, which they hold on any
condition, as suppose their Orthodox Profession of the Protestant Religion, if
they fail in, or fall from the Performance of it; leaving only things purely
Spiritual and Evangelical to the care and Power of the Churches, and all
litigious causes of what sort soever, with the infliction of all outward
Penalties, unto the Determination of the Laws, of the Land, and a great
Progress will be made toward Order and Peace amongst us.

4. Yea these few things in general are only needful thereunto; (1) Let the
King and Parliament secure the Protestant Religion as it is the public
Interest of the Nation against all Attempts of the Papacy for its Destruction,
with proper Laws, and their due execution. (2) Let the Wisdom and Power of the
Nation in the Supreme and Subordinate Magistrates be exerted, in the rule of
all Persons and Causes, Civil and Criminal, by one and the same Law of the
Land, in a Compliance wherewith the Allegiance of the Subject unto the King
does consist; without which, Government will never be well fixed on its proper
and immovable Basis. (3) That Provision be made for the sedulous Preaching of
the Gospel in all Parts and Places of the Land, or all Parochial Churches, the
care whereof is incumbent on the Magistrates. (4) Let the Church be protected
in the exercise of its Spiritual Power, by Spiritual means only, as Preaching
of the Word, Administration of the Sacraments, and the like; whatever is
farther pretended, as necessary unto any of the ends of true Religion or its
preservation in the Nation, is but a Cover for the Negligence, Idleness, and
Insufficiency of some of the Clergy, who would have a^ outward apearance of
effecting that by external force, which themselves by diligent Prayer, sedulous
Preaching of the Word, and an exemplary Conversation, ought to labor for in
the Hearts of Men.

5. It is evident that hereon all causes of Jealousies, animosities and strifes
among the Protestants would be taken away; all Complaints of oppression by
Courts and Jurisdictions, not owned by the People, be prevented; all
Encroachments on the Consciences of men, (which are and will be an endless and
irreconcilable cause of Difference among us) be obviated; all ability to
control or disturb the Power and Privilege of Kings in their Persons or Rule;
and all Temptations to exalt their Power in Absoluteness above the Law, will be
removed; so as that by the Blessing of God, Peace and Love may be preserved
among all true Protestants.

And if there do ensue hereon some Variety in outward Rites and Observations,
as there was in all the Primitive Churches, who pleaded that the Unity of Faith
was commended and not at all impeached by such varieties; yet whilst the same
Doctrine of Truth is preached in all places, the same Sacraments only
administered, wherein every Protestant Subject of the Nation, will be at Liberty
to join in Protestant Christian Worship, and to partake of all Church
Ordinances, in the outward way and according unto the outward Rites of his own
choosing, without the Authoritative examination or Prohibition of any pretended
Church Power, but what in his own Judgment he does embrace, no Inconvenience
will follow hereon, unless it be judged such, that the Protestant Roligion, the
Liberty of the Subjects, and the due Freedom of the Consciences of men sober
and peaceable, will be all preserved.

FINIS.

