PNEYATOLOGIA: OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning the HOLY SPIRIT. WHEREIN An Account
is given of his Name, Nature, Personality, Dispensation, Operations, and
Effects. His whole Work in the Old and New Creation is Explained; The Doctrine
concerning it Vindicated from Oppositions and Reproaches. THE Nature also and
Necessity of Gospel-Holiness; the Difference between Grace and Morality, or a
Spiritual Life unto God in Evangelical Obedience and a Course of Moral Virtues,
are Stated and Declared.

By JOHN OWEN, D. D.

John 5. 39.Search the Scriptures, etc. (...). Chrysostom. LONDON, Printed by
J. Darby, for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Peacock in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet, MDCLXXIV.

To the Readers.
AN account in general of the Nature and Design of the ensuing Discourse, with
the Reasons why it is made public at this time, being given in the first
Chapter of the Treatise it self; I shall not long detain the Readers here at
the entrance of it. But some few things it is necessary they should be
acquainted withal, and that both as to the Matter contained in it, and as to
the mann^r of its handling. The Subject Matter of the whole, as the Title and
almost every Page of the Book declare, is the Holy Spirit of God and his
Operations. And two things there are which either of them are sufficient to
render any Subject either difficult on the one hand, or unpleasant on the
other, to be treated of in this way; both which we have herein to conflict
withal. For where the Matter it self is abstruse and mysterious, the handling
of it cannot be without its Difficulties; and where it is fallen by any means
whatever under public contempt and scorn, there is an abatement of
satisfaction in the Consideration and Defense of it. Now all the Concern^^^s of
the Holy Spirit are an eminent part of the Mystery, or deep Things of God* For
as the knowledge of them does wholly depend on, and is regulated by Divine
Revelation, so are they in their own Nature Divine and Heavenly, distant and
remote from all things that the Heart of Man in the mere Exercise of its own
Reason or Understanding can rise up unto. But yet on the other hand there is
nothing in the World that is more generally despised as foolish and
contemptible, than the things that are spoken of and ascribed unto the Spirit
of God. He needs no furtherance in the forfeiture of his Reputation with many,
as a Person Fanatical, estranged from the conduct of Reason, and all generous
Principles of Conversation, who dares avow an Interest in his Work, or take
upon him the Defense thereof. Wherefore th^se things must be a little spoken
unto, if only to manifest whence Relief may be had against the Discouragements
wherewith they are attended.

For the first thing proposed, it must be granted that the things here treated
of, are in themselves mysterious and abstruse. But yet the way whereby we may
endeavor an acquaintance with them, according to the (...) of the Gift of
Christ unto every one, is made plain in the Scriptures of Truth. If this Way be
neglected or despised, all other ways of attempting the same end, be they
never so vigorous or promising, will prove ineffectual. What belongs unto it,
as to the inward frame and dispo^^tion of Mind in them who search after
Understanding in these things, what unto the outward use of Means, what unto
the performance of Spiritual Duties, what unto conformity in the whole Soul
unto each discovery of Truth that is attained, is not my present Work to
declare, nor shall I divert thereunto. If God give an opportunity to treat
concerning the Work of the Holy Spirit enabling us to understand the Scriptures
or the mind of God in them, the whole of this way will be at large declared.

At present it may suffice to observe, that God who in himself is the eternal
Original Spring and Fountain of all Truth, is also the only Sovereign Cause and
Author of its Revelation unto us. And whereas that Truth which Originally is
one in him is of various sorts and kinds, according to the Variety of the
things which it respects in its Communication unto us, the ways and means of
that communication are suited unto the distinct Nature of each Truth in
particular. So the Truth of things natural is made known from God by the
Exercise of Reason, or the due Application of the understanding that is in Man
unto their Investigation. For the things of a Man knows the Spirit of a Man
that is in him. Neither ordinarily is there any thing more required unto that
Degree or Certainty of knowledge in things of that Nature whereof our Minds are
capable, but the diligent Application of the faculties of our Souls in the due
Use of proper means u^^o the Attainment thereof. Yet is there a secret Work of
the Spirit of God herein, even in the Communication of Skill and Ability in
things Natural* as also in things Civil, Moral, Political and Artificial, as in
our ensuing Discours^ is fully manifested. But whereas these things belong unto
the Work of the O^d^^e^tion and the Preservation thereof, or the Rule and
Government of Mankind in this World merely as rational Creatures, there is no
use of Means, no Communication of Aids spiritual or supernatural absolutely
necessary to be exercised g^^nt^d about them. Wherefore Knowledge and Wisdom in
things of this Nature (...) ^stributed promiscuously among all sorts of Persons
according to the ro^^tion of their Natural Abilities, and a superstruction
thereon in their diligent Exercis^ without any peculiar Application to God for
especial Grace or (...) serving still a Liberty unto the Sovereignty of Divine
Providence in the disposal of all Men and their Concerns.

But as to things supernatural, the Knowledge and Truth of them, the Teachings
of God are of another Nature; and in like manner a peculiar Application of our
selves unto him for Instruction is required of us. In these things also there
are Degrees according as they approach on the one hand unto the Infinite Abyss
of the Divine Essence and Existence, as the eternal Generation and Incarnation
of the Son, the Procession and Mission of the Holy Spirit; or on the other unto
those Divine Effects which are produced in our Souls whereof we have
Experience. According unto these Degrees as the Divine Condescension is exerted
in their Revelation, so ought our Attention in the Exercise of Faith, Humility
and Prayer, to be increased in our Enquiries into them. For although all that
Diligence in the Use of outward Means, necessary to the Attainment of the
Knowledge of any other Useful Truth, be indispensibly required in the pursuit of
an Acquaintance with these things also; yet if moreoover there be not an
Addition of Spiritual Ways and M^ans suited in their own Nature, and appointed
of God un^o the receiving of Supernatural Light, and the Understanding of the
Deep Things of God, our labor about them will in a great measure be but
fruitless and unprofitable. For although the Letter of the Scripture, and the
sense of the Propositions are equally exposed to the Reason of all mankind; yet
the real spiritual Knowledge of the Things themselves, is not communicated unto
any but by the especial Operation of the Holy Spirit; nor is any considerable
Degree of Insight into the Doctrine of the Mysteries of them attainable but by
a due waiting on him, who alone gives the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in
the Knowledge of them. For the things of God knows no Man but the Spirit of
God, and they to whom by him they are revealed. Neither can the Scriptures be
interpreted aright but by the Aid of that Spirit by which they were indicted, as
Hierom a^^^rmes, and as I shall afterward fully prove. But in the use of the
means mentioned we need not despond, but that seeing these things themselves
are revealed that we may know God in a due manner, and live unto him as we
ought, we may attain such a measure of Spiritual Understanding in them as is
useful unto our own and others Edification. They may I say do so who are not
slothful in hearing or learning, but by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern both Good and Evil.

Wherefore the Subject of the ensuing Discourses being entirely things of this
Nature in their several Degrees of Access unto God or our selves, I shall give
no account of any particular Endeavors in my Enquiries into them, but leave
the Judgment thereof unto the Evidence of the Effects produced thereby. Only
whereas I know not any who ever went before me in this Design of representing
the whole Economy of the Holy Spirit, with all his Adjuncts, Operations and
Effects, whereof this is the first Part (the Attempt of Crellius in this kind
being only to corrupt the Truth in some few Instances) as the Difficulty of my
work was increased thereby, so it may plead my Excuse, if any thing be found
not to answer so regular a Projection, or just a Method as the nature of the
Subject requires, and as was aimed at.

In the first Part of the whole Work which concerns the Name, Divine Nature,
Personality and Mission of the Holy Spirit, I do but declare and defend the
faith of the Catholic Church against the Socinians; with what Advantage, with
what contribution of Light or Evidence, strength or order unto what has been
pleaded before by others, is left unto the Learned Readers to judge* and
determine. And in what concerns the Adjuncts and Properties of his Mission and
Operation, some may, and I hope do judge themselves not unbeholding unto me for
administering an occasion unto them of deeper and better Thoughts about them.

The second Part of our Endeavor concerns the Work of the Holy Spirit in the
Old Creation, both in its Production, Preservation and Rul^. And whereas I had
not therein the Advantage of any one Ancient or Modern Author to beat out the
Paths of Truth before me, I have confined my self to express Testimonies of
Scripture with such Expositions of them as sufficiently evidence their own
Truth, though also they want not such a suffrage from others as may give them
the Reputation of some Authority.

The like may be said of what succeeds in the next Place concerning his Work
under the New Testament preparatory for the new Creation, in the Communication
of all sorts of Gifts Ordinary and Extraordinary, all kind of Skill and Ability
in things Spiritual, Natural, Moral, Artificial and Political, with the
Instances whereby those Operations of his are confirmed. All these things, many
wherefore are handled by others separately and apart, are here proposed in
their Order with respect unto their proper End and Design.

For what concerns his Work on the Head of the New Creation, or the Humane
Nature in the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, I have been careful to keep
severely unto the Bounds of Sobriety, and not to indulge unto any curious or
unwarrantable speculations. I have therefore therein not only diligently
attended unto the Doctrine of the Scripture, our only infallible Rule and
Guide, but also expressly considered what was taught and believed in the Ancient
Church in this Matter, from which I know that I have not departed.

More I shall not add as to the first Difficulty wherewith an Endeavor of this
kinds is attended, arising from the Nature of the Subject treated of. The other
concerning the Contempt that is cast by many on all these things, must yet be
further spoken unto.

In all the Dispensations of God toward his People under the Old Testament,
there was nothing of God communicated unto them, nothing of Worth or Excellency
wrought in them or by them, but it is expressly assigned unto the Holy Spirit as
the Author and Cause of it. But yet of all the Promises given unto them
concerning a better and more glorious State of the Church to be afterward
introduced, next unto that of the coming of the Son of God in the Flesh, those
are the most eminent which concern an Enlargement and more full Communication
of the Spirit, beyond what they were or could in their imperfect state be made
Partakers of. Accordingly we find in the New Testament, that whatever concerns
the Conversion of the Elect, the Edification of the Church, the Sanctification
and Consolation of Believers; the performance of those of Duties of Obedience
which we owe unto God, with our Conduct in all the ways thereof, is in general
and particular Instances so appropriated unto him, as that it is withal
declared, that nothing of it in any kind can be enjoyed or performed without
his especial^ ^peration, ^^yd and Assistance. So careful was God fully to
instruct and to secure the faith of the Church in this matter, according as he
knew its eternal Concernments to lie therein. Yet notwithstanding all the
evidence given hereunto, the Church of God in most Ages has been exercised
with Oppositions, either to his Person or his Work, or the manner of it,
contrary unto what is promised and declared concerning them in the Word of
Truth; nor does it yet cease so to be. Yea, though the Contradictions of some
in former Ages have been fierce and clamorous, yet all that has fallen out of
that kind, has been exceeding short of what is come to pass in the days
wherein we live. For not to mention the Socinians who have gathered into one
Head, or rather ulcerous impostume, all the virulent Oppositions made unto his
Deity or Grace by the Photinians, Macedonians, and Pelagians of old; there are
others who professing no Enmity unto his Divine Person, yea, admitting and
owning the Doctrine of the Church concerning it, are yet ready on all occasions
to despise and reproach that whole Work for which he was promised under the Old
Testament, and which is expressly assigned unto him in the Now. Hence is it
grown amongst a Matter of Reproach and Scorn for any one to make mention of his
Grace, or to profess an interest in that Work of his as his, without which no
Man shall see God, if the Scripture be a faithful Testimony. And some have
taken pains to prove, That sundry things which are expressly assigned unto him
in the Gospel as Effects of his Power and Grace, are only filthy Enthusiasms,
or at least weak Imaginations of Distempered Minds. Neither is there any end of
Calumnious Imputations on them by whom his Work is avowed, and his Grace
professed. Yea, the department of many herein is such, as that if it were not
known how effectual the Efforts of Profaneness are upon the corrupted Minds of
Men, it would rather seem ridiculous and be despised, than to deserve any
serious notice. For let any avow or plead for the known Work of the Spirit of
God, and it is immediately apprehended a sufficient Ground to charge them with
leaving the Rule of the Word to attend unto Revelations and Inspirations, as
also to forgo all thoughts of the necessity of the Duties of Obedience; whereas
no other Work of his is pleaded for, but that only which no Man can either
attend unto the Rule of the Scripture as he ought, or perform any one Duty of
Obedience unto God in a due manner. And there are none of this Conspiracy so
weak or unlearned, but are able to scoff at the mention of him, and to cast the
very naming of him on others as a Reproach. Yea, it is well if some begin not
to deal in like manner with the Person of Christ himself. For Error and
Profaneness if once countenanced, are at all times fruitful and progressive,
and will be so whilst Darkness and Corruption abiding on the Minds of Men, the
great Adversary is able by his subtle malice to make impressions on them. But
in these things not a few do please themselves, despise others, and would count
themselves injured if their Christianity should be called in question. But what
value is there in that Name or Title, where the whole Mystery of the Gospel is
excluded out of our Religion? Take away the Dispensation of the Spirit, and his
effectual Operations in all the Intercourse that is between God and Man; be
ashamed to avow or profess the Work attributed unto him in the Gospel, and
Christianity is plucked up by the Roots. Yea, this practical contempt of the
Work of the Holy Spirit, being grown the only plausible Defiance of Religion,
is so also to be the most pernicious, beyond all national Mistakes and Errors
about the same things, being constantly accompanied with profaneness, and
commonly issuing in Atheism.

The sense I intend is fully expressed in the ensuing complaint of a Learned
Person published many years ago; In seculo hodie tam perverso prorsus immersi
vivimus miseri, in quo Spiritus Sanctus omnino ferme pro ludibrio habetur: imo
in quo etiam sunt qui non tantum cord toto eum repudient ut factis negent, sed
quoque adeo blasphemi in eum exurgant ut penitas eundem ex orb expulsum aut
exulatum cupiant, quum illi nullam in operationibus suis relinquant efficaciam;
ac propriis vanorum habituum suorum viribus, ac rationis profanae liberrati
carnalitatique suae omnem ascribant sapientiam, and fortitudinem in rebus
agendis. Unde tanta malignitas externae proterviae apud mortales cernitur.
Ideoque pernicies nostra nos jam ante fores expecta; etc. Herein lies the Rise
and Spring of that stated Apostasy from the Power of Evangelical Truth, wherein
the World takes its liberty to immerge it self in all licentiousness of Life
and Conversation, the end whereof many cannot but expect with Dread and Terror.

To obviate these Evils in any measure, to vindicate the Truth and Reality of
Divine Spiritual Operations in the Church, to avow what is believed and taught
by them concerning the Holy Spirit and his Work, who are most charged and
reslected on for their Profession thereof, and thereby to evince the Iniquity
of those Calumnies, under the darkness and shades whereof some seek to
countenance themselves in their profane scoffing at his whole Dispensation; to
manifest in all Instances, that what is ascribed unto him is not only
consistent with Religion, but also that without which Religion cannot consist,
nor the Power of it be preserved, is the principal Design of the ensuing
Discours^s.

Now whereas the Effectual Operation of the Blessed Spirit in the Regeneration
or Conversion of Sinners, is of all other parts of his Work most vielently by
opposed, and has of late been virulently traduced, I have the more largely
insisted thereon. And because it can neither be well understood, nor duly
explained without the Consideration of the State of Lapsed or Corrupted Nature,
I have taken in that also at large, as judging it necessary so to do. For
whereas the knowledge of it lies at the bottom of all our Obedience unto God by
Christ, it has always been the Design of some, and yet continues so to be,
either wholly to deny it, or to extenuate it unto the depression and almost
annihilation of the Grace of the Gospel, whereby alone our Nature can be
repaired. Designing therefore to treat expressly of the Reparation of our Nature
by Grace, it was all accounts necessary that we should treat of its Depravation
by Sin also.

Moreover what is Discoursed on these things, is suited unto the Edification of
them that do believe, and directed unto their furtherance in true Spiritual
Obedience and Holiness, or the Obedience of Faith. Hence it may be some will
judge that our Discourses on these Subjects are drawn out into a greater length
than was needful ^^nvenient, by that continual intermixture of Practical
Applications which runs along in them all. But if they shall be pleased to
consider, that my Design was not to handle these things in a way of
Controversy, but declaring and confirming the truth concerning them, to
accommodate the Doctrines (...) unto Practice; and that I dare not treat of
things of this Nature any other way, but such as may promote the Edification of
the generality of Believers, they will either be of my mind, or it may be
without much difficulty admit of my Excuse. How-ever if these things are
neglected or despised by some, yea, be they never so many, there are yet others
(...) will judge their principal Concernment to lie in such Discourses as may
direct and encourage them in the Holy Practice of their Duty. And whereas the
Way, Manner, and Method of the Holy Spirit in his Operations, as to this Work
of translating Sinners from Death unto Life, from a State of Nature unto that
of Grace, have been variously handled by some, and severely reslecled on with
scorn by others, I have endeavourered so to declare and assert what the
Scripture manifestly teaches concerning them, confirming it with the
Testimonies of some of the Ancient Writers of the Church, as I no way doubt but
it is suited unto the Experience of who have in their own Souls been made
Partakers of that Blessed Work of the Holy Ghost. And whilst in the substance
of what is delivered, I have the plain Testimonies of the Scripture, the
Suffrage of the Ancient Church, and the Experience of them who do sincerely
believe to rest upon, I shall not be greatly moved with the Censures and
Opposition of those who are otherwise minded.

I shall add no more on this Head, but that whereas the only Inconvenience
wherewith our Doctrine is pressed, is the pretended difficulty in reconciling
the Nature and Necessity of our Duty, with the Efficacy of the Grace of the
Spirit; I have been so far from waving the Consideration of it, as that I have
embraced every Opportunity to examine it in all particular Instances, wherein
it may be urged with most appearance of Probability. And it is I hope at length
made to appear, that not only the necessity of our Duty is consistent with the
Efficacy of God's Grace; but also that as on the one hand we can perform no
Duty to God as we ought without its Aid and Assistance, nor have any
encouragement to attempt a course of Obedience without a just Expectation
thereof; so on the other, that the Work of Grace it self is no way effectual
but in the compliance with in a way of Duty; only with the leave of some
Persons, or whether they will or no, we give the pre-eminence in all unto Grace
and not unto our selves. The Command of God is the Measure and Rule of our
Industry and Diligence in a way of Duty; And why any one should be discouraged
from the Exercise of that Industry which God requires of him, by the
Consideration of the Aid and Assistance which he has promised unto him, I
cannot understand. The Work of Obedience is difficult and of the highest
Importance, so that if any one can be negligent therein, because God will help
and assist him, it is because he hates it, he likes it not. Let others do what
they please, I shall endeavor to comply with the Apostle's Advice upon the
Enforcement which he gives unto it; Work out your own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; for it is God which works in you both to will and to do of his own
good Pleasure.

These things, with sundry of the like Nature, falling unavoidably under
Consideration have drawn out these Discourses unto a length much beyond my
first Design; which is also the occasion why I have forborne the present adding
unto them, those other Parts of the Work of the Holy Spirit, in Prayer or
Supplication, in Illumination with respect unto the Belief of the Scripture,
and right understanding of the Mind of God in them, in the Communication of
Gifts unto the Church, and the Consolation of Believers, which must now wait
for another Opportunity, if God in his Goodness and Patience shall be pleased
to grant it unto us.

Another Part of the Work of the Holy Spirit consists in our Sanctification,
whereon our Evangelical Obedience or Holiness does depend. How much all his
Operations herein also are by some despised, what Endeavors there have been to
debase the Nature of Gospel-Obedience, yea, to cast it out of the Hearts and
Lives of Christians, and to substitute an Heathenish Honesty at best in the
room thereof, is not unknown to any, who think it their Duty to inquire into
these things. Hence I thought it not unnecessary, on the occasion of treating
concerning the Work of the Holy Spirit in our Sanctification, to make a
diligent and full enquiry into the true Nature of Evangelical-Holiness, and
that Spiritual ^ase unto God which all Believers are Created unto in Christ
Jesus. And herein following the Conduct of the Scriptures from first to last,
the Difference that is between them and that Exercise of Moral Virtue which
some pl^ad for in their stead, did so evidently manifest it self, as that it
needed no great Endeavor to represent it unto any impartial Judgment. Only in
the handling of these things, I thought meet to pursue my former Method and
Design, and principally to respect the reducing of the Doctrines insisted on
unto the Practice and Improvement of Holiness, which also has occasioned the
lengthning of these Discourses. I doubt not but all these things will be by
some despised; they are so in themselves, and their Declaration by me will not
recommend them unto a better Acceptance. But let them please themselves whilst
they see good in their own Imaginations, whilst the Scripture is admitted to be
an Infallible Declaration of the Will of God and the Nature of Spiritual
Things, and there are Christians remaining in the World who endeavor to live
to God and to come to the enjoyment of him by Jesus Christ, there will not want
sufficient Testimony against that putid Figment of Moral Virtue being all our
Gospel Holiness, or that the Reparation of our Natures and Life unto God do
consist therein alone.

In the last Place succeeds a Discourse concerning the necessity of Holiness
and Obedience; some regard I confess I had therein, though not much, unto the
ridiculous clamours of malevolent and ignorant Persons, charging those who
plead for the Efficacy of the Grace of God, and the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, as though thereby they took away the necessity of an
Holy Life. For who would much trouble himself about an Accusation which is
laden with as many Convictions of its Forgery, as there are Persons who
sincerely believe those Doctrines; and which Common Light gives Testimony
against in the Conversations of them by whom they are received, and by whom
they are despised? It was the Importance of the Thing it self made peculiarly
seasonable by the manifold Temptations of the days wherein we live, which
occasioned that Addition unto what was delivered about the Nature of
Evangelical Holiness; seeing, if we know these things, happy are we if we do
them. But yet the Principal Arguments and Demonstrations of that Necessity
being drawn from those Doctrines of the Gospel which some traduce as casting no
good Aspect thereon, the Calumnies mentioned are therein also obviated. And
thus far have we proceeded in the Declaration and Vindication of the despised
Work of the Spirit of God under the New Testament, referring the remaining
Instances abovementioned unto another occasion.

The Oppositions unto all that we believe and maintain herein are of two sorts.
First; Such as consist in Particular Exceptions against, and Objections unto
each particular Work of the Spirit, weather in the Communication of Gifts, or
the Operation of Grace. Secondly; Such as consist in Reflections cast on the
whole Work ascribed unto him in general. These of the first sort, will all of
them ^all under Consideration in their proper Places, where we treat of those
especial Actings of the Spirit whereunto they are opposed. The other sort, at
least the principal of them wherewith some make the greatest noise in the
World, may be here briefly spoken unto.

The first and chief Pretense of this Nature is, That all those who plead for
the Effectual Operations of the Holy Spirit, in the Illumination of the Minds
of Men, the Reparation of their Natures, the Sanctification of their Persons,
and their Endowment with Spiritual Gifts, are therein and thereby Enemies to
Reason, and impugn the Use of it in Religion, or at least allow it not that
Place and Exercise therein which is its due. Hence some of those who are
otherwise minded, affirm that it is cast on them as a Reproach that they are
Rational Divines; although s^^far as I can discern, if it be so, it is as
Hierom was beaten by an Angel for being a Ciceronian (in the judgment of some)
very undeservedly. But the grounds whereon this Charge should be made good,
have not as yet been made to appear; neither has it been evinced that any
thing is ascribed by us unto the Efficacy of God's Grace, in the least
derogatory unto Reason, its Use, or any Duty of Man depending thereon. I
suppose we are agreed herein, That the Reason of Man in the State wherein we
are, is not sufficient of it self to find out or frame a Religion whereby we
may please God and be accepted with him. Or if we are not agreed herein, yet I
shall not admit it as a part of our present Controversy, wherein we suppose a
Religion proceeding from, and resolved into Supernatural Revelation. Neither is
it, that I know of, as yet pleaded by any, that Reason is able to comprehend
all the things in their Nature and Being, or to search them out unto
Perfection, which are revealed unto us; for we do not directly deal with them
by whom the Principal Mysteries of the Gospel are rejected, because they cannot
comprehend them, under a pretense, that what is above Reason is against it. And
it may be it will be granted moreover, that Natural Reason cannot enable the
Mind of a Man unto a saving Perception of Spiritual Things as revealed, without
the especial Aid of the Spirit of God in Illumination. If this be denied by
any, as we acknowledge our dissent from t^em, so we know that we do no Injury to
Reason thereby, and will rather suffer under the Imputation of so doing, than
by renouncing of the Scripture to turn Infidels, that we may be esteemed
Rational. But we cannot conceive how Reason should be prejudiced by the
Advancement of the Rational Faculties of our Souls, with respect unto their
Exercise toward their proper Objects; which is all we assign unto the Work of
the Holy Spirit in this Matter. And there are none in the World more free to
grant than we are, that unto us our Reason is the only Judge of the Sense and
Truth of Propositions drawn from the Scripture or proposed therein, and do wish
that all Men might be left peaceable under that determination, where we know
they must abide whether they will or no.

But the enquiry in this Matter, is what Reasonableness appears in the
Mysteries of our Religion when revealed unto our Reason, and what ability we
have to receive, believe and obey them as such. The latter part of this Enquiry
is so fully spoken unto in the ensuing Discourses, as that I shall not here
again insist upon it; the former may in a few words be spoken unto. It cannot
be, it is not that I know of denied by any, that Christian Religion is highly
Reasonable. For it is the Effect of the Infinite Reason, Understanding and
Wisdom of God. But the Question is not, What it is in it self, but what it is
with relation unto our Reason, or how it appears thereunto. And there is no
doubt but every Thing in Christian Religion appears highly reasonable unto
Reason enlightened, or the Mind of Man affected with that Work of Grace in its
Renovation, which is so expressly ascribed unto the Holy Spirit in the
Scripture. For as there is a suitableness between an Enlightened Mind and
Spiritual Mysteries as revealed; so seeing them in their proper Ligh^, it finds
by experience their Necessity, Use, Goodness and Be^^t, with respect unto our
Chi^fest Good and Supreme End. It remains therefore only, that we enquire how
reasonable the Mysteries of Christian Religion are unto the Minds of Men as
corrupter; for that they are so by the entrance of sin, as we believe, so we
have proved in the ensuing Treatise. And it is in vain to dispute with any
about the Reasonableness of Evangelical Faith and Obedience, until the St^te
and Condition of our Reason be agreed. Wherefore to speak plainly in the Case,
as we do a knowledge that Reason in its corrupted State is all that any Man has
in that State, whereby to understand and judge of the Sense and Truth of
Do^^rines revealed in the Scripture, and in the use of such Aids and Means as
it is capable to improve, is more and better unto him than any Judge or
Interpreter that should impose a Sense upon him not suited thereunto; so as to
the Spiritual Things themselves of the Gospel in their own Nature, it is Enmity
against them, and they are Foolishness unto it. If therefore it be a Crime, if
it b^^ to the impeachm^nt and disadvantage of Reason, to affirm that our Minds
stand in need of the Renovation of the Holy Ghost to enable them to understand
Spiritual Things in a Spiritual Manner, we do acknowledge our selves guilty
thereof. But otherwise, That by asserting the Efficacious Operations of the
Spirit of God, and the necessity of them unto the discharge of every Spiritual
Duty toward God in an acceptable manner, we do deny that Use and Exercise of
our own Reason in things Religious and Spiritual, whereof in any state it is
capable, and whereunto of God it is appointed, is unduly charged on us, as will
afterward be (...) manifested.

But it is moreover pretended, that by the Operations we ascribe unto the Holy
Spirit, we expose Man to be deceived by Satanical Delusions, open a door to
Enthusiasms, directing them to the guidance of unaccountable Impulses and
Revelations, so making may unto all Folly and Villainy. By what means this
Charge can be fixed on them who professedly avow that nothing is Good, nothing
Duty unto us, nothing acceptable unto God, but what is warranted by the
Scripture directed unto thereby and suited thereunto, which is the alone
perfect Rule of all that God requires of us in the way of Obedience, but only
ungrounded Clamours, has not yet been attempted to be made manifest. For all
things of this Nature are not only condemned by them, but all things which they
teach concerning the Holy Spirit of God, are the principal Ways and Means to
secure us from the danger of them. It is true, there have been of old, and
happily do still continue among some, Satanical Delusions, Diabolical
Suggestions, and soul Enthusiasms, which have been pretended to proceed from
the Spirit of God, and to be of a Divine Original. For so it is plainly
affirmed in the Scripture, both under the Old Testament and the New, Directions
being therein added for their Discovery and Disprovement. But if we must
therefore reject the true and real Operations of the Spirit of God, the
Principal Preservative against our being deceived by them, we may as well
reject the owning of God himself, because the Devil has imposed himself on
Mankind as the Object of their Worship. Wherefore as to Enthusiasms of any
kind, which might possibly give countenance unto any Diabolical Suggestions, we
are so far from affirming any Operations of the Holy Ghost to consist in them,
or in any thing like unto them, that we allow no pretense of them to be
consistent therewithal. And we have a sure Rule to try all these things by,
which as we are bound in all such Cases precisely to attend unto, so has God
promised the Assistance of his Spirit that they be not deceived, unto them who
do it in sincerity. What some Men intend by Impulses I know not. If it be
especial Aids, Assistances and Inclinations unto Duties, acknowledged to be
such, and the Duties of Persons so assisted and inclined, and that peculiarly
incumbent on them in their present Circumstances, it requires no small Caution
that under an invidious Name we reject not those supplies of Grace which are
promised unto us, and which we are bound to pray for. But if irrational
Impressions, or violent Inclinations unto Things or Actions which are not
acknowledged Duties in themselves, evidenced by the Word of Truth, and so unto
the Persons so affected in their present Condition and Circumstances, are thus
expressed; as we utterly abandon them, so no pretense is given unto them from
any thing which we believe concerning the Holy Spirit and his Operations. For
the whole Work which we assign unto him, is nothing but that whereby we are
enabled to perform that Obedience unto God which is required in the Scripture,
in the way and manner wherein it is required. And it is probably more out of
Enimity unto him than us, where the contrary is pretended. The same may be said
concerning Revelations. They are of two sorts, Objective and Subjective. Those
of the former sort, whether they contain Doctrines contrary unto that of the
Scripture or additional thereunto, or seemingly confirmatory thereof, they are
all universally to be rejected, the former being absolutely false, the latter
useless. Neither have any of the Operations of the Spirit pleaded for the least
respect unto them. For he having finished the whole Work of External
Revelation, and closed it in the Scripture, his whole internal Spiritual Work
is suited and commensurate thereunto. By Subjective Revelations nothing is
intended but that Work of Spiritual Illumination, whereby we are enabled to
discern and understand the Mind of God in the Scripture, which the Apostle
prays for in the behalf of all Believers, ( Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19.) and whose
Nature God assisting shall be fully explained hereafter. So little pretense
therefore there is for this Charge on them by whom the Efficacious Operations
of the Spirit of God are asserted, as that without them we have no absolute
security that we shall be preserved from being imposed on by them, or some of
them.

But it may be it will be said at last, that our whole Labor in declaring the
Work of the Spirit of God in us and toward us, as well as what we have now
briefly spoken in the Vindication of it from these or the like Imputations, is
altogether vain, seeing all we do or say herein is nothing but canting with
unintelligible Expressions. So some affirm indeed, before they have produced
their Charter wherein they are constituted the sole Judges of what Words, what
Expressions, what way of Teaching is proper in things of this Nature. But by
any thing that yet appears, they seem to be as unmeet for the Exercise of that
Dictatorship herein which they pretend unto, as any sort of Men that ever
undertook the Declaration of Things Sacred and Spiritual. Wherefore unless they
come with better Authority than as yet they can pretend unto, and give a better
Example of their own Way and Manner of teaching such Things than as yet they
have done, we shall continue to make Scripture Phraseology our Rule and Pattern
in the Declaration of Spiritual Things, and endeavor an Accommodation of all
our Expressions thereunto, whether to them intelligible or not; and that for
Reasons so easy to be conceived, as that they need not here be pleaded.

An Advertisement unto the Readers.
BEing absent from the Press a good part of the time wherein this Treatise was
Printed, and being sometimes disinabled by Sickness from attending unto a
perusal of the Sheets, I find that sundry Errors and Mistakes have fallen out
in some Copies of this Impression. But whereas for the most part they are
Literal Faults, or in Pointing, not so corrupting the Sense but that an
understanding Reader may easily discern what is intended, I do not judge it
necessary scrupulously to collect or represent them. Some few may be taken
notice of in a way of Instance.

Page 239. line 28. read (...). P. 348. l. 46. r. Afflatus. P. 350. l. 50. for
weakened, r. awaked. P. 365. l. 6. for public r. putid. Ibid. l. 15. for
fruitless r. frontless, etc. P. 495. l. 17. r. (...). P. 510. l. 21. r. (...).
l. 22. (...). l. 34. r. (...). P. 535. for exclusively r. extensively. P. 549.
l. 8. for deceit r. defect. P. 559. l. 28. for Cisterne r. Systeme.

And sundry other such Mistakes I have observed, which need not to be mentioned
in particular, as not likely to give the least trouble unto an intelligent
Reader; The most of these also which I have here taken notice of, are Corrected
in some Copies; sundry of them in the most.

BOOK I.
General Principles Concerning the HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. CHAP. I.
(1.) 1 Cor. 12. 1. opened. (...), spiritual Gifts. Their Grant unto, Use, and
Abuse in that Church. (2.) Jesus, how called Anathema; impiety of the Jews. How
called Lord. The Foundation of Church Order and Worship. (3.) In what sense we
are enabled by the Spirit to call Jesus Lord. (4.) The Holy Spirit the Author
of all Gifts; why called God, and the Lord. (5.) General Distribution of
Spiritual Gifts. (6.) Proper End of their Communication. (7.) Nine sorts of
Gifts; Abuse of them in the Church. Their tendency unto Peace and Order. (8.)
General Design of the ensuing Discourse concerning the Spirit and his
Dispensation. (9.) Importance of the Doctrine concerning the Spirit of God, and
his Operations. Reasons hereof. (10.) Promise of the Spirit to supply the
Absence of Christ, as to his Humane Nature. Concernment thereof. (11.) Work of
the Spirit in the Ministration of the Gospel. (12, 13.) All saving Good
communicated unto us; and wrought in us by Him. (14.) Sin against the Holy
Ghost irremissible. (15.) False pretenses unto the Spirit dangerous. (16.)
Pretenses unto the Spirit of Prophecy under the Old Testament. (17.) Two sorts
of false Prophets; the first. (18.) The second sort. (19.) Pretenders under the
New Testament. (20, 21.) The Rule for the Trial of such Pretenders, 1 John 4.
1, 2, 3. (22.) Rules to this purpose under the Old and New Testament compared.
(23.) A false Spirit set up against the Spirit of God, examined. (24.) False
and noxious Opinions concerning the Spirit, and how to be obviated. (25.)
Reproaches of the Spirit and his Work. (26.) Further declared. (27.) Principles
and Occasions of the Apostasy of Churches under the Law and Gospel. (28.)
Dispensation of the Spirit not confined to the first Ages of the Church. (29,
30, 31.) The great necessity of a diligent enquiry into the things taught,
concerning the Spirit of God and his Work.

THE Apostle Paul, in the 12th Chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians,
directs their Exercise of Spiritual Gifts; concerning which, amongst other
Things and Emergencies, they had made enquiry of him. This, the first words
wherewith he prefaceth his whole Discourse, declare, verse. 1. Now concerning
Spiritual Gifts; (...); that is, (...), as his ensuing Declaration does evince.
(...). Chrysostom. in Loc. So also Ambros. and Theophylact. in Loc.
And the imagination of some concerning Spiritual Persons to be here intended,
contrary to the sense of all the Ancients, is inconsistent with the Context.
For as it was about Spiritual Gifts and their Exercise that the Church had
consulted with him; so the whole series of his ensuing Discourse is directive
therein. And therefore in the close of it, contracting the Design of the whole,
he does it in that advice, (...), covet the best Gifts, namely, among those
which he proposed to treat of, and had done so accordingly, verse. 31. The (...)
of verse. 1. are the (...) of verse. 31. as it is expressed, chap. 14. 1. (...);
that is, (...), desire Spiritual Gifts; whose Nature and Use you are now
instructed in, as at first was proposed. Of these that Church had received an
abundant measure, especially of those that were Extraordinary, and tended to
the Conviction of Unbelievers. For the Lord having much people in that City,
whom he intended to call to the Faith, Acts 18. 9, 10. not only encouraged our
Apostle against all fears and dangers to begin and carry on the Work of
Preaching there, wherein he continued an year and six months, verse. 11. but
also furnished the first Converts with such eminent, and some of them such
miraculous Gifts, as might be a prevalent means to the Conversion of many
others. For he will never be wanting to provide Instruments and suitable means
for the effectual attaining of any End that he aims at. In the Use, Exercise
and Management of these Spiritual Gifts, that Church or sundry of the Principal
Members of it, had fallen into manifold disorders; and abused them unto the
matter of Emulation and Ambition, whereon other Evils did ensue; (...).
Chrysostom. in Loc.
as the best of God's Gifts may be abused by the Lusts of Men, and the purest
Water may be tainted by the Earthen Vessels whereinto it is poured. Upon the
information of some, who loving Truth, Peace, and Order, were troubled at these
Miscarriages, chap. 1. 11. and in Answer unto a Letter of the whole Church
written unto him about these and other Occurrences, Chap. 7. 1. he gives them
Counsel and Advice for the rectifying of these Abuses. And first, to prepare
them aright with humility and thankfulness becoming them who were entrusted
with such excellent Privileges as they had abused, and without which they
could not receive the Instruction which he intended them, he minds them of
their former State and Condition before their Calling and Conversion to Christ,
verse. 2. You know that you were Gentiles, carried away with dumb Idols, even as
you were led; (...); Hurried with violent Impressions from the Devil, into the
service of Idols. This he mentions not to reproach them, but to let them know
what frame of Mind, and what fruit of Life might be justly expected from them,
who had received such an alteration in their Condition. Spiritualia illis
traditurus, exemplum prioris conversationis memorat; ut simulacrorum fuerunt
forma colentes idola, and ducebantur duce voluntate doemoniru^; ita and
colen^tes deum sint forma legis dominicae. Ambros. in loc.
Particularly as he elsewhere tells them, If they had not made themselves to
differ from others; if they had nothing but what they had received, they should
not boast nor exalt themselves above others, as though they had not received,
chap. 4. v. 7. For it is a vain thing for a man to boast in himself of what he
has freely received of another, and never deserved so to receive it; as it is
with all who have received either Gifts or Grace from God.

Alteration of their State and Condition he farther declares unto them by the
Effects, and Author of it, verse. 3. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no
man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed; and that no man can
say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. The great Difference which
was then in the World, was concerning Jesus who was preached unto them all.
Unbelievers, who were still carried with an impetus of Mind and Affections
after dumb Idols, being led and acted therein by the Spirit of the Devil,
blasphemed, and said Jesus was Anathema, or one accursed. They looked on him as
a Person to be detected and abominated as the common odium of their Gods and
Men. Hence on the mention of him, they used to say, Jesus Anathema, he is, or
let him be accursed, detested, destroyed. (And in this Blasphemy do the Jews
continue to this day, hiding their cursed Sentiments under a corrupt
pronunciation of his Name. For instead of (...), they write and call him (...),
the initial Letters of (...); that is, Let his Name and Memory be blotted out;
the same with Jesus Anathema. And this Blasphemy of pronouncing Jesus accursed,
was that wherewith the first Persecutors of the Church tried the Faith of
Christians, as Pliny in his Epistle to Trajan, and Justin Martyr, with other
Apologists agree. And as the Apostle says, Those who did thus, did not so by
the Spirit of God; so he intends that they did it by the acting and instigation
of the Devil, the unclean Spirit, which ruled in those Children of
Disobedience. And this was the Condition of these Corinthians themselves to
whom he wrote, whilst they also were carried away after dumb Idols. On the
other side, those that believed called Jesus Lord, or professed that he was the
Lord, and thereby avowed their Faith in him and Obedience unto him. Principally
they owned him to be Jehovah, the Lord, over all God blessed for ever. For the
Name (...) is every where in the New Testament expressed by (...), here used.
He who thus professes Jesus to be the Lord, in the first place acknowledges
him to be the true God. And then they professed him therewithal, to be their
Lord, the Lord of their Souls and Consciences, unto whom they owed all
Subjection, and performed all Obedience, as Thomas did in his great Confession,
My Lord, and my God, John 20. 28. Now as he had before intimated that those who
disowned him and called him accursed, did speak by the instinct and instigation
of the Devil by whom they were acted; So he lets them know, on the other hand,
that no man can thus own and confess Jesus to be the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost. But it may be said that some acted by the unclean Spirit confessed
Christ to be the Lord. So did the Man in the Synagogue, who cried out, I know
thee who thou art, the Holy One of God, Mark 1. 23, 24. And verse. 24. He
suffered not the Devils to speak, because they knew him. And the Damsel
possessed with a Spirit of Divination, cried after the Apostle, saying, These
Men are the Servants of the most high God, Acts 16. 17. So also did the Man who
abode in the Tombs, possessed with an unclean Spirit, who cried out unto him,
What have I to do with thee Jesus, thou Son of the most high God, Mark 5. 7.
And other Testimonies to the like purpose among the Heathen, and from their
Oracles, might be produced. Ans. (1.) Our Apostle speaks of such a saying of
Jesus to be Lord, as is accompanied with Faith in him, and subjection of Soul
unto him, which is from the Holy Ghost alone. Thus none acted by the unclean
Spirit can call him Lord. (2.) These Acknowledgments were either (1.) wrested
from the Devil, and were no small part of his punishment and torment; or, (2)
were designed by him with an intention to prejudice the Glory of Christ, by his
Testimony, who was a Liar from the Beginning. And Malus bonum cum simulat, tunc
est pessimus. (...) Chrysostom. in loc.
These things therefore can have here no place. Hereby then the Apostle informs
them wherein the Foundation of all Church-Relation, Order, and Worship did
consist. For whereas they had all respect unto the Lordship of Christ, and
their acknowledgment thereof, this was not from themselves, but was a pure
Effect of the Operation of the Holy Ghost in them, and toward them. And any
thing of the like kind, which does not proceed from the same Cause and
Fountain, is of no Use to the Glory of God, nor of any advantage unto the Souls
of Men.

saying of Jesus to be the Lord, is to be restrained unto the manner of
speaking afterward insisted on. Crel. de Sp. S. Prolegom. p. 29, 30, 31.
For the Apostle in the following verses treats of those Extraordinary Gifts,
which many in that Church were then endowed withal. None can, says he, say
Jesus is the Lord, in an extraordinary manner, with diverse tongues, and in
Prophesy, but by the Holy Ghost. Without his especial Assistance, none can
eminently and miraculously declare him so to be. And if this be so, it is
likely that those before intended, who said Jesus was accursed, were some
Persons pretending to be acted, or really acted by an extraordinary Spirit,
which the Apostle declares not to be the Spirit of God. And so Chrysostom
interprets those words of them who were visibly and violently acted by the
Devil. Many such Instruments of his Malice did Satan stir up in those days, to
preserve, if it were possible, his tottering Kingdom from Ruin. But there is
no necessity thus to restrain the words, or to affix this sense unto them. Yea,
it seems to me to be inconsistent with the Design of the Apostle, and Scope of
the Place. For intending to instruct the Corinthians, as was said, in the
Nature, Use, and Exercise of Spiritual Gifts, he first lays down the Spring and
Fountain of all Saving Profession of the Gospel, which those Gifts were
designed to the furtherance and improvement of. Hereupon having minded them of
their Heathen State and Condition before, he lets them know by what means they
were brought into the Profession of the Gospel, and owning of Jesus to be the
Lord, in opposition unto the dumb Idols whom they had served. And this was by
the Author of those Gifts, unto whose consideration he was now addressing
himself. The great Change wrought in them as to their Religion and Profession,
was by the Holy Ghost. For no Man can say that Jesus is the Lord, which is the
Sum and Substance of our Christian Profession, but by him; though some think he
has little or no concern at all in this matter. But to say Christ is the Lord,
includes two things; First, Faith in him as Lord and Savior. So was he
declared and preached by the Angels; Luke 2. 11. A Savior which is Christ the
Lord. And this word Lord, includes as the Dignity of his Person, so his
Investiture with those Offices which for our Good this Lord did exercise and
discharge. Secondly, The profession of that Faith; which two, where they are
sincere, do always accompany each other; Romans 10. 10. For as the saying of
Jesus to be Anathema, did comprise an open Disclaimure and Abrenunciation of
him; so the calling of him Lord, expresses the Profession of our Faith in him,
and Subjection unto him. And both these are here intended to be sincere and
saving. For that Faith and Profession are intended, whereby the Church is built
upon the Rock; the same with that of Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the
Living God, Matthew. 16. 16. And that these are the Works of the Holy Ghost,
which none of themselves are sufficient for, shall God assisting be afterward
abundantly declared.

same Spirit is likewise the Author of all those Gifts, whereby it was to be
built up and established, and whereby the Profession of it might be enlarged;
V. 4. Now there are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit. These are the
things which he intends to discourse upon, wherein he enlarges himself in
the whole ensuing Chapter. Now because the Particulars here insisted on by him
in the beginning of his Discourse, will all of them occur unto us and be called
over again in their proper places, I shall only point unto the Heads of the
Discourse, in the verses preceding the Eleventh, which we principally aim it.

Treating therefore, (...), of these Spiritual Things or Gifts in the Church,
he first declares their Author, from whom they come, and by whom they are
wrought and bestowed. Him he calls the Spirit, v. 4. the Lord, v. 5. God, v. 6.
And to denote the Oneness of their Author, notwithstanding the diversity of the
things themselves, he calls him the same Spirit, the same Lord, the same God.
The words may be understood two ways; First, That the whole Trinity, and each
Person distinctly should be intended in them. For consider the immediate
Operator of these Gifts, and it is the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, verse. 4.
Consider them as to their Procurement, and immediate Authoritative Collation;
and so they are from Christ, the Son, the Lord, verse. 5. But as to their first
Original and Fountain, they are from God, even the Father, verse. 6. And all
these are one and the same. But rather the Spirit alone is intended, and has
this threefold denomination given unto him; For as he is particularly denoted
by the Name of the Spirit, which he uses that we may know whom it is that
eminently he intends, so he calls him both Lord, and God, as to manifest his
Sovereign Authority in all his Works and Administrations; so to ingenerate a
due Reverence in their Hearts toward him with whom they had to do in this
Matter. And no more is intended in these three Verses, but what is summed up
verse. 11. But all these works that one and the self same Spirit, dividing to
every Man severally as he will.

Gifts, (...), v. 4. Administrations, (...), v. 5. Operations, (...), v. 6.
which Division, with the Reasons of it, will in our Progress be farther cleared.

End of the Spirit of God in the Communication of them, and the Use of them in
the Church, verse. 7. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given unto every
Man to profit withal; (...); Sir. (...), the Revelation of the Spirit; that is,
the Gifts whereby, and in whose Exercise he manifests and reveals his own
Presence, Power, and effectual Operation. And the Spirit of God has no other
aim in granting these his enlightening Gifts, wherein he manifests his care of
the Church, and declares the things of the Gospel unto any Man, but that they
should be used to the Profit, Advantage, and Edification of others. They are
not bestowed on Men, to make their secular Gain or, Advantage by them, in
Riches, Honor, or Reputation, for which Ends Simon the Magician would have
purchased them with his Money, Acts 8. 19. No nor yet merely for the good and
benefit of the Souls of them that do receive them, but for the Edification of
the Church, and the furtherance of Faith and Profession in others, (...); ad id
quod expedit, prodest; For that which is expedient, useful, profitable, namely
to the Church, 1 Cor. 6. 12. Chap. 10. 23. 2 Cor. 8. 10. Thus was the
Foundation of the first Churches of the Gospel laid by the Holy Ghost, and thus
was the Work of their building unto perfection, carried on by him. How far
present Churches do, or ought to stand on the same bottom, how far they are
carried on upon the same Principles, is worth our Enquiry, and will in its
proper Place fall under our Consideration.

distributes the Spiritual Gifts then bestowed on the Church, or some Members
of it, into nine Particular Heads or Instances. As (1) Wisdom. (2.) Knowledge,
v. 8. or the Word of Wisdom, and the Word of Knowledge. (3.) Faith. (4) Healing,
verse. 9. (5.) Working of Miracles. (6.) Prophesy. (7.) Discerning of Spirits.

(8.) Kinds of Tongues. (9) Interpretation of Tongues, v. 10. And all these
were extraordinary Gifts, in the manner of the Communication and Exercise,
which related unto the then present state of the Church. What is yet continued
anologous unto them, or holding proportion with them, must be farther enquired
into; when also their especial Nature will be unfolded. Ex hoc capite and
proximo licet conjicere quae fuerint dotes illius veteris Ecclesiae
Christianae, priusquam tot ceremoniis, opibus, imperiis, copiis, bellis
aliisque id genus esset onerata. Nunc fere tot praeclara munia ad unam
potestatem redacta sunt: h. e. Christi tituto palliatam Tyrannidem. Quid enim
aliud est potestas nisi adsit animus Apostolicus? Erasm. Annot. ad v. 4.
But now if there be that great Diversity of Gifts in the Church, if so much
Difference in their Administrations, how can it possibly be prevented but that
Differences and Divisions will arise amongst them on whom they are bestowed,
and those amongst whom they are excercised? It is true, this may so fall out
and sometimes does so, and de facto it did so in this Church of Corinth. One
Admired one Gift, a second another of a different kind, and so the third.
Accordingly among those who had received them, one boasted of this or that
Particular Gift and Ability, and would be continually in its exercise to the
exclusion and contempt of others, bestowed no less for the edification of the
Church than his own. And so far were they transported with Vainglory, and a
desire of self-Advancement, as that they preferred the use of those Gifts in
the Church, which tended principally to beget Astonishment and Admiration in
them which heard or beheld them, before those which were peculiarly useful unto
the Edification of the Church it self; which Evil in particular the Apostle
rebukes at large Chap. 14. By this means the Church came to be divided in it
self, and almost to be broken in Pieces. Chap. 1. v. 11, 12. So foolish oftimes
are the minds of Men; so liable to be imposed upon; so common is it for their
Lusts seduced and principled by the crafts of Satan, to turn Judgment into
Wormwood, and to abuse the most useful Effects of Divine Grace and Bounty. To
prevent all these Evils for the future, and to manifest how perfect an harmony
there is in all these diverse Gifts and different Administrations, at what an
Agreement they are among themselves in their Tendency unto the same Ends of the
Union and Edification of the Church, from what Fountain of Wisdom they do
proceed, and with what Care they ought to be used and improved; the Apostle
declares unto them both the Author of them, and the Rule he proceeds by in
their Dispensation; v. 11. All these, says he, (...). Basil. Homil. 15. de
fide.
works that one and self-same Spirit, dividing to every Man severally as he
will.

Person of the Spirit, his Will, and his Operations which are all asserted in
them. For my Purpose is, through the Permission and Assistance of God, to treat
from hence of the Name, Nature, Existence, and whole Work of the Holy Spirit,
with the Grace of God through Jesus Christ in the Communication of him unto the
Sons of Men. A Work in it self too great and difficult for me to undertake, and
beyond my Ability to manage unto the Glory of God, or the Edification of the
Souls of them that do believe. For who is sufficient for these things? But yet
I dare not utterly faint in it, nor under it, whilst I look unto him whose Work
it is, who gives Wisdom to them that lack it, and upbraideth them not, Jam. 1.
5. Our Eyes therefore are unto him alone, who both supplieth seed to the Sower,
and when he has done blesses it with an increase. The present Necessity,
Importance, and Usefulness of this work, are the Things which alone have
engaged me into the undertaking of it. These therefore I shall briefly
represent in some general Considerations, before I insist on the Things
themselves whose especial Explanation is designed.

second great Head or Principle of those Gospel Truths wherein the Glory of
God, and the Good of the Souls of Men are most eminently concerned. And such
also it is, that without it, without the Knowledge of it in its Truth, and the
Improvement of it in its Power, the other will be useless unto those Ends. For
when God designed the Great and Glorious Work of recovering Fallen Man, and the
saving of sinners to the Praise of the Glory of his Grace, he appointed in his
Infinite Wisdom two great Means thereof. The one was the giving of his Son for
them, and the other was the giving of his Spirit unto them. And hereby was way
made for the Manifestation of the Glory of the whole Blessed Trinity, which is
the utmost end of all the Works of God. Hereby, were the Love, Grace, and
Wisdom of the Father in the Design and Projection of the whole; the Love,
Grace, and Condescension of the Son in the Execution Purchase and Procurement
of Grace and Salvation for sinners, with the Love, Grace, and Power of the Holy
Spirit in the effectual Application of all unto the Souls of Men, made
gloriously conspicuous. Hence from the first Entrance of sin, there were two
general Heads of the Promises of God unto Men, concerning the means of their
Recovery and Salvation. The One was that concerning the sending of his Son to
be Incarnate to take our Nature upon him, and to suffer for us therein; the
Other concerning the giving of his Spirit, to make the Effects and Fruits of
the Incarnation, Obedience, and Suffering of his Son, effectual in us and
toward us. To these Heads may all the Promises of God be reduced. Now because
the Former was to be the Foundation of the Latter, that was first to be laid
down and most insisted on until it was actually accomplished. Hence the Great
Promise of the Old Testament, the Principal Object of the Faith, Hope, and
Expectation of Believers, was that concerning the Coming of the Son of God in
the Flesh, and the Work which he was to perform. Yet was this also, as we shall
see in our Progress, accompanied with a great intermixture of Promises
concerning the Holy Spirit, to render his coming and work effectual unto us.
But when once that first work was fully accomplished, when the Son of God was
come, and had destroyed the Works of the Devil, the Principal remaining Promise
of the New Testament, the spring of all the rest, concerns the sending of the
Holy Spirit unto the Accomplishment of his Part of that great Work which God
had designed. Hence the Holy Ghost, the Doctrine concerning his Person, his
Work, his Grace, is the most peculiar and principal Subject of the Scriptures
of the New Testament, and a most eminent immediate Object of the Faith of them
that do believe. And this must be further cleared, seeing we have to deal with
some who will scarce allow him to be of any Consideration in these matters at
all. But I shall be brief in these previous Testimonies hereunto, because the
whole ensuing discourse is designed to the Demonstration of the Truth of this
Assertion.

First, It is of great Moment and sufficient of it self to maintain the Cause
as proposed; that when our Lord Jesus Christ was to leave the world, He
promised to send his Holy Spirit unto his Disciples to supply his Absence. Of
what use the Presence of Christ was unto his Disciples we may in some measure
conceive; they knew full well whose Hearts were filled with sorrow upon the
mention of his Leaving of them, John. 16. 5. 6. Designing to relieve them in
this great Distress, which drew out the highest Expressions of Love,
Tenderness, Compassion and Care toward them, he does it principally by this
Promise; which he assures them shall be to their greater Advantage than any
they could receive by the continuance of his bodily Presence amongst them. And
to secure them hereof as also to inform them of its great importance, he
repeats it frequently unto them, and inculcates it upon them. Consider somewhat
of what he says to this Purpose in his last Discourse with them; John 14. 16,
17, 18. I will pray the Father and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of Truth whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not neither knows him; but ye know him; for he
dwells with you and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless, I will
come unto you; that is in and by this Holy Spirit. And v. 25, 26, 27. These
things I have spoken unto you being present with you; but the Comforter who is
the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all Things to your remembrance whatever I have said unto you.
Peace I leave with you, etc. And Chap. 15. 25. But when the Comforter is come
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth which
proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. And Chap. 16. v. 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 15. Now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of
you asks me, whither go thou. But because I have said these things unto
you, sorrow has filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell you the Truth, is is
expedient for you that I go away, for if I go not away the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart I will send him unto You. And when he is come he
will reprove the World of Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment. Of Sin
because they believe not on me. Of Righteousness because I go to my Father, and
ye see me no more; of Judgment because the Prince of this World is judged. I
have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now. Howbeit
when he the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth; for he
shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak,
and he shall show you things to come. He shall Glorify me for he shall receive
of mine, and he shall show it unto You. All things that the Father has are
mine; therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and show it unto You.
Spiritus Sanctus ad hoc missus a Christo, ad hoc postulatus de Patre ut esset
Doctor Veritatis, Christi Vicarius, Tertul. advers. Haeret. c. 28.

Quoniam Dominus in caelos esset abituius, Paracletum Discipulis necessario
dabat, ne illos quodammodo pupillos, quod minime decebat, relinqueret; and sine
Advocato and quodam Tutore desereret. Hic est enim qui ipsorum animos mentesque
firmavit, qui in ipsis illuminator rerem Divinarum fuit; quo confirmati, pro
Nomine Domini nec Carceres nec Vincula timuerunt; quin imo ipsas seculi
potestates and tormenta calcaverunt, armati jam sclicet per ipsum atque
firmati, habentes in se dona quae hic idem Spiritus Ecclesiae Christi sponsa,
quasi quaedam ornamenta distribuit and dirigit, Novatian. de Trinitat.

Totum ex Spiritus Sancti constat ducatu, quod devii diriguntur, quod impii
converuntur, quod debiles confirmantur. Spiritus rectus, Spiritus Sanctus,
Spiritus Principalis regit, componit, consummat and perficit, Nostras inhabitat
mentes etc. corda quae possidet, nec errare patitur, nec corrupi, nec vinci
quos docuerit, quos possederit, quos gladio potentissimae veritatis accimet ir,
Cyprian. de Spirit. Sanct.


This was the great Legacy which our Lord Jesus Christ departing out of this
World bequeathed unto his sorrowful Disciples. This he promises unto them as a
sufficient relief against all their Troubles, and a faithful Guide in all their
ways. And because of the Importance of it unto them he frequently repeats it,
and enlarges upon the benefits that they should receive thereby; giving them a
particular account why it would be more advantageous unto them than his own
bodily Presence. And therefore after his Resurrection he minds them again of
this Promise, commanding them to act nothing toward the building of the
Church, until it was accomplished toward them, Acts 1. 4, 5, 8. They would
have been again embracing his humane Nature and rejoicing in it. But as he said
unto Mary, touch me not, John 20, 17. to wean her from any carnal consideration
of him; so he instructs them all now to look after and trust unto the Promise
of the Holy Ghost. Hence is that of our Apostle; though we have known Christ
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more; 2 Cor. 5. 16. For
although it was a great Privilege to have known Christ in this World after the
flesh, yet it was much greater to enjoy him in the Dispensation of the Spirit.
And this was spoken by the Apostle as the Ancients judge, to rebuke the
boasting of some about their seeing the Lord in the Flesh, who were thereon
called (...), whom he directs unto a more excellent knowledge of him. It is in
vain pretended that it was the Apostles only, and it may be some of the
Primitive Christians who were concerned in this Promise. For although the Holy
Ghost was bestowed on them in a peculiar manner, and for especial Ends, yet the
Promise in general belongs unto all Believers unto the End of the World.
Praesentia spiritali cum eis erat ubique futurus post Ascensionem suam, and cum
tota Ecclesia sua in hoc mundo usque in consummationem seculi: -- Neque enim de
solis Apostolis potest intelligi, sicut dedisti ei potestatem omnis carnis, ut
omne quod dedisti ei det eis vitam aeternam; sed ubique de omnibus quibus in
eum credentibus vita aeterna datur. August. Tractat. 106. in Evangel. Johan.

Munus hoc quod in Christo est, in consummationem seculi nobiscum; hoc
expectationis nostrae solatium, hoc in donorum operationibus futurae spei
pignus est; hoc Moralium lumen, hic splender animarum est. Hilar. lib. 2. de
Trinitat.


For as to what concerns his Gracious Operations, whatever the Lord Christ
prayed for for them, and so promised unto them, (as the Spirit was procured for
them on his Prayer, Joh. 17. 16, 17.) he prayed not for it, for them alone, but
for them also which should believe on him through their word; John. 17. 20. And
his Promise is, to be with his always even unto the End of the World, Math. 28.
20. As also that wherever two or three are gathered together in his Name, there
he would be in the midst of them, Math. 18. 20; which he is no otherwise but by
his Spirit: For as for his Humane Nature, the Heavens must receive him until
the times of the Restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. And this one
Consideration, is sufficient to evince the importance of the Doctrine, and
things which concern the Holy Spirit. For is it possible that any Christian
should be so supinely negligent and careless, so inconcerned in the Things
whereon his Present Comforts and future Happiness do absolutely depend, as not
to think it his Duty to inquire with the greatest Care and Diligence, into what
our Lord Jesus Christ has left unto us to supply his Absence, and at length to
bring us unto himself? He by whom these things are despised, has neither Part
nor Lot in Christ himself. For if any Man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of his, Romans 8. 9.

Hic est qui Prophetas in Ecclesia constituit, magistros erudit, linguas
dirigit, vertutes and sanctitates facit, opera mirabiliagerit, discretiones
Spirituum porrigit, gubernationes contribuit, consilia suggerit, quaeque alia
sunt Charismatum dona componit and degerit; and ideo Ecclesiam Domino undique
and in omnibus consummatam and perfectum facit. Tertul.
Ministration of the Gospel unto all the Ends of it, is another evidence unto
the same Purpose. Hence the Gospel it self is called the Ministration of the
Spirit, in opposition to that of the Law, which is called the Ministration of
the Letter and of Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 8. (...), the Ministry of the Spirit,
is either that Ministry which the Spirit makes effectual; or that Ministry
whereby the Spirit in his Gifts and Graces is communicated unto Men. And this
is that which gives unto the Ministry of the Gospel both its Glory and its
Efficacy. Take away the Spirit from the Gospel and you render it a dead Letter,
and leave the New Testament of no more use unto Christians than the
Old Testament is of unto the Jews. It is therefore a mischievous imagination
proceeding from Ignorance Blindness and Unbelief, that there is no more in the
Gospel, but what is contained under any other Doctrine or Declaration of Truth;
that it is nothing but a Book for men to exercise their Reason in and upon, and
to improve the things of it by the same Faculty. For this is to separate the
Spirit or the Dispensation of the Spirit from it, which is in Truth to destroy
it. And therewith is the Covenant of God rejected, which is, that his Word and
Spirit shall go together, Isa. 59. v. 20. 21. We shall therefore, God assisting
manifest in our Progress, that the whole Ministry of the Gospel, the whole Use
and Efficacy of it, do depend on that Ministration of the Spirit wherewith
according to the Promise of God it is accompanied. If therefore we have any
concernment in, or have ever received any benefit by the Gospel or the
Ministration of it, we have a signal Duty lying before us in the matter in hand.

Saving-Good from first to last communicated unto us, or that we are from and
by the Grace of God made Partakers of, but it is revealed to us and bestowed on
us by the Holy Ghost. He who has not an immediate and especial Work of the
Spirit of God upon him and toward him, did never receive any especial Love
Grace or Mercy from God. For how should he so do? Whatever God works in us and
upon us he does it by his Spirit. He therefore who has no Work of the Spirit
of God upon his heart, did never receive either Mercy or Grace from God. For
God gives them not but by his Spirit. A disclamure therefore of any Work of
the Spirit of God in us or upon us, is a disclamure of all Interest in his
Grace and Mercy. And they may do well to consider it, with whom the Work of the
Spirit of God is a Reproach. When they can tell us of any other way whereby a
Man may be made Partaker of Mercy and Grace, we will attend unto it; in the
mean time we shall prove from the Scripture this to be the way of God.

Holy and Acceptable unto God, but it is an Effect of the Holy Spirit, it is of
his operation in us and by us. Without him we can do nothing. For without
Christ we cannot, Joh. 15. 5. And by him alone is the Grace of Christ
communicated unto us, and wrought in us. Hic est qui operatur ex aquis,
secundam Nativitatem, semen quoddam divini generis, and conserator caelestis
Nativitatis; Pignus promissae haereditatis and quasi chirographum quoddam
aeternae salutis; qui nos Dei faciat Templum and nos efficiat domum, qui
interpellat divinas auces pro nobis gemitibus ineloquacibus, advocationis
officia, and defensionis exhibens nunera, inhabitator corporibus nostris
ductus, and Sanctitatis effector; Hic est qui inexplebiles cupiditates coercet
etc. Novat de Trinitat.
By him we are Regenerated, by him we are Sanctified, by him are we Cleansed,
by him are we Assisted in and unto every Good Work. Particular instances to
this Purpose will be afterward insisted on, and proved. And it is our
unquestionable concernment to enquire into the Cause and Spring of all that is
Good in us, wherein also we shall have a true discovery of the Spring and Cause
of all that is Evil; without a competent knowledge of both which, we can do
nothing as we ought.

remediless Sin and way of sinning under the Gospel, is to sin in an especial
manner against the Holy Ghost. And this of it self is sufficient to convince us
how needful it is for us to be well instructed in what concerns him. For there
is somewhat that does so, which is accompanied with irrecoverable and eternal
Ruin. And so is nothing else in the World. So Mark 3. 28, 29. All sins shall
be forgiven unto the Sons of Men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall
blaspheme; but he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, has never
forgiveness. Or, He that speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this World, nor in the World to come, Matthew. 12. 32.
There remains nothing for him who does despite to the Spirit of Grace, but a
certain fearful looking-for of Judgment and fiery Indignation that shall devour
the Adversaries, Heb. 10. 27, 29. This is that sin unto death whose remission
is not to be prayed for, 1 John 5. 16 For He having taken upon him to make
effectual unto us the great Remedy provided in the blood of Christ for the
Pardon of our Sins, if He in the Prosecution of that Work be despised,
blasphemed, despitefully used, there neither is Relief, nor can there be Pardon
for that Sin. For whence in that Case should they arise or Spring? As God has
not another Son to offer another sacrifice for Sin, so that he by whom his
Sacrifice is despised can have none remaining for him; no more has he another
Spirit to make that Sacrifice effectual unto us, if the Holy Ghost in his work
be despised and rejected. This therefore is a tender Place. Omnibus quidem quae
divina sunt cum Reverentia and vehementi cura oportet intendere, maxim autem
his quae de Spiritus Sancti divinitate dicuntur, praesertim cum Blasphemia in
eum sine venia sit; ita ut blasphemantis poena tendatur non solum in omne
praesens seculum, sed etiam in futurum. Ait quippe Salvator, Blasphemanti in
Spiritum Sanctum non esse remissionem, neque in isto seculo neque in futuro:
unde magis ac magis intendere oportet quae Scripturarum de eo sit relatio, ne
in aliquem, saltem per ignorantiam, Blasphemiae error obrepat. Dydym. de Spir.
Sanct. lib. 1. Interpret. Hieron.
We cannot use too much Holy Diligence in our Enquiries after what God has
revealed in his Word concerning his Spirit and his Work; seeing there may be so
fatal a miscarriage in an opposition unto him, as the Nature of Man is
incapable of in any other Instance.

And these Considerations belong unto the first Head of Reasons of the
Importance, Use, and Necessity of the Doctrine proposed to be enquired into.
They are enough to manifest what is the Concernment of all Believers herein.
For on the Account of these things the Scripture plainly declares, as we
observed before, that he who has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his;
their Portion is not in him, they shall have no benefit by his Mediation. Men
may please themselves with a Profession of being Christians and owning the
Gospel, whilst they despise the Spirit of God both name and thing. Their
Condition we shall examine and judge by the Scripture before we come to the End
of this Discourse. And for the Scripture it self, whoever reads the Books of
the New Testament, besides the great and precious Promises that are given
concerning him in the Old, will find and conclude, unless he be prepossessed
with Prejudice, that the whole of what is declared in those Writings, turns on
this only hinge. Remove from them the consideration of the Spirit of God and
his Work, and it will be hard to find out what they aim at or tend unto.

Deceit and Abuse that has been in all Ages of the Church under the Pretense
of the Name and Work of the Spirit, make the through-consideration of what we
are taught concerning them, exceeding necessary. Had not these things been
Excellent in themselves and so acknowledged by all Christians, they would never
have been by so many falsely pretended unto. Men do not seek to adorn
themselves with Rags, or to boast of what on its own account is under just
contempt. And according to the worth of things so are they liable to abuse. And
the more excellent any thing is the more vile and pernicious is an undue
Pretense unto it. Such have been the false Pretenses of some in all Ages unto
the Spirit of God and his work, whose real Excellencies in themselves, have
made those pretenses abominable and unspeakably dangerous. For the better the
things are which are counterfeited, the worse always are the Ends they are
employed unto. In the whole World there is nothing so vile as that which
pretends to be God, and is not; nor is any other thing capable of so
pernicious an abuse. Some Instances hereof I shall give both out of the Old
Testament and the New.

Old Testament, was that of Prophesy. This therefore was deservedly in Honor
and Reputation; as having a great impression of the Authority of God upon it,
and in it of his Neerness unto Man. Besides; those in whom it was had justly
the Conduct of the Minds and Consciences of others given up unto them. For they
spoke in the Name of God, and had his warranty for what they proposed, which is
the highest security of Obedience. And these things caused many to pretend unto
this Gift, who were indeed never inspired by the Holy Spirit, but were rather
on the contrary acted by a Spirit of Lying and uncleanness. For it is very
probable, that when Men falsely and in mere pretense took upon them to be
Prophets divinely inspired, without any antecedent Diabolical Enthusiasm, that
the Devil made use of them to compass his own Designs. Being given up by the
righteous Judgment of God unto all Delusions, for belying his Spirit and holy
Inspirations, they were quickly possessed with a Spirit of Lying and unclean
Divination. So the false Prophets of Ahab, who encouraged him to go up unto
Ramoth Gilead, foretelling his prosperous success, 1 Kings 22. 6. seemed only
to have complied deceitfully with the Inclinations of their Master, and to have
out-acted his other Courtiers in Flattery, by gilding it with a pretense of
Prophesy. But when Micaiah came to lay open the Mystery of their Iniquity, it
appeared that a Lying Spirit by the permission of God had possessed their
Minds, and gave them Impressions, which being Supernatural, they were deceived
as well as they did deceive, v. 21, 22, 23. This they were justly given up
unto, pretending falsely unto the Inspiration of that Holy Spirit, which they
had not received. And no otherwise has it fallen out with some in our Days,
whom we have seen visibly acted by an extraordinary Power; unduely pretending
unto Supernatural Agitations from God, they were really acted by the Devil, a
thing they neither desired nor looked after; but being surprised by it were
pleased with it for a while; as it a was with sundry of the Quakers at their
first appearance.

served other Gods, directing all their Prophetic actings unto the Promotion
of their Worship. Such were the Prophets of Baal, in whose name expressly they
prophesied, and whose Assistance they invocated. They called on the name of
Baal, saying, O Baal hear us, 1 Kings 18, 26, 27, 28. Many of these were slain
by Elijah, and the whole Race of them afterward extirpated by Jehu, 2 Kings
25, 26, 27, 28. This put an End to his Diety, for it is said, he destroyed Baal
out of Israel; false Gods having no Existence but in the deceived Minds of
their Worshippers. It may be asked why these are called Prophets? and so in
general of all the false Prophets mentioned in the Scripture. Was it because
they merely pretended and counterfeited a Spirit of Prophecy, or had they
really any such? I Answer, that I no way doubt, but that they were of both
sorts. These Prophets of Baal were such as worshipped the Sun, after the manner
of the Tyrians. Herein they had invented many Hellish Mysteries, Ceremonies,
and Sacrifices; these they taught the People, by whom they were hired. Being
thus engaged in the Service of the Devil, he actually possessed their minds as
a Spirit of Divination, and enabled them to declare things unknown unto other
Men. They in the mean time really finding themselves acted by a Power superior
to them, took and owned that to be the Power of their God; and thereby became
immediate Worshippers of the Devil. This our Apostle declares 1 Cor. 10. 20.
Whatever those who left the true God aimed at to worship, the Devil interposed
himself between that and them as the Object of their Adoration. Hereby he
became the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Him whom in all their Idols they
worshipped and adored. With a spirit of Divination from him were many of the
false Prophets acted, which they thought to be the Spirit of their God. For
they found themselves acted by a superior Power, which they could neither
excuse nor resist. (...) Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 12.
Others of them were mere Pretenders and Counterfeits, that deceived the
foolish Multitude with vain false Predictions. Of these more will be spoken
afterward.

Name, and as they falsely professed, by the Inspiration of the Spirit of the
Holy God. With this sort of Men Jeremiah had great Contests. For in that
Apostatizing Age of the Church, they had got such an Interest and Reputation
among the Rulers and People, as not only to confront his Prophesies with
contrary Predictions, Chap. 28. 2, 3, 4. but also to traduce him as a false
Prophet, and to urge his Punishment according to the Law, Chap. 29. v. 25, 26,
27. And with the like confidence did Zedekiah the Son of Chenaanah carry it
toward Micaiah, 1 Kings 22. 26. for he scornfully asks him, Which way went the
Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee; That is, whereas assuredly he
speaks in me, how came he to inspire thee with a contrary Revelation? Ezekiel
at the same time with Jeremiah, was exercised and perplexed with them, Chap.
13, and 14. For this sort of Persons* namely false Pretenders unto Divine
extraordinary Revelations, did of old usually abound in times of Danger and
approaching Desolations. The Devil stirred them up to fill men with vain hopes,
to keep them in Sin and Security that Destruction might seize upon them at
unawares. And whoever takes the same course in the time of deserved threatened
impendent Judgments, though they use not the same means, yet they also do the
Work of the Devil. For whatever encourages men to be secure in their sins, is
a false Divination, Jer. 5. 30, 31. And this sort of Men is characterized by
the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 23. from verse. 9. to 33. where any one may read
their Sin and Judgment. And yet this false pretending unto the Spirit of
Prophecy, was very far from casting any contempt on the real Gift of the Holy
Ghost therein; nay it gave it the greater Glory and Luster. God never more
honored his true Prophets, than when there were most false Ones. Neither shall
ever any false Pretense to the Spirit of Grace render him less dear unto those
that are Partakers of him, or his Gifts of less use unto the Church.

New Testament at the first preaching of the Gospel. The Doctrine of it at
first was declared from the immediate Revelation of the Spirit, preached by the
Assistance of the Spirit, made effectual by his Work and Power, was accompanied
in many by outward miraculous Works and Effects of the Spirit, whence the whole
of what peculiarly belonged unto it in opposition to the Law was called the
Ministration of the Spirit. These things being owned and acknowledged by all,
those who had any false Opinions or Dotages of their own to broach, or any
other deceit to put upon Christians, could think of no more expedite means for
the compassing of their ends, than by pretending to immediate Revelations of
the Spirit. For without some kind of credibility given them from hence, they
knew that their fond Imaginations would not be taken into the least
consideration. Hence the Apostle Peter having treated concerning the Revelation
of God by his Spirit in Prophecy under the Old Testament and the New, 2 Epist.
chap. 1. v. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. adds as an Inference from that Discourse, a
comparison between the false Prophets that were under the Old Testament, and
the false Teachers under the New; Chap. 2. 1. But there were false Prophets
also among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you. And the
Reason of it is, because that as they pretended to the Spirit of the Lord in
their prophesies, saying, Thus says the Lord, when he sent them not; so these
ascribed all their abominable Heresies to the Inspiration of the Spirit, by
whom they were not assisted.

Hence is that blessed Caution and Rule given us by the Apostle John, who lived
to see much mischief done in the Church by this Pretense; 1 Epist. chap. 4. v.
1, 2. Beloved, beieve not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of
God, because many false prophets are gone out into the World. Hereby know we
the Spirit of God; every Spirit that confesses that Jesus is come in the
flesh, is of God; and every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is not of God. A twofold Direction does the Apostle here
give unto all Believers. The first by the way of Caution, that they would not
believe every Spirit; that is, not receive or give credit to every Doctrine
that was proposed unto them as of immediate Revelation and Inspiration of the
Spirit. He intends the same with the Apostle Paul, Eph^s. 4. 14. who would not
have us carried about with every wind of Doctrine, like Vessels at Sea without
Anchor or Helms, by the sleight of Men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie
in wait to deceive. For the craft and sleights intended, are such as men use
when they cast a mist as it were before the eyes of others whom they intend to
cheat and de^ra^d. So dealt false Teachers with their Disciples by their
Pretenses of immediate Revelations. His next Direction informs us how we may
observe this Caution unto our Advantage, and this is by trying the Spirits
themselves. This is the duty of all Believers on any such Pretenses. They are
to try these Spirits, and examine whether they are of God or no. For the
observation of this Rule, and discharge of this Duty, the Church of Ephesus is
commended by our Lord Jesus Christ; Rev. ^. 2. Thou have tried them, which say
they are Apostles and are not, and have found them Liars. For those who said
they were Apostles, pretended the rewithal to Apostolical Authority and
Infallibility, on the account of the immediate Inspirations which they received
by the Holy Ghost. In trying them, they tried the Spirits that came unto them.
And by this Warrant may we try the Spirit of the Church of Rome, which in like
manner pretends unto Apostolical Authority and Infallibility.

Reason of the present watchfulness required unto the discharge of this Duty.
For, says he, many false Prophets are gone out into the World. It is false
Teachers, as Peter calls them, bringing in damnable Heresies, concerning whom
he speaks. And he calls them false Prophets, partly in an Allusion unto the
false Prophets under the Old Testament, with whom they are ranked and compared
by Peter; and partly because as they fathered their Predictions on Divine
Revelation, so these falsely ascribed their Doctrines unto immediate Divine
Inspiration. And on this account also he calls them Spirits; Try the Spirits.
For as they pretended unto the Spirit of God, so indeed for the most part they
were acted by a Spirit of Error, Lying, and Delusion, that is the Devil
himself. And therefore I no way doubt but that mostly those who made use of
this Plea, that they had their Doctrines which they taught by immediate
Inspiration, did also effect other extraordinary Operations or undiscoverable
Appearances of them, as lying Miracles, by the Power of that Spirit whereby
they were acted, as Matthew. 24. 24. Hence the Apostle does not direct us to try
their pretensions unto Inspiration, by putting them on other extraordinary
Works for their confirmation; for these also they made a show and appearance
of, and that in such a manner as that they were not to be detected by the
generality of Christians, but he gives unto all a blessed stable Rule which
will never fail them in this case who diligently attend unto it. And this is to
try them by the Doctrine that they teach, verse. 2, 3. Let their Doctrine be
examined by the Scriptures and if it be found consonant thereunto, it may be
received without danger unto the Hearers, whatever corrupt Affections the
Teachers may be influenced by. But if it be not consonant thereunto, if it keep
not up an harmony in the Analogy of Faith, whatever Inspiration or Revelation
be pleaded in its Justification it is to be rejected, as they also are by whom
it is declared. This Rule the Apostle Paul confirms by the highest Instance
imaginable; Gal. 1. 8. If we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel
unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. And
the Apostle shows that for our advantage in this trial we are to make of
Spirits, it is good to have a clear conviction of, and a constant adherence
unto some fundamental Principles, especially such as we have reason to think
will be the most cunningly attaqued by Seducers. Thus because in those days
the principal design of Satan was to broach strange false Imaginations about
the Person and Mediation of Christ, endeavoring thereby to overthrow both the
one and the other; the Apostle advises Believers to try the Spirits by this
one Fundamental Principle of Truth, namely, that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh; which contains a confession both of his Person and Mediation. This
therefore Believers were to demand of all new Teachers and Pretenders unto
Spiritual Revelations in the first place; do you confess that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh; and if they immediately made not this confession, they never
stood to consider their other Pretenses but turned from them not bidding them
God-speed, 2 John 7. 10, 11. And I could easily manifest how many pernicious
Heresies were obviated in those days by this short Confession of Faith. For
some of late (as Grotius following Socinus and S^lictingius) interpreting this
coming of Christ in the flesh, of his outward mean Estate and Condition, and
not in the Pomp and Glory of an Earthly King, do openly corrupt the Text. His
coming in the flesh, is the same with the Words being made flesh, John 1. 14.
or, God being manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. That is, the Son of God
being made partaker of flesh and blood, Heb. 2. 14. or taking on him the Seed
of Abraham, verse. 14. That is, his being made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. or his
being made of the Seed of David according to the flesh, Romans 1. 3. His being of
the Fathers ^s to the flesh, Rom, 9. 5. And this was directly opposed unto
those Heresies which were then risen, whose Broachers contended that Jesus
Christ was but a Fantasy an Appearance, a manifestation of Divine Love and
Power, denying that the Son of God was really incarnate, as the Ancients
generally testify. And well had it been for many in our days had they
attended unto such Rules as this. But through a neglect of it, accompanied with
an ungrounded boldness and curiosity, they have hearkened in other things to
deceiving Spirits, and have been engaged beyond a recovery, before they have
considered that by their cogging deceits they have been cheated of all the
principal Articles of their Faith; by which, if at first they had steadily
tried and examined them, they might have been preserved from their Snares.

The Jews say well, that there was a double trial of Prophets under the Old
Testament; the one by their Doctrine, the other by their Predictions. That by
their Doctrine, namely, whether they seduced Men from the Worship of the true
God unto Idolatry, belonged unto all individual Persons of the Church.
Direction for this is given Deuteronomy. 13. 2, 3. If the Prophet gives a Sign or a
Wonder, and it come to pass, (effect any thing by a seeming presence of an
extraordinary Power) and say, Let us go serve other Gods, thou shall not
hearken unto him. Let his Signs and Wonders be what they would the People were
to try them by what they taught. The Judgment upon Predictions was left unto
the Sanhedrim; for which Directions are given Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 21, 22. And by
virtue hereof they falsely and cruelly endeavored to take away the Life of
Jeremiah, because he foretold the Ruin of them and their City, Chap. 26. v.
11. In the first place, though his Sign, Wonder, or Prediction came to pass,
yet the Doctrine he sought to confirm by it being false, he was to be rejected.
In the latter, the fulfilling of his Sign acquitted him, because he taught with
it nothing in point of Doctrine that was false. The first kind of trial of the
Spirits of Prophets is the Duty of all Believers under the Gospel. And those
who would deprive them of this Liberty would make Bruits of them instead of
Christians; unless to believe a Man knows not what, and to obey he knows not
why, be the Properties of Christians, see Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Phil. 1. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. The other, so far as was needful to preserve the
Church in Truth and Peace, was provided for in those Primitive Times, whilst
there was a real communication of extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, (and so
more occasion given to the false Pretense of them, and more danger in being
deceived by them) by a peculiar Gift of discerning them bestowed on some
amongst them, 1 Cor. 12. 10. Discerning of Spirits is reckoned among the Gifts
of the Spirit. So had the Lord graciously provided for his Churches, that some
among them should be enabled in an extraordinary manner, to discern and judge of
them who pretended unto extraordinary actings of the Spirit. And upon the
ceasing of Extraordinary Gifts really given from God, the Gift also of
discerning Spirits ceased, and we are left unto the Word alone for the trial of
any that shall pretend unto them. Now this kind of Pretense was so common in
those days, that the Apostle Paul writing to the Thessalonians, to caution
them that they suffered not themselves to be deceived in their Expectation and
Computations about the Time of the coming of Christ, in the first place warns
them not to be moved in it by Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. That is, Persons
pretending unto Spiritual Revelations. Something also of this nature has
continued and broken out in succeeding Ages, and that in Instances abominable
and dreadful. And the more eminent in any Season are the real Effusions of the
Holy Spirit upon the Ministers of the Gospel, and Disciples of Christ, the more
Diligence and Watchfulness against these Delusions are necessary. For on such
opportunities it is, when the Use and Reputation of Spiritual Gifts is eminent,
that Satan does lay hold to intrude under the color of them his own deceitful
Suggestions. In the dark Times of the Papacy all Stories are full of Satanical
Delusions in Fantastical Apparitions, Horrors, Spectrums, and the like Effects
of Darkness. It was seldom or never that any falsely pretended to the Gifts and
Graces of the Holy Spirit; For these things were then of little use or request
in the World. But when God was pleased to renew really a fresh communication of
Spiritual Gifts and Graces unto Men in and upon the Reformation, the old Dreads
and Terrors, nightly Appearances tending unto Deeds of Darkness vanished, and
every where by Satan's Instigation arose false Pretenders to the Spirit of God;
in which way of delusion he will still be more active and industrious, as God
shall increase the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit in his Churches; though as
yet in these latter Ages he has not attained what he was arrived unto in the
Primitive Times of the Gospel. A full and clear Declaration from the Scripture
of the Nature of the Holy Spirit and his Operations, may through the blessing
of God be of use to fortify the Minds of Professors against Satanical
Delusions counterfeiting his Actings and Inspirations. For Directions unto this
purpose are given us by the Holy Apostle, who lived to see great havoc made in
the Churches by deluding Spirits. Knowledge of the Truth, trying of Spirits that
go abroad by the Doctrines of the Scriptures, Dependence on the Holy Spirit for
his Teachings according to the Word, are the Things which to this purpose he
commends unto us.

Anti-Spirit set up and advanced against the Spirit of God in his Being and all
his Operations, in his whole Work and Use toward the Church of God. For this
new Spirit takes upon him whatever is promised to be effected by the good
Spirit of God. This is that which some Men call the Light within them, though
indeed it be nothing but a dark Product of Satan upon their own Imaginations;
or at best the Natural Light of Conscience, which some of the Heathens also
called a Spirit. Ita dico Lucili; sacer inter nos spiritus sedet, bonorum
malorumque nostrorum observator and custos; prout a nobis tractatus est, ita
ipse nos tractat. Senec. Epist. 41.
But hereunto do they trust as that which does all for them, leaving no room
for the Promise of the Spirit of God, nor any thing for him to do. This
teaches them, instructs them, enlightens them; to this they attend as the
Samaritans to Simon Magus, and as they say, yield Obedience unto it. And from
hence with the Fruits of it do they expect Acceptance with God, Justification
and Blessedness hereafter. And one of these two things these deluded Souls must
fix upon; namely, that this Light whereof they speak, is either the Holy Spirit
of God or it is not. If they say it is the Spirit, it will be easy to
demonstrate how by their so saying they utterly destroy the very Nature and
Being of the Holy Ghost, as will evidently appear in our Explication of them.
And if they say that it is not the Holy Spirit of God which they intend
thereby, it will be no less manifest that they utterly exclude him on the other
side from his whole Work and substitute another, yea an Enemy in his room. For
another God is a false God, another Christ is a false Christ, and another
Spirit is a false Spirit, the Spirit of Antichrist. Now because this is a
growing Evil amongst us many being led away and seduced, our Duty unto Jesus
Christ, and Compassion for the Souls of Men, do require that our utmost
endeavor in the ways of Christ's Appointment, should be used to obviate this
Evil which eats as does a Canker; which also is propagated by profane and
vain bablings increasing still unto more ungodliness. Some I confess do unduly
rage against the Persons of those who have imbibed these Imaginations, falling
upon them with violence and fury, as they do also on others; The Lord lay it
not unto their charge. Yet this hinders not but that by those Weapons of our
Warfare which are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong holds, casting down such like Imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every
thought unto the Obedience of Christ, We ought to attempt the destruction of
their Errors, and the breaking of the Snares of Satan by whom they are taken
captive alive at his pleasure. The course indeed of opposing Errors and false
Spirits by Praying, Preaching, Writing, is despised by them in whose furious
and haughty minds, Ure, Seca, Occide; Burn, Gut, and Kill, are alone of any
signification; that think, Arise Peter kill and eat, to be a Precept of more
Use and Advantage unto them than all the Commands of Jesus Christ besides. But
the way proposed unto us by the Lord Jesus Christ himself, walked in by his
Holy Apostles and all the Ancient Holy Learned Writers of the Church, is that
which in these Matters we must and shall attend unto. And that course which is
particularly suited to obviate the Evil mentioned, is to give a full plain
evident Declaration from the Scripture of the Nature and Operations of the Holy
Spirit of God. Hence will it be undeniable manifest what a stranger this
pretended Light is unto the true Spirit of Christ; how far it is from being of
any real Use to the Souls of Men; yea how it is set up in opposition unto Him
and his Work, by whom, and by which alone we become accepted with God, and are
brought unto the enjoyment of him.

Opinions concerning the Holy Ghost gone abroad in the World, and entertained
by many to the Subversion of the Faith which they have professed, Quoniam
quidam temeritate potius quam recta via etiam in superna eriguntur, and haec de
Spiritu Sancto Jactitant, quae neque in Scripturis lecta, nec a quoquam
Ecclesiasticerum Veterum usurpata sunt, compulsi sumus celeberrimae
Exhortationi fratrum cedere, quaeque sit nostra de eo opinio etiam Scripturarum
Testimoniis comprobare; ne imperitia tanti dogmatis, hi qui contraria opponunt
decipiant eos qui sine discussione sollicita in adverfariorum sententiam statim
pertra^untur. Didym. de Sp. S. Lib. 1.
Such are those whereby his Deity and Personality are denied. About these there
have been many contests in the World; some endeavoring with Diligence and
subtilty to promote the perverse Opinions mentioned; others contending
according to their Duty for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints. But these
Disputations are for the most Part so managed, that although the Truth be in
some of them strenuously vindicated, yet the minds of Believers generally are
but little edified by them. For the most are unacquainted with the ways and
Terms of arguing, which are suited to convince or stop the mouths of
gainsayers, rather than to direct the Faith of others. Besides, our Knowledge
of things is more by their operations and proper Effects, than from their own
Nature and formal Reason. Especially is it so in Divine Things, and
particularly with respect unto God himself. In his own Glorious Being, he
dwells in Light whereunto no Creature can approach. In the Revelation that he
has made of himself by the Effects of his Will in his Word and Works are we to
seek after him. By them are the otherwise invisible things of God made known,
his Attributes declared; and we come to a better Acquaintance with him, than
any we can attain by our most diligent speculations about his Nature it self
immediately. So is it with the Holy Ghost and his Personality. He is in the
Appellatio Spiritus Sancti, and ea quae monstratur ex ipsa appellatione
substantia, penitus ab his ignoratur, qui extra sacram Scripturam
philosophantur; solummodo eum in nostratibus literis and notio ejus and
Vocabulum refertur tam in Nobis quam in Veteribus, Didym. de Spirit Sanc. lib.
1.
Scripture proposed unto us to be known by his Properties and Works, Adjuncts
and Operations; by our Duty toward him, and our Offenses against him. The due
consideration of these things, is that which will lead us into that assured
knowledge of his Being and Subsistence, which is necessary for the guidance of
our Faith and Obedience, which is the end of all these Enquiries, Col. 2. 2.
Wherefore although I shall by the way explain confirm and vindicate the
Testimonies that are given in the Scripture, or some of them, unto his Deity
and Personality; yet the principal means that I shall insist on for the
establishing of our Faith in him, is the due and just Exposition and
Declaration of the Administrations and Operations that are ascribed unto him in
the Scriptures; which also will give great Light into the whole Mystery and
Economy of God in the work of our salvation by Jesus Christ.

opposition that is made unto the Spirit of God and his Work in the World.
There is no concernment of his that is not by many derided, exploded, and
blasphemed. The very name of the Spirit is grown to be a reproach; nor do some
think they can more despightfully expose any to scorn, than by ascribing to
them a Concern in the Spirit of God. This indeed is a thing which I have often
wondered at, and do continue still so to do. For whereas in the Gospel every
thing that is Good, Holy, Praise worthy in any Man, is expressly assigned to the
Spirit as the immediate Efficient Cause and Operator of it, and whereas the
Condition of Men without him, not made Partakers of Him, is described to be
reprobate or rejected of God, and foreign unto any Interest in Christ; yet
many pretending unto the Belief and Profession of the Gospel, are so far from
owning or desiring a Participation of this Spirit in their own Persons, as that
they deride and contemn them who dare plead or avow any concern in him or his
Works. Only I must grant that herein they have had some that have gone before
them, namely the old scoffing Heathens. For so does Lucian in his Philopatris,
speak in imitation of a Christian by way of scorn, (...); Speak out now,
receiving Power or Ability of speaking from the Spirit, or by the Spirit.
Certainly an attendance to the old Caution, Si non cast tamen Caute, had been
needful for some in this Matter. Could they not bring their own hearts unto a
due Reverence of the Spirit of God, and an endeavor after a Participation of
his Fruits and Effects, yet the things that are spoken concerning him and his
Work in the whole New Testament, and also in Places almost innumerable in the
Old, might have put a check to their public Contemptuous Reproaches and
scornful Mockings, whilst they own those writings to be of God. But such was
his Entertainment in the World upon his first Effusion; Acts 2. 13. Many
Pretenses I know will be pleaded to give Countenance unto this Abomination. For
First, They will say, it is not the Spirit of God himself and his works, but
the Pretense of others unto him and them, which they so reproach and scorn. I
fear this Plea or Excuse, will prove too short and narrow, to make a Covering
unto their Profaneness. It is dangerous venturing with Rudeness and Petulancy
upon holy things, and then framing of Excuses. But in Reproaches of the Lord
Christ and his Spirit, Men will not want their Pretenses, Joh. 10. 32. And the
things of the Spirit of God which they thus Reproach and scorn in any, are
either such as are truly and really ascribed unto him and wrought by him in
the Disciples of Jesus Christ; or they are not: If they are such as indeed are
no Effects of the Spirit of Grace, such as he is not promised for, nor attested
to work in them that do believe, as vain Enthusiasmes, extatical Raptures, and
Revelations, certainly it more became Christians, Men professing or at least
pretending a Reverence unto God, his Spirit, and his Word, to manifest and
convince those of whom they treat, that such things are not Fruits of the
Spirit, but Imaginatiocs of their own; then to deride them under the name of
the Spirit or his Gifts and Operations. Do Men consider with whom and what they
make bold in these things? But if they be things that are real Effects of the
Spirit of Christ in them that believe, or such as are undeniably assigned unto
him in the Scripture, which they despise; what remains to give countenance unto
this daring Profaneness? Yea, but they say, Secondly, It is not the real true
Operations of the Spirit themselves, but the false Pretensions of others unto
them which they traduce and expose. But will this warrant the Course which it
is manifest they steer in Matter and Manner? The same Persons pretend to
believe in Christ and the Gospel, and to be made Partakers of the Benefits of
his Mediation. And yet if they have not the Spirit of Christ, they have no
saving Interest in these things; for if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his. If it be then only their false pretending unto the Spirit
of God and his Works which these Persons so revile and scorn, why do they not
deal with them in like manner with respect unto Christ and the Profession of
the Gospel? Why do they not say unto them, you believe in Christ, you believe
in the Gospel; and thereon expose them to Derision? So plainly dealt the Jews
with our Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm. 22. 7, 8. Math. 21. 39, 43. It is therefore
the things themselves, and not the Pretenses pretended, that are the Objects of
this contempt and Reproach. Besides; suppose those whom at present on other
Occasions they hate or despise, are not Partakers of the Spirit of God, but are
really strangers unto the things which hypocritically they profess? Will they
grant and allow that any other Christians in the World do so really partake of
him, as to be led, guided, directed, by him, to be quickened, sanctified,
purified by him, to be enabled unto Communion with God, and all duties of Holy
Obedience by him, with those other Effects and Operations for which he is
promised by Jesus Christ unto his Disciples? If they will grant these things to
be really effected and accomplished in Any, let them not be offended with them
who desire that they should be so in themselves, and declare themselves to that
purpose, and Men would have more Charity for them under their petulant
scoffing, than otherwise they are able to exercise. It will Thirdly, Yet be
pleaded, that they grant as fully as any the Being of the Holy Ghost, the
Promise of him and his real Operations, only they differ from others as to the
sense and Exposition of those Phrases and Expressions that are used concerning
these things in the Scripture which those others abuse in an unintelligible
manner, as making them proper which indeed are Metaphorical. But is this the
way which they like and choose to express their Notions and Apprehensions?
Namely openly to revile and scorn the very Naming and asserting the work of
the Spirit of God, in the words which himself has taught? A Boldness this is
which as whereof the former Ages have not given us a President, so we hope the
future will not afford an Instance of any to follow the Example. For their
sense and Apprehension of these things they shall afterward be examined, so far
as they have dared to discover them. In the mean time we know that the
Socinians acknowledge a Trinity, the Sacrifice of Christ, the Exp^ation of sin
made thereby; and yet we have some differences with them about these things.
And so we have with these Men about the Spirit of God and his Dispensation
under the Gospel; though like them, they would grant the things spoken of them
to be true, as Metaphorically to be interpreted. But of these things we must
treat more fully hereafter.

Gospel to be true, that the Name or Naming of the Spirit of God is become a
Reproach. So also is his whole work. And the Promise of him made by Jesus
Christ unto his Church, is rendered useless and frustrated. It was the main, and
upon the matter the only supportment which he left unto it in his Bodily
Absence, the only means of rendering the work of his Mediation effectual in them
and among them. For without him, all others, as the Word, Ministry, and
Ordinances of Worship, are Lifeless and Useless. God is not Glorified by them,
nor the Souls of Men advantaged. But it is now uncertain with some of what Use
he is unto the Church, yea as far as I can discern whether he be of any or no.
Some have not trembled to say and contend, that some things as plainly ascribed
unto him in the Scripture, as words can make an assignation of any thing, are
the cause of all the Troubles and Confusions in the World. Let them have the
Word or Tradition outwardly revealing the Will of God, and what it is that he
would have them do, (as the Jews have both to this day) these being made use of
by their own Reason, and improved by their natural Abilites, they make up the
whole of Man, all that is required to render the Persons or Duties of any
accepted with God. Of what use then is the Spirit of God in these things? Of
none at all it may be, nor the Doctrine concerning him, but only to fill the
World with a buzze and noise, and to trouble the minds of Men with
unintelligible Notions. Had not these things been spoken, they should not have
been repeated, for Death lies at the Door in them. So then Men may pray
without him, and preach without him, and turn to God without him, and perform
all their Duties without him well enough. For if any one shall plead the
necessity of his Assistance for the due performance of these things, and
ascribe unto him all that is good and well done in them, he shall hardly escape
from being notably derided. Yet all this while we would be esteemed Christians.
Adesto Sancte Spiritus, and paraclesin tuam expectantibus illabere Caelitus,
Sanctifica templum corporis nostri and consecra in habitaculum tuum;
Desiderantes te animas tua praesentia laetifica, dignam te habitatore domum
compone; adorna thalamum tuum, and quietis tuae reclinatorium, circumda
varietatibus Virtutum; stern pavimenta pigmentis; niteat mansio tua
carbunculis flammeis, and Gemmarum splendoribus; and omnium Chrismatum
intrinsecus spirent Odoramenta; affatim balsami liquor flagrantia sua cubiculum
suum imbuat; and abigens inde quicquid tabidum est, quicquid corruptelae
seminarium; stabile and perpetuum hoc facias gaudium nostrum, and creationis
tuae renovationem in decore immar^^ssibili solides in aeternum. Cyprian. de Sp.
Sa.
And what do such Persons think of the Prayers of the Ancient Church and
Christians unto him for the working of all Good in them, and their Ascriptions
of every good thing unto him? And wherein have we any advantage of the Jews, or
wherein consists the preeminence of the Gospel? They have the Word of God, that
part of it which was committed unto their Church, and which in its kind is
sufficient to direct their Faith and Obedience; For so is the sure Word of
Prophecy if diligently attended unto, 2 Pet. 1. 19. And if Traditions be of
any use, they can outvie all the World. Neither does this sort of Men want
their Wits, and the Exercise of them. Those who Converse with them in the
things of this World, do not use to say they are all Fools. And for their
Diligence in the Consideration of the letter of the Scripture, and inquiring
into it according to the best of their Understanding, none will Question it,
but those unto whom they and their Concernments are unknown. And yet after all
this, they are Jews still. If we have the New Testament, no otherwise then they
have the Old, have only the letter of it to Philosophize upon according to the
best of our Reasons and Understandings without any Dispensation of the Spirit
of God accompanying it to give us a Saving Light into the Mystery of it, and to
make it effectual unto our Souls; I shall not fear to say, but that as they
call themselves Jews and are not, but are the Syn^gogue of Satan, Revel. 2. 9.
So we who pretend our selves to be Christians, as to all the saving Ends of the
Gospel, shall not be found in a better Condition.

And yet it were to be wished that even here bounds might be fixed unto the
fierceness of some Men's Spirits. But they will not suffer themselves to be so
confined. In many Places they are transported with Rage, and Fury, so as to
stir up Persecution against such as are really anointed with the Spirit of
Christ, and that for no other Reason but because they are so. Gal. 4. 29. Other
things indeed are pretended by them, but but all the World may see that they
are not of such importance as to give Countenance unto their wrath. This is the
Latent cause which stirs it up, and is oftentimes openly expressed.

Private Persons. When they are received in Churches, they are the Cause of,
and an Entrance into a Fatal Defection and Apostasy. From the Foundation of the
World the Principal Revelation that God made of himself, was in the Oneness of
his Nature, and his Monarchy over all. And herein the Person of the Father was
immediately represented with his Power and Authority. For he is the Fountain
and Original of the Deity, the other Persons as to their Subsistence being of
him. Only he did withal give out Promises concerning the peculiar Exhibition of
the Son in the Flesh in an appointed season, as also of the Holy Spirit to be
given by him in an especial manner. Hereby were their Persons to be signally
glorified in this World; it being the Will of God that all Men should honor
the Son, as they honored the Father; and the Holy Spirit in like manner. In
this state of things, the only Apostasy of the Church could be Polutheisme and
Idolatry. Accordingly so it came to pass. The Church of Israel was continually
prone to these Abominations; so that scarcely a Generation passed, or very few,
wherein the Body of the People did not more or less defile themselves with
them. To wean and recover them from this Sin was the Principal End of the
Preaching of those Prophets which God from time to time sent unto them, 2 Kings
17. 13. And this also was the Cause of all the Calamities which befell them, and
of all the Judgments which God inflicted on them, as is testified in all the
Historical Books of the Old Testament, and confirmed by Instances innumerable.
To put an End hereunto God at length brought a total Desolation upon the whole
Church, and caused the People to be carried into Captivity out of their own
Land. And hereby it was so far effected that upon their Return whatever other
sins they fell into, yet they kept themselves from Idols and Idolatry, Ezekiel.
16. 62, 63. Chap. 23. verse. 27, 48. And the Reason hereof was, because the time
was now drawing nigh wherein they were to be tried with another Dispensation of
God. The Son of God was to be sent unto them in the Flesh. To receive and obey
him was now to be the principal Instance and Trial of their Faith and
Obedience. They were no longer to be tried merely by their Faith whether they
would own only the God of Israel, in opposition unto all false Gods and Idols;
for that Ground God had now absolutely won upon them; But now all is to turn on
this Hinge, whether they would receive the Son of God coming in the Flesh
according to the Promise; Here the Generallity of that Church and People fell
by their Unbelief, apostatised from God, and became thereby neither Church nor
People Joh. 8. 24. They being rejected, the Son of God calls and gathers
another Church, founding it on his own Person with Faith and the Profession of
it therein. Mat. 16. v. 18, 19. In this new Church therefore this Foundation is
fixed and this Ground made Good, That Jesus Christ the Son of God is to be
owned and honored as we honor the Father. 1 Cor. 3. 11. And herein all that
are duly called Christians do agree; as the Church of Israel did in one God
after their return from the Captivity of Babylon; But now the Lord Jesus Christ
being ascended unto his Father, has committed his whole Affairs in the Church
and in the World unto the Holy Spirit. Joh. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And it is on
this Design of God, that the Person of the Spirit may be singularly exalted in
the Church, unto whom they were so in the dark before that some none of the
worst of them professed they had not so much as heard whether there were any
Holy Ghost or no, Acts 19. 2. that is, at least as unto the peculiar
Dispensation of him then introduced in the Church. Wherefore the Duty of the
Church now immediately respects the Spirit of God, who acts toward it in the
Name of the Father and of the Son. And with respect unto him it is, that the
Church in its present state is capable of an Apostasy from God; And whatever is
found of this Nature amongst any here it has its Beginning. For the sin of
despising his Person and rejecting his work now, is of the same Nature with
Idolatry of Old, and the Jews Rejection of the Person of the Son. And whereas
there was a Releif provided against these Sins, because there was a new
Dispensation of the Grace of God to ensue in the Evangelical work of the Holy
Ghost; if Men sin against him and his operations containing the Perfection and
Complement of God's Revelation of himself unto them, their Condition is
deplorable.

Holy Ghost, his Graces, Gifts, and Operations, did entirely belong unto the
first Times of the Gospel wherein they were manifested by visible and wonderful
Effects. To those times they were confined, and consequently that we have no
other Interest or concern in them but as in a recorded Testimony given of old
unto the Truth of the Gospel. This is so indeed as unto his Extraordinary and
miraculous operations. But to confine his whole Work thereunto, is plainly to
deny the Truth of the Promises of Christ, and to overthrow his Church. For we
shall make it undenyably evident that none can believe in Jesus Christ or yield
Obedience unto him, or Worship God in him, but by the Holy Ghost. And therefore
if the whole Dispensation of him and his Communications unto the Souls of Men
do cease, so does all Faith in Christ, and Christianity also.

necessary for my self, and unto the Church of God, that the Scripture should
be diligently searched in and concerning this great matter. For none can deny
but that the Glory of God, the Honor of the Gospel, the Faith and Obedience of
the Church, with the Everlasting Welfare of our own Souls, are deeply concerned
herein.

Peter treating about the Great things of the Gospel taught by himself and the
Rest of the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, tells those to whom he wrote,
that in what was so preached unto them, they had not followed cunningly devised
Fables, 2 Pet. 1. 16. For so were the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
then reported to be in the World. What was preached concerning them, was looked
on as cunningly devised and artificially framed fables to inveagle and allure
the People. This the Apostle gives his Testimony against, and withal appeals
unto the Divine Assurance which they had of the Holy Truths delivered unto
them. v. 17, 18, 19, 20. In like manner our Lord Jesus Christ himself having
preached the Doctrine of Regeneration unto Nicodemus, he calls it into Question
as as thing incredible, or unintelligible, Joh. 3. 4. For whose Instruction and
the Rebuke of his Ignorance he lets him know that he spoke nothing but what he
brought with him from Heaven, from the Eternal Fountain of Goodness and Truth.
v. 11, 12. 13. It is fallen out not much otherwise in this Matter.

Spirit of God, and his Work on the Souls of Men, has been preached in the
World. What he does in convincing Men of Sin, what in Working Godly Sorrow and
Humiliation in them, what is the exceeding Greatness of his Power which he puts
forth in the Regeneration and Sanctification of the Souls of Men, What are the
supplys of Grace which he bestows on them that do believe, what Assistance he
gives unto them as the Spirit of Grace and Supplications, has been preached,
taught, and pressed on the minds of them that attend unto the Dispensation of
the Word of the Gospel. Answerable hereunto Men have been urged to try, search,
examine them-selves, as to what of this Work of the Holy Ghost they have found,
observed, or had experience to have been effectually accomplished in or upon
their own Souls. And hereon they have been taught, that the Great Concernments
of their Peace, Comfort, and Assurance, of their Communion among themselves as
the Saints of God, with many other Ends of their Holy Conversation, do depend.
Nay it is and has been constantly taught them that if there be not an
effectual Work of the Holy Ghost upon their hearts, that they cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God. Now these things and whatever is spoken in the Explication
of them, are by some called in Question if not utterly rejected. Yea some look
on them as cunningly devised Fables; Things that some not long since invented,
and others have propagated for their Advantage. Others say, that what is
delivered concerning them is hardly if at all to be understood by Rational Men,
being only empty Speculations about things wherein Christian Religion is little
or not at all concerned. Whereas therefore many, very many, have received these
things as Sacred Truths, and are persuaded that they have found them realized
in their own Souls, so that into their Experience of the work of the Holy
Spirit of God in them and upon them according as it is declared in the Word,
all their Consolation and Peace with God is for the most part resolved, as that
which gives them the best Evidence of their Interest in him who is their Peace;
and whereas for the Present they do believe that unless these things are so in
and with them, they have no Foundation to build an Hope of Eternal Life upon;
it cannot but be of indispensible necessity unto them to examine and Search the
Scripture diligently whether these things be so or no. For if there be no such
Work of the Spirit of God upon the Hearts of Men and that indispensibly
necessary to their Salvation; if there are no such Assistances and supplys of
Grace needful unto every Good Duty as wherein they have been instructed; then
in the whole course of their Profession they have only been seduced by
cunningly devised Fables, their deceived hearts have fed upon ashes, and they
are yet in their Sins. It is then of no less consideration and Importance than
the eternal welfare of their Souls immediately concerned therein can render it,
that they diligently try, examine and search into these things, by the safe
and infallible Touchstone and Rule of the Word, whereon they may, must, and
ought to venture their Eternal Condition. I know indeed that most Believers are
so far satisfied in the Truth of these things and their own Experience of them,
that they will not be moved in the least by the Oppositions which are made unto
them, and the scorn that is cast upon them. For he that beleiveth on the Son of
God has the witness in himself. 1 John 5. 10. But yet as Luke wrote his Gospel
to Theophilus that he might know the certainty of those things wherein he had
been instructed, Luke 1. 4. that is, to confirm him in the Truth by an Addition
of new Degrees of Assurance unto him; so it is our Duty to be so far excited by
the Clamorous Oppositions that are made unto the Truths which we Profess, and
in whose being such we are as much concerned as our Souls are worth, to compare
them diligently with the Scripture that we may be the more fully confirmed and
established in them. And upon the Examination of the whole matter, I shall
leave them to their option as Elijah did of Old; if Jehovah be God, serve him,
and if Baal be God let him be worshipped. If the things which the Generality of
Professors do believe and acknowledge concerning the Spirit of God and his Work
on their Hearts, his Gifts and Graces in the Church with the manner of their
Communication, be for the substance of them wherein they all generally agree
according to the Scripture, taught and revealed therein on the same terms as by
them received; them may they abide in the Holy Profession of them, and rejoice
in the Consolations they have received by them. But if these things with those
other which in the Application of them to the Souls of Men are directly and
necessarily deduced, and to be deduced from them, are all but vain and useless
Imaginations, it is high time the Minds of Men were disburthened of them.

The Name and Titles of the HOLY SPIRIT.CHAP. II.
(1.) Of the Name of the Holy Spirit. (2.) Various Uses of the words (...) and
(...) for the Wind or any thing invisible with a sensible Agitation. (3.) Amos
4. 14. Mistakes of the Ancients rectified by Hierom. (5.) (...) metaphorically
for vanity. (6.) Metonymically for the part or quarter of any thing. (7.) For
our Vital Breath. The Rational Soul. The Affections. Angels good and bad. (8.)
Ambiguity from the Use of the Word how to be removed. Rules concerning the Holy
Spirit. The Name Spirit how peculiar and appropriate unto him. Why he is called
the Holy Spirit. Whence called the Good Spirit. The Spirit of God. The Spirit
of the Son, Acts 2. 33. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. explained. 1 John 4. 3. vindicated.

Things themselves concerning which we are to treat, it will be necessary to
speak something unto the Name whereby the Third Person in the Trinity is
commonly known, and peculiarly called in the Scripture. This is the Spirit, or
the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost as we usually speak. And this I shall do
that we be not deceived with the Homonimy of the Word, nor be at a loss in the
intention of those places of Scripture where it is used unto other Purposes.
For it is so that the Name of the Second Person, (...), the Word, and of the
Third, (...), the Spirit, are often applied to signify other things; I mean,
those words are so. And some make their Advantages of the ambiguous use of
them. But the Scripture is able of it self to manifest its own Intention and
Meaning unto humble and diligent enquirers into it.

Didymus of Alexandria, whose Words therefore I have set down at large, and
shall cast his Observations into a more perspicuous Method, with such Additions
as are needful for the further clearing of the whole Matter. Quia vero Spiritus
Vocabulum multa significat, enumerandum est breviter quibus rebus nomen ejus
aptetur: Vocatur. Spiritus and Ventus, sicut in Ezechiele; Tertiam partem
disperges in Spiritum; hoc est in Ventum. Quod si voles secundum historiam
scribere quod scriptum est; in spiritu violento conteres naves Tharcis, non
aliud ibi spiritus quam ventus accipitur: Neo non Solomon inter multa hoc
quoque munus a Deo accepit ut sciret violentias spirituum; non aliud in hoc se
accepisse demonstrans, quam scire rapidos ventorum flatus, and quibus causis
eorum natura subsistat. Vocatur and anima spiritus us in Jacobi Epistola.
Quomodo corpus tuum sine spiritu mortuum est; manifestissime enim spiritus hic
nihil aliud nisi anima nuncupatur. Juxta quam intelligentiam Stephanus animam
suam Spiritum vocans; Domine inquit Jesus suscipe Spiritum meum. Illud quoque
quod in Ecclesiastice dicitur, quis scit an spiritus hominis ascendat sursum,
and spiritus Jumenti descendat deorsum. Considerandum ultimo number and pecudum
animae spiritus appellentur. Dicitur etiam excepta anima, and excepto spiritu
sancto, spiritus alius quis esse in homine de quo Paulus scribit; Quis enim
scit hominum ea quae sunt hominis, nisi spiritus hominis qui in eo est? Sed and
in alio loco idem Apostolus a nostro spiritu spiritum Dei secernens ait, ipse
spiritus testimonium perhibet spiritui nostro; hoc significans, quod spiritus
Dei, id est, spiritus sanctus testimonium spiritui nostro praebeat, quem nunc
diximus esse spiritum hominis. Ad Thessalonicenses quoque, integer, inquit,
spiritus vester and anima and corpus. -- Appellantur quoque supernae
rationabilesque virtutes, quae solet Scriptura Angelos and Fortitudines
nominare, vocabulo spiritus; ut ibi, qui facis Angelos tuos Spiritus; and
alibi, nonne omnes sunt administratores spiritus? Rationales quoque aliae
creaturae and de bono in malum sponte profluentes, spiritus passim, and
spiritus appellantur immundi; sicut ibi, cum autem spiritus immundus exierit ab
homine, and in consequentibus; assumit septem alios spiritus nequiores se.
Spiritus quoque Daemones in Evangelio appellantur: sed hoc notandum, nunquam
simpliciter spiritum sed cum aliquo additamento spiritum significari
contrarium, ut spiritus immundus, and spiritus Daemonis; hi vero qui sancti
sunt spiritus absque ullo additamento spiritus simpliciter appellantur.
Sciendum quoque quod nomen spiritus and voluntatem hominis and animi sententiam
sonet. Volens quippe Apostolus non solum corpore sed and mente sanctum esse, id
est, non tantum corpore, sed and motu cordis interno, ait, ut sitis sancti
corpore and spiritu, voluntatem spiritu and corpore opera significans.
Considera alium hoc ipsum in Esaia sonet quod scriptum est; and scient qui
spiritu errant, intellectum. -- Et super omnia vocabubulum spiritus, altiorem
and mysticum in scripturis sanctis significat intellectum; ut ibi litera
occidit, spiritus autem vivificat. Haec juxta possibilitatem nostri ingenii,
quot res spiritus significet, attigimus. -- Nonnunquam autem spiritus and
Dominus noster Jesus Christus, id est, Dei Filius appellatur. Dominus autem
spiritus est ut ante diximus; ubi etiam illud adjunximus, spiritus Deus est,
non juxta nominis communionem, sed juxta naturae substantiaeque consortium. --
Porto adhaec necessario devoluti sumus, ut quia frequenter Appellatio Spiritus,
in Scripturis est respersa Divinis, non labamur in nomine sed unumquodque
secundum locorum varietates and intelligentias accipiamus. Omni itaque studio
ac diligentia vocabulum Spiritus, ubi and quomodo appellatum sit contemplantes,
sophismata eorum and fraudulentas Decipulas conteramus, qui spiritum sanctum
asserunt creaturam. Legentes enim in Propheta ego confirmavi tonitruum, and
creavi spiritum, ignorantia multiplicis in hac part Sermonis putaverunt
Spiritum Sanctum ex hoc vocabulo demonstrari; cum in praesentiarum Spiritus
nomen ventum sonet. Ergo ut praelocuti sumus, quomodo unumquodque dictum sit,
consideremus ne forte per ignorantiam in barathrum decidamus erroris. Didym. de
Sp. Sanct. lib. 3.
In general, (...) and (...) signify a Wind or Spirit, that is, any thing
which moves and is not seen. So the Air in a violent agitation, is called
(...), Genesis 8. 1. (...). And God made a Wind or Spirit, that is, a strong and
mighty Wind to pass over the Earth for the driving and removal of the Waters.
So (...) is used John 3. 8. (...); The Wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor whether it
goes; which is a proper description of this first signification of the Word.
It is an agitation of the Air which is unseen. So Psalm. 1. 4. And in this sense
sometimes it signifies a violent and strong Wind; that is, (...), 1 Kings 19.
11. And sometimes a cool and soft Wind, or a light easy agitation of the Air,
such as often arises in the Evenings of the Spring or Summer; So Genesis 3. 8.
God Walked in the Garden, (...), in the cool of the Day; that is, when the
Evening-Air began to breath gently and moderate the heat of the Day. So in the
Poet; Solis ad occasum cum frigidus era Vesper temperat. Virgil. Georg. 3. At
the going down of the Sun when the cold Evening tempers the Heat of the Air.
And some think this to be the sense of that place; Psalm. 104. v. 4. Who makes
his Angels (...) Spirits; Swift, agile, powerful as mighty Winds. But the
Reader may consult our Exposition on Heb. 1. 7.

one thing denoted by it in the Scripture. So among many other places expressly;
Amos 4. 13. for lo, (...), He that forms the Mountains, and creates the
Spirit, that is, the Wind. The LXX render this place, (...), who establishes
the Thunder, and creates the Spirit; though some Copies read (...), the
Mountains. And the next words in the Text, (...), and declares unto Man what
is his Thought; they render (...), and declares unto men his Christ, or his
Anointed, or his Messiah. For they took (...) for (...), by inadvertency, and
not for want of Points or Vowels as some imagine, seeing the Mistake consists
in the casting out of a Letter it self. And thence the old Latin Translation
renders the words, Firmans Tonitruum, and creans Spiritum, and annuncians in
homines Christum suum. Which Hierom rectified into, formans Montes, and creans
Ventum, and annuntians Homini eloquium suum; discovering in his Comment the
Mistake of the LXX. But it is certain that from the Ambiguity of the word (...)
in this place, with the corrupt Translations making mention of Christ in the
next words, some who of old denied the Deity of the Holy Spirit, mightily
insisted on it to prove him a Creature, as may be seen in Didymus, Ambrose,
Hierom, Hilarious, and the Ancients generally. But the Context determines the
signification of the Word beyond all just Exceptions. It is the Power of God in
making and disposing of things here below, whether dreadful for their Greatness
and Height, as the Mountains; or Mighty and Effectual in their operations, as
the Wind; or Secret in their Conceptions, as the Thoughts of men; or stable in
their Continuance, as the Night and Day, the Evening and Morning, without the
least respect to Christ or the Spirit, that it treats of.

And I cannot but observe from hence, the great necessity there is of searching
the Original Text in the Interpretation of the Scriptures; as it might be
evidenced by a Thousand other Instances. But one we may take from two Great and
Learned Men who were Contemporaries in the Latin Church, in their thoughts on
this place; The one is Ambrose, who interpreting these words in his second Book
de Spiritu Sancto, cap. 1. being deceived by the corrupt Translation mentioned,
annuncians in homines Christum suum, is forced to give a very strained
Exposition of that which in Truth is not in the Text, and to relieve himself
also with another Corruption in the same place, where forming the Mountains, is
rendered by establishing the Thunder; and yet when he has done all, can scarce
free himself of the Objection about the creation of the Spirit, which he
designs to answer. His words are, Siquis propheticum dictum, ideo derivandum
putet ad interpretationem Spiritus sancti; quia habet, annuncians in homines
Christum suum is ad Incarnationis Dominicae Mysteria dictum facilius derivabit.
Nam si te movet quia Spiritum dixit, and hoc non putas derivandum ad Mysteria a
assumptionis humanae; persequere scripturas and invenies ptime congruere de
Christo, de quo been convenit aestimari, quia firmavit tonitrua adventu suo;
vim videlicet and sonum coelestium scripturarum; quar^m velut quodam tonitru
mentes nostrae redduntur attonitae; and timere dis^^^us, and reverentiam
caelestibus deferamus oraculis. Denique, in Evangelio fratres Domini Filii
tonitru dicebantur. Et cum vox Patris facta esset dicentis ad Filium, and
honorificavi te, and iterum honorificabo, Judaei dicebant tonitruum factum esse
illi. And hereon, with some Observations to the same purpose, he adds; Ergo
tonitrua ad sermones Domini retulit quorum in omnem terram exivit sonus;
Spiritum autem hoc loco, animam quam suscepit rationabilem and perfectam
intelligimus.

The substance of his Discourse is, that treating of Christ (who indeed is
neither mentioned nor intended in the Text) he speaks of confirming the
Thunder, (which no where here appears) by which the sound of the Scriptures and
preaching of the Word is intended; the Spirit that was created being the humane
Soul of Jesus Christ. Nor was he alone in this Interpretation. Didym. Lib. 2.
de Spiritu sancto; Athanas, ad Serapion. Basil. Lib. 4. contra Eunom. amongst
the Grecians, are in like manner entangled with this Corruption of the Text; as
was also Council. Sardicen. in Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 20. The other Person
intended is Hierom, who consulting the Original, as he was well able to do,
first translated the words, Quia ecce formans Montes and creans Ventum, and
annuntians Homini eloquium suum, declares the Mistake of the LXX, and the
occasion of it: Pro Montibus qui Hebraice dicuntur (...), soli LXX (...), id
est, tonitruum verterunt. Cur autem illi Spiritum and nos dixerimus Ventum, qui
Hebraice (...) vocatur, causa manifesta est. Quodque sequitur annuncians homini
eloquium suum, LXX transtulerent (...), Verbi similitudine, and ambiguitate
decepti. So he shows that it is not (...) in the Text, but (...); that is,
says he, juxta Aquilam (...); Symmachum (...), juxta Theodotionem (...); juxta
quintam Editionem (...).

And as (...), whence the word is, signifying both to meditate and to speak, so
the word it self intends a conceived thought to be spoken afterward. And that
(...) here is reciprocal not relative. And to this purpose in his ensuing
Exposition; Qui confirmat Montes, ad cujus vocem coelorum cardines et terrae
fundamenta quatiuntur. Ipse qui creat Spiritum, quem in hoc loco non Spiritum
sanctum, ut Haeretici suspicantur, sed Ventum intelligimus, sive Spiritum
hominis, annuncians homini eloqium ejus; qui cogitationum secreta cognoscit.
Hieron. in loc.

Wind on the account of its unaccountable variation, inconstancy and changes,
is esteemed vain, not to be observed or trusted unto; whence the Wisemen tells
us, that he which observes the Wind shall not sow, Eccles. 11. 4. the word is
used metaphorically to signify vanity, Eccles. 5. 16. What profit has a man
that he has labored (...) for the Wind. So Mic. 2. 11. If a Man walk (...)
with the Wind and falsehood; that is, in vanity; pretending to a Spirit of
Prophecy, and falsehood, vainly, foolishly, falsely boasting. So Job 15. 2.
Should a Wiseman utter (...) knowledge of Wind? vain words with a pretense of
knowledge of Wisdom. As he calls them (...) words of Wind. Chap. 16. 3. So also
Jer. 5. 13. And the Prophets shall become (...) Wind; or, be vain, foolish,
uncertain, and false in their Predictions. But (...) is not used thus
metaphorically in the New Testament.

Metonymy also it signifies any Part or Quarter, as we say, of the World from
whence the Wind blows; as also a part of any thing divided into four sides or
quarters. So Jer. 52. 23. There were ninety and six Pomegranats (...) toward a
Wind, that is, on the one side of the Chapter that was above the Pillars in
the Temple. Ezekiel. 5. 12. I will scatter a third part (...) to all the Winds, or
all Parts of the Earth. Hence the four Quarters of a thing lying to the four
Parts of the World, are called its four Winds, (...). 1 Chro. 9. 24. whence are
the (...), the four Winds in the New Testament, Matthew. 24. 31. This is the use
of the word in general with respect unto things natural and inanimate; and
every place where it is so used gives it determinate sense.

Material and Corporeal, or absolutely Spiritual and Immaterial; So the Vital
Breath which we and other Living Creatures Breath is called. Every thing
wherein was (...) the Breath of the Spirit of Life, Genesis 1. 22. that Vital
Breath which our Lives are maintained by in Respiration. So Psalm. 135. 17. Job
19. 17. which is a thing Material or Corporeal. But most frequently it denotes
things purely Spiritual and Immaterial. As in finite Substances it signifies
the Rational Soul of Man, Psalm. 31. 5. Into thy hands I commend, (...), that is
my Soul; they are the words whereby our Savior committed his departing Soul
into the hands of his Father; Luke 23. 46. (...). So Psalm. 146. 4. (...); his
Breath, say we, goes forth; he returns to his Earth. It is his Soul and its
departure from the Body that is intended. This is (...) that Spirit of the Sons
of Men that goes upwards, when the Spirit of a Beast goes downwards to the
Earth, or turns to Corruption, Eccles. 3. 21. see Chap. 8. 8. and Chap. 12.
7. Hence, fourthly, by a Metonymy also, it is taken for the Affections of the
Mind or Soul of Man; and that whether they be Good or Evil, Gen 45. 27. The
Spirit of Jacob revived. He began to take heart and be of good Courage, Ezekiel.
13. 3. The Prophets that walk (...), after their Spirit; that is their own
Desires and Inclinations, when indeed they had no Vision but spoke what they
had a mind unto. Numb. 14. 24. Caleb is said to have another Spirit than the
murmuring People; another Mind, Will, Purpose, or Resolution. It is taken for
Prudence, Josh. 5. 1. Anger, or the Irascible Faculty, Eccles. 7. 10. Fury,
Zech. 6. 8. He will cut off the Spirit of Princes; that is, their Pride,
Insolency, and Contempt of others. (...) in the New Testament frequently
intends the Intellectual Part of the Mind or Soul, and that as it is Active, or
in Action, Luke 1 47. Romans 1. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And oft-times it is taken for
the Mind in all its Inclinations, in its whole habitual Bent and Design. Angels
also are called Spirits. Good Angels, Psalm. 104. 4. And it may be an Angel is
intended, 1 Kings 18. 12. And evil Angels, or Devils, 1 Kings 22. 21, 22. For
that Spirit who appeared before the Lord and offered himself to be a lying
spirit in the Mouths of Ahab's Prophets, was no other but he who appeared
before God, Job 1. who is called Satan. These in the New Testament are called
unclean Spirits, Matthew. 10. 1. And the Observation of the Ancients, that Satan
is not called a Spirit absolutely, but with an Addition or Mark of Distinction
holds only in the New Testament. Discant (homines) Scripturae Sanctae
consuetudinem; nunquam Spiritum perversum absolute, sed cum additamento aliquo
Spiritum nuncupari; sicut ibi, Spiritu fornicationis seducti sunt. Et in
Evangelio, cum autem Spiritus immundus exierit de homine, and caetera his
similia. Hieronym. Comment. in Habbak. Cap. 2.
And because Evil Spirits are wont to torment the Minds and Bodies of Men,
therefore evil Thoughts, disorders of Mind, wicked Purposes disquieting and
vexing the Soul, arising from or much furthered by Melancholy Distempers, are
called, it may be, sometimes an Evil Spirit. The Case of Saul shall be
afterward considered.

general Notions wherein the things intended do agree. For the most part there
is no great difficulty in discovering the especial meaning of them, or what it
is they signify in the several places where they occur. Their Design and
Circumstances as to the Subject Matter treated of, determine the signification.
And notwithstanding the ambiguous Use of these words in the Old and New
Testament, there are two things clear and evident unto our purpose. First, That
there is in the Holy Scriptures a full distinct Revelation or Declaration of
the Spirit, or the Spirit of God Qui Spiritum negant, and Deum Patrem negant
and Filium; quoniam idem est Spiritus Dei, qui Spiritus Christi est. Vnum autem
esse Spiritum nemo dubitaverit; etsi de uno Deo plerique dubitaverunt. Ambros.
de Sp. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 3.
as one singular, and every way distinct from every thing else that is
occasionally or constantly signified or denoted by that Word Spirit. And this
not only a multitude of particular places gives testimony unto, but also the
whole course of the Scripture supposes, as that without an acknowledgment
whereof nothing else contained in it can be understood or is of any use at all.
For we shall find this Doctrine to be the very Life and Soul which quickens the
whole from first to last. Take away the Work and powerful Efficacy of the Holy
Spirit from the administration of it, and it will prove but a dead Letter, of
no saving advantage to the Souls of Men; and take away the Doctrine concerning
him from the writing of it, and the whole will be unintelligible and useless.
Secondly, That whatever is affirmed of this Holy Spirit, the Spirit of God, it
all relates either to his Person or his Operations. And these Operations of his
being various, are sometimes by a Metonymy called Spirit, whereof afterward. I
shall not therefore need to prove that there is an Holy Spirit distinct from
all other Spirits whatever, and from every thing else that on several Occasions
is signified by that Name. For this is acknowledged by all that acknowledge the
Scriptures; yea, it is so by Jews and Mahometans, as well as all sorts of
Christians. And indeed all those false apprehensions concerning him which have
at this day any countenance given unto them, may be referred unto two Heads.
(1.) That of the Modern Jews, who affirm the Holy Ghost to be the influential
fluential Power of God; which conceit is entertained and diligently promoted by
the Socinians. (2.) That of the Mahumetans, who make him an eminent Angel, and
sometimes say it is Gabriel, which being traduced from the Ma^edonians of old,
has found some Defenders and Promoters in our days.

Name of him concerning whom we treat, some things concerning it and the use of
it, as peculiarly applied unto him are to be premised. (...). Chrysostom. de
Adorand. Sp.
For sometimes he is called ^he Spirit absolutely, sometimes the Holy Spirit,
or as we speak, the Holy Ghost; sometimes the Spirit of God, the Good Spirit of
God, the Spirit of Truth and Holiness; sometimes the Spirit of Christ, or of
the Son. The first absolutely used, denotes his Person; the Additions, express
his Properties and Relation unto the other Persons.

In the Name Spirit two things are included. First, his Nature or Essence;
namely, that he is a pure spiritual or immaterial Substance. For neither the
Hebrews nor the Greeks can express such a Being in its Subsistence, but by
(...) and (...); a Spirit. Nor is this Name firstly given unto the Holy Spirit
in allusion unto the Wind in its Subtilty, Agility and Efficacy. Crell.
Prolegom.
For these things have respect only unto his Operations, wherein from some
general Appearances his Works and Effects are likened unto the Wind and its
Effects, Joh. 3. 8. But it is his Substance or Being which is first intended in
this Name. So it is said of God, Sanctificationis bonitatisque vocabulim, and
ad Patrem and ad Filium, and ad Spiritum Sanctum aeque refertur; sicut ipsa
quoque appellatio Spiritus. Nam and Pater Spiritus dicitur ut ibi, Spiritus est
Deus; Spiritus est Deus and Filius Spiritus, Dominus inquit Spiritus ejus:
Spiritus autem Sanctus semper Spiritus Sancti appellatione censetur; non quod
ex consortio tantum Nominis cum Patre ponatur and Filio; sed quod una Natura
unum possideat and nomen. Didym. de Sp. Sanct. lib. 3.
Joh. 4. 24. (...), God is a Spirit; that is, he is of a pure spiritual
immaterial Nature, not confined unto any place, and so not regarding one more
than another in his Worship; as is the design of the place to evince. It will
therefore be said, that on this account the Name of Spirit is not peculiar unto
the third Person, seeing it contains the Description of that Nature, which is
the same in them all. For whereas it is said God is a Spirit, it is not spoken
of this or that Person, but of the Nature of God abstractedly. I grant that so
it is, Multa sunt Testimonia, quibus hoc evidenter ostenditur, and Patris and
Filii ipsum esse Spiritum, qui in Trinitate dicitur Spiritus Sanctus. Nec ob
aliud existimo ipsum proprie vocari Spiritum, cum etiam si de singulis
interrogemur, non possimus non Patrem and Filium Spiritum dicere; quoniam
Spiritus est Deus, id est non Corpus est Deus sed Spiritus; hoc proprie vocari
oportuit eum, qui non est unus eorum, sed in quo communitas apparet amborum.
August. Tractat. 99. in Johan.
and therefore the name Spirit is not in the first place characteristical of
the Third Person in the Trinity, but denotes that Nature whereof each Person is
partaker. But moreover as it is peculiarly and constantly ascribed unto Him; it
declares his especial Manner and Order of Existence. So that wherever there is
mention of the Holy Spirit, his Relation unto the Father and Son is included
therein, for he is the Spirit of God: And herein there is an allusion to
somewhat created. Not as I said to the Wind in general, unto whose Agility and
Invisibility he is compared in his Operations, but unto the Breath of man. For
as the vital breath of a man has a continual Emanation from him, and yet is
never separated utterly from his Person or forsakes him; so does the Spirit of
the Father and the Son proceed from them by a continual Divine Emanation, still
abiding one with them. For all these Allusions are weak and imperfect wherein
substantial things are compared with Accidental, Infinite things with Finite,
and those that are Eternal with those that are Temporary. Hence their
disagreement is infinitely more than their Agreement; yet such Allusions does
our weakness need instruction from and by. Thus he is called (...), Psalm. 33.
6. The Spirit or Breath of the Mouth of the Lord; or of his Nostrils; as Psalm.
18. 15. wherein there is an eminent Allusion unto the Breath of a Man. Of the
manner of this proceeding and emanation of the Spirit from the Father and the
Son so far as it is revealed, and as we are capable of an useful Apprehension
of it, I have treated elsewhere. And from hence, or the Subsistence of the Holy
Spirit in an eternal Emanation from the Father and Son as the Breath of God,
did our Savior signify his Communication of his Gifts unto his Disciples by
breathing on them, John 20. 22. (...). And because in our first Creation it is
said of Adam, that God (...), breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life,
Genesis 2. 7. He has the same Appellation with respect unto God, Psalm. 18. 15.
Thus is he called the Spirit. And because as we observed before the Word (...)
is variously used, Didymus de Spiritu Sancto, lib. 3. supposes that the
prefixing of the Article (...) does distinguish the signification, and confine
it to the Holy Ghost in the New Testament. Oft-times no doubt it does so, but
not always as is manifest from Joh. 8. 3. where (...) is joined with (...),
and yet only signifies the Wind. But the Subject treated of and what is
affirmed of him, will sufficiently determine the signification of the Word,
where he is called absolutely THE SPIRIT.

Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost. (...). Justin. Mart.
This is the most usual Appellation of him in the New Testament. And it is
derived from the Old, Psalm. 51. 11. (...), The Spirit of thy Holiness, or thy
Holy Spirit. Isa. 63. 10, 11. (...), The Spirit of his Holiness, or his Holy
Spirit. Hence are (...) and (...), The Holy Spirit, and the Spirit of Holiness
in common use among the Jews. In the New Testament He is (...), That Holy
Spirit. And we must enquire the special Reasons of this Adjunct. Some suppose
it is only from his peculiar Work of sanctifying us, or making us Holy. For
this Effect of Sanctification is his peculiar Work and that of what sort soever
it be; whether it consist in a separation from things Profane and Common unto
Holy Uses and Services; or whether it be the real Infusion and Operation of
Holiness in Men, it is from him in an especial manner. And this also
manifests him to be God, for it is God alone who sanctifyeth his People.
Levit. 20. 8. I am Jehovah who sanctifies you. And God in that Work ascribes
unto himself the Title of Holy in an especial manner, and as such would have us
to consider him. Levit. 21. 8. I the Lord which sanctifies you am Holy. And
this may be one Reason of the frequent use of this Property with reference unto
the Spirit.

But this is not the whole Reason of this Name and Apellation. For where he is
first so mentioned he is called the Spirit of Gods Holiness, Psalm. 51. 11. Isa
63. 10, 11. And in the New Testament absolutely the Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1.
4. And this respects his Nature in the first Place, and not merely his
Operations. (...). Chrysostom. ub. Sup.
As God then absolutely is called Holy, the Holy One, and the Holy One of
Israel, being therein described by that Glorious Property of his Nature whereby
he is Glorious in Holiness; Exodus 15. 11, And whereby he is distinguished from
all false Gods; who is like unto thee O Jehovah, among the Gods, who is like
unto thee, Glorious in Holiness; So is the Spirit called Holy to denote the
Holiness of his Nature. And on this Account is the Opposition made between him
and the Unholy, or unclean Spirit. Mark. 3. 29, 30. He that shall blaspheme
against the Holy Spirit, has never forgiveness. Because they said he has an
unclean Spirit. And herein first his Personality is asserted; for the Unclean
Spirit is a Person. And if the Spirit of God were only a Quality or Accident as
some fancy and dream, there could no comparative opposition be made between him
and this unclean Spirit, that is the Devil. So also are they opposed with
respect unto their Natures. His Nature is Holy, whereas that of the unclean
Spirit is Evil and perverse. This is the Foundation of his being called Holy;
even the eternal Glorious Holiness of his Nature. And on this account he is so
styled also with respect unto all his Operations. For it is not only with
regard unto the particular Work of Regeneration and Sanctification, or making
of us Holy, but unto all his Works and Operations that he is so termed. For he
being the immediate Operator of all Divine Works that outwardly are of God, and
they being in themselves all Holy be they of what kind soever, He is called the
Holy Spirit. Yea he is so called to attest and witness that all his Works, all
the Works of God, are Holy, although they may be great and terrible, and such
as to Corrupt Reason may have an other Appearance; in all which we are to
acquiesce in this, that the Holy One in the midst of us will do no iniquity,
Zeph. 3. 5. The Spirit of God then is thus frequently and almost constantly
called Holy; to attest that all the Works of God whereof he is the immediate
Operator are Holy. For it is the Work of the Spirit to harden and blind
obstinate sinners, as well as to Sanctify the Elect. And his acting in the One
is no less Holy than in the other, although Holiness be not the Effect of it in
the Objects. So when he came to declare his dreadful Work of the final hardening
and Rejection of the Jews, one of the most tremendous Effects of Divine
Providence, a Work which for the strangeness of it Men would in no wise
believe, though it were declared unto them, Acts 13. 41. he was signally
proclaimed Holy by the Seraphims that attended his Throne, Isa. 6. 3, 10, 11,
12. Joh. 12. 40. Acts 28. 26.

Evil Spirits; whose Persons and actings are placed in Opposition to the Spirit
of God. So Sam. 16. 14, 15. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
Evil Spirit from the Lord troubled him. And Readiness servants said unto him,
behold now an Evil Spirit from God troubles thee. So also v. 23. The Evil
Spirit from God was upon Saul. So chap. 18. 10. Chap. 19. 9. This Spirit is
called, (...), an evil Spirit of God, Chap. 16. 15. and absolutely (...), a
Spirit of God, v. 33. where we have supplied Evil in the Translation. But these
Expressions are to be regulated and explained by v. 14. where he is called
(...), an Evil Spirit from the Lord, that is appointed and commissioned by him,
for the punishing and terrifying of Saul. For as the Spirit of the Lord
departed from him by withdrawing his Assistance and Influential operations,
whereby he had wrought in him those Gifts and Abilities of mind which fitted
him unto the discharge of his Kingly Office, upon the first impressions whereof
he was turned into another man from what he was in his Private Condition, 1 Samuel 10. 6, 9. So the Evil Spirit came upon him to excite out of his own adust
Melancholy, discontents, fears, a sense of Guilt, as also to impress terrifying
thoughts and Apprehensions on his Imagination. For so it is said an Evil Spirit
from the Lord (...), 1 Samuel 16. 14. terrified him, frightened him with dreadful
Agitations of Mind. And that we may touch a little on this by the way; The
Foundation of this Trouble and distress of Saul lay in himself. For as I do
grant that he was sometimes under an immediate Agitation of Body and Mind from
the powerful Impressions of the Devil upon him, for under them it is said, he
prophesied in the midst of the House, 1 Samuel 18. 10. which argues an
extraordinary and involuntary Effect upon him; yet principally he wrought by
the Excitation and Provocation of his Personal Distempers Moral and Natural.
For these have in themselves a great Efficacy in cruciating the Minds of Guilty
Persons. So Tacitus observes out of Plato; Annal. lib. 6. Neque frustra
praestantissimus humanae sapientiae firmare solitus est, si recludantur
Tyrannorum mentes posse aspici laniatus and ictus; quando ut corpora verberibus
ita saevitia, libidine, malis consultis animus dilaceretur. The most Eminent
Wiseman was not wont in vain to affirm, that if the minds of Tyrants were laid
open and discovered, it would be seen how they were cruciated and punished;
seeing that as the Body is rent and torn by stripes, so is the Mind, by
cruelty, Lusts, evil Counsels and Undertakings; so he, as I suppose from Plato
de Repub. lib. 9. Where Socrates disputes sundry things to that purpose. And
another Roman Historian gives us a signal Instance hereof in Jugurtha, after he
had contracted the Guilt of many horrible wickednesses. Neque post id locorum,
Jugurthae dies aut nox ulla quieta fuit; neque loco neque mortali cuiquam aut
tempori satis credere; civis hostisque juxta metuere: circumspectare omnia and
omni strepitu pavescere, alio atque alio loco saepe contra decus regium
requiescere, interdum somno excitus amplis animis tumultum facere; ita
formidine quasi vaecordia agitari. Bell. Jugur.


And yet this Work in it self is of the same kind with what God sometimes
employs holy Angels about, because it is the Execution of his Righteous
Judgments. So it was a watcher and an Holy One that in such a Case smote
Nebuchadnezzar with a sudden madness and frenzy, Dan. 4. 13, 14.

Good Spirit of God. Psalm. 143. v, 10. (...). Thy Spirit is Good, lead me into
the Land of Uprightness. So Ours. Rather, Thy Good Spirit shall lead Me. Or as
Junius; Spiritu tuo bono deduc me; lead me by thy Good Spirit. The Chaldee here
adds (...); The Good Spirit of thy Holiness; or thy Holy Good Spirit. Didymus
Lib. 2. de Spirit. Sanc. says that some Copies here read (...), a Remembrance
whereof is in the M. S. of T^cla and not elsewhere. So Nehem. 9. 10. Thou
gave them (...), that Good Spirit of thine to instruct them. And he is called
so principally from his Nature which is essentially Good; as there is none Good
but One that is God, Matthew. 19. 17. as also from his Operations which are all
Good as they are Holy; and unto them that believe are full of goodness in their
Effects. Crel. Prolegom. p. 7. distinguishes between this Good Spirit and the
Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost. For this Good Spirit he would confine unto the
Old Testament, making it the Author or Cause of those Gifts of Wisdom, Courage,
Prudence, and Government that were granted unto many of the People of old. So
it is said of Bezaliel, That he was filled with the Spirit of God, in Wisdom
and Understanding, and in Knowledge, Exodus 31. 3. So Chap. 35. 31. That is,
says he, with this Good Spirit of God. So also it is pretended in all those
Places where the Spirit of God is said to come on Men to enable them unto some
great and extraordinary Work; as Judge. 3. 10. But this is plainly to contradict
the Apostle, who tells us, that there are indeed various Operations, but one
Spirit; and that the one and self same Spirit works all these things as he
pleases. Nemo suspicetur alium Spiritum Sanctum fuisse in Sanctis, nimirum
aute adventum Domini, and alium in Apostolis caeterisque Discipulis, and quasi
nomina in differentibus esse substantiis; possumus quidem testimonia de Divinis
Literis exhibere, quia idem Spiritus and in Apostolis and in Prophetis fuerit.
Paulus in Epistola quam ad Hebraeos scribit, de Psalmorum Volumine Testimonium
proserens, a Spiritu Sancto id dictum esse commemorat. Didym. de Spirit. Sanct.
lib. 1.
And if from every different or distinct Effect of the Spirit of God, we must
multiply Spirits, and assign every one of them to a distinct Spirit, no Man
will know what to make of the Spirit of God at last. Probably we shall have so
many feigned Spirits, as to lose the only true One. As to this particular
Instance, David prays that God would lead him by his Good Spirit, Psalm. 143.
10. Now certainly this was no other but that Holy Spirit which he prays in
another place that the Lord would not take from him. Psalm. 51. 11. Take not thy
Holy Spirit from me, which is confessed to be the Holy Ghost. This he also
mentions 2 Samuel 23. 2. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was in
my Tongue. And what Spirit this was Peter declares, 1 Epist. Chap. 1. v. 21.
The Holy Men of God spoke in old time as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So
vain is this pretense.

Spirit of God, and the Spirit of the Lord; So in the first mention of Him,
Genesis 1. 2. (...), The Spirit of God, moved on the Face of the Waters. And I
doubt not but that the Name (...) Elohim, which includes a plurality in the
same Nature is used in the Creation and the whole Description of it, to
intimate the Dictinction of the Divine Persons; For presently upon it the Name
Jehovah is mentioned also, Chap. 2. 4. but so as Elohim is joined with it. But
that Name is not used in the account given us of the Work of Creation, because
it has respect only unto the Unity of the Essence of God. Now the Spirit is
called the Spirit of God, originally and principally as the Son is called the
Son of God. For the Name of God in those Enunciations is taken personally for
the Father; that is God the Father, the Father of Christ and our Father, John
20. 17. And he is thus termed (...), upon the account of the Order and Nature
of Personal Subsistence and Distinction in the Holy Trinity. The Person of the
Father being Fons and Origo Trinitatis, the Son is from him by eternal
Generation, and is therefore his Son, the Son of God, whose denomination as the
Father is originally from hence, even the Eternal Generation of the Son. So is
the Person of the Holy Spirit from him by eternal Procession or Emanation.
Hence is that Relation of his to God even the Father, whence he is called the
Spirit of God. And he is not only called (...), the Spirit of God, but (...),
the Spirit that is of God, which proceeds from him as a Distinct Person.
(...). Chrysostom. (...).
This therefore arising from and consisting in his proceeding from him, he is
called Metaphorically the Breath of his Mouth, as proceeding from him by an
eternal Spiration. On this Foundation and Supposition, he is also called,
Secondly, The Spirit of God (...), to difference him from all other Spirits
whatever; as, thirdly, also because he is promised, given, and sent of God, for
the accomplishment of his whole Will and Pleasure toward us. The Instances
hereof will be afterward considered. But these Appellations of him have their
Foundation in his eternal Relation unto the Father before mentioned.

Spirit of the Son. God has sent forth the Spirit of the Son into your Hearts,
Gal. 4. 6. And the Spirit of Christ: What time the Spirit of Christ that was in
them did signify, 1 Pet. 1. 11. So Romans 8. 9. But ye are not in the Flesh but
in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. (...). Chrysostom.
de Sp. Sanct.
Now if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his. The Spirit
therefore of God, and the Spirit of Christ, are one and the same. For that
Hypothetical Proposition, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none
of his, is an Inference taken from the words foregoing; if so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you. And this Spirit of Christ, v. 11. is said to be the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead. Look then in what sense he is
said to be the Spirit of God, that is of the Father, in the same he is said to
be the Spirit of the Son. And this is because he proceeds from the Son also.
And for no other Reason can he be so called, at least not without the original
and formal Reason of that Appellation. Secondarily, I confess he is called the
Spirit of Christ, because promised by him, sent by him, and that to make
effectual and accomplish his Work toward the Church. But this he could not be
unless he had antecedently been the Spirit of the Son by his proceeding from
him also. For the order of the Dispensation of the Divine Persons toward us,
arises from the Order of their own Subsistence in the same Divine Essence. And
if the Spirit did proceed only from the Persons of the Father, he could not be
promised, sent, or given by the S n. Consider therefore the Humane Nature of
Christ in it self and abstractedly, and the Spirit cannot be said to be the
Spirit of Christ. For it was anointed and endowed with Gifts and Graces by him
as we shall show. And if from hence he may be said to be the Spirit of Christ
without respect unto his proceeding from him as the Son of God, then he may be
also said to be the Spirit of every Believer who has received the Unction, or
are anointed with his Gifts and Graces. For although Believers are so as to
Measure and Degree unspeakably beneath what Christ was, who received not the
Spirit by Measure; yet as he is the Head, and they are the Members of the same
Mystical Body, their Unction by the Spirit is of the same kind. But now the
Spirit of God may not be said to be the Spirit of this or that Man who has
received of his Gifts and Graces. David prays, Take not thy Holy Spirit from
me; not my Holy Spirit. And he is distinguished from our Spirits even as they
are sanctified by him. Romans 8. 16. The Spirit himself bears witness with our
Spirit. No more than can he be said to be the Spirit of Christ merely upon the
account of his Communications unto him, although in a degree above all others
inconceivably excellent. For with respect hereunto he is still called the
Spirit of God or the Father who sent him, and anointed the Humane Nature of
Christ with him.

Peter speaks Acts 2. 33. Having received of the Father the Promise of the Holy
Ghost, he has shed forth this which ye now see and hear. But in this regard,
namely as given by Christ the Mediator he is expressly called the Spirit of the
Father; he was given as the Promise of the Father; for so he is introduced
speaking, v. 17. it shall come to pass in the last Days, says God, I will pour
out of my Spirit on all flesh. And so our Savior tells his Disciples, that he
would pray the Father and he should give them another Comforter, even the
Spirit of Truth, Joh. 14. 16, 17. Nor is he otherwise the Spirit of Christ
originally and formally, but as he is the Spirit of God, that is as Christ is
God also. On this supposition, I grant as before, that he may consequentially
be called the Spirit of Christ, because promised and sent by him, because doing
his Work, and Communicating his Grace Image and likeness to the Elect.

Pet. 1. 10, 11. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched
diligently, who prophesyed of the Grace that should come unto you; searching
what, or what manner of Time, the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify. And this Spirit is said absolutely to be the Holy Ghost; 2 Epist.
Chap. 1. 21. So then the Spirit that was in the Prophets of old in all Ages
since the World began, before the Incarnation of the Son of God is called the
Spirit of Christ, that is of him who is so. Now this could not be, because he
was anointed by that Spirit, or because he gave it afterward to his Disciples;
for his Humane Nature did not exist in the Time of their Prophesying. Those
indeed who receive him after the Unction of the Humane Nature of Christ, may be
said in some sense to receive the Spirit of Christ because they are made
Partakers of the same Spirit with him, to the same Ends and Purposes according
to their measure. But this cannot be so with respect unto them who lived and
Prophesyed by him and died long before his Incarnation. Wherefore it is pleaded
by those who oppose both the Deity of Christ and the Spirit, which are
undeniably here attested unto, that the Spirit here, whereby they cannot deny
the Holy Ghost to be intended is called the Spirit of Christ, because the
Prophets of old who spoke by him did principally prophesy concerning Christ,
and his Grace, and delivered great Mysteries concerning them. So Christ is made
in this Place the Object of the Spirits Teaching, and not the Author of his
sending. So Crell. Prolegom. p. 13. 14. But why then is he not called the
Spirit of God also on this Reason; because the Prophets that speak by him,
treated wholly of God, the things and the Will of God? This they will not say,
for they acknowledge him to be the Virtue and Power of God inherent in him and
proceeding from him. But then whereas God even the Father is a Person, and
Christ is a Person, and the Spirit is said to be the Spirit of God, and the
Spirit of Christ, whence does it appear that the same Expression must have
different Interpretations; and that the Spirit, is called the Spirit of God
because he is so and proceeds from him? but the Spirit of Christ because he
is not so, but only treats of him? The answer is ready; namely because the
Father is God, but Christ is not, and therefore could not give the Spirit when
he was not. This is an easy Answer; namely to deny a Fundamental Truth, and to
set up that denial in an Opposition unto a clear Testimony given unto it. But
the Truth is, this pretended sense leaves no sense at all in the Words. For if
the Spirit which was in the Prophets be called the Spirit of Christ, only
because he did beforehand declare the things of Christ, that is his suffering
and the Glory that did ensue, and that be the sole Reason of that Denomination,
then the sense or importance of the Words is this, searching what or what
manner of Time the Spirit which did signify when it testified before hand the
sufferings of Christ which was in them did signify when he testified before
hand the sufferings of Christ. For according to this Interpretation, the Spirit
of Christ is nothing but the Spirit as testifying beforehand of him, and
thence alone is he so called; the Absurdity whereof is apparent unto all.

Joh. 4. 3. Every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh is not of God; and this is that of Antichrist whereof you have heard that
it should come, and even now already is it in the World. For say some the
Spirit of Antichrist is said to be in the World, when Antichrist was not as yet
come. But the Spirit here intended, is not called the Spirit of Antichrist,
because it declared and foretold the things of Antichrist before his coming; On
which account alone they allow the Spirit of God in the Prophets of Old to be
called the Spirit of Christ. They have therefore no countenance from this Place
which fails them in the Principal thing they would prove by it. Again
supposing those Words, whereof you have heard that it should come and is now in
the World, are to be interpreted of the Spirit mentioned and not of Antichrist
himself, yet no more can be intended, but that the false Teachers and Seducers
which were then in the World acted with the same Spirit, as Antichrist should
do at his coming. And so there is no Conformity between these Expressions.
Besides the Spirit of Antichrist was then in the World, as was Antichrist
himself; so far as his Spirit was in the world, so far was he so also; For
Antichrist and his Spirit cannot be separated. Both he and it were then in the
World, in their forerunners who opposed the Truth of the Gospel about the
Incarnation of the Son of God and his sufferings. And indeed the Spirit of
Antichrist in this Place, is no more but his Doctrines; Antichristian Doctrine
which is to be tried and rejected. Neither is any singular Person intended by
Antichrist, but a Mysterious Opposition unto Christ and the Gospel, signally
Headed by a series of men in the latter days. He therefore and his Spirit began
to be together in the World in the Apostles Days, when the Mystery of Iniquity
began to work, 2 Thessal. 2. 7. There is therefore no countenance to be taken
from these words, unto the perverting and wresting of that other expression
concerning the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets of old. This therefore is the
formal Reason of this Apellation. The Holy Spirit is called the Spirit of the
Son, and the Spirit of Christ, upon the Account of his Procession or Emanation
from his Person also. Without respect hereunto he could not be called properly
the Spirit of Christ; but on that supposition he may be, he is so denominated,
from that various Relation and Respect that he has unto him in his Work and
Operations. Thus is the Spirit called in the Scripture, these are the Names
whereby the Essence and Subsistence of the Third Person in the Holy Trinity are
declared. How he is called on the Account of his Offices and Operations will be
manifested in our Progress.

Divine Nature and Personality of the HOLY SPIRIT Proved and Vindicated. CHAP.
III.
(1.) Ends of our consideration of the Dispensation of the Spirit. (2.)
Principles premised thereunto. (3.) The Nature of God the Foundation of all
Religion. (4.) Divine Revelation gives the Rule and Measure of Religious
Worship. (5.) God has revealed himself as Three in One. (6.) Distinct Actings
and Operations ascribed unto these Distinct Persons. (7.) Therefore the Holy
Spirit a Divine Distinct Person. (8.) Double Opposition to the Holy Spirit.
(9.) By some his Personality granted, and his Deity denied. (10.) His
Personality denied by the Socinians. (11.) Proved against them. (12.) The open
vanity of their Pretenses. Matthew. 28. 19. pleaded. (13, 14, 15.) Appearances of
the Spirit under the shape of a Dove. (16.) Explained and Improved. (17.) His
appearance as Fire opened. (18.) His Personal Subsistence proved. (19.)
Personal Properties assigned unto him. Understanding. Argument from hence
pleaded and vindicated. (20.) A Will; Joh. 33. Jam. 3. 4. cleared. (21.)
Exceptions removed. (22.) Power. (23, 24, etc.) Other Personal Ascriptions to
him, with Testimonies of them, vindicated and explained.

Matter it self designed unto Consideration; namely, the Dispensation of the
Spirit of God unto the Church. And I shall endeavor to six what I have to
offer upon its proper Principles, and from them to educe the whole Doctrine
concerning it. And this must be so done, as to manifest the Interest of our
Faith, Obedience, and Holy Worship, in the whole and each Part of it. For these
are the immediate Ends of all Divine Revelations; according to that Holy Maxim
of our Blessed Savior; if you know these things, happy are ye if you do them.
To this End the Ensuing Principles are to be observed.

The Nature and Being of God is the Foundation of all true Religion and holy
Religious Worship in the World. The great End for which we were made, for which
we were brought forth by the Power of God into this World, is to Worship him
and to give glory unto him. For he made all things for himself or his own Glory
( Prove. 16. 4.) to be rendered unto him according to the Abilities and
Capacities that he has furnished them withal, Revel. 4. 11. And that which
makes this Worship indispensibly necessary unto us, and from whence it is Holy
or Religious, is the Nature and Being of God himself. There are indeed many
Parts or Acts of Religious Worship which immediately respect, (as their Reason
and Motive) what God is unto us, or what he has done and does for us. But the
Principal and Adaequate Reason of all Divine Worship and that which makes it
such, is what God is in himself. Because he is, that is, an Infinitely
Glorious, Good, Wise, Holy, Powerful, Righteous, self-subsisting,
self-sufficient, All-sufficient Being, the Fountain, Cause and Author of Life
and Being to all things, and of all that is Good in every kind, the First
Cause, last End, and absolutely Sovereign Lord of all, the Rest and
All-satisfactory Reward of all other Beings, therefore is he by us to be
adored, and Worshipped with Divine and Religious Worship. Hence are we in our
Hearts, Minds and Souls, to Admire, Adore, and Love Him, his Praises are we to
celebrate; Him to Trust and fear, and so to resign our selves and all our
concernments unto his Will and Disposal; to regard him with all the Acts of our
Minds and Persons, answerably to the Holy Properties and Excellencies of his
Nature. This it is to glorify him as God. For seeing of him, and through him,
and to him are all things, to him must be Glory for ever, Romans 11. 36.
Believing that God thus is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him, is
the Ground of all Coming unto God in his Worship, Heb. 11. 6. And herein lies
the sin of Men, that the invisible things of God being Manifest unto them, even
his Eternal Power and Godhead, yet they do not Glorify him as God, Romans 1. 21.
This is to Honor, Worship, Fear God for himself; that is, on the Account of
what he is himself. Where the Divine Nature is, there is the true, proper,
formal Object of Religious worship, and where that is not, it is Idolatry to
ascribe it to or exercise it toward any. And this God instructs us in, in all
those Places where the Proclaims his Name and describes his Eternal
Excellencies, and that either absolutely or in Comparison with other things.
All is that we may know him to be such a one, as is to be Worshipped and
Glorified for himself, or his own sake.

The Revelation that God is pleased to make of himself unto us, gives the Rule
and measure of all Religious Worship and Obedience. His Being absolutely
considered as comprehending in it all infinitely Divine Perfections, is the
formal Reason of our Worship; but this Worship is to be directed, guided,
regulated, by the Revelation he makes of that Being, and of those Excellencies
unto us. This is the End of Divine Revelation; namely to direct us in paying
that Homage which is due unto the Divine Nature. I speak not now only of
Positive Institutions which are the free Effects of the Will of God depending
originally and solely on Revelation, and which therefore have been various and
actually changed. But this is that which I intend. Look what way soever God
manifests his Being and Properties unto us, by his Works or his Word, our
Worship consists in a due Application of our Souls unto him according to that
Manifestation of himself.

God has revealed or manifested himself as Three in One. And therefore as such
is to be worshipped and glorified by us; that is, as three distinct Persons,
subsisting in the same Infinitely Holy One individed Essence. This Principle
might be, and had not that labor been obviated, ought to have been here at
large confirmed, it being that which the whole ensuing Discourse does
presuppose and lean upon. And in truth I fear that the failing of some Men's
Profession begins with their Relinquishment of this Foundation. It is now
evident unto all, that here has been the fatal miscarriage of those poor
deluded Souls amongst us whom they call Quakers. And it is altogether in vain
to deal with them about other Particulars, whilst they are carried away with
Infidelity from this Foundation. Convince any of them of the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and all the rest of their Imaginations vanish into Smoke: And I wish
it were so with them only. There are others and those not a few, who either
reject the Doctrine of it as false, or despise it as unintelligible, or neglect
it as useless or of no great Importance. I know this Ulcer lies hid in the
minds of many, and cannot but expect when it will break out and cover the whole
Body with its Defilements whereof they are Members. But these things are left
to the care of Jesus Christ. The Reason why I shall not in this place insist
professedly on the Confirmation and Vindication of this Fundamental Truth, is
because I have done it elsewhere, as having more than once publicly cast my
Mite into this Sanctuary of the Lord; for which and the like services wherein I
stand indebted unto the Gospel, I have met with that Reward which I did always
except. For the present I shall only say, that on this Supposition that God
has revealed himself as Three in One; He is in all our Worship of him so to be
considered. And therefore in our Initiation into the Profession and Practice of
the Worship of God according to the Gospel, we are in our Baptism engaged to
it, In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28. 19. This
is the Foundation of our doing all the things that Christ commands us, v. 20.
Unto this Service we are solemnly dedicated, namely of God, as Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit; as they are each of them equally participant of the same Divine
Nature.

These Persons are so distinct in their peculiar Subsistence, that distinct
Actings and Operations are ascribed unto them. And these Actings are of two
sorts; (1.) Ad intra, which are those internal Acts in one Person whereof
another Person is the Object. And these Acts ad invicem, or intra, are natural
and necessary inseparable from the Being and Existence of God. So the Father
knows the Son, and loves him, and the Son sees, knows, and loves the
Father. In these mutual Actings, one Person is the Object of the Knowledge and
Love of the other. John 3. 35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all
things into his hand, Chap. 5. 20. The Father loves the Son, Matthew. 11. 27. No
Man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any Man the Father save the
Son. John 6. 46. None has seen the Father save he which is of God he has seen
the Father. This mutual Knowledge and Love of Father and Son is expressed at
large, Prove. 8. 22. which place I have opened and vindicated elsewhere. And
they are Absolute, Infinite, Natural and Necessary unto the Being and
Blessedness of God. So the Spirit is the mutual Love of the Father and the Son,
knowing them as he is known, and searching the deep things of God. And in these
mutual internal eternal Actings of themselves, consists much of the infinite
Blessedness of the Holy God. Again, (2.) there are distinct Actings of the
several Persons ad extra, which are voluntary or effects of Will and Choice,
and not natural or necessary. And these are of two sorts, (1.) Such as respect
one another. For there are external Acts of one Person toward another; but
then the Person that is the Object of these actings is not considered
absolutely as a Divine Person, but with respect unto some peculiar Dispensation
and Condescension. So the Father gives, sends, commands the Son, as he had
condescended to take our Nature upon him, and to be the Mediator between God
and Man. So the Father and the Son do send the Spirit, as he condescends in an
especial manner to the Office of being the Sunctifier and Comforter of the
Church. Now these are free and voluntary Acts, depending upon the Sovereign
Will Counsel and Pleasure of God, and might not have been without the least
diminution of his Eternal Blessedness. (2.) There are especial Acts ad extra
toward the Creatures. In hae Divini Magisterii Schola, Pator est qui doce^ and
instruit; Eilius qui ^rc^^s Dei nobis revelat and apperit, Spiritus Sanctus qui
nos replet and imbuit. A Patre potentiam, a Filio sapientiam, a Spiritu Sancto
accipimus Innocentiam; Pater eligi^, Filius diligit, Spiritus Sanctus conjungit
and unit. Cyprian. de Baptismo Christi.
This the whole Scripture testifies unto, so that it is altogether needless to
confirm it with particular Instances. None who have learned the first
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but can tell you what works are ascribed
peculiarly to the Father, what to the Son, and what to the Holy Ghost. Besides
this will be manifested afterward in all the distinct Actings of the Spirit,
which is sufficient for our purpose.

that this Spirit of whom we treat, is in himself a distinct, living, powerful,
intelligent divine Person; for none other can be the Author of those internal
and external Divine Acts and Operations which are ascribed unto him. But here I
must stay a little, and firm that Foundation which we build upon. For we are in
the Investigation of those things which that one and self-same Spirit
distributeth according to his own Will. And it is indispensibly necessary unto
our present Design, that we enquire who, and what that one and self-same Spirit
is; seeing on him and his Will all these things do depend. And we do know
likewise, that if men prevail in the Opposition they make unto his Person, it
is to no great purpose to concern our selves in his Operations. For the
Foundation of any Fabric being taken away, the Superstructure will be of no
use nor abide.

Personality, or that he is a distinct self-subsisting Person; but they deny
his Deity, deny him to be a participant of the Divine Nature, or will not allow
him to be God. A Created Finite Spirit they say he is, but the chiefest of all
Spirits that were created, and the Head of all the Good Angels. Such a Spirit
they say there is, and that he is called the Spirit of God, or the Holy Ghost,
upon the account of the Work wherein he is employed. This way went the
Macedonian Heretics of old, and they are now followed by the Mahumetans; and
some of late among our selves have attempted to revive the same Frenzy. But we
shall not need to trouble our selves about this Notion. The folly of it is so
evident, that it is almost by all utterly deserted. For such things are
affirmed of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture, as that to assert his Personality
and deny his Deity, is the utmost madness that any one can fall into in
Spiritual things. Wherefore the Socinians, the present great Enemies of the
Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, and who would be thought to go soberly about the
work of destroying the Church of God, do utterly reject this Plea and Pretense.
But that which they advance in the room of it is of no less pernicious Nature
and Consequence. For granting the things assigned to him to be the Effects of
Divine Power, they deny his Personality; and assert that what is called by the
Name of the Spirit of God, or the Holy Spirit, is nothing but a Quality in the
Divine Nature, or the Power that God puts forth for such and such purpose;
which yet is no new invention of theirs. Haec autem omnia operatur unus atque
idem Spiritus, dividens singulis prout vult; unde discentes operatricem and ut
ita dicam distributricem naturam Spiritus Sancti; non abducamur ab his qui
dicunt, operationem and non substantiam Dei esse Spiritum Sanctum, Et ex aliis
quoque plurimis locis subsistens natura demonstratur Spiritus Sancti. Didym. de
Spirit. Sanct. lib. 2.
I do not design here professedly to contend with them about all the
Concernments of this Difference; for there is nothing of importance in all
their Pretenses or Exceptions, but it will in one place or other occur unto
consideration in our Progress; I shall only at present confirm the Divine
Personality of the Holy Ghost with one Argument; which I will not say is such
as no Man can return the show of an Answer unto; For what is it that the
Serpentine Wits of Men will not pretend an Answer unto, or an Exception
against, if their Lusts and Prejudices require them so to do? But I will boldly
say, it is such as that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against it in the
Hearts of true Believers, the strengthening of whose Faith is all that in it I
do aim at. And if it does not unto all unprejudiced Persons evince the Truth
and Reality of the Divine Personality of the Holy Ghost, it must certainly
convince all Men, that nothing which is taught or delivered in the Scripture
can possibly be understood.

Subject of our Argument from Ambiguity. And this is that this Word or Name
Spirit is used sometimes to denote the Spirit of God (...). Chrysostom.

Nec existimare debemus Spiritum Sanctum secundum substantias esse divisum quia
multitudo bonorum dicatur -- impassibilis enim and indivisibilis atque
immutabilis est, sed juxta differentes efficientias and intellectus multis
bonorum vocabulis nuncupatur; quia participes suos, non juxta unam eandemque
virtutem communione sui donet. Quippe cum ad utilitatem uniuscujusque aptus
sit. Didym. lib. 1.


himself, and sometimes his Gifts and Graces, the Effects of his Operations on
the Souls of Men. And this our Adversaries in this Cause are forced to confess,
and thereon in all their Writings distinguish between the Holy Spirit and his
Effects. This alone being supposed, I say it is impossible to prove the Father
to be a Person, or the Son to be so, both which are acknowledged any other way,
than we may and do prove the Holy Ghost to be so. For he to whom all personal
Properties, Attributes, Adjuncts, Acts and Operations are ascribed, and unto
whom they do belong, and to whom nothing is or can be truly and properly
ascribed, but what may and does belong unto a Person, he is a Person, and him
are we taught to believe so to be. So know we the Father to be a Person, as
also the Son. For our Knowledge of things is more by their Properties and
Operations, than by their Essential Forms. Especially is this so with respect
to the Nature Being and Existence of God, which are in themselves absolutely
Incomprehensible, Now I shall not confirm the Assumption of this Argument with
reference unto the Holy Ghost from this or that particular Testimony, nor from
the Assignation of any single Personal Property unto him, but from the constant
Uniform Tenor of the Scripture in ascribing all these Properties unto him. And
we may add hereunto, that things are so ordered in the Wisdom of God, that
there is no Personal Property that may be found in an Infinite Divine Nature,
but it is in One place or other ascribed unto him.

some things on the One hand are ascribed unto the Spirit which belong not unto
a Person, nor can be spoken of him who is so; and on the other, that sundry
things that properly belong to Persons are in the Scripture figuratively
ascribed unto such things as are not so. Thus as to the first head of this
Exception, the Holy Spirit is said to be poured out, to be shed abroad, to be
an Unction, or the like, of all which Expressions we shall treat afterward.
What then shall we say, that he is not a Person, but only the Power of God?
Will this render those Expressions concerning him proper? How can the Virtue of
God or the Power of God be said to be poured out, to be shed abroad and the
like? Wherefore both they and we acknowledge that these Expressions are
figurative, as many things are so expressed of God in the Scripture and that
frequently; and what is the meaning of them under their figurative Colors we
shall afterward declare. This therefore does not in the least impeach our
Argument, unless this Assertion were true generally; that whatever is spoken of
figuratively in the Scripture is no Person; which would leave no One in Heaven
or Earth. On the other side it is confessed that there are things peculiar unto
rational Subsistents or Persons, which are ascribed sometimes unto those that
are not so. Many things of this Nature, as to hope, to believe, to bear, are
ascribed unto Charity; 1 Cor. 13. But every one presently apprehends that this
Expression is figurative; the Abstract being put for the Cencrete, by a
Metalepsis; and Charity is said to do that, which a Man endued with that Grace
will do. So the Scripture is said to see, to foresee, to speak, and to judge,
which are Personal Actings; but who does not see and grant that a Metonymy, is
and must be allowed in such assignations; that being ascribed unto the Effect,
the Scripture, which is proper to the Cause, the Spirit of God speaking in it.
So the Heavens and the Earth are said the hear, and the Fields with the Trees
of the Forest to sing and clap their hands, by a Prosopopeia. Now concerning
these things there is no danger of Mistake. The Light of Reason and their own
Nature therein, do give us a sufficient understanding of them. And such
figurative Expressions as are used concerning them, are common in all Good
Authors. Besides the Scripture it self in other Places innumerable does so
teach and declare what they are, as that its plain and direct proper Assertions
do sufficiently expound its own figurative Enunciations. For these and such
like Ascriptions are only occasional, the direct description of the Things
themselves is given us in other Places. But now with respect unto the Spirit of
God all things are otherwise. The constant uniform Expressions concerning him,
are such as declare him to be a Person endowed with all Personal Propertys, no
Description being any-where given of him inconsistent with their proper
Application to him.

Country where he has been, there is One who is the Governor of it that does
well discharge his Office; that he hears Causes, discerns Right,
distributes Justice, relieves the Poor, comforts them that are in distress;
supposing you gave him that Credit which Honesty Wisdom and Sobriety do
deserve, would you not believe that he intended a Righteous, Wise, Diligent,
Intelligent Person, discharging the Office of a Governor? What else could any
Man living imagine? But now suppose that another unknown Person, or so far as
he is known justly suspected of deceit and forgery, should come unto you and
tell you, that all which the other informed you and acquainted you withal was
indeed true; but that the words which he spoke have quite another Intention.
For it was not a Man or any Person that he intended, but it was the Sun or the
Wind that he meant by all which he spoke of him. For whereas the Sun by his
benign Influences does make a Country fruitful and temperate, suited to the
Relief and Comfort of all that dwell therein, and disposes the Minds of the
Inhabitants unto mutual Kindness and Benignity; he described these things
figuratively unto you, under the notion of a Righteous Governor and his
Actions, although he never gave you the least intimation of any such Intention.
Must you not now believe that either the First Person whom you know to be a
Wise Sober and Honest Man, was a Notorious trister, and designed your Ruin if
you were to Order any of your occasions according to his Reports; or that your
latter Informer whom you have just reason to suspect of falsehood and deceit in
other things, has endeavored to abuse both him and you; to render his
Veracity suspected, and to spoil all your Designs grounded thereon. One of
these you must certainly conclude upon. And it is no otherwise in this Case.
The Scripture informs us, that the Holy Ghost Rules in and over the Church of
God, appointing Overseers of it under him, that he discerns and judges all
things, that he comfort them that are faint, strengthens them that are weak,
is grieved with them and provoked by them who sin, and that in all these and in
other things of the like Nature innumerable, he works, orders and disposes
all according to the Counsel of his Own Willl. Hereupon it directs us so to
order our Conversation toward God, that we do not grieve him nor displease
him, telling us thereon, what great things he will do for us, on which we lay
the stress of our Obedience and Salvation. Can any Man possibly that gives
Credit to the Testimony thus proposed in the Scripture, conceive any otherwise
of this Spirit, but as of an Holy, Wise, Intelligent, Person. Now whilst we are
under the Power of these Apprehensions, there come unto us some Men, Socinians
or Quakers, whom we have just cause on many other Accounts to suspect at least
of deceit and falsehood; and they confidently tell us that what the Scripture
speaks concerning the Holy Spirit is indeed true; but that in and by all the
Expressions which it uses concerning him, it intends no such Person as it
seems to do, but an Accident, a Quality, an Effect, or Influence of the Power
of God, which figuratively does all the things mentioned; namely, that has a
Will figuratively, and Understanding figuratively, discerns and judges
figuratively, is sinned against figuratively, and so of all that is said of
Him. Can any Man that is not forsaken of all Natural Reason as well as
Spiritual Light, choose now but determine that either the Scripture designed to
draw him into Errors and Mistakes about the Principal Concernments of his Soul,
and so to ruin him Eternally; or that these Persons who would impose such a
sense upon it, are indeed Corrupt Seducers that seek to overthrow his Faith and
Comforts? Such will they at last appear to be: I shall now proceed to confirm
the Argument proposed.

Initiation into Covenant with God. Mat. 28. 19. Our Lord Jesus Christ commands
his Apostles to Disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. This is the Foundation we lay of all our
Obedience and Profession which are to be regulated by this initial Engagement.
Now no Man will or does deny but that the Father and the Son are distinct
Persons. Some indeed there are who deny the Son to be God; but none are so mad
as to deny him to be a Person, though they would have him only to be a Man. All
grant him, whether God and Man, or only Man, to be a distinct Person from the
Father. Now what confusion must this needs introduce, to add to them and to
join equally with them as to all the concerns of our Faith and Obedience, the
Holy Ghost, if he be not a Divine Person even as they? If as some fancy he be
as Person indeed, but not one that is Divine but a Creature, then here is
openly the same Honor assigned unto him who is no more, as unto God himself.
This elsewhere the Scripture declares to be Idolatry to be detested, Gal. 1. 8.
Romans 1. 25. And if he be not a Person but a Virtue and Quality in God, and
Emanation of Power from him, concerning which our Adversaries (...), speak
things portentous and unintelligible, what sense can any Man apprehend in the
Words?

equally ascribed unto the Holy Ghost. For whatsoever is intended by the Name
of the Father and the Son, he is equally with them concerned therein. It is not
the Name Father, and the name Son, but the Name of God, that is of them both,
that is intended. It is a Name common to them all, and distinctly applied unto
them all; but they have not in this sense distinct or diverse Names. And by the
Name of God, either his Being or his Authority is signified; for other
intention of it none have been able to invent. Take the Name here in either
sense, and it is sufficient as to what we intend. For if it be used in the
first way, then the Being of the Spirit must be acknowledged to be the same
with that of the Father. If in the latter he has the same Divine Authority
with him. He who has the Nature and Authority of God is God, is a Divine
Person.

joined with the Father and the Son; for so as to some Ends and Purposes any
Creatures may be joined with them. This our Adversaries prove from Acts 20. 32.
Ephesians. 6. 10. Phil. 3. 10. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. and might do it from other places
innumerable, although the first of these will not confirm what it is produced
to give countenance unto; Schlicting. de Trinitat. ad. Meisner. p. 605. But it
is from the manner and end of his being conjoined with the Father and the Son,
wherein their Name, that is, their Divine Nature and Authority are ascribed
unto him, that we argue.

into his Name. And no sense can be affixed unto these words, but what does
unavoidably include his Personality. For two things they may and do intend, nor
any thing else but what may be reduced unto them. First, Our Religious owning
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in all our Divine Worship, Faith, and
Obedience. Now as we own and avow the One, so we do the Other; for we are alike
baptized into their Name, Baptizate Gentes in Nomine Patris and Filii and
Spiritus Sancti. In Nomine dixit, non in Nominibus. Non ergo aliud nomen
Patris, aliud nomen Filii, aliud nomen Spiritus Sancti, quam unus Deus. Ambros.
de Sp. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 4.
equally submitting to their Authority, and equally taking the Profession of
their Name upon us. If then we avow and own the Father as a Distinct Person, so
we do the Holy Ghost. Again by being baptized into the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, we are sacredly initiated and consecrated or
dedicated unto the Service and Worship of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This
we take upon us in our Baptism. Herein lies the Foundation of all our Faith and
Profession, with that engagement of our selves unto God which constitutes our
Christianity. This is the Pledge of our entrance into Covenant with God, and of
our giving up our selves unto him in the solemn Bond of Religion. Herein to
conceive that any one who is not God as the Father is, who is not a Person as
he is also and the Son likewise, is joined with them for the ends and in the
manner mentioned, without the least note of Difference as to Deity or
Personality, is a strange fondness, destructive of all Religion, and leading
the minds of men toward Polytheism. And as we engage into all Religious
Obedience unto the Father and Son herein, to believe in them, trust, fear,
honor and serve them, so we do the same with respect unto the Holy Ghost;
which how we can do, if he be not as they are, no Man can understand.

We do not then in this Case from hence merely plead our being baptized into
the Holy Ghost, as some pretend. Nor indeed are we said so to be. Men may
figuratively be said to be baptized into a Doctrine, when their Baptism is a
Pledge and Token of their Profession of it. So the Disciples whom the Apostle
Paul met withal at Ephesus, Acts 19. 3. are said to be baptized (...), into the
baptism of John; that is, the Doctrine of Repentance for the forgiveness of
sins whereof his Baptism was a Pledge. So also the Israelites are said to be
baptized (...) into Moses, 1 Cor. 10. 2. because he led and conducted them
through the Sea, when they were Sprinkled with the Waves of it is a token of
their Initiation into the Rites and Ceremonies which he was to deliver unto
them. But we are said to be baptized into his Name, which is the same with that
of the Father and Son. And certainly this Proposal of God as Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to be the Object of all our Faith and Worship, and our engagement
hereunto required as the Foundation of all our present Religion and future
Hopes, being made unto us, and that under one and the same Name; if the
Doctrine of a Trinity of Persons subsisting in the same individed Essence be
not taught and declared in these words, we may justly despair of ever having
any Divine Mystery manifested unto us.

visible sign argues his Personal Existence. This is related Matthew. 3. 16. Luke
3. 22. John 1. 32. Luke speaks first in general that he descended, (...) in a
Bodily shape; or Appearance. And they all agree that it was the shape of a Dove
under which he appeared. The words in Matthew are, (...). He saw the Spirit of
God descending like a Dove, and lighting, (or rather coming,) upon him. He,
that is John the Baptist, not Christ himself. The Relative (...), refers in
this Place to the more remote Antecedent. For although he that is Christ
himself also saw the descending of the Holy Spirit, yet I suppose this relates
unto that Token which was to be given of him unto John, whereby he should know
him, Joh. 1. 32, 33. The following words are ambiguous. For that Expression,
like a Dove, may refer to the manner of his descending, descending, (in a
bodily shape) as a Dove descends. Or they may respect the manner of his
Appearance; he appeared like a Dove descending. And this sense is determined in
the other Evangelists, to the bodily shape wherein he descended. He took the
form or shape of a Dove, to make a visible Representation of himself by. For a
visible Pledge was to be given of the coming of the Holy Ghost on the Messiah
according to the Promise; and thereby did God direct his great forerunner to
the Knowledge of him. Now this was no real Dove. That would not have been a
thing so Miraculous as this Appearance of the Holy Ghost is represented to be.
And the Text will not bear any such Apprehension, though it was entertained by
some of the Ancients. For it is evident that this shape of a Dove came out of
Heaven. He saw the Heavens opened and the Dove descending, that is out of
Heaven, which was opened to make way, as it were, for him. Moreover the
Expression of the Opening of the Heavens is not used but with respect unto some
Appearance or Manifestation of God himself. And so, or (which is the same,) the
bowing of the Heavens, is often used; Psalm. 144. 5. Isa. 64. 1. Bow thy Heavens
O Lord, and come down. 2 Samuel 22. 10. Ezekiel. 1. 1. The Heavens were opened and I
saw the Visions of God. So Acts 7. 56. God used not this Sign but in some
manifestation of himself. And had not this been an Appearance of God, there had
been no need of bowing or opening the Heavens for it. And it is plainly said
that it was not a Dove, but the shape or representation of a Dove. It was
(...), a bodily shape, and that (...), of a Dove.

old Creation, the Spirit of God, (...) incubabat, came and fell on the Waters,
cherishing the whole, and communicating a prolifick and vivifick Quality unto
it, as a Fowl or Dove in particular gently moves it self upon its Eggs, until
with, and by its generative warmth it has communicated vital heat unto them;
so now at the entrance of the new Creation, he comes as a Dove upon Him who was
the immediate Author of it, and virtually comprised it in himself, carrying it
on by virtue of his Presence with him. And so this is applied in the Syriack
Ritual of Baptism composed by Severinus, in the account given of the Baptism of
Christ, (...). And the pirit of Holiness descended, flying in the likeness of a
Dove, and rested upon him, and moved on the Waters. And in the assumption of
this form there may be some respect unto the Dove that brought tidings to Noah
of the ceasing of the Flood of Waters, and of the ending of the Wrath of God,
who thereon said that he would curse the Earth no more, Genesis 8. 11. For herein
also was there a significant Representation of him who visited poor lost
mankind in their cursed Condition, and proclaimed Peace unto them that would
return to God by him the Great Peacemaker, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. And this Work he
immediately engaged into on the resting of this Dove upon him. Besides there is
a natural aptness in that Creature to represent the Spirit that rested on the
Lord Jesus. For the known Nature and Course of a Dove is such, as is meet to
mind us of Purity and harmless Innocence, Mat. 10. 16. Hence is that
Direction, Be harmless as Doves. So also the sharpness of its sight or eyes, as
Cant. 1. 16. Chap. 4. 1. is fixed on, to represent a quick and discerning
Understanding, such as was in Christ from the resting of the Spirit upon him,
Isa. 11. 3.

shape thereof that appeared was that of a Dove; but the Substance it self I
judge was of a fiery Nature, an ethereal Substance shaped into the form or
resemblance of a Dove. It had the shape of a Dove, but not the appearance of
Feathers, Colors, or the like. This also rendered the appearance the more
Visible, Conspicuous, Heavenly and Glorious. And the Holy Ghost is often
compared to Fire, because he was of old typified or represented thereby. For on
the first solemn offering of Sacrifices, there came fire from the Lord for the
kindling of them. Hence Theodotion of old rendered. (...), Genesis 4. 4. the Lord
had respect to the Offering of Abel; by (...), God fired the Offering of Abel,
sent down Fire that kindled his Sacrifice as a Token of his Acceptance. However
it is certain that at the first Erection of the Altar in the Wilderness, upon
the first Sacrifices, fire came out from before the Lord and consumed on the
Altar the Burnt-Offering and the Fat; which when all the People saw, they
shouted and fell on their Faces, Levit. 9. 24. And the Fire kindled hereby was
to be perpetuated on the Altar, so that none was ever to be used in Sacrifice
but what was traduced from it. For a neglect of this Intimation of the Mind of
God, were Nadab and Abihu consumed, Chap. 10. 1. So was it also upon the
Dedication of the Altar in the Temple of Solomon. Fire came down from Heaven
and consumed the Burnt-Offering, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. and a fire thence kindled, was
always kept burning on the Altar. And in like manner God bare Testimony to the
Ministry of Elijah, 1 King. 18. 38, 39. God by all these signified, that no
Sacrifices were accepted with him, where Faith was not kindled in the Heart of
the Offerer by the Holy Ghost, represented by the Fire that kindled the
Sacrifices on the Altar. And in Answer hereunto is our Lord Jesus Christ said
to offer himself through the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. It was therefore most
probably a fiery Appearance that was made. And in the next bodily shape which
he assumed, it is expressly said that it was fiery, Acts 2. 3. There appeared
unto them cloven Tongues like as of Fire; which was the Visible Token of the
coming of the Holy Ghost upon them. And he chose then that figure of Tongues,
to denote the Assistance, which by the miraculous Gift of speaking with diverse
Tongues, together with that Wisdom and Utterance, which he furnished them
withal for the Publication of the Gospel. And thus also the Lord Christ is said
to baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, Matthew. 3. 11. Not two things are
intended, but the latter words and with Fire are added (...), and the
expression is (...); with the Holy Ghost, who is a Spiritual, Divine, Eternal
Fire. So God absolutely is said to be a consuming Fire, Heb. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4.
24. And as in these words, He shall Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire,
there is a Prospect unto what came to pass afterward, when the Apostles
received the Holy Ghost with a visible Pledge of fiery Tongues; So there seems
to be a Retrospect by way of Allusion unto what is recorded, Isa. 6. 6, 7. For
a living or fiery Coal from the Altar, where the Fire represented the Holy
Ghost or his Work and Grace, having touched the Lips of his Prophet, his sin
was taken away both as to the guilt and filth of it. And this is the Work of
the Holy Ghost; who not only sanctifies us, but by ingenerating Faith in us,
and the application of the Promise unto us, is the Cause and Means of our
Justification also, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. whereby our sins on both
accounts are taken away. So also his Efficacy in other places is compared unto
Fire and Burning; Isa. 4. 4, 5. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth
of the Daughters of Sion, and shall have purged the Blood of Jerusalem from the
midst thereof, by the Spirit of Judgment, and the Spirit of Burning; He is
compared both to Fire and Water, with respect unto the same cleansing virtue in
both. So also Mal. 3. 2. Hence as this is expressed, by the Holy Ghost and Fire
in two Evangelists, Matthew. 3. 11. Luke 3. 16. So in the other two there is
mention only of the Holy Ghost, Mark 8. John 1. 33. the same thing being
intended. I have added these things, a little to clear the manner of this
Divine Appearance, which also belongs unto the Economy of the Spirit.

bodily shape, wherein he was represented by that which is a Substance and has
a Subsistence of his own, does manifest that he himself is a Substance and has
a Subsistence of his own. For if he be no such thing, but a mere influential
Effect of the Power of God, we are not taught right Apprehensions of him but
mere mistakes by this Appearance. For of such an accident there can be no
substantial Figure or Resemblance made, but what is monstrous. It is excepted
by our Adversaries, ( Crell. de Nature. Spirit. Sanct.) that a Dove is no
Person, because not endued with an Understanding which is essentially required
unto the constitution of a Person. And therefore they say no Argument can
thence be taken for the Personality of the Holy Ghost. But it is enough that he
was represented by a subsisting Substance; which if they will grant him to be,
we shall quickly evince that he is endued with a Divine Understanding, and so
is completely a Person. And whereas they farther Object, That if the Holy Ghost
in the Appearance intended to manifest himself to be a Divine Person, he would
have appeared as a Man, who is a Person, for so God or an Angel in his Name
appeared under the Old Testament; it is of no more importance than the
preceding Exception. The Holy Ghost did manifest himself as it seemed good
unto him; and some Reasons for the instructive Use of the shape of a fiery
Dove, we have before declared. Neither did God of old appear only in an humane
shape. He did so sometimes in a burning fiery Bush, Exodus 3. 2, 4. Sometimes in
a Pill^r of Fire, or a Cloud, Exodus 14. 24. Moreover the Appearances of God, as
I have elsewhere demonstrated, under the Old Testament, were all of them of the
second Person; and he assumed an Humane Shape as a preludium unto, and a
signification of his future personal Assumption of our Nature. No such thing
being intended by the Holy Ghost, he might represent himself under what shape
he pleased. Yea the Representation of himself under an humane shape had been
dangerous and unsafe for us. For it would have taken off the Use of those
instructive Appearances under the Old Testament, teaching the Incarnation of
the Son of God; and also that sole Reason of such Appearances being removed,
namely that they had all respect unto the Incarnation of the Second Person, as
they would have been by the like appearance of the Third, there would have been
danger of giving a false Idea of the Deity unto the Minds of Men. For some
might from thence have conceived that God had a bodily shape like unto us, when
none could ever be so fond as to imagine him to be like a Dove. And these with
the like Testimonies in general are given unto the Divine Personality of the
Holy Spirit. I shall next consider those Personal Properties which are
particularly and distinctly ascribed unto him.

Understanding or Wisdom, which is the first inseparable Property of an
Intelligent Subsistence, is so ascribed unto him in the Acts and Effects of it;
1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.
What Spirit it is that is intended is declared expressly, v. 12. For we have not
received (...) the Spirit of the World are not acted by the Evil Spirit, (...),
but that Spirit which is of God, a signal Description of the Holy Ghost. So he
is called his Spirit verse. 10. God has revealed these things unto us by his
Spirit. Now to search is an Act of Understanding. And the Spirit is said to
search, because he knows, v. 11. No man knows the things of a Man save the
Spirit of a Man; which is intimate unto all its own Thoughts and Counsels. So
the Things of God knows no Man but the Spirit of God; and by him are they
revealed unto us, for by him we know the things that are freely given us of
God, v. 12. These things cannot be spoken of any but a Person endued with
Understanding. And he thus searches (...) the deep things of God; that is the
Mysteries of his Will, Counsel, and Grace; and is therefore a Divine Person
that has an Infinite Understanding. As it is said of God, (...), Isa. 40. 28.
There is no End, Measure, or Investigation of his Understanding, Psalm. 147. 5.
There is no number of his Understanding; it is endless, boundless, infinite. It
is excepted ( Schilicting. de Trinitat. p. 605.) that the Spirit is not here
taken for the Spirit himself, nor does the Apostle express what the Spirit
himself does, but what by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost men are enabled to
do. By that Believers are helped to search into the deep Counsels of God. But
as this Exception is directly against the words of the Text, so the context
will by no means admit of it. For the Apostle gives an account how the Wisdom,
Counsels, and deep things of God, which the World could not understand, were
now preached and declared unto the Church. God, says he, has revealed them
unto us by the Spirit. But how comes the Spirit himself the Author of these
Revelations to be acquainted with these things? This he has from his own
Nature, whereby he knows or searches all things, even the deep things of
God. It is therefore the Revelation made by the Spirit unto the Apostles and
Penmen of the Scripture of the New Testament, who were acted by the Holy Ghost
in like manner as were the Holy Men of old, 1 Pet. 1. 21. which the Apostle
intends, and not the Illumination and Teaching of Believers in the knowledge
of the Mysteries by them revealed, whereof the Apostle treats in these words.
But who is this Spirit? The same Apostle tells us, that the Judgments of God
are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11. 33. And asks who
has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? v. 34. And
yet this Spirit is said to search all things, even the deep things of God; such
as to all Creatures are absolutely unsearchable and past finding out. This then
is the Spirit of God himself, who is God also. For so it is in the Prophet from
whence these words are taken. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or
being his Counselor has taught him? Isa. 40. 13.

It will not relieve the Adversaries of the Holy Ghost, though it be pleaded by
them, that he is compared with and opposed unto the spirit of a Man, v. 11.
which they say is no Person. For no Comparisons hold in all Circumstances. The
Spirit of a Man is his Rational Soul endued with Understanding and Knowledge.
This is an individual intelligent Substance, capable of a subsistence in a
separate Condition. Grant the Spirit of God to be so far a Person, and all
their Pretenses fall to the ground. And whereas it is affirmed by one among our
selves, though otherwise asserting the Deity of the Holy Ghost, (Good. p. 175.)
that this Expression of searching the things of God, cannot be applied directly
to the Spirit, but must intend his enabling us to search into them, because to
search includes imperfection, and the use of means to come to the knowledge of
any thing; it is not of weight in this matter. For such Acts are ascribed unto
God with respect unto their Effects. And searching being with us the means of
attaining the perfect knowledge of any thing, the perfection of the knowledge of
God is expressed thereby. So David prays that God would search him and know his
heart, Psalm. 139. 23. And he is often said to search the hearts of men, whereby
his infinite Wisdom is intimated, whereunto all things are open and naked. So
is the Spirit said to search the deep things of God, because of his infinite
Understanding, and the perfection of his Knowledge, before which they lie open.
And as things are here spoken of the Spirit in reference unto God the Father;
so are they spoken of him, in reference unto the Spirit. Romans 8. 27. He that
searches the Hearts, knows the Mind of the Spirit. And hereunto that this
Spirit is the Author of Wisdom and Understanding in and unto others; and
therefore he must have them in himself, and that not virtually or causally
only, but formally also. 1 Cor. 12. 8. Wisdom and Knowledge are reckoned among
the Gifts bestowed by him. For those of Faith and Tongues it is enough that
they are in him virtually. But for Wisdom and Understanding, they cannot be
given by any but he that is wise and understands what he does. And hence is
he called expressly a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, of Counsel and
Knowledge, Isa. 11. 3. I might confirm this by other Testimonies where other
Effects of Understanding are ascribed unto him; as 1 Timothy 4. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 11. 2
Pet. 1. 21. but what has been spoken is sufficient unto our purpose.

Will is ascribed unto him. This is the most eminently distinguishing Character
and Property of a Person. Whatever is endued with an intelligent Will is a
Person. And it cannot by any Fiction with any tolerable congruity be ascribed
unto any thing else, unless the Reason of the Metaphor be plain and obvious. So
when our Savior says of the VVind that it blows (...), as it wills or
lists, Joh. 3. 8. the abuse of the Word is evident. All intended is, that the
Wind as unto us is (...), and not at all at our disposal; acts not by our
Guidance or Direction. And no Man is so foolish as not to apprehend the meaning
of it, or once to enquire whether our Savior does properly ascribe a Will to
the Wind or no. So James, Chap. 3. v. 4. The words rendered by us, turned about
with a very small Helm, whithersoever the Governor lists, are in the
Original, (...), in which the act of Willing is ascribed to the (...), the
imp^tus or inclination of the Governor; which yet has not a Will. But the
(...) in that place is not the (...) of the Philosophers; the motus
primo-primus or the first Agitation or Inclination of the Mind; but it is the
Will it self under an earnest Inclination, such as is usual with them who
govern Ships by the Helms in Storms. Hereunto the Act of Willing is properly
ascribed, and he in whom it is proved to be a Person. Thus a Will acting with
Understanding and Choice, as the Principle and Cause of his outward Actions is
ascribed unto the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 11. All these things works that one
and self-same Spirit dividing unto every Man as he will. He had before asserted
that he was the Author and Donor of all the Spiritual Gifts which he had been
discoursing about, v. 4, 5, 6. These Gifts he declares to be various, as he
manifests in nine Instances, and all variously disposed of by him, v. 8, 9, 10.
If now it be enquired what is the Rule of this his distribution of them, he
tells us that it is his own Will, his Choice and Pleasure. What can be spoken
more fully and plainly to describe an intelligent Person, acting voluntarily
with freedom and by choice I know not.

Schli^ting. p. 610.) that the Holy Ghost is here introduced as a Person by a
Prosopopeia; that the distribution of the Gifts mentioned is ascribed unto him
by a Metaphor; and by the same or another Metaphor, he is said to have a Will
or to act as he will. But is it not evident that if this course of interpreting
or rather of perverting Scripture may be allowed, nothing of any certainty will
be left unto us therein. It is but saying this or that is a Metaphor, and if
one will not serve the turn, to bring in two or three one on the neck of
another and the work is done, the Sense intended is quite changed and lost.
Allow this Liberty or bold Licentiousness, and you may overthrow the Being of
God himself and the Mediation of Christ, as to you Testimony given unto them in
the Scripture. But the words are plain, He d^videth to every one as he will.
And for the confirmation of his Deity, though that be out of question on the
supposition of his Personality, I shall only add from this place, that he who
has the sovereign disposal of all Spiritual Gifts, having only his own Will
which is infinitely Wise and Holy, for his Rule, He is over all God blessed for
ever.

Power absolutely, or ability unto any thing that I intend. For they may
signify no more but the Efficacy wherewith such things are attended in their
proper places, as Instruments of the Effects whereunto they are applied. In
this sense Power is ascribed to the Word of God, when it is said, to be able to
save our Souls, Jam. 1. 21. And Acts 20. 32. The Word of God's Grace is said to
be able to build us up, and to give us an Inheritance among them that are
sanctified; if that place intend the Word written or preached, whereinto I have
made enquiry elsewhere. For these things are clearly interpreted in other
places. The Word is said to be able, yea to be the Power of God unto Salvation,
Romans 1. 16. because God is pleased to use it and make it effectual by his Grace
unto that End. But where Power, Divine Power is absolutely ascribed unto any
one, and that declared to be put forth and exercised by the Understanding, and
according to the Will of him to whom it is so ascribed, it does undeniably
prove him to be a Divine Person. For when we say the Holy Ghost is so, we
intend no more but that he is one who by his own Divine Understanding, puts
forth his own Divine Power. So is it in this Case, Job 32. 4. The Spirit of God
has made me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me Life. Creation is an
Act of Divine Power; the highest we are capable to receive any Notion of. And
it is also an Effect of the Wisdom and Will of him that creates, as being a
voluntary act and designed unto a certain end. All these therefore are here
ascribed to the Spirit of God. It is excepted ( Schlicting. p. 613, 615.) that
by the Spirit of God here mentioned, no more is intended but our own vital
Spirits, whereby we are quickened, called the Spirit of God because he gave it.
But this is too much confidence; The words are (...). There were two distinct
Divine Operations in and about the Creation of Man. The first was the forming
of his Body out of the Dust of the Earth; This is expressed by (...) and (...);
He made he formed: and secondly, the infusion of a living or quickening Soul
into him, called (...) or the Breath of Life. Both these are here distinctly
mentioned; the first ascribed to the Spirit of God, the other to his Breath;
that is the same Spirit considered in a peculiar way of operation in the
Infusion of the rational Soul. Such is the sense of those figurative and
oenigmatical words; God breathed into Man the Breath of Life; that is by his
Spirit he effected a Principle of Life in him, as we shall see afterward.

Isa. 11. 2. As he is called a Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, so is he
also of Might or Power; and although it may be granted that the things there
mentioned are rather Effects of his Operations than Adjuncts of his Nature; yet
he who effects Wisdom and Power in others, must first have them himself. To
this purpose also is that demand, Mich. 2. 7. Is the Spirit of the Lord
straightened or shortened? that is, in his Power, that he cannot Work and Operate
in the Prophets and his Church as in former days; And the same Prophet, Chap.
3. verse. 8. affirms, That he is full of Power, and of Judgment, and of Might,
by the Spirit of the Lord. These things were wrought in him by his Power, as
the Apostle speaks to the same purpose, Ephesians. 3. 16.

Those by whom this Truth is opposed, do lay out all their strength and skill
in Exceptions, I may say Cavils, against some of these particular Testimonies
and some Expression in them. But as to the whole Argument taken from the
consideration of the Design and Scope of the Scripture in them all they have
nothing to except.

Argument, I shall add the Consideration of those Works and Operations of all
sorts which are ascribed to the Spirit of God, which we shall find to be such
as are not capable of an assignation unto him with the least congruity of
Speech, or design of speaking intelligibly, unless he be a distinct singular
Subsistent, or Person endued with Divine Power and Understanding. And here what
we desired formerly might be observed must be again repeated. It is not from a
single Instance of every one of the Works which we shall mention that we draw
and confirm our Argument. for some of them singly considered may perhaps
sometimes be metaphorically ascribed unto other Causes, which does not prove
that therefore they are Persons also, which contains the force of all the
Exceptions of our Adversaries against these Testimonies. But as some of them at
least never are nor can be assigned unto any but a Divine Person; So we take
our Argument from their joint consideration, or the uniform constant
Assignation of them all unto him in the Scriptures, which renders it
irrefragable. For the things themselves I shall not insist upon them because
their particular Nature must be afterward unfolded.

teach us, Luke 12. 12. The Holy Ghost shall teach you what you ought to say,
John 14. 26. The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in
my Name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to remembrance, 1
John 2. 27. He is the Unction which teaches us all things; how and whence he
is so called shall be afterward declared. He is the great Teacher of the
Church, unto whom the accomplishment of that great Promise is committed; and
they shall be all taught of God, John 6. 45. It is said with the Church of God
when Her Teachers are removed into a Corner, and Her Eyes see them not. But
better lose all other Teachers and that utterly, than to lose this great
Teacher only. For although he is pleased to make use of them, He can teach
effectually and savingly without them where they are removed and taken away;
but they cannot teach without him unto the least Spiritual Advantage. And those
who pretend to be Teachers of others, and yet despise his teaching Assistance,
will one day find that they undertook a Work which was none of theirs. But as
unto our use of this Assertion it is excepted, that the Apostle affirms, that
Nature also teaches us; 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does not even Nature it self teach you?
Now Nature is not a Person. This is the way and manner of them with whom we
have to do. If any word in a Testimony produced by us have been any where used
metaphorically, though it be never so evident that it is so used in that place,
instantly it must have the same figurative Application in the Testimony
excepted against, although they can give no Reason why it should so signify.
And if this course of excepting be allowed, there will be nothing left
intelligible in the Scripture nor in any other Author, nor in common
Conversation in the World. For there is scarce any Word or Name of thing but
one where or other is or has been abused or used Metaphorically. In
particular, Nature in this place of the Apostle is said to teach us
objectively, as the Heavens and Earth teach us in what we learn from them. For
it is said to teach us what we may learn from the customs and actings of them,
who live proceed and act according to the Principles Dictates and Inclinations
of it. Every one sees that here is no intimation of an active teaching by
Instruction or a real Communication of Knowledge; but it is said figuratively
to do what we do with respect unto it. And not only in several places, but in
the same Sentence a word may be used properly with respect unto one thing, and
abusively with respect unto another. As in that saying of the Poet; Disce puer
virtutem ex me, verumque laborem; Fortunam ex aliis. For Virtue and Industry
are to be learned properly; but Fortune, as they called it, or prosperous
Events are not so. These things therefore are very different, and their
difference is obvious unto all. But we insist not merely on this or that
particular Instance. Let any Man not absolutely prepossessed with prejudice,
read over that Discourse of our Savior unto his Disciples, wherein he
purposely instructs them in the Nature and Work of the Spirit of God, on whom
as it were he then devolved the care of them and the Gospel according unto the
Promise John 14, 15, 16, Chap. and he will need no farther Instruction or
Confirmation in this Matter. He is there frequently called the Comforter, the
Name of a Person, and that vested with an Office, with respect unto the Work
that he would do; and another Comforter in answer and conformity unto the Lord
Christ who was one Comforter and a Person as all grant, Chap. 14. 16. If he be
not so, the intention of this Expression with these Circumstances, must be to
deceive us and not instruct us. He tells them moreover that he is one whom the
World neither sees nor knows, but who abides with and dwells in Believers,
v. 17. One whom the Father would send, and who would come accordingly; and that
to teach them, to lead and guide them, and to bring things to their
remembrance, v. 26. A Comforter that should come and testify or bear witness
unto him, Chap. 15. 26. One that should be sent of Him to reprove the world of
Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment, Chap. 16. 7, 8. and abide with his Disciples
to supply his own bodily absence. So is he said to Speak, Guide, Teach, Hear,
to receive of Christ and to show it unto others, v. 13, 14. with sundry other
things of the same Nature and Importance. And these things are not spoken of
him occasionally or in transitu, but in a direct continued Discourse, designed
on purpose by our Lord Jesus Christ, to acquaint his Disciples who he was, and
what he would do for them. And if there were nothing spoken of him in the whole
Scripture but what is here declared by our Savior, all unprejudiced Men must
and would acknowledge him to be a Divine Person. And it is a confidence swelling
above all bounds of Modesty, to suppose that because one or other of these
things are or may be Metaphorically or Metaleptically ascribed unto this or
that thing which are not Persons, when the figurativeness of such an Ascription
is plain and open; that therefore they are all of them in like manner so
ascribed unto the Holy Ghost in that Discourse of our Savior unto his
Disciples, wherein he designed the Instruction of them as above declared. Of
the same Nature is that which we discoursed before concerning his searching of
all things, from 1 Cor. 2. 11. which as it proves him to be an understanding
Agent, so it undeniably denotes a Personal Action. Such also are the things
mentioned; Romans 8. 15, 16, 26. He helps our Infirmities, he makes
intercession for us, He himself bears; witness with our Spirits; the
particular meaning of all which Expressions shall be afterward enquired into.
Here the only refuge of our Adversaries is to cry up a Prosopopaeia,
(Schlicting. p. 627.) But how do they prove it? Only by saying that these
things belong properly to a Person which the Spirit is not: Now this is nothing
but to set up their own false Hypothesis against our Arguments, and not being
able to contend with the Premises to deny the Conclusion.

Acts 13. 2, 4. As they ministered unto the Lord and fasted, the Holy Ghost
said, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the Work whereunto I have called them.
So they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost departed. The other is Acts 20. 28.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers. These places hold a good correspondence;
and what is reported in an extraordinary case as matter of Fact in the first,
is doctrinally applied unto ordinary Cases in the latter. And two things are
remarkable in the first Place. (1.) The Holy Ghost's designation of Himself as
the Person unto whom and whose Work Barnabas and Saul were to be separated and
dedicated. Says he (...), not, separate me, as in our Translation, making the
Spirit only the Author of the Command, but separate unto me; which proposes
him also as the Object of the Duty required, and the Person whose Work was to
be attended. Who or what then is intended by that Pronoun Me? Some Person is
directed unto and signified thereby. Nor can any Instance be given where it is
so much as figuratively used, unless it be in a professed Parable. That remains
therefore to be enquired into, Who is intended in that word Me? And the words
are the words of the Holy Ghost; The Holy Ghost said separate unto me; He
therefore alone is intended. All the Answer which the Wit and Diligence of our
Adversaries can invent is, That these words are ascribed unto the Holy Ghost,
because the Prophets that were in the Church of Antioch spoke therein by his
Instinct and Inspiration. But in this Evasion there is no regard unto the force
of our Argument; for we do not argue merely from his being said to speak but
from what is spoken by him, separate unto me, and do enquire whether the
Prophets be intended by that word or no? If so, which of them? for they were
many by whom the Holy Ghost spoke the same thing; and some one must be intended
in common by them all. And to say that this was any of the Prophets is foolish,
indeed blasphemous. (2.) The close of the third Verse confirms this application
of the Word, to the Work whereunto I have called them. This confessedly is the
Holy Ghost. Now to call Men to the Ministry is a free Act of Authority Choice
and Wisdom, which are Properties of a Person and none other. Nor is either the
Father or the Son in the Scripture introduced more directly clothed with
Personal Properties than the Holy Ghost is in these places. And the whole is
confirmed verse. 4. And they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed. He
called them by furnishing them with Ability and Authority for their work; he
commanded them to be set apart by the Church, that they might be blessed and
owned in their Work; and he sent them forth by an impression of his Authority
on their Minds given them by those former Acts of his. And if a Divine Person
be not hereby described, I know not how he may so be.

Chap. 20. 28. It is expressly said that the Holy Ghost made the Elders of the
Church the Overseers of it. The same Act of Wisdom and Authority is here again
assigned unto him; and here is no room left for the Evasion before insisted on.
For these words were not spoken in a way of Prophecy, nor in the Name of the
Holy Ghost, but concerning him. And they are Explicatory of the other. For he
must be meant in those Expression, separate unto Me those whom I have called,
by whom they are made Ministers. Now this was the Holy Ghost, for he makes the
Overseers of the Church. And we may do well to take notice, that if he did so
then he does so now; for they were not Persons extraordinarily inspired or
called that the Apostle intends, but the ordinary Officers of the Church. And
if Persons are not called and constituted Officers as at the first in ordinary
Cases, the Church is not the same as it was. And it is the Concernment of those
who take this Work and Office upon them, to consider what there is in their
whole Undertaking that they can ascribe unto the Holy Ghost. Persons furnished
with no Spiritual Gifts or Abilities, entering into the Ministry in the pursuit
of Secular Advantages, will not easily satisfy themselves in this Enquiry,
when they shall be willing, or be forced at the last to make it.

one sort of Testimonies to the same purpose which must briefly be passed
through. And they are those where he is spoken of as the Object of such Actings
and Actions of Men as none but a Person can be. For let them be applied unto
any other Object and their Inconsistency will quickly appear. Thus he is said
to be tempted of them that sin. You agree together to tempt the Spirit of the
Lord, Acts 5. 9. In what sense soever this word is used, whether in that which
is indifferent to try, as God is said to tempt Abraham, or in that which is
evil, to provoke or induce to sin, it never is, it never can be used but with
respect unto a Person. How can a Quality, an Accident, an Emanation of Power
from God be tempted? None can possibly be so but he that has an Understanding
to consider what is proposed unto him, and a Will to determine upon the
Proposals made. So Satan tempted our first Parents; so Men are tempted by their
own Lusts; so are we said to tempt God when we provoke him by our Unbelief, or
when we unwarrantably make Experiments of his Power. So did they tempt the Holy
Ghost, who sinfully ventured on his Omniscience as if he would not or could not
discover their sin; or on his Holiness, that he would patronize their Deceit.
In like manner Ananias is said to lie to the Holy Ghost, verse. 3. And And none
is capable of lying unto any other but such a one as is capable of hearing and
receiving a Testimony. For a Lie is a false Testimony given unto that which is
spoken or uttered in it. This He that is lied unto, must be capable of judging
and determining upon, which without Personal Properties of Will and
Understanding none can be. And the Holy Ghost is here so declared to be a
Person, as that he is declared to be One that is also Divine. For so the
Apostle Peter declares in the Exposition of the words, v. 4. Thou have not lied
unto Men but unto God. These things are so plain and positive, that the Faith
of Believers will not be concerned in the Sophistical Evasions of our
Adversaries. In like manner he is said to be resisted, Acts 7. 51. which is the
moral Reaction or Opposition of one Person unto another. So also is he said to
be grieved, or we are commanded not to grieve him, Ephesians. 4. 30. as they of old
were said to have rebelled and vexed the Holy Spirit of God, Isa. 63. 10. A
figurative Expression is allowed in these words. Properly the Spirit of God
cannot be grieved or vexed; for these things include such Imperfections as are
incompetent unto the Divine Nature. But as God is said to repent and to be
grieved at his heart, Genesis 6. 6. when he would do things correspondent unto
those which Men will do, or judge fit to be done on such Provocations; and when
he would declare what Effects they would produce in a Nature capable of such
perturbations; So on the same Reason is the Spirit of God said to be grieved
and vexed. But this can no way be spoken of him, if he be not one whose respect
unto sin may from the Analogy unto humane Persons, be represented by this
figurative Expression. To talk of grieving a Virtue, or an actual Emanation of
Power, is to speak that which no Man can understand the Meaning or Intention
of. Surely He that is thus tempted resisted and grieved by Sin and Sinners, is
one that can understand judge and determine concerning them. And these things
being elsewhere absolutely spoken concerning God, it declares that he is so,
with respect unto whom they are mentioned in particular.

Discourse of our Savior, Matthew. 12. 24. The Pharisees said, He does not cast
out Devils but by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, v. 28. If I cast out Devils
by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom of God is come unto you, v. 31, 32.
Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto Men, but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
Men; And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven
him; but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him. To the same purpose see Luke 12. 8, 9, 10. The Spirit is here expressly
distinguished from the Son, as one Person from another. They are both spoken of
with respect unto the same things in the same manner; and the things mentioned
are spoken concerning them universally in the same sense. Now if the Holy Ghost
were only the Virtue and Power of God then present with Jesus Christ in all
that he did, Christ and that Power could not be distinctly spoken against for
they were but one and the same. The Pharisees blasphemed, saying, That he cast
out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. A Person they intended, and so
expressed him by his Name Nature and Office. To which our Savior replies, that
he cast them out by the Spirit of God; A Divine Person opposed to him who is
Diabolical. Hereunto he immediately subjoyns his Instruction and Caution, that
they should take heed how they blasphemed that Holy Spirit, by assigning his
Effects and Works to the Prince of Devils. And blasphemy against him directly
manifests both what and who He is; especially such a peculiar blasphemy as
carries an aggravation of Guilt along with it, above all that Humane Nature in
any other Instance is capable of. It is supposed that blasphemy may be against
the Person of the Father. So was it in him who blasphemed the Name of Jehovah
and cursed by it, Levit. 24. 11. The Son as to his distinct Person may be
blasphemed, so it is said here expressly; and thereon it is added that the Holy
Ghost also may be distinctly blasphemed, or be the immediate Object of that Sin
which is declared to be inexpiable. To suppose now that this Holy Ghost is not
a Divine Person, is for Men to dream whilst they seem to be awake.

not a Quality as some speak residing in the Divine Nature; not a mere
Emanation of Virtue and Power from God; not the acting of the Power of God in
and unto our Sanctification, but an Holy Intelligent Subsistent or Person. And
in our Passage many Instances have been given, whence it is undeniably evident
that he is a Divine Self-sufficient Self-subsisting Person, together with the
Father and the Son equally participant of the Divine Nature. Nor is this
distinctly much disputed by them with whom we have to do. For they confess that
such things are ascribed unto him as none but God can effect. Wherefore denying
him so to be, they lay up all their hopes of success in denying him to be a
Person; But yet because the Subject we are upon does require it, and it may be
useful to the Faith of some; I will call over a few Testimonies given expressly
unto his Deity also.

God; and having the Name of God properly and directly given unto him, with
respect unto Spiritual Things, or things peculiar unto God, he must have the
Nature of God also, Acts 5. 3. Ananias is said to lie to the Holy Ghost. This
is repeated and interpreted v. 4. Thou have not lied unto Men but unto God. The
Declaration of the Person intended by the Holy Ghost, is added for the
aggravation of the Sin, for he is God. The same Person, the same Object of the
sin of Ananias is expressed in both places; and therefore the Holy Ghost is
God. The word for lying is the same in both places; (...) only it is used in a
various construction; v. 3. It has the Accusative Case joined unto it; (...);
that thou should deceive, or think to deceive or attempt to deceive the Holy
Ghost: How? by lying unto him in making a Profession in the Church wherein he
presides of that which is false. This is explained v. 4. by (...), thou have
lied unto God; the Nature of his Sin being principally intended in the first
place, and the Object in the latter. Wherefore in the progress of his
Discourse, the Apostle calls the same sin a tempting of the Spirit of the Lord,
verse. 9. It was the Spirit of the Lord that he lied unto when he lied unto God.
These three Expressions the Holy Ghost, God, the Spirit of the Lord do denote
the same thing and Person, or there is no coherence in the Discourse. It is
excepted that what is done against the Spirit is done against God, because he
is sent by God. It is true, as he is sent by the Father, what is done against
him is morally and as to the Guilt of it done against the Father. And so our
Savior tells us with respect unto what was done against himself. For says he,
He that despises me, despises him that sent me. But directly and immediately
both Christ and the Spirit were sinned against in their own Persons. He is God
here provoked. So also He is called Lord in a sense appropriate unto God alone,
2 Cor. 3. 17, 18. Now the Lord is that Spirit; and we are changed from Glory to
Glory, (...), by the Lord the Spirit, or the Spirit of the Lord; where also
Divine Operations are ascribed unto him. What is affirmed to this purpose, 1
Cor. 12. 6, 7, 8. has been observed in the opening of the beginning of that
Chapter at the beginning of our Discourse. The same also is drawn by just
Consequence from the comparing of Scriptures together, wherein what is spoken
of God absolutely in one place is applied directly and immediately unto the
Holy Ghost in another. To instance in one or two particulars, Levit. 26. 11,
12. I will, says God, set my Tabernacle amongst you; and I will walk among
you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my People. The accomplishment of
this Promise the Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the Temple of the
Living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk amongst them, and
I will be their God, and they shall be my People. How and by whom is this done?
1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Know you not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwells in you? If any Man defile the Temple of God, him will
God destroy, for the Temple of God is Holy, which ye are. If it were then God
who of old promised to dwell in his People and to make them his Temple thereby,
then is the Holy Spirit God; for he it is, who according to that Promise thus
dwells in them. So Deuteronomy. 32. 12. speaking of the People in the Wilderness, he
says, The Lord alone did lead him; And yet speaking of the same People at the
same time it is said, That the Spirit of the Lord did lead them, and caused
them to rest, Isa. 63. 14. The Spirit of the Lord therefore is Jehovah, or
Jehovah alone did not lead them. That also which is called in the same People
their sinning against God, and provoking the most High in the Wilderness,
Psalm. 78. 17, 18. is termed their rebelling against, and vexing the Holy
Spirit, Isa. 63. 10, 11. And many other Instances of an alike Nature have been
pleaded and vindicated by others.

him. As Eternity; Heb. 9. 14. He is the Eternal Spirit. Immensity, Psalm. 139.
7. Whither shall I flee from thy Spirit. Omnipotency, Micah 2. 8. The Spirit of
the Lord is not straightened; compared with Isa. 40. 28. The Power of the Spirit
of God; Romans 15. 19. Prescience, Acts 1. 16. This Scripture must be fulfilled
which the Holy Ghost by the Mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas.
Omniscience; 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. The Spirit searches all things, even the deep
things of God. Sovereign Authority over the Church, Acts 13. 3. Acts 20. 28.
The Divine Works also which are assigned unto him, are usually and to good
purpose pleaded in the vindication of the same Truth. But these in the progress
of our Discourse I shall have occasion distinctly to consider and inquire into,
and therefore shall not in this place insist upon them. What has been proposed
cleared and confirmed may suffice as unto our present purpose; that we may know
who He is, concerning whom, his Works and Grace, we do design to Treat.

Being and Personality of the Holy Spirit. And this is that in the Order of
Subsistence He is the Third Person in the Holy Trinity. So it is expressed in
the solemn Numeration of them, where their Order gives great direction unto
Gospel Worship and Obedience; Matthew. 28. 18. Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. This Order I confess in their
Numeration, because of the Equality of the Persons in the same Nature is
sometimes varied. So Rev. 1. 4, 5. Grace be unto you, and Peace, from him which
is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven Spirits which are
before his Throne, and from Jesus Christ. The Holy Spirit under the name of the
seven Spirits before the Throne of God, because of his various and perfect
Operations in and toward the Church, is reckoned up in order before the Son
Jesus Christ. And so in Paul's euctical conclusion unto his Epistles, the Son
is placed before the Father: 2 Cor. 13. 14. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. And
some think that the Holy Ghost is mentioned in the first place: Col. 2. 2. The
acknowledgment of the Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ. In this
expression of them therefore we may use our liberty, they being all one God
over all blessed for ever. But in their true and natural Order of Subsistence,
and consequently of Operation, the Holy Spirit is the Third Person. For as to
his Personal Subsistence, he proceeds from the Father and the Son, being
equally the Spirit of them both as has been declared. This constitutes the
natural Order between the Persons which is unalterable. On this depends the
Order of his Operation; for his working is a consequent of the Order of his
Subsistence. Thus the Father is said to send him, and so is the Son also, John
14. 16, 26. Chap. 16. 7. And he is thus said to be sent by the Father and the
Son, because he is the Spirit of the Father and Son, proceeding from both, and
is the next cause in the Application of the Trinity unto External Works. But as
he is thus sent, so his own Will is equally in and unto the Work for which he
is sent. As the Father is said to send the Son, and yet it was also his own
Love and Grace to come unto us and to save us. And this arises from hence,
that in the whole Economy of the Trinity, as to the Works that outwardly are
of God, especially the Works of Grace, the order of the Subsistence of the
Persons in the same Nature is represented unto us, and they have the same
dependence on each other in their Operations as they have in their Subsistence.
The Father is the Fountain of all, as in Being and Existence so in Operation.
The Son is of the Father, begotten of him, and therefore as unto his Work is
sent by him. But his own Will is in and unto what he is sent about. The Holy
Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, and therefore is sent and given
by them as to all the Works which he immediately effects; but yet his own
Will is the direct Principle of all that he does. He divides unto every one
according to his own Will. And thus much may suffice to be spoken about the
Being of the Holy Spirit, and the order of his Subsistence in the Blessed
Trinity.

Peculiar Works of the HOLY SPIRIT in the First or Old Creation. CHAP. IV.
(1.) Things to be observed in Divine Operations. The Works of God, how
ascribed absolutely unto God, and how distinctly to each Person. (2.) The
Reason hereof. (3.) Perfecting Acts in Divine Works ascribed unto the Holy
Spirit and why. (4, 5.) Peculiar Works of the Spirit with respect unto the Old
Creation. (6.) The Parts of the Old Creation. Heaven and its Host. What the
Host of Heaven. The Host of the Earth. (7.) The Host of Heaven completed by
the Spirit. (8.) And of the Earth. (9.) His moving on the Old Creation, Psalm.
104. 30. (10.) The Creation of Man, the Work of the Spirit therein. (11, 12,
13, 14, 15.) The Work of the Spirit in the preservation of all things when
created, Natural and Moral. (16.) Farther Instances thereof, in and out of the
Church. (17.) Work of the Spirit of God in the Old Creation why sparingly
delivered.

Operations of the Holy Ghost or those which are peculiar unto him, some things
must be premised concerning the Operation of the Godhead in general, and the
manner thereof. And they are such as are needful to guide us in many Passages
of the Scripture, and to direct us aright in the Things in particular which now
lie before us. I say then (1.) that all Divine Operations are usually ascribed
unto God absolutely. So it is said God made all things, and so of all other
Works whether in Nature or in Grace. And the reason hereof is, because the
several Persons are individed in their Operations, acting all by the same Will,
the same Wisdom, the same Power. Every Person therefore is the Author of every
Work of God, because each Person is God, and the Divine Nature is the same
individed Principle of all Divine Operations. (...). Athanas. Epistol. ad
Serapionem.

(...). Basil. Homil. 17. in Sanctum Baptisma. (...). Idem advers. Eunom. lib.
4.

Quicquid de Spiritu Sancto diximus hoc similiter de Patre and Filio communiter
and indivise volumus intelligi; quia sancta and inseparabilis Trinitas nunquam
aliquid extra se sigillatim operari noverit. Ambros. in Symbol. Apost. c. 9.


And this arises from the Unity of the Persons in the same Essence. But as to
the manner of Subsistence therein, there is Distinction Relation and Order
between and among them. And hence there is no Divine Work but is distinctly
assigned unto each Person and eminently unto one. So is it in the Works of the
Old Creation and so in the New, and in all particulars of them. Thus the
Creation of the World is distinctly ascribed to the Father as his Work, Acts 4.
24. And to the Son as his, John 1. 3. and also to the Holy Spirit, Job 33. 4.
but by the way of eminence to the Father, and absolutely to God, who is Father
Son and Holy Spirit.

distinctly ascribed unto each Person, is because in the individed Operation of
the Divine Nature, each Person does the same Work in the Order of their
Subsistence; not one as the Instrument of the other or merely employed by the
other, but as one common Principle of Authority, Wisdom, Love, and Power. How
come they then eminently to be assigned one to one Person, another to another?
As unto the Father are assigned Opera Naturae, the Works of Nature or the Old
Creation; to the Son, Opera Gratiae procuratae, all Divine Operations that
belong unto the recovery of Mankind by Grace; and unto the Spirit, Opera
Gratiae applicatae, the Works of God whereby Grace is made effectual unto us.
And this is done; (1.) (...). Arethas, in Apocal. Commentar. cap. 1.
when any especial Impression is made of the especial property of any Person on
any Work, then is that work assigned peculiarly to that Person. So there is of
the Power and Authority of the Father on the Old Creation, and of the Grace and
Wisdom of the Son on the New. (2.) Where there is a peculiar condescension of
any Person unto a Work wherein the others have no concurrence but by
Approbation and Consent. Such was the susception of the Humane Nature by the
Son and all that he did therein. And such was the Condescension of the Holy
Ghost also unto his Office, which intitles him peculiarly and by way of
Eminence unto his own immediate Works.

Order of Operation among the Distinct Persons, depends on the Order Hoc non
est inaequalitas substantiae, sed ordo naturae; non quod alter esset prior
altero, sed quod alter esset ex altero. Aug. lib. 3. contra Maxentium, cap. 14.
of their Subsistence in the Blessed Trinity in every great Work of God, the
Concluding, Completing, Perfecting Acts are ascribed unto the Holy Ghost.
(...). Gregor. Nyssen. ad Ablabium. (...). Basilius de Spirit. Sanc. cap. 16.
This we shall find in all the Instances of them that will fall under our
consideration. Hence the immediate actings of the Spirit are the most hidden,
curious, and mysterious, as those which contain the perfecting part of the
Works of God. Some seem willing to exclude all thoughts or mention of him from
the Works of God; but indeed without him no part of any Work of God is perfect
or complete. (...). Jobius apud Photium. lib. 122. cap. 18.
The beginning of Divine Operations is assigned unto the Father as he is fons
and origo Deitatis, the Fountain of the Deity it self. Of him, and through him,
and to him are all things, Romans 11. 32. The subsisting, establishing, and
upholding of all things is ascribed unto the Son: He is before all things, and
by him all things consist; Col. 1. 17. As he made all things with the Father,
so he gives them a consistency, a permanency in a peculiar manner, as he is the
Power and Wisdom of the Father. He upholds all things by the Word of his Power
Heb. 1. 3. And the finishing and perfecting of all these Works is ascribed to
the Holy Spirit, as we shall see. I say not this as though one Person succeeded
unto another in their Operation, or as though where one ceased and gave over a
Work, the other took it up and carried it on. For every Divine Work and every
part of every Divine Work is the Work of God, that is, of the whole Trinity
unseparably and undividedly. But on these Divine Works which outwardly are of
God, there is an especial impression of the order of the Operation of each
Person with respect unto their natural and necessary Subsistence, as also with
regard unto their internal Characteristical Properties, whereby we are
distinctly taught to know them and adore them. And the due Consideration of
this order of things will direct us in the right understanding of the proposals
that are made unto our Faith, concerning God in his Works and Word.

peculiar Operations of the Holy Spirit, as revealed unto us in the Scripture
Now all the Works of God, may be referred unto two Heads. (1.) Those of Nature;
(2.) Those of Grace. Or the Works of the Old, and New Creation. And we must
enquire what are the especial Operations of the Holy Spirit, in and about these
Works, which shall be distinctly explained.

Old Creation had two Parts (1.) That which concerned the inanimate Part of it
in general, with the Influence it had into the Production of animated or Living
but bruit Creatures. (2.) The Rational or Intelligent Part of it, with the Law
of its Obedience unto God, the especial Uses and Ends for which it was made. In
both these sorts we shall enquire after and consider the especial Works of the
Holy Spirit.

Heavens and the Earth. Genesis 1. 1. In the Beginning God Created the Heavens and
the Earth; and what belongs unto them is called their Host. Genesis 2. 1. The
Heavens and the Earth were finished and all their Host. The Host of Heaven is
the Sun, Moon, and Stars; and the Angels themselves. So are they called 1
Kings. 22. 19. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne (...), and all the Host of
Heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left. That is all the Holy
angels; as Dan. 7. 10. 2 Chronicles. 18. 18. And the Host of God, Genesis 32. 1, 2. And
Jacob went on his Way, and the Angels of God met him; and when Jacob saw them,
he said this is God's Host. (...), the Word he uses signifies an Host
encamped; (...) Luke. 2. 13. The Heavenly Host or Army. The Sun, Moon and stars
are also called the Host of Heaven. Deuteronomy. 4 19. And lest thou should lift up
thine Eyes unto Heaven and when thou see the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars,
even all the Host of Heaven. So Isa. 34. 4. Jerem. 33. 22. This was that Host
of Heaven which the Jews Idolatrously Worshipped; Jerem. 8. 2. They shall
spread them before the Sun and the Moon and all the Host of Heaven, whom they
have Loved, and whom they have served, after whom they have Walked, and whom
they have sought, and whom they have Worshipped. The Expressions are multiplied
to show that they used all ways of ascribing that Divine Honor unto them which
was due to God alone, whom only they ought to have Loved, to have Served, to
have Walked after, to have Sought and Worshipped. So Chap. 19. 13. This they
called (...) the Queen of Heaven; Jerem. 44. 17. Because of its Beauty and
Adornings. The Host of the Earth is men and Beasts, with all other Creatures
that either grow out of it, or live upon it, and are nourished by it. And these
things are called the Host of Heaven and Earth upon a double Account. (1.)
Because of their Order and beautiful Disposition. An Host properly is a Number
of Men put into a certain Order, for some certain End or Purpose. And all their
strength and Power, all their Terror and Beauty consists in, and arises from
that Order. Without this they are but a confused Multitude. But an Host or Army
with Banners is beautiful and terrible, Cant. 6. 10. Before things were cast
into this Order, the Universe was as it were full of Confusion; it had no
beauty nor Glory, for the Earth was void and without form, Genesis 1. 2. Hence the
Vulgar Latin in this Place renders the Word by Ornatus eorum; all their Beauty
and Adorning. For the Creation and Beautiful disposal of these Hosts gave them
Beauty and Ornament, and thence do the Greeks call the World (...); that is, an
Adorned thing. (2.) Because all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, are God's Armies
to accomplish his irresistible Will and Pleasure. Hence he often styles himself
the Lord of Hosts; of both these Hosts, that above of the Heavens, the Holy
Angels, and the Celestial Bodies; and that of all Creatures beneath in the
Earth. For all these he uses and applies at his Pleasure to do his will and
execute his Judgments. Thus One of those Angels slew an whole Host of men in
one Night, Isa. 37. 36. And it is said that the Stars in their Courses fought
against Sisera, Judge. 5. 20. God overruled the Influences of Heaven against
them, though it may be Angels also are here intended. And among the meanest
Creatures of the Earth, he calls Locusts and Caterpillars when he sends them to
destroy a Country for sin, his Host or Army, Joel. 2. 11. This by the Way.

this Host of Heaven and Earth, is that which is assigned peculiarly to the
Spirit of God. And hereby the Work of Creation was completed and finished.
First for the Heavens; Job 26. 13. By his Spirit he has garnished the Heavens,
his hand has formed the crooked Serpent. Or rather, His Spirit has garnished.
For (...) agrees with (...), the Spirit, and not with He; and the word
signifies to adorn, to make fair, to render beautiful to the Eye. Thus the
Heavens were garnished by the Spirit of God, when by the Creation and disposal
of the aspectable Host of them, he rendered them so glorious and beautiful as we
behold. So the Targum; His Spirit beautified the Face of the Heavens, or gave
them that comely beauty and Order wherein their Face appears unto us. Hence
the Heavens as adorned with the Moon and the Stars, are said to be the Work of
God's fingers. Psalm. 8. 3. That is, not only those which were powerfully made,
but also Curiously wrought and adorned by the Spirit of God. For by the finger
or fingers of God, the Spirit of God is in an especial manner intended. Hence
those words of our Savior, Luke 11. 20. but if I with the finger of God, do
cast out Devils; Matthew. 12. 28. are; if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God.
By him were the Heavens as it were curiously wrought, adorned, garnished,
rendered beautiful and Glorious, to show forth the Praise of his Power and
Wisdom; Psalm. 19. 1. And by the Crooked Serpent, which is added to the
garnishing of the Heavens, the Hebrews understand the Galaxie or Milky way
which to the Eye represents the moving or wirthing of a Serpent in the Water.
This then is peculiarly assigned to the Spirit with respect to the Heavens and
their Host; the completing finishing Work is ascribed unto him, which we must
understand by the Rules before mentioned and not exclusively to the other
Persons.

Inferior Globe, which afterward divided itself into Seas and dry Land; as the
Heavens contain in that Expression of their Creation all that is above and over
it. The whole Material Mass of Earth and Water wherewith probably the more
solid and firm substance was covered and as it were overwhelmed, is intended by
that Earth which was first Created. For immediately there is mention made of
the Deeps and the Waters, without any intimation of their Production but what
is contained in that of the Creation of the Earth. Genesis 1. 2. This Mass being
thus framed and mixed, the Spirit of God moved on the Face of the Waters; not
taken distinctly but as containing that radical Humor which was the Material
Principle of Life and Being unto all Creatures. (...). The Word Merachepheth
signifies an easy gentle motion, such as a Dove or other Fowl uses over its
Nest or Young Ones, either to communicate Vital heat unto its Eggs, or to
cherish and defend its Young. And this will no way consist with that Exposition
which some would give in this place of (...) Ruah they say here signifies the
Wind, as it does sometimes; and it is called the Wind of God, because it was
great and mighty. For this Phrase of Speech is usual in the Sacred Language, to
set out the Greatness and Singular Eminency of any thing. So a great trembling,
is called a trembling of God, 1 Samuel 14. 15. the Cedars of God, and the like.
But: (1.) When was this Wind Created? The Meteors were not made before the
fourth Day with the Firmament the Place of their Residence. And whence or what
this Wind should be is not to be discovered. (2.) The Word here used signifies
such an easy and gentle Motion as is in Birds when they move themselves upon
their Nests. And it is but three times used in the Scripture. In this Place,
and Deuteronomy. 32. 11. Jerem. 23. 9. In Deuteronomy. it is expressly applied unto the Motion
of an Eagle over her young, for their safety protection and growth. (...) as an
Eagle fluttereth spreading her Wings over her Young; and in the other Place, we
render it shake. All My bones shake; that is are in a trembling Motion, like
the feathers of a fowl over her Nest. No such great and Violent Wind therefore
as from thence should be called a Wind of God, can be intended in this Place.
But it is the Spirit of God himself and his Work that is expressed.

Earth and the Host thereof. The whole matter being Created out of which all
Living Creatures were to be educed and of which they were to be made, he takes
upon him the Cherishing and Preservation of it, that as it had its Subsistence
by the Power of the Word of God, it might be carried on toward that Form,
Order, Beauty and Perfection that it was designed unto. To this purpose he
Communicated unto it a Quickening and prolifick Virtue, inlaying it with the
Seeds of animal Life unto all kinds of things. Hence upon the Command of God it
brought forth all sorts of Creatures in Abundance, according to the Seeds and
Principles of Life which were communicated unto the Rude inform Chaos, by the
cherishing Motion of the Holy Spirit. Without him all was a dead-Sea, a
confused deep with Darkness upon it, able to bring forth nothing, nor more
prepared to bring forth any one thing than another. But by the Moving of the
Spirit of God upon it the Principles of all those Kinds, Sorts, and Forms of
things which in an unconceivable variety make up its Host and Ornament were
communicated unto it. And this is a better account of the Original of all
things in their several kinds, than any is given by ancient or Modern
Philosophers. And hence was the Old Tradition of all things being formed of
Water; which the Apstle alludes unto, 2 Pet. 3. 5. The whole is declared by
Cyprian, whose words I have therefore transcribed at large. Hic Spiritus
Sanctus ab ipso Mundi initio aquis legitur superfusus; non materialibus aquis
quasi vehiculo egens, quas potius ipse ferebat, and complectentibus Firmamentum
dabat congruum motum and limitem praesinitum. Hujus sempiterna virtus and
Divinitas, eum in propria natura ab inquisitoribus mundi antiquis Philosophis
proprie investigari non posset, subtilissimis tamen intuiti sunt conjecturis
compositionem Mundi; compositis and distinctis Elementorum Affectibus presentem
omnibus animam affusse, quae secundum genus and ordinem singulorum vitam
praeberet and motum, and intransgressibiles figeret metas, and stabilitatem
assignaret and usum. Hanc vitam, hunc motum, hanc rerum essentiam, Animam Mundi
Philosophi vocaverunt, putantes caelestia corpora, Solemn dico Lunam and Stellas
ipsumque Firmamentum hujus animae virtute moveri and regi, and aquas and terram
and aerem hujus semine impraegnari. Qui si Spiritum and dominum and creatorem
and vivificatorem and nutritorem crederent omnium quae sub ipsosum,
convenientem haberent ad vitam accessum. Sed abscondita est a sapientibus and
prudentibus tantae rei majestas, nec potuit humani fastus Ingenii secretis
interesse caelestibus, and penetrare ad superessentialis Naturae altitudinem;
and licet intelligerent, quod vere esset Creatrix and Gubernatrix rerum
Divinitas, distinguere tamen nullo modo potuerunt quae esset Deitatis Trinitas,
vel quae unitas vel quae personarum proprietas. Hic est Spiritus vitae cujus
vivificus calor animat omnia and fovet and provehit and faecundat. Hic omnium
viventium Anima, ita largitate sua se omnibus abundanter infundit, ut habeant
omnia rationabilia and irrationabilia secundum genus suum ex eo quod sunt, and
quod in suo ordine suae naturae competentia agunt; on quod ipse sit
substantialis anima singulis* sed in se singulariter manens, de plenitudm^ sua
distributor magnificus proprias efficientias singulis dividit and largitur; and
quasi Sol omnia calefacieus subjecta, omnia nutrit, and absque ulla sui
diminutione, integritatem suam de inexhausta abunda^tia quod satis est and
sufficit omnibus commodat and impartit. Cyprian. lib. de Spirit. Sanct.
And as at the first Creation so in the Course of Providence, this Work of
Cherishing and Nourishing the Cretures is assigned in an especial manner unto
the Spirit; Psalm. 104. 30. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit they are Created, and
thou renewest the Face of the Earth. The Making or Creation of things here
intended, is not the first great Work of the Creation of all but the daily
Production of Creatures in and according to their Kind, For in the verse
foregoing the Psalmist treats of the decay of all sorts of Creatures in the
World, by a Providential cutting off and finishing of their Lives, v. 29. Thou
hidest thy Face they are troubled; thou take away their breath they dye and
return unto their Dust. That under this continual decay and dying of all sorts
of Creatures, the World does not come to Emptiness and Desolation; the only
Reason is, because the Spirit of God whose Office and Work it is to uphold and
preserve all things continually, produces by his Power a new supply of
Creatures in the room of them that fall off like Leaves from the Trees and
return to their Dust every day. And whereas the Earth it self, the common Nurse
of them all, seems in the Revolution of every year to be at an end of its Use
and Work, having Death brought upon the Face of it, and oft-times entering deep
into its Bowels, the Spirit of God by its influential Concurrence renews it
again, causing every thing afresh to bring forth Fruit according unto its Kind,
whereby its Face receives a new Beauty and Adorning. And this is the Substance
of what the Scripture expressly asserts concerning the Work of the Spirit of God
toward the inanimate part of the Creation. His actings in reference unto Man,
and that Obedience which he owed to God according to the Law and Covenant of
his Creation is nextly to be considered.

naturally as to the essentially constitutive parts of his Being, or morally
also with reference unto his Principles of Obedience the Law given unto him,
and the End proposed as his Reward. And these things are distinctly proposed
unto our contemplation in the Scripture. The first is expressed Genesis 2. 7. And
the Lord God formed Man of the Dust of the Ground, and breathed into his
Nostrils the Breath of Life, and Man became a Living Soul. (1.) There is the
Matter whereof he was formed; (2.) The Quickening Principle added thereunto; And
(3.) the Effect of their Conjunction and Union. For the Matter he was made of,
it is said he was formed (...) dust of the Ground, or dust gathered together on
an heap from and upon the Ground, (...), Prove. 8. 26. So is God the great
(...), the universal framer of All, represented as an Artificer, who first
prepares his Matter and then forms it as it seems good unto him. And this is
mentioned for two ends; First, To set forth the Excellency, Power, and Wisdom
of God, who out of such vile contemptible Matter, as an heap of Dust swept as
it were together on the Ground, could and did make so excellent curious and
glorious a Fabric as is the Body of Man, or as was the Body of Adam before the
Fall. Secondly, To mind Man of his Original, that he might be kept humble and
in a meet dependence on the Wisdom and Bounty of his Creator; for thence it
was, and not from the Original Matter whereof he was made, that he became so
excellent. Hereof Abraham makes his solemn Acknowledgment before the Lord; Genesis
18. 27. Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord which am but Dust
and Ashes. He ashes himself with the Remembrance of his Original. And this as
it were God reproacheth Adam withal upon his Sin and Transgression; Genesis 3. 19.
Thou shall return unto the Ground, for out of it wast thou taken. For Dust thou
art, and unto Dust thou shall return. He lets him know that he had now by sin
lost that Immortality which he was made in a condition to have enjoyed; and
that his Body according to his Nature and Constitution, should return again
into its first Principles or the Dust of the Earth.

Into this formed Dust, Secondly, God breathed (...); the Breath of Life;
Divine aurae particulam, a vital immortal Spirit. This God breathed into him as
giving him something of himself, somewhat immediately of his own, not made out
of any praecreated Matter. This is the Rational Soul or Intelligent Spirit.
Thus Man became a middle Creature between the Angels above and the sensitive
Animals below. His Body was formed as the Beasts from the Matter made the first
Day, and digested into dry Land on the third Day. His Soul was an immediate
Production of and Emanation from the Divine Power as the Angels were. So when
in the Works of the New Creation our Blessed Savior bestowed the Holy Ghost on
his Disciples, he breathed on them as a sign that he gave them something of his
own. This Celestial Spirit, this Heavenly Breath was unto Man a quickening
Principle. For, thirdly, the Effect hereof is that Man became (...) a living
Soul. His Body was hereby animated and capable of all Vital Acts. Hence he
could move, eat, see, hear, etc. for the natural Effects of this Breath of Life
are only intended in this Expression. Thus the first Man Adam was made a Living
Soul, 1 Cor. 15. 45. This was the Creation of Man, as unto the essentially
constituting Principles of his Nature.

Moral Condition and Principle of Obedience unto God, it is expressed Genesis 1.
26, 27. And God said, Let us make Man in our own Image after our likeness; and
let them have dominion; so God created Man in his own Image, in the Image of
God created he him. He made him upright, Eccles. 7. 29. perfect in his
Condition; every way complete, fit, disposed, and able to and for the Obedience
required of him. Without Weakness, Distemper, Disease, contrariety of
Principles Inclinations or Reasonings. An universal Rectitude of Nature
consisting in Light Power and Order in his Understanding Mind and Affections,
was the principal part of this Image of God wherein he was created. And this
appears as from the Nature of the thing it self, so from the Description which
the Apostle gives us of the Renovation of that Image in us by the Grace of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. And under both these Considerations we may
weigh the especial Operations of the Spirit of God.

Essential Principles of the Nature of Man, it is not for nothing that God
expresses his Communication of a Spirit of Life by his breathing into him. God
breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life. The Spirit of God and the Breath
of God are the same; only the one Expression is proper, the other
metaphorical; wherefore this breathing is the especial acting of the Spirit of
God. The Creation of the Humane Soul, a Vital Immortal Principle and Being, is
the immeate Work of the Spirit of God; Job 33. 4. The Spirit of God has made
me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me Life. Here indeed the Creation
and Production of both the essential parts of Humane Nature Body and Soul, are
ascribed unto the same Author. For the Spirit of God and the Breath of God are
the same; but several Effects being mentioned causes a repetition of the same
Cause under several names. This Spirit of God first made Man, or formed his
Body of the Dust, and then gave him that Breath of Life whereby he became a
living Soul. So then under this first Consideration, the Creation of Man is
assigned unto the Holy Spirit; for Man was the Perfection of the Inferior
Creation, and in order unto the Glory of God by him were all other things
Created. Here therefore are his Operations distinctly declared, to whom the
perfecting and completing of all Divine Works is peculiarly committed.

moral State and Condition of Man, with the Furniture of his Mind and Soul in
reference unto his Obedience to God and his enjoyment of him. This was the
principal part of that Image of God wherein he was created. Three things were
required to render Man idoneous or fit unto that Life to God for which he was
made. First, An ability to discern the Mind and Will of God, with respect unto
all the Duty and Obedience that God required of him; as also so far to know the
Nature and Properties of God, as to believe him the only proper Object of all
Acts and Duties of Religious Obedience, and an all-sufficient Satisfaction and
Reward in this World and to Eternity. Secondly, A free uncontrolled unintangled
disposition to every Duty of the Law of his Creation in order unto living unto
God. Thirdly, An ability of Mind and Will, with a readiness of compliance in
his Affections, for a due regular performance of all Duties and abstinence from
all Sin. These things belonged unto the integrity of his Nature, with the
uprightness of the State and Condition wherein he was made. And all these
things were the peculiar Effects of the immediate Operation of the Holy Ghost.
For although this Rectitude of his Nature be distinguishable and separable from
the Faculties of the Soul of Man; yet in his first Creation they were not
actually distinguished from them, nor superadded or infused into them when
Created, but were concreated with them; that is his Soul was made meet and able
to live to God as his Sovereign Lord, Chiefest Good, and Last End. And so they
were all from the Holy Ghost from whom the Soul was as has been declared. Yea
suppose these Abilities to be superadded unto Man's Natural Faculties, as Gifts
supernatural (which yet is not so) they must be acknowledged in a peculiar
manner to be from the Holy Spirit. For in the Restoration of these Abilities
unto our minds, in our Renovation unto the Image of God in the Gospel, it is
plainly asserted that the Holy Ghost is the immediate Operator of them. And he
does thereby restore his own Work, and not take the Work of another out of his
Hand. For in the New Creation the Father in the way of Authority designs it and
brings all things unto an head in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 10. which retrived his
original peculiar Work; and the Son gave unto all things a new consistency
which belonged unto him from the beginning, Col. 1. 16. So also the Holy Spirit
renews in us the Image of God, the original implantation whereof was his
peculiar Work. And thus Adam may be said to have had the Spirit of God in his
Innocence. He had him in these peculiar Effects of his Power and Goodness, and
he had him according to the Tenor of that Covenant, whereby it was possible
that he should utterly lose him as accordingly it came to pass. He had him not
by especial Inhabitation, for the whole World was then the Temple of God. In
the Covenant of Grace founded in the Person and on the Mediation of Christ it
is otherwise. On whomsoever the Spirit of God is bestowed for the Renovation of
the Image of God in him, he abides with him for ever. But in all Men from first
to last, all Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth, are the Fruits of the Spirit,
Ephesians. 5. 9.

The Works of God being thus finished, and the whole frame of Nature set upon
its Wheels, it is not deserted by the Spirit of God. For as the preservation,
continuance, and acting of all things in the Universe, according to their
especial Nature and mutual Application of one unto another, are all from the
powerful and efficacious Influences of Divine Providence; so there are
particular Operations of the Holy Spirit ^^nd about all things, whether merely
Natural and Animal, or also Rational and Moral. An Instance in each kind may
suffice. For the first, (as we have showed) the Propagation of the succeeding
Generations of Creatures, and the annual Renovation of the Face of the Earth
are ascribed unto him, Psalm. 104. 30. For as we would own the due and just
Powers and Operations of second Causes, so we abhor that Atheism which ascribes
unto them an Original and Independent Efficacy and Causality, without a
previous acting in, by, and upon them, of the Power of God. And this is here
ascribed unto the Spirit, whom God sends forth unto that End and Purpose. As
to rational and moral actions, such as the great Affairs of the World do
consist in and are disposed of by, he has in them also a peculiar Efficiency.
Thus those great Virtues of Wisdom, Courage, and Fortitude, which have been
used for the producing of great Effects in the World, are of his especial
Operation. So when God stirred up Men to Rule and Govern his People of Old, to
fight against and to subdue their Enemies, it is said the Spirit of God came
upon them, Jud. 3. 10. The Spirit of the Lord came upon Othniel, and he judged
Israel and went out to War. The Spirit of God endued him with Wisdom for
Government, and with courage and skill in conduct for War. So Judge. 6. 34. And
although Instances hereof are given us principally among the People of God, yet
wherever Men in the World have been raised up to do great and wonderful
things, whereby God executes his Judgments, fulfilleth any of his Promises or
his Threatenings, even they also have received of the especial Gifts and
Assistances of the Holy Spirit of God. For this Reason is Cyrus expressly called
God's Anointed, Isa. 45. 1. Cyrus had by God's Designation a great and mighty
Work to effect. He was utterly to ruin and destroy the Great, Ancient,
Babylonian Monarchy. God had a concern herein, as to the avenging of the
Quarrel of his People, and therein the accomplishment of many Promises and
Threatenings. The Work it self was great, arduous, and insuperable to ordinary
humane Abilities. Wherefore God sends his Spirit to fill Cyrus with Wisdom,
Courage, skill in all Military Affairs, that he might go through with the Work
whereunto in the Providence of God he was designed. Hence is he called God's
Anointed, because the Unction of Kings of old was an instituted Sign of the
Communication of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost for Government unto them; see Isa.
45. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and other Instances of the like kind might be given.

Zerubbabel is in an especial manner called to begin and carry on this Work in
the building of the Temple. But the Difficulties he had to conflict withal were
great, and appeared insuperable. The People were few and poor, and the
Oppositions made unto them and their Work great and many. Especially what arose
from the Power of the Persian Monarchy under whose Rule and Oppression they
were. For although they had Permission and Encouragement from Cyrus for their
Work, yet immediately upon his Death they were oppressed again, and their Work
caused to cease. This Power they could no way conflict withal; yet God tells
them that all this Opposition shall be removed and conquered. Who art thou,
says he, O great Mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, Zech.
4. 7. All the hindrance that arose from that great Mountain of the Persian
Empire shall be removed out of the way, and the progress of Zerubbabel in his
Work shall be made smooth plain and easy. But how shall this be effected and
brought about? Not by an Army, or by Might, nor by Power, but by my Spirit
says the Lord of Hosts, v. 6. You would suppose that it must be done by Armies
and open force, which you are altogether insufficient for. But this is not the
way I will take in this matter. My Spirit shall work in their Hearts, Minds,
and Counsels, that contrary to their fears they shall themselves further that
work which hitherto they have impeded. And he shall work in the Minds and
Counsels of others to oppose them and entangle them where they would hinder it,
until they are destroyed, and that great Mountain be fully removed, as in the
Event it came to pass. So that the Providential Alterations that are wrought in
the World, are Effects of his Power and Efficacy also.

first Creation. But the Effect hereof being a State of things that quickly
passed away, and being of no advantage to the Church after the entrance of sin,
what belonged unto it is but sparingly delivered in the Scriptures; the true
sense of what is so delivered depending much on the Analogy of the following
Works of God in Man's Renovation and Recovery. But as to the New Creation
(which falls under our Consideration in the next place, as that alone which is
directly intended by us) the Foundation, building up and finishing the Church
of God therein, being the things whereon depends the principal manifestation of
the Glory of God, and wherein the great Concerns of all the Elect do lie, they
are more fully and directly declared in the Scripture. And in reference unto
them we shall find a full distinct Declaration of the whole Dispensation and
Work of the Spirit of God.

Way and Manner of the Divine Dispensation of the HOLY SPIRIT. CHAP. V.
(1.) Dispensation of the Spirit to be learned from the Scripture only; general
Adjuncts thereof. (2.) The Administration of the Spirit and his own Application
of himself to his Work how expressed. (3.) The Spirit how and in what sense
given and received. (4.) What is included in the giving of the Spirit. (5.)
What in receiving of him. (6, 7.) Privilege and Advantage in receiving the
Spirit. (8.) How God is said to SEND the Spirit; what is included in sending.
(9.) How God MINISTERS the Spirit. (10.) How God is said to PUT his Spirit on
us; What is included in that Expression. (11.) The Spirit how POURED out. (12,
13.) What is included and intended herein. (14.) The ways of the Spirits
Application of himself unto his Work. (15.) His proceeding from Father and Son
explained. (16.) How he comes unto us. (17.) His falling on Men. (18.) His
resting. (19.) How and in what sense he is said to depart from any Person.
(20.) Of the Divisions of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2. 3. (21.) Exposition of them
vindicated.

New Creation, the Order of things requires, that we should first speak
somewhat of the General Nature of God's Dispensation of him, and of his own
Applications of himself unto his Actings and Workings in this Matter. For this
is the Foundation of all that he does, and this for our Edification we are
instructed in by the Scriptures. Unto them in this whole Discourse we must
diligently attend; for we are exercised in such a Subject as wherein we have no
Rule nor Guide, nor any thing to give us Assistance but pure Revelation. And
what I have to offer concerning these things, consists upon the Matter solely
in the Explication of those places of Scripture wherein they are revealed. We
must therefore consider (1.) what we are taught on the part of God the Father
with respect unto the Holy Spirit and his Work; and (2.) what relates
immediately unto himself.

five ways expressed in the Scripture. For he is said, (1.) to give or bestow
Him; (2.) to send Him; (3.) to administer him; (4.) to pour him out; (5.) to
put him on us. And his own Application of Himself unto his Work is likewise
five ways expressed. For he is said (1.) to proceed, (2.) to Come, or come
upon; (3.) to fall on Men, (4.) to rest; and (5.) to depart. These things
containing the general Manner of his Administration and Dispensation, must be
first spoken unto.

GIVEN of God; that is, of God the Father, who is said to GIVE him in an
especial manner. Luke 11. 13. Your Heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him. Joh. 3. 34. He has Given his Spirit unto us. 1. Joh. 3. 24.
Joh. 14. 16. The Father shall Give you another Comforter, which is the Holy
Ghost, v. 26. And in answer unto this Act of God, those on whom he is bestowed
are said to Receive him. Joh. 7. 39. This he spoke of the Spirit which they
that believe on Him should Receive. 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received the Spirit
which is of God. 2. Cor. 11. 4. if you have received another Spirit which you
had not Reoeived; Where the Receiving of the Spirit is made a matter Common
unto all Beleivers. So Gal. 3. 2. Acts. 8. 15, 19. Joh. 14. 17. Chap. 20. 22.
For these two, Giving and Receiving are related; the one supposing the other.
And this Expression of the Dispensation of the Holy Ghost is irreconcilable
unto the Opinion before rejected; Namely that he is nothing but a transient
Accident, or an Occasional Emanation of the Power of God. For how, or in what
sense can an Act of the Power of God be Given by him, or be Received by us? It
can indeed in no sense be either the Object of God's Giving or of our
Receiving, especially as this is explained in those other Expressions of the
same thing before laid down, and afterward considered. It must be somewhat
that has a Subsistence of its own, that is thus Given and Received. So the
Lord Christ is frequently said to be Given of God and Received by us. It is
true we may be said in another sense to receive the Grace of God. Which is the
Exception of the Socinians unto this Consideration, and the constant practice
they use to evade plain Testimonies of the Scripture. For if they can find any
Words in them used elsewhere in another sense, they suppose it sufficient to
contradict their plain Design and proper meaning in an other place. Thus we are
exhorted not to receive the Grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1. I Answer the
Grace of God may be considered two Ways. (1.) Objectively for the Revelation or
Doctrine of Grace; as Tit. 2. 11, 12. So we are said to Receive it when we
believe and profess it, in opposition unto them by whom it is opposed and
rejected. And this is the same with our Receiving the Word preached so often
mentioned in the Scripture; Acts 2. 41. James 1. 21; which is by Faith to give
it Entertainment in our Hearts; which is the meaning of the Word in this Place,
2 Cor. 6. 1. Having taken the Profession of the Doctrine of Grace, that is of
the Gospel upon us, we ought to express its Power in Holiness and suitable
Obedience, without which it will be of no use or Benefit unto us. And the Grace
of God is sometimes (2.) take Subjectively, for the Grace which God is pleased
to Communicate unto us, or gracious Qualities that he Works in our Souls by his
Spirit. In this sense also we are sometimes said to receive it; 1 Cor. 4. 7.
Who makes thee to differ from another, and what have thou which thou did not
receive; Where the Apostle speaks both of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit.
And the Reason hereof is, because in the Communication of internal Grace unto
us, we contribute nothing to the Procurement of it, but are merely capable
recipient Subjects. And this Grace is a Quality or Spiritual Habit permanent
and abideing in the Soul. But in neither of these senses can we be said to
receive the Spirit of God, nor God to Give him, if he be only the Power of God
making an Impression on our Minds and Spirits; no more than a Man can be said
to receive the Sunbeams, which cause Heat in him by their Natural Efficacy,
falling on him. Much less can the Giving and Receiving of the Spirit be so
interpreted, considering what is said of his being sent and his own Coming,
with the like Declarations of God's Dispensation of him, whereof afterward.

Giving of the Spirit, as it is the Act of Him by whom he is Given, denotes
Authority Freedom and Bounty; and on the Part of them that receive him,
Privilege and Advantage.

(1.) Authority; He that gives any thing, has Authority to dispose of it. None
can give but of his own, and that which in some sense he has in his Power. Now
the Father is said to give the Spirit, and that upon our Request; as Luke 11.
13. This I acknowledge wants not some Difficulty in its Explication. For if the
Holy Ghost be God himself, as has been declared, how can he be said to be
given by the Father, as it were, in a way of Authority? But keeping our selves
to the sacred Rule of Truth, we may solve this Difficulty without Curiosity or
Danger. Wherefore (1.) the Order of the Subsistence of the three Persons in the
Divine Nature is regarded herein. For the Father as has been showed is the
Fountain and Original of the Trinity, the Son being of him, and the Spirit of
them both. Hence he is to be considered as the principal Author and Cause of
all those works which are immediately wrought by either of them. For of whom
the Son and Spirit have their Essence as to their Personality, from him have
they Life and Power of Operation; Joh. 5. 19, 26. Therefore when the Holy
Spirit comes unto any, the Father is said to Give him, for he is the Spirit of
the Father. And this Authority of the Father does immediately respect the Work
it self, and not the Person Working. But the Person is said to be given for the
Works sake. (2.) The Economy of the Blessed Trinity in the Work of our
Redemption and Salvation is respected in this Order of things. The Fountain
hereof lies in the Love Wisdom Grace and Counsel of the Father. Whatever is
done in the pursuit hereof is originally the Gift of the Father, because it is
designed unto no other End but to make his Grace effectual. Hence is he said to
send and give his Son also. And the whole Work of the Holy Ghost, as our
Sanctifier Guide Comforter and Advocate, is to make the Love of the Father
effectual unto us; Joh. 10. 13, 14. (...). Basil. Hom. 15. de fide.
As this out of his own Love and Care he has Condescended unto, so the
Fountain of it being in the Love and Purpose of the Father, and that also or
the making them effectual being their End, he is rightly said to be Given of
him. (3.) In the whole Communication of the Spirit respect is had unto his
Effects, or the Ends for which he is given. What they are shall be afterward
declared. Now the Authority of this Giving respects principally his Gifts and
Graces, which depend on the Authority of the Father.

(2.) This Expression denotes Freedom. What is given might be withheld. This is
the Gift of God, (as he is called Joh. 4. 10,) not the Purchase of our
Endeavors, nor the Reward of our Desert. Some men delight to talk of their
Purchasing Grace and Glory. But the one and the other are to be bought without
Money and without Price. Even Eternal Life it self the End of all our
Obedience, is the Gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 23. The
Scripture knows of no earnings that Men can make of themselves but Death. For
as Austin says, Quicquid tuum est peccatum est; and the Wages of Sin is death.
To what End or Purpose soever the Spirit is bestowed upon us, whether it be for
the Communication of Grace, or the Distribution of Gifts, or for Consolation
and Refreshment, it is of the Mere Gift of God, from his absolute and Sovereign
Freedom.

Receive him, on whom as a Gift he is bestowed; as in the Testimonies before
mentioned. And in Receiving two things are employed. (1.) That we contribute
nothing thereunto which should take off from the thing Received as a Gift.
Receiving answers Giving, and that implys freedom in the Giver. (2.) That it is
their Privilege and Advantage. For what a Man Receives he does it for his own
Good. First, then we have him freely as a Gift of God. For to Receive him in
general is to be made Partaker of him, as unto those Ends for which he is given
of God. Be those Ends what they will, in respect of them they are said to
Receive him who are made Partakers of him. Two things may be pleaded to take
off the Freedom of this Gift and of our Reception, and to cast it on something
necessary and required on our part. For (1.) our Savior tells us, that the
World cannot Receive him, because it sees him not, neither knows him, Joh.
14. 17. Now if the World cannot Receive him, there is required an Ability and
Preparation in them that do so, that are not in the World; and so the Gift and
Communication of the Spirit depends on that Qualification in us. But all Men
are Naturally alike the World, and of it. No One Man by Nature has more
Ability or strength in Spiritual things than another. For all are equally dead
in Trespasses and Sins, all equally Children of Wrath. It must therefore be
enquired how some come to have this Ability and Power to Receive the Spirit of
God which others have not. Now this, as I shall fully manifest afterward, is
merely from the Holy Ghost himself and his Grace; respect being had herein only
unto the Order of his Operations in us, some being Preparatory for and
dispositive unto other; One being instituted as the means of obtaining another,
the whole being the Effect of the free Gift of God. For we do not make our
selves to differ from others, nor have we any thing that we have not Received,
1 Cor. 4. 7. Wherefore the Receiving of the Holy Ghost intended in that
Expression of our Savior, with respect whereunto some are able to receive him
some are not, is not absolute, but with respect unto some certain Work and End.
And this, as is plain in the Context, is the receiving of him as a Comforter
and a Guide in Spiritual Truth. Here-unto Faith in Christ Jesus, which also is
an effect and fruit of the same Spirit, is antecedently required. In this sense
therefore Beleivers alone can receive him, and are enabled so to do by the
Grace which they have received from him in their first Conversion unto God. But
(2dly.) it will be said that we are bound to pray for him before we receive
him; and therefore the bestowing of him depends on a Condition to be by us
fulfilled. For the Promise is that our Heavenly Father will give the Holy
Spirit unto them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. But this does not prove the
bestowing and receiving of him not to be absolutely free. Nay it proves the
Contrary. It is Gratia indebita, undeserved Grace, that is the proper object of
Prayer. And God by these encouraging Promises does not abridge the Liberty of
his own Will, nor derogate from the Freedom of his Gifts and Grace, but only
directs us into the way whereby we may be made Partakers of them, unto his
Glory and our own Advantage. And this also belongs unto the Order of the
Communication of the Grace of the Spirit unto us. This very Praying for the
Spirit is a Duty which we cannot perform without his Assistance. For no man can
call Jesus Lord but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. He helps us as a Spirit of
Grace and Supplication, to pray for him as a Spirit of Joy and Consolation.

Bounty. For God is said to give him unto us richly, Tit. 3. 6. This will be
spoken unto in the fourth Way of his Communication. Only I say at present, the
greatness of a Gift, the free Mind of the Giver, and want of desert or merit in
the Receiver, are that which declare Bounty to be the spring and fountain of
it. And all these concur to the height in God's Giving of the Holy Ghost.

Gift, Privilege and Advantage are intimated. They receive a Gift and that from
God, and that a great and singular Gift from Divine Bounty. Some indeed receive
him in a sort as to some Ends and Purposes, without any advantage finally unto
their own Souls. So do they who prophecy and cast out Devils by his Power in
the Name of Christ, and yet continuing workers of Iniquity are rejected at the
last day, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Thus it is with all who receive his Gifts only
without his Grace to sanctify their Persons and their Gifts, and this whether
they be ordinary or extraordinary; But this is only by accident. There is no
Gift of the Holy Ghost but is good in its own Nature, tending to a good End,
and is proper for the Good and Advantage of them by whom it is received. And
although the direct end of some of them be not the Spiritual Good of them on
whom they are bestowed but the Edification of others; for the manifestation of
the Spirit is given unto every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 4. 12, 17. yet
there is that excellency and worth in them, and that use may be made of them,
as to turn greatly to the advantage of them that receive them. For although
they are not Grace, yet they serve to stir up and give an edg unto Grace, and
to draw it out unto Exercise whereby it is strengthened and increased. And they
have an influence into Glory; For it is by the Abilities which they give that
some are made wise and effectual Instruments for the turning of many to
Righteousness, who shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the
Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3. But the Unbelief, Ingratitude, and Lusts
of Men, can spoil these and any other good things whatever. And these things
will afterward in particular fall under our Consideration. In general, to be
made Partaker of the Holy Ghost, is an inestimable Privilege and Advantage, and
as such is proposed by our Savior, John 14. 17.

Secondly; God is said to SEND him. Psalm. 104. 30. Thou sendest forth thy
Spirit. John 14. 26. The Father will send the Holy Ghost in my Name. This is
also spoken of the Son; I will send unto you the Comforter from the Father,
John 15. 26. John 16. 7. And in the accomplishment of that Promise it is said,
he poured him forth, Acts 2. 33. Gal. 4. 6. God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son in your hearts; and in other places the same Expression is used. Now
this upon the matter i^ the same with the former of Giving him, arguing the
same Authority, the same Freedom, the same Bounty. Only the word naturally
includes in its signification a respect unto a local Motion. He which is sent,
removes from the place where he was, from whence He is sent, unto a place
where he was not, whither he was sent. Now this cannot properly be spoken of
the Holy Ghost. For he being God by Nature, is naturally omnipresent, and an
Omnipresence is inconsistent with a Local Mutation. So the Psalmist expressly,
Psalm. 139. 7, 8. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee
from thy presence? if I ascend up into Heaven, etc. There must therefore a
Metaphor be allowed in this Expression, but such a One as the Scripture by the
frequent use of it has rendered familiar unto us. Thus God is said to arise out
of his place, to bow the Heavens and come down; to come down and see what is
done in the Earth, Genesis 18. 21. Isa. 64. 1. That these things are not spoken
properly of God who is immense all men acknowledge. But where God begins to work
in any place in any kind, where before he did not do so, he is said to come
thither; For so must we do, we must come to a place before we can work in it.
Thus the Sending of the Holy Ghost includes two things as added unto his being
Given. (1.) That He was not before in or with that Person, or amongst those
Persons for that especial Work and End which he is sent for. He may be in them
and with them in one respect, and be afterward said to be sent unto them in
another: So our Lord Jesus Christ promises to send the Holy Ghost unto his
Disciples as a Comforter, whom they had received before as a Sanctifier. I
will, says he, send him unto you and you know him, for he dwells with you,
John 14. 17. He did so as a Sanctifier before he came unto them as a Comforter.
But in every coming of His, He is sent for one especial Work or another. And
this sufficiently manifests that in his Gifts and Graces he is not common unto
all. A supposition thereof would leave no place for this especial Act of
sending him, which is done by Choice and Distinction of the Object. Much less
is he a Light which is always in all Men, and which all Men may be in if they
please. For this neither is nor can be absent in any sense from any one at any
time. (2.) It denotes as especial Work there or on them, where and on whom,
there was none before of that kind. For this cause is he said to be sent of the
Father. Etenim si de loco procedit Spiritus and in locum transit, and ipse
Pater in loco invenitur and Filius: si de loco exit quem Pater mittit aut
Filius, utique de loco transiens Spiritus and progrediens, and Patrem sicut
corpus secundum impias interpretationes relinquere videtur and Filium. Hoc
secundum eos loquor qui putant quod habet Spiritus descensorium motum; venit
non de loco in locum, sed de dispositione constitutionis in salutem
Redemptionis. Ambros. de Sp. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 10.
No Local Motion then is intended in this Expression only there is an allusion
thereunto. For as a Creature cannot produce any Effects where it is not, until
it either be sent thither, or go thither of its own accord; So the Holy Ghost
produces not the blessed Effects of his Power and Grace, but in and toward
them unto whom he is given and sent by the Father. How in answer hereunto he is
said himself to come, shall be afterward declared. And it is the Person of the
Spirit which is said to be thus sent; For this belongs unto that Holy
Dispensation of the several Persons of the Trinity in the Work of our
Salvation. And herein the Spirit in all his Operations is considered as sent of
the Father, for the Reasons before often intimated.

MINISTER the Spirit; Gal. 3. 5. He that ministers the Spirit unto you, (...);
He that gives you continual or abundant supplies of the Spirit. (...), is to
give a sufficiency of any thing; and (...) and (...) are dimensum, a
sufficiency of Provision. And addition thereunto is (...), whereby the
Communication of the Spirit is expressed. Phil. 1. 19. For I know that this
shall turn to my Salvation through your Prayers, (...), and the additional
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. That Spirit and its Assistance he had
before received; but He yet stood in need of a daily further supply. So is the
word used constantly for the adding of one thing to another, or one degree of
the same thing unto another, 2 Pet. 1. 5. (...), add to your Faith Virtue; or
in your Faith make an increase of Virtue. When therefore God is thus said to
Minister the Spirit, it is his continual giving out of Additional Supplies of
his Grace by his Spirit which is intended. For the Holy Spirit is a voluntary
Agent, and distributes unto every one as he will. When therefore he is given
and sent unto any, his Operations are limited by his own Will and the Will of
him that sends him. And therefore do we stand in need of supplies of him and
from him, which are the principal Subject Matter of our Prayers in this World.

PUT his Spirit in or upon Men; and this also belongs unto the manner of his
Dispensation; Isa. 42. 1. Behold my Servant whom I uphold, I have put my Holy
Spirit upon him. The word there indeed is (...), I have given my Holy Spirit
upon him, but because (...) upon Him is joined to it, it is by ours rendered by
Put. As also Ezekiel. 37. 14. where (...) in you is added; Put my Spirit in you.
The same is plainly intended with that Isa. 63. 11. (...), that put his Holy
Spirit in the midst of them. Hence (...), I have given, or I will give, Isa.
42. 1. is rendered by (...), Matthew. 12. 18. (...), I will put my Spirit upon
him. The Word (...) then used in this sense, does not denote the granting or
Donation of any thing but its actual bestowing, as (...) does. And it is the
effectual Acting of God in this Matter that is intended. He does not only give
and send his Spirit unto them to whom he designs so great a Benefit and
Privilege, but he actually collates and bestows him upon them. Quid igitur
Spiritus Sancti operatione Divinius, cum etiam benedictionum suarum praesentem
Spiritum Deus ipse testetur, dicens, Ponam Spiritum meum super semen tuum, and
benedictiones meas super Filios tuos, nulla enim potest esse plena benedictio
nisi per infusionem Spiritus Sancti. Ambros. de Sp. Sancto. lib. 1. cap. 7.
He does not send Him unto them, and leave it in their Wills and Power whether
they will receive Him or no; but he so effectually collates and puts him in
them or upon them, as that they shall be actually made Partakers of him. He
efficaciously endows their Hearts and Minds with Him for the Work and End which
he is designed unto. So Exodus 31. 6. I have put Wisdom, is as much as I have
filled them with Wisdom, v. 2. So then, where God intends unto any the
Benefit of his Spirit, he will actually and effectually collate Him upon them.
He does not indeed always do this in the same manner. Sometimes he does it as
it were by a surprizal when those who receive him are neither aware of it nor
do desire it. So the Spirit of the Lord as a Spirit of Prophesy, came upon Saul
when his Mind was remote and enstranged from any such thoughts. In like manner
the Spirit of God came upon Eldad and Medad in the Camp; when the other Elders
went forth unto the Tabernacle to receive Him, Numb. 11. 27. And so the Spirit
of Prophesy came upon most of the Prophets of Old, without either Expectation
or Preparation on their Parts; So Amos gives an Account of his Call unto his
Office, Chap. 7. 1^, 15. I was, says he, no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets
Son, but I was an Heardman and a gatherer of Sycomore fruits. And the Lord took
me as I followed the Flock, and the Lord said unto me go Prophesy. He was not
brought up with any Expectation of receiving this Gift. He had no Preparation
for it, but God surprised him with his Call and Gift as he followed the Flock.
Such also was the Call of Jeremiah, Chap. 1. 5, 6, 7. So vain is the Discourse
of Maimonides on this Subject prescribing various Natural and Moral
Preparations for the receiving of this Gift. But these things were
extraordinary. Yet I no way doubt but that God does yet continue to Work Grace
in many by such unexpected Surprizal, the manner whereof shall be afterward
inquired into. But sometimes, as to some Gifts and Graces, God does bestow his
Spirit, where there is some Preparation and Cooperation on our Part. But
wherever he designs to put or place him, he does it effectually.

Fifthly; God is said to POUR him out; and that frequently. Prove. 1. 23. (...)
behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you. Significat autem effusionis verbum
largam and divitem muneris abundantiam; itaque cum unus quis alicubi aut duo
Spiritum Sanctum accipiant non dicitur effundam de Spiritu meo, sed tunc quando
in universas gentes munus Spiritus Sancti redundaverit. Dydim. de Sp. Sanc.
lib. 1.
(...) signifies ebullire more scaturiginis, to bubble up as a Fountain. Hence
the words are rendered by Theodot (...); scaturire faciam; I will cause my
Spirit to Spring out unto you as a Fountain; And it is frequently applied unto
speaking, when it signifies eloqui aut proferre verba more scaturiginis. See
Psalm. 72. 2. Psalm. 145. 7. And (...) also which some take to be the root of
(...) Prove. 1. 23. has the same signification. And the Word has a double
lively Metaphor. For the Proceeding of the Spirit from the Father, is compared
to the continual rising of the Waters of a Living Spring; and his Communication
unto us, to the overflowing of those Waters, yet guided by the Will and Wisdom
of God. Isa. 32. 15. Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on High, and the
Wilderness be a fruitful field. (...) is indeed sometimes to pour out, but more
properly and more commonly to uncover, to make bare, to reveal. Until the
Spirit be revealed from on High. There shall be such a plentiful Communication
of the Spirit, as that He and His Work shall be made open, revealed, and plain.
Or the Spirit shall be bared, as God is said to make his Arm bare when he will
Work mightily and effectually. Isa. 52. 10. Isa. 44. 3, I will pour my Spirit
upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring. (...) the Word here is so
to pour a thing out, as that it cleaves unto and abides on that which it is
poured out upon. As the Spirit of God abides with them unto whom he is
Communicated. Ezekiel. 39. 29. I have poured out my Spirit on the House of Israel.
(...) another word; This is properly to pour out, and that in a plentiful
manner. The same word that is used in that great Promise, Joel. 2. 28. which is
rendered Acts 2. 17. by (...), effundam, I will pour out my Spirit; and the same
Thing is again expressed by the same word, Acts 10. 45. The Gift of the Holy
Ghost is poured on the Gentiles.

Times of the Gospel. Either it is a part of the Promises concerning it, or of
the Story of its Accomplishment under it. But wherever it is mentioned, the
Time, State, and Grace of the Gospel are intended in it. For the Lord Christ
was in all things to have the preeminence, Col. 1. 18. And therefore although
God gave his Spirit in some measure before, yet he poured him not out until He
was first anointed with his Fullness. (2.) There is a tacit comparison in it
with some other Time and Season, or some other Act of God wherein or whereby
God gave his Spirit before, but not in the way and manner that he intended now
to bestow him. A larger Measure of the Spirit to be now given than was before,
or is signified by any other Expressions of the same Gift, is intended in this
Word.

Bounty. Pouring forth is the way whereby Bounty from an all-sufficeing fullness
is expressed. As the Clouds filled with a moist vapor pour down Rain, Job 36.
27. until it water the Ridges of the Earth abundantly, settling the Furrows
thereof, and making it soft with Showers; as Psalm. 65. 10. which with the
things following in that place, v. 11, 12, 13. are spoken Allegorically of this
pouring out of the Spirit of God from above. Hence God is said to do this
richly, Tit. 3. 6. The renewing of the Holy Ghost; (...), which he has poured
on us richly; that is, on all Believers who are converted unto God. For the
Apostle discourses not of the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost which were
then given forth in a plentiful manner, but of that Grace of the Holy Ghost
whereby all that believe are regenerated, renewed, and converted unto God. For
so were men converted of old by a rich participation of the Holy Ghost, and so
they must be still whatever some pretend, or die in their sins. And by the same
word is the bounty of God in other things expressed. The living God who gives
us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17. (2.) This pouring out has respect
unto the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit and not unto his Person. For where he
is given he is given absolutely, and as to himself not more or less; but his
Gifts and Graces may be more plentifully and abundantly given at one time than
at another, to some Persons than to others. Wherefore this Expression is
metonymical, that being spoken of the Cause which is proper to the Effect; the
Spirit being said to be poured forth, because his Graces are so. (3.) Respect
is had herein unto some especial Works of the Spirit. Such are the Purifying or
Sanctifying, and the Comforting or Refreshing them on whom He is poured. With
respect unto the first to these Effects, he is compared both unto Fire and
Water. For both Fire and Water have purifying Qualities in them, though toward
different Objects and working in a different manner. So by Fire are Metals
purified and purged from their Dross and Mixtures, and by Water are all other
unclean and defiled things cleansed and purified. Hence the Lord Jesus Christ
in his Work by his Spirit is at once compared unto a Refiners Fire and to
Fullers Soap, Mal. 3. 2, 3. because of the purging purifying Qualities that are
in Fire and Water. And the Holy Ghost is expressly called a Spirit of Burning,
Isa. 4. 4. For by him are the Vessels of the House of God that are of Gold and
Silver refined and purged, as those that are but of Wood and Stone are
consumed. And when it is said of our Lord Jesus that he should baptize with the
Holy Ghost and with Fire, Luke 3. 16. it is but (...) the same thing doubly
expressed, and therefore mention is made only of the Holy Ghost, John 1. 33.
But the Holy Ghost was in his Dispensation to purify and cleanse them as Fire
does Gold and Silver. And on the same account is he compared to Water, Ezekiel.
36. 35. I will sprinkle clean Water upon you and you shall be clean; which is
expounded v. 26. by a New Spirit will I put within you, which God calls his
Spirit, Jer. 32. 39. So our Savior calls him Rivers of Water, Joh. 7. 38, 39.
see Isa. 44. 3. And it is with regard unto his purifying cleansing and
sanctifying our Natures that he is thus called. With respect therefore in an
especial manner hereunto is he said to be poured out. So our Apostle expressly
declares, Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. Again it respects his comforting and refreshing them
on whom he is poured. Hence is he said to be poured down from above as Rain
that descends on the Earth; Isa. 44. 3. I will pour Water upon him that is
thirsty, and Floods upon the dry ground; that is, I will pour my Spirit on thy
Seed, and my Blessing upon thy Offspring; and they shall spring up as among
the Grass, as Willows by the Watercourse, v. 4. see Chap. 35. 6, 7. He comes
upon the dry parched barren ground of the hearts of men, with his refreshing
fructifying Virtue and Blessing, causing them to spring and bring forth Fruits
in Holiness and Righteousness to God, Heb. 6. 7. And in respect unto his
Communication of his Spirit, is the Lord Christ said to come down like Rain
upon the mown Grass, as Showers that water the Earth, Psalm. 72. 6. The good
Lord give us always of these Waters and refreshing Showers.

And these are the ways in general whereby the Dispensation of the Spirit from
God, for what End or Purpose soever it be, is expressed.

compliance with these Acts of God whereby he is given and administered. Now
these are such Things or Actions as manifest him to be a Voluntary Agent; and
that not only as to what he acts or does in men, but also as to the manner of
his coming forth from God, and his Application of himself unto his Work. And
these we must consider as they are declared unto us in the Scripture.

The first and most general Expression hereof is, that he proceeds from the
Father; and being the Spirit of the Son, he proceeds from him also in like
manner; John 15. 25. The Spirit of Truth which proceeds from the Father, he
shall testify of me. There is (...) (...) or Procession of the Holy Ghost. The
(...), Natural or Personal. This expresses his Eternal Relation to the Persons
of the Father and the Son. He is of them by an eternal Emanation or Procession.
Spiritus Sanctus qui a Patre and Filio procedit, nec ipse caepit; quia
processio ejus continua est, and ab eo qui non caepit. Ambros. in Symbol.
Apostol. cap. 3.

Spiritus quidem Sanctus nec ingenitus est nec genitus alieubi dicitu^, ne si
ingenitus diceretur sicut Pater, duo Patres in Sancta Trinitate
intelligerentur; aut sigenitus diecretur sicut Filius, duo itidem Filii in
eadem estimarentur esse Sancta Te^uitate: sed tantummodo procedere de Patre and
Filio salva fide dicendum est. Qui tamen non de Patre procedit in Filium, and
de Filio procedit ad Sanctificandam ereaturam, sicut quidam male intelligentes
credendum esse putabant, sed simul de utroque procedit. Quia Pater talem genuit
Filium, ut quemadmodum de se, ita and de illo quoque procedat Spiritus Sanctus.
August. Sermo 38. de Tempore.


The manner hereof unto us in this Life is incomprehensible. Therefore it is
rejected by some who will believe no more than they can put their hands into
the sides of. And yet are they forced in things under their Eyes, to admit of
many things which they cannot perfectly comprehend. But we live by Faith and
not by Sight. (...). Justin. Martyr. Expositio Fidei de recta Confess.
This is enough unto us that we admit nothing in this great Mystery but what is
revealed, and nothing is revealed unto us that is inconsistent with the Being
and Subsistence of God. For this Procession or Emanation includes no Separation
or Division in or of the Divine Nature, but only expresses a distinction in
Subsistence by a Property peculiar to the Holy Spirit: But this is not that
which at present I intend. The consideration of it belongs unto the Doctrine
of the Trinity in general and has been handled elsewhere. Secondly, There is
an (...) or Procession of the Spirit, which is (...) or dispensatory. This is
the Egress of the Spirit in his Application of Himself unto his Work. A
voluntary Act it is of his Will, and not a necessary Property of his Person.
And he is said thus to proceed from the Father, because he goes forth or
proceeds in the pursuit of the Counsels and Purposes of the Father, and as
sent by him to put them into Execution or to make them effectual. And in like
manner he proceeds from the Son, sent by Him for the Application of his Grace
unto the Souls of his Elect, John 15. 16. It is true, this proves his Eternal
Relation to the Father, and the Son, as he proceeds from them, or receives his
peculiar Personal Subsistence from them; For that is the Ground of this order
of Operation. But it is his own Personal voluntary acting that is intended in
the Expression. And this is the general Notation of the Original of the Spirits
acting in all that he does. He proceeds or comes forth from the Father. Had
it been only said that He was given and sent, it could not have been known that
there was any thing of his own Will in what he did, whereas he is said to
divide unto every one as He will. But in that (...), He proceeds of his own
accord unto his Work, his own Will and Condescension is also asserted. And this
his proceeding from the Father, is in compliance with his sending of Him to
accomplish and make effectual the Purposes of his Will and the Counsels of his
Grace.

come; John 15. 26. When the Comforter is come. John 16. 7. If I go not away
the Comforter will not come; v. 8. and when he is come. So is he said to come
upon Persons. We so express it, 1 Chronicles. 12. 18. The Spirit came upon Amasai,
(...). And the Spirit clothed Amasai; possessed his Mind as a Man's Cloths
cleave unto him, Acts 19. 6. The Holy Ghost came on them and they prophesied;
(...) to come is as it were the Terminus ad Quem of (...), going forth or
proceeding. For there is in these Expressions an Allusion unto a local Motion,
whereof these two words denote the Beginning and the End. The first intends
his voluntary Application of himself to his Work, the other his progress in it;
such Condescentions does God make use of in the declaration of his Divine
Actings to accommodate them unto our Understandings, and to give us some kind
of Apprehension of them. He proceeds from the Father as given by him, and
comes unto us as sent by him. The meaning of both is, that the Holy Ghost by
his own Will and Consent works in the pursuit of the Will of the Father,
there and that where and what he did not work before. Nullus sine Deo, neque
ullus non in Deo locus est. In Caelis est, in Inferno est, ultra Maria est.
Inest interior, excedit exterior. Itaque cum habet atque habetur, neque in
aliquo ipse, neque non in omnibus est. Hilar. lib. 1. de Trinitat.
And as there is no local Motion to be thought of in these things, so they can
in no tolerable sense be reconciled to the Imagination of his being only the
inherent Virtue or an actual Emanation and Influence of the Power of God. And
hereby is our Faith and Obedience Regulated in our dealing with God about Him.
For we may both pray the Father that he would give and send Him unto us
according to his Promise, and we may pray to Him to come unto us to sanctify
and comfort us according to the Work and Office that he has undertaken. This
is that which we are taught hereby. For these Revelations of God are for our
Instruction in the Obedience of Faith.

fall on Men; Acts 10. 44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them which heard the Word. So Chap. 11. 4. Where Peter repeating
the same Matter, says, The Holy Ghost fell on them as on us at the beginning:
that is, Acts 2. 4. A greatness and suddainness in a surprizal is intended in
this Word. As when the Fire fell down from Heaven (which was a Type of him)
upon the Altar and Sacrifice of Elijah the People that saw it were amazed, and
falling on their Faces cried out, The Lord he is God, 1 Kings 18. 38, 39. When
Men are no way in expectation of such a Gift, or when they have an Expectation
in general but are suddenly surprised as to the particular Season it is thus
declared. But wherever this word is used, some extraordinary Effects
evidencing his Presence and Power do immediately ensue, Acts 10. 44, 46. And so
it was at the beginning of his Effusion under the New Testament, Acts 2. 4. and
8. 16.

come, He is said to Rest on the Persons to whom he is given and sent; Isa. 11.
3. And the Spirit of the Lord shall Rest upon him. This is interpreted abiding
and remaining, John 1. 32, 33. Numb. 11. 25, 26. The Spirit of the Lord rested
on the Elders. So the Spirit of Elijah rested on Elisha, 2 Kings 2. 15. 1 Pet.
4. 14. The Spirit of God and of Glory rests on you. Two things are included
herein; (1.) Complacency. (2.) Permanency. First, He is well-pleased in his
Work wherein he Rests. So where God is said to rest in his Love, he does i^
with Joy and singing, Zeph. 3. 17. so does the Spirit rejoice where he rests.
Secondly, He abides where he Rests. Under this Notion is this acting of the
Spirit promised by our Savior. He shall abide with you for ever, John 14. 16.
He came only on some Men by a sudden surprizal to act in them and by them some
peculiar Work and Duty. To this end he only transiently affected their Minds
with his Power. But where he is said to rest, as in the works of Sanctification
and Consolation, there he abides and continues with Complacency and Delight.

depart from some Persons. So it is said of Saul, 1 Samuel 16. 14. The Spirit of
the Lord departed from him. And David prays that God would not take his Holy
Spirit from him. Psalm. 51. 11. And this is to be understood answerably unto
what we have discoursed before about his coming and his being sent. As he is
said to come so is he said to depart; and as he is said to be sent so is he
said to be taken away. His departure from men therefore is his ceasing to work
in them and on them as formerly; and as far as this is penal he is said to be
taken away. So he departed and was taken away from Saul when he no more helped
him with that Ability for Kingly Government which before he had by his
Assistance. And this departure of the Holy Ghost from any is either total or
partial only. Some on whom he has been bestowed for the working of sundry
Gifts for the good of others, with manifold convictions by Light and general
Assistance unto the performance of Duties, He utterly deserts and gives them up
unto themselves and their own hearts lusts. Examples hereof are common in the
World. Men who have been made Partakers of many Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
been in an especial manner enlightened, and under the Power of their Convictions
carried out unto the Profession of the Gospel and the performance of many
Duties of Religion; yet being entangled by Temptations and overcome by the
power of their lusts, relinquish all their Beginnings and Engagements and turn
wholly unto Sin and Folly. From such Persons the Holy Ghost utterly departs,
all their Gifts dry up and wither; their Light goes out and they have Darkness
in stead of a Vision. The Case of such is deplorable; for it had been better
for them not to have known the way of Righteousness, than after they have known
it to turn from the Holy Commandment delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2. 21. And
some of these add despite and contempt of that whole Work of the Spirit of God
whereof themselves were made Partakers unto their Apostasy. And the condition
of such profligate Sinners is for the most part irrecoverable, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
Chap. 10. v. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. From some He withdraws and departs
partially only, and that mostly but for a season. And this Departure respects
the Grace Light and Consolation which he administers unto Believers, as to the
degrees of them and the Sense of them in their own Souls. On whom He is
bestowed to work these things in a saving way, from them he never utterly or
totally departs. This our Blessed Savior plainly promises and asserteth; John
4. 14. Whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him shall never
thirst; but the Water that I shall give him shall be in him a Well of Water
springing up into Everlasting Life. That this Well of Living Water is his
Sanctifying Spirit himself declares, John 7. 37, 38. He who has received him,
shall never have a thirst of total Want and Indigence any more. Besides He is
given unto this end by virtue of the Covenant of Grace. And the Promise is
express therein, that he shall never depart from them to whom he is given, Isa.
59. 21. Jer. 31. 33. Chap. 32. 39, 40. Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20, But now as to the
degrees and sensible Effects of these Operations, He may depart and wi^hdraw
from Believers for a Season. Hence they may be left unto many Spiritual Decays
and much weakeness, the things of Grace that remain in them being as it were
ready to die, Revel. 3. 2. and they may apprehend themselves deserted and
forsaken of God. So did Sion, Isa. 40. 27. Chap. 49. 15. For therein does God
hide himself, Isa. 44. 15. or forsake his People for a moment, Chap. 54. 7. He
hides himself and his wrath, Chap. 57. 17. These are the things which David so
often and so bitterly complains of, and which with so much earnestness he
contendeth and wrestleth with God to be delivered from. These are those
spiritual Desertions which some of late have laden with reproach contempt and
scorn. All the apprehensions and complaints of the People of God about them,
they would represent as nothing but the idle Imaginations of distempered
Brains, or the Effects of some disorder in their Blood and Animal Spirits. I
could indeed easily allow that Men should despise and laugh at what is declared
as the Experience of Professors at present. Their prejudice against their
Persons will not allow them to entertain any thoughts of them but what are
suited unto Folly and Hypocrisy. But at this I acknowledge I stand amazed; that
whereas these things are so plainly, so fully and frequently declared in the
Scriptures, both as to the actings of God and his Holy Spirit in them, and as
to the sense of those concerned about them; whereas the whole of God's
dealings, and Believers application of themselves to him in this Matter, are so
graphically exemplified in sundry of the Holy Saints of old, as Joh, David,
Heman, and others; and great and plentiful Provision is made in the Scripture
for the Direction, Recovery, Healing and Consolation of Souls in such a
condition; yet men professing themselves to be Christians, and to believe the
Word of God at least not to be a Fable, should dare to cast such opprobrious
Reproaches on the Ways and and Works of God. The end of these Attempts can be
no other but to decry all real intercourse between God and the Souls of Men,
leaving only an outside form or shape of Religion, not one jot better than
Atheism.

Neither is it only what concerns Spiritual Desertions, whose Nature, Causes,
and Remedies, are professedly and at large handled by all the Casuistical
Divines even of the Roman Church, but the whole Work of the Spirit of God upon
the Hearts of Men, with all the Effects produduced in them with respect unto
Sin and Grace, that some men by their odious and scurrilous Expressions
endeavor to expose to contempt and scorn; S. P. p. 339, 340, 341, 342.
Whatever trouble befalls the minds of men upon the account of a sense of the
guilt of Sin, whatever Darkness and Disconsolation they may undergo through the
displeasure of God and his withdrawing of the wonted influences of his Grace
Love and Favor toward them, whatever Peace Comfort or Joy they may be made
Partakers of by a sense of the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts by the
Holy Ghost, it is all ascribed in most opprobrious Language unto Melancholy
reeks and vapors, whereof a certain and mechanical account may be given by
them who understand the Anatomy of the Brain. To such an height of Profane
Atheism is the daring Pride and Ignorance of some in our days arrived.

Adjunct of the Dispensation and Work of the Holy Ghost, which gives a further
Description of the manner of it; which I have left unto a single Consideration.
This is that which is mentioend Heb. 2. 4. God witnessing unto them with Signs
and Wonders, with diverse Miracles, (...), and Gifts say we of the Holy Ghost.
But (...), are Distributions or Partitions. And hence advantage is taken by
some to argue against his very Being. So Crellius contends that the Holy Ghost
here is taken passively, or that the Expression (...) is Genitivus Materiae.
Wherefore he supposes that it follows that the Holy Ghost himself may be
divided into Parts, so that one may have one Part and Parcel of him, and
another may have another Part. How inconsistent this is with the Truth of his
Being and Personality is apparent. But yet neither can he give any tolerable
account of the Division and Partition of that Power of God which he calls the
Holy Ghost, unless he will make the Holy Spirit to be a Quality in us and not
in the Divine Nature, as Justin Martyr affirms Plato to have done, and so to be
divided. (...). Justin. Martyr. ad Graec. Cohortat.

Aliter statuit Cyprianus seu quisquis fuit Author lib. de Spirit. Sanct. inter
Opera Cypriani. Hic est Spiritus Sa^ctus quem Magi in Aegypto tertii signi
ostensione convicti, cum sua defeciss^. praestigia faterentur, Dei digitum
appellabant, and antiquis Philosophis ej^^ intimarunt presentiam defuisse. Et
licet de Patre and Filio aliqua sensissent Platonici, Spiritus tamen tumidus
and humani appetitor favoris sanctificationem mentis Divinae mereri non potuit,
and ubi ad profunditatem Sacramentorum deventum est, omnis eorum caligavit
subtilitas, nec potuit insidelitas Sanctitudini propinquare. Cyp. de Spirit.
Sanct.


And the Interpretation he uses of the words is wrested perverse and foolish.
For the Contexture of them requires that the Holy Ghost be here taken actively
as the Author of the Distribution mentioned. He gives out of his Gifts and
Powers unto Men in many Parts, not all to One, not all at once; not all in one
way, but some to one some to another, some at one time some at another, and
that in great variety. The Apostle therefore in this place declares, That the
Holy Spirit gave out various Gifts unto the first Preachers of the Gospel for
the confirmation of their Doctrine, according to the Promise of our Savior,
John 15. 26, 27. Of these he mentions in particular, First, (...), Signs. That
is, Miraculous Works wrought to signify the Presence of God by his Power with
them that wrought them; so giving out his Approbation of the Doctrine which
they taught. Secondly, (...), Prodigies or Wonders, Works beyond the Power of
Nature or energie of Natural Causes wrought to fill Men with Wonder and
Admiration; manifesting (...), and surprising Men with a sense of the Presence
of God. Thirdly, (...) mighty Works of several sorts, such as opening of the
Eyes of the Blind, raising the Dead and the like. These being mentioned, there
is added in general (...), that is, (...) Gifts of the Holy Ghost. For these
and other like things did the Holy Ghost work and effect to the end mentioned.
And these Distributions are from him as the Signs and Wonders were, that is,
Effects of his Power; only there is added an intimation how they are all
wrought by him, which is by giving them a power for their Operation variously
dividing them amongst those on whom they were bestowed; and that as it is
added, (...) according unto his own Will. And this place is so directly and
fully expounded, 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. that there is no room of exception
left unto the most obstinate. And that place having been opened before in the
entrance of this Discourse, I shall not here call it over again. These (...)
therefore are his Gifts which as Parts and Parcels of his Work he gives out in
great variety. (...). Origin. Comment. in Matthaeum.
To the same purpose are his Operations described, Isa. 11. 2, 3. The Spirit of
the Lord shall rest upon Him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and of Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of the
Lord. He is first called the Spirit of the Lord to express his Being and
Nature; and then he is termed the Spirit of Wisdom and of Counsel, etc. That is
He who is the Author of Wisdom and Counsel, and the rest of the Graces
mentioned, who divides and distributes them according to his own Will. That
variety of Gifts and Graces wherewith Believers are endowed and adorned are
these (...) or Distributions of the Holy Spirit. Hence the principal respect
that we have unto him immediately in our Worship of him under the New Testament
is, as he is the Author of these various Gifts and Graces. So John saluting the
Churches of Asia, prays for Grace for them from God the Father, and the seven
Spirits that are before his Throne, Rev. 1. 4. That is, the Holy Spirit of God
considered in his care of the Church, and his yielding supplies unto it as the
Author of that Perfection of Gifts and Graces which are and are to be bestowed
upon it. So does the number of Seven denote. And therefore whereas our Lord
Jesus Christ as the Foundation of his Church was anointed with all the Gifts
and Graces of the Spirit in their Perfection, it is said that upon that one
Stone should be seven Eyes, Zech. 3. 9. all the Gifts of the Seven Spirits of
God, or of that Holy Spirit which is the Author of them all.

Division of the Holy Ghost from this place, is built on the Supposition that
we have before rejected; namely, that he is not a Divine Person, but an
Arbitrary Emanation of Divine Power; and yet neither so can the division of the
Holy Ghost pleaded for be with any tolerable sense maintained. Crellius says
indeed that all Divine Inspirations may be considered as one Whole, as many
Waters make up one Sea. In this respect the Holy Ghost is One, that is, one
Universal made up of many Species, this is totum logicum. And so He may be
divided into his Subordinate Species. But what Ground or Color is there for
any such Notions in the Scripture? Where is it said that all the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost do constitute or make up one Holy Ghost? Or the Holy Ghost is one in
general, because many Effects are ascribed unto him? Or that the several Gifts
of the Spirit are so many distinct kinds of it? The contrary unto all these is
expressly taught; namely, that the One Holy Spirit works all these things as
he pleases, so that they are all of them external Acts of his Will and Power.
And it is to as little purpose pleaded by the same Author, that he is divided
as a Natural Whole into its Parts, because there is mention of a Measure and
Portion of him. So God is said not to give him to Jesus Christ by Measure, John
3. 34. And to every one of us is given Grace according to the Measure of the
Gift of Christ; as though one Measure of him were granted unto One, and another
Measure to another. But this Measure is plainly of his Gifts and Graces. These
were bestowed on the Lord Christ in all their fullness, without any limitation
either as to Kinds or Degrees. They were poured into him according unto the
utmost extent and capacity of Humane Nature, and that under an inconceivable
advancement by its Union unto the Son of God. Others receive his Gifts and
Graces in limited proportion both as to their Kinds and Degrees. To turn into a
Division of the Spirit himself is the greatest madness. And casting aside
Prejudices there is no difficulty in the understanding of that saying of God to
Moses, Numb. 11. 17. I will take of the Spirit that is on thee and put it on
the Elders. For it is evidently of the Gifts of the Spirit enabling Men for
Rule and Government that God speaks and not of the Spirit himself. Without
any diminution of that Spirit in him, that is of the Gifts that He had
received, God gave unto them, as lighting their Candle by his. And so also the
double Portion of the Spirit of Elijah, which Elisha requested for himself, was
only a large and peculiar measure of Prophetical Light, above what other
Prophets which he left behind him had received; 2 Kin. 2. 9. He asked (...) os
duorum or duplex; (...), or (...). This Expression is first used Deuteronomy. 21. 17.
where the double Portion of the Firstborn is intended. So that probably it was
such a Portion among the other Prophets, as the Firstborn had among the
Brethren of the same Family, which he desired; and so it came to pass, whence
also he had the Rule and Government of them.

BOOK II.
Peculiar Operations OF THE HOLY SPIRIT UNDER THE Old Testament Preparatory for
The NEW. CHAP. I.
(1.) The Work of the Spirit of God in the New Creation; by some despised. (2.)
Works under the Old Testament preparatory to the New Creation. (3, 4.)
Distribution of the Works of the Spirit. (5.) The Gift of Prophecy; the
Nature, Use, and End of it. (6.) The beginning of Prophecy. (7.) The Holy
Spirit the only Author of it. (8.) The Name of a Prophet; its signification,
and his Work. (9.) Prophecy by Inspiration; whence so called. (10.) Prophets
how acted by the Holy Ghost. (11.) The Adjuncts of Prophecy, or distinct ways
of its Communication. (12.) Of Articulate Voices. (13.) Dreams. (14.) Visions.
(15.) Adjuncts of Prophecy. Symbolical Actions. (16.) Local Mutations. (17.)
Whether unsanctified Persons might have the Gift of Prophecy. The Case of
Baalam. (18.) Answered. (19.) Of writing the Scriptures. (20.) Three things
required thereunto. (21.) Of Miracles. (22.) Works of the Spirit of God in the
improvement of the Natural Faculties of the Minds of Men in things Political.
(23.) In things Moral. (24.) In things Corporeal. (25.) In things Intellectual
and Artificial. (26.) In preaching of the Word.

HAving passed through these general things which are of a necessary previous
Consideration unto the especial Works of the Holy Ghost, I now proceed unto
that which is the principal Subject of our present Design. And this is the
Dispensation and Work of the Holy Spirit of God, with respect unto the New
Creation and the Recovery of Mankind or the Church of God thereby. A Matter
this is of the highest Importance unto them that sincerely believe, but most
violently and of late virulently opposed by all the Enemies of the Grace of God
and our Lord Jesus Christ. The Weight and Concernment of the Doctrine hereof,
have in part been spoken unto before. I shall at present add no farther
Considerations to the same purpose, but leave all that fear the Name of God to
make a Judgment of it by what is revealed concerning it in the Scriptures, and
the Uses whereunto it is in them directed. Many we know will not receive these
things, but whilst we keep our selves in the handling of them unto that Word
whereby one day both we and they must either stand or fall; we need not be
moved at their Ignorance, or Pride, nor at the Fruits and Effects of them in
Reproaches Contempt and scorn. For (...).

New Creation are of two sorts. First, Such as were Preparatory unto it under
the Old Testament. For I reckon that the State of the Old-Creation, as unto our
Living unto God, ended with the Entrance of Sin and giving the First Promise.
Whatever ensued thereon, in a Way of Grace, was preparatory for and unto the
New. 2dly, Such as were actually wrought about it under the New. Those Acts and
Workings of his, which are Common to both states of the Church, as is his
effectual Dispensation of sanctifying Grace toward the Elect of God, I shall
handle in Common under the Second Head. Under the First, I shall only reckon up
those that were peculiar unto that State. To make way hereunto I shall premise
two general Positions.

Excellent amongst Men, whether it be absolutely Extraordinary, and every way
above the Production of Natural Principles; or whether it consist in an eminent
and peculiar Improvement of those Principles and Abilities, but it is ascribed
unto the Holy Spirit of God as the immediate Operator and Efficient Cause of
it. This we shall afterward confirm by Instances. Of old he was All; now some
would have him nothing.

2. Whatever the Holy Spirit wrought in an eminent manner under the Old
Testament, it had generally and for the most part, if not absolutely and
always, a Respect unto our Lord Jesus Christ and the Gospel, and so was
preparatory unto the Completing of the great Work of the New Creation in and
by Him.

And these Works of the Holy Spirit, may be referred unto the two sorts
mentioned; Namely, (1.) Such as were Extraordinary and exceeding the whole
compass of the Abilities of Nature however improved and advanced; and (2.)
Those which consist in the Improving and Exaltation of those Abilities, to
answer the Occasions of Life, and Use of the Church. Those of the first sort
may be reduced unto three Heads. (1.) Prophesy. (2.) Inditeing of the
Scripture. (3.) Miracles. Those of the other sort we shall find. (1.) In things
Political as skill for Government and Rule amongst Men. (2.) In things Moral,
as Fortitude and Courage. (3.) In things Natural as increase of Bodily
strength. (4.) Gifts Intellectual; (1.) of things Sacred, as to preach the Word
of God, (2.) In things Artificial as in Bezaliel and Aholiab. The Work of Grace
on the Hearts of Men being more fully revealed under the New Testament then
before, and of the same Kind and Nature in every state of the Church since the
fall, I shall treat of it once for all in its most proper Place.

Prophecy. For the Chief and Principal End hereof in the Church was to
foresignify Him, his Sufferings and the Glory that should ensue; or to appoint
such things to be observed in Divine Worship as might be Types and
Representations of Him. For the Chiefest Privelidg of the Church of Old was but
to hear Tidings of the Things which we enjoy, Isa. 33. 17. As Moses on the top
of Pisgah saw the Land of Canaan; and in Spirit, the Beauties of Holiness to be
erected therein, which was his highest Attainment; So the best of these Saints
was to contemplate the King of Saints in the Land that was yet very far from
them, or Christ in the flesh. And this Prospect which by Faith they obtained
was their Chiefest Joy and Glory, Joh. 8. 56; yet they all ended their Days as
Moses did, with respect unto the Type of the Gospel-state, Deuteronomy. 3. 24, 25. So
did they: Luke 10. 23. 24. God having provided some better thing for us, that
they without us should not be made perfect, Heb. 11. 40. That this was the
Principal End of the Gift of Prophecy Peter declares; 1 Epist. Chap. 1. v. 9,
10, 11, 12. Receiving the End of your Faith, he Salvation of your Souls; of
which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently who
prophesyed of the Grace that should come unto you. Searching what, or what
manner of Time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it
testified before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should
follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they
did minister the Things, which are now reported unto you. Some of the Ancients
apprehended that some things were spoken obscurely by the Prophets and not to
be understood without great search, especially such as concerned the Rejection
of the Jews, lest they should have been provoked to abolish the Scripture it
self. (...). Eusebius. Demost. Evangel. lib. 6. Proem.
But the Sum and Substance of the Prophetical Work under the Old Testament,
with the Light, Design, and Ministry of the Prophets themselves, are declared
in those Words. The Work was to give Testimony unto the Truth of God in the
first Promise; concerning the Coming of the Blessing Seed. This was God's
Method. First, He gave Himself immediately that Promise which was the
Foundation of the Church; Genesis 3. 15. Then by Revelation unto the Prophets he
confirmed that Promise, after all which the Lord Christ was sent to make them
all good unto the Church; Romans 15. 8. Herewithal they received fresh
Revelations concerning his Person and his Sufferings, with the Glory that was
to ensue thereon and the Grace which was to come thereby unto the Church.
Whilst they were thus employed and acted by the Holy Ghost or the Spirit of
Christ, they diligently endeavored to come to an Acquaintance with the Things
themselves, in their Nature and Efficacy, which were revealed unto them; Omnes
Prophetae illa tantummodo sciebant quae illis fuissent a Domino revelata. Vnde
and Rex Hieremiam dubio interrogat, si in ea hora qua cum illo loquebatur apud
eum Sermo Domini haberetur. Sed and Eliseus dicit, quomodo haec Dominus
abscondit a me, and Elias preter se esse alios qui Deum colerent ignoravit.
Hierom. Comment. in Epist. ad Roman. Cap. 2.
yet so as considering that not Themselves but some Succeeding Generations
should enjoy them in their actual Exhibition. And whilst they were intent on
these things, they searched also, as far as intimation was given thereof by the
Spirit, after the Time wherein all these things should be accomplished; both
when it should be, and what Manner of time it should be, or what would be the
State and Condition of the People of God in those Days. This was the Principal
End of the Gift of Prophecy, and this the principal Work and Employment of the
Prophets. The first Promise was given by God in the Person of the Son, as I
have proved elsewhere; Genesis 3. 15. But the whole Explication Confirmation and
Declaration of it, was carried on by the Gift of Prophecy.

betimes in the World, and continued without any known interruption in the
Possession of some one or more in the Church at all times, during its
Preparatory or subservivient Estate. After the finishing of the Canon of the
Old Testament, it ceased in the Judaical Church until it had a revival in John
the Baptist, who was therefore Greater than any Prophet that went before,
because he made the nearest Approach unto, and the clearest Discovery of the
Lord Jesus Christ, the End of all Prophecys. Thus God spoke by the mouth of his
Holy Prophets, (...), Luke 1. 70. that were from the Beginning of the World.
Adam himself had many things revealed unto him; without which he could not have
Worshipped God aright in that state and condition whereinto he was come. For
although his Natural Light was sufficient to direct Him unto all Religious
Services required by the Law of Creation; yet was it not so unto all Duties of
that state whereinto he was brought by the giving of the Promise after the
entrance of Sin. So was he guided unto the Observance of such Ordinances of
Worship as were needful for Him, and accepted with God, as were Sacrifices. The
Prophecy of Enoch in not only remembered, but called over and recorded; Jude 14.
15. And its a matter neither curious nor difficult to demonstrate, that all the
Patriarchs of Old before the Flood, were guided by a Prophetical Spirit in the
Imposition of Names on those Children who were to succeed them in the sacred
Line. Concerning Abraham God expressly says Himself, that he was a Prophet,
Genesis 20. 7. that is, One who used to receive Divine Revelations.

Now this Gift of Prophecy was always the immediate Effect of the Operation of
the Holy Spirit. So it is both affirmed in general, and in all the Particular
Instances of it. In the first way, we have the Illustrious Testimony of the
Apostle Peter; 2 Epist. Chap. 1. v. 20, 21. Knowing this first that no Prophecy
of Scripture is of any Private Interpretation, for the Prophecy came not in Old
Time by the Will of Man, but Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. (...). Theophil. ad Autolycum. lib. 2.
This is a Principle among Beleivers; this they grant and allow in the first
Place, as that which they resolve their Faith into; Namely, that the sure word
of Prophecy, Prophetae voces itemque Virtutes ad fidem Divinitatis edebant.
Tertul. Apol. Cap. 18.

(...). Plotin. Ennead. 3. lib. 3.


which they in all Things take heed unto v. 19. was not a fruit of any Men's
private conceptions; nor was Subject to the Wills of Men, so as to attain it,
or exercise it by their own Ability. But it was given by Inspiration from God;
2 Timothy 3. 16; For the Holy Ghost, by acting, moving, guiding the Minds of Holy
Men, enabled them thereunto. This was the sole Fountain and Cause of all true
Divine Prophecy thatever was given or granted to the Use of the Church. And in
particular the Coming of the Spirit of God upon the Prophets enabling them unto
their Work is frequently mentioned. Micah declares in his own Instance how it
was with them all, Chap. 3. 8. But truly I am full of Power by the Spirit of
the Lord, and of Judgment, and of Might, to declare unto Jacob his
Transgression, and to Israel his Sin. It was from the Spirit of God alone, that
he had all his Ability for the discharge of that Prophetical Office whereunto
he was called. And when God would endow Seventy Elders with a Gift of Prophecy;
he tells Moses that he would take of the Spirit that was upon him, and give
unto them for that Purpose; that is, he would communicate of the same Spirit
unto them as was in Him. And where it is said at any time, that God spoke by
the Prophets, or that the Word of God Came to them, of God spoke to them; it is
always intended that this was the immediate Work of the Holy Ghost. So says
David of Himself; The Spirit of the Lord spoke by Me, or in me; and his word
was in my Tongue. 2 Samuel 23. 2. Hence our Apostle repeating his words ascribes
them directly to the Holy Ghost; Heb. 3. 7. Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says,
to day if you will hear his voice; and Chap. 4. 7. Saying in David. So the
Words which are ascribed unto the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6. 9. are asserted to be
the Words of the Holy Ghost, Acts 28. 25. He spoke to them, or in them by his
holy Inspirations; and he spoke by them in his effectual infallible guidance of
them, to utter, declare, and write what they received from Him, without Mistake
or Variation.

Exercise is considered two ways. First, precisely for the Prediction or
foretelling things to Come, as the Greek word and the Latin traduced from
thence do signify. So Prophecy is a Divine Prediction of future things
proceeding from Divine Revelation. But the Hebrew (...) whence are (...) a
Prophet, and (...) Prophesy, is not confined unto any such signification,
although Predictions from supernatural Revelation are constantly expressed by
it. But in general ^he word signifies no more, but to speak out, interpret and
declare the Minds or Words of another. So God tells Moses; that He would make
Him a God unto Pharaoh; One that should deal with him in the Name, stead and
Power of God; and Aaron his Brother should be his Prophet; Exodus 7. 1. that is,
one that should interpret his meaning and declare his Words unto Pharaoh, Moses
having complained of the Defect of his own Utterance. So Prophets are the
Interpreters, the Declarers of the Word Will, Mind or Oracles of God unto
others. Such an One is described Job. 33. 23. Hence those who expounded the
Scripture unto the Church under the New Testament were called Prophets, and
their work Prophecy; Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 14. 31, 32. And under the Old Testament
those that celebrated the Praises of God with singing in the Temple according
to the Institution of David, are said therein to Prophesy; 1 Chronicles. 25. 2. And
this Name (...) a Prophet was of ancient use; for so God termed Abraham. Genesis
20. 7. Afterward in common use a Prophet was called (...) and (...) a Seer,
because of their Divine Visions; and this was occasioned from those words of
God concerning Moses, Numb. 11. 6. And this being the Ordinary way of his
Revealing himself, namely by Dreams and Visions, Prophets in those Days even
from the Death of Moses were commonly called Seers; which continued in use
until the days of Samuel, 1. Sam. 9. 9. And (...) a Man of God; 1 Samuel 2. 27;
which Name Paul gives to the Preachers of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 6. 11. 2 Timothy 3.
17. And it is not altogether unworthy Observation what Kimchi notes, that the
Verb (...) is most frequently used in the Passive Conjugation Niphal, because
it denotes a receiving of that from God by way of Revelation which is spoken
unto others in a way of Prophecy. And as it lies before us as an Extraordinary
Gift of the Holy Ghost, it is neither to be confined to the strict Notion of
Prediction and Foretelling, nor to be extended to every true Declaration of the
Mind of God, but only that which is obtained by immediate Revelation.

Peculiar Gift therefore of the Holy Spirit we may a little distinctly enquire
into. And two things concerning it may be considered. (1.) Its General Nature.
(2.) The particular ways whereby especial Revelation was granted unto any.
First, For its Nature in general it consisted in Inspiration. Sed and hoc
notandum ex eo quod dixerat; ut videam quid loquatur, in me; Prophetiam
Visionem and Eloquium Dei non extrinsecus ad Prophetas fieri, sed intrinsecus
and interiori homini respondere. Vnde and Zacharias, and Angelus inquit, qui
loquebatur in me, Hieron. Comment. in Habbak. Cap. 2.
So the Apostle speaks of the Prophesies recorded in the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.
16. (...). Divine Inspiration was the Original and Cause of it. And the acting
of the Holy Ghost in communicating his Mind unto the Prophets was called
Inspiration on a double account. First, in answer unto his Name and Nature. The
Name whereby He is revealed unto us signifies Breath; and He is called the
Breath of God whereby his Essential Relation to the Father and Son, with his
Eternal Natural Emanation from them, is expressed. And therefore when our
Savior gave Him unto his Disciples as a proper Instructive Emblem of what he
gave he breathed upon them, John 20. 22. So also in the great Work of the
Infusion of the Reasonable Soul into the Body of Man, it is said, God breathed
into him the Breath of Life, Genesis 2. 7. From hence I say it is, namely from the
Nature and Name of the Holy Spirit, that his immediate actings on the Minds of
Men in the supernatural Communication of Divine Revelations unto them is called
Inspiration or Inbreathing. And the Unclean Spirit counterfeiting his Actings,
did inspire his Worshippers with a preternatural Afflatus, by ways suited unto
his own filthy Vileness. Secondly; This Holy Work of the Spirit of God, as it
is expressed suitable to his Name and Nature, so the Meekness, Gentleness
Facility wherewith he works is intended hereby. He did as it were gently and
softly breath into them the Knowledge and Comprehension of Holy Things. It is an
especial and immediate Work wherein he acts suitably unto his Nature as a
Spirit, the Spirit or Breath of God; and suitably unto his peculiar Personal
Properties of Meekness Gentleness and Peace. So his Acting is Inspiration,
whereby he came within the Faculties of the Souls of Men, acting them with a
Power that was not their own. It is true when He had thus inspired any with the
Mind of God, they had no Rest nor could have unless they declared it in its
proper Way and Season; Jer. 20. 9. Then I said I will not make mention of him,
nor speak in his Name any more; but his Word was in mine heart as a burning
Fire shut up in my Bones, and I was weary with forbearing I could not stay. But
this Disturbance was from a moral sense of their Duty, and no^ from any violent
Agitations of his upon their Natures. And whereas sometimes trouble and
consternation of Spirit did befall some of the Prophets in and under the
Revelations they received from Him; it was on a double account. First, Of the
dreadful Representations of things that were made unto them in Visions. Things
of great dread and terror were represented unto their Fancies and Imaginations.
Secondly, Of the greatness and dread of the Things themselves revealed, which
sometimes were terrible and destructive, Dan. 17. 27. Chap. 7. 15, 28. Hab. 16.
Isa. 21. 2, 3, 4. But his Inspirations were gentle and placid.

moved or acted by the Holy Ghost. Holy Men of God spoke (...), 2 Pet. 1. 21.
Moved or Acted by the Holy Ghost. And two things are intended hereby. First,
The Preparation and Elevation of their Intellectual Faculties, their Minds and
Understandings wherein his Revelations were to be received. He prepared them
for to receive the Impressions he made upon them, and confirmed their memories
to retain them. He did not indeed so enlighten and raise their Minds as to give
them a distinct Understanding and full Comprehension of all the Things
themselves that were declared unto them. There was more in their Inspirations
than they could search into the bottom of And whereas the Ancients contend
against the Ebionites, Marcionites, and Montanists, as Epiphanius Advers.
Haeres. lib. 2. Tom. 1 Haeres. 48. Hierom. Proaem. Comment. in Isaiam, that the
Prophets were not used extatically, but understood the things that were spoken
to them; They did not intend that they had by virtue of their Inspiration a
full Comprehension of the whole sense of the Revelations made unto them, but
only that they were not in or by Prophecy deprived of the use of their
Intellectual Faculties, as it befell Satanical Enthusiasts. (...), as Epiphanius
speaks. Wherefore upon these words of Austin, per quosdam scientes, per quosdam
nescientes, id quod ex adventu Christi usque nunc and deinceps agitur
praenunciaretur esse venturum, de Civitat. Dei, lib. 7. cap. 32. One well adds,
Prophetae nec omnes sua vaticinia intelligebant, nec qui intelligebant omnia
intelligebant: non enim ex se loquebantur sed ex superiore Dei afflatu; cujus
consilia non omnia eis erant manifesta; utebaturque Deus illis non velut
consultis futurorum, sed instrumentis quibus homines alloqueretur.
Hence although the Prophets under the Old Testament were made use of to
communicate the clearest Revelations and Predictions concerning Jesus Christ,
yet in the Knowledge and Understanding of the meaning of them, they were all
inferior to John Baptist, as he was in this Matter to the meanest Believer, or
least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore for their own Illumination and
Edification did they diligently enquire by the ordinary means of Prayer and
Meditation, into the meaning of the Spirit of God in those Prophesies which
themselves received by extraordinary Revelation, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Nor did
Daniel who had those express Representations and glorious Visions concerning
the Monarchies of the World, and the providential Alterations which should be
wrought in them, understand what and how things would be in their
Accomplishment. That account he does give of himself in the close of his
Visions, Chap. 12 8, 9. But he so raised and prepared their Minds, as that they
might be capable to receive and retain those impressions of things which he
communicated unto them. So a Man Tunes the Strings of an Instrument, that it
may in a due manner receive the Impressions of his Finger and give out the
Sound he intends. He did not speak in them or by them, and leave it unto the
Use of their Natural Faculties their Minds or Memories, to understand and
remember the things spoken by Him, and so declare them to others. But he
himself acted their Faculties, making use of them to express his Words not
their own Conceptions. And herein besides other things consists the difference
between the Inspirations of the Holy Spirit and those so called of the Devil.
The utmost that Satan can do is, to make strong impressions on the Imaginations
of Men, or influencing their Faculties by possessing, wresting, distorting the
Organs of the Body and Spirits of the Blood. The Holy Spirit is in the
Faculties and uses them as his Organs. And this he did secondly with that
Light and Evidence of Himself, of his Power, Truth and Holiness, as left them
liable to no suspicion, whether their Minds were under his Conduct and
Influence or no. Men are subject to fall so far under the Power of their own
Imaginations, through the prevalency of a corrupt distempered Fancy, as to
suppose them Supernatural Revelations. And Satan may and did of old, and
perhaps does so still impose on the minds of some, and communicate unto them
such a conception of his Insinuations, as that they shall for a while think
them to be from God himself. But in the Inspirations of the Holy Spirit, and
his actings of the Minds of the Holy Men of old, he gave them infallible
Assurance that it was himself alone by whom they were acted, Jer. 23. 28. If
any shall ask by what (...) or Infallible Tokens, they might know assuredly the
Inspirations of the Holy Spirit, and be satisfied with such a persuasion as was
not liable to mistake, that they were not imposed upon? I must say plainly,
That cannot tell; for these are things whereof we have no Experience. Nor is
any thing of this Nature, whatever some falsely and foolishly impute unto them
who profess and avow an interest in the ordinary gracious workings of the Holy
Ghost, pretended unto. What some Phrenetical Persons in their Distempers or
under their Delusions have boasted of, no sober or wise Man esteems worthy of
any sedate Consideration. But this I say, It was the Design of the Holy Ghost
to give those whom He did thus extraordinarily inspire, an Assurance sufficient
to bear them out in the discharge of their Duty that they were acted by himself
alone. For in the pursuit of their Work which they were by Him called unto,
they were to encounter various Dangers, and some of them to lay down their
Lives for a Testimony unto the Truth of the Message delivered by them. This
they could not be engaged into without as full an evidence of his acting them,
as the Nature of Man in such Cases is capable of; The Case of Abraham fully
confirms it. And it is impossible but that in these extraordinary workings
there was such an impression of Himself, his Holiness and Authority left on
their Minds, as did secure them from all fear of Delusion. Even upon the Word
as delivered by them unto others, he put those Characters of Divine Truth,
Holiness and Power, as rendered it (...) worthy to be believed, and not to be
rejected without the highest sin by them unto whom it came. Much more was there
such an evidence in it unto them who enjoyed its Original Inspiration.
Secondly, He acted and guided them as to the very Organs of their Bodies,
whereby they expressed the Revelation which they had received by Inspiration
from Him. They spoke as they were acted by the Holy Ghost. He guided their
Tongues in the Declaration of his Revelations, as the Mind of a Man guides his
Hand in writing to express its Conceptions. Hence David having received
Revelations from Him, or being inspired by Him, affirms in his Expression of
them, That his Tongue was the Pen of a ready Writer, Psalm. 45. 2. that is, it
was so guided by the Spirit of God to express the Conceptions received from
Him. And on this account God is said to speak by their Mouths, as he spoke by
the Mouth of the Holy Prophets, Luke 1. 70. all of whom had but one Mouth on
the account of their absolute Consent and Agreement in the same Predictions;
For this is the meaning of one Voice or one Mouth in a Multitude. The Holy
Ghost spoke by the Mouth of David, Acts 1. 16. For whatever they received by
Revelation they were but the Pipes through which the Waters of it were
conveyed, without the least mixture with any allay from their Frailties or
Infirmities. So when David had received the Pattern of the Temple, and the
manner of the whole Worship of God therein by the Spirit; 1 Chronicles. 28. 12. He
says, Nec aer v^ce pulsatus ad aures eorum perveniebat, sed Deus loquebatur in
animo Prophetarum. Hieron. Proem. in lib. 1. Commentar. in Isa.
All this the Lord made me understand in writing by his hand upon me, even all
the Work of this Pattern, v. 19. The Spirit of God not only revealed it unto
him, but so guided Him in the writing of it down, as that he might understand
the Mind of God out of what Himself had written; or he gave it him so plainly
and evidently, as if every Particular had been expressed in writing by the
Finger of God.

Maimonides in his More Nebuchim, have from the several ways of the
Communication of Divine Revelations, distinguished the Degrees of Prophecy or
of the Gifts of it, preferring one above another. This I have elsewhere
disproved, Expos. Heb. Chap. 1. Neither indeed is there either hence or from
any other ground the least occasion to feign those eleven Degrees of Prophecy
which he thought he had found out; much less may the Spirit or Gift of
Prophecy be attained by the ways he prescribes, and with Tatianus seems to
give countenance unto. (...). Tatian. Assyr. Contra Graecos.
The distinct outward manners and ways of Revelation mentioned in the
Scriptures may be reduced unto three Heads. (1.) Voices. (2.) Dreams. (3.)
Visions. And the accidental Adjuncts of it are two; (1.) Symbolical Actions.
(2.) Local Mutations. The Schoolmen after Aquinas 22. q. 174. A. 1. do commonly
reduce the means of Revelation unto three Heads. For whereas there are three
ways whereby we come to know any thing. (1.) By our External Senses. (2.) By
Impressions on the Fantasy or Imagination. (3.) By pure Acts of the
Understanding; So God by three ways revealed his Will unto the Prophets: (1.)
By Objects of their Senses as by audible Voices. (2.) By Impressions on the
Imagination in Dreams and Visions. (3.) By Illustration or enlightening of their
Minds. But as this last way expresses Divine Inspiration, I cannot acknowledge
it as a distinct way of Revelation by it self. For it was that which was
absolutely necessary to give an infallible assurance of mind in the other ways
also. And setting that aside, there is none of them but are obnoxious to
Delusion.

Articulate Voice, speaking out those things which he did intend to declare in
words significant of them. So he revealed Himself or his Mind unto Moses when
he spoke to him face to face as a Man speaks unto his Friend, Exodus 33. 11.
Numb. 12. 8. And as far as I can observe the whole Revelation made unto Moses,
was by outward audible articulate Voices, whose Sense was impressed on his Mind
by the Holy Spirit. For an external Voice without an inward Elevation and
Disposition of Mind, is not sufficient to give security and assurance of Truth
unto him that does receive it. So God spoke to Elijah, 1 Kings 19. 12, 13, 14.
as also to Samuel and Jeremiah, and it may be to all the rest of the Prophets
at their first Calling and Entrance into their Ministry. For words formed
miraculously by God, and conveyed sensibly unto the outward Ears of Men,
carry a great Majesty and Authority with them. This was not the usual way of
God's revealing his Mind, nor is it signified by that Phrase of Speech, The
Word of the Lord came unto me; whereby no more is intended but an immediate
Revelation by what way or means soever it was granted. Mostly this was by that
Secret effectual Impression on their Minds which we have before described. And
these Voices were either immediately created by God himself as when he spoke
unto Moses, wherein the eminency of the Revelation made unto him principally
consisted, or the Ministry of Angels was used in the Formation and
Pronunciation of them. But, as we observed before, the Divine Certainty of
their Minds to whom they were spoken with their Abilities infallibly to declare
them unto others, was from an immediate internal Work of the Spirit of God upon
them. Without this the Prophets might have been imposed on by external audible
Voices; nor would they by themselves give their minds an infallible assurance.

Secondly; Dreams were made use of under the Old Testament to the same purpose,
and unto them also I refer all those Visions which they had in their sleep
though not called Dreams. Sunt autem multa genera Prophetandi, quorum unum est
Somni^rum quale fuit in Daniele. Hieron. in Hieremiam, cap. 23.
And these in this Case were the immediate Operation of the Holy Ghost as to
the Divine and Infallible Impressions they conveyed to the Minds of Men.
Hence in the Promise of the Plentiful Pouring out of the Spirit or
Communication of his Gifts, mention is made of Dreams, Acts 2. 17. I will pour
out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy,
your young Men shall see Visions, and your old Men shall dream Dreams. Not that
God intended much to make use of this way of Dreams and Nocturnal Visions under
the New Testament; but the intention of the words is to show, that there should
be a plentiful E^^usion of that Spirit which acted by those various Ways and
Means then under the Old. Only as to some particular Directions God did
sometimes continue his Intimations by Visions in the Rest of the Night. Such a
Vision had Paul, Acts 16. 10. But of old this was more frequent. So God made a
signal Revelation unto Abraham, when the horror of a deep sleep fell upon him,
Genesis 15. 12, 13, 14. And Daniel heard the Voice of the words of him that spoke
unto him, when he was in a deep Sleep, Dan. 10. 9. But this Sleep of theirs I
look not on as Natural, but as that which God sent and cast them into, that
therein he might represent the Image of things unto their Imaginations. So of
old he caused a deep sleep to fall on Adam, Genesis 2. 21. The Jews distinguish
between Dreams and those Visions in Sleep as they may be distinctly considered;
but I cast them together under one Head of Revelation in Sleep. And this way of
Revelation was so common, that one who pretended to Prophecy would cry out
(...), I have dreamed, I have dreamed, Jer. 23. And by the Devils imitation of
God's dealing with his Church, this became a way of Vaticination among the
Heathen also, Hom. Ili. 1. (...); A Dream is from Jupiter. And when the
reprobate Jews were deserted as to all Divine Revelations, they pretended unto
a singular skill in the Interpretation of Dreams, on the account of their
deceit wherein they were sufficiently infamous. Qualiacumque voles Judaei
somnia vendent.

Visions or Representations of things to the inward or outward senses of the
Prophets. And this way was so frequent, that it bare the Name for a Season of
all Prophetical Revelations. For so we observed before that a Prophet of old
time was called a Seer. And that because in their receiving of their Prophesies
they saw Visions also. So Isaiah terms his whole Glorious Prophecy (...) the
Vision which he saw, Chap. 1. 1. partly from the especial Representation of
things that were made unto Him, Chap. 6. 1, 2, 3. and partly it may be from the
Evidence of the things revealed unto him, which were cleared as fully to his
Mind as if he had had an ocular inspection of them. So from the Matter of them,
Prophesies began in common to be called the Burden of the Lord. For he burdened
their Consciences with his Word, and their Persons with its Execution. But when
false Prophets began to make frequent use and to serve themselves of this
Expression it was forbidden, Jer. 23. 33, 36. And yet we find that there is
mention hereof about the same Time it may be by Habbakuk, Chap. 1. 1. as also
after the return from the Captivity, Zech. 9. 1. Mal. 1. 1. Either therefore
this respected that only season wherein false Prophets abounded, whom God
would thus deprive of their Pretense; or indeed the People by Contempt and
Scorn did use that Expression as that which was familiar unto the Prophets in
their Denunciation of God's Judgments against them, which God here rebukes them
for and threatens to revenge. But none of the Prophets had all their
Revelations by Visions; nor does this concern the Communication of the Gift of
Prophecy but it Exercise. And their Visions are particularly recorded. Such
were those of Isa. 6. 1, 2. Jer. 1. 11, 14, 15. Ezekiel. 1. and the like. Now
these Visions were of two sorts. Propheta Deum qui corporaliter invisibilis
est, non corporaliter sed spiritualiter videt. Nam multa genera Visionis in
Scripturis Sanctis inveniuntur. Vnum secundum oculos corporis, sicut vidit
Abraham tres viros sub Ilice Mambre. Alterum secundum quod imaginamur ea quae
per Corpus sentimus. Nam and pars ipsa nostra cum Divinitus assumitur, multa
revelantur non per oculos corporis, aut aures, aliumve sensum carnalem, sed
tamen his similia, sicut vidit Petrus discum illum submitti a Coelo cum variis
animalibus. Tertium autem genus Visionis est secundum mentis intuitum quo
intellecta conspiciuntur v^ritas and sapientia; sine quo gene^^^^^ duo quae
prius posui vel infractu^s^ sunt vel in Errorem mittunt. August. c^ntra
Adamantum cap. 28.
(1.) Outward Representations of things unto the bodily Eyes of the Prophets.
(2.) Inward Representations unto their Minds. (1.) There were sometimes
appearances of Persons or Things made to their outward Senses. And herein God
made use of the Ministry of Angels. Thus three Men appeared unto Abraham, Genesis
18. 1, 2. one whereof was the Son of God himself, the other two Ministering
Angels as has been proved elsewhere. So was the Burning Bush which Moses saw,
Exodus 3. 2. The Appearances without similitude of any living thing on Mount
Sinai at the giving of the Law, Exodus 19. The Man that Joshua saw at the Siege
of Jericho, Chap. 5. 13, 14. Such were the Seething-Pot and Almond-Rod seen by
Jeremiah, Chap. 1. 11, 14. as also his Baskets of Figs, and many more of the
like kind might be instanced in. In these Cases God made Representations of
Things unto their outward Senses. (2.) They were made sometimes only to their
Minds. So it is said expressly that when Peter saw his Vision of a Sheet knit at
the four Corners and let down from Heaven to Earth he was in a Trance, (...),
Acts 10. 10. An Ecstasy seized on him, whereby for a season he was deprived of
the use of his bodily Senses. And to this Head I refer Daniel's and the
Apocalyptical Visions. Especially I do so all those wherein a Representation
was made of God himself and his Glorious Throne. Such as that of Micaiah, 1
Kings 22. 18. and Isa. 6. 1. Ezekiel. 1. 3, 4, 5. It is evident that in all these
there was no use of the bodily Senses of the Prophets, but only their Minds
were affected with the Idea's and Representation of Things. But this was so
effectual, as that they understood not but that they also made use of their
visive Faculty. Hence Peter when he was actually delivered out of Prison,
thought a good while that he had only seen a Vision, Acts 12. 9. for he knew
how powerfully the Mind was wont to be affected by them. Now these Visions of
both sorts were granted unto the Prophets to confirm their Minds in the
Apprehension of the Things communicated unto them for the instruction of
others. For hereby they were deeply affected with them, whereunto a clear Idea
and Representation on of things does effectually tend. But yet two things were
required to render these Visions direct and complete Parts of Divine
Revelation. (1.) That the Minds of the Prophets were acted guided and raised in
a due manner by the Holy Spirit for the receiving of them; this gave them their
Assurance that their Visions were from God. (2.) His enabling them faithfully
to retain, and infallibly to declare what was so represented unto them, For
instance, Ezekiel receives a Vision by way of Representation unto his Mind of
a Glorious Fabric of a Temple, to instruct the Church in the Spiritual Glory
and Beauty of Gospel Worship which was to be introduced, Chap. 44. 4, 5, 6,
etc. It seems utterly impossible for the Mind of Man to conceive and retain at
once all the Harmonious Structure, Dimensions, and Laws of the Fabric
represented. This was the peculiar Work of the Holy Ghost, namely to implant
and preserve the Idea presented unto him on his Mind, and to enable him
accurately and infallibly to declare it. So David affirms that the Spirit of
God made him to understand the Pattern of the Temple built by Solomon in
writing by his hand upon him.

Accidental Adjuncts of Prophecy, which at some times accompanied it. In the
Revelation of the Will of God to the Prophets, they were sometimes enjoined
Symbolical Actions. So Isaiah was commanded to walk naked and barefoot, Isa.
20. 1, 2, 3. Jeremiah to dispose of a Linen Girdle, Chap. 13. 1, 2. Ezekiel to
lie in the Siege, Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. and to remove the Stuff of his House,
Chap. 12. 3, 4. Hosea to take a Wife of Whoredoms, and Children of Whoredoms,
Hos. 1. 2. I shall be brief in what is frequently spoken unto. Some of these
things, as Isaiah's going Naked, and Hoseah's taking a Wife of Whoredoms,
contain things in them against the Light of Nature and the express Law of God,
and of evil example unto others. None of these therefore can be granted to have
been actually done; only these things were represented unto them in Visions to
take the deeper impression upon them. And what they saw or did in Vision, they
speak positively of their so seeing or doing, see Ezekiel. 8. 3, 4. For the other
Instances, I know nothing but that the things reported might be really
performed and not in Vision only. And it is plain that Ezekiel was commanded to
do the things he did in the sight of the People for their more evident
conviction, Chap. 12. 4, 5, 6. and on the sight whereof they made enquiry what
those things belonged unto them, Chap. 24. 19.

Local Mutations, or their being carried and transported from one place unto
another; So was it with Ezekiel, Chap. 8. 3. and 11. 24. And it is expressly
said, that it was in the Visions of God. Falling by Divine Dispensation into a
Trance or Ecstasy, wherein their outward Senses were suspended their Operation,
their Minds and Understandings were unto their own Apprehension carried in a
Holy Rapture from one place unto another, which was effected only by a Divine
and Efficacious Representation of the things unto them, which were done in the
places from whence they were really absent. And these are some of those
Accidents of Prophetical Revelations which are recorded in the Scripture; and
it is possible that some other Instances of the like nature may be observed.
And all these belong to the (...), or manifold variety of Divine Revelations
mentioned Heb. 1. 1.

did ever grant his Holy Inspirations, and the Gift of Propheste thereby, unto
Men wicked and unsanctified. Prophetae erant Baal, and Prophetae confusionis,
and alii ossensionum, and quoscunque vitiosos prophetas Scriptura Commemorat.
Hieron. Comment. in Epist. ad Titum. cap. 1.
For the Apostle Peter tells us, that Holy Men spoke of old as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. which seems to intimate that all those who
were inspired and moved by him as to this Gift of Prophecy were Holy Men of
God. (...). Origin. Commentar. in Johan. Tom. 30.

Prophetiae mysterio usi sunt etiam qui exorbitaverant a vera Religione, quia
and illis dedit Deus Verbum suum ut mysteria futura pronunciarent hominibus.
Hieron. Comment. in Job, cap. 33.

Nam and Prophetare and Daemonia excludere and virtutes magnas in terris facere
sublimis utique and admirabilis res est, non tamen regnum coeleste consequitur
quisquis in his omnibus invenitur, nisi recti and justi itineris observatione
gradiatur. Cyprian. de Veritat. Ecclesiae.


And yet on the other hand we shall find that true Prophesies have been given
out by Men seeming utterly void of all sanctifying Grace. And to increase the
difficulty, it is certain that great Predictions, and those with respect unto
Christ himself, have been given and made by Men guided and acted for the most
part by the Devil. So was it with Balaam who was a Sorcerer, that gave himself
to Diabolical Enchantments and Divinations, and as such a one was destroyed by
God's Appointment. Yea at or about the same time wherein he uttered a most
Glorious Prophecy concerning the Messiah the Star of Jacob; being left unto
his own Spirit and Inclination, he gave cursed Advice and Counsel for the
drawing of the People of God into destructive and Judgment-procuring sins,
Numb. 33. 16. And in the whole of his Enterprise he thought to have satisfied
his Covetousness with a reward for cursing them by his Enchantments. And yet
this Man not only professes of himself that he heard the Words of God and saw
the Visions of the Almighty. Numb. 24. 4. but did actually foretell and
prophecy Glorious Things concerning Christ and his Kingdom. Shall we then
think that the Holy Spirit of God will immix his own Holy Inspirations with the
wicked suggestions of the Devil in a South-sayer? Or shall we suppose that the
Devil was the Author of those Predictions, whereas God reproacheth false Gods
and their Prophets acted by them, that they could not declare the things that
should happen, nor show the things that were to come afterward? Isa. 41. 22,
23. So also it is said of Saul that the Spirit of the Lord departed from him,
and an Evil Spirit vexed him; and yet afterward that the Spirit of God came
upon him and he prophesied, 1 Samuel 19. 24. The Old Prophet at Bethel who lied
unto the Prophet that came from Judah, and that in the Name of the Lord,
seducing him unto Sin and Destruction, and probably defiled with the Idolatry
and false Worship of Jeroboam, was yet esteemed a Prophet, and did foretell what
came to pass, 1 Kings 13.

Sundry things may be offered for the Solution of this Difficulty. For (1.) as
to that place of the Apostle Peter; (1.) It may not be taken Universally, that
all who prophesied at any time were Personally Holy, but only that for the most
part so they were. (2.) He seems to speak particularly of them only who were
Penmen of the Scripture, and of those Prophesies which remain therein for the
Instruction of the Church, concerning whom I no way doubt but that they were
all Sanctified and Holy. (3.) It may be that he understands not real inherent
Holiness, but only a Separation and Dedication unto God by especial Office,
which is a thing of another nature. (2.) The Gift of Prophecy is granted not
to be in it self and its own Nature a Sanctifying Grace, nor is the Inspiration
so whereby it is wrought. For whereas it consists in an affecting of the Mind
with a transient irradiation of Light in hidden things, it neither did nor
could of it self produce Faith, Love, or Holiness in the Heart. Another Work of
the Holy Ghost was necessary hereunto.

(3.) There is therefore no Inconsistency in this Matter, that God should grant
an immediate Inspiration unto some that were not really sanctified. And yet I
would not grant this to have been actually done without a just Limitation. For
whereas some were established to be Prophets unto the Church in the whole
course of their Lives after their first Call from God, as Samuel, Elijah,
Elisha, Jeremiah, and the rest of the Prophets mentioned in the Scripture; in
like manner I no way doubt but they were all of them really sanctified by the
Holy Spirit of God. But others there were who had only some occasional
Discoveries of hidden or future things made unto them, or fell into some
Ecstasies or Raptures with a Supernatural Agitation of their Minds (as it is
twice said of Saul) for a short Season. And I see no Reason why we may not
grant, yea from Scripture-Testimonies we must grant, that many such Persons may
be so acted by the Holy Spirit of God. So was it with wicked Caiaphas who is
said to Prophecy, John 11. 51. And a great Prophecy indeed it was which his
words expressed, greater than which there is none in the Scripture. But the
Wretch himself knew nothing of the Importance of what was uttered by him. A
sudden Impression of the Spirit of God caused him against his Intention to
utter a Sacred Truth, and that because he was High Priest whose words were of
great Reputation with the People. (...). Origin. Comment. in Johan. Sect. 30.
And as Balaam was overruled to Prophecy and speak good of Israel, when he
really designed and desired to curse them: So this Caiaphas designing the
Destruction of Jesus Christ, brought forth those words which expressed the
Salvation of the World by his Death. (5.) For the Difficulty about Balaam
himself who was a Sorcerer and the Devil's Prophet, I acknowledge it is of
Importance. But sundry things may be offered for the removal of it. (1.) Some
do contend that Balaam was a Prophet of God only. That indeed he gave himself
unto Judicial Astrology, and the Conjectures of future Events from Natural
Causes. But as to his Prophesies they were all Divine; and the Light of them
affecting only the Speculative Part of his Mind; had no influence upon his
Will, Heart, and Affections which were still corrupt. This Tostatus pleads
for. But as it is expressly said, That he sought for Enchantments, Numb. 24. 1.
So the whole Description of his Course and End gives him up as a Cursed
Sorcerer, and he is expressly called (...), a Sooth-sayer, John. 12. 22. Which
word though we have once rendered by Prudent, that is, One who prudently
conjectureth at future Events according unto present appearing Causes, Isa. 3.
2. yet it is mostly used for a Diabolical Diviner or Sooth-sayer. And for what
he said of himself, That he heard the Voice of God, and saw the Visions of the
Most High, it might be only his own boasting to procure veneration to his
Diabolical Incantations. But in Reputation we find he was in those days in the
World, and supposed he was to utter Divine Oracles unto Men. This God in his
Providence made use of to give out a Testimony to the Nations concerning the
coming of the Messiah, the Report whereof was then almost lost amongst Men. In
this condition it may be granted, that the Good Spirit of God, without the
least Reflection on the Majesty and Purity of his own Holiness did overruled
the Power of the Devil, cast out his Suggestions from the Man's Mind, and gave
such an Impression of Sacred Truths in the room of them, as he could not but
utter and declare. For that instant he did as it were take the Instrument out
of the Hand of Satan, and by his Impression on it caused it to give a sound
according to his Mind, which when he had done he left it again unto his
Possession. And I know not but that he might do so sometimes with others among
the Gentiles who were professedly given up to receive and give out the Oracles
of the Devil. So he made the Damsel possessed with a Spirit of Divination and
Sooth-saying to acknowledge Paul and his Companions to be Servants of the most
High God, and to show to Men the way of Salvation, Acts 16. 16, 17. And this
must be acknowledged by them who suppose that the Sybills gave out Predictions
concerning Jesus Christ, seeing the whole strain of their Prophetical Oracles
were expressly Diabolical. And no Conspiracy of Men or Devils shall cause him to
forego his Sovereignty over them, and the using of them to his own Glory. (6.)
The Case of Saul is plain. The Spirit of the Lord who departed from him, was
the Spirit of Wisdom, Moderation and Courage to fit him for Rule and
Government, that is, the Gifts of the Holy Ghost unto that purpose, which he
withdrew from him. And the Evil Spirit that was upon him, proceeded no farther
but to the stirring up Vexatious and disquieting Affections of Mind. And
notwithstanding this molestation and punishment inflicted on him, the Spirit of
God might at a season fall upon him so as to cast him into a Rapture or Ecstasy
wherein his Mind was acted and exercised in an extraordinary manner, and
himself transported into Actions that were not at all according unto his own
Inclinations. So is this Case well resolved by Saul invidiae stimulo suscitatus
and malo Spiritu saepe arreptus, cum David occidere vellet, and ipse David tunc
cum Samuele and caeterorum Prophetarum c^neo Prophetaret, misit Saul nuncios
and ipsum interficiendum de medio Prophetarum rapere Jubet. -- Sed and ipse cum
inter Prophetas venerat Prophetabat. -- Quoniam Spiritus Sancti verba non
dicentium merito pensantur, sed ipsius voluntate ubicunque voluerit
proferuntur. At vero quidam in hoc loco aestimant quod Saul non Divino Spiritu
sed malo illo quo saepe arripiebatur per totum illum diem Prophetaret. -- Sed
qualiter hoc se^tiri potest cum ita scribitur; and Sanctus est super eum
Spiritus Domini and ambulans prophetabat? nisi forte sic in hoc loco accipiatur
Spiritus Domini quomodo and alio loco Spiritus Domini malus Saul arripiebat.
Verumtamen ubicunque sieve additamento Spiritus Dei vel Spiritus Domini vel
Spiritus Christi in Scripturis Sanctis invenitur, Spiritus Sanctus esse a nullo
sano sensu dubitatur. Vbicunque vero cum additamento Spiritus Domini malus
dicitur esse, intelligitur Diabolus esse, qui Domini propter ministerium, malus
propter vitium dictus videtur. August. de mirabil. Scripturae, lib. 2. cap. 10.
Augustine. And for the old Prophet at Bethel, 1 Kings 13. although he appear
to have been an evil Man, yet he was one whom God made use of to reveal his
Mind sometimes to that People; nor is it probable that he was under Satanical
Delusions like the Prophets of Baal; for he is absolutely called a Prophet, and
the Word of the Lord did really come unto him, v. 20, 21.

Writing of the Scripture was another Effect of the Holy Ghost, which had its
beginning under the Old Testament. I reckon this as a distinct Gift from
Prophecy in general, or rather a distinct Species or kind of Prophecy. For
many Prophets there were Divinely Inspired, who yet never wrote any of their
Prophesies, nor any thing else for the use of the Church. And many Penmen of
the Scripture, were no Prophets in the strict sense of that Name. And the
Apostle tells us that the (...), the Scripture or Writing it self was by
Inspiration from God, 1 Timothy 3. 16. as David affirms that he had the Pattern of
the Temple from the Spirit of God in Writing, because of his guidance of him in
putting its Description into Writing, 1 Chronicles. 28. 19. Now this Ministry was
first committed unto Moses, who besides the Five Books of the Law, probably
also wrote the Story of Job. Many Prophets there were before Him, but he was
the first who committed the Will of God to Writing, after God himself who wrote
the Law in Tables of Stone, which was the Beginning and Pattern of the
Scriptures. The Writers of the Historical Books of the Old Testament before the
Captivity are unknown. The Jews call them (...) the first or former Prophets.
Who they were in particular is not known; but certain it is that they were of
the Number of those Holy Men of God, who of old Wrote and Spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost; Hence are they called Prophets. For although they
wrote in an Historical manner, as did Moses also, concerning things past and
gone in their Days, or it may be presently acted in their own Times, yet they
did not Write them either from their own Memory, nor from Tradition, nor from
the Rolls or Records of Times, (although they might be furnished with and
skilled in these things) but by the Inspiration, Guidance and Direction of the
Holy Ghost. Hence are they called Prophets in such a Latitude as the Word may
be used in, to signify any that are Divinely Inspired, or receive immediate
Revelations from God. And thus was it with all the Penmen of the Holy
Scripture. As their Minds were under that full assurance of Divine Inspiration
which we before described, so their words which they wrote were under the
especial care of the same Spirit, and were of his Suggestion or Inditing.

Inspiration of the Minds of these Prophets, with the Knowledge and Apprehension
of the things communicated unto them. (2.) The Suggestion of words unto them to
express what their Minds conceived. (3.) The guidance of their Hands in setting
down the words suggested, or of their Tongues in uttering them unto those by
whom they were committed to Writing, as Baruch wrote the Prophecy of Jeremiah
from his Mouth, Jer. 36. 3. 18. If either of these were wanting, the Scripture
could not be absolutely and every way Divine and Infallible. For if the Penmen
of it were left unto themselves in any thing wherein that Writing was
concerned, who can secure us that nihil Humani no Humane Imperfection mixed it
self therewithal. I know some think that the Matter and Substance of things
only was communicated unto them; but as for the words whereby it was to be
expressed, that was left unto themselves and their own Abilities. And this they
suppose is evident from that variety of Style which according to their various
Capacities, Education and Abilities, is found amongst them. This argues, as
they say, that the wording of their Revelations was left unto themselves, and
was the Product of their Natural Abilities. This in general I have spoken unto
elsewhere, and manifested what mistakes sundry have run into about the Style of
the Holy Penmen of the Scripture. Here I shall not take up what has been
argued and evinced in another place. I only say that the variety intended
arises mostly from the variety of the Subject Matters treated of; nor is it
such as will give any countenance to the profaneness of this Opinion. For the
Holy Ghost in his Work on the Minds of Men does not put a force upon them, nor
acts them any otherwise than they are in their own Natures, and with their
present Endowments and Qualifications meet to be acted and used. He leads and
conducts them in such Paths wherein they are able to walk. The words therefore
which he suggests unto them are such as they are accustomed unto, and he
causes them to make use of such Expressions as were familiar unto themselves.
So he that uses diverse Seals makes different Impressions, though the guidance
of them all be equal and the same. And he that touches skilfully several
Musical Instruments variously tuned, makes several Notes of Music. We may
also grant and do, That they used their own Abilities of Mind and Understanding
in the choice of Words and Expressions. So the Preacher sought to find out
acceptable words, Eccles. 12. 10. But the Holy Spirit who is more intimate unto
the Minds and Skill of Men than they are themselves, did so guide act and
operate in them, as that the words they fixed upon were as directly and
certainly from him, as if they had been spoken to them by an audible Voice.
Hence that which was written was upright, even Words of Truth, as in that
place. This must be so or they could not speak as they moved by the Holy Ghost,
nor could their Writing be said to be of Divine Inspiration. Hence oft-times in
the Original great Senses and Significations depend on a single Letter, as for
instance in the change of the Name of Abraham; And our Savior affirms that
every Apex and Iota of the Law, is under the care of God as that which was
given by Inspiration from himself, Matthew. 5. But I have on other occasions
treated of these things, and shall not therefore here enlarge upon them.

extraordinary Operations of the Holy Ghost absolutely exceeding the actings
and compliance of Humane Faculties are Miracles of all sorts, which were
frequent under the Old Testament. Such were many things wrought by Moses and
Joshua, Elijah and Elisha with some others; those by Moses exceeding, if the
Jews fail not in their Computation, all the rest that are recorded in the
Scripture. Now these were all the immediate Effects of the Divine Power of the
Holy Ghost. He is the sole Author of all real miraculous Operations. For by
Miracles we understand such Effects as are really beyond and above the Power of
Natural Causes however applied unto Operation. Now it is said expressly that our
Lord Jesus Christ wrought Miracles (for Instance, the casting out of Devils
From Persons possessed) by the Holy Ghost. And if their immediate Production
were by him in the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ personally united unto the Son
of God; how much more must it be granted that it was He alone whose Power they
were wrought in those who had no such Relation unto the Divine Nature. And
therefore where they are said to be wrought by the Hand or Finger of God, it is
the Person of the Holy Spirit which is precisely intended as we have declared
before; And the Persons by whom they were wrought were never the real Subjects
of the Power whereby they were wrought, as though it should be inherent and
residing in them as a Quality, Acts 2. 12, 16. Only they were infallibly
directed by the Holy Ghost by Word or Action to presignifie their Operation. So
was it with Joshua when he commanded the Sun and Moon to stand still, Josh. 10.
12. There was no Power in Joshua, no not extraordinarily communicated to Him,
to have such a real influence upon the whole frame of Nature as to effect so
great an Alteration therein. Only he had a Divine Warranty to speak that which
God himself would effect; whence it is said that therein God hearkened unto the
Voice of a Man, v. 14. It is a vanity of the greatest magnitude in some of the
Jews as Maimonides More Nebuch. p. 2. cap. 35. Levi B. Gerson on the place, and
others who deny any fixation of the Sun or Moon, and judge that it is only the
speed of Joshua in subduing his Enemies before the close of that day which is
intended. This they contend for lest Joshua should be thought to have wrought a
greater Miracle than Moses. But as the Prophet Habakkuk is express to the
contrary, c. 3. 11. and their own Sirachides, c. 45. 56. so it is no small
prevarication in some Christians to give countenance unto such a putid Fiction,
see Grot. in loc. It is so in all other miraculous Operations, even where the
Parts of the Bodies of Men were made instrumental of the Miracle it self, as in
the Gift of Tongues. They who had that Gift did not so speak from any Skill or
Ability residing in them, but they were merely Organs of the Holy Ghost which
he moved at his Pleasure. Now the end of all these miraculous Operations was to
give reputation to the Persons, and to confirm the ministry of them by whom
they were wrought. For as at first they were the occasion of wonder and
astonishment, so upon their consideration they evidenced the respect and regard
of God unto such Persons and their Work. So when God sent Moses to declare his
Will in an extraordinary manner unto the People of Israel, he commands him to
work several Miracles or Signs before them that they might believe that he was
sent of God, Exodus 4. 8. And such Works were called Signs, because they were
Tokens and Pledges of the Presence of the Spirit of God with them by whom they
were wrought. Nor was this Gift ever bestowed on any Man alone or for its own
sake, but it was always subordinate unto the Work of Revealing or Declaring
the Mind of God. And these are the general Heads of the extraordinary
Operations of the Holy Spirit of God in Works exceeding all Humane or Natural
Abilities in their whole kind.

proved through immediate impression of his own Power, the Natural Faculties
and Abilities of the Minds of Men. And these as was intimated have respect to
things Political, Moral, Natural, and Intellectual, with some of a mixed
Nature. First, He had in them respect unto things Political, such were his
Gifts whereby he enabled sundry Persons unto Rule and Civil Government amongst
Men. Government or Supreme Rule is of great concernment unto the Glory of God
in the World and of the highest usefulness unto Mankind. Without it the whole
World would be filled with violence, and become a Stage for all Wickedness
visibly and openly to act it self upon in disorder and confusion. And all Men
confess that unto a due management hereof unto its proper Ends, sundry peculiar
Gifts and Abilities of Mind are required in them and needful for them who are
called thereunto. These are they themselves to endeavor after and sedulously
to improve the Measures which they have attained of them. And where this is by
any neglected, the World and themselves will quickly feed on the Fruits of that
Negligence. But yet because the utmost of what Men may of this kind obtain by
their ordinary endeavors and an ordinary Blessing thereon, is not sufficient
for some especial ends which God aimed at in and by their Rule and Government;
the Holy Ghost did oftentimes give an especial Improvement unto their Abilities
of Mind by his own immediate and extraordinary Operation. And in some Cases he
manifested the Effects of his Power herein by some external visible Signs of
his coming on them in whom he so wrought. So in the first Institution of the
Sanhedrim or Court of Seventy Elders, to bear together with Moses the Burden of
the People in their Rule and Government; the Lord is said to put his Spirit
upon them, and that the Spirit rested on them, Numb. 11. 16, 17. And the Lord
said unto Moses, Gather unto me Seventy Men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou
know to be Elders of the People and Officers over them. And I will take of
the Spirit that is upon thee and put it upon them, and they shall bear the
burden of the People with thee, verse. 25. And the Lord took of the Spirit that
was on Moses and gave it unto the Seventy Elders, and the Spirit rested on
them. That which these Elders were called unto, was a share in the Supreme Rule
and Government of the People, which was before entirely in the hand of Moses.
This the occasion of their Call declares, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and they
were (...) inferior Officers before; such as they had in Egypt who influenced
the People by their Counsel and Arbritration, Exodus 3. 16. Chap. 5. 6. Chap.
24. 1, 9. Now they had a Supreme Power in Judgment committed to them, and were
thence called (...) or Gods. For these were they unto whom the Word of God came
who were thence called Gods, John 10. 34, 35. Psalm. 82. 6. and not the Prophets
who had neither Power nor Rule. And on them the Spirit of God that was in Moses
rested; that is, wrought the same Abilities for Government in them as he had
received. That is, Wisdom, Righteousness, Diligence, Courage and the like; that
they might judge the People wisely, and look to the Execution of the Law
impartially. Now when the Spirit of God thus rested on them, it is said they
Prophesied and ceased not, v. 25, 26. That is, they sang or spoke forth the
Praises of God in such a way and manner as made it evident unto all that they
were extraordinarily acted by the Holy Ghost. So is that Word used 1 Samuel 10.
10. and elsewhere. But this Gift and Work of Prophecy was not the especial End
for which they were endowed by the Spirit, for they were now called as has
been declared unto Rule and Government. But because their Authority and Rule
was new among the People, God gave that visible Sign and Pledge of his calling
them to their Office, that they might have a due Veneration of their Persons
and acquiesce in their Authority. And hence from the Ambiguity of that word
(...) which we render and ceased not, they Prophesied and ceased not, verse. 25.
which may signify to add as well as to cease; many of the Jews affirm that
they so prophesied no more but that day only; they prophesied then and added
not, that is, to do so any more. So when God would erect a Kingdom amongst
them, which was a new kind of Government unto them, and designed Saul to be the
Person that should Reign, it is said that he gave him another heart; 1 Samuel 10.
9. that is, the Spirit of God came upon him as it is elsewhere expressed to
endow him with that Wisdom and Magnanimity that might make him meet for Kingly
Rule. And because he was new called from a Low Condition unto Royal Dignity;
the Communication of the Spirit of God unto him was accompanied with a Visible
sign and Token, that the People might acquiesce in his Government who were
ready to despise his Person. For he had also an extraordinary Afflatus of the
Spirit expressing it self in a Visible Rapture, verse. 10, 11. And in like
manner he dealt with others. For this cause also he instituted the Ceremony of
Anointing at their Inauguration; for it was a Token of the Communication of the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost unto them; though respect were had therein to Jesus
Christ who was to be anointed with all his fullness, of whom they were Types
unto that People. Now these Gifts for Government are Natural and Moral
Abilities of the Minds of Men, such as are Prudence, Righteousness, Courage,
Zeal, Clemency and the like. And when the Holy Ghost fell upon any Persons to
enable them for Political Rule and the Administration of Civil Power, he did
not Communicate Gifts and Abilities unto them quite of another kind, but only
gave them an extraordinary improvement of their own ordinary Abilities. And
indeed so great is the Burden wherewith a just and useful Government is
attended, so great and many are the Temptations which Power and a Confluence of
Earthly Things will invite and draw toward them, that without some especial
Assistance of the Holy Spirit of God, Men cannot choose but either sink under
the weight of it, or wretchedly miscarry in its Exercise and Management. This
made Solomon when God in the beginning of his Reign, gave him his option of all
earthly desirable things, to prefer Wisdom and Knowledge for Rule before them
all, 2 Chronicles. 1. 10, 11, 12. And this he received from him who is the Spirit of
Wisdom and Understanding, Isa. 11. 3. And if the Rulers of the Earth would
follow this Example, and be earnest with God for such supplies of his Spirit as
might enable them unto an Holy Righteous discharge of their Office, it would in
many places be better with them and the World, than it is or can be where is
the state of things described, Hos. 7. 3, 4, 5. Now God of old did carry this
Dispensation out of the Pale of the Church for the effecting of some especial
Ends of his own; and I no way question but that he continues still so to do.
Thus he anointed Cyrus, and calls him his Anointed accordingly, Isa. 45. 1. For
Cyrus had a double Work to do for God in both parts whereof he stood in need of
his especial Assistance. He was to execute his Judgments and Vengeance on
Babylon, as also to deliver his People that they might re-edifie the Temple.
For both these he stood in need and did receive especial Aid from the Spirit of
God, though he was in himself but a ravenous Bird of prey, Isa. 46. 11. For the
Gifts of this Holy One in this kind wrought no real Holiness in them on whom
they were bestowed; they were only given them for the good and benefit of
others, with their own success in what they attempted unto that purpose. Yea,
and many on whom they are bestowed never consider the Author of them, but
sacrifice to their own Nets and Drags, and look on themselves as the Springs of
their own Wisdom and Ability. But it is no wonder that all regard unto the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost in the Government of the World is despised, when his
whole Work in and toward the Church it self is openly derided.

Moral Virtues which he granted unto sundry Persons for the accomplishment of
some especial Design. So He came upon Gideon and upon Jeptha to anoint them
unto the Work of delivering the People from their Adversaries in Battle, Judge.
6. 34. Chap. 11. 29. It is said before of them both, That they were Men of
Valor, Chap. 6. 12. Chap. 11. 1. This coming therefore of the Spirit of God
upon them and clothing of them, was his especial Excitation of their Courage,
and his fortifying of their Minds against those Dangers they were to conflict
withal. And this he did by such an efficacious impression of his Power upon
them, as that both themselves received thereby a Confirmation of their Call,
and others might discern the presence of God with them. Hence it is said that
the Spirit of the Lord clothed them, they being warmed in themselves, and
known to others by his Gifts and Actings of them.

adding unto the Gifts of the Mind, whereby he qualified Persons for their
Duties, even bodily strength When that also was needful for the Work whereunto
he called them; Such was his Gift unto Sampson. His bodily strength was
supernatural, a mere effect of the Power of the Spirit of God, and therefore
when he put it forth in his Calling, it is said that the Spirit of the Lord
came mightily upon him, Judge. 14. 6. Chap. 15. 14. or wrought powerfully in
him. And he gave him this strength in the way of an Ordinance, appointing the
growing of his Hair to be the Sign and Pledge of it; the Care whereof being
violated by him, he lost for a season the Gift it self.

Gifts intellectual to be exercised in and about things Natural and Artificial.
So he endowed Bezaliel and Aholiab with Wisdom and Skill in all manner of
curious Workmanship about all sorts of things for the building and beautifying
of the Tabernacle, Exodus 31. 2, 3. Whether Bezaliel were a Man that had before
given himself unto the Acquisition of those Arts and Sciences is altogether
uncertain. But certain it is that his present Endowments were extraordinary.
The Spirit of God heightened improved and strengthened the Natural Faculties of
his Mind, to a Perception and Understanding of all the curious Works mentioned
in that place, and unto a skill how to contrive and dispose of them into their
Order deigned by God himself. And therefore although the skill and wisdom
mentioned differed not in the kind of it from that which others attained by
industry; yet he received it by an immediate Afflatus or Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, as to that degree at least, which he was made Partaker of.

Publishing and Preaching of the Word of God to others, as to Noah who was a
Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. for the Conviction of the Word and
Conversion of the Elect, wherein the Spirit of God strove with Men, Genesis 6. 3.
and preached unto them that were Disobedient, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. might here also
be considered, but that the Explanation of his whole Work in the Particular
will occur unto us in a more proper place.

Dispensation of the Spirit of God under the Old Testament. Nor have I aimed
therein to gather up his whole Work and all his Actings; for then every thing
that is praiseworthy in the Church must have been enquired into; For all
without him is Death and Darkness and Sin. All Life Light and Power are from
him alone. And the instances of things expressly assigned unto him which we have
insisted on, are sufficient to manifest that the whole Being and Welfare of the
Church depended solely on his Will and his Operation. And this will yet be more
evident when we have also considered those other Effects and Operations of his,
which being common to both States of the Church under the Old Testament and the
New, are purposely here omitted, because the Nature of them is more fully
cleared in the Gospel wherein also their Exemplifications are more illustrious.
From him therefore was the Word of Promise and the Gift of Prophecy whereon
the Church was founded and whereby it was built. From him was the Revelation
and Institution of all the Ordinances of Religious Whorship; from him was that
Communication of Gifts and Gracious Abilities which any Persons received for
the Edification, Rule, Protection, and Deliverance of the Church. All these
things were wrought by that one and self-same Spirit, which divides to every
Man severally as he will. And if this were the state of things under the Old
Testament, a Judgment may thence be made how it is under the New. The principal
Advantage of the present State above that which is past next unto the coming of
Christ in the Flesh, consists in the pouring out of the Holy upon the Disciples
of Christ in a larger manner than formerly. And yet I know not how it is come
to pass that some Men think that neither He nor his Work are of any great use
unto us. And whereas we find every thing that is good even under the Old
Testament assigned unto him as the sole immediate Author of it, it is hard to
persuade with many that he continues now to do almost any good at all. And what
he is allowed to have any hand in, it is sure to be so stated, as that the
principal praise of it may redound unto our selves; So diverse, yea so adverse
are the thoughts of God and Men in these things, where our Thoughts are not
captivated unto the Obedience of Faith. But we must shut up this Discourse. It
is a common saying among the Jewish Masters, That the Gift of the Holy Ghost
ceased under the second Temple or after the finishing of it. Their meaning must
be, that it did so as to the Gifts of Ministerial Prophecy, of Miracles, and
of Writing the Mind of God by Inspiration for the Use of the Church; Otherwise
there is no Truth in their Observation. For there were afterward especial
Revelations of the Holy Ghost granted unto many as unto Simeon and Anna, Luke
1. And others constantly received of his Gifts and Graces to enable them unto
Obedience, and fit them for their Employments. For without a continuance of
these supplies the Church it self must absolutely cease.

General Dispensation of the HOLY SPIRIT, with respect unto the New Creation.
CHAP. II.
(1.) The Work of the Spirit of God in the New Creation proposed to
Consideration. The Importance of the Doctrine hereof. (2.) The plentiful
Effusion of the Spirit the great Promise respecting the Times of the New
Testament. (3.) Ministry of Gospel founded in the Promise of the Spirit. (4.)
How this Promise is made unto all Believers. (5.) Injunction to all to pray for
the Spirit of God. (6.) The solemn Promise of Christ to send his Spirit when he
left the Word. (7.) The ends for which he promised him. (8.) The Work of the
New Creation the principal means of the Revelation of God and his Glory. (9.)
How this Revelation is made in particular herein.

Gospel, or the New Creation of all things in and by Jesus Christ. And this if
any thing in the Scripture is worthy of our most diligent Enquiry and
Meditation; nor is there any more important Principle and Head of that Religion
which we do profess. The Doctrine of Being and Unity of the Divine Nature is
common to us with the rest of Mankind, and has been so from the Foundation of
the World; however some like bruit Beasts have herein also corrupted
themselves. The Doctrine of the Trinity, or the Subsistence of three Persons in
the one Divine Nature or Being, was known to all who enjoyed Divine Revelation
even under the Old Testament, though to us it be manifested with more Light and
convincing Evidence. The Incarnation of the Son of God was promised and
expected from the first entrance of Sin, and received its actual Accomplishment
in the fullness of Time, during the continuance of the Mosaical Paedagogie. But
this Dispensation of the Holy Ghost whereof we now proceed to treat, is so
peculiar unto the New Testament, that the Evangelist speaking of it says, The
Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified, Joh. 7. 39.
And they who were instructed in the Doctrine of John the Bapist only, knew not
whether there were any Holy Ghost, Acts 19. 2. Both which saying concerned his
Dispensation under the New Testament; for his eternal Being and Existence they
were not ignorant of, nor did he then first begin to be as we have fully
manifested in our foregoing Discourse. To stir us up therefore unto diligence
in this Enquiry unto what was in general laid down before, I shall add some
Considerations evidencing the Greatness and Necessity of this Duty, and then
proceed to the Matter it self that we have proposed to handle and explain.

plentiful Effusion of the Spirit is that which was principally prophesied of,
and foretold as the great Privilege and Pre-eminence of the Gospel Church
State; This was that good Wine which was kept until the last; This all Prophets
bear witness unto, see Isa. 35. 7. Chap. 44. 3. Joel. 2. 28. Ezekiel. 11. 19.
Chap. 36. 27. with other places innumerable. The great Promise of the Old
Testament was that concerning the coming of Christ in the Flesh. But he was so
to come as to put an end unto that whole Church State, wherein his coming was
expected. To prove this was the principal Design of the Apostle in his Epistle
to the Hebrews. But this Promise of the Spirit whose accomplishment was
reserved for the Times of the Gospel, was to be the Foundation of another
Church State and the means of its Continuance. If therefore we have any
interest in the Gospel it self or desire to have; if we have either Part or Lot
in this Matter, or desire to be made Partakers of the Benefits which attend
thereon, which are no less than our Acceptance with God here and our Salvation
hereafter; it is our Duty to Search the Scriptures and enquire diligently into
these things. And let no Man deceive us with vain words, as though the things
spoken concerning the Spirit of God and his Work toward them that do believe,
are fanatical and unintelligible by rational Men, for because of this contempt
of him the Wrath of God will come on the Children of Disobedience. And if the
World in Wisdom and their Reason know him not, nor can receive him, yet they
who believe do know him, for he dwells with them and shall be in them, John
14. 17. And the present practice of the World in despising and sleighting the
Spirit of God and his Work, gives Light and Evidence unto those words of our
Savior, that the World cannot receive him. And it cannot do so because it
neither sees him nor knows him, or has no Experience of his Work in them or
of his Power and Grace. Accordingly does it, is it come to pass. Wherefore not
to avow the Spirit of God in his Work, is to be ashamed of the Gospel and of
the Promise of Christ, as if it were a thing not to be owned in the World.

Ministry of the Gospel whereby we are begotten again that we should be a kind
of first Fruits of his Creatures unto God, is from his promised Presence with
it and Work in it, called the Ministry of the Spirit, even of the Spirit that
gives Life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. And it is so in opposition to the ministration of the
Law, wherein yet there were a multitude of Ordinances of Worship and Glorious
Ceremonies. And he who knows no more of the Ministry of the Gospel but what
consists in an attendance unto the Letter of Institutions, and the manner of
their performance, knows nothing of it. Nor yet is there any extraordinary
Afflatus or Inspiration now intended or attended unto, as we are slanderously
reported, and as some affirm that we pretend. But there is that present of the
Spirit of God with the Ministry of the Gospel, in his Authority, Assistance,
Communication of Gifts and Abilities, Guidance and Direction, as without which
it will be useless and unprofitable in and unto all that take the Work thereof
upon them. This will be more fully declared afterward. For;

Gift of the Spirit under the Gospel, is not made nor granted unto any peculiar
sort of Persons only, but unto all Believers as their Conditions and Occasions
do require. They are not therefore the especial Interest of a few but the
common concern of all Christians. The Papists grant that this Promise is
continued; but they would confine it to their Pope or their Councils, things no
where mentioned in the Scripture, nor the Object of any one Gospel-Promise
whatever. It is all Believers in their Places and Stations, Churches in their
Order, and Ministers in their Office, unto whom the Promise of him is made, and
toward whom it is accomplished as shall be shown. Others also grant the
continuance of this Gift, but understand no more by it but an ordnary blessing
upon Men's rational endeavors, common and exposed unto all alike. This is no
less than to overthrow his whole Work, to take his Sovereignty out of his Hand,
and to deprive the Church of all especial Interest in the Promise of Christ
concerning him. In this enquiry therefore we look after what at present belongs
unto our selves, if so be we are Disciples of Christ and do expect the
fulfilling of his Promises. For whatever Men may pretend, unto this day, if
they have not the Spirit of Christ they are none of his, Romans 8. 9. For our
Lord Jesus Christ has promised him as a Comforter to abide with his Disciples
for ever, Joh. 14. And by him it is that he is present with them and among them
to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. Chap. 18. 20. That we speak no^ as yet of
his sanctifying Work, whereby we are enabled to believe and are made Partakers
of that Holiness without which no Man shall see God. Wherefore without him all
Religion is but a Body without a Soul, a Carcass without an animating Spirit.
It is true in the continuation of his Work he cease from putting forth those
extraordinary Effects of his Power which were needful for the laying the
Foundation of the Church in the World. But the whole Work of his Grace
according to the Promise of the Covenant, is no less truly and really carried
on at this day in and toward all the Elect of God, than it was on the day of
Pentecost and onwards; and so is his communication of Gifts necessary for the
edification of the Church, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. The owning therefore and
avowing the Work of the Holy Ghost in the Hearts and on the Minds of Men,
according to the Tenor of the Convenant of Grace, is the principal part of that
Profession which at this day all Believers are called unto.

to pray that God would give his Holy Spirit unto us, that through his Aid and
Assistance we may live unto God in that Holy Obedience which he requires at our
hands, Luke 11. 9, 10, 12, 13. Our Savior enjoining an importunity in our
Supplications, v. 9, 10. and giving us encouragement that we shall succeed in
our Requests, v. 11, 12. makes the Subject Matter of them to be the Holy
Spirit; Your Heavenly Father shall give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him,
v. 13. Which in the other Evangelists is good things, Mat. 7. 11. because he is
the Author of them all in us and to us; Nor does God bestow any good thing on
us, but by his Spirit. Hence the Promise of bestowing the Spirit is accompanied
with a Prescription of Duty unto us that we should ask him or pray for him;
which is included in every Promise where his sending, giving, or bestowing is
mentioned. He therefore is the great Subject Matter of all our Prayers. And
that signal Promise of our Blessed Savior to send him as a Comforter to abide
with us for ever, is a Directory for the Prayers of the Church in all
Generations. Nor is there any Church in the World fallen under such a total
Degeneracy* but that in their Public Offices there are Testimonies of their
ancient Faith and Practice in praying for the coming of the Spirit unto them,
according to this Promise of Christ. And therefore our Apostle in all his most
solemn Prayers for the Churches in his days makes this the chief Petition of
them, That God would give unto them and increase in them the Gifts and Graces
of the Holy Spirit, with the Spirit himself for sundry especial Effects and
Operations whereof they stood in need, Ephesians. 1. 17. Chap. 3. 16. Col. 2. 2.
And this is a full conviction of what importance the Consideration of the
Spirit of God and his Work is unto us. We must deal in this Matter with that
confidence which the Truth instructs us unto, and therefore say, That he who
prays not constantly and diligently for the Spirit of God that he may be made
partaker of him for the Ends for which he is promised, is a Stranger from
Christ and his Gospel. This we are to attend unto as that whereon our Eternal
Happiness does depend. God knows our State and Condition, and we may better
learn our Wants from his Prescription of what we ought to pray for, than from
our own Sense and Experience. For we are in the Dark unto our own Spiritual
Concerns, through the Power of our Corruptions and Temptations, and know not
what we should pray for as we ought, Romans 8. 26. But our Heavenly Father knows
perfectly what we stand in need of. And therefore whatever be our present
Apprehensions concerning our selves which are to be examined by the Word, our
Prayers are to be regulated by what God has enjoined us to ask, and what he
has promised for to bestow.

solemn Promise of Jesus Christ when he was to leave this World by Death. And
whereas he therein made and confirmed his Testament, Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17, He
bequeathed his Spirit as his great Legacy unto his Disciples. And this he gave
unto them as the great Pledge of their future Inheritance, 2 Cor. 1. 22. which
they were to live upon in this World. All other good things he has indeed
bequeathed unto Believers, as he speaks of Peace with God in particular. Peace
I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, John 14. 27. But he gives
particular Graces and Mercies for particular Ends and Purposes. The Holy Spirit
he bequeaths to supply his own Absence, John 16. 17. that is, for all the Ends
of Spiritual and Eternal Life. Let us therefore consider this Gift of the
Spirit either formally, under this Notion that he was the principal Legaoy left
unto the Church by our dying Savior, or materially, as to the Ends and
Purposes for which he is so bequeathed, and it will be evident what valuation
we ought to have of Him and his Work. How would some rejoice if they could
possess any Relic of any thing that belonged unto our Savior in the days of
his Flesh, though of no use or benefit unto them? Yea, how great a part of Men
called Christians do boast in some pretended Parcels of the Tree whereon he
suffered. Love abused by Superstition lies at the bottom of this Vanity. For
they would embrace any thing left them by their dying Savior. But he left them
no such things, nor did ever bless and Sanctify them unto any holy or Sacred
Ends. And therefore has the abuse of them been punished with blindness and
Idolatry. But this is openly testified unto in the Gospel then when his Heart
was overflowing with Love unto his Disciples, and Care for them, when he took
an Holy Prospect of what would be their Condition, their Work, Duty, and
Temptations in the World, and thereon made Provision of all that they could
stand in need of; he promises to leave and give unto them his Holy Spirit to
abide with them for ever, directing us to look unto Him for all our Comforts
and Supplies. According therefore unto our valuation and esteem of Him, of our
Satisfaction and Acquiescency in Him, is our regard to the Love, Care and
Wisdom of our Blessed Savior to be measured. And indeed it is only in his Word
and Spirit wherein we can either honor or despise him in this World. In his
own Person he is exalted at the Right Hand of God far above all Principalities
and Powers; So that nothing of ours can immediately reach him or affect him.
But it is in our regard to these that he makes a Trial of our Faith Love and
Obedience. And it is a matter of Lamentation to consider the contempt and scorn
that on various Pretenses is cast upon this Holy Spirit, and the Work whereunto
he is sent by God the Father and by Jesus Christ. For there is included therein
a contempt of them also. Nor will a pretense of honoring God in their own way
secure such Persons as shall contract the guilt of this Abomination. For it is
an Idol and not the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who does not work
effectually in the Elect by the Holy Ghost according to the Scriptures. And
(2.) if we consider this Promise of the Spirit to be given unto us as to the
Ends of it; Then,

sole Cause and Author of all the Good that in this Gratias ago tibi
elementissime Deus, quia quod quaesivi mane prior ipse donasti. Cypri. de
Baptism. Christi.
World we are or can be made Partakers of. For (1.) there is no good
communicated unto us from God, but it is bestowed on us or wrought in us by the
Holy Ghost. No Gift, no Grace, no Mercy, no Privilege, no Consolation, do we
receive possess or use, but it is wrought in us. collated on us, or manifested
unto us by him alone. Nor (2.) is there any good in us toward God, any Faith,
Love, Duty, Obedience, but what is effectually wrought in us by Him, by him
alone. For in us that is in our flesh (and by Nature we are but flesh) there
dwells no good thing. All these things are from him and by him, as shall God
assisting be made to appear by Instances of all sorts in our ensuing Discourse.
And these Considerations I thought meet to premise unto our Entrance into that
Work which now lies before us.

New Creation or of the Recovery and Restoration of all things by Jesus
Christ, Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3. Ephesians. 1. 10. And as this is in general confessed by
all Christians, so I have elsewhere insisted on the Demonstration of it. (2.)
That which God orders and designeth as the principal means for the
manifestation of his Glory, must contain the most perfect and absolute
Revelation and Declaration of Himself, his Nature, his Being, his Existence and
Excellencies. For from their discovery and manifestation, with the Duties which
as known they require from rational Creatures, does the Glory of God arise and
no otherwise. (3.) This therefore was to be done in this great Work, and it was
done accordingly. Hence is the Lord Christ in his Work of Mediation said to be
the Image of the Invisible God, Col. 1. 15. The brightness of his Glory, and
the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 3. in whose Face the Knowledge of the
Glory of God shines forth unto us, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Because in and by him in his
Work of the New Creation all the glorious Properties of the Nature of God are
manifested and displayed incomparably above what they were in the Creation of
all things in the beginning. I say therefore in the Contrivance, Projection,
Production, carrying on, disposal and accomplishment of this great Work, God
has made the most eminent and glorious Discovery of himself unto Angels and
Men, Ephesians. 3. 8, 9, 10. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. That we may Know, Love, Trust,
Honor and Obey him in all things as God and according to his Will. (4.) In
particular in this New Creation he has revealed himself in an especial manner
as Three in One. There was no one more glorious Mystery brought to Light in and
by Jesus Christ than that of the Holy Trinity, or the Subsistence of the Three
Persons in the Unity of the same Divine Nature. And this was done not so much
in express Propositions or verbal Testimonies unto that purpose, which yet is
done also, as by the Declaration of the mutual Divine Internal Acts of the
Persons toward one another, and the distinct immediate Divine external Actings
of each Person in the Work which they did and do perform. For God reveals not
himself unto us merely Doctrinally and Dogmatically, but by the Declaration of
what he does for us, in us, toward us, in the accomplishment of the Counsel of
his Will; see Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And this Revelation is
made unto us, not that our minds might be possessed with the Notions of it, but
that we may know aright how to place our Trust in Him, how to Obey him and Live
unto him, how to obtain and exercise Communion with him, until we come to the
enjoyment of him.

Application of these things unto, and exemplify them yet farther in the Work
under Consideration. Three things in general are in it proposed unto our Faith.
(1.) The Supreme Purpose Design Contrivance and Disposal of it. (2.) The
Purchasing and Procuring Cause and Means of the Effects of that Design; with
its Accomplishment in it Self and with respect unto God. (3.) The Application
of the Supreme Design and actual Accomplishment of it to make it effectual unto
us. The first of these is absolutely in the Scripture assigned unto the Father,
and that Uniformely and every where. His Will, His Counsel, His Love, His
Grace, His Authority, His Purpose, His Design are constantly proposed as the
Foundation of the whole Work, as those which were to be pursued, effected,
accomplished; see Isa 42. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8. John 3. 16. Isa. 53. 10,
11, 12. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and other places innumerable. And on
this Account, because the Son undertook to effect whatever the Father had so
designed and purposed, there were many Acts of the Will of the Father toward
the Son in sending, giving, appointing of Him, in preparing him a Body, in
Comforting and Supporting Him, in rewarding and giving a People unto Him which
belong unto the Father on the account of the Authority, Love and Wisdom that
were in them, their actual Operation belonging particularly unto another
Person. And in these things is the Person of the Father in the Divine Being
proposed unto us to be known and adored. Secondly; The Son condescendeth,
consents, and engages to do and accomplish in his own Person, the whole Work
which in the Authority, Counsel and Wisdom of the Father was appointed for him,
Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. And in these Divine Operations is the Person of the Son
revealed unto us to be honored even as we honor the Father. Thirdly, The Holy
Ghost does immediately Work and Effect whatever was to be done in reference
unto the Person of the Son, or the Sons of Men, for the Perfecting and
Accomplishment of the Father's Counsel, and the Son's Work, in an especial
Application of both unto their especial Effects and Ends. Hereby is he made
known unto us, and hereby our Faith concerning him and in him is directed. And
thus in this great Work of the New Creation by Jesus Christ does God cause all
his Glory to pass before us, that we may both know him and worship him in a due
manner. And what is the peculiar Work of the Holy Ghost herein we shall now
declare.

Work of the Holy Spirit with respect unto the Head of the New Creation, the
Humane Nature of Christ. CHAP. III.
(1.) The especial Works of the Holy Spirit in the New Creation. (2.) His Work
on the Humane Nature of Christ. (3.) How this Work could be considering the
Union of the Humane Nature unto and in the Person of the Son of God. (4.)
Assumption of the Humane Nature into Union the only Act of the Person of the
Son toward it. (5.) Personal Union the only necessary Consequent of this
Assumption. (6.) All other Actings of the Person of the Son in and on the
Humane Nature voluntary. (7.) The Holy Spirit the immediate efficient cause of
all Divine Operations. (8.) He is the Spirit of the Son or of the Father. (9.)
How all the Works of the Trinity are individed. (10.) The Body of Christ formed
in the Womb by the Holy Ghost; but of the Substance of the Blessed Virgin; why
this was necessary. (11.) Christ not hence the Son of the Holy Ghost according
to the Humane Nature. (12.) Difference between the Assumption of the Humane
Nature by the Son, and the Creation of it by the Holy Ghost. (13.) The
Conception of Christ how ascribed to the Holy Ghost, and how to the Blessed
Virgin. Reasons of the Espousal of the Blessed Virgin to Joseph before the
Conception of Christ. (14.) The actual Purity and Holiness of the Soul and Body
of Christ from his Miraculous Conception.

Head of the Church, the Lord Jesus Christ in his Humane Nature, as it was to
be and was united unto the Person of the Son of God. Secondly, It concerns the
Members of that Mystical Body in all that belongs unto them as such. And under
these two Heads we shall consider them.

Head of the Church. And these were of two sorts. (1.) Such as whereof the
Person of Christ in his Humane Nature was the immediate Object. (2.) Such as he
performs toward others on his behalf; that is, with direct respect unto his
Person and Office.

shall begin withal, an Objection of seeming weight and Difficulty must be
removed out of our way; which I shall the rather do, because our answer unto it
will make the whole matter treated of the more plain and familiar unto us. It
may therefore be, and it is Objected, That whereas the Humane Nature of Christ
is assigned as the immediate Object of these Operations of the Holy Ghost, and
that Nature was immediately, inseparably, and undividedly united unto the
Person of the Son of God, there does not seem to be any need, nor indeed room
for any such Operations of the Spirit. For could not the Son of God himself in
his own Person, perform all things requisite both for the forming, supporting,
sanctifying and preserving of his own Nature, without the especial Assistance
of the Holy Ghost? Nor is it easy to be understood how an immediate Work of the
Holy Ghost should be interposed in the same Person, between the one Nature and
the other. And this seeming Difficulty is vehemently pressed by the Socinians,
who think to entangle our whole Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, and
Incarnation of the Son of God thereby. But express Testimonies of Scripture,
with the clear and evident Analogy of Faith, will carry us easily and safely
through this seeming Difficulty. To which End we may Observe; That,

Act of the Person of the Son on the Humane Nature, was the Assumption of it
into Subsistence with Himself. Herein the Father and the Spirit had no Interest
nor concurrence, (...), but by Approbation and Consent, as Damascen speaks. For
the Father did not assume the Humane Nature; he was not Incarnate; neither did
the Holy Spirit do so. But this was the Peculiar Act, and Work of the Son. See
Joh. 1. 14. Romans 1. 4. Gal. 4. 4. Phil. 2. 6, 7. Heb. 2. 14. 17; which Places
with many others to the same Purpose, I have elsewhere expounded, and
vindicated from the Exceptions of the Socinians.

Necessary Consequent of this Assumption of the Humane Nature, or the
Incarnation of the Son of God, is the Personal Union of Christ, or the
inseparable Subsistence of the assumed Nature in the Person of the Son. This
was necessary, and indissoluble, so that it was not impeached, nor shaken in
the least, by the temporary dissolution of that Nature by the separation of the
Soul and Body. For the Union of the Soul and Body in Christ did not constitute
him a Person, that the Dissolution of them should destroy his Personality. But
he was a Person by the Uniting of both unto the Son of God.

Person of the Son toward the Humane Nature were Voluntary, and did not
necessarily ensue on the Union mentioned. For there was no Transfusion of the
Properties of one Nature into the other, nor real Physical Communication of
Divine Essential Excellencies unto the Humanity. Those who seem to contend for
any such thing, resolve all at last into a true Assignation by way of
Predication as necessary on the Union mentioned, but contend not for a real
transfusion of the Properties of one Nature into the other. But these
Communications were Voluntary. Hence were those temporary Dissations, when
under his great trial the Humane Nature complained of its desertion and
Dereliction by the Divine, Matthew. 27. 46. For this forsaking was not as to
Personal Union, or necessary Subsistence and supportment, but as to Voluntary
Communications of Light and Consolation. Hence himself declares that the Humane
Nature was not the Residential Subject of Omnisciency. For so he speaks, Mark.
13. 32. But of that Day and that hour knows no Man, no nor the Angels which
are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. For the Exposition given by
some of the Ancients, that the Lord Christ speaks not this absolutely, but
only, that he knew it not to declare it unto them, is unworthy of him. For no
more did the Father so know it, seeing he has not declared it. But this was
the Opinion only of some of them, the more advised were otherwise minded. He
(...). Athanas. Orat. 4. Ad. Arian.

(...). Chrysostom. Tom. 7. Sermon. 117.

(...). Leontius Byzantinus, de Sectis.


speaks of himself with respect unto his Humane Nature only. And thereunto all
Communications were Voluntary. So after his Ascension God gave him that
Revelation that he made to the Apostle: Revel. 1. 1. The Humane Nature
therefore, however inconceivably advanced, is not the Subject of Infinite
Essentially Divine Properties. And the Actings of the Son of God toward it,
consequential unto its Assumption, and that indissoluble subsistence in its
Union which ensued thereon, are Voluntary.

immediate Peculiar Efficient Cause of all External Divine Operations; for God
Works by his Spirit; or in him immediately applies the Power and Efficacy of
the Divine Excellencies unto their Operation; Whence the same Work is equally
the Work of each Person.

Spirit of the Son, no less than the Spirit of the Father. He proceeds from
the Son, as from the Father. He is the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4. 6. And hence
is He the immediate Operator of all Divine Acts of the Son himself, even on his
own Humane Nature. Whatever the Son of God, wrought in, by, or upon the Humane
Nature, he did it by the Holy Ghost, who is his Spirit as he is the Spirit of
the Father.

immediate actings of the Holy Ghost are not spoken of him absolutely, nor
ascribed unto him exclusively, as unto the other Persons and their Concurrence
in them. It is a saying generally admitted, that Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa. There is no such Division in the external Operations of God, that any
one of them should be the Act of one Person without the Concurrence of the
others. And the Reason of it is, because the Nature of God which is the
Principle of all Divine Operations, is one and the same individed in them all.
Whereas therefore they are the Effects of Divine Power, and that Power is
essentially the same in each Person, the Works themselves belong equally unto
them. As if it were possible that Three Men might see by the same Eye, the Act
of seeing would be but One, and it would be equally the Act of all Three. But
the Things we insist on are ascribed eminently unto the Holy Ghost on the
account of the Order of his Subsistence in the Holy Trinity, as he is the
Spirit of the Father and the Son; whence in every Divine Act, the Authority of
the Father, the Love and Wisdom of the Son, with the immediate Efficacy and
Power of the Holy Ghost are to be considered. Yea, and there is such a
distinction in their Operations, that one Divine Act may produce a peculiar
Respect and Relation unto one Person and not unto another; as the Assumption of
the Humane Nature did to the Son, for he only was incarnate. And such are the
especial Actings of the Holy Ghost toward the Head of the Church our Lord
Jesus Christ in this Work of the New Creation, as we shall demonstrate in
sundry Instances.

framing forming and miraculous Conception of the Body of Christ in the Maximum
in tota creatura Testimonium de Divinitate Spiritus Sancti Corpus Domini est;
quod ex Spiritu Sancto esse creditur secundum Evangelistam, Mat. 1. sicut
Angelus ad Josephum dicit, quod in ea natum est de Spiritu Sancto est.
Athanasius de fid. Un. and Trin.

Creatrix virtus altissimi, superveniente Spiritu Sancto in virginem Mariam,
Christi corpus fabricavit; quo ille usus Templo sine viri natus est semine.
Didym. de Sp. Sanct. lib. 2.


Womb of the Blessed Virgin, was the peculiar and especial Work of the Holy
Ghost. This Work I acknowledge in respect of Designation and the Authoritative
Disposal of things is ascribed unto the Father. For so the Lord Christ speaks
unto him; A Body have thou prepared me, Heb. 10. 6. But this Preparation does
not signify the actual forming and making ready of that Body, but the Eternal
Designation of it; It was prepared in the Counsel and Love of the Father. As to
voluntary Assumption it is ascribed to the Son himself; Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch
as the Children were Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself pertook of
the same; he took unto him a Body and Soul, entire Humane Nature, as the
Children or all Believers have the same, Synecdochically expressed by Flesh and
Blood; v. 16. He took on him the Seed of Abraham. But the immediate Divine
Efficiency in this Matter was the Peculiar Work of the Holy Ghost. Matthew. 1.
18. When his Mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together she
was found to be with Child of the Holy Ghost; v. 20. That which is conceived in
her is of the Holy Ghost: Luke 1. 35. The Angel answered and said unto her, The
Holy Ghost shall come upon Thee, and the Power of the Highest shall overshadow
Thee; therefore also that Holy Thing which shall be born of Thee shall be
called the Son of God. (1.) The Person working is the Holy Ghost. He is the
wonderful Operator in this Glorious Work; and therein the Power of the most
High was exerted. For the Power of the most High is neither explicatory of the
former expression, the Holy Ghost, as though he were only the Power of the most
High; nor is it the adjoining of a Distinct Agent or Cause unto him, as though
the Holy Ghost and the Power of the most High were different Agents in this
Matter. Only the manner of his effecting this wonderful Matter concerning which
the Blessed Virgin had made that enquiry, v. 34. How can this be seeing I know
not a Man? is expressed. The Holy Ghost, says the Angel, acting the Power of
the most High, or in the Infinite Power of God shall accomplish it. (2.) For
his access unto his Work; it is expressed by his coming upon her. The
importance of this Expression and what is signified thereby, has been declared
before. And it is often used to declare his Actings with reference unto the
Production of Miraculous Works. Acts 1. 8. Ye shall receive Power after the
Holy Ghost is come upon you. He will so come upon you as to put forth the Power
of the most High in you and by you, in Gifts and Operations miraculous. For he
is said to come with respect unto his beginning of any marvelous Operation,
where before he did not work to the like purpose. (3.) The Act of the Holy
Ghost in this Matter was a Creating Act; not indeed like the first Creating Act
which produced the Matter and Substance of all things out of nothing, causing
that to be, which was not before, neither in Matter nor Form, nor passive
Disposition; but like those subsequent Acts of Creation, whereby out of Matter
before made and prepared, things were made that which before they were not, and
which of themselves they had no active Disposition unto nor concurrence in. So
Man was created or formed of the Dust of the Earth, and Woman of a Rib taken
from Man. There was a previous Matter unto their Creation, but such as gave no
assistance, nor had any active Disposition to the Production of that particular
kind of Creature whereinto they were formed by the Creating Power of God. Such
was this Act of the Holy Ghost in forming the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For although it was effected by an Act of Infinite Creating Power, yet it was
formed or made of the Substance of the Blessed Virgin. That it should be so was
absolutely necessary (1.) For the accomplishment of the Promises made unto
Abraham and David, that the Messiah should be of their Seed and proceed from
their Loins. (2.) So was it also on the account of the first Original Promise,
That the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents Head. For the Word was to
be made Flesh, John 1. 14. to be made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. or made of the
Seed of David according to the Flesh, Romans 1. 4. and take upon him the Seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. (3.) To confirm the Truth hereof is his Genealogy
according to the Flesh given us by two of the Evangelists, which were neither
to the purpose nor true, if he were not made of the Substance or Flesh of the
Blessed Virgin. (4.) Besides all our Cognation and Alliance unto him, whence he
was meet to be our Savior suffering in the same Nature wherein we have sinned,
do depend hereon, Heb. 2. 14. For if he had not been made like us in all things
sin only excepted, if he had not been Partaker of our Nature, there had been no
Foundation for the imputing that unto us which he did suffered and wrought,
Romans 8. 3. And hence these things are accounted unto us, and cannot be so unto
Angels whose Nature he did not take upon him, Heb. 2. 16. This therefore was
the Work of the Holy Ghost in reference unto the Humane Nature of Christ in the
Womb of his Mother. By his Omnipotent Power he formed it of the Substance of
the Body of the Holy Virgin, that is as unto his Body. And hence sundry things
do ensue.

Son of the Holy Ghost, although he supplied the Place and Virtue of a Natural
Father in Generation. For the Relation of Filiation depends only on and
arises from a Perfect Generation, and not on every Effect of an Efficient
cause. When one Fire is kindled by another, we do not say that it is the Son of
that other, unless it be very improperly. Much less when a Man builds an House,
do we say that it is his Son. There was therefore no other Relation between the
Person of the Holy Ghost and the Humane Nature of Christ, but that of a Creator
and a Creature. And the Lord Christ is, and is called the Son of God, with
respect only unto the Father and his eternal ineffable Generation,
communicating Being and Subsistence unto Him, as the Fountain and Original of
the Trinity. Filiation therefore is a Personal Adjunct, and belongs unto Christ
as he was a Divine Person, and not with respect unto his Humane Nature. But
that Nature being assumed, whole Christ was the Son of God.

forming of the Body of Christ, differs from the Act of the Son in assuming the
Humane Nature into Personal Union with Himself. For this Act of the Son was not
a Creating Act producing a Being out of Nothing, or making any thing by the
same Power to be what in its own Nature it was not. But it was an ineffable Act
of Love and Wisdom, taking the Nature so formed by the Holy Ghost, so prepared
for him, to be his own in the instant of its Formation, and thereby preventing
the singular and individual Subsistence of that Nature in and by it self. So
then as the creating Act of the Holy Ghost in forming the Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ in the Womb, does not denominate him to be his Father, no not
according to the Humane Nature, but he is the Son of God upon the account of
his Eternal Generation only; So it does not denote an Assumption of that Nature
into Union with himself, nor was he incarnate. He made the Humane Nature of
Christ Body and Soul, with, in, and unto a Subsistence in the Second Person of
the Trinity, not his own.

Womb, being the Effect of a Creating Act, was not accomplished successively
and in process of time but was perfected in an Instant. For although the (...).
Council. Constantinop. ad Origenistas.
Creating Acts of Infinite Power, where the Works effected have distinct Parts,
may have a Process or Duration of Time allotted unto them, as the World was
Created in six Days; yet every part of it that was the Object of an especial
Creating Act was instantaneously produced. So was the forming of the Body of
Christ, with the infusion of a Rational Soul to quicken it, though it increased
afterward in the Womb unto the Birth. And as it is probable that this
Conception was immediate upon the Angelical Salutation, so it was necessary
that nothing of the Humane Nature of Christ should exist of it self,
antecedently unto its Union with the Son of God. For in the very instant of its
Formation, and therein, was the Word made Flesh, John 1. 14. And the Son of God
was made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. So that the whole Essence of his Nature was
created in the same Instant. Thus far the Scriptures go before, and herein it
is necessary to assert the forming of the Body and Soul of Christ by the Holy
Spirit. The curious enquiries of some of the Schoolmen and others, are to be
left unto themselves, or rather to be condemned in them. For what was farther
in this Miraculous Operation of the Holy Ghost, it seems purposely to be hid
from us in that Expression, (...), The Power of the most High shall overshadow
thee. Under the Secret Glorious Covert hereof, we may learn to adore that Holy
Work here, which we hope to rejoice in and bless God for unto Eternity. And I
suppose also that there is in the Word, an allusion unto the Expression of the
Original Acting of the Holy Spirit, toward the newly produced Mass of the Old
Creation, whereof we spoke before. Then it is said of Him that He was (...), as
it were hovering and moving over it for the Formation and Production of all
things living. For both the Words include in them an allusion unto a Covering
like that of a Fowl over its Eggs, communicating by its cognate warmth and
heat, a principle of Life unto their Seminal Virtue.

Conception of Christ, is assigned unto the Holy Ghost, and to the Blessed
Virgin. For of Her it is said expressly in Prophecy. (...), Isa. 7. 14. A
Virgin shall Conceive; the same Word that is used to express the Conception of
any other Woman, Genesis 4. 1. Hence She is termed by the Ancients (...), and Dei
genetrix, which last at least I wish had been forborne. Compare it with the
Scripture and there will appear an unwarrantable (...) in it. So Luke 1. 31.
The words of the Angel to Her are, (...), Thou shall Conceive in thy Womb and
bring forth a Son; where Her Conception of Him is distinguished from her
bringing of him forth. And yet in the Ancient Creed commonly called the
Apostles, and generally received by all Christians as a Summary of Religion, it
is said he was Conceived by the Holy Spirit, and only Born of the Virgin Mary.
An. The same Work is assigned to both as Causes of a different kind, unto the
Holy Spirit as the active efficient Cause, who by his Almighty Power produced
the Effect. And the Disputes managed by some of the Ancients about de Spiritu
Sancto, and ex Spiritu Sancto, were altogether needless. For it is his Creating
Efficiency that is intended. And his Conceiving is ascribed unto the Holy
Virgin as the passive material Cause; for his Body was formed of her Substance
as was before declared. And this Conception of Christ was after her Solemn
Espousals unto Joseph, and that for sundry Reasons. For (1.) under the Covering
of her Marriage to him she was to receive a Protection of her Spotless
Innocence. And besides (2.) God provided one that should take care of her and
her Child in his infancy. And hereby (3.) also was our Blessed Savior freed
from the imputation of an illegitimate Birth; until by his own Miraculous
Operations he should give Testimony unto his Miraculous Conception, concerning
which before his Mother could not have been believed. (4.) That he might have
one on whose account his Genealogy might be recorded, to manifest the
accomplishment of the Promise unto Abraham and David. For the Line of a
Genealogy was not legally continued by the Mother only. Hence Matthew gives us
his Genealogy by Joseph, to whom his Mother was legally espoused; And although
Luke give us the true Natural Line of his Descent by the Progenitors of the
Blessed Virgin, yet he names her not, only mentioning her Espousals, he begins
with Heli who was her Father, Chap. 3. 23. And this is the first thing ascribed
peculiarly to the Holy Spirit with respect unto the Head of the Church Christ
Jesus.

From this Miraculous Creation of the Body of Christ by the immediate Power of
the Holy Ghost, did it became a meet Habitation for his Holy Soul, every way
ready and complying with all actings of Grace and Virtue. We have not only the
Depravation of our Natures in General, but the obliquity of our particular
Constitutions to conflict withal. Hence it is that one is disposed to Passion
Wrath and Anger, another to Vanity and Lightness, a third of Sensuality and
fleshly Pleasures, and so others to Sloth and Idleness. And although this
Disposition so far as it is the Result of our especial Constitutions and
Complexion is not sin in it self, yet it dwells at the next Door unto it, and
as it is excited by the Moral Pravity of our Natures, a continual occasion of
it. But the Body of Christ being formed pure and exact by the Holy Ghost, there
was no Disposition or Tendency in his Constitution to the least Deviation from
perfect Holiness in any kind. The exquisite Harmony of his natural temperature,
made Love Meekness Gentleness Patience Benignity and Goodness, Natural and
Cognate unto him, as having an incapacity of such Motions as should be
subservient unto or complaint with any thing different from them. Hence, 2dly,
also; although he took on him those Infirmities which belong unto our Humane
Nature as such, and are inseparable from it until it be glorified, yet he took
none of our particular Infirmities which cleave unto our Persons, occasioned
either by the Vice of our Constitutions or irregularity in the use of our
Bodies. Those natural Passions of our Minds which are capable of being the
means of affliction and trouble, as Grief Sorrow and the like, he took upon
him; as also those Infirmities of Nature which are troublesome to the Body, as
Hunger Thirst Weariness and Pain. Yea, the purity of his Holy Constitution made
him more highly sensible of these things than any of the Children of Men. But
as to our Bodily Diseases, and Distempers which personally adhere unto us upon
the Disorder and Vice of our Constitutions, he was absolutely free from.

Work of the HOLY SPIRIT in and on the Humane Nature of Christ. CHAP. IV.
(1.) The actual Sanctification of the Humane Nature of Christ by the Holy
Ghost. On what Ground spotless and free from sin. Positively endowed with all
Grace. (2.) Original Holiness and Sanctification in Christ how carried on by
the Spirit. Exercise of Grace in Christ by the rational Faculties of his Soul.
Their Improvement. (3.) Wisdom and Knowledge how increased objectively in the
Humane Nature of Christ. (4.) The Anointing of Christ by the Holy Spirit with
Power and Gifts. (5.) Collated eminently on him at his Baptism. John 3. 34.
explained and vindicated. (6.) Miraculous Works wrought in Christ by the Holy
Ghost. (7.) Christ guided, conducted and supported by the Spirit in his whole
Work. Mark 1. 11. opened. (8.) How the Lord Christ offered himself unto God
through the Eternal Spirit. (9.) His Sanctification thereunto. (10.) Graces
acting eminently therein. Love, Zeal, Submission, Faith and Truth all exercised
therein. (11, 12.) The Work of the Spirit of God toward Christ whilst he was
in the state of the Dead; in his Resurrection and Glorification. (13.) The
Office of the Spirit to bear Witness unto Christ and its Discharge. (14.) The
true Way and Means of coming unto the Knowledge of Christ, with the necessity
thereof. (15.) Danger of Mistakes herein. (16.) What it is to Love Christ as we
ought.

Creating Act of the Holy Spirit, was in the instant of its Conception
sanctified, and filled with Grace according to the measure of its Receptivity.
Being not begotten by Natural Generation, it derived no taint of Original Sin
or Corruption from Adam, that being the only Way and Means of its Propagation.
And being not in the Loins of Adam morally before the Fall, the Promise of his
Incarnation being not given until afterward, the Sin of Adam could on no
account be imputed unto him. All Sin was charged on him as our Mediator, and
Surety of the Covenant; but on his own account he was obnoxious to no charge of
Sin Original or Actual. His Nature therefore as miraculously created in the
manner described, was absolutely innocent, spotless, and free from sin, as was
Adam in the day wherein he was Created. But this was not all; It was by the
Holy Spirit positively endowed with all Grace. And hereof it was afterward
only capable of farther degrees as to actual Exercise, but not of any new kind
of Grace. And this Work of Sanctification or the Original Infusion of all Grace
into the Humane Nature of Christ, was the immediate Work of the Holy Spirit
which was necessary unto him. For let the Natural Faculties of the Soul, the
Mind Will and Affections be created pure innocent undefiled, as they cannot be
otherwise immediately created of God, yet this is not enough to enable any
rational Creature to live to God; much less was it all that was in Jesus
Christ. There is moreover required hereunto supernatural Endowments of Grace,
superadded unto the Natural Faculties of our Souls. If we live unto God there
must be a principle of Spiritual Life in us as well of Life Natural. This was
the Image of God in Adam, and was wrought in Christ by the Holy Spirit. Isa.
11. 1, 2, 3. And there shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a
Branch shall grow out of his Roots. And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might,
the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of the Lord; and shall make him of quick
Understanding in the Fear of the Lord. It is granted that the following Work of
the Spirit in and upon the Lord Christ, in the execution of his Office as the
King and Head of the Church, is included in these words. But his first
Sanctifying Work in the Womb is principally intended. For those Expressions, a
Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch out of his Roots, with respect
whereunto the Spirit is said to be communicated unto him, do plainly regard his
Incarnation. And the Soul of Christ from the first moment of its Infusion was a
Subject capable of a Fullness of Grace, as unto its habitual Residence and
Inbeing, though the actual exercise of it was suspended for a while until the
Organs of the Body were fitted for it. This therefore it received by this first
Unction of the Spirit. Hence from his Conception he was Holy as well as
harmless and undefiled, Heb. 7. 26. An Holy Thing, Luke 1. 35. radically filled
with a Perfection of Grace and Wisdom; Inasmuch as the Father gave him not the
Spirit by Measure, John 3. 34. See to this purpose Our Commentary on Heb. 1. v.
1. p. 17. see John 1. 14, 15, 16.

carried on that Work whose Foundation it had thus laid. And Two Things are to
be here diligently observed. (1.) That the Lord Christ as Man, did and was to
exercise all Grace by the Rational Faculties and Powers of his Soul, his
Understanding Will and Affections. For he acted Grace as a Man made of a Woman,
made under the Law. His Divine Nature was not unto him in the place of a Soul,
nor did immediately operate the things which he performed, as some of old
vainly imagined. But being a perfect Man his Rational Soul was in him the
immediate principle of all his Moral Operations, even as ours are in us. Now in
the Improvement and Exercise of these Faculties and Powers of his Soul, he had
and made a Progress after the manner of other Men. For he was made like unto us
in all things yet without sin. In their Increase, Enlargement and Exercise
there was required a Progression in Grace also. And this he had continually by
the Holy Ghost. Luke Quomodo prosiciebat sapientia Dei? doceat te ordo
Verborum. Profectus est aetatis, Profectus est Sapientiae, sed humanae. Idea
aetatem ante praemisit, ut secundum homines crederes dictum; aetas enim non
Divinitatis sed Corporis est. Ergo si proficiebat aetate hominis proficiebat
sapientia hominis. Sapientia autem sensu proficit, quia a sensu Sapientia.
Ambros. de Incarnat. Dom. Mysterio, Chap. 7.
2. 40. The Child grew and waxed strong in Spirit. The first Clause refers to
his Body which grew and increased after the manner of other Men; as v. 52. He
increased in Stature. The other respects the confirmation of the Faculties of
his Mind, he waxed strong in Spirit. So v. 47. he is said to increase in Wisdom
as in Stature. He was (...), continually filling and filled with new Degrees of
Wisdom as to its Exercise, according as the Rational Faculties of his Mind were
capable thereof; N^m and Dominus homo accepit communicationem Spiritus Sancti;
sicut in Evangeliis legitur; Jesus ergo repletus Spiritu Sancto, regressus est
a Iordane. Haec autem absque ulla calumnia de Dominico homine, qui totus
Christus, unus est Jesus Filius Dei, sensu debemus pietatis accipere, non quod
alter and alter sit, sed quod de uno atque eodem quasi de altero secundum
naturam Dei, and hominis disp^tatur; Didym. de sp. San. Lib. 3.
an increase in these things accompanied his years, v. 52. And what is here
recorded by the Evangelist, contains a Description of the Accomplishments of
the Prophecy before mentioned, Isa. 11. 1, 2, 3. And this Growth in Grace and
Wisdom was the peculiar Work of the Holy Spirit. For as the Faculties of his
Mind were enlarged by Degrees and strengthened, so the Holy Spirit filled them
up with Grace for Actual Obedience.

New Objects proposed to its Mind and Understanding, whereof before it had a
simple Nescience. And this is an inseparable adjunct of Humane Nature as such,
as it is to be weary or hungry, and no vice or blameable defect. Some have made
a great outcry about the ascribing of Ignorance by some Protestant Divines unto
the Humane Soul of Christ, Bellarm. de Anim. Christi. Take Ignorance for that
which is a moral Defect in any kind, or an unacquaintedness with that which any
one ought to know, or is necessary unto him as to the Perfection of his
Condition or his Duty, and it is false that ever any of them ascribed it unto
him. Take it merely for a nescience of some things, and there is no more in it
but a denial of Infinite Omniscience, nothing inconsistent with the highest
Holiness and Purity of Humane Nature. So the Lord Christ says of himself, that
he knew not the Day and Hour of the End of all things; and our Apostle of him,
that he learned Obedience by the things that he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. In the
representation then of things anew to the Humane Nature of Christ, the Wisdom
and Knowledge of it was objectively increased, and in new Trials and Temptations
he experimentally learned the new Exercise of Grace. And this was the constant
Work of the Holy Spirit in the Humane Nature of Christ. He dwelt in him in
fullness, for he received him not by measure. And continually upon all occasions
he gave out of his unsearchable Treasures, Grace for Exercise in all Duties and
Instances of it. From hence was he habitually Holy, and from hence did he
exercise Holiness entirely and universally in all things.

extraordinary Powers and Gifts which were necessary for the Exercise and
Discharging of his Office on the Earth. (...), etc. Chrysostom. Homil. de Spiritu
Sancto.
Isa. 61. 1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me, because the Lord has
anointed me to Preach good Tidings unto the Meek; he has sent me to bind up
the brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the
Prison unto them that are bound. It is the Prophetical Office of Christ and his
discharge thereof in his Ministry on the Earth which is intended. And he
applies these words unto himself with respect unto his Preaching of the Gospel,
Luke 4. 18. For this was that Office which he principally attended unto here in
the World, as that whereby he instructed Men in the Nature and Use of his other
Offices. For his Kingly Power in his Humane Nature on the Earth he exercised
but sparingly. Thereunto indeed belonged his sending forth of Apostles and
Evangelists to preach with Authority. And toward the End of his Ministry he
instituted Ordinances of Gospel Worship, and appointed the Order of his Church
in the Foundation and Building of it up, which were Acts of Kingly Power. Nor
did he perform any Act of his Sacerdotal Office but only at his Death, when he
gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
Savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. wherein God smelt a Savor of Rest and was appeased
toward us. But the whole course of his Life and Ministry was the Discharge of
his Prophetical Office unto the Jews, Romans 15. 8. Which he was to do according
to the great Promise. Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19. And on the Acceptance or Refusal of him
herein, depended the Life and Death of the Church of Israel, v. 19. Acts 3. 23.
Heb. 1. 1. John 8. 44. Hereunto was he fitted by this Unction of the Spirit.
And here also is a distinction between the Spirit that was upon him, and his
being anointed to Preach, which contains the Communication of the Gifts of that
Spirit unto him. As it is said, Chap. 11. 3. The Spirit rested on him as a
Spirit of Wisdom to make him of quick Understanding in the Fear of the Lord.
Now this was in a singular manner and in a measure inexpressible, whence he is
said to be anointed with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, or those who
were Partakers of the same Spirit with him, Psalm. 45. 7. Heb. 1. 8, 9. Although
I acknowledge that there was in that Expression a peculiar respect unto his
Glorious Exaltation which afterward ensued, as has been declared on that
place. And this Collation of Extraordinary Gifts for the discharge of his
Prophetical Office was at his Baptism, Matthew. 3. They were not bestowed on the
Head of the Church, nor are any Gifts of the same Nature in general bestowed on
any of his Members, but for Use, Exercise, and Improvement. And that they were
then collated appears; For,

Visible Pledge which confirmed him in, and testified unto others his calling
of God to the Exercise of his Office. For then the Spirit of God descended like
a Dove and rested on him, and lo a voice came from Heaven saying, This is my
Beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. 16, 17. Hereby was he sealed
of God the Father, John 6. 27, in that Visible Pledge of his Vocation setting
the great Seal of Heaven to his Commission. And this also was to be a Testimony
unto others, that they might own him in his Office now he had undertaken to
discharge it, John 1. 33.

2. He now entered on his Public Ministry and wholly gave himself up unto his
Work. For before he did only occasionally manifest the Presence of God with
him, somewhat to prepare the Minds of Men to attend unto his Ministry; as when
he filled them with astonishment at his Discourses with the Doctors in the
Temple, Luke 2. 46, 47. And although it is probable that he might be acted by
the Spirit in and unto many such extraordinary Actions during his Course of a
Private Life, yet the fullness of Gifts for his Work he received not until the
time of his Baptism, and therefore before that, he gave not himself up wholly
unto his public Ministry.

3. Immediately hereon it is said that He was full of the Holy Ghost, Luke 4.
1. Before he was said to wax strong in Spirit, (...), Luke 2. 40. continually
filling; but now he is (...), full of the Holy Ghost. He was actually possessed
of and furnished with all that fullness of Spiritual Gifts which were any way
needful for him or useful unto him, or which Humane Nature is capable of
receiving. With respect hereunto does the Evangelist use that Expression,
(...), John 3. 34. For God gives not the Spirit by measure. That it is the
Lord Jesus Christ who is here intended unto whom the Spirit is thus given, is
evident from the Context, although it be not express in the Text. He is spoken
of, and is the Subject of the whole Discourse, v. 31. He that comes from Above
is above all. He that comes from Heaven is above all. None doubts but that
this is a Description of the Person of Christ. And in the beginning of this
Verse, He whom God has sent speaks the Words of God; which is the usual
Periphrasis of the Lord Christ used at least twenty times in this Gospel. Of
him this account is given that he testifies what he has seen and heard, v.
32. and that he speaks the Words of God, v. 3, 4. Different events are also
marked upon his Testimony, for many refused it, v. 32. but some received it who
therein set to their Seal that God is true, verse. 33. For he that believes not
the Record that he gave of his Son has made him a liar, 1 John 5. 1. As a
Reason of all this it is added, That God gave not the Spirit unto him by
Measure; So that he was fully enabled to speak the Words of God, and those by
whom his Testimony was rejected were justly liable to Wrath, v. 36. Vain
therefore is the attempt of Crellius de Spirit. Sanct. followed by Sclictingius
in his Comment on this Place, who would exclude the Lord Christ from being
intended in these words. For they would have them signify no more but only in
general, That God is not bound up to Measures in the Dispensation of the
Spirit, but gives to one according unto one measure, and to another according
to another. But as this gloss overthrows the coherence of the words, disturbing
the Context, so it contradicts the Text it self. For God's not giving the
Spirit (...) by Measure, is his giving of him (...) immeasurably, without known
Bounds or Limits, and so the Spirit was given unto the Lord Christ only. For
unto every one of us is given Grace according to the Measure of the Gift of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. That is, in what Measure he pleases to communicate and
distribute it. But the Effects of this giving of the Spirit unto the Lord
Christ not by Measure, belonged unto that fullness from whence we receive Grace
for Grace, John 1. 16. For hereby the Father accomplished his Will, when it
pleased him, that in him all fullness should dwell, Col. 1. 19. that he in all
things might have the Pre-eminence. Nor can any Difficulty of weight be cast on
this Interpretation from the use of the word in the present Tense, which is by
Crellius insisted on, (...) he gives. For Christ, they say, had before
received the Spirit, for this is spoken of him after his Baptism. If therefore
he had been intended, it should rather have been, he has given, or he has not
given unto him by Measure. But (1.) this was immediately on his Baptism, and
therefore the collation of the Fullness of the Spirit might be spoken of as a
thing present being but newly past, which is an ordinary kind of Speech on all
occasions. Besides (2.) the collation of the Spirit is a continued Act, in that
he was given him to abide with him, to rest upon him, wherein there was a
continuance of the Love of God toward, and his care over him in his Work.
Hence the Lord Christ says of himself, or the Prophet in his Person, that the
Spirit sent him. Now the Lord God and his Spirit has sent me, Isa. 48. 16. The
same Work in sending of Christ is ascribed unto the Lord God, that is the
Father, and to the Spirit, but in a different manner. He was sent by the Father
authoritatively, and the Furniture he received by the Spirit, of Gifts for his
Work and Office, is called his sending of him. As the same Work is assigned
unto different Persons in the Trinity on different accounts.

miraculous Works whereby his Ministry was attested unto and confirmed. Hence
it is said, That God wrought Miracles by him, Acts 2. 22. Jesus of Nazareth a
Man approved of God, by Miracles and Wonders and Signs which God did by him.
For they are all immediate Effects of Divine Power. So when he cast out Devils
with a word of command, he affirms that he did it by the Finger of God, Luke
11. 20. that is, the Infinite Divine Power of God; but the Power of God acted
in an especial manner by the Holy Spirit, as is expressly declared in the other
Evangelist, Matthew. 12. 28. And therefore on the Ascription of his Mighty Works
unto Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, he lets the Jews know that therein they
blasphemed the Holy Spirit whose Works indeed they were, v. 31, 32. Hence these
mighty Works are called (...) Powers, because of the Power of the Spirit of God
put forth for their working and effecting, see Mark 6. 5. Chap. 9. 39. Luke 4.
36. and 5. 17. and 6. 19. and 8. 46. and 9. 1. And in the Exercise of this
Power consisted the Testimony given unto him by the Spirit that he was the Son
of God. For this was necessary unto the Conviction of the Jews to when he was
sent, John 10. 37, 38.

guided, directed, comforted, supported, in the whole Course of his Ministry,
Temptations, Obedience and Sufferings. Some few Instances on this Head may
suffice. Presently after his Baptism when he was full of the Holy Ghost, he was
led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, Luke 4. 1. The Holy Spirit guided him to
begin his Contest and Conquest with the Devil. Hereby he made an entrance into
his Ministry; and it teaches us all what we must look for, if we solemnly
engage our selves to follow him in the Work of Preaching the Gospel. The word
used in Mark to this purpose has occasioned some doubt, what Spirit is
intended in those words, (...), Chap. 1. 12. The Spirit drives him into the
Wilderness. It is evident that the same Spirit and the same Act is intended in
all the Evangelists here and, Mat. 4. 1. Luke 4. 1. But now the Holy Spirit
should be said (...) to drive him, is not so easy to be apprehended. But the
Word in Luke is (...) which denotes a guiding and rational Conduct. And this
cannot be ascribed unto any other Spirit with respect unto our Lord Jesus but
only the Spirit of God. Matthew expresses the same effect by (...), Chap. 4.
1. he was carried or carried up, or taken away from the midst of the People.
And this was (...) of that Spirit, namely which descended on him, and rested on
him immediately before, Chap. 3. 17. And the Continuation of the Discourse in
Luke will not admit that any other Spirit be intended. And Jesus being full of
the Holy Spirit, returned from Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the
Wilderness; namely, by that Spirit which he was full of. By (...) therefore in
Mark, no more is intended but the sending of him forth by an high and strong
impression of the Holy Spirit on his Mind. Hence the same word is used with
respect unto the sending of others by the powerful impression of the Spirit of
God on their Hearts, unto the Work of Preaching the Gospel. Matthew. 9. 38. Pray
you therefore the Lord of the Harvest, (...). So also, Luke 10. 2. that he
would thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest; namely, by furnishing them with
the Gifts of his Spirit, and by the Power of his Grace constraining them to
their Duty. So did he enter upon his Preparation unto his Work under his
Conduct. And it were well if others would endeavor after a conformity unto
them within the Rules of their Calling. (2.) By his assistance was he carried
triumphantly through the course of his Temptations unto a perfect Conquest of
his Adversary, as to the present Conflict wherein he sought to divert him from
his Work, which afterward he endeavored by all ways and means to oppose and
hinder. (3.) The Temptation being finished he returned again out of the
Wilderness to Preach the Gospel in the Power of the Spirit, Luke 4. 14. He
returned (...), in the Power of the Spirit into Galilee, that is powerfully
enabled by the Holy Spirit unto the discharge of his Work. And thence is his
first Sermon at Nazareth he took those Words of the Prophet for his Text; The
Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because he has anointed me to Preach the Gospel
to the Poor, Luke 4. 18. The issue was, That they all bare him Witness, and
wondered at the gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth, v. 22. And as he
thus began his Ministry in the Power of the Spirit, so having received him not
by measure, he continually on all occasions put forth his Wisdom, Power, Grace
and Knowledge, to the astonishment of all, and the stopping of the Mouths of his
Adversaries, shutting them up in their Rage and Unbelief. (4.) By him was he
directed strengthened and comforted in his whole Course, in all his Temptations,
Troubles and Sufferings from first to last. For we know that there was a
confluence of all those upon him in his whole Way and Work, a great part of
that whereunto he humbled himself for our sakes consisting in these things. In
and under them he stood in need of mighty Supportment and strong Consolation.
This God promised unto him and this he expected, Isa. 50. 7, 8. and 42. 4, 6.
and 49. 5, 6, 7, 8. Now all the voluntary Communications of the Divine Nature
unto the Humane, were as we have showed, by the Holy Spirit.

Seventhly; He offered himself up unto God through the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.
14. I know many Learned Men do judge that by the Eternal Spirit in that place,
not the Third Person is intended, but the Divine Nature of the Son himself. And
there is no doubt but that also may properly be called the Eternal Spirit.
There is also a Reason in the words themselves strongly inclining unto that
sense and acceptance of them. For the Apostle does show whence it was that the
Sacrifices of the Lord Christ had an Efficacy beyond and above the Sacrifices
of the Law; and whence it would certainly produce that great Effect of purging
our Consciences from dead Works. And this was from the Dignity of his Person on
the account of his Divine Nature. It arose I say from the Dignity of his
Person, his Deity giving sustentation unto his Humane Nature in the Sacrifice
of himself. For by reason of the indissoluble Union of both his Natures, his
Person became the Principle of all his Mediatory Acts, and from thence had they
their Dignity and Efficacy. Nor will I oppose this Exposition of the words. But
on the other side many Learned Persons, both of the Ancient and Modern Divines,
do judge that it is the Person of the Holy Spirit that is intended.

offered up himself unto God as a Sacrifice by the Eternal Spirit, I shall
farther explain it though but briefly. Those who look only on the outward part
of the Death of Christ can see nothing but suffering in it. The Jews took him,
and they with the Soldiers both scourged and slew him, hanging him on the
Tree. But the principal Consideration of it, is his own offering himself a
Sacrifice unto God as the great High Priest of the Church, to make Atonement
and Reconciliation for Sinners, which was hid from the World by those outward
Acts of Violence which were upon him. And this he did by the Eternal Spirit,
wherein we may take notice of the ensuing Instances.

1. He Sanctified, Consecrated or Dedicated himself unto God for to be an
Offering or Sacrifice; John 17. 19. For their sakes, that is the Elect, I
sanctify my self. The Lord Christ was before this perfectly sanctified as to
all Inherent Holiness, so that he could not speak of sanctifying himself afresh
in that sense. Neither was it the Consecration of himself unto his Office of a
Priest. For this was the Act of him who called him, He glorified not himself to
be made an High Priest, but he that said unto Him, Thou art my Son, Heb. 5. 6.
He made him a Priest by his Death, after the Power of an Endless Life, Chap. 7.
16, 20, 21. Wherefore he consecrated himself to be a Sacrifice, as the Beast to
be Sacrificed of old was first devoted unto that purpose. Therefore it is said
that he thus Sanctified or Consecrated himself, that we might be Sanctified.
Now we are Sanctified by the Offering of the Body of Christ once for all, Heb.
10. 10. This was his first Sacerdotal Acts. He dedicated himself to be an
Offering to God. And this he did through the Effectual Operation of the Eternal
Spirit in him.

2. He went voluntarily and of his own accord to the Garden, which answered the
Adduction or bringing of the Beast to be Sacrificed unto the Door of the
Tabernacle according to the Law; for there he did not only give up himself into
the hands of those who were to shed his Blood; but also actually entered upon
the offering up of himself unto God in his Agony, when he offered up Prayers
and Supplications with strong Crying and Tears, Heb. 5. 7. which declares not
the Matter but the Manner of his Offering.

3. In all that ensued, all that followed hereon, unto his giving up the Ghost,
he offered himself to God in and by those Actings of the Grace of the Holy
Spirit in him, which accompanied him to the last. And these are diligently to
be considered, because on them depends the Efficacy of the Death of Christ, as
to Atonement and Merit, as they were enhanced and rendered excellent by the
Worth and Dignity of his Person. For it is not the Death of Christ merely as it
was penal and undergone by the way of Suffering, that is the Means of our
Deliverance, but the Obedience of Christ therein, which consisted in his
offering of himself through the Eternal Spirit unto God, that gave efficacy and
success unto it. We may therefore enquire what were those Principal Graces of
the Spirit which he acted in this offering of himself unto God. And they were,

(1.) Love to Mankind, and Compassion toward Sinners. This the Holy Soul of
the Lord Jesus was then in the highest and most inconceivable Exercise of. This
therefore is frequently expressed where mention is made of this Offering of
Christ; Gal. 2. 20. Who loved me and gave himself for me; Rev. 1. 5. Who loved
us and washed us in his own Blood. And Compassion is the first Grace required
in an High Priest or Sacrificer, Heb. 5. 2. God being now upon a Design of
Love, (for it was in the pursuit of Eternal Love that Christ was sent into the
World, John 3. 16. Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6.) This Love that was now in its most
inconceivable Advancement in the Heart of Christ, was most grateful and
acceptable unto him. And this Intenseness of Love did also support the Mind of
Christ under all his Sufferings, as Jacob through the greatness of his Love
unto Rachel, made light of the seven years Service that he endured for her,
Genesis 29. 20. And so did the Lord Christ endure the Cross and despise the shame
for the Joy of saving his Elect which was set before him, Heb. 12. 2. And this
was one Grace of the Eternal Spirit whereby he offered himself unto God.

2. That which principally acted him in the Whole, was his unspeakable Zeal,
for and Ardency of Affection unto the Glory of God. These were the Coals which
with a Vehement Flame as it were consumed the Sacrifice. And there were two
things that he aimed at with respect unto the Glory of God. (1.) The
manifestation of his Righteousness, Holiness and Severity against Sin. His
Design was to repair the Glory of God, wherein it had seemed to suffer by sin,
Psalm. 40. 6, 7, 8. and Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. He came to do that with full desire of
Soul, (expressed in those words, Lo I come) which Legal Sacrifices could not
do, namely to make satisfaction to the Justice of God for sin, to be a
propitiation to declare his Righteousness, Romans 3. 25. And this he does as to
the manner of it with inexpressible Ardency of Zeal and Affections; v. 8. I
delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea thy Law is in the midst of my Bowels; he
doubles the Expression of the Intenseness of his Mind hereon. And therefore
when he was to prepare himself in his last Passover for his Suffering, he
expresses the highest engagement of Heart and Affections unto it; Luke 22. 15.
With desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. As
with respect unto the same Work he had before expressed it. I have a Baptism to
be Baptized withal, and how am I straightened, or pained, till it be accomplished?
Luke 12. 50. His Zeal to advance the Glory of God in the manifestation of his
Righteousness and Holiness, by the offering up himself as a Sin-Offering to
make Atonement, gave him no Rest and Ease until he was engaged in it, whence it
wrought unto the utmost. (2.) The Exercise of his Grace and Love. This he knew
was the way to open the Treasures of Grace and Love that they might be poured
out on Sinners to the Everlasting Glory of God. For this was the Design of God
in the whole, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. This Zeal and Affection unto the Glory of
God's Righteousness, Faithfulness and Grace, which was wrought in the Heart of
Christ by the Eternal Spirit, was that wherein principally he offered up
himself unto God.

3. His Holy Submission and Obedience unto the Will of God, which were now in
the height of their Exercise, and Grace advanced unto the utmost in them, was
another especial part of this his Offering up himself. That this was wrought in
him by the Holy or Eternal Spirit was before declared. And it is frequently
expressed as that which had an especial Influence into the Efficacy and Merit
of his Sacrifice. Psalm. 2. 8. He humbled himself, and became Obedient unto
Death, the Death of the Cross. And when he offered up Prayers and
Supplications, though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things
that he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. That is, he experienced Obedience in Suffering. It
is true, that the Lord Christ in the whole course of his Life yielded Obedience
unto God, as he was made of a Woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. But now he
came to the great Trial of it, with respect unto the especial command of the
Father, to lay down his Life, and to make his Soul an Offering for sin, Isa.
53. 10. This was the highest Act of Obedience unto God that ever was or ever
shall be to all Eternity. And therefore does God so express his satisfaction
therein and acceptance of it, Isa. 53. 11, 12. Phil. 2. 9, 10. This was wrought
in him, this he was wrought unto by the Holy Spirit, and therefore by him
offered himself unto God.

4. There belongs also hereunto that Faith and Trust in God, which with fervent
Prayers, Cries and Supplications, he now acted on God and his Promises, both
with respect unto himself, and to the Covenant which he was sealing with his
Blood. This our Apostle represents as an especial Work of his testified unto in
the Old Testament; Heb. 2. 13. I will put my trust in him. And this (1.)
respected himself, namely that he should be supported, assisted, and carried
through the Work he had undertaken unto a blessed Issue. Herein I confess he
was horribly assaulted until he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Psalm. 22. 1. But yet after and through all his dreadful Trial, his
Faith and Trust in God were Victorious. This he expressed in the Depth and
Extremity of his Trials, Psalm. 22. 9, 10, 11. and made such an open Profession
of it, that his Enemies when they supposed him lost and defeated, reproached
him with it, v. 8. Matthew. 27. 43. To this purpose be declared himself at large,
Isa. 50. 7, 8, 9. So his Faith and Trust in God, as to his own supportment and
deliverance, with the accomplishment of all the Promises that were made unto
him upon his engagement into the Work of Mediation, were victorious. (2.) They
respected the Covenant and all the Benefits that the Church of the Elect was to
be made Partaker of thereby. The Blood that he now shed was the Blood of the
Covenant, and it was shed for his Church; namely, that the Blessings of the
Covenant might be communicated unto them, Gal. 3. 13, 14. With respect hereunto
did he also exercise Faith in God, as appears fully in his Prayer which he made
when he entered on his Oblation, John 17.

Now concerning these Instances we may observe three Things to our present
purpose.

(1.) These and the like gracious Actings of the Soul of Christ, were the Ways
and Means whereby in his Death and Bloodshedding, which was violent and by
force inflicted on him as to the outward Instruments, and was penal as to the
Sentence of the Law, he voluntarily and freely offered up himself a Sacrifice
unto God for to make Atonement. And these were the things which from the
dignity of his Person became Efficacious and Victorious. Without these his
Death and Bloodshedding had been no Oblation.

(2.) These were the things which rendered his Offering of himself, to be a
Sacrifice of a sweet sm^lling Savor unto God, Ephesians. 5. 2. God was so
absolutely delighted and pleased with these high and glorious Acts of Grace and
Obedience in Jesus Christ, that he smelt as it were a Savor of Rest toward
Mankind, or those for whom he offered himself; so that he would be angry with
them no more, curse them no more: As it is said of the Type of it in the
Sacrifice of Noah, Genesis 8. 20, 21. God was more pleased with the Obedience of
Christ, than he was displeased with the Sin and Disobedience of Adam, Romans 5.
17, 18, 19. It was not then the outward suffering of a violent and bloody Death
which was inflicted on him, by the most horrible wickedness that ever Humane
Nature brake forth into, that God was atoned, Acts 2. 23. Nor yet was it merely
his enduring the Penalty of the Law, that was the means of our Deliverance. But
the voluntary giving up of himself to be a Sacrifice in these Holy Acts of
Obedience, was that upon which in an especial manner God was reconciled unto us.

All these things being wrought in the Humane Nature by the Holy Ghost, who in
the time of his Offering acted all his Graces unto the utmost; He is said
thereon to offer himself unto God through the Eternal Spirit, by whom as our
High Priest he was Consecrated, Spirited, and Acted thereunto.

State of the Dead. For here our precedeing Rule must be remembered; namely,
that notwithstanding the Union of the Humane Nature of Christ with the Divine
in the Person of the Son, yet the Communications of God unto it, beyond
Subsistence, were voluntary. Thus in his Death the Union of his Natures in his
Person was not in the least impeached; but yet for his Soul or Spirit he
recommends that in an especial manner into the Hands of God his Father, Psalm.
31. 5. Luke 23. 46. Father into thy Hands I commend my Spirit; for the Father
had engaged himself in an Eternal Covenant, to take care of him, to preserve
and protect him even in Death, and to show him again the Way and Path of Life,
Psalm. 16. 11. Notwithstanding then the Union of his Person, his Soul in its
separate State was in an especial manner under the care protection and power of
the Father, preserved in his Love until the Hour came wherein he showed him
again the Path of Life. His Holy Body in the Grave continued under the especial
care of the Spirit of God, and hereby was accomplished that great Promise, That
his Soul should not be left in Hell, nor the Holy One see Corruption, Psalm. 16.
10. Acts 2. 31. It is the Body of Christ which is here called the Holy One; as
it was made an holy Thing by the Conception of it in the Womb by the Power of
the Holy Ghost. And it is here spoken of in contradistinction unto his Soul,
and opposed by Peter unto the Body of David, which when it died saw Corruption,
Acts 2. 29. This Pure and Holy Substance was preserved in its Integrity by the
overshadowing Power of the Holy Spirit, without any of those Accidents of
change which attend the dead Bodies of others. I deny not but there was use
made of the Ministry of Angels about the dead Body of Christ whilst it was in
the Grave; even those which were seen sitting afterward in the place where he
lay, John 20. 12. by these was it preserved from all outward Force and
Violation; But this also was under the peculiar care of the Spirit of God, who
how he works by Angels has been before declared.

Resurrection, this being the completing Act in laying the Foundation of the
Church whereby Christ entered into his Rest, the great Testimony given unto the
finishing of the Work of Redemption, with the satisfaction of God therein, and
his acceptance of the Person of the Redeemer. It is on various accounts
assigned distinctly to each Person in the Trinity. And this not only as all the
external Works of God are individed, each Person being equally concerned in
their Operation, but also upon the account of their especial respect unto and
interest in the Work of Redemption, in the manner before declared. Unto the
Father it is ascribed on the account of his Authority, and the declaration
therein of Christ's perfect accomplishment of the Work committed unto him; Acts
2. 24. Him has God raised up, having loosed the Pains of Death, because it was
not possible that he should be holden of it; it is the Father who is spoken of.
And he is said, as in other places, to raise Christ from the Dead; but this he
does with respect unto his loosing the Pains of Death, (...). These are the
(...), which with a little alteration of one Vowel, signify the Sorrows of
Death, or the Cords of Death. For (...) are the Sorrow of Death, and (...) are
the Cords of Death, see Psalm. 18. 4. Psalm. 116. 3. And these Sorrows of Death
here intended were the Cords of it, that is, the Power it had to bind the Lord
Christ for a season under it. For the Pains of Death, that is the (...),
tormenting Pains, ended in his death it self. But the Consequents of them are
here reckoned unto them, or the continuance under the Power of Death according
unto the Sentence of the Law. These God loosed when the Law being fully
satisfied the Sentence of it was taken off, and the Lord Christ was acquitted
from its whole Charge. This was the Act of God the Father, as the Supreme
Rector and Judge of all. Hence he is said to raise him from the Dead, as the
Judge by his Order delivers an acquitted Prisoner, or one who has answered
the Law. The same Work he also takes unto himself; John 10. 17, 18. I lay down
my Life that I may take it again, no Man takes it from me, but I lay it down
of my self, I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. For
although Men by violence took away his Life, when with wicked hands they
crucified and slew him, Acts 2. 23. Chap. 3. 15; Yet because they had neither
Authority nor Ability so to do without his own consent, he says, No Man could
or did take away his Life, that is, against his Will, by Power over him, as the
lives of other Men are taken away; for this neither Angels nor Men could do. So
also although the Father is said to raise him from the Dead by taking off the
Sentence of the Law, which he had answered; yet he himself also took his Life
again by an Act of the Love, Care, and Power of his Divine Nature; his living
again being an Act of his Person, although the Humane Nature only died. But the
peculiar efficiency in the reuniting of his most Holy Soul and Body was an
Effect of the Power of the Holy Spirit; 1 Pet. 3. 18. He was put to death in
the Flesh, but quickened in the Spirit, (...), he was restored to Life by the
Spirit; and this was that Spirit whereby he preached unto them that were
disobedient in the days of Noah, v. 19, 20. or that Spirit of Christ which was
in the Prophets from the Foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. by which he
preached in Noah unto that disobedient Generation, 2 Pet. 2. 5. whereby the
Spirit of God strove for a season with those Inhabitants of the Old World, Genesis
6. 3. that is the Holy Spirit of God. To the same purpose we are instructed by
our Apostle; Romans 8. 11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
Dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the Dead shall also quicken
your Mortal Bodies by his Spirit which dwells in you. God shall quicken our
Mortal Bodies also, by the same Spirit whereby he raised Christ from the Dead.
For so the Relation of the one Work to the other, requires the words to be
understood. And he asserts again the same expressly, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20.
he prays that God would give his Holy Spirit unto them, as a Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation, v. 17. The Effects thereof in them and upon them are described,
v. 18. and this he desires that they may so be made Partakers of, that by the
Work of the Spirit of God in themselves renewing and quickening of them, they
might have an experience of that exceeding greatness of his Power, which he put
forth in the Lord Christ when he raised him from the Dead. And the Evidence or
Testimony given unto his being the Son of God, by his Resurrection from the
Dead, is said to be according to the Spirit of Holiness, or the Holy Spirit,
Romans 1. 4. He was positively declared to be the Son of God by his Resurrection
from the Dead, (...), that is, by the powerful working of the Holy Spirit. This
also is the intendment of that Expression, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Justified in the
Spirit. God was manifest in the Flesh by his Incarnation and Passion therein,
and justified in the Spirit by a Declaration of his acquitment from the
Sentence of Death, and all the Evils which he underwent, with the Reproaches
wherewith he was contemptuously used, by his Quickening and Resurrection from
the Dead, through the mighty and effectual working of the Spirit of God.

glorified the Humane Nature, and made it every way meet for its Eternal
Residence at the Right Hand of God, and a Pattern of the Glorification of the
Bodies of them that believe on him. He who first made his Nature Holy, now made
it Glorious. And as we are made conformable unto him in our Souls here, his
Image being renewed in us by the Spirit, so he is in his Body now glorified by
the Effectual Operation of the same Spirit, the Exemplar and Pattern of that
Glory which in our Mortal Bodies we shall receive by the same Spirit. For when
he appears we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. seeing he will change our vile
Bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body, according to
the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21.
And these are some of the principal Instances of the Operations of the Holy
Spirit on the Humane Nature of the Head of the Church. The whole of them all, I
confess, is a Work that we can look but little into, only what is plainly
revealed we desire to receive and embrace; considering that if we are his, we
are predestined to be made conformable in all things unto him, and that by
the powerful and effectual Operation of that Spirit which thus wrought all
things in him to the Glory of God. And as it is a matter of unspeakable
consolation unto us, to consider what has been done in and upon our Nature by
the Application of the Love and Grace of God through his Spirit unto it; so it
is of great Advantage, in that it directs our Faith and Supplications in our
Endeavors after Conformity with him, which is our next End, under the
enjoyment of God in Glory. What therefore in these Matters we apprehend we
embrace; and for the depth of them they are the Object of our Admiration and
Praise.

toward him and on his behalf with respect unto his Work and Office. And it
comprizeth the Head and Fountain of the whole Office of the Holy Spirit toward
the Church. This was his witness-bearing unto the Lord Christ; namely, that he
was the Son of God, the true Messiah, and that the Work which he performed in
the World, was committed unto him by God the Father to accomplish. And this
same Work he continues to attend unto, unto this day, and will do so to the
consummation of all things. It is known how the Lord Christ was reproached
whilst he was in this World, and how ignominiously he was sent out of it by
Death. Hereon a great contest ensued amongst mankind, wherein Heaven and Hell
were deeply engaged. The greatest part of the World, the Princes, Rulers, and
Wise Men of it, affirmed that he was an Impostor, a Seducer, a Malefactor,
justly punished for his Evil Deeds. He on the other side chose twelve Apostles
to bear Testimony unto the Holiness of his Life, the Truth and Purity of his
Doctrine, the Accomplishment of the Prophesies of the Old Testament in his
Birth, Life, Work, and Death; and in especial unto his Resurrection from the
Dead, whereby he was justified and acquitted from all the Reproaches of Hell
and the World, and their Calumnies refelled. But what could the Testimony of
twelve poor Men, though never so honest, prevail against the confronting
Suffrage of the World? Wherefore this Work of bearing witness unto the Lord
Christ, was committed unto him who is above and over all, who knows how, and
is able to make his Testimony prevalent; John 15. 26. But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth which
proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. Accordingly the Apostles
plead his concurring Testimony; Acts 5. 32. And we are his Witnesses of these
things, and so also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to them that obey
him. And how he thus gave his Testimony our Apostle declares, Heb. 2. 4. God
also bearing witness with them, (that is, the Apostles) both with Signs and
Wonders, and with diverse Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Spirit according to his
Will. The first principal End why God gave the Holy Spirit to work all those
miraculous Effects in them that believed in Jesus, was to bear witness unto his
Person that he was indeed the Son of God, owned and exalted by him. For no Man
not utterly forsaken of all Reason and Understanding, not utterly blinded,
would once imagine that the Holy Spirit of God would work such marvelous
Operations in and by them who believed on him, if he designed not to justify
his Person, Work, and Doctrine thereby. And this in a short time, together with
that effectual Power which he put forth in and by the Preaching of the Word,
carried not only his Vindication against all the Machinations of Satan, and his
Instruments throughout the World, but also subdued the generality of Mankind
unto Faith in him and Obedience unto him, 1 Cor. 10. 4, 5. And upon this
Testimony it is, that there is real Faith in him yet maintained in the World.
This is that which he promised unto his Disciples whilst he was yet with them
in the World, when their hearts were solicitous how they should bear up against
their Adversaries upon his absence. I will* says he, send the Comforter unto
you, and when he is come he will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment; of sin, because they believe not on me; of
Righteousness, because I go to my Father and ye see me no more; of Judgment,
because the Prince of this World is Judged, John 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. The
Reason why the World believed not on Christ, was because they believed not that
he was sent of God, John 9. 29. By his Testimony the Spirit was to reprove the
World of their Infidelity, and to convince them of it by evidencing the Truth
of his Mission. For hereon the whole issue of the Controversy between him and
the World did depend. Whether he were Righteous or a Deceiver, was to be
determined by his being sent, or not sent of God, and consequently God's
Acceptance or Disapprobation of him. That he was so sent, so approved, the Holy
Spirit convinced the World by his Testimony, manifesting that he went to the
Father, and was exalted by him; for it was upon his Ascension and Exaltation
that he received and poured out the Promise of the Spirit to this purpose, Acts
2. 33. Moreover whilst he was in the World, there was an unrighteous Judgment
by the instigation of Satan passed upon him. On this Testimony of the Spirit,
that Judgment was to be reversed, and a contrary Sentence passed on the Author
of it, the Prince of this World. For by the Gospel so testified unto, was he
Discovered, Convicted, Judged, Condemned, and cast out of that Power and Rule
in the World, which by the darkness of the Minds of Men within, and Idolatry
without, he had obtained and exercised. And that the Holy Spirit continues to
do the same Work, though not absolutely by the same means unto this very day,
shall be afterward declared.

And by these Considerations may we be led into that Knowledge of, and
Acquaintance with our Lord Jesus Christ, which is so necessary, so useful, and
so much recommended unto us in the Scripture. And the utter neglect of Learning
the Knowledge of Christ, and of the Truth as it is in him, is not more
pernicious unto the Souls of Men, than is the learning of it by undue means,
whereby false and mischievous Ideas or Representations of him are infused into
the Minds of Men. The Papists would learn and teach him by Images, the Work of
Men's Hands, and Teachers of Lies. For besides that they are forbidden by God
himself to be used unto any such purposes, and therefore cursed with barrenness
and uselesness as to any end of Faith or Holiness; they are in themselves
suited only to ingenerate low and carnal Thoughts in depraved superstitious
Minds. For as the Worshippers of such Images know not what is the proper Cause
nor the proper Object of that Reverence, and those Affections they find in
themselves, when they approach unto them and adore before them; So the
Apprehensions which they can have hereby, tend but to the knowing after the
flesh, which the Apostle looked on as no part of his Duty, 2 Cor. 5. 16. But
the Glory of the Humane Nature, as united unto the Person of the Son of God,
and engaged in the discharge of his Office of Mediator, consists alone in these
eminent, peculiar, ineffable Communications of the Spirit of God unto him, and
his powerful Operations in him; This is represented unto us in the Glass of the
Gospel, which we beholding by Faith are changed into the same Image by the same
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

If, says he, they shall say unto you, He is in the Wilderness, go not forth,
behold he is in the Secret Chambers, believe it not, Matthew. 24. 26. It is not a
Wilderness, low, persecuted, unglorious and invisible Condition, as to outward
Profession, that our Savior here intends. For himself foretold that his
Church should be driven into the Wilderness, and nourished there, and that for
a long season, Rev. 12. 6. And where his Church is there is Christ, for his
Promise is to be with them and among them unto the end of the World, Matthew. 28.
20. Nor by Secret Chambers does he intend those private places of meeting for
security, which all his Disciples for some hundreds of years were compelled
unto and did make use of, after his Apostles who met sometimes in an upper
Room, sometimes in the Night for fear of the Jews. And such it is notorious
were all the Meetings of the Primitive Christians. But our Savior here
foretells the false ways that some would pretend he is taught by and found in.
For, first, some would say he was (...) in the Desert or Wilderness; and if Men
would go forth thither, there they would see him and find him. And there is
nothing intended hereby, but the ancient Superstitious Monks, who under a
pretense of Religion retired themselves into Deserts and Solitary Places. For
there they pretended great Intercourse with Christ, great Visions and
Appearances of him, being variously deluded and imposed on by Satan and their
own Imaginations. It is ridiculous on the one hand, and deplorable on the
other, to consider the woeful Follies, Delusions, and Superstitions this sort of
Men fell into: Yet was in those days nothing more common, than to say, That
Christ was in the Desert, conversing with the Monks and Anchorites. Go not
forth unto them, says our Lord Christ, for in so doing you will be deceived;
And again says he, If they say unto them he is, (...), in the Secret Chambers,
believe it not. There is, or I am much deceived, a deep and mysterious
Instruction in these words. (...), signifies those secret places in an House
where Bread and Wine and Cates of all sorts are laid up and stored. This is the
proper signification and use of the word. What pretense then could there be for
any to say that Christ was in such a place? Why, there insued so great a
pretense hereof, and so horrible a superstition thereon, that it was of Divine
Wisdom to foresee it, and of Divine Goodness to forewarn us of it. For it is
nothing but the Popish Figment of Transubstantiation that is intended. Christ
must be in the secret Places where their Wafer and Wine was deposited, that is,
(...). Concerning this says our Savior, believe them not. All Crafts and
Frauds and bloody Violences will be used to compel you to believe a Christ in
the Pix and Repository; but if you would not be seduced, believe them not. Such
are the false ways whereby some have pretended to teach Christ, and to learn
him, which have led them from him into hurtful Snares and Perdition. The
consideration that we have insisted on will guide us, if attended, unto a
Spiritual and Saving Knowledge of him, and we are to learn thus to know him.

love him with a pure unmixed Love. It is true, it is the Person of Christ as
God and Man, that is the Proper and Ultimate Object of our Love toward him.
But a clear distinct Consideration of his Natures and their Excellencies is
effectual to stir up and draw forth our Love toward him. So the Spouse in the
Canticles rendering a Reason of her intense Affections toward him, says, That
he is White and Ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand; that is, perfect in the
Beauty of the Graces of the Holy Spirit, which rendered him exceeding amiable.
So also Psalm. 45. 2. Would you therefore propose Christ unto your Affections,
so as that your Love unto him may be sincere and without corruption as it is
required to be, Ephesians. 6. 24. that you may not lavish away the Actings of your
Souls upon a false Object, and think you love Christ, when you love only the
Imaginations of your own Breasts; consider his Humane Nature, as it was rendered
beautiful and lovely by the Work of the Spirit of God upon it before described.
Do you love him because he was and is so full of Grace, so full of Holiness,
because in him there was an All-fulness of the Graces of the Spirit of God?
Consider aright what has been delivered concerning him, and if you can and do
on the account thereof delight in him, and love him, your Love is Genuine and
Spiritual. But if your Love be merely out of an apprehension of his being now
Glorious in Heaven, and there able to do you Good or Evil, it differs not much
from that of the Papists, whose Love is much regulated in its Actings, by the
good or bad painting of the Images whereby they represent him. You are often
pressed to direct your Love unto the Person of Christ, and it is that which is
your principal Duty in this World. But this you cannot do without a distinct
Notion and Knowledge of him. There are therefore three things in general that
you are to consider to this purpose.

(1.) The Blessed Union of his two Natures in the same Person. Herein he is
singular, God having taken that especial State on him, which in no other thing
or way had any Consideration; This therefore is to have a specialty in our
Divine Love to the Person of Christ.

(2.) The Uncreated Glories of the Divine Nature, whence our Love has the same
Object with that which we owe unto God absolutely.

(3.) That Perfection and Fullness of Grace which dwelt in his Humane Nature, as
communicated unto him by the Holy Spirit whereof we have treated.

If you love the Person of Christ, it must be on these Considerations. Which
whilst some have neglected, they have doted on their own Imaginations; and
whilst they have thought themselves even sick of Love for Christ, they have
only languished in their own Fancies.

Secondly; We are to know Christ so, as to labor after conformity unto him.
And this Conformity consists only in a Participation of those Graces whose
fullness dwells in him. We can therefore no other way regularly press after it,
but by an Acquaintance with, and due Consideration of the Work of the Spirit of
God upon his Humane Nature, which is therefore worthy of our most diligent
enquiry into.

And so have we given a brief delineation of the Dispensation and Work of the
Holy Spirit, in and toward the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Head of
the Church; his preparation of a Mystical Body for him, in his Powerful
Gracious Work on the Elect of God, does nextly ensue.

The General Work of the Holy Spirit in the New Creation, with respect unto the
Members of that Body whereof Christ is the Head. CHAP. V.
(1) Christ the Head of the New Creation. (2.) Things premised in general unto
the remaining Work of the Spirit. Things presupposed unto the Work of the
Spirit toward the Church, the Love and Grace of Father and Son. (3.) The whole
Work of the building of the Church committed to the Holy Spirit; Acts 2. 33.
opened. (4.) The Foundation of the Church in the Promise of the Spirit, and its
Building by him alone. (5.) Christ present with his Church only by his Spirit,
Mat. 28. 19. Acts 1. 9, 10. Acts 3. 21. Mat. 18. 19. 1 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Cor. 3.
16. compared. (6.) The Holy Spirit works the Work of Christ; John 16. 13, 14,
15. opened. (7.) The Holy Spirit the peculiar Author of all Grace. (8.) The
Holy Spirit works all this according to his own Will. 1. His Will and
Pleasure is in all his Works. 2. He works variously as to the Kinds and Degrees
of his Operations. How he may be resisted, how not. (9) How the same Work is
ascribed unto the Spirit distinctly, and to others with him. (10.) The General
Heads of his Operations toward the Church.

laying the Foundation of the Church of the New Testament, by his Dispensations
toward the Head of it, our Lord Jesus Christ. He is the Foundation Stone of
this Building, with seven Eyes engraven on him, or filled with an absolute
perfection of all the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, Zech. 3. 9. which when he
is exalted also as the Head Stone in the Corner, there are shoutings in Heaven
and Earth, crying, Grace, Grace unto him, Zech. 4. 7. As upon the laying of the
Foundation, and placing of the Corner Stones of the Earth in the Old Creation;
the Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy, Job
38. 6, 7. So upon the laying of this Foundation, and placing of this Corner
Stone in the New Creation, all things sing together and cry, Grace, Grace unto
it. The same Hand which laid this Foundation, does also finish the Building.
The same Spirit which was given unto him, not by Measure, Joh. 3. 34. gives
Grace unto every one of us, according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ,
Ephesians. 4. 7. And this falls now under our Consideration; namely, the
perfecting the Work of the New Creation by the effectual Operation and
Distributions of the Spirit of God. And this belongs unto the Establishment of
our Faith, that he who Prepared, Sanctified, and Glorified the Humane Nature,
the Natural Body of Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church, has undertaken to
Prepare, Sanctify, and Glorify his Mystical Body, or all the Elect given unto
him of the Father. Concerning which before we come to consider particular
Instances, some things in general must be premised; which are these that follow.

toward the Church, some things are supposed from whence it proceeds, which it
is built upon, and resolved into. It is not an Original but a Perfecting Work;
some things it supposes, and brings all things to perfection; And these are,

First; The Love, Grace, Counsel and Eternal Purpose of the Father. (2.) The
whole Work of the Mediation of Jesus Christ, which things I have handled
elsewhere. For it is the peculiar Work of the Holy Spirit, to make those things
of the Father and Son effectual unto the Souls of the Elect, to the Praise of
the Glory of the Grace of God. God does all things for himself, and his Supreme
End is the manifestation of his own Glory. And in the Old or First Creation, he
seems principally or firstly to intend the Demonstration and Exaltation of the
Glorious Essential Properties of his Nature, his Goodness, Power, Wisdom, and
the like: as Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. Romans 1. 19, 20, 21. Acts 14. 15, 16, 17.
Acts 7. 24, 25, 26, 27. leaving only on the Works of his Hands some obscure
Impressions of the distinction of Persons, subsisting in the Unity of that
Being, whose Properties he had displayed and glorified. But in the Work of the
New Creation, God firstly and principally intends the especial Revelation of
each Person of the whole Trinity distinctly, in their peculiar distinct
Operations; all which tend ultimately to the manifestation of the Glory of his
Nature also. And herein consists the principal Advantage of the New Testament
above the Old; for although the Work of the New Creation was begun and carried
on Secretly and Virtually under the Old Testament; yet they had not a full
discovery of the Economy of the Holy Trinity therein, which was not evidently
manifest until the whole Work was illustriously brought to Light by the Gospel.
Hence although there appear a vigorous acting of Faith, and ardency of
Affection in the Approaches of the Saints unto God, under the Old Testament;
yet as unto a clear access to the Father through the Son by the Spirit, as
Ephesians. 2. 18. wherein the Life and Comfort of our Communion with God does
consist, we hear nothing of it. Herein therefore God plainly declares, that the
Foundation of the Whole was laid in the Counsel, Will, and Grace of the Father,
Ephesians. 1. 3 4, 5, 6. Then that the making way for the accomplishing of that
Counsel of his, so that it might be brought forth to the praise of his Glory,
is by the Mediation of the Son; God having designed in this Work to bring
things so about, that all Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father, John 5. 23. There yet remains the actual Application of all to the
Souls of Men, that they may be Partakers of the Grace designed in the Counsel
of the Father, and prepared in the Mediation of the Son. And herein is the Holy
Spirit to be manifested and glorified, that He also, together with the Father
and the Son, may be Known, Adored, Worshipped, according unto his own Will.
This is the Work that he has undertaken. And hereon upon the solemn Initiation
of any Person into the Covenant of God, in answer unto this Design and Work, he
is Baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, Matthew. 28. 18. And these things have been discoursed of before, though
necessarily here called over again.

Nature and Order of this Work of God, it is, That after the Son was actually
exhibited in the Flesh according to the Promise, and had fulfilled what he had
taken upon him to do in his own Person, the great Promise of carrying on and
finishing the whole Work of the Grace of God in our Salvation, concerns the
sending of the Holy Spirit, to do and perform what he also had undertaken.
(...). Jobius apud Photium. lib. 122.
Thus when our Lord Jesus Christ was ascended into Heaven, and began
conspicuously and gloriously to carry on the building of his Church upon
himself the Rock and Foundation of it, it is said, That being exalted by the
Right Hand of God, he received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Spirit,
Acts 2. 33. which must be a little opened. Before he departed from his
Disciples, as has been mentioned on several occasions, he comforted and
cheared their drooping Spirits, with the Promise of sending him unto them,
which he often repeated and inculcated on their minds, John 14. 15, 16. And
(2.) when he was actually leaving of them after his Resurrection he gives them
order to sit still, and not to engage in the public Work of building the
Church, whereunto he had designed them, until that Promise were actually
accomplished toward them, Acts 1. 4. Being assembled together with them, he
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
Promise of the Father; and Verse. 8. Ye shall receive Power after the Holy
Spirit is come upon you, and ye shall be Witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem
and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the utmost parts of the Earth. He
would have them look neither for Assistance in their Work, nor success unto it,
but from the promised Spirit alone; and lets them know also, that by his Aid
they should be enabled to carry their Testimony of him to the uttermost parts
of the Earth. And herein lay, and herein does lie the Foundation of the
Ministry of the Church, as also its Continuance and Efficacy. The Kingdom of
Christ is Spiritual, and in the animating Principles of it, invisible. If we
fix our Minds only on outward Order, we lose the Rise and Power of the whole;
it is not an outward visible Ordination by Men, though that be necessary by
Rule and Precept, but Christ's Communication of that Spirit, the Everlasting
Promise whereof he received of the Father, that gives Being, Life, Usefulness,
and success to the Ministry. Wherefore also (3.) upon his Ascension in the
Accomplishment of the great Promises given unto the Church under the Old
Testament, Isa. 44. 3. Joel 1. 18. as also of his own newly given unto his
Disciples, he poured forth his Spirit on them. This the Apostle Peter declares
in this place; Being exalted by the right Hand of God, and having received of
the Father the Promise of the Holy Spirit; he shed forth what they then saw and
heard, in the Miraculous Operations and Effects of it. And he is said then to
receive the Promise of the Father, because he then received the thing promised.
The Promise was not then first given unto him, nor did he then receive it for
himself; For as the Promise was given long before, so in his own Person he had
received the fullness of the Spirit from his Incarnation, as has been declared.
But now he had Power given him actually to fulfill and accomplish the Promise in
the Collation of the thing promised, and is thence said to receive the Promise.
So Heb. 11. 13, 39. it is said of all Believers under the Old Testament, That
they died in Faith, having not received the Promise; that is, the thing
promised was not actually exhibited in their days, though they had the Promise
of it; as it is expressly said of Abraham, Chap. 7. 6. The Promise therefore it
self was given unto the Lord Christ, and actually received by him in the
Covenant of the Mediator, when he undertook the great Work of the Restoration
of all things to the Glory of God. For herein had he the Engagement of the
Father that the Holy Spirit should be poured out on the Sons of Men, to make
effectual unto their Souls, the whole Work of his Mediation; wherefore he is
said now to receive this Promise, because on his account, and by him as
exalted, it was now solemnly accomplished, in and toward the Church. In the
same manner the same thing is described, Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on
High, thou have led Captivity captive, thou have received Gifts for Men; which
is rendered, Ephesians. 4. 8. Thou have given Gifts unto Men, for he received the
Promise at this time, only to give out the Spirit and his Gifts unto Men. And
if any are so fond as to expect Strength and Assistance in the Work of the
Ministry without him, or such success in their Labors as shall find Acceptance
with God; they do but deceive their own Souls and others.

building his Church, and the propagation of his Gospel in the World. Of
themselves they were plainly and openly defective in all Qualifications and
Abilities that might contribute any thing thereunto. But whatever is wanting in
themselves, whether Light, Wisdom, Authority, Knowledge, Utterance, or Courage,
he promises to supply them withal. And this he would not do, nor did any
otherwise, but by sending the Holy Spirit unto them, on whose presence and
assistance alone depended the whole success of their Ministry in the World. It
was through the Holy Ghost that he gave Commandments unto them, Acts 1. 2.
Those Commandments concern the whole Work in Preaching the Gospel and Founding
of the Church; and these he gives unto them through the acting of Divine Wisdom
in the Humane Nature by the Holy Ghost. And on their part, without his
Assistance he forbids them to attempt any thing, v. 4, 8, 9. In this Promise
then the Lord Christ founded the Church it self, and by it he builded it up;
And this is the Hinge whereon the whole weight of it does turn and depend unto
this day. Take it away, suppose it to cease as unto a continual Accomplishment,
and there will be an absolute end of the Church of Christ in this World. No
Dispensation of the Spirit, no Church. He that would utterly separate the
Spirit from the Word, had as good burn his Bible. The bare Letter of the New
Testament will no more ingenerate Faith and Obedience in the Souls of Men, no
more constitute a Church State among them who enjoy it, than the Letter of the
Old Testament does so at this day among the Jews, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8. But blessed
be God who has knit these things together toward his Elect in the Bond of an
Everlasting Covenant, Isa. 59. 21. Let Men therefore cast themselves into what
order they please, institute what Forms of Government and Religious Worship
they think good, let them do it either by an attendance according unto the best
of their understandings unto the Letter of the Scripture, or else in an
Exercise of their own Wills, Wisdom and Invention; if the Work of the Spirit of
God be disowned or disclaimed by them, if there be not in them and upon them
such a Work of his as he is promised by our Lord Jesus Christ, there is not
Church State amongst them; nor as such is it to be owned or esteemed. And on
the Ministry and the Church do all ordinary Communications of Grace from God
depend.

bodily absence of Christ; and by him does he accomplish all his Promises to
the Church. Hence some of the Ancients call him Vicarium Christi, the Vicar of
Christ, or he who represents his Person, and discharges his promised Work;
Operam navat Christo Vicariam. When our Lord Jesus was leaving the World he
gave his Disciples command to Preach the Gospel, and to Disciple the World into
the Faith and Profession thereof, Matthew. 28. 19. For their encouragement
herein, he promises his own presence with them in their whole Work, wherever
any of them should be called unto it, and that whilst he would have the Gospel
preached on the Earth; so says he, I am with you always even unto the end of
the World, or the Consummation of all things, v. 20. Immediately after he had
thus spoken unto them, while they beheld he was taken up, and a Cloud received
him out of their sight, and they looked steadfastly toward Heaven as he went
up, Acts 1. 9, 10. Where now is the Accomplishment of his Promise, that he
would be with them unto the end of all things, which was the sole Encouragement
he gave them unto their great undertaking? It may be that after this his
triumphant Ascension into Heaven to take possession of his Kingdom and Glory,
he came again unto them, and made his abode with them: No, says Peter, the
Heavens must receive him until the time of the restitution of all things, Acts
3. 21. How then is this Promise of his made good, which had such a peculiar
respect unto the Ministry and Ministers of the Gospel, that without it none can
ever honestly or conscientiously engage in the Dispensation of it; or expect
the least success upon their so doing? Besides he had promised unto the Church
it self, That where ever two or three were gathered together in his Name, that
he would be in the midst of them, Matthew. 18. 19, 20. Hereon do all their
Comforts and all their Acceptance with God depend. I say, all these Promises
are perfectly fulfilled by his sending of the Holy Spirit. In and by him he is
present with his Disciples in their Ministry and their Assemblies. And
whenever Christ leaves the World, the Church must do so too. For it is his
Presence alone which puts Men into that condition, or invests them with that
Privilege. For so he says, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my People, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Levit. 26. 12. Their
being the People of God, so as therewithal to be the Temple of the Living God,
that is, to be brought into a Sacred Church State for his Worship, depends on
his dwelling in them, and walking in them; and this he does by his Spirit
alone. For know you not that you are Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God
dwells in you, 1 Cor. 3. 16. He therefore so far represents the Person, and
supplies the bodily absence of Christ, that on his Presence the Being of the
Church, the Success of the Ministry, and the Edification of the whole do
absolutely depend. And this if any thing in the whole Gospel deserves our
serious Consideration. For (1.) the Lord Jesus has told us that his presence
with us by his Spirit is better and more expedient for us than the continuance
of his Bodily Presence. Now who is there that has any Affection for Christ,
but thinks that the Carnal Presence of the Humane Nature of Christ would be of
unspeakable Advantage unto him? And so no doubt it would, had any such thing
been designed or appointed in the Wisdom and Love of God. But so it is not; and
on the other side we are commanded to look for more Advantage and Benefit by
his Spiritual Presence with us, or his Presence with us by the Holy Ghost. It
is therefore certainly incumbent on us, to inquire diligently what Valuation we
have hereof, and what Benefit we have hereby. For if we find not that we really
receive Grace, Assistance, and Consolation from this presence of Christ with
us, we have no benefit at all by him, nor from him, for he is now no otherwise
for those ends with any but by his Spirit. And this they will one day find,
whose Profession is made up of such a sottish Contradiction as to avow an
honor for Jesus Christ, and yet blaspheme his Spirit in all his Holy
Operations. (2.) The Lord Christ having expressly promised to be present with us
to the end of all things, there are great Enquiries how that Promise is
accomplished. Some say he is present with us by his Ministers and Ordinances;
but how then is he present with those Ministers themselves, unto whom the
Promise of his Presence is made in an especial manner? The Papists would have
him Carnally and Bodily present in the Sacrament. But he himself has told us,
that the Flesh in such a sense profits nothing, John 6. 63. and that it is
the Spirit alone that quickneth. The Lutherans sancy an Omnipresence or
Ubiquity of his Humane Nature, by virtue of its Personal Union. But this is
destructive of that Nature it self; which being made to be every where as such
a Nature, is truly no where. And the most Learned among them are ashamed of
this Imagination. The words of Smidh on Ephesians. 4. 10. (...) are worthy
consideration. Per (...) aliqui intelligunt totum Mundum, seu totum Universum
hoc, exponuntque ut Omnipraesentia sua omnibus in Mundo locis adesset, loca
omnia implendo: and hi verbum (...) de Physica and crassa impletione accipiunt;
quam tamen talis (...) seu impletio locorum in Mundo omnium quae vel
expansionem corpoream in quantitate continua, vel multiplicationem, imo
infinitam multitudinem unius ejusdemque corporis in discreta praesupponit, and
ex humana speculatione orta est, falsoque nostris Ecclesiis a^^ingitur;
(wherein yet he confesses that it is taught) Ne cogitanda quidem sit pio
homini; sed potius Omnipraesentia Christi Hominis -- uti promissa est, modo
nobis ineffabili credi, and multo certius aliunde sciri possit ex ipsius
promissione, Matthew. 28. 20. This way, as we say with the Scripture, is by his
Spirit; the perfect manner of whose Presence and Operation is ineffable.

Fourthly; As he represents the Person, and supplies the Room and Place of
Jesus Christ, so he works and effects whatever the Lord Christ has taken
upon himself to Work and Effect toward his Disciples. Wherefore as the Work of
the Son was not his own Work, but rather the Work of the Father who sent him,
and in whose Name he performed it; so the Work of the Holy Spirit is not his
own Work, but rather the Work of the Son, by whom he is sent, and in whose Name
he does accomplish it. John 16. 13, 14, 15. Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is
come, he will guide you into all Truth. For he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that he shall speak, and he will show you things to
come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and shall show it unto
you. all things that the Father has are mine; therefore said I that he shall
take of mine, and show it unto you. He comes to reveal and communicate Truth
and Grace to the Disciples of Christ. And in his so doing he speaks not of
himself; that is, of himself only. He comes not with any absolute new
Dispensation of Truth or Grace, distinct or different from that which is in and
by the Lord Christ, and which they had heard from him. The Holy Spirit being
promised unto the Disciples, and all their Work and Duty being suspended on the
accomplishment of that Promise, whereas he is God, they might suppose that he
would come with some absolute new Dispensation of Truth, so that what they had
learned and received from Christ should pass away and be of no use unto them.
To prevent any such Apprehensions, he lets them know that the Work he had to
do, was only to carry on and build on the Foundation which was laid in his
Person or Doctrine, or the Truth which he had revealed from the Bosom of the
Father. And this I take to be the meaning of that Expression. For he shall not
speak of himself, he shall reveal no other Truth, communicate no other Grace
but what is in from and by my self. This was the Holy Spirit to do, and this he
did; and hereby may we try every Spirit whether it be of God. That Spirit which
reveals any thing or pretends to reveal any Thing, any Doctrine, any Grace,
any Truth, that is contrary unto, that is not consonant to, yea that is not the
Doctrine, Grace, or Truth of Christ, as now revealed in the Word, that brings
any thing new, his own, or of himself, that Spirit is not of God. So it is
added, (2.) Whatsoever he shall hear that shall he speak. This which he hears,
is the whole Counsel of the Father and the Son concerning the Salvation of the
Church. And how is he said to hear it, which word in its proper signification
has no place in the mutual internal Actings of the Divine Persons of the Holy
Trinity. Being the Spirit of the Father and the Son, proceeding from both, he
is equally participant of their Counsels. So the outward Act of Hearing is
mentioned as the sign of his Infinite Knowledge of the Eternal Counsels of the
Father and Son; He is no stranger unto them. And this is a general Rule, That
those words which with respect unto us express the means of any thing, as
applied unto God, intend no more but the signs of it. Hearing is the means
whereby we come to know the mind of another who is distinct from us. And when
God is said to hearken or hear, it is a sign of his knowledge, not the means of
it. So is the Holy Spirit said to hear those things because he knows them. As
he is also on the same account said to search the deep things of God. Add
hereunto that the Counsel of these things is originally peculiar to the Father,
and unto him it is every where peculiarly ascribed; therefore is the
participation of the Spirit therein as a distinct Person called his hearing.
Hereunto (3.) his great Work is subjoyned. He, says Christ, shall glorify me.
This is the Design that he is sent upon; this is the Work that he comes to do,
even as it was the Design and Work of Jesus Christ to glorify the Father by
whom he was sent. And this are they always to bear in mind, who stand in need
of or pray for his Assistance in their Work or Office in the Church of God. He
is given unto them that through him they may give and bring Glory to Jesus
Christ. And (4.) how the Holy Spirit does glorify the Lord Christ is also
declared. He shall receive of mine and show it unto you; The Communication of
Spiritual Things from Christ by the Spirit is here called his receiving of
them; as the communication of the Spirit from the Father by the Lord Christ to
his Disciples, is called the receiving of the Promise. The Spirit cannot
receive any thing subjectively which he had not, as an addition unto him. It is
therefore the Economy of these things that is here intended. He is not said to
receive them as though before he had them not. For what can he who is God so
receive? only when he begins to give them unto us, because they are peculiarly
the things of Christ, he is said to receive them. For we can give nothing of
another but what we receive of him. Good things are given unto us from Christ
by the Spirit. For so it is added, and shall show them unto you. He shall make
them known unto you; so declare them and manifestly evidence them to you, and
in you, that you shall understand and have experience of them in your selves;
show them by Revelation, instructing you in them, by communication imparting
them to you. And what are these things that he shall so declare? They are
(...), my things, says our Savior. The things of Christ may be referred unto
two Heads, His Truth and His Grace, John 1. 17. The first he shows by
Revelation, the latter by Effectual Communication. His Truth he showed unto
them by Revelation, as we have declared him to be the Immediate Author of all
Divine Revelations. This he did unto the Apostles by his Inspirations, enabling
them infallibly to receive understand and declare, the whole Counsel of God in
Christ. For so according unto the Promise, He led them into all Truth. And his
Grace he showed unto them in his pouring out both of his Sanctifying Graces and
Extraordinary Gifts upon them in an abundant measure. And so he still continues
to show the Truth and Grace of Christ unto all Believers, though not in the
same manner as unto the former, nor unto the same Degree as unto the latter.
For he shows unto us the Truth of Christ, or the Truth that came by Jesus
Christ, by the Word as Written and Preached, instructing us in it, and
enlightening our Minds Spiritually and Savingly to understand the Mind of God
therein. And of his Grace he imparts unto us in our Sanctification,
Consolation, and Communication of Spiritual Gifts, according unto the measure
of the Gift of Christ unto every one of us, as the present use of the Church
does require, which things must be afterward declared. And the Reason of the
Assertion is added in the last place. All things that the Father has are mine;
therefore said I, that he shall take of mine and shall show it unto you. Two
things may be observed in these words. 1. The Extent of the Things of Christ,
which are to be showed unto Believers by the Spirit; and they are all the
things that the Father has. They are mine, says our Savior; And these All
things may be taken either absolutely and personally, or with a restriction
unto Office. (1.) All things that the Father has absolutely, were the Son's
also. For receiving his Personality from the Father, by the communication of
the whole entire Divine Nature, all the things of the Father must needs be his.
Thus as the Father has Life in himself, so he has given unto the Son to have
Life in himself, John 5. 26. and the like may be said of all other Essential
Properties of the Godhead. But these seem not to be the All Things here
intended. They are not the All things of the Divine Nature which he had by
Eternal Generation; but the All Things of Spiritual Grace and Power which he
had by voluntary Donation; Matthew. 11. 27. Joh. 3. 35. The Father loves the
Son, and has given all things into his hand. That is, all the Effects of the
Love, Grace, and Will of the Father, whatever he had purposed in himself from
Eternity, and whatever his Infinite Power and Goodness would produce in the
pursuit thereof, was all given and committed unto Jesus Christ; so All things
that the Father has were his.

2. That these things may be rightly understood and apprehended, we must
consider a two-sold Operation of God as Three in One. The first hereof is
absolute in all Divine Works whatever; the other respects the Economy of the
Operations of God in our Salvation. In those of the first sort, both the
Working and the Work, do in common and undivid^dly belong unto and proceed from
each Person. And the Reason hereof is, because they are all Effects of the
Essential Properties of the same Divine Nature; which is in them all, or rather
which is the one Nature of them all. But yet as they have one Nature, so there
is an Order of subsistence in that Nature, and the distinct Person Work in the
Order of their Subsistence; John 5. 19, 20. Verily I say unto you, the Son can
do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do; for whatsoever things
he does, those also does the Son likewise. The Father does not first work in
order of Time, and then the Son seeing of it work another Work like unto it.
But the Son does the same Work that the Father does. This is absolutely
necessary, because of their Union in Nature. But yet in the Order of their
Subsistence, the Person of the Father is the Original of all Divine Works, in
the principle and beginning of them, and that in order of Nature, antecedently
unto the Operation of the Son. Hence he is said to see what the Father does;
which according unto our former Rule in the Exposition of such Expressions,
when ascribed unto the Divine Nature is the sign and evidence, and not the
means of his Knowledge. He sees what the Father does, as he is his Eternal
Wisdom. The like must be said of the Holy Spirit, with respect both unto the
Father and Son. And this Order of Operation in the Holy Trinity is not
voluntary, but natural and necessary from the one Essence and distinct
Subsistences thereof. Secondly; There are those Operations, which with respect
unto our Salvation, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, do graciously condescend
unto, which are those treated of in this place. Now though the designing of
this Work was absolutely voluntary, yet upon a supposition thereof, the order
of its Accomplishment was made necessary from the Order of the Subsistence of
the distinct Persons in the Deity; and that is here declared. Thus (1.) the
things to be declared unto us, and bestowed on us, are originally the Father's
Things. He is the peculiar Fountain of them all. His Love, His Grace, His
Wisdom, His Goodness, His Counsel, His Will, is their Supreme Cause and Spring.
Hence are they said to be the things that the Father has. (2.) They are made
the Things of the Son, that is, they are given and granted in and unto his
disposal, on the account of his Mediation; for thereby they were to be prepared
for us, and given out unto us, to the Glory of God. Answerable hereunto as the
Lord Christ is Mediator, all the things of Grace are originally the Fathers,
and then given unto him. (3.) They are actually communicated unto us by the
Holy Spirit, Therefore said I, he shall take of mine and show unto you. He does
not communicate them unto us immediately from the Father. We do not so receive
any Grace from God that is the Father; nor do we so make any return of Praise
or Obedience unto God. We have nothing to do with the Person of the Father
immediately. It is by the Son alone by whom we have an Access unto him, and by
the Son alone that he gives out of his Grace and Bounty unto us. He that has
not the Son has not the Father. With him as the great Treasurer of Heavenly
Things, are all Grace and Mercy entrusted. The Holy Spirit therefore shows them
unto us, works them in us, bestows them on us, as they are the Fruits of the
Media^ion of Christ, and not merely as Effects of the Divine Love and Bounty of
the Father; and this is required from the Order of Subsistence before
mentioned. Thus the Holy Spirit supplies the bodily Absence of Jesus Christ,
and Effects what he has to do and accomplish toward his in the World; so that
whatever is done by him, it is the same as if it were wrought immediately by
the Lord Christ himself in his own Person; whereby all his Holy Promises are
fully accomplished toward them that believe.

Communion which we have with God by the Gospel. For herein the Life, Power,
and Freedom of our Evangelical State does consist, and an acquaintance herewith
gives us our Translation out of Darkness into the marvelous Light of God. (1.)
The Person of the Father in his Wisdom, Will, and Love, is the Original of all
Grace and Glory. But nothing hereof is communicated immediately unto us from
him. It is the Son whom he loves and has given all things into his hand. He
has made way for the Communication of these things unto us unto the Glory of
God. And he does it immediately by the Spirit, as has been declared. Hereby
are all our Returns unto God to be regulated. The Father who is the Original of
all Grace and Glory, is ultimately intended by us in our Faith, Thankfulness,
and Obedience; yet not so, but that the Son and Spirit are considered as one
God with him. But we cannot address our selves with any of them immediately
unto him. There is no going to the Father, says Christ, but by me, John 14. 6.
Through him we believe in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. But yet neither can we do so,
unless we are enabled thereunto by the Spirit, the Author in us, of Faith,
Prayer, Praise, Obedience, and whatever our Souls tend unto God by. As the
descending of God toward us in Love and Grace, issues or ends in the Work of
the Spirit in us and on us; so all our ascending toward him begins therein.
And as the first Instance of the proceeding of Grace and Love toward us from
the Father, is in and by the Son; so the first step that we take toward God,
even the Father, is in and by the Son. And these things ought to be explicitly
attended unto by us, if we intend our Faith, and Love, and Duties of Obedience
should be Evangelical. Take an Instance of the Prayer of Wicked Men under their
Convictions, or their Fears, Troubles and Dangers; and the Prayers of
Believers. The former is merely, Vox Naturae Clamantis ad Dominum Naturae; an
outcry that distressed Nature makes to the God of it, and as such alone it
considers him. But the other is, Vox Spiritus Adoptionis clamantis per
Christum, Abba Pater; It is the Voice of the Spirit of Adoption addressing it
self in the Hearts of Believers unto God as a Father. And a due attendance unto
this Order of things, gives Life and Spirit unto all that we have to do with
God. Woe to Professors of the Gospel who shall be seduced, to believe that all
they have to do with God, consists in their attendance unto Moral Virtue. It is
fit for them so to do, who being weary of Christianity, have a mind to turn
Pagans. But our Fellowship is in the way described, with the Father and his Son
Christ Jesus. It is therefore of the highest importance unto us, to enquire
into, and secure unto our selves the promised workings of the Holy Spirit. For
by them alone are the Love of the Father, and the Fruits of the Mediation of
the Son communicated unto us, without which we have no interest in them. And by
them alone are we enabled to make any acceptable Returns of Obedience unto God.
It is sottish Ignorance and Infidelity to suppose that under the Gospel there
is no communication between God and us, but what is on his part in Laws,
Commands, and Promises; and on ours by Obedience performed in our own Strength,
and upon our Convictions unto them. The exclude hence the real internal
Operations of the Holy Ghost, is to destroy the Gospel. And as we shall see
farther afterward, this is the true Ground and Reason why there is a sin
against the Holy Spirit, that is irremissible; for the coming unto us to make
Application of the Love of the Father, and Grace of the Son unto our Souls; in
the contempt of him, there is a contempt of the whole actings of God toward
us, in a way of Grace, for which there can be no Remedy.

Spirit of Grace, and the immediate Efficient Cause of all Grace, and Gracious
Effects in Men; wherever there is mention made of them, or any fruits of
them, it is to be looked on as a part of his Work, though he be not expressly
named, or it be not particularly attributed unto him. I know not well, or do
not well understand what some Men begin to talk about Moral Virtue; Some thing
they seem to aim at, (if they would once leave the old Pelagian ambiguous
Expressions, and learn to speak clearly and intelligibly) that is in their own
Power, and so consequently of all other Men. At least it is so with an ordinary
blessing upon their own endeavors, which things we must afterward enquire
into. But for Grace, I think all Men will grant, that as to our participation
of it, it is of the Holy Spirit, and of him alone. Now Grace is taken two ways
in the Scripture; (1.) For the gracious free Love and Favor of God toward us:
And (2.) for gracious free effectual Operations in us, and upon us. In both
senses the Holy Spirit is the Author of it, as unto us. In the first as to its
manifestation and Application; in the latter, as to the Operation it self. For
although he be not the principal Cause, nor procurer of Grace in the first
sense, which is the free Act of the Father; yet the Knowledge, Sense, Comfort,
and all the Fruits of it are by him alone communicated unto us, as we shall see
afterward. And the latter is his proper and peculiar Work. This therefore must
be taken for granted, that wherever any gracious actings of God in or toward
Men are mentioned, it is the Holy Spirit who is peculiarly and principally
intended.

according to his own Will. This our Apostle expressly affirms. And sundry
things of great moment do depend hereon in our walking before God. As;

1. That the Will and Pleasure of the Holy Spirit is in all the Goodness,
Grace, Love, and Power, that he either communicates unto us, or works in us.
He is not as a mere Instrument or Servant disposing of the things wherein he
has no Concern, or over which he has no Power. But in all things he works
toward us according to his own Will. We are therefore in what we receive from
him, and by him, no less to acknowledge his Love, Kindness, and Sovereign Grace,
than we do to those of the Father, and the Son.

2. That he does not work as a natural Agent, ad ultimum virium, to the utmost
of his Power, as though in all he did, he came and did what he could. He
moderates all his Operations by his Will and Wisdom. And therefore whereas some
are said to resist the Holy Spirit, Acts 7. 51. and so to frustrate his Work
toward them, it is not because they can do so absolutely, but only they can do
so as to some way, kind, or degree, of his Operations. Men may resist some sort
or kind of means that he uses, as to some certain end and purpose; but they
cannot resist him as to his purpose and the end he aims at. For he is God, and
who has resisted his Will? Romans 9. 19. Wherefore in any Work of his, two
things are to be considered; (1.) What the means he makes use of tend unto in
their own Nature; And (2.) what he intends by it; The first may be resisted and
frustrated, but the latter cannot be so. Sometimes in and by that word which in
its own Nature tends to the Conversion of Sinners, he intends by it only
their hardening, Isa. 6. 9, 10. John 12. 40, 41. Acts 18. 26. Romans 11. 8. And he
can, when he pleases, exert that Power and Efficacy in working, as shall take
away all Resistance. Sometimes he will only take order for the Preaching and
Dispensation of the Word unto Men; for this also is his Work, Acts 13. 2.
Herein Men may resist his Work, and reject his Counsel concerning themselves.
But when he will put forth his Power in and by the Word, to the creating of a
new heart in Men, and the opening of the Eyes of them that are blind, he does
therein so take away the Principle of Resistance, that he is not, that he
cannot be resisted.

various kinds, and that those which are of the same kind may yet be carried on
unequally as to Degrees. It is so in the Operations of all voluntary Agents,
who work by Choice and Judgment. They are not confined to one sort of Works,
nor to the Production of the same kind of Effects; and where they design so to
do, they moderate them as to degrees according to their Power and pleasure.
Thus we shall find some of the Works of the Holy Spirit to be such as may be
perfect in their kind, and Men may be made Partakers of the whole End and
Intention of them, and yet no saving Grace be wrought in them. Such are his
Works of Illumination, Conviction, and sundry others. Men, I say, may have a
Work of the Holy Spirit on their Hearts and Minds, and yet not be Sanctified
and Converted unto God. For the Nature and Kind of his Works are regulated by
his own Will and Purpose; if he intends no more but their Conviction and
Illumination, no more shall be effected. For he works not by a necessity of
Nature, so that all his Operations should be of the same kind, and have their
especial Form from his Nature, and not from his Will. So also where he does
work the same Effect in the Souls of Men, I mean the same in the kind of it, as
in their Regeneration he does; yet he does it by sundry means, and carries it
on to a great inequality, as to the strengthening of its Principle, and
increase of its Fruits unto Holiness; And hence is that great difference as to
Light, Holiness, and Fruitfulness, which we find among Believers, although all
alike Partakers of the same Grace for the kind thereof. The Holy Spirit works
in all these things according to his own Will; whereof there neither is nor can
be any other Rule but his own Infinite Wisdom. And this is that which the
Apostle minds the Corinthians of, to take away all Emulation and Envy about
Spiritual Gifts, that every one should orderly make use of what he had received
to the Profit and Edification of others. They are, says he, given and
distributed by the same Spirit according to his own Will, to one after one
manner, unto another after another; so that it is an unreasonable thing for any
to contend about them.

working of Grace in us, but also the Effects and Fruits of it, in all its
variety of Degrees, is to be ascribed unto the Holy Spirit, and his Operations
in us according to his own Will, then do we signify nothing our selves; nor is
there any need that we should either use our endeavors and diligence, or at
all take any care about the furtherance or growth of Holiness in us, or attend
unto any Duties of Obedience. To what end and purpose then serve all the
Commands, Threatenings, Promises, and Exhortations of the Scripture, which are
openly designed to excite and draw forth our own Endeavors? And this is indeed
the principal Difficulty wherewith some Men seek to entangle and perplex the
Grace of God. But I Answer.

(1.) Let Men imagine what absurd Consequences they please thereon, yet that
the Spirit of God is the Author and Worker of all Grace in us, and of all the
Degrees of it, of all that is spiritually good in us, is a Truth which we must
not forgo, unless we intend to part with our Bibles also. For in them we are
taught, That in us, that is, in our flesh, there dwells no good thing, Romans
7. 18. That we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Who is able to make all
Grace abound toward us, that we may always have All Sufficiency in all things
abounding to every good work, Chap. 9. 8. But without Christ we can do nothing,
John 15. 5. For it is God which works in us both to Will and to Do of his
good Pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. To grant therefore that there is any spiritual good
in us, or any Degree of it, that is not wrought in us by the Spirit of God,
both overthrows the Grace of the Gospel, and denies God to be the only First,
Supreme, and chiefest Good; as also the immediate cause of what is so, which is
to deny his very Being. It is therefore certain, whatever any pertend, that
nothing can hence ensue, but what is true, and good, and useful to the Souls of
Men: For from Truth, especial such great and important Truths, nothing else
will follow.

2. It is brutish Ignorance in any to argue in the Things of God, from the
Effectual Operations of the Spirit, unto a sloth and negligence of our own
Duty. He that does not know that God has promised to work in us, in a way of
Grace, what he requires from us in a way of Duty, has either never read the
Bible, or does not believe it, or never Prayed, or never took notice of what he
prayed for. He is a Heathen, he has nothing of the Christian in him, who does
not pray that God would work in him what he requires of him. This we know that
what God commands and prescribes unto us, what he encourages us unto, we ought
with all diligence and earnestness, as we value our Souls and their eternal
welfare, to attend unto and comply withal. And we do know that whatever God
has promised, that he will do himself in us, toward us, and upon us: It is
our Duty to believe that he will so do. And to fancy an inconsistency between
these things, is to charge God foolishly.

3. If there be an Opposition between these things, it is either because the
Nature of Man is not meet to be commanded, or because it needs not to be
assisted. But that both these are false and vain Suppositions, shall be
afterward declared. The Holy Spirit so works in us, as that he works by
us; and what He does in us, is done by us; Our Duty it is to apply our selves
unto his Commands, according to the Conviction of our Minds; and his Work it is
to enable us to perform them.

4. He that will indulge, or can do so, unto sloth and negligence in himself on
the account of the promised working of the Spirit of Grace, may look upon it as
an evidence, that he has no interest or concern therein. For he ordinarily
gives not out his Aids and Assistances anywhere, but where he prepares the
Soul with Diligence in Duty. And whereas he acts us no otherwise but in and by
the Faculties of our own Minds, it is ridiculous, and implies a Contradiction,
for a Man to say he will do nothing, because the Spirit of God does all; For
where he does nothing, the Spirit of God does nothing, unless it be merely in
the infusion of the first Habit or Principle of Grace, whereof we shall treat
afterward.

5. For Degrees of Grace and Holiness which are enquired after, they are
peculiar unto Believers. Now these are furnished with an Ability and Power to
attend unto and perform those Duties, whereon the increase of Grace and
Holiness does depend. For although there is no Grace, nor Degree of Grace or
Holiness in Believers, but what is wrought in them by the Spirit of God; yet
ordinarily and regularly the Increase and Growth of Grace, and their thriving
in Holiness and Righteousness, depend upon the Use and Improvement of Grace
received, in a diligent Attendance unto all those Duties of Obedience which are
required of us, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7. And methinks it is the most unreasonable
and sottish thing in the World, for a Man to be slothful and negligent in
attending unto those Duties which God requires of him, which all his Spiritual
Growth depends upon, which the eternal welfare of his Soul is concerned in, on
pretense of the efficacious Aids of the Spirit, without which he can do
nothing, and which he neither has, nor can have, whilst he does nothing.

exercising Faith in particular toward him, and of our acting of it in
Supplications and Thanksgivings. His participation of the Divine Nature is the
formal Reason of our yielding unto him Divine and Religious Worship in general;
but his acting toward us according to the Sovereignty of his own Will, is the
especial Reason of our particular Addresses unto him in the exercise of Grace,
for we are baptized into his Name also.

distinctly and separately ascribed unto him, although some things be of the
same kind wrought by the Person in and by whom he Acts; or he is said at the
same time to do the same thing distinctly by himself, and in and by others. So
John 15. 26, 27. I will, says our Savior, send the Spirit of Truth, and he
shall testify of me, and ye also shall bear witness. The Witness of the Spirit
unto Christ is proposed as distinct and separate from the witness given by the
Apostles. He shall testify of me, and ye also shall bear witness. And yet they
also were enabled to give their witness by him alone. So it is expressly
declared, Acts 1. 8. Ye shall receive Power after that the Holy Spirit is come
upon you, and ye shall be Witnesses unto me. Their witnessing unto Christ was
the Effect of the Power of the Holy Spirit upon them, and the Effect of his
Work in them. And he himself gave no other Testimony but in and by them. What
then is the distinct Testimony that is ascribed unto him? It must be somewhat
that in or by whomsoever it was wrought, it did of its own Nature discover its
Relation unto him as his Work. So it was in this Matter; For it was no other
but those Signs and Wonders, or Miraculous Effects which he wrought, in the
confirmation of the Testimony given by the Apostles, all which clearly
evidenced their own Original. So our Apostle, Heb. 2. 4. The word was
confirmed, (...), God co-witnessing by Signs and Wonders. He enabled the
Apostles to bear witness unto Christ by their Preaching, Sufferings, Holiness,
and constant Testimony which they gave unto his Resurrection. But in this he
appeared not, he evidenced not himself unto the World, though he did so in and
by them in whom he wrought. But moreover he wrought such visible miraculous
Works by them, as evidenced themselves to be Effects of his Power, and were his
distinct Witness to Christ. So our Apostle tells us, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it
self bears witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God. The
Witness which our own Spirits do give unto our Adoption, is the Work and Effect
of the Holy Spirit in us. If it were not, it would be false, and not confirmed
by the Testimony of the Spirit himself, who is the Spirit of Truth. and none
knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. If he declare
not our Sonship in us, and to us, we cannot know it. How then does he bear
witness with our Spirits? What is his distinct Testimony in this Matter? It
must be some such Act of his, as evidenceth it self to be from him immediately,
unto them that are concerned in it, that is, those unto whom it is given. What
this is in particular, and wherein it does consist, we shall afterward
enquire. So Rev. 22. 17. The Spirit and the Bride say come. The Bride is the
Church, and she prays for the coming of Christ. This She does by his Aid and
Assistance, who is the Spirit of Grace and Supplications. And yet distinctly
and separately the Spirit says come; that is, he puts forth such earnest and
fervent desires, as have upon them an Impression of his immediate efficiency.
So v. 20. carries the sense of the place, namely, that it is Christ himself,
unto whom She says come, or they pray for the hastening of his coming. Or they
say come unto others, in their Invitation of them unto Christ, as the end of v.
17. seems to apply it. Then is it the Prayers and Preaching of the Church for
the Conversion of Souls that is intended. And with both the Spirit works
eminently to make them effectual. Or it may be in this place, the Spirit is
taken for the Spirit in the Guides and Leaders of the Church. They praying by
his especial Guidance and Assistance, say, Come; or Preachers say unto others.
Come, and the Bride, or the Body of the Church acted by the same Spirit, join
with them in this great Request and Supplication; and thereunto all Believers
are invited in the following words; and let him that hears, say, Come.

especial Works in the Calling, Building, and Carrying on the Church unto
Perfection. Now all his Works of this kind may be reduced unto three Heads.
(1.) Of Sanctifying Grace. (2.) Of Especial Gifts. (3.) Of peculiar Evangelical
Privileges. Only we must observe that these things are not so distinguished,
as to be negatively contradistinct to each other; for the same thing under
several Considerations may be all these, a Grace, a Gift, and a Privilege. All
that I intend, is to reduce the Operations of the Holy Spirit unto these Heads,
casting each of them under that which it is most eminent in, and as which it is
most directly proposed unto us. And I shall begin with his Work of Grace.

BOOK III.
WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN THE New Creation BY REGENERATION. CHAP. I.
(1.) The New Creation Completed. (2.) Regeneration the especial Work of the
Holy Spirit; (3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.) Wrought under the Old Testament, but
clearly revealed in the New; And (10, 11, 12.) is of the same kind in all that
are Regenerate. (13, 14.) The Causes and Way of it being the same in all. (15,
16.) It consists not in Baptism alone; Nor (17, 18.) in a Moral Reformation
of Life; But (19, 20.) a New Creature is Formed in it; whose (21, 22.) Nature
is declared, and (23.) farther explained. (24.) Denial of the Original
Depravation of Nature the Cause of many Noxious Opinions. (25, 26.)
Regeneration consists not in Enthusiaslick Raptures; their Nature and Danger.
(27.) The whole Doctrine necessary, d^spised, corrupted, vindicated.

WE have formerly declared the Work of the Holy Spirit in Preparing and Forming
the Natural Body of Christ. This was the beginning of the New Creation, the
Foundation of the Gospel-State and Church. But this was not the whole of the
Work he had to do. As he had provided and prepared the Natural Body of Christ,
so he was to prepare his Mystical Body also. And hereby the Work of the New
Creation was to be completed and perfected. And as it was with respect unto
him and his Work in the Old Creation, so was it also in the New. All things in
their first production had Darkness and Death upon them. For the Earth was Void
and without Form, and Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep, Genesis 1. 2.
Neither was there any thing that had either Life in it, or Principle of Life,
or any Disposition thereunto. In this condition he moved on the prepared
Matter, preserving and cherishing of it, and communicating unto all things a
Principle of Life whereby they were animated, as we have declared. It was no
otherwise in the New Creation. There was a Spiritual Darkness and Death came by
sin on all Mankind. Neither was there in any Man living the least Principle of
Spiritual Life, or any Disposition thereunto. In this State of things the Holy
Spirit undertaketh to create a New World, New Heavens, and a New Earth, wherein
Righteousness should dwell. And this in the first place was by his Effectual
Communication of a New Principle of Spiritual Life unto the Souls of God's
Elect, who were the Matter designed of God for this Work to be wrought upon.
This he does in their Regeneration, as we shall now manifest.

Regeneration in Scripture is everywhere assigned to be the proper and
peculiar Work of the Holy Spirit. John 3. 3, 4, 5, 6. Jesus answered and said
unto Nicodemus, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a Man be born again he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus says unto him, How can a Man be born
when he is old; can he enter the second time into his Mothers Womb and be born?
Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a Man be born of Water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is born
of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. It was
an ancient knowing Teacher of the Church of the Jews, a Master in Israel, whom
our Blessed Savior here discourses withal and instructs. For on the
consideration of his Miracles, he concluded that God was with him, and came to
enquire of him about the Kingdom of God. Our Savior knowing how all our Faith
and Obedience to God, and all our Acceptance with him depended on our
Regeneration, or being born again, acquaints him with the necessity of it,
wherewith he is at first surprised. Wherefore he proceeds to instruct him in
the Nature of the Work, whose necessity he had declared. And this he describes
both by the Cause and the Effect of it. For the Cause of it he tells him, it is
wrought by Water and the Spirit. By the Spirit as the Principal Efficient
Cause; and by Water Si in Gratia, non ex natura Aquae, sed ex praesentia est
Spiritus Sancti: numquid in Aqua vivimus, sicut in Spiritu? numquid in Aqua
signamur sicut in Spiritu? Ambros. de Spirit. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 6.
as the Pledge, Sign and Token of it, in the initial Seal of the Covenant, the
Doctrine whereof was then preached amongst them by John the Baptist; or the
same thing is intended in a redoub^ed Expression, the Spirit being signified by
the Water also, under which Notion he is often promised.

born of the Spirit, v. 8. so is every one that is born of the Spirit. And this
is the same with what is delivered, Chap. 1. v. 13. Who are born not of Blood,
nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. The Natural
and Carnal Means of Blood, Flesh, and the Will of Man, are rejected wholly in
this Matter, and the whole Efficiency of the New Birth is ascribed unto God
alone. His Work answers whatever Contribution there is unto Natural
Generation, from the Will and Nature of Man. For these things are here
compared, and from its Analogy unto Natural Generation, is this Work of the
pirit called Regeneration; so in this place is the Allusion and Opposition
between these things expressed by our Savior; That which is born of the Flesh
is Flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, v. 6. And herein
also we have a farther Description of this Work of the Holy Spirit, by its
Effect or the Product of it; It is Spirit, a new Spiritual Being, Creature,
Nature, Life, as shall be declared. And because there is in it a Communication
of a new Spiritual Life, it is called a Vivification or quickening, with respect
unto the State wherein all Men are, before this Work is wrought in them and on
them, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. which is the Work of the Spirit alone; for it is the
Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing, John 6. 63. see Romans 8. 9,
10. Titus 3. 4, 5, 6. where the same Truth is declared and asserted. But after
that the kindness and love of God our Savior toward Man appeared; not by
Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved
us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit, which he
shed on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior.

acting distinctly in the Work of our Salvation. The Spring or Fountain of the
whole lies in the Kindness and Love of God, even the Father. Thereunto it is
everywhere ascribed in the Scripture, see John 3. 16. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6.
Whatever is done in the Accomplishment of this Work, it is so in the pursuit
of his Will, Purpose, and Counsel; and is an Effect of his Love and Grace. The
procuring Cause of the Application of the Love and Kindness of God unto us, is
Jesus Christ our Savior, in the whole Work of his Mediation, v. 6. and the
immediate efficient Cause in the Communication of the Love and Kindness of the
Father, through the Mediation of the Son unto us, is the Holy Spirit. And this
he does in the Renovation of our Natures, by the washing of Regeneration,
wherein we are purged from our sins, and sanctified unto God.

More Testimonies unto this purpose need not be insisted on. This Truth of the
Holy Spirit being the Author of our Regeneration, which the Ancients esteemed a
Cogent Argument to prove his Deity even from the Similiter ex Spiritu secundum
Gratiam nos renasci, Dominus ipse testatur Dicens; quod natum est ex carne,
caro est, quia de carne natum est; and quod natum est de Spiritu, Spiritus est,
quia Spiritus Deus est. Claret igitur spiritalis quoque generationis authorem
esse Spiritum Sanctum, quia secundum Deum creamur and Filii Dei simus. Ergo cum
ille nos in regnum suum per adoptionem sacrae regenerationis assumpserit, nos
ei quod suum est denegamus? ille nos supernae generationis haeredes fecit, nos
haereditatem vindicamus, refutamus authorem: sed non potest manner beneficium
cum author excluditur; nec author sine munere, nec sine authore munus. Si
vindicas Gratiam, creed potentiam; si refutas potentiam, gratiam ne requiras.
Sancti igitur Spiritus opus est Regeneratio ista praestantior, and novi hujus
hominis qui creatur ad imaginem Dei author est Spiritus, quem utique meliorem
hoc exteriori esse nostro homine nemo dub^taverit. Ambros. de Sp. San. l. 2. c.
9.
the Greatness and Dignity of the Work, is in words at least, so far as I know,
granted by all who pretend to sobriety in Christianity. That by some others it
has been derided and exploded, is the occasion of this Vindication of it. It
must not be expected that I should here handle the whole Doctrine of
Regeneration practically, as it may be educed by Inferences from the Scripture,
according to the Analogy of Faith, and the Experiences of them that believe;
It has been done already by others. My present aim is only, to confirm the
Fundamental Principles of Truth concerning those Operations of the Holy Spirit,
which at this day are opposed with violence and virulence. And what I shall
offer on the present Subject, may be reduced unto the ensuing Heads.

Regeneration by the Holy Spirit was wrought under the Old Testament, even from
the Foundation of the World; and the Doctrine of it was recorded in the
Scriptures, yet the Revelation of it was but obscure in comparison of that
Light and Evidence which it is brought forth into by the Gospel. This is
evident from the Discourse which our Blessed Savior had with Nicodemus on this
Subject. For when he acquainted him clearly with the Doctrine of it, he was
surprised and fell into that enquiry which argued some amazement; How can these
things be? But yet the Reply of our Savior manifests, That he might have
attained a better acquaintance with it out of the Scripture than he had done.
Art thou says he, a Master in Israel and know not these things? Do thou
take upon thee to Teach others what is their State and Condition, and what is
their Duty toward God, and art ignorant thy self of so Great and Fundamental a
Doctrine, which thou might have learned from the Scripture? For if he might
not so have done, there would have been no just cause of the Reproof given him
by our Savior. For it was neither Crime nor Negligence in him to be ignorant
of what God had not revealed. This Doctrine therefore, namely, That every one
who will enter into the Kingdom of God must be born again of the Holy Spirit,
was contained in the Writings of the Old Testament. It was so in the Promises,
That God would circumcise the Hearts of his People, that he would take away
their Heart of Stone, and give them a Heart of Flesh, with his Law written in
it, and other ways as shall be afterward proved.

indeed would have this Regeneration, if they knew what they would have, or as
to what may be gathered of their minds, out of their great swelling words of
vanity, to be nothing but Reformation of Life, according to the Rules of the
Scripture. But Nicodemus knew the necessity of Reformation of Life well enough,
if he had ever read either Moses or the Prophets. And to suppose that our Lord
Jesus Christ proposed unto him the thing which he knew perfectly well, only
under a new Name or Notion which he had never heard of before: So to take an
advantage of charging him with being ignorant of what indeed he full well knew
and understood, is a blasphemous Imagination. How they can free themselves from
the Guilt hereof, who look on Regeneration as no more but a Metaphorical
Expression of Amendment of Life, I know not. And if it be so, if there be no
more in it, but as they love to speak, becoming a new Moral Man, a thing which
all the World, Jews and Gentiles understood; our Lord Jesus was so far from
bringing it forth into more Light, and giving it more perspicuity, by what he
teaches concerning Regeneration, the Nature, Manner, Causes and Effects of it,
that he cast it thereby into more darkness and obscurity than ever it was
delivered in, either by Jewish Masters, or Gentile Philosophy. For although the
Gospel do really teach all Duties of Morality with more exactness and
clearness, and press unto the Observance of them, on motives incomparably more
cogent than any thing that otherwise ever befell the Mind of Man to think or
apprehend; yet if it must be supposed to intend nothing else in its Doctrine of
the New Birth or Regeneration, but those Moral Duties and their Observance, it
is dark and unintelligible; I say, if there be not a secret mysterious Work of
the Spirit of God, in and upon the Souls of Men intended in the Writings of the
New Testament, but only a Reformation of Life, and the Improvement of Men's
Natural Abilities in the Exercise of Moral Virtue, through the Application of
outward means unto their Minds and Understandings, conducting and persuading
thereunto; they must be granted to be obscure, beyond those of any other
Writers whatsoever, as some have not feared already to publish unto the World
concerning the Epistles of Paul. But so long as we can obtain an acknowledgment
from Men, that they are true, and in any sense the Word of God, we doubt not
but to evince that the things intended in them, are clearly and properly
expressed, so as they ought to be, and so as they are capable to be expressed;
The Difficulties which seem to be in them, arising from the Mysterious Nature
of the things themselves contained in them, and the weakness of our Minds in
apprehending such things, and not from any obscurity or intricacy in the
Declaration of them. And herein indeed consists the main Contest whereunto
things with the most are reduced. Some judge that all things are so expressed in
the Scripture with a condesension unto our Capacity, so as that there is still
to be conceived an inexpressible Grandeur in many of them beyond our
Comprehension. Others judge on the other hand, That under a Grandeur of Words
and Hyperbolical Expressions, things of a meaner and a lower sense are intended
and to be understood. Some judge the Things of the Gospel to be deep and
mysterious, the Words and Expressions of it to be plain and proper: Others
think the Words and Expressions of it to be Mystical and Figurative, but the
Things intended to be ordinary and obvious to the Natural Reason of every Man.
But to return.

Old Testament. All the Elect of God in their several Generations were all
Regenerate by the Spirit of God. But in that Ampliation and Enlargement of
Truth and Grace under the Gospel which came by Jesus Christ, who brought Life
and Immortality to light, as more Persons than of old were to be made Partakers
of the Mercy of it, so the Nature of the Work it self is far more clearly,
evidently and distinctly revealed and declared. And because this is the
principal and internal Remedy of that Disease which the Lord Christ came to
cure and take away, one of the first things that he Preached was the Doctrine
of it. All things of this Nature before, even from the beginning of the World
lay hid in God, Ephesians. 3. 9. Some intimations were given of them in Parables
and dark Sayings, (...), Psalm. 78. 2. in Types, Shadows, and Ceremonies, so as
the Nature of the Grace in them was not clearly to be discerned. But now when
the great Physician of our Souls came, who was to heal the Wound of our
Natures, whence we were dead in Trespasses and Sins, he lays naked the Disease
it self, declares the Greatness of it, the Ruin we were under from it, that we
might know and be thankful for its Reparation. Hence no Doctrine is more fully
and plainly declared in the Gospel, than this of our Regeneration by the
effectual and ineffable Operation of the Holy Spirit. And it is a Consequent
and Fruit of the Depravation of our Nature, that against the full Light and
Evidence of Truth now clearly manifested, this Great and Holy Work is opposed
and despised.

Denique quomodo respondeat advertite, and videte latebras ambiguitatis
falsitati praeparare refugia, ita ut etiam nos cum primum ea legimus, recta vel
correcta propemodum gauderemus. August. de Peccat. Orig. cap. 18.

Mihi pene persuaser it hanc illum gratiam de qua quaestio est confiteri; quo
minus in multis ejus opusculi locis sibiipsi contradicere videretur. Sed cum in
manus meas and alia venissent quae posterius latiusque scripsit, vidi
quemadmodum etiam illic gratiam nominare sed ambigua generalitate quid sentiret
abscondens, gratiae tamen vocabulo frangens invidiam, offensionemque declinans.
Id. de Great. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 37.

Vid. August. lib. 1. cont. Julianum cap. 5. lib. 3. cap. 1. lib. de gest.
Pelag. cap. 30. Epist. 95. ad Innocent. Epist. Innocent. ad August.

N^gant etiam quam ad Sacram Christi virginem Neme^iadem in orient
conscripsimus, and noverint nos ita hominis laudare naturam ut Dei semper
addamus auxilium, (verba Pelagii quibus respondet Augustinus) istam sane lege,
mi^ique pene persuaserat, hanc illam gratiam de qua quae quaestio est
confiteri. Id. ubi supra.


This was Pelagius, whose principal Artifice which he used in the Introduction
of his Heresy, was in the clouding of his Intentions with general and
ambiguous Expressions, as some would be making use of his very Words and
Phrases. Hence for a long time, when he was justly charged with his
Sacrilegious Errors, he made no defense of them, but reviled his Adversaries as
corrupting his Mind, and not understanding his Expressions. And by this means
as he got himself acquitted in the Judgments of some, less experienced in the
sleights and cunning craftiness of them who lie in wait to deceive; and
Fefellit Judicium Palaestinum propterea ibi videtur purgatus; Romanam vero
Ecclesiam, ubi cum esse notissimum scitis fallere usque-quaque non potuit,
quamvis and hoc fuerit utrumque conatus. Tanto Judices fefellit occultius,
quanto exponit ista versutius. August. lib. de peccat. Orig. cap. 16.
juridically freed in an Assembly of Bishops: so in all probability he had
suddenly infected the whole Church with the poison of those Opinions which the
proud and corrupted Nature of Man is so apt to receive and embrace, if God had
not stirred up some few Holy and Learned Persons, Austin especially, to
discover his Frauds, to refel his Calumnies, and confute his Sophisms; which
they did with indefatigable industry and good success. But yet these Tares
being once sown by the envious one, found such a suitable and fruitful Soil in
the darkened Minds and proud Hearts of Men, that from that day to this they
could never be fully extirpated; but the same bitter Root has still sprung up
unto the defiling of many, though various new Colors have been put upon its
Leaves and Fruit. And although those who at present amongst us have undertaken
the same Cause with Pelagius, do not equal him either in Learning or Diligence,
or an Appearance of Piety and Devotion, yet do they exactly imitate him in
declaring their minds in cloudy ambiguous Expressions, capable of various
Constructions until they are fully examined, and thereon reproaching (as he
did) those that oppose them as not aright representing their Sentiments, when
they judge it their Advantage so to do, as the scurrilous clamorous Writings of
S. P. do sufficiently manifest.

same Work for the kind of it, and wrought by the same Power of the Spirit in
all that are Regenerate, or ever were, or shall be so, from the beginning of
the World unto the end thereof. Great variety there is in the Application of
the outward means, which the Holy Spirit is pleased to use and make effectual
toward the Accomplishment of this great Work. Nor can the Ways and Manner
hereof be reduced unto any certain order. For the Spirit works how and when
he pleases, following the sole Rule of his own Will and Wisdom. Mostly, God
makes use of the Preaching of the Word, thence called an Engrafted Word, which
is able to save our Souls, James 1. 21. and the incorruptible Seed, by which we
are born again, 1 Pet. 1. 21. Sometimes it is wrought without it; as in all
those who are Regenerate before they come to the use of Reason, or in their
Infancy. Sometimes Men are called, and so regenerate in an extraordinary
manner, as was Paul; but mostly they are so in and by the use of ordinary
Means, instituted, blessed, and sanctified of God to that end and purpose. And
great variety there is also in the perception and understanding of the Work it
self, in them in whom it is wrought. For in it self it is secret and hidden,
and is no other ways discoverable but in its Causes and Effects. For as the
Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can
not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes; so is every one that is born
of the Spirit, John 3. 8.

Paul knew that Christ was formed and revealed in himself, Gal. 1. 16. So he
declared that who-ever is in Christ Jesus is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. that
is, is born again, whether they know themselves so to be or no. And many are in
the dark as to their own condition in this Matter all their days; For they
fear the Lord, and obey the Voice of his Servant (Christ Jesus) and yet walk in
Darkness and have no Light, Isa. 50. 10. They are Children of Light, Luke 16.
8. John 12. 36. Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5. and yet walk in darkness and have
no Light; which Expressions have been well used and improved by some, and by
others of late derided and blasphemed.

Growth of the New Creature, or the Increase of Grace, implanted in our Natures
by it: For some through the supplies of the Spirit make a great and speedy
progress toward Perfection; others thrive slowly and bring forth little Fruit;
the Causes and Occasions whereof are not here to be enumerated. But
notwithstanding all Differences in previous Dispositions, in the Application of
outward Means, in the manner of it, ordinary or extraordinary, in the
Consequen^s of much or less Fruit, the Work it self in its own Nature is of the
same kind, one and the same. The Elect of God were not regenerate one way, by
one kind of Operation of the Holy Spirit, under the Old Testament, and those
under the New Testament another. They who were miraculously Converted, as Paul,
or who upon their Conversion had miraculous Gifts bestowed on them, as had
multitudes of the Primitive Christians, were no otherwise regenerate, nor by
any other internal Efficiency of the Holy Spirit, then every one is at this
day, who is really made Partaker of this Grace and Privilege. Neither were
those Miraculous Operations of the Holy Spirit, which were visible unto others,
any part of the Work of Regeneration, nor did they belong necessarily unto it.
For many were the Subjects of them, and received miraculous Gifts by them, who
were never Regenerate; and many were Regenerate who were never Partakers of
them. And it is a Fruit of the highest Ignorance and Unacquaintedness
imaginable with these things, to affirm that in the Work of Regeneration, the
Holy Spirit wrought of old miraculously in and by outwardly visible Operations,
but now only in an humane and rational way, leading our Understanding by the
Rules of Reason, unless the more external Mode and Sign of his Operation be
intended. For all ever were and ever shall be Regenerate by the same kind of
Operation, and the same Effect of the Holy Spirit on the Faculties of their
Souls. Which will be farther manifest if we consider;

1. That the Condition of all Men as Unregenerate is absolutely the same, One
is not by Nature more unregenerate than another. All Men since the Fall, and
the corruption of our Nature by sin, are in the same State and Condition
toward God. They are all alike alienated from him, and all alike under his
Curse, Psalm. 51. 5. John 3. 5, 36. Romans 3. 19. Chap. 5. 15, 16, 17, 18. Ephesians.
2. 3. Tit. 3, 3. 4. There are Degrees of Wickedness in them that are
Unregenerate; but there is no difference as to State and Condition between
them, all are Unregenerate alike. As amongst those who are Regenerate, there
are different Degrees of Holiness and Righteousness, one it may be far
exceeding another; yet there is between them no difference of State and
Condition, they are all equally Regenerate. Yea some may be in a greater
forwardness and preparation for the Work it self, and thereby in a greater
nearness to the State of it than others; but the State it self is incapable of
such Degrees. Now it must be the same Work for the Kind and Nature of it, which
relieves and translates Men out of the same State and Condition. That which
gives the formal Reason of the change of their State, of their Translation from
Death to Life is and must be the same in all. If you can fix on any Man from
the Foundation of the World, who was not equally born in sin, and by Nature
dead in Trespasses and Sins with all other Men, the Man Christ Jesus only
excepted, I would grant that he might have another kind of Regeneration than
others have, but that I know he would stand in need of none at all.

State whereinto Men are brought by Regeneration is the same. Nor is it in its
Essence or Nature capable of Degrees, so that one should be more Regenerate
than another. Every one that is born of God is equally so, though one may be
more beautiful than another, as having the Image of his Heavenly Father more
evidently impressed on him, though not more truly. Men may be more or less
Holy, more or less Sanctified; but they cannot be more or less Regenerate. All
Children that are born into the World, are equally born, though some quickly
outstrip others in the Perfections and Accomplishments of Nature. And all born
of God are equally so, though some speedily out-go others in the
Accomplishments and Perfections of Grace. There was then never but one kind of
Regeneration in this World, the Essential Form of it being specifically the
same in all.

3. That the Efficient Cause of this Work, the Grace and Power whereby it is
wrought, with the internal manner of the Communication of that Grace, are the
same, shall be afterward declared. To this Standard then all must come. Men
may bear themselves high, and despise this whole Work of the Spirit of God, or
set up an Imagination of their own in the room thereof; but whether they will
or no, they must be tried by it; and no less depends on their interest in it,
than their Admission into the Kingdom of God. And let them pretend what they
please, the true Reason why any despise the New Birth, is because they hate a
New Life. He that cannot endure to live to God, will as little endure to hear
of being born of God. But we shall by the Scripture enquire what we are taught
concerning i^, and declare both what it is not, of things which falsely pretend
thereunto, and then what it is indeed.

Baptism, and a profession of the Doctrine of Repentance. This is all that some
will allow unto it, to the utter rejection and overthrow of the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ. For the dispute in this Matter is not whether the Ordinances
of the Gospel, as Baptism, do really communicate internal Grace unto them, that
are, as to their outward manner of their Administration, duly made Partakers of
them, whether ex opere operato as the Papists speak, or as a ^aederal means of
the Conveyance and Communication of that Grace which they betoken and are the
Pledges of; but whether the outward susception of the Ordinance, joined with a
profession of Repentance in them that are adult, be not the whole of what is
called Regeneration. The vanity of this presumptuous folly, destructive of all
the Grace of the Gospel, invented to countenance Men in their Sins, and to hide
from them the necessity of being born again, and therein of turning unto God,
will be laid open in our Declaration of the Nature of the Work it self. For the
present the ensuing Reasons will serve to remove it out of our way.

outward Signs and Tokens of it, or at most, instituted means of effecting it.
For the Nature of thing* is different and distinct from the Means, and
Evidences or Pledges of them. But such only is Baptism, with the Profession of
the Doctrine of it, as is acknowledged by all who have Treated of the Nature of
that Sacrament. (2.) The Apostle Peter really states this Case, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
In answer whereunto even Baptism does also now save us; not the putting away of
the filth of the Flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The outward Administration of this Ordinance
considered materially, reaches no farther, but to the washing away of the
filth of the Flesh, but more is signified thereby. There is denoted in it the
Restipulation of a good Conscience unto God, by the Resurrection of Christ from
the Dead, or a Conscience purged from Dead Works to serve the Living God, Heb.
9. 14. and quickened by virtue of his Resurrection unto Holy Obedience; see Romans
6 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. (3.) The Apostle Paul does plainly distinguish between the
outward Ordinances, with what belongs unto a due participation of them, and the
Work of Regeneration it self; Gal. 6. 15. In Jesus Christ neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a New Creature.
For as by Circumcision the whole System of Mosaical Ordinances is intended, so
the state of Uncircumcision, as then it was in the Professing Gentiles,
supposed a Participation of all the Ordinances of the Gospel. But from them all
he distinguishes the New Creation, as that which they may be without, and
which being so, they are not available in Christ Jesus. (4.) It this were so,
then all that are duly Baptized, and do thereon make profession of the Doctrine
of it, that is, of Repentance for the forgiveness of Sins, must of necessity be
Regenerate. But this we know to be otherwise. For instance; Simon the Megician
was rightly and duly Baptized, for he was so by Philip the Evangelist; which he
could not be without a Profession of Faith and Repentance; accordingly it is
said that he believed, Acts 8. 13. that is, made a profession of his Faith in
the Gospel. Yet he was not Regenerate, for at the same time he had no part or
lot in that Matter, his Heart not being right in the sight of God, but was in
the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity, v. 21, 23. which is not the
Description of a Person newly Regenerate and Born again. Hence the
Cabbalistical Jews, who grope in darkness after the old Notions of Truth that
were among their Forefathers, do say, That at the same instant wherein a Man is
made a Proselyte of Righteousness, there comes a New Soul into him from Heaven,
his old Pagan Soul vanishing or being taken away. The Introduction of a New
Spiritual Principle, to be that unto the Soul which the Soul is unto the Body
naturally, is that which they understand, or they choose thus to express the
reiterated Promise of taking away the Heart of Stone, and giving an Heart of
Flesh in the place of it.

Moral Reformation Life and Conversation. Let us suppose such a Reformation to
be extensive unto all known Instances. Suppose a Man be changed from Sensuality
unto Temperance, from Rapine to Righteousness, from Pride and the Dominion of
Irregular Passions, unto Humility and Moderation, with all Instances of the
like Nature which we can imagine, or are prescribed in the Rules of the
strictest Moralists? Suppose this change be labored, exact and accurate, and
so of great use in the World. Suppose also that a Man has been brought and
persuaded unto it, through the preaching of the Gospel, so escaping the
Pollutions that are in the World through Lust, even by the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, or the Directions of his Doctrine delivered in the
Gospel; yet I say all this, and all this added unto Baptism, accompanied with a
Profession of Faith and Repentance, is not Regeneration, nor do they comprize
it in them. And I have extended this Assertion beyond what some among us, so
far as I can see, do so much as pretend unto, in their confused Notions and
sophistical Expressions about Morality, when they make it the same with Grace.
But whatever there may be of Actual Righteousness in these things, they do not
express an inherent habitual Righteousness, which whosoever denies, overthrows
the Gospel, and all the whole Work of the Spirit of God, and of the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

But we must stay a while. This Assertion of ours is by some not only denied
but derided. Neither is that all, but who-ever maintains it, is exposed as an
Enemy to Morality, Righteousness, and Reformation of Life. All Virtue, they
say, is hereby excluded, to introduce I know not what imaginary Godliness. But
whether we oppose or exclude Moral Virtue or no, by the Doctrine of
Regeneration or any other, God and Christ will in due time judge and declare.
Yea, were the confession of the Truth consistent with their Interests, the
decision of this doubt might be referred unto their own Consciences. But being
not free to commit any thing to that Tribunal, unless we had better security of
its freedom from corrupt Principles and Prejudices than we have, we shall at
present leave all the World to judge of our Doctrine, with respect unto Virtue
and Morality, by the Fruits of it, compared with theirs, by whom it is denied.
In the mean time we affirm that we design nothing in Virtue and Morality, but
to improve them by fixing them on a proper Foundation, or ingraf^ing them into
that Stock whereon alone they will thrive and grow to the Glory of God, and the
good of the Souls of Men; neither shall we be moved in this Design by the
Clamorous or Calumnious outcries of Ignorant or Profligate Persons. And for
the Assertion laid down, I desire that those who despise and reproach it, would
attempt an Answer unto the ensuing Arguments whereby it is confirmed; with
those other which shall be insisted on in our Description of the Nature of the
Work of Regeneration it self; and that upon such Grounds and Principles as are
not destructive of Christian Religion, nor introductive of Atheism, before they
are too confident of their success.

Per inhaerentem Justitiam int^lligimus supernaturale donum gratiae
sanctificantis, oppositum originali peccato, and in singulis animae
facultatibus reparans and renovans illam Dei imaginem, quae per peccatum
originale foedata ac dissipata fuit. Originale peccatum mentem tenebris
implevit, haec infusa gratia lumine caelesti collustrat. Istud, cor humanum
(...) and odi^ Dei ac Divinae Legis (...), haec infuse Justitia (...) emollit
and more boni accendit and i^st^^^at. Postremo illud affectus omnes atqu. ipsum
appetitum rebellione infecit; haec ren vata Sanctitas in ordin^m (...) pertu^^
it as affectiones, and ips^m rebellem (...) Dominio spoliat, and quasi sub
Jug^m mittit. Davenant. de Jus^it. Habit. cap. 3.

Fides tanquam radix imbre suscepto hae^et in animae solo; ut cum per legem Dei
excoli caeperit surgant in ea rami qui fructus operum ferant. Non ergo ex
operibus radix Justitiae, sed ex radice Justitiae seuctus aperum crescit.
Origin. lib. 4. in Epist. ad Roman.


infusion of a new real Spiritual Princip^e into the Soul and its Faculties, of
Spiritual Life, Light, Holiness, and Righteousness, disposed unto, and suited
for the Destruction or Expulsion of a contrary inbred habitual Principle of sin
and enmity against God, enabling un^o all Acts of Holy Obedience, and so in
order of Nature antecedent unto them; then it does not consist in a mere
Reformation of Life and Moral Virtue, be they never so exact or accurate. Three
things are to be observed for the clearing of this Assertion, before we come to
the Proof and Confirmation of it. As, (1.) That this Reformation of Life, which
we say is not Regeneration, or that Regeneration does not consist therein, is a
necessary Duty indispensibly required of all Men. For we shall take it here for
the whole course of Actual Obedience unto God, and that according to the
Gospel. Those indeed by whom it is urged and pressed in the room of
Regeneration, or as that wherein Regeneration does consist, do give such an
Account and Description of it, as that it is, or at least may be Foreign unto
true Gospel-Obedience, and so not contain in it one Acceptable Duty unto God,
as shall afterward be declared. But here I shall take it in our present
enquiry, for that whole Course of Du^^^s, which in Obedience toward God, are
prescribed unto us. (2.) That the Principle before described, wherein
Regeneration as passiv^ly considered, or as wrought in us consists, does
always certainly and infallibly produce the Reformation of Life intended. In
some it does it more completely, in others more imperfectly, in all sincerely.
For the same Grace in Nature and Kind is communicated unto several Persons in
various Degree, and is by them used and improved with more (...) care and
diligence. In th^se therefore that are adult, these things are inseparable.
Therefore, (3.) The difference in this Matter (...) unto this Head; We say and
believe that Regeneration consi^s in Spirituali Renovatione Naturae; in a
Spiritual Renovation of our Nature: Our Modern Socinians, that it does so, in
Morali Reformatione vitae in a Moral Reformation of Life. Now as we grant that
this Spiritual Renovation of Nature will infallibly produce a Moral Reformation
of Life; so if they will grant that this Moral Reformation of Life does proceed
from a Spiritual Renovation of our Nature, this difference will be at an end.
And this is that which the Ancients intend by first receiving the Holy Ghost,
and then all Graces with him. (...)
However if they only design to speak ambiguously, improperly and
unscripturally, confounding Effects and their Causes, Habits and Actions,
Faculties or Powers and occasional Acts, infused Principles and acquired
Habits, Spiritual and Moral, Grace and Nature, that they may take an
opportunity to rail at others for want of better Advantage, I shall not contend
with them. For allow a new Spiritual Principle, an infused Habit of Grace, or
gracious Abilities to be required in and unto Regeneration, or to be the
Product or the Work of the Spirit therein, that which is born of the Spirit
being Spirit, and this part of the Nature of this Work is sufficiently cleared.
Now this the Scripture abundantly testifies unto.

If any Man be in Christ he is a New Creature. This New Creature is that which
is intended, that which was before described, which being born of the Spirit is
Spirit. Sicut in nativitate carnali omnem nascentis hominis voluntatem
praecedit operis Divini formatio, sic in spirituali nativitate qua veterem
hominem deponere incipimus. Fulgent. de Incarnat. and Great. Christ. c. 29.

Forma praecessit in carne Christi, quam in nostra fide Spiritualiter
agnoscamus; Nam Christus Filius Dei, secundum carnem de Spiritu Sancto
conceptus and natus est: Carnem autem illam nec concipere virgo posset nec
parere, nisi ejus carnis Spiritus Sanctus operetur exordium. Sic etiam in
hominis cord nec concipi fides potuit nec augeri, nisi eam Spiritus Sanctus
effundat and nutriat. Ex eodem namque Spiritu renati sumus, ex quo Christus
natus est. Idem. cap. 20.


This is produced in the Souls of Men by aS Creating Act of the Power of God,
or it is not a Creature; and it is superinduced into the essential Faculties of
our Souls, or it is not a New Creature; for whatever is in the Soul of Power,
Disposition, Ability, or Inclination unto God, or for any Moral Actions, by
Nature, it belongs unto the Old Creation, it is no New Creature. And it must be
somewhat that has a Being and Subsistence of its own in the Soul, or it can be
neither New nor a Creature. And by our Apostle it is opposed to all outward
Privileges, Gal. 5. 6. Chap. 6. 15. That the production of it also is by a
Creating Act of Almighty Power the Scripture testifies, Psalm. 51. 10. Ephesians.
2. 10. And this can denote nothing but a New Spiritual Principle or Nature
wrought in us by the Spirit of God. No, say some, a New Creature is no more but
a changed Man; it is true, but then this Change is Internal also; yes, in the
Purposes, Designs, and Inclinations of the Mind: But is it by a real Infusion
of a new Principle of Spiritual Life and Holiness? No, it denotes no more but a
new course of Conversation; only the Expression is Metaphorical, a New Creature
is a Moral Man, that has changed his Course or Way. For if he were always a
Moral Man, that he was never in any vicious Way or Course, as it was with him,
Matthew. 19. 18, 19, 20. then he was always a New Creature. This is good Gospel,
at once overthrowing Original Sin, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. This
Doctrine I am sure was not learned from the Fathers, whereof some used to
boast: Nay, it is much more fulsome than any thing ever taught by Pelagius
himself, who indeed ascribed more unto Grace than these Men do, although he
denied this Creation of a New Principle of Grace in us, antecendent unto Acts
of Obedience. Adjuvat nos Deus ( the words of Pelagius) per doctrinam and
revelationem suam, dum cordis nostri oculos aperit, dum nobis, ne praesentibus
occupemure, futura demonstrat, dum Diaboli pandit insidias, dum nos multiformi
and ineffabili dono gratiae caelestis illuminat. August. lib. de Great. cont.
Pelag. and Caelest. cap. 7.
And this turning all Scripture-Expressions of Spiritual Things into Metaphors,
is but a way to turn the whole into a Fable, or at least to render the Gospel
the most obscure and improper way of teaching the Truth of things that ever was
made use of in the World.

New Creature therefore does not consist in a new course of Actions, but in
renewed Faculties with new Dispositions, Power, and Ability, to them and for
them. Hence it is called the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. He has given unto us
exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these you might be Partakers of
the Divine Nature. This (...), this Divine Nature is not the Nature of God,
whereof in our own Persons we are not subjectively Partakers. And yet a Nature
it is, which is a Principle of Operation, and that Divine or Spiritual; namely,
an Habitual Holy Principle, wrought in us by God and bearing his Image. By the
Promises therefore we are made Partakers of a Divine Supernatural Principle, of
Spiritual Actions and Operations, which is what we contend for. So the whole of
what we intend is declared, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. Put off concerning the former
Conversation the Old Man, which is corrupt, according to deceitful lusts; and
be renewed in the Spirit of your Mind; and put on the New Man, which after God
is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. It is the Work of Regeneration,
with respect both to its Foundation and Progress that is here described. (1.)
The Foundation of the whole is laid in our being renewed in the Spirit of our
Mind; which the same Apostle elsewhere calls, being transformed in the
Renovation of our Minds, Romans 12. 2. That this consists in the participation of
a new saving Supernatural Light, to enable the Mind unto Spiritual Actings and
to guide it therein, shall be afterward declared. Herein consists our
Renovation in Knowledge, after the Image of him who created us, Col. 3. 10. And
(2.) the Principle it self infused into us, created in us, is called the New
Man, v. 24. That is the New Creature beforementioned; and called the New Man,
because it consists in the universal change of the whole Soul, as it is the
principle of all Spiritual and Moral Actions. And (1.) it is opposed unto the
Old Man, verse. 23. put off the Old Man and put on the New Man, verse. 22, 24.
Now this Old Man is the corruption of our Nature, as that Nature is the
Principle of all Religious, Spiritual and Moral Actions, as is evident, Romans 6.
6. It is not a corrupt Conversation, but the Principle and Root of it. For it
is distinguished both from the Conversation of Men, and those corrupt lusts
which are exercised therein as to that Exercise. And (2.) it is called the New
Man, because it is the Effect and Product of God's Creating Power, and that in
a way of a New Creation; see Ephesians. 1. 18. Col. 2. 12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. and
it is here said to be Created after God, v. 24. Now the Object of a Creating
Act is an instantaneous Production. Whatever preparations there may be for it,
and dispositions unto it, the bringing forth of a new Form and Being by
Creation, is in an instant. This therefore cannot consist in a mere Reformation
of Life. So are we said herein to be the Workmanship of God created in Christ
Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2. 10. There is a Work of God in us precedeing
all our good Works toward him. For before we can work any of them, in order of
Nature, we must be the Workmanship of God, created unto them, or enabled
Spiritually for the performance of them.

New Man, whereby we are born again, is said to be created in Righteousness and
true Holiness. That there is a respect unto Man created in Innocence, wherein
he was made in the Image of God, I suppose will not be denied. It is also
expressed, Col. 3. 10. You have put on the New Man, which is renewed in
Knowledge, after the Image of him that created him. Look then what was, or
wherein consisted the Image of God in the First Man, thereunto answers this New
Man, which is created of God. Now this did not consist in Reformation of Life,
no nor in a course of virtuous Actions; For he was created in the Image of God,
before he had done any one good thing at all, or was capable of so doing. But
this Image of God consisted principally, as we have evinced elsewhere, in the
Uprightness, Rectitude, and Ability of his whole Soul, his Mind, Will, and
Affections, in, unto, and for the Obedience that God required of him. This he
was endowed withal antecedently unto all voluntary Actions whereby he was to
live to God. Such therefore must be our Regeneration, or the Creation of this
New Man in us. It is the begetting, infusing, creating, of a new saving
Principle of Spiritual Life, Light and Power in the Soul, antecedent unto true
Evangelical Reformation of Life, in Order of Nature, enabling Men thereunto,
according unto the Mind of God.

Luke 6. 43. A good Tree brings not forth corrupt Fruit, neither does a
corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit; compared with Matthew. 7. 18. The Fruit
follows the Nature of the Tree. And there is no way to change the Nature of
the Fruit, but by changing the Nature of the Tree which brings it forth. Now
all Amendment of Life in Reformation is but Fruit, Matthew. 3. 10. But the
changing of our Nature is antecedent hereunto. This is the constant Course and
Tenor of the Scripture, to distinguish between the Grace of Regeneration, which
it declares to be an immediate supernatural Work of God in us and upon us, and
all that Obedience, Holiness, Righteousness, Virtue, or whatever is good in
us, which is the Consequent, Product, and Effect of it. Yea, God has declared
this expressly in his Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. Jer. 31. 33. Chap. 32. 39,
40. The Method of God's proceeding with us in his Covenant is, that he first
washes and cleanses our Natures, takes away the Heart of Stone, gives an
Heart of Flesh, writes his Law in our Hearts, puts his Spirit in us, wherein as
shall be evidenced the Grace of Regeneration does consist. The Effect and
Consequent hereof is, That we shall walk in his Statutes, keep his Judgments
and do them; that is, reform our Lives, and yield all Holy Obedience unto God;
wherefore these things are distinguished as Causes and Effects. See to the same
purpose, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. Col. 3. 1, 5. Ephesians. 2. 10. Chap. 4. 23, 24, 25.
This I insist upon still, on supposition, that by Reformation of Life, all
Actual Obedience is intended. For as to that kind of Life which is properly
called a moral course of Life, in opposition to open Debaucheries and
Unrighteousness, which does not proceed from an internal Principle of Saving
Grace; It is so far from being Regeneration or Grace, as that it is a thing of
no acceptance with God absolutely, whatever Use or Reputation it may be of in
the World.

Sanctification of the whole Spirit, Soul, and Body, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And if
this be that which some men intend by Reformation of Life and Moral Virtue,
they must needs win much esteem, for their clearness and perspicuity in
teaching Spiritual Things. For who would not admire them for such a Definition
of Morality, namely, that it is the principal Sanctification of the whole
Spirit, Soul and Body of a Believer by the Holy Ghost? But not to dwell longer
on this Subject, There is no description of the Work of Regeneration in the
Scripture, in its Nature, Causes, or Effects, no Name given unto it, no promise
made of it, nothing spoken of the Ways, Means, or Power by which it is
wrought, but is inconsistent with this bold Pelagian Figment, which is
destructive of the Grace of Jesus Christ.

The ground of this Imagination, that Regeneration consists in a Moral
Reformation of Life, arises from a denial of Original Sin, or an inherent
habitual corruption of Nature. For the Masters unto the Men of this Persuasion
tell us, that whatever is of vice or defilement in us, it is contracted by a
custom of sinning only. And their Conceptions hereof do regulate their Opinions
about Regeneration. For if Man be not originally corrupted and polluted, if his
Nature be not depraved, if it be not possessed by, and under the Power of evil
Dispositions and Inclinations, it is certain that he stands in no need of an
inward Spiritual Renovation of it. It is enough for such a one, that by change
of Life he renounce a custom of sinning, and reform his Conversation according
to the Gospel, which in himself he has power to do. But as it has been in
part already manifested, and will fully, God assisting, be evinced afterward,
that in our Regeneration the native Ignorance, Darkness and Blindness of our
Minds are dispelled, Saving and Spiritual Light being introduced by the Power
of God's Grace into them, That the pravity and stubbornness of our Wills are
removed and taken away, a new principle of Spiritual Life and Righteousness
being bestowed on them, and that the Disorder and Rebellion of our Affections
are cured, by the infusion of the Love of God into our Souls; so the corrupt
Imagination of the contrary Opinion directly opposite to the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, the Faith of the Ancient Church, and the Experience of all sincere
Believers, has amongst us of late nothing but Ignorance and ready Confidence
produced to give countenance unto it.

Enthusiastical Raptures, Ecstasies, Voices, or any thing of the like kind. It
may be some such things have been by some deluded Persons apprehended or
pretended unto. But the countenancing of any such Imaginations, is falsely and
injuriously charged on them, who maintain the powerful and effectual Work of
the Holy Spirit in our Regeneration. And this some are prone to do, wherein
whether they discover more of their Ignorance, or of their Malice I know not,
but nothing is more common with them. All whom in this Matter they dissent
from, so far as they know what they say, or whereof they affirm, do teach Men
to look after Enthusiastic Inspirations, or unaccountable Raptures, and to
esteem them for Conversion unto God, although in the mean time they live in a
neglect of Holiness and Righteousness of Conversation. I Answer, if there be
those who do so, we doubt not but that without their Repentance, the Wrath of
God will come upon them as upon other Children of Disobedience. And yet in the
mean time we cannot but call aloud, that others would discover their diligence
in attendance unto these things, who as far as I can discern, do cry up the
Names of Virtue and Righteousness, in opposition to the Grace of Jesus Christ,
and that Holiness which is a Fruit thereof. But for the Reproach now under
Consideration, it is as applied, no other but a Calumny and false Accusation.
And that it is so, the Writings and Preachings of those who have most
diligently labored in the Declaration of the Work of the Holy Spirit in our
Regeneration, will bear Testimony at the great Day of the Lord. We may
therefore as unto this Negative Principle observe three things. (1.) That the
Holy Spirit in this Work does ordinarily put forth his Power in and by the use
of Means. He works also on Men suitably unto their Natures, even as the
Faculties of their Souls, their Minds, Wills, and Affections, are meet to be
affected and wrought upon. He does not come upon them with involuntary
Raptures, using their Faculties and Powers, as the Evil Spirit wrests the
Bodies of them whom he possesses; His whole Work therefore is rationally to be
accounted for, by and unto them who believe the Scripture, and have received
the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive. The formal efficiency of
the Spirit indeed, in the putting forth the exceeding greatness of his Power,
in our quickening; Which the Ancient Church constantly calls his Inspiration
of Grace, both in private Writing, and Canons of Councils, is no otherwise to
be comprehended by us, than any other Creating Act of Divine Power: for as we
hear the Wind but know not from whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is
every one that is born of God; yet these two things are certain herein. First,
That he works nothing, nor any other way, nor by any other means, than what
are determined and declared in the Word. By that therefore may, and must every
thing, really belonging, or pretended to belong unto this Work of Regeneration,
be tried and examined. Secondly; That he acts nothing contrary unto, puts no
force upon any of the Faculties of our Souls, but works in them and by them
suitably to their Natures; and being more intimate unto them, as Austin speaks,
than they are unto themselves, by an Almighty Facility he produces the Effect
which he intends.

Raptures, Ecstasies, Visions, Enthusiastic Inspirations, but in the Effect of
the Power of the Spirit of God on the Souls of Men, by and according to his
Word, both of the Law and the Gospel. And those who charge these things on
them, who have asserted, declared, and preached it according to the Scriptures,
do it probably to countenance themselves in their hatred of them, and of the
Work it self. Wherefore 2dly, where by Reason of Distempers of Mind, Disorder
of Fancy, or long continuance of distressing Fears and Sorrows, in and under
such Preparatory Works of the Spirit, which sometimes cut Men to their Hearts
in the sense of their sin, and sinful lost condition, any do fall into
Apprehensions or Imaginations of any thing extraordinary in the ways
beforementioned, if it be not quickly and strictly brought unto the Rule, and
discarded thereby, it may be of great danger unto their Souls, and is never of
any solid Use or Advantage. Such Apprehensions for the most part are either
Conceptions of distempered Minds, and discomposed Fancies, or Delusions of
Satan transforming himself into an Angel of Light, which the Doctrine of
Regeneration ought not to be accountable for. Yet I must say, (3dly,) That so
it is come to pass, that many of those who have been really made Partakers of
this gracious Work of the Holy Spirit, have been looked on in the World, which
knows them not, as mad, Enthusiastic and Fanatical. So the Captains of the
Host esteemed the Prophet that came to anoint Jehu, 2 Kings 9. 11. And the
Kindred of our Savior, when he began to Preach the Gospel, said, He was
besides himself, or extatical, Mark 3. 21. and they went out to lay hold of
him. So Festus judged of Paul, Acts 26. 24, 25. And the Author of the Book of
Wisdom gives us an account what acknowledgments some will make when it shall be
too late, as to their own Advantage; Chap. 5. 3, 4, 5. They shall say, crying
out, because of the trouble of their Minds; This is he whom we accounted a
scorn, and a common reproach, We Fools esteemed his Life madness, and his
latter End to have been shameful; but how is he reckoned among the Sons of God,
and his Lot is among the Holy Ones. From what has been spoken it appears;

Preaching of the Gospel, and all to whom the Word is dispensed. For the former
sort, there is a peculiar Reason for their Attendance unto this Duty. For they
are used and employed in the Work it self by the Spirit of God, and are by him
made instrumental for the effecting of this New Birth and Life. So the Apostle
Paul styles himself the Father of them who were Converted to God, or Regenerate
through the Word of his Ministry: 1 Cor. 4. 15. Though you have ten thousand
Instructers in Christ, yet have you not many Fathers, for in Christ Jesus I
have begotten you through the Gospel. He was used in the Ministry of the Word
for their Regeneration, and therefore was their Spiritual Father, and he only,
though the Work was afterward carried on by others. And if Men are Fathers in
the Gospel to no more than are Converted unto God by their Personal Ministry,
it will be no Advantage unto any, one day, to have assumed that Title, when it
has had no Foundation in that Work as to its effectual success. So speaking of
Onesimus, who was Converted by him in Prison, he calls him his Son whom he had
begotten in his Bonds, Philem. 10. and this he declared to have been prescribed
unto him as the Principal End of his Ministry, in the Commission he had for
Preaching the Gospel, Acts 26. 17, 18. Christ said unto him, I send thee unto
the Gentiles to open their Eyes, to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from
the Power of Satan unto God; which is a Description of the Work under
Consideration. And this is the principal End of our Ministry also. Now
certainly it is the Duty of Ministers to understand the Work about which they
are employed, as far as they are able, that they may not Work in the Dark, and
Fight Uncertainly, as Men beating the Air, What the Scripture has revealed
concerning it, as to its Nature, and the manner of its Operation; as to its
Causes, Effects, Fruits, Evidences, they ought diligently to enquire into. To
be spiritually skilled herein, is one of the principal Furnishments of any for
the Work of the Ministry, without which they will never be able to divide the
Word aright, nor show themselves Workmen that need not be ashamed. Yet is it
scarcely imaginable with what rage and perversity of Spirit, with what scornful
Expressions this whole Work is traduced, and exposed to contempt. Those who
have labored herein, are said to prescribe long and tedious trains of
Conversion, to set down nice and subtle Processes of Regeneration, to fill
Peoples Heads with innumerable Swarms of Superstitious Fears and Scruples about
the due Degrees of Godly Sorrow, and the certain Symptoms of a
through-Humiliation, p. 306, 307. Could any mistake be charged on particular
Persons in these things, or the prescribing of Rules about Conversion to God
and Regeneration, that are not warranted by the Word of Truth, it were not
amiss to reflect upon them, and refute them. But the intention of these
Expressions is evident, and the reproach in them is cast upon the Work of God
it self. And I must profess, that I believe the Degeneracy from the Truth and
Power of Christian Religion; the Ignorance of the principal Doctrines of the
Gospel, and that scorn which is cast in these and the like Expressions on the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, by such as not only profess themselves to be
Ministers, but of an higher Degree than ordinary, will be sadly ominous unto
the whole State of the Reformed Church amongst us, if not timely repressed and
corrected. But what at present I affirm in this Matter is, That it is a Duty
indispensibly incumbent on all Ministers of the Gospel, to acquaint themselves
thoroughly with the Nature of this Work, that they may be able to comply with
the Will of God, and Grace of the Spirit in the Effecting and Accomplishment of
it, upon the Souls of them unto whom they dispense the Word. Neither without
some competent knowledge hereof, can they discharge any one part of their Duty
and Office in a right manner. If all that hear them are born dead in Trespasses
and Sins, if they are appointed of God to be the Instruments of their
Regeneration, It is a madness which must one day be accounted for, to neglect a
sedulous enquiry into the Nature of this Work, and the means whereby it is
wrought. And the ignorance hereof, or negligence herein, with the want of an
Experience of the Power of this Work in their own Souls, is one great cause of
that lifeless and unprofitable Ministry which is among us.

Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, prove your own
selves; know you not your own Selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except
you be Reprobates. It is the Concernment of all individual Christians, or
Professors of Christian Religion, to try and examine themselves what Work of
the Spirit of God, there has been upon their hearts; and none will deter them
from it, but those who have a design to hoodwink them to Perdition. And (1.)
the Doctrine of it is revealed and taught us. For secret things belong unto the
Lord our God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our
Children for ever, that we may do all the Words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. And
we speak not of curious Enquiries into, or after hidden things, or the secret
veiled Actions of the Holy Spirit; but only of an upright endeavor to search
into, and comprehend the Doctrine concerning this Work, to this very end, that
we might understand it. (2.) It is of such Importance unto all our Duties, and
all our Comforts, to have a due Apprehension of the Nature of this Work, and of
our own Concernment therein, that an enquiry into the one and the other cannot
be neglected without the greatest folly and madness. Whereunto we may add, (3.)
the danger that there is of Men's being deceived in this Matter, which is the
Hinge whereon their Eternal State and Condition does absolutely turn and
depend. And certain it is, that very many in the World do deceive themselves
herein. For they evidently live under one of these pernicious Mistakes; namely,
That (1.) either Men may go to Heaven, or enter into the Kingdom of God, and
not be born again; contrary to that of our Savior, John 3. 6. or that Men may
be born again, and yet live in sin, contrary to 1 John 3. 9.

Works of the HOLY SPIRIT Preparatory unto Regeneration. CHAP. II.
(1.) Sundry things Preparatory to the Work of Conversion. (2.) Material and
Formal Dispositions with their Difference. (3, 4.) Things in the power of our
Natural Abilities required of us in a way of Duty. (5.) Internal Spiritual
Effects wrought in the Souls of Men by the Word. (6, 7.) Illumination.
Conviction of Sin. Consequents thereof. (8.) These Things variously taught.
(9.) Power of the Word and Energie of the Spirit distinct. (10.) Subject of
this Work; Mind, Affections, and Conscience. (11, 12, 13.) Nature of this whole
Work, and Difference from Saving Conversion farther declared.

positively considered, we may observe, that ordinarily there are certain
previous and preparatory Works, or workings in and upon the Souls of Men, that
are antecedent and dispositive unto it. But yet Regeneration does not consist
in them, nor can it be educed out of them. This is for the substance of it the
Position of the Divines of the Church of England, at the Synod of Dort, two
whereof died Bishops, and others of them were dignified in the Hierarchy. I
mention it, that those by whom these things are despised, may a little consider
whose Ashes they trample on and scorn. Lawful doubtless it is for any Man, on
just grounds, to dissent from their Judgments and Determinations; Sunt quaedam
opera externa ab hominibus ordinary requisita priusquam ad statum
Regenerationis aut Conversionis perducantur, quae ab iisdem quandoque libere
fieri, quandoque libere omitti solent, ut adire Ecclesiam, audire verbi
praeconium, and id genus alia.

Sunt quaedam effecta interna ad Conversionem sive Regenerationem praevia, quae
virtute Verbi Spiritusque in nondum regeneratorum cordibus excitantur, qualia
sunt notitia voluntatis Divinae, sensus peccati, timor paenae; cogitatio de
liberatione, spes aliqua veniae. Synod. Derdrec. Suffrag. Theolog. Britan. ad
Artic. quartum, These. 1. 2.


but to do it with an imputation of folly, with derision, contempt, scorn and
scoffing at what they believed and taught, becomes only a Generation of new
Divines amongst us. But to return; I speak in this Position only of them that
are Adult, and not Converted until they have made use of the Means of Grace, in
and by their own Reasons and Understandings: And the Dispositions I intend, are
only materially so; not such as contain Grace of the same Nature as is
Regeneration it self. A material Disposition is that which disposes, and some
way makes a Subject fit for the Reception of that which shall be communicated,
added, or infused into it as its Form. So Wood by dryness and a due composure,
is made fit and ready to admit of firing, or continual Fire. A formal
Disposition is where one Degree of the same kind, disposes the Subject unto
farther Degrees of it. As the Morning Light which is of the same kind,
disposes the Air to the reception of the full Light of the Sun. The former we
allow here, not the latter. Thus in Natural Generation there are sundry
Dispositions of the Matter before the Form is introduced. So the Body of Adam
was formed, before the rational Soul was breathed into it; and Ezekiel's Bones
came together with a noise and shaking before the Breath of Life entered into
them.

Preparatory Work; because in the close of these Discourses, I shall handle it
practically and more at large. Wherefore what I have here to offer concerning
it, shall be reduced unto the ensuing Observations.

power of our own natural Abilities, as that nothing but corrupt prejudices and
stubbornness in sinning, does keep or hinder Men from the performance of them.
And these we may reduce unto two Heads. (1.) An outward Attendance unto the
Dispensation of the Word of God, with those other external means of Grace,
which accompany it, or are appointed therein. Faith comes by Hearing, and
Hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. that is, it is Hearing the Word of God
which is the ordinary means of ingenerating Faith in the Souls of Men. This is
required of all to whom the Gospel does come, and this they are able of
themselves to do, as well as any other Natural or Civil Action. And where Men
do it not, where they despise the Word at a distance, yea, where they do it not
with diligence and choice, it is merely from supine negligence of Spiritual
Things, carnal security and contempt of God, which they must answer for. (2.) A
diligent Intension of Mind, in attendance on the Means of Grace, to understand
and receive the things revealed and declared as the Mind and Will of God. For
this end has God given Men their Reasons and Understandings, that they may use
and exercise them about their Duty toward him, according to the Revelation of
his Mind and Will. To this purpose he calls upon them to remember that they are
Men, and to turn unto him. And there is nothing herein but what is in the
Liberty and Power of the rational Faculties of our Souls, assisted with those
common Aids, which God affords unto all Men in general. And great Advantages
both may be, and are daily attained hereby. Persons, I say, who diligently
apply their Rational Abilities in and about Spiritual Things, as externally
revealed in the Word, and the Preaching of it, do usually attain great
Advantages by it, and excel their Equals in other things; as Paul did when he
was brought up at the Feet of Gamaliel. Would Men be but as intent and diligent
in their endeavors after knowledge in Spiritual Things, as revealed in a way
suited unto our Capacities and Understandings, as they are to get skill in
Crafts, Sciences, and other Mysteries of Life, it would be much otherwise with
many than it is. A neglect herein also is the Fruit of Sensuality, Spiritual
Sloth, love of Sin, and contempt of God, all which are the voluntary Frames and
Actings of the Minds of Men.

power of our own Wills to comply with them; and we may observe concerning
them, That (1.) the omission of them, the neglect of Men in them, is the
principal occasion and cause of the eternal ruin of the Souls of the
generality of them to whom, or amongst whom the Gospel is preached. This is the
condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds are evil, John 3. 19. The generality of Men
know full well that they do in this Matter, no more what they are able, than
what they should. All pleadable pretenses of inability and weakness are far
^^om them. They cannot but know here, and they shall be forced to (...)
hereafter, that it was merely from their own cursed sloth, with lov^ of the
World and Sin, that they were diverted from a diligent Attendance on the Means
of Conversion, and the sedulous exercise of their Minds about them. Complaints
hereof against themselves will make up a great part of their last dreadful cry.
(2.) In the most diligent use of outward means, Men are not able of themselves
to attain unto Regeneration, or complete Conversion to God, without an
especial, effectual, internal Work of the Holy Spirit of Grace on their whole
Souls. This, containing the substance of what is principally proposed unto
confirmation in the ensuing Discourses, needs not here be insisted on. (3.)
Ordinarily God in the effectual Dispensation of his Grace meets with them,
who attend with Diligence on the outward Administration of the means of it. He
does so, I say, ordinarily, in comparison of them who are Despisers and
Neglecters of them. Sometimes indeed he goes as it were out of the way, to
meet with and bring home unto himself a persecuting Saul, taking of him in, and
taking him off, from a course of open Sin and Rebellion. But ordinarily he
dispenses his peculiar especial Grace, among them who attend unto the common
means of it. For he will both glorify his Word thereby, and give out Pledges
of (...), Approbation of our Obedience unto his Commands and Institutions.

internal Spiritual (...) in and upon the Souls of Men, whereof the Word (...)
the immediate instrumental Cause, which ordinarily do prec^de the Work of
Regeneration, or real Conversion unto God. And they are reduce^^ (...) to three
Heads. 1. Illumination. 2. Conviction. 3. Ref^^^^ The first of these respects
the Mind only; the second the Min^^^ ^^^science, and Affections; and the third
the Life and Conversation.

Illumination, of whose Nature and Causes we must afterward treat distinctly;
At present I shall only consider it, as it is ordinarily previous unto
Regeneration, and materially disposing the Mind thereunto. Now all the Light
which by any means we attain unto, or Knowledge that we have in or about
Spiritual Things, things of supernatural Revelation, come under this
Denomination of Illumination. And hereof there are three Degrees. (1.) That
which arises merely from an industrious Application of the Rational Faculties
of our Souls, to know, perceive, and understand, the Doctrines of Truth as
revealed unto us. For hereby much knowledge of Divine Truth may be obtained,
which others, through their negligence, sloth, and pride, are unacquainted
with. And this knowledge I refer unto Illumination, that is, a Light superadded
to the innate conceptions of Men's Minds, and beyond what of themselves they can
extend unto; because it is concerning such things as the heart of Man could
never of it self conceive, but the very knowledge of them is communicated by
their Revelation, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 11. And the reason why so very few do exercise
themselves to the attaining of this Knowledge, according to their Abilities, is,
because of the Enmity which is in the Carnal Minds of all Men by Nature unto
the things themselves that are revealed. And within the compass of this Degree,
I comprize all knowledge of Spiritual Things that is merely Natural. (2.) There
is an Illumination which is an especial Effect of the Holy Ghost by the Word on
the Minds of Men. With respect hereunto, some who fall totally from God, and
perish Eternally, are said to have been once enlightened, Heb. 6. 4. This Light
variously affects the Mind, and makes a great Addition unto what is purely
natural or attainable by the mere exercise of our Natural Abilities.

Perspicuity unto it, making the things discerned in it more clear and
perspicuous to the Mind. Hence Men endowed with it, are said to know the Way of
Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 21. clearly and distinctly to apprehend the Doctrine
of the Gospel as the way of Righteousness. They know it not only or merely as
true, but as a way of Righteousness; namely, the way of God's Righteousness,
which is therein revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1. 17. and the way of
Righteousness for sinners in the sight of God, Romans 10. 3, 4. (2.) It adds a
greater Assent unto the Truth of the things revealed, than mere natural Reason
can rise up unto. Hence those thus Illuminated are frequently said to believe;
their Faith being only the naked Assent of their Minds unto the Truth revealed
to them. So it is said of Simon the Magician, Acts 8. 12. and of sundry of the
Jews, John 2. 23, 24. Chap. 12. 42. (3.) It adds unto them some kind of evanid
Joy. These receive the Word with Joy, and yet have no Root in themselves, Luke
18. 13. They rejoice in the Light of it, at least for a Season, Joh. 5. 35.
Persons that are thus enlightened, will be variously affected with the Word, so
as they are not whose Natural Faculties are not Spiritually Excited. (4.) It
adds oft-times Gifts also, whereof this Spiritual Light is as it were the common
Matter, which in Exercise is formed and fashioned in great variety. I say, this
kind of Spiritual Light, the Effect of this Ilumination is the Subject Matter,
and contains in it the Substance of all Spiritual Gifts. One sort of Gift it
is, when put forth and exercised in one way, or one kind of Duty, and another
as in another. And where it is improved into Gifts, which principally it is by
Exercise, there it wonderfully affects the Mind, and raises its Apprehensions
in and of Spiritual Things. Now concerning this Degree of Illumination, I say,
(1.) That it is not Regeneration, nor does it consist therein, nor does
necessarily or infallibly ensue upon it. A third Degree is required thereunto,
which we shall afterward explain. Many therefore may be thus enlightened, and
yet never be converted. (2.) That in order of Nature it is previous unto a full
and real Conversion to God, and is materially preparatory and dispositive
thereunto. For Saving Grace enters into the Soul by Light. As it is therefore a
Gift of God, so it is the Duty of all Men, to labor after a participation of
it, however by many it be abused.

Conviction of Sin is another Effect of the Preaching of the Word,
antecedaneous unto real Conversion to God. This in general the Apostle
describes, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. If ye prophecy, and one comes in who believes
not, he is convinced of all; and thus are the Secrets of his Heart made
manifest, and so falling down on his Face he will Worship God. And sundry
things are included herein, or do accompany it. As (1.) a disquieting sense of
the guilt of Sin, with respect unto the Law of God, with his Threatenings and
future Judgments. Things that before were slighted and made a mock of, do now
become the Soul's Burden and constant Disquietment. Fools make a mock of Sin;
they traverse their ways, and snuff up the Wind like the wild Ass; but in their
Month, when Conviction has burdened them, you may find them. And hereby are
the Minds of Men variously affected with Heu miserum nimisque miserum quem
torquet Conscientia sua, quam fugere not potest; nimis miserum quem expectat
Damnatio sua quam vitare non potest, nisi Deus eripiat. Nimis est infaelix cui
mors aeterna est sensibilis; nimis aerumnosus quem terrent continui de sua
infaelicitate horrores. August. de contritione Cordis.
fears and anguish in various degrees, according as Impressions are made upon
them by the Word. And these Degrees are not prescribed as necessary Duties unto
Persons under their Conversions, but only described as they usually fall out to
the relief and direction of such as are concerned in them. As a Man going to
give Directions unto another, how to guide his Course in a Voyage at Sea; he
tells him, That in such a place he will meet with Rocks and Shelves, Storms and
cross Winds, so that if he Steer not very heedfully, he will be in danger to
miscarry and to be cast away. He does not prescribe it unto him as his Duty, to
go among such Rocks, and into such Storms, but only directs him how to guide
himself in them, where he does meet with them, as assuredly he will, if he miss
not his proper Course. (2.) Sorrow or Grief for Sin committed, because past and
irrecoverable, which is the formal Reason of this condemning Sorrow. This the
Scripture calls sorrow of the World, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Divines usually legal
sorrow, as that which in Conjunction with the sense of the guilt of sin
mentioned, brings Men into bondage under fear, Romans 8. 15. (3.) Humiliation for
Sin; which is the exercise or working of Sorrow and Fear in outward Acts of
Confession, Fasting, Praying, and the like. This is the true Nature of Legal
Humiliation, 1 Kings 21. 29. (4.) Unless by these things the Soul be swallowed
up in despair, it cannot be but that it will be filled with Thoughts, Desires,
Enquiries, and Contrivances about a Deliverance out of that State and Condition
wherein it is; as Acts 2. 27. Acts 16. 30.

Thirdly; Oftentimes a great Reformation of Life, and Change in Affections does
ensue hereon; as Matthew. 13. 20. 2 Pet. 2. 20. Matthew. 12. 43.

All these things may be wrought in the Minds of Men by the Dispensation of the
Word, and yet the Work of Regeneration be never perfected in them. Yea,
although they are good in themselves, and Fruits of the kindness of God toward
us, they may not only be lost as unto any Spiritual Advantage, but also be
abused unto our great disadvantage. And this comes not to pass but by our own
Sin, whereby we contract a new Guilt upon our Souls. And it commonly so falls
out one of these three ways. For (1.) some are no way careful or wise to
improve this Light and Conviction unto the end whereunto they tend and are
designed. Their Message is to turn the Minds of Men, and to take them off from
their self-confidence, and to direct them unto Christ. Where this is not
attended unto, where they are not used and improved unto the pursuit of this
End, they insensibly wither, decay, and come to nothing. (2.) In some they are
overborn by the Power and Violence of their Lusts, the Love of Sin, and
Efficacy of Temptation. They are sinned away every day, and leave the Soul in
ten-times a worse condition than they found it. (3.) Some rest in these things
as though they comprised the whole Work of God toward them, and guided them in
all the Duties required of them. This is the State of many where they extend
their Power, in the last Instance, unto any considerable Reformation of Life,
and Attendance unto Duties of Religious Worship. But this, as was said, falls
out through the abuse which the Carnal Minds of Men, retaining their Enmity
against God, do put these things unto. In their own Nature they are good,
useful, and material Preparations unto Regeneration, disposing the Mind unto
the reception of the Grace of God.

Divines and Faithful Ministers of the Gospel. Unto that Light which they
received into them from the infallible Word of Truth, they joined those
Experiences which they had observed in their own Hearts, and the Consciences of
others with whom they had to do, which were suitable thereunto. And in the
Dispensation of this Truth, according to the measure of the Gift of the Grace
of Christ, which they severally received, they had an useful and fruitful
Ministry in the World, to the Converting of many unto God. But we have lived to
see all these things decried and rejected. And the way which some have taken
therein, is as strange and uncouth as the thing it self. For they go not about
once to disprove by Scripture or Reason, what has been taught or delivered by
any sober Persons to this purpose; nor do they endeavor themselves to declare
from, or by the Scriptures, what is the Work of Regeneration, what are the
Causes and Effects of it, in opposition thereunto. These and such like ways
made use of by all that have treated of Spiritual Things, from the Foundation
of Christianity are despised and rejected. But horrible and contemptuous
Reproaches are cast upon the things themselves, in words heaped together on
purpose to expose them unto scorn, among Persons ignorant of the Gospel and
themselves. Those that teach them are extatical and illiterate; and those that
receive them are superstitious. giddy, and Phanatical. All conviction, sense
of, and sorrow for sin; all fear of the Curse and Wrath due unto Sin, all
Troubles and Distressed of Mind, by reason of these things, are foolish
Imaginations, the Effects of bodily Diseases and Distempers, Enthusiastic
Notions arising from the disorders of Men's Brains; and I know not what untoward
Humors in their Complexions and Constitutions. The same or the like account is
also given concerning all Spiritual Desertions, or Joys and Refreshments. And
the whole Doctrine concerning these things is branded with novelty, and hopes
expressed of its sudden vanishing out of the World. This contempt and scorn of
the Gospel have we lived to see, whereof it may be other Ages and Places have
not had Experience. For as all these things are plentifully taught by some of
the Ancients, in their Expositions of the Scriptures, wherein they are
expressed, especially by Austin, who had occasion particularly to enquire into
them; so the Doctrine concerning them is in a great measure retained in the
Church of Rome it self. Only some amongst ourselves are weary of them; who
being no way able to oppose the Principles and Foundations whereon they are
Built, nor to disprove them by Scripture or Reason, betake themselves to these
Revilings and Reproaches. And as if it were not enough for them to proclaim
their own Ignorance and Personal unacquaintance with those things which
inseparably accompany that Conviction of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, which
our Lord Jesus Christ has promised to sent the Holy Spirit to Work in all that
should believe, they make the reproaching of it in others a Principal Effect of
that Religion which they profess. Nevertheless the Foundation of God stands
sure; God knows who are his. But we must return to our purpose.

Effects of the Power of the Spirit of God. The Word it self, under a bare
proposal to the Minds of Men will not so affect them. We need go no further for
the Confirmation hereof, than merely to consider the Preaching, (with the
Effects which it had toward many) of the Prophets of old, Isa. 49. 4. Jer. 15.
30. Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. of Jesus Christ himself, John 8. 59. And of the Apostles,
Acts 13. 41, 45, 46. Hence to this day the Jews who enjoy the Letter of the Old
Testament, without the Administration of the Spirit, are as full of blindness,
hardness, and obstinacy, as any in the World who are utterly deprived of it.
Many amongst our selves fit all their days under the Preaching of the Word,
and yet have none of the Effects mentioned wrought upon them, when others their
Associates in Hearing, are really Affected, Convinced, and Converted. It is
therefore the Ministration of the Spirit, in and by the Word, which produces
all or any of these Effects on the Minds of Men. He is the Fountain of all
Illumination. Hence they that are enlightened are said to be made Partakers of
the Holy Spirit, Heb. 6. 4. And he is promised by our Savior to Convince the
World of Sin, John 16. 8. which although in that place it respects only one
kind of Sin, yet it is sufficient to establish a general Rule, that all
Conviction of Sin is from and by him. And no wonder if Men live securely in
their Sins, to whom the Light which he gives, and the Convictions which he
works are a Scorn and Reproach.

There is indeed an Objection of some Moment, against the Ascription of this
Work, unto the energie of the Holy Spirit. For whereas it is granted, that all
these things may be wrought in the Minds and Souls of Men, and yet they may
come short of the Saving Grace of God; How can he be thought to be the Author
of such a Work? Shall we say that he designs only a weak and imperfect Work
upon the Hearts of Men? Or that he deserts and gives over the Work of Grace
which he has undertaken toward them as not able to accomplish it?

Ans. (1.) In many Persons, it may be in the most who are thus affected, real
Conversion unto God does ensue; The Holy Spirit by these Preparatory Actings
making way for the Introduction of the new Spiritual Life into the Soul. So
they belong unto a Work that is perfect in its kind. (2.) Wherever they fail
and some short of what in their own Nature they have a tendency unto; it is not
from any weakness and imperfection in themselves, but from the sins of them in
whom they are wrought. For Instance, even common Illumination and Conviction of
sin* have in their own Nature a tendency unto sincere Conversion. They have so
in the same kind, as the Law has to bring us unto Christ. Where this end is
not attained, it is always from the Interposition of an Act of wilfulness and
stubbornness in those Enlightened and Convicted. They do not sincerely improve
what they have received, and faint not merely for want of strength to proceed,
but by a free Act of their own Wills, they refuse the Grace which is further
tendered unto them in the Gospel. This Will, and its actual Resistency unto the
Work of the Spirit, God is pleased in some to take away; It is therefore of
Sovereign Grace when, and where it is removed; but the Sin of Men and their
Guilt is in it, where it is continued. For no more is required hereunto, but
that it be voluntary; It is Will and not Power, that gives Rectitude or
Obliquity unto Moral Actions. (3.) As we observed before, The Holy Spirit in
his whole Work is a Voluntary Agent. He works what, when, and how he
pleases. No more is required unto his Operations, that they may be such as
become him but these two things. First That in themselves they be good and
holy. Secondly, That they be effectual as unto the ends whereunto by him they
are designed. That he should always design them to the utmost length of what
they have a moral tendency toward, though no real efficiency for, is not
required. And these things are found in these Operations of the Holy Spirit.
They are in their own Nature good and holy; Illumination is so, so is
Conviction, and Sorrow for Sin, with a subsequent change of Affections and
Amendment of Life.

end aimed at; which is no more, but that Men be Enlightened, Convinced,
Humbled, and reformed, wherein he fails no^. In these things he is pleased to
take on him the management of the Law, so to bring the Soul into bondage
thereby, that it may be stirred up to seek after Deliverance: And he is thence
actively called the Spirit of Bondage unto Fear, Romans 8. 15. And this Work is
that which constitutes the third ground in our Saviors Parable of the Sower.
It receives the Seed and Springs up hopefully until by cares of the World,
Temptations and occasions of Life it is choked and lost, Matthew. 13. 22. Now
because it oftentimes makes a great Appearance and Resemblance of Regeneration
it self, or of real Conversion to God, so that neither the World nor the Church
are able to distinguish between them, it is of great concernment unto all
Professors of the Gospel, to enquire diligently whether they have in their own
Souls been made Partakers of any other Work of the Spirit of God or no. For
although this be a good Work, and do lie in a good subserviency unto
Regeneration, yet if Men attain no more, if they proceed no farther, they will
perish, and that eternally. And multitudes do herein actually deceive
themselves, speaking peace unto their Souls on the Effects of this Work,
whereby it is not only insufficient to save them, as it is to all Persons at
all times, but also becomes a means of their present security and future
destruction. I shall therefore give some few Instances of what this Work in the
Conjunction of all the parts of it, and in its utmost improvement cannot
effect, whereby Men may make a Judgment how things stand in their own Souls in
respect unto it.

Mind, Conscience, Affections, and Conversation. Hence it follows,
notwithstanding all that is or may be spoken of it, that the Will is neither
really changed, nor internally renewed by it. Now the Will is the ruling,
governing Faculty of the Soul, as the Mind is the guiding and leading. Whilst
this abides unchanged, unrenewed, the Power and Reign of Sin continues in the
Soul; though not undisturbed, yet unruined. It is true, there are many checks
and controuls from the Light of the Mind, and Reflections of Conscience cast in
this State upon the Actings of the Will, so that it cannot put it self forth in
and toward Sin, with that freedom, security, and licentiousness, as it was
wont to do; Its fierceness and rage rushing into Sin, as the Horse into the
Battle, running on God, and the thick Bosses of his Buckler, may be broken and
abated, by those Hedges of Thorns which it finds set in its way, and those
buffettings it meets withal from Light and Convictions. Its delight and
greediness in sinning, may be calmed and quieted by those frequent
Representations of the terror of the Lord on the one hand, and the pleasure of
Eternal Rest on the other, which are made unto it. But yet still, setting aside
all Considerations foreign unto its own Principle, the Bent and Inclination of
the Will it self is to Sin and Evil always and continually. The Will of
sinning may be restrained upon a thousand Considerations, which Light and
Convictions will administer; but it is not taken away. And this discovers it
self where the very first Motions of the Soul toward sinful Objects have a
sensible complacency, until they are controuled by Light and Fear. This argues
an unrenewed Will, if it be constant and universal.

Mind, which is the first Subject affected with it, proceeds not so far as to
give it Delight, Complacency, and Satisfaction, in the lively Spiritual Nature
and Excellencies of the things revealed unto it. The true Nature of Saving
Illumination consists in this, that it gives the Mind such a direct intuitive
insight and prospect into Spiritual Things, as that in their own Spiritual
Nature they suit, please, and satisfy it. So that it is transformed into them,
cast into the Mould of them, and rests in them, Romans 6. 17. Chap. 12. 2. 1 Cor.
2. 13, 14. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Chap. 4. 6. This the Work we have insisted in reaches
not unto. For notwithstanding any discovery that is made therein of Spiritual
Things unto the Mind, it finds not an immediate direct Spiritual Excellency in
them, but only with respect unto some Benefit or Advantage which is to be
attained by means thereof. It will not give such a Spiritual insight into the
Mystery of God's Grace by Jesus Christ, called, his Glory shining in the Face
of Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. as that the Soul in its first direct view of it, should
for what it is in it self admire it, delight in it, approve it, and find
Spiritual Solace with refreshment in it. But such a Light, such a Knowledge it
communicates, as that a Man may like it well in its Effects, as a way of Mercy
and Salvation.

Conscience also; but yet it does not purge the Conscience from dead Works,
that we should serve the living God. This is the effect of a real Application
of the Blood of Christ by Faith unto our Souls, Heb. 9. 14. Two things it
effects upon the Conscience. (1.) It renders it more ready, quick, and sharp in
the reproving and condemning of all Sin than it was before. To condemn Sin
according unto its Light and Guidance, is natural unto, and inseparable from
the Conscience of Man. But its Readiness and Ability to exercise this
condemning Power, may by custom and course of sinning in the World, be
variously weakened and impeded. But when Conscience is brought under the Power
of this Work, having its directing Light augmented, whereby it sees more of the
evil of sin than formerly, and having its self-reflections sharpened and
multiplied, it is more ready and quick in putting forth its Judging and
Condemning Power than it was. (2.) Conscience is assisted and directed hereby
to condemn many things in Sin, which before it approved of. For its Judging
Power is still commensurate unto its Light. And many things are thereby now
discovered to be sinful, which were not so by the mere natural guidance under
which before it was. But yet notwithstanding all this, it does not purge the
Conscience from Dead Works; that is, Conscience is not hereby wrought unto such
an Abhorrency of Sin for it self, as continually to direct the Soul unto an
Application to the Blood of Christ, for the cleansing of itself, and the
purging of it out. It contents it self to keep all things in a tumult,
disorder, and confusion, by its constant condemning both Sin and Sinners.

Affections; We have given Instances in the Fear, Sorrow, Joy and Delight,
about Spiritual Things, that are stirred up and acted thereby. But yet it comes
short in two things of a through-Work upon the Affections themselves. For (1.)
it does not fix them. And (2.) it does not fill them. (1.) It is required that
our Affections be fixed on Heavenly and Spiritual Things, and true Grace will
effect it. Col. 3. 1, 2. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are Above, where Christ sits on the Right Hand of God. Set your Affections
on things Above. The Joys, the Fears, the Hopes, the Sorrows, with reference
unto Spiritual and Eternal Things, which the Work before mentioned does
produce, are evanid, uncertain, unstable; not only as to the Degrees, but as
to the very Being of them. Sometimes they are as a River ready to overflow its
Banks, Men cannot but be pouring them out on all occasions. And sometimes as
Waters that fail, no drop comes from them. Sometimes they are hot, and
sometimes cold; sometimes up, and sometimes down; sometimes all Heaven, and
sometimes all World, without equality, without stability. But true Grace fixes
the Affections on Spiritual Things. As to the Degrees of their Exercise, there
may be and is in them great variety, according as they may be excited, aided,
assisted, by Grace, and the means of it, or obstructed and impeded by the
interposition of Temptations and Diversions. But the constant bent and
inclination of renewed Affections is unto Spiritual Things, as the Scripture
everywhere testifies, and Experience does confirm. (2.) The forementioned
Work does not fill the Affections; how-ever it may serve to take them up and
pacify them. It come like many Strangers to an Inn to Lodge, which take up a
great deal of room, and make an Appearance, as if none were in the House but
themselves; and yet they turn not out the Family which dwells there, but
there they make their abode still. Light and Conviction with all their Train
and Attendants come into the Mind and Affections, as if they would fill them
and possess them for themselves alone. But yet when they have done all, they
leave the quiet Places of the House for the World, and Sin, and Self; they do
not thrust them out of the Affections, and fill up their places with Spiritual
Things. But Saving-Grace fills up the Affections with Spiritual Things, fills
the Soul with Spiritual Love, Joy, and Delight, and exercises all other
Affections about their proper Objects. It denies not a room to any other
Things, Relations, Possessions, Enjoyments, merely as they are natural, and are
content to be subordinate unto God, and Spiritual Things. But if they would be
carnal, disorderly, or predominant, it casts them out.

Reformation of Life, and Conversation, so that it will express the whole form
of Godliness therein. But herein also it is subject unto a threefold Defect
and Imperfection. For (1.) it will consist with and allow of raging and
reigning sins of Ignorance. The conducting Light in this Work not leading into
the Abhorrency of all sin as sin, nor into a pursuit of Holiness, out of a
design to be universally conformable unto Christ; but being gathered up from
this and that particular Command, it oft-times leaves behind it great sins
unregarded. So it left Persecution in Paul before his Conversion; and so it
leaves hatred and a desire of Persecution in many at this day. And other Sins
of the like Nature may escape its utmost search to the ruin of the Soul. (2.)
Its Reformation of the Conversation is seldom universal as to all known sins,
unless it be for a season, whilst the Soul is under a flagrant pursuit of
Self-Righteousness. Paul in that condition had preserved himself, so as that
according to the Law he was blameless; and the young Man thought he had kept
all the Commandments from his youth. But setting aside this Consideration,
notwithstanding the utmost that this Work can attain unto, after the efficacy
of its first Impressions begin to abate. Lust will reserve some peculiar way of
venting and discovering it self, which is much spoken unto. (3.) The
Conversations of Persons who live and abide under the Power of this Work only,
is assuredly fading and decaying; Coldness, Sloth, Negligence, Love of the
World, Carnal-Wisdom and Security do every day get ground upon them. Hence
although by a long course of abstinence from open sensual sins, and stating of
a contrary Interest, they are not given up unto them; yet by the decays of the
Power of their Convictions, and the ground that Sin gets upon them, they become
walking and talking Sceletons in Religion, dry sapless, useless Worldlings. But
where the Soul is inlaid with real Saving-Grace, it is in a state of thriving
continually. Such a one will go on from Strength to Strength, from Grace to
Grace, from Glory to Glory, and will be fat and flourishing in Old Age. By
these things may we learn to distinguish in our selves between the preparatory
Work mentioned, and that of real Saving-Conversion unto God. And these are some
of the Heads of those Operations of the Holy Spirit on the Minds of Men, which
oftentimes are preparatory unto a real Conversion unto God; and sometimes
their Contempt and Rejection, a great Aggravation of the sin and misery of them
in whom they were wrought.

Papists have carried them so far, as to make them formally dispositive unto
Justification, and to have a congruous merit thereof. But this the Ancients
denied, who would not allow that either any such Preparation, or any Moral
Virtues did capacitate Men for real Conversion, observing that others were
often called before those who were so qualified. Nonne advertimus multos
fideles nostros ambulantes viam Dei, ex nulla part ingenio comparari; non
dicam quorundam haereticorum, sed etiam minorum? Item nonne videmus quosdam
homines utriusque sexus in conjugali castitate viventes sine querela, and tamen
vel haereticos vel Paganos, vel etiam in vera fide and vera Ecclesia sic
tepidos, ut eos miremur meretricum and bistrionum subito conversorum, non solum
sapientia and temperantia, sed etiam fide, spe and Charitate superari. August.
lib. 2. Quaest. ad Simplician. q. 2.
And in them there are Goads and Nails, which have been fastened by Wise and
Experienced Masters of the Assemblies, to the great Advantage of the Souls of
Men. For observing the usual Ways and Means whereby these Effects are wrought
in the Minds of the Hearers of the Word, with their Consequences, in Sorrow,
troubles, Fear, and Humiliations, and the Courses which they take to improve
them, or to extricate themselves from the perplexity of them, they have managed
the Rules of Scripture with their own and others Experience suitable thereunto,
to the great benefit of the Church of God. That these things are now despised
and laughed to scorn, is no part of the happiness of the Age wherein we live,
as the event will manifest.

Church of God, merely because they understand them not, and therefore reproach
them, they will be greatly mistaken. Let them lay aside that unchristian way of
treating about these things which they have engaged in; and plainly prove that
Men need not be convinced of sin, that they ought not to be humbled for it, nor
affected with sorrow with respect unto it; that they ought not to seek for a
Remedy or Deliverance from it; that all Men are not born in a state of Sin;
that our Nature is not depraved by the Fall; that we are able to do all that is
required of us, without the Internal Aids and Assistances of the Spirit of God,
and they shall be diligently attended unto.

Corruption or Depravation of the Mind by Sin. CHAP. III.
(1.) Contempt and Corruption of the Doctrine of Regeneration. (2.) All Men in
the World Regenerate or Unregenerate. (3.) General Description of Corrupted
Nature. (4, 5.) Depravation of the Mind. (6.) Darkness upon it. (7.) The Nature
of Spiritual Darkness. (8, 9.) Reduced into two Heads of Darkness objective.
(10.) How removed. (11, 12, 13, 14.) Of Darkness subjective, its Nature and
Power. (15, 16. proved. (17.) Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. opened. (18.) Applied. (19.)
The Mind alienated from the Life of God. (20, 21. 22.) The Life of God what it
is. (23.) The Power of the Mind, with respect unto Spiritual Things, examined.
(24, 25.) 1 Cor. 2. 14. opened. (...), or the Natural Man, who. (26.) Spiritual
Things, what they are. (27.) How the Natural Man cannot know or receive
Spiritual Things. (28.) Difference between understanding Doctrines, and
receiving of Things. (29, 30.) A twofold Power and Ability of Mind, with
respect unto Spiritual Things, explained. (31.) Reasons why a Natural Man
cannot discern Spiritual Things. (32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.) How and wherefore
Spiritual Things are foolishness to Natural Men. (38.) Why Natural Men cannot
receive the Things of God. (39, 40, 41.) A double impotency in the Mind of Man
by Nature. (42.) 1 Cor. 2. 14. farther vindicated. (43.) Power of Darkness in
Persons Unregenerate. (44.) The Mind filled with Wills or Lusts, and enmity
thereby. (45.) The Power and Efficacy of Spiritual Darkness at large declared.

Living Stones for the building of a Temple, wherein the Living God will dwell.
Now that we may not only declare the Truth in this Matter, but also vindicate
it from those Corruptions wherewith some have endeavored to debauch it, I
shall promise a Description lately given of it, with confidence enough, and it
may be not without too much Authority. And it is in these words; What is it to
be born again, and to have a new Spiritual Life in Christ, but to become
sincere Proselytes to the Gospel; to renounce all vicious Customs and
Practices, and to give an upright and uniform obedience to all the Laws of
Christ; and therefore if they are all but precepts of moral virtue, to be born
again, and to have a new Spiritual life, is only to become a new moral man. But
their account (speaking of nonconformist Ministers) of this Article, is so wild
and Fantastic, that had I nothing else to make good my charge against them,
that alone would be more than enough to expose the prodigious folly of their
Spiritual Divinity. p. 343, 344. I confess these are the words of one who seems
not much to consider what he says, so as that it may serve his present turn, in
reviling and reproaching other men. For he considers not that by this
description of it he utterly excludes the baptismal Regeneration of Infants,
which is so plainly professed by the Church wherein he is dignified. But this
is publicly declared, avowed, and vended as allowed Doctrine amongst us, and
therefore deserves to be noticed, though the person that gives it out, be at
irreconcilable feuds with himself and his Church. Of Morality and Grace an
account shall be given elsewhere. At present the work of Regeneration is that
which is under our consideration. And concerning this, those so severely
treated, teach no other Doctrine, but what for the substance of it is received
in all the Reformed Churches in Europe, and which so many learned Divines of
the Church of England confirmed with their suffrage at the Synod of Dort.
Whether this deserves all the scorn which this haughty person pours upon it by
his swelling words of vanity, will to indifferent persons be made appear in the
ensuing discourse; as also what is to be thought of the description of it given
by that Author, which whether it savor more of ignorance and folly, or of
pride and fulsom errors, is hard to determine. I know some words in it are used
with the old Pelagian trick of ambiguity, so as to be capable of having another
sense and Interpretation put upon them, than their present use and design will
admit of. But that Artifice will be immdiately rendered useless.

Unregenerate, or Regenerate. There being an Affirmation and a Negation
concerning the state of Regeneration in the Scripture, one of them may be used
concerning every capable Subject; every man living is so, or he is not so; And
herein, as I suppose, there is a general consent of Christians. Again, it is
evident in the Scripture, and we have proved it in our way, that all men are
born in an unregenerate Condition. This is so positively declared by our
Savior, that there is no rising up against it. Joh. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Now
Regeneration being the delivery of men (or the means of it) from that state and
condition wherein they are born, or are by nature, we cannot discover wherein
it does consist, without a declaration of that state which it gives us
deliverance from. And this in the first place we shall insist upon at large,
giving an account of the state of lapsed nature under a loss of the Original
Grace of God. And these things I shall handle practically for the Edification
of all sorts of Believers, and not in the way and method of the Schools, which
yet shall be done elsewhere.

Di^o veterem Nativitatem atque adeo omnes vires naturae, qua naturali
propagatione transfunduntur in s^b^lem in scriptura damnari; maledictam cordis
nostri imaginationem, rationem, os, manus, pedes peccato and (...) inveluta in
^^bis omnia. Johan. Ferus in Evang. Joh. cap. 1. v. 23. Fide perdita spe
relicta, in elligentia obcaecata, Voluntate captiva, homo quo in se repareter
non invenit. de Vocat. Gent. l. 7. c 3.
Declaration of the state of corrupted nature after the fall, and before the
Reparation of it by the Grace of Jesus Christ, that is, the effectual Operation
of the Holy Spirit, The Scripture principally insists on 3 things. (1) The
Corruption and Depravation of the Mind; which it calls by the name of Darkness
and Blindness, with the consequents of vanity, ignorance and folly. (2) The
Depravation of the Will and Affections, which it expresses several ways, as
by weakness or impotency, and stubbornness or obstinacy. (3) By the general
name of death, extended to the condition of the whole soul; and these have
various Effects and Consequences, as in our explanation of them will appear.

state of Darkness and Blindness, with respect unto God and Spiritual things,
with the way of pleasing him, and living unto him. Be men otherwise, and in
other things never so wise, knowing, learned, and skilful; in Spiritual things
they are dark, blind, ignorant, unless they are renewed in the Spirit of their
Minds by the Holy Ghost. This is a matter which the World cannot endure to hear
of, and is ready to fall into a tumult upon its mention. They think it but an
Artifice which some weak men have got, to reflect on and condemn them who are
wiser than themselves. On the like occasion did the Pharisees ask of our
Savior that question with pride and scorn; are we blind also? Joh. 9. 40. But
as he lets them know, that their presumption of light and knowledge, would serve
only to aggravate their sin and condemnation, v. 41. so he plainly tells them
that notwithstanding all their boasting, they had not heard the voice of God at
any time, nor seen his shape, Joh. 5. 37.

intellectual faculties of our Souls, as though they were neither debased,
corrupted, impaired, nor depraved. All that disadvantage which is befallen our
anture by the entrance of Sin is but in the disorder of the affections, and the
inferior sensitive parts of the Soul, which are apt to tumultuate and rebel
against that poor untainted light which is in the Mind. And this they speak of
it, without respect unto its Renovation by the Holy Spirit; for if they include
that also, they are in their discourses most notorious confused triflers.
Indeed some of them write, as if they had never deigned once to consult with
the Scriptures, and others are plainly gone over into the Tents of the
Pelagians. But setting aside their modern Artifices, of confident boasting,
contemptuous reproaches, and scurrilous railings, it is no difficult
undertaking, so to demonstrate the depravation of the Minds of men by nature,
and their impotency thence to discern Spiritual things in a spiritual manner,
Si quis per Naturae vigorem evangelizanti predie itioni nos consentire posse
confirmat absque illuminatione Spiritus Sancti; haeretico Fallitur Spiritu.
Conc. Arausie. 2 Can 7.
without a saving effectual Work of the Holy Spirit in their Renovation; as
that the proudest and most petulant of them shall not be able to return any
thing of a solid answer thereunto. And herein we plead for nothing but the
known doctrine of the ancient Catholic Church, declared in the writings of the
most learned Fathers and Determinations of Councils against the Pelagians,
whose errors and heresies are again revived among us by a crew of Socinianized
Arminians.

unto the Assertion as laid down in general; Matthew. 4. 16. The People which sat
in darkness saw great Light, and to them that sat in the Region and Shadow of
Death, Light is sprung up. Of what kind this Darkness was in particular shall
be afterward declared. For the present it answers what is proposed, That
before the Illumination given them by the Preaching of the Gospel, the People
mentioned sat in Darkness, or lived under the Power of it. And such as was the
Light whereby they were relieved, of the same kind was the Darkness under which
they were detained. And in the same sense when Christ preached the Gospel, the
Light shined into Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not, John 1. 5.
gave not place to the Light of the Truth declared by him, that it might be
received in the Souls of Men. The Commission which he gave to Paul the Apostle
when he sent him to Preach the Gospel, was to open the Eyes of Men, and to turn
them from Darkness to Light, Acts 26. 18. not a Light within them; for Internal
Light is the Eye, or seeing of the Soul. But the Darkness was such as consisted
in their blindness, in not having their eyes open. To open their Eyes, and turn
them from Darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye
Light in the Lord. What is the Change and Alteration made in the Minds of Men
intended in this Expression will afterward appear. But that a great Change is
proposed none can doubt; Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the Power of
Darkness; as also 1 Pet. 2. 9. Who has called us out of Darkness into his
marvelous Light. And the Darkness which is in these Testimonies ascribed unto
Persons in an unregenerate Condition, is by Paul compared to that which was at
the beginning, before the Creation of Light; Genesis 1. 2. Darkness was upon the
Face of the Deep. There was no Creature that had a Visive Faculty, there was
Darkness Subjectively in all, and there was no Light to see by, but all was
objectively wrapped up in Darkness. In this state of things, God by an Almighty
Act of his Power created Light; verse. 3. God said, Let there be Light, and
there was Light. And no otherwise is it in this new Creation. God who commanded
then Light to shine out of Darkness, shines into the Hearts of Men to give them
the knowledge of his Glory in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Spiritual
Darkness is in and upon all Men, until God by an Almighty and Effectual Work of
the Spirit shine into them, or Create Light in them. And this Darkness is that
Light within which some boast to be in themselves and others.

Darkness, what it is, and wherein it does consist; and then secondly, show its
Efficacy and Power in and on the Minds of Men, and how they are corrupted by it.

First; The Term of Darkness in this case is Metaphorical, and borrowed from
that which is Natural. What Natural Darkness is, and wherein it consists all
Men know; if they know it not in its Cause and Reason, yet they know it by its
Effects. They know it is that which hinders Men from all Regular Operations,
which are to be guided by the outward Senses. And it is twofold; (1.) When Men
have not Light to see by; or when the usual Light, the only external Medium for
the discovery of distant Objects is taken from them. So was it with the
Egyptians during the three days darkness that was on their Land. They could
not see for want of Light; they had their Visive Faculty continued unto them;
yet having no Light, they saw not one another, nor arose any from his place,
Exodus 10. 23. For God probably to augment the terror of his Judgment,
restrained the virtue of Artificial Light, as well as he did that which was
Natural. (2.) There is Darkness unto Men when they are blind, either born so,
or made so. Psalm. 69. 29. Let their Eyes be darkened that they may not see. So
the Angel smote the Sodomites with blindness, Genesis 19. 11. and Paul the
Sorcerer, Acts 13. 11. However the Sun shines, it is all one perpetual Night
unto them that are blind.

Spiritual Darkness may be referred unto two Heads. For there is an Objective
Darkness, a Darkness that is on Men; and a Subjective Darkness, a Darkness that
is in them. The first consists in the want of those Means whereby alone they
may be enlightened in the Knowledge of God and Spiritual Things. This is
intended, Mat. 4. 16. This Means is the Word of God, and the preaching of it.
Hence it is called a Light, Psalm. 119. 105. and is said to give Light, Psalm.
19. 8. or to be a Light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. And it is so
termed, because it is the outward Means of Communicating the Light of the
Knowledge of God unto the Minds of Men. What the Sun is unto the World, as unto
things natural, that is the Word and the Preaching of it unto Men as to Things
Spiritual. And hence our Apostle applies what is said of the Sun in the
Firmament, as to the enlightening of the World, Psalm. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. unto the
Gospel, and the Preaching of it, Romans 10. 15, 18.

so, it were easy to demonstrate, that there is no Saving Revelation of the
Knowledge of God unto Sinners, but as he is in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself; and that so he is not made known, but by the Word of Reconciliation
committed unto the Dispensers of the Gospel. Whatever knowledge therefore of
God may be attained by the means mentioned, as he is the God of Nature ruling
over Men, and requiring Obedience from them according to the Covenant and Law
of their Creation, yet the knowledge of him as a God in Christ pardoning Sin and
saving Sinners, is attainable by the Gospel only. But this I have proved and
confirmed elsewhere.

this Darkness, which until it is done, no Man can see the Kingdom of God or
enter into it. And this he does by sending the Word of the Gospel into any
Nation, Country, Place, or City, as he pleases. The Gospel does not get ground
in any place, nor is restrained from any Place or People, by accident, (...) by
the endeavors of Men, but it is sent and disposed of (...), to the Sovereign
Will and Pleasure of the Spirit of God. He Gifteth, Calls, and Sends Men unto
the Work of Preaching it, Acts 13. 2, 4. and disposes them unto the Places
where they shall declare it, either by express Revelation as of old, Acts 16.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10. or guides them by the secret Operations of his Providence. Thus
the Dispensation of the Light of the Gospel, as to Times, Places, and Persons,
depends on his Sovereign Pleasure, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Wherefore although we are
to take care and pray much about the continuance of the Dispensation of the
Gospel in any place, and its Propagation in others; yet need we not to be
over-solicitous about it. This Work and Care the Holy Ghost has taken on
himself, and will carry it on according to the Counsel of God and his Purposes,
concerning the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in this World. And thus far the
Dispensation of the Gospel is only a causa sine qua non, of the Regeneration of
Men, and the granting of it depends solely on the Will of the Spirit of God.

Subjective Darkness which is of more direct and immediate Consideration in
this Matter, the Nature whereof, with what it does respect, and the influence
of it on the Minds of Men must be declared, before we can rightly apprehend the
Work of the Holy Spirit, in its removal by Regeneration.

This is that whereby the Scripture expresses the Natural Depravation and
Corruption of the Minds of Men, with respect unto Spiritual Things, and the
Duty that we owe to God according to the Tenor of the Covenant. And two things
must be premised to our consideration of it. As;

Things Natural, Civil, Political, or Moral, but merely with regard to things
Spiritual, Heavenly, and Evangelical. It were easy to evince, not only by
Testimonies of the Scripture, but by the Experience of all Mankind built on
Reason, and the Observation of Instances innumerable, that the whole Rational
Soul of Man since the Fall, and by the entrance of sin, is weakened, impaired,
vitiated, in all its Faculties, and all their Operations about their proper and
natural Objects. Neither is there any Relief against these Evils, with all
those unavoidable Perturbations wherewith it is possessed, and actually
disordered in all its Workings, but by some secret and hidden Operation of the
Spirit of God, such as he continually exerts in the Rule and Government of the
World. But it is concerning the Impotency, Defect, Depravation, and Perversity
of the Mind, with respect unto Spiritual Things alone that we shall treat at
present. I say then;

Vice, Corruption, or Depravation of the Minds of all Unregenerate Men, which
the Scripture calls Darkness and Blindness, they are not able of themselves, by
their own Reasons and Understandings how-ever exercised and improved, to
discern, receive, understand, or believe savingly Spiritual Things, or the
Mystery of the Gospel, when and as they are outwardly revealed unto them,
without an effectual powerful Work of the Holy Spirit creating, or by his
Almighty Power inducing a new Saving Light into them. Quomodo lux incassum
circumfudit oculus caecos vel clausos, ita animalis homo non percipit ea quae
sunt Dei. Bernliard. Ser. 1. sup. Cantie.
Let it be supposed that the Mind of a Man be no way hurt or impaired by any
natural defect, such as does not attend the whole Race of Mankind but is
personal only and accidental; suppose it free from contracted habits of Vice,
or voluntary Prejudices: yet upon the Proposal of the Doctrine and Mysteries of
the Gospel, let it be done by the most skilful Masters of the Assemblies, with
the greatest Evidence and Demonstration of the Truth; it is not able of it
self, Spiritually and Savingly to receive, understand, and assent unto them,
without the especial Si quis per naturae vigorem bonum aliquod quod ad salutem
pertinet vitae aeternae cogitare ut expedit aut eligere, sive salutari, id est,
Evangelicae praedicationi consentire posse confirmat, absque illuminatione and
inspiratione Spiritus Sancti, qui dat omnibus suavitatem consentiendo and
credendo veritati, haeretico fallitur Spiritu. Conc. Arausican. can. 2. can. 7.
Ideo dictum est quia nullus hominum illuminatur nisi illo lumine veritatis quod
Deus est; ne quisquam putaret ab eo se illuminari, a quo aliquid audit ut
discat, non dico si quenquam magnum hominem, sed nec si angelum ei contingat
habere Doctorem. Adhibetur enim sermo veritatis extrinsecus Vocis Ministerio
corporali; verumtamen neque qui plantat est aliquid, neque qui rigat, sed qui
incrementum dat Deus. Audit quippe homo dicentem vel Hominem vel Angelum, sed
ut sentiat and cognoscat verum esse quod dicitur, illo lumine men's ejus intus
aspergitur, quod aeternum manet, quod etiam in tenebris lucet. August. de
Peccator. Meritis and Remissione. lib. 1. c. 25.
Aid, and Assistance, and Operation of the Holy Spirit. To evince this Truth,
we may consider in one Instance, the Description given us in the Scripture of
the Mind it self, and of its Operations, with respect unto Spiritual Things.
This we have Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord,
that you henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their
Mind, having the Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God,
through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their Heart.
It is of the Gentiles that the Apostle speaks, But the Apostle speaks of them,
on the account of that which is common unto all Men by Nature. For he Treats of
their Condition, with respect unto the Faculties of their Minds and Souls,
wherein there is, as unto the Life of God or Spiritual Things, no difference
naturally among Men; and their Operations and Effects are for the substance of
them the same.

Do we not live after the Heathens, in the vileness of those Practices, and in
their Idol Worship? That long course of Sin having blinded their
Understandings, so that they see not that which by the Light of Nature they are
enabled to see, and by that gross Ignorance and obduration of Heart, run into
all Impiety, are far removed from that Life which God and Nature require of
them. It is supposed in this Exposition, (1.) That the Apostle has respect in
the first place to the Practices of the Gentiles, not to their State and
Condition. (2.) That this Practice concerns only their Idolatry and
Idol-Worship. (3.) That what is here ascribed unto them, came upon them by a
long course of sinning. (4.) That the Darkness mentioned consists in a not
discerning of what might be seen by the Light of Nature. (5.) That their
Alienation from the Life of God, consisted in running into that Impiety which
was distant or removed from the Life that God and Nature require. But all these
Sentiments are so far from being contained in the Text, as that they are
expressly contrary unto it. For (1.) although the Apostle does carry on his
Description of this State of the Gentiles, unto the vile Practices that ensued
thereon, on, v. 19. Yet it is their State by Nature, with respect unto the Life
of God, which is first intended by him. This is apparent from what he
prescribes unto Christians in opposition thereunto; namely, The New Man which
after God is created in Rightcousness and true Holiness, v. 24. (2.) The Vanity
mentioned is subjective in their Minds, and so has no respect to Idol-Worship
but as it was an Effect thereof. The vanity of their Minds is the Principle
whereof this walking, be what it will, was the Effect and Consequent. (3.) Here
is no mention nor intimation of any long course of sinning, much less that it
should be the cause of the other things ascribed to the Gentiles, whereof
indeed it was the Effect. The Description given, is that of the state of all
Men by Nature, as is plain from Chap. 2. 1, 2, 3. (4.) The Darkness here
mentioned, is opposed unto being Light in the Lord, Chap. 5. 8. which is not
mere Natural Light, nor can any by that Light alone discern Spiritual Things,
or the Things that belong to the Life of God. (5.) The Life of God here is not
that Life which God and Nature require, but that Life which God reveals in,
requires and communicates by the Gospel through Jesus Christ, as all Learned
Expositors acknowledge. Wherefore the Apostle treats here of the State of Men
by Nature, with respect unto Spiritual and Supernatural Things. And three Heads
he reduces all things in Man unto. (1.) He mentions (...), the Mind. (2.)
(...), the Understanding. And (3.) (...), the Heart. And all these are one
entire Principle of all our Moral and Spiritual Operations; and are all
affected with the Darkness and Ignorance whereof we treat.

Vanity; they walk in the vanity of their Mind. Things in the Scripture are
said to be vain, which are useless and fruitless. (...), Vain, is from (...),
to no purpose, Matthew. 15. 9. Hence the Apostle calls the Idols of the Gentiles,
and the Rites used in their Worship, (...), vain things, Acts 14. 15. So he
expresses the Hebrew, (...), Jonas 2. 8. lying Vanities; or (...), which is as
much as (...), a thing altogether useless and unprofitable, according to the
Description given of them, 1 Samuel 12. 21. (...), Vain things which cannot
profit, nor deliver, for they are vain. There is no profit in, nor use of that
which is vain. As the Mind is said to be vain, or under the Power of vanity,
two things are intended. (1.) Its natural Inclination unto things that are
vain; that is, such as are not a proper nor useful Object unto the Soul and its
Affections. It seeks about to lead the Soul to rest and satisfaction, but
always unto vain things, and that in great variety. Sin, the World, Pleasures,
the Satisfaction of the Flesh, with Pride of Life, are the things which it
naturally pursues. And in actings of this Nature a vain Mind abounds; it
multiplies vain Imaginations, like the Sand on the Seashore. These are called
the Figments of the Hearts of Men, Genesis 6. 5. which are found to be only evil
continually. These it feigns and frames, abundantly bringing them forth as the
Earth does Grass, or as a Cloud pours out drops of Water. And herein (2.) it is
unstable. For that which is vain is various, inconstant, unfixed, light, as a
natural Mind is; so that it is like Hell it self for Confusion and Disorder; or
the Whorish Woman described by Solomon, Prove. 7. 11, 12. And this has befallen
it by the loss of that fixed regularity which it was created in. There was the
same cogitative or imaginative Faculty in us in the State of Innocence, as
there remains under the Power of Sin. But then all the Actings of it were
orderly and regular. The Mind was able to direct them all unto the end for
which we were made. God was and would have been the principal Object of them,
and all other things in order unto him. But now being turned off from him, the
Mind in them engages in all manner of Confusion; and they all end in vanity or
disappointment. They offer, as it were, their Service unto the Soul, to bring
it in Satisfaction. And although they are rejected one after another, as not
answering what they pretend unto, yet they constantly arise under the same
Notion, and keep the whole Soul under Everlasting Disappointments. And from
hence it is that the Mind cannot assent unto the common Principles of Religion
in a due manner, which yet it cannot deny. This will be further cleared
afterward. Hereon in Conversion unto God, we are said to have our Minds
renewed, Romans 12. 2. and to be renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, Ephesians. 4.
23. By the Mind the Faculty it self is intended, the rational Principle in us
of Apprehension, of Thinking, Discoursing, and Assenting. This is renewed by
Grace, or brought into another Habitude and Frame, by the implantation of a
Ruling, Guiding, Spiritual Light in it. The Spirit of the Mind is the
Inclination and Disposition in the Actings of it. These also must be regulated
by Grace.

Understanding. This is the (...), the directive, discerning, judging-Faculty
of the Soul, that leads it unto Practice. It guides the Soul in the choice of
the Notions which it receives by the Mind. And this is more corrupt than the
Mind it self. For the nearer things come to Practice, the more prevalent in
them is the Power of Sin. This therefore is said to be darkened. And being so,
it is wholly in vain to pretend a sufficiency in it to discern Spiritual
Things, without a Supernatural Illumination. Light in the Dispensation of the
Gospel shines, or casts out some Rays of it self into this darkened
Understanding of Men, but that receives it not, John 1. 5.

Heart. This in Scripture is (...), in the Soul the practical Principle of
Operation, and so includes the Will also. It is the actual compliance of the
Will and Affections with the Mind and Understanding, with respect unto the
Objects proposed by them. Light is received by the Mind, applied by the
Understanding, used by the Heart. Upon this, says the Apostle, there is (...),
blindness. It is not a mere Ignorance, or Incomprehensiveness of the Notions of
Truth that is intended, but a stubborn Resistance of Light and Conviction. An
obstinate and obdurate hardness is upon the Heart, whence it rejects all the
Impressions that come upon it from Notions of Truth. And on these
Considerations Men themselves before Conversion are said to be Darkness, Ephesians.
5. 8. There may be Degrees in a moral Privation; but when it is expressed in
the abstract, it is a sign that it is at its height, that it is total and
absolute; and this is spoken with respect unto Spiritual and Saving Light only,
or a saving Apprehension of Spiritual Truths. There is not in such Persons so
much as any Disposition remaining to receive Saving Knowledge, no more than
there is a Disposition in Darkness it self to receive Light. The Mind indeed
remains a capable Subject to receive it, but has no active Power nor
Disposition in it self toward it. And therefore when God is pleased to give us
a new Ability to understand and perceive Spiritual Things in a due manner, he
is said to give us a new Faculty, because of the utter disability of our Minds
naturally to receive them, 1 John 5. 20. Let vain Men boast whilst they please
of the Perfection and Ability of their Rational Faculties, with respect unto
Religion, and the Things of God; this is the State of them by Nature, upon his
Judgment that must stand for ever.

Vanity, for this is the Spring and inexhaustible Fountain of all that Vanity
which the World is filled with. There is indeed a Vanity which is penal,
namely, that vexation and disappointment which Men finally meet withal in the
pursuit of perishing things, whereof the Wise Man treats at large in his
Ecclesiastes. But I intend that sinful Vanity which the Mind it self produces,
and that in all sorts of Persons, Ages, Sexes, and Conditions in the World.
This some of the Heathens saw, complained of, reproved and derided, but yet
could never reach to the cause of it, nor free themselves from being under the
Power of the same Vanity, though in a way peculiar and distinct from the common
sort, as might easily be demonstrated. But the thing is apparent, almost all
that our Eyes see, or our Ears hear of in the World is altogether vain. All
that which makes such a Noise, such a Business, such an Appearance and Show
among Men, may be reduced unto two Heads. (1.) The Vanity that they bring into
the things that are, and that are either good in themselves, and of some use,
or at least indifferent. So Men do variously corrupt their Buildings and
Habitations, their Trading, their Conversation, their Power, their Wealth,
their Relations; they join innumerable Vanities with them, which render them
loathsome and contemptible, and the meanest condition to be the most suitable
to rational Satisfaction. (2.) Men find out, and as it were, create things to
be mere Supporters, Countenancers, and Nourishers of Vanity. Such in Religion
are carnal pompous Ceremonies, like those of the Church of Rome, which have no
end, but to bring in some kind of Provision for the satisfaction of vain Minds;
Stage Plays, Mimicks, with innumerable other things of the same nature, which
are nothing but Theaters for Vanity to act it self upon. It were endless but to
mention the common Effects of Vanity in the World; and Men are mightily divided
about these things. Those engaged in them, think it strange that others run not
out into the same compass of excess, and riot with themselves, speaking evil of
them, 1 Pet. 4. 4. They wonder at the perverse stubborn and froward Humor
which befalls some Men, that they delight not in, that they approve not of those
Things and Ways wherein they find so great a suitableness unto their own
Minds. Others again are ready to admire whence it is that the World is mad on
such vain and foolish things as it is almost wholly given up unto. The
Consideration we have insisted on, gives us a satisfactory account of the
Grounds and Reasons hereof. The Mind of Man by Nature is wholly vain, under the
Power of Vanity, and is an endless fruitful! Womb of all monstrous Births. The
World is now growing toward six thousand years old, and yet is no nearer the
bottom of the Springs of its vanity, or the drawing out of its supplies, than
it was the first day that Sin entered into it. New Sins, new Vices, new Vanities
break forth continually; and all is from hence, that the Mind of Man by Nature
is altogether vain. Nor is there any way or means for putting a stop hereunto
in Persons, Families, Cities, Nations, but so far as the Minds of Men are cured
and renewed by the Holy Ghost. The World may alter its shape, and the outward
appearances of things, it may change its Scenes, and act its Part in new Habits
and Dresses, but it will still be altogether vain so long as natural uncured
vanity is predominant in the Minds of Men, and this will sufficiently secure
them from attaining any saving acquaintance with Spiritual Things.

remainders of this Vanity in our own Minds. The sinful Distempers of our
Natures are not presently cured at once, but the healing and removing of them
is carried on by degrees unto the consummation of the course of our obedience
in this World. And there are three Effects of this natural Vanity of the Mind
in its depraved condition to be found among Believers themselves. (1.) An
instability in Holy Duties, as Meditation, Prayer, and Hearing of the Word; How
ready is the Mind to wander in them, and to give entertainment unto vain and
fond Imaginations, at least unto Thoughts and Apprehensions of things unsuited
to the Duties wherein we are engaged? How difficult is it to keep it up unto an
even fixed stable frame of acting spiritually in Spiritual Things? How is it
ready at every breath to unbend and let down its Intension? All we experience
or complain of in this kind, is from the uncured Relics of this Vanity. (2.)
This is that which inclines and leads Men toward a conformity with and unto a
vain World, in its Customs, Habits, and ordinary Converse, which are all vain
and foolish. And so prevalent is it herein, and such Arguments has it
possessed it self withal to give it countenance, that in many instances of
vanity it is hard to give a distinction between them and the whole World that
lies under the Power of it. Professors it may be will not comply with the World
in the things beforementioned, that have no other use nor end, but merely to
support, act, and nourish vanity; but from other things which being indifferent
in themselves; are yet filled with Vanity in their use; How ready are many for
a compliance with the course of the World which lies in evil and passes away?
(3.) It acts it self in fond and foolish Imaginations, whereby it secretly
makes provision for the Flesh and the Lusts thereof, for they all generally
lead unto Self-Exaltation and Satisfaction. And these, if not carefully checked,
will proceed to such an excess as greatly to taint the whole Soul. And in these
things lies the principal Cause and Occasion of all other Sins and
Miscarriages. We have therefore no more important Duty incumbent on us, than
mightily to oppose this Radical Distemper. It is so also to attend diligently
unto the remedy of it. And this consists (1.) in an holy fixedness of Mind, and
an habitual inclination unto Things Spiritual, which is communicated unto us by
the Holy Ghost, as shall be afterward declared, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. (2.) In the
due and constant improvement of that gracious Principle. (1.) By constant
watchfulness against the Minds acting it self in vain, foolish, unprofitable
Imaginations, so far at least that vain thoughts may not lodge in us. (2.) By
exercising it continually unto Holy Spiritual Meditations, minding always the
things that are above, Col. 3. 3. (3.) By a constant conscientious humbling of
our Souls, for all the vain actings of our Minds that we do observe; All which
might be usefully enlarged on, but that we must return.

Darkness, and thereby being brought under the Power of Vanity, we may yet
farther consider what other Effects and Consequents are on the same account
ascribed unto it. And the Mind of Man in this State may be considered; either
(1.) as to its Dispositions and Inclinations. (2.) As to its Power and Actings,
with respect unto Spiritual Supernatural Things.

(1.) As to its Dispositions, it is (from the Darkness described) perverse and
depraved, whereby Men are alienated from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. for
this Alienation of Men from the Divine Life, is from the depravation of their
Minds. Hence are they said to be Alienated and Enemies in their Minds by wicked
Works, or by their Minds in wicked Works, being fixed on them, and under the
Power of them, Col. 1. 21. And that we may the better understand what is
intended hereby, we may consider both what is this Life of God, and how the
unregenerate Mind is alienated from it.

Acts 17. 28. Psalm. 104. 30. And (2.) that peculiar vital Life which we have by
the union of the rational Soul with the Body is from God also, and that in an
especial manner, Genesis 2. 7. Job 10. 12. But neither of these are any-where
called the Life of God. But it is an especial Life unto God which is intended,
and sundry things belong thereunto, or sundry things are applied unto the
Description of it. (1.) It is the Life which God requires of us, that we may
please him here, and come to the enjoyment of him hereafter. The Life of Faith
and Spiritual Obedience by Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 17. Gal. 2. 20. I live by the
Faith of the Son of God, Romans 6. 7. (2.) It is that Life which God works in
us, not Naturally by his Power, but Spiritually by his Grace; And that both as
to the Principle and all the Vital Acts of it, Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. Phil. 2. 13.
(3.) It is that Life whereby God lives in us, that is, in and by his Spirit
through Jesus Christ. Gal. 2. 20. Christ lives in me, and where the Son is
there is the Father; whence also this Life is said to be hid with him in God,
Col. 3. 3. (4.) It is the Life whereby we live to God, Romans 6. 7. whereof God
is the Supreme and Absolute End, as he is the principal efficient Cause of it.
And two things are contained herein; (1.) That we do all things to his Glory.
This is the proper End of all the Acts and Actings of this Life, Romans 14. 7, 8.
(2.) That we design in and by it, to come unto the eternal enjoyment of him, as
our Blessedness and Reward, Genesis 15. 1. (5.) It is the Life whereof the Gospel
is the Law and Rule, John 6. 68. Acts 5. 20. (6.) A Life, all whose Fruits are
Holiness and Spiritual Evangelical Obedience, Romans 6. 22. Phil. 1. 11. Lastly,
It is a Life that dies not, that is not obnoxious unto Death, Eternal Life,
John 17. 3. These things contain the chief concerns of that peculiar Spiritual
Heavenly Life, which is called the Life of God.

alienated from this Life; it has no liking of it, no inclination to it, but
carries away the whole Soul with an aversation from it. And this Alienation or
Aversation appears in two things; (1.) In its unreadiness and unaptness to
receive Instructions in and about the Concernments of it. Hence are Men dull
and flow of heart to believe, Luke 24. 25. (...), Heb. 5. 11, 12. Heavy in
Hearing, and flow in the Apprehension of what they hear. So are all Men toward
what they do not like but have an aversation from. This God complains of in the
People of old; My People are foolish, they have not known me; they are sottish
Children, and have none understanding; they are wise to do evil, but to do good
they have no knowledge, Jer. 4. 22. (2.) In the Choice and preferring of any
other Life before it. The first Choice a Natural Mind makes, is of a Life in
Sin and Pleasure; which is but a Death, a Death to God, 1 Timothy 5. 6. James 5.
5. a Life without the Law, and before it comes, Romans 7. 9. This is the Life
which is suited to the Carnal Mind, which it desires, delights in, and which
willingly it would never depart from. Again, if by Afflictions or Convictions
it be in part or wholly forced to forsake and give up this Life, it will choose
magnify and extol a moral Life, a Life in, by and under the Law, though at the
last it will stand it in no more stead than the Life of Sin and Pleasure, which
it has been forced to forgo, Romans 9. 32. Chap. 10. 3. The thoughts of this
Spiritual Life, this Life of God, it cannot away with; the Notions of it are
Uncouth, the Description of it is Unintelligible, and the Practice of it either
odious Folly or needless Superstition. This is the Disposition and Inclination
of the Mind toward Spiritual Things, as it is corrupt and depraved.

Power also of the Mind, with respect unto its actings toward Spiritual Things
may be considered. And this in short is none at all, in the sense which shall
be explained immediately, Romans 5. 6. for this is that which we shall prove
concerning the Mind of a Natural Man, or of a Man in the State of Nature;
how-ever it may be excited and improved, under those Advantages of Education
and Parts which it may have received; yet is not able, has not a power of its
own, Spiritually and Savingly, or in a due manner to receive, embrace, and
assent unto Spiritual Things, when proposed unto it in the Dispensation and
Preaching of the Gospel, unless it be renewed, enlightened, and acted by the
Holy Ghost.

This the Apostle plainly asserts, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The Natural Man receives not
the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

(1.) The Subject spoke of is (...), animalis homo, the natural Man, he who is
a natural Man. This Epithete is in the Scripture opposed unto (...), Spiritual,
1 Cor. 15. 44. Jud. 15. where (...) are described by (...), such as have not
the Spirit of God. The foundation of this distinction, and the distribution of
Men into these two sorts thereby, is laid in that of our Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 45.
(...). The first Adam was made a living Soul; Hence every Man who has no more
but what is traduced from him, is called (...); he is a living Soul, as was the
first Adam. And the last Adam is made a quickening Spirit; Hence he that is of
him, Partaker of his Nature, that derives from him, is (...), a Spiritual Man.
The Person therefore here spoken of, or (...), is one that has all that is or
can be derived from the first Adam, one endowed with a rational Soul, and who
has the use and exercise of all its rational Faculties.

Magisterial Dictates, and scornful Reflections upon others; tell us, that by
this Natural Man, a Man given up to his Pleasures, and guided by brutish
Affections, and no other is intended; one that gives himself up to the
government of his Inferior Faculties. But no rational Man, no one that will
attend unto the Dictates of Reason, is at all concerned in this Assertion. But
how is this proved? If we are not content with bare affirmations, we must at
length be satisfied with railing* and lying, and all sorts of Reproaches. But
the Apostle in this Chapter distributes all Men living into (...) and (...),
Spiritual and Natural. He who is not a Spiritual Man, be he who and what he
will, be he as rational as some either presume themselves to be, or would beg
of the World to believe that they are, is a Natural Man. The supposition of a
middle state of Men is absolutely destructive of the whole Discourse of the
Apostle as to its proper design. Besides, this of (...) is the best and softest
term that is given in the Scripture to unregenerate Men, with respect untoth^e
Things of God; and there is no reason why it should be thought only to express
the worst sort of them thereby. The Scripture terms not Men peculiarly
captivated unto brutish Affections, (...), natural Men, but rather (...), 2
Pet. 2. 12. natural bruit Beasts. And Austin gives us a better account of this
Exposition, Tractat. 98. in Johan. Animalis homo, i. e. qui secundum hominem
sapit, animalis dictus ab anima, carnalis a carne, quia ex anima and carne
constat omnis homo, non percipit ea quae sunt Spiritus Dei, i. e. quid gratia
credentibus conferat crux Christi. And another; Carnales dicimur, quando totos
nos voluptatibus damus; Spirituales, quando Spiritum Sanctum praevium sequimur;
id est, cum ipso sapimus instruente, ipso ducimur auctore. Animales reor esse
Philosophos qui proprios cogitatus putant esse Sapientiam, de quibus recte
dicitur, animalis autem homo non recipit ea quae sunt Spiritus, stultitia
quippe est ei. Hieronim. Comment. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 5. And another, (...)
(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 2. 15. The Natural Man is he who ascribes all things
to the Power of the Reasonings of the Mind, and does not think that he stands
in need of Aid from Above, which is madness. For God has given the Soul that
it should learn and receive what he bestows, or what is from him, and not
suppose that it is sufficient of it self, or to it self. Eyes are beautiful and
profitable; but if they would see without Light, this Beauty and Power will not
profit but hurt them. And the Mind if it would see (Spiritual Things) without
the Spirit of God, it does but ensnare it self. And it is a sottish
Supposition, that there are a sort of unregenerate Rational Men, who are not
under the power of corrupt Affections in and about Spiritual Things; seeing the
carnal Mind is enmity against God. This therefore is the Subject of the
Apostle's Proposition, namely, a Natural Man, every one that is so, that is no
more but so, that is, every one who is not a Spiritual Man, is not one who has
received the Spirit of Christ, v. 11, 12. one that has the Spirit of a Man
enabling him to search and know the things of a Man, or to attain Wisdom in
things Natural, Civil, or Political.

proposal of some things unto the Mind of this Natural Man. For the Apostle
speaks with respect unto the Dispensation and Preaching of the Gospel, whereby
that Proposal is made, v. 4. 7. and these things are (...); the things of the
Spirit of God; which are variously expressed in this Chapter, v. 7. They are
called the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, the hidden Wisdom that God has
ordained. v. 12. The things that are freely given unto us of God. v. 16. The
mind of Christ. v. 2. Jesus Christ and him crucified. And sundry other ways to
the same purpose. These are in the Gospel and belong to the preaching of it,
precepts innumerable concerning moral Duties to be observed toward God, our
selves, and other Men. And all these have a Coincidence with, and a
suitableness unto the inbred Light of Nature, because the principles of them
all are indelibly ingrafted therein. These things being in some sense the
things of a man, may be known by the Spirit of a Man that is in him, v. 11.
Howbeit they cannot be observed and practiced according to the mind of God,
without the Aid and Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But these are not the things
peculiarly here intended, but the Mysteries, which depend on more sovereign
Supernatural Revelation, and that wholly. Things that Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, nor have they entered into the heart of man to conceive, v. 9. Things
of God's Sovereign Counsel, whereof there were no impressions in the Mind of
Man in his First Creation, see Ephesians. 3. v. 8. 9, 10, 11.

he receives them not. (2) By (...), he cannot know them. In this double
Assertion, (1) A Power of receiving Spiritual things is denied, he cannot know
them. He cannot receive them. As Romans 7. 8. The Carnal Mind is not Subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be; and the rea^^n hereof is subjoyned;
because they are Spiritually discerned, a thing which such a Person has no
power to effect. (2.) a Will of rejecting them is employed. He receives them
not, for the Reason hereof is, because they are foolishness unto him. They are
represented unto him under such a notion, as that he will have nothing to do
with them. (3.) Actually. (and) that both because he cannot, and because he
will not,) he receives them not. The Natural Man neither can, nor will, nor
does receive the things of the Spirit of God; is altogether incapable of giving
them admission in the sense to be explained.

To clear and free this Assertion from Objections it must be observed.

Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites, posse quidem hominem, quem nec
ignorantia literarum, neque aliqua prohibet imbecillitas aut adversitas, verba
sanctae legis and Evangelii legere sive ex ore cujusdum praedicatoris audire;
sed ut quod audit percipiat etiam cord, ut mandata Dei facere velit, nemo
potest nisi quem Deus gratia sua praeveniret, data divinitus bona voluntate and
virtute, August. de fide ad Petrum cap. 32.
Literal Sense of Doctrines or Propositions of Truth that is intended. For
instance that Jesus Christ was crucified, mentioned by the Apostle. v. 2. is a
Proposition, whose sense and importance any Natural Man may understand, and
assent unto its Truth, and so be said to receive it. And all the Doctrines of
the Gospel may be taught and declared, in Propositions and Discourses, the
sense and meaning whereof a Natural Man may understand. And in the due
investigation of this sense, and judging thereon concerning Truth and Falsehood,
lies that use of Reason in religious things, which some would ignorantly
confound with an Ability of discerning Spiritual things in themselves, and
their own proper Nature. This therefore is granted; but it is denied that a
Natural Man can receive the things themselves. There is a wide difference
between the Mind's receiving Doctrines Notionally, and its receiving the things
taught in them really. The first a Natural Man can do. It is done by all, who
by the use of outward means do know the Doctrine of the Scripture, in
distinction from ignorance, falsehood and error. Hence Men Unregenerate are
said to know the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 21. that is, Notionally and
Doctrinally; for Really, says our Apostle they cannot. Hereon they profess
that they know God, that is the things which they are taught concerning him and
his will, whilst in works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, Tit.
1. 16. Romans 2. 17, 18. In the latter way they only receive Spiritual things, in
whose Minds they are so implanted as to produce their real and proper Effects,
Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. And there are two things required unto the
receiving of Spiritual things Really and as they are in themselves.

receive him, under an Apprehension of their conformity and agreeableness to
the Wisdom, Holiness, and Righteousness of God, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. The Reason
why men receive not Christ crucified as preached in the Gospel, is because they
see not a consonancy in it unto the Divine Perfections of the Nature of God.
Neither can any receive it until they see in it an Expression of Divine Power
and Wisdom. This therefore is required unto our receiving the things of the
Spirit of God in a due manner; namely, that we spiritually see and discern
their answerableness unto the Wisdom, Goodness and Holiness of God, wherein
lies the principal Rest and Satisfaction of them that really believe. This a
Natural man cannot do.

2. That we discern their suitableness unto the great Ends for which they are
proposed as the means of accomplishing. Unless we see this clearly and
distinctly we cannot but judge them Weakness and Foolishness. These Ends being
the Glory of God in Christ, with our Deliverance from a state of sin and
misery, with a Translation into a state of Grace and Glory; unless we are
acquainted with these things, and the aptness and fitness, and Power of the
things of the Spirit of God to effect them, we cannot receive them as we ought;
and this a Natural Man cannot do. And from these considerations unto which
sundry others of the like nature might be added, it appears how and whence it
is, that a Natural Man is not capable of the things of the Spirit of God.

twofold Capacity or Ability of receiving, knowing or understanding Spiritual
things in the Mind of a Man.

1. There is a Natural Power consisting in the suitableness, and
proportionableness of the faculties of the Soul, to receive Spiritual things in
the way that they are proposed unto us. This is supposed in all the
Exhortations, Promises, Precepts, and Threatenings of the Gospel. For in vain
would they be proposed unto us, had we not rational Minds and Understandings to
apprehend their sense, use, and importance; and also meet Subjects for the
Faith, Grace and Obedience which are required of us. None pretend that men are
in their Conversion to God, like stocks and stones, or bruit beasts that have
no understanding. For although the work of our Conversion is called a turning
of stones into children of Abraham; because of the greatness of the change, and
because of our selves we contribute nothing thereunto: yet if we were every way
as such, as to the capacity of our natures, it would not become the Wisdom of
God to apply the means mentioned for effecting of that Work. God is said indeed
herein to give us an understanding, 1 John 5. 20. but the Natural Faculty of
the Understanding is not thereby intended but only the Renovation of it by
Grace, and the actual exercise of that Grace in apprehending Spiritual things.
There are two Adjuncts of the Commands of God; (1.) That they are equal, (2.)
That they are Easy, or not grievous. The former they have from the nature of
the things commanded and the fitness of our Minds to receive such Commands,
Ezekiel. 28. 25. The latter they have from the dispensation of the Spirit and
Grace of Christ, which renders them not only possible unto us, but easy for us.

Magnum aliquid Pelagiani se scire putant quando discunt, non Juberet Deus quod
sit non posse ab homine fieri, quis hoc nesciat? sed ideo Jubet aliqua quae non
possumus ut noverimus quid ab illo petere debeamus. Ipsa enim est quae orando
impetrat, quod lex imperat. August. de Great. and lib. Arbit. cap. 19.

Bernard. Sermon. 50. in Cantic.


Some pretend that whatever is required of us, or prescribed unto us in a way
of Duty, that we have a Power in and of our selves to perform. If by this Power
they intend no more, but that our Minds and the other rational Faculties of our
Souls, are fit and meet, as to their natural Capacity, for and unto such Acts,
as wherein those duties do consist, it is freely granted. For God requires
nothing of us, but must be acted in our Minds and Wills, and which they are
naturally meet and suited for. But if they intend such an active Power and
Ability, as being excited by the Motives proposed unto us, can of it self
answer the Commands of God in a due manner; They deny the Corruption of our
Nature by the entrance of sin, and render the Grace of Christ useless, as shall
be demonstrated.

2. That is, or may be a Power in the Mind to discern Spiritual things, whereby
it is so able to do it, as that it can immediately exercise that Power in the
Spiritual discerning of them upon their due Proposal unto it, that is
Spiritually; as a man that has a Visive Faculty sound and entire, upon the due
proposal of visible Objects unto him, can discern and see them. This Power must
be Spiritual and Supernatural. For whereas to receive Spiritual things,
Spiritually, is so to receive them as really to believe them with Faith Divine
and Supernatural, to love them with Divine Love, to conform the whole Soul and
Affection unto them, Romans 6. 17. 2. Cor. 3. 18. no Natural Man has power so to
do; This is that which is denied in this place by the Apostle: Wherefore
between the Natural Capacity of the Mind, and the Act of Spiritual Discerning,
there must be an interposition of an Effectual Work of the Holy Ghost inableing
it thereunto, 1 John 5. 20, 1 Cor. 4. 6.

Nature of the things to be known, with respect unto the Mind and Understanding
of a Natural Man, the other from the Way or Manner whereby alone Spiritual
things may be acceptably discerned.

1. The first Reason taken from the Nature of the things themselves with
respect unto the mind, is, that they are foolishness. In themselves they are
the Wisdom of God, 2. Cor. 2. 7. Effects of the Wisdom of God, and those which
have the impress of the Wisdom of God upon them; and when the Dispensation of
them was said to be foolishness, the Apostle contends not about it, but tells
them how-ever it is the foolishness of God, 1 Cor. 1. 15. which he does to cast
contempt on all the Wisdom of Men, whereby the Gospel is despised: And they are
the hidden Wisdom of God; such an effect of Divine Wisdom as no Creature could
make any discovery of, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10. Job 28. 20, 21, 22. And they are the
Wisdom of God in a Mystery, or full of deep mysterious Wisdom. But to the
Natural Man they are foolishness, not only although they are the Wisdom of God,
but peculiarly because they are so, and as they are so; for the Carnal Mind is
Enmity against God. Now that is esteemed foolishness, which is looked on either
as weak and impertinent, or as that which contains or expresses Means and Ends
disproportionate, or as that which is undesirable in comparison of what may be
set up in competition with it, or is on any other consideration not eligible,
or to be complied with on the terms whereon it is proposed. And for one or
other, or all of these Reasons, are Spiritual Things, namely, those here
intended, wherein the Wisdom of God in the Mystery of the Gospel does consist,
foolishness unto a Natural Man; which we shall demonstrate by some Instances.

the Learned Philosophers of old, both our Apostle does testify, and the known
Experience of those first Ages of of the Church makes evident, 1 Cor. 1. 22,
23, 26, 27, 28. Had Spiritual Things been suited unto the Minds or Reasons of
Natural Men, it could not be but that those who had most improved their Minds,
and were raised unto the highest exercise of their Reasons, must much more
readily have received and embraced the Mysteries of the Gospel, than those who
were poor, illiterate, and came many degrees behind them in the Exercise and
Improvement thereof. So we see it is as to the Reception of any thing in Nature
or Morality, which being of any worth is proposed unto the Minds of Men; they
are embraced soonest by them that are wisest and know most. But here things
fell out quite otherwise; they were the Wise, the Knowing, the Rational, the
Learned Men of the World, that made the greatest and longest opposition unto
Spiritual Things; and that expressly and avowedly, because they were foolishness
unto them, and that on all the accounts beforementioned; and their opposition
unto them they managed with Pride, Scorn, and Contempt, as they thought foolish
things ought to be handled.

Learned, Rational, Wise part of Mankind, as they were esteemed or professed of
themselves; the Philosophers, and such as under their Conduct pretended unto a
Life according to the Dictates of Reason, who first embraced the Gospel, as
being more disposed unto its Reception than others, cannot be sufficiently
admired or despised. Had they once considered what is spoken unto this purpose
in the New Testament, or knew any thing of the Entrances, Growth, or Progress
of Christian Religion in the World, they would themselves be ashamed of this
folly. But every day in this Matter, Prodeunt Orators novi, stulti
adolescentuli, who talk confidently, whilst they know neither what they say,
nor whereof they do affirm.

foolish, because false and untrue. Though indeed they have no reason to think
them false, but because they suppose them foolish; and they fix upon charging
them with falsity, to countenance themselves in judging them to be folly.
Whatever concerns the Incarnation of the Son of God, the Satisfaction that he
made for Sin and Sinners; the Imputation of his Righteousness unto them that
believe; the effectual working of his Grace in the Conversion of the Souls of
Men, which with what belongs unto them, comprize the greatest part of the
Spiritual Things of the Gospel, are not received by many, because they are
false as they judge. And that which induces them so to determine, is because
they look on them as foolish and unsuited unto the rational Principles of their
Minds.

scoff at them, and despise them as the most contemptible Notions that Mankind
can exercise their Reasons about. Such were of old Prophesied concerning, 2
Pet. 3. 3, 4. and things at this day are come to that pass. The World swarms
with Scoffers at Spiritual Things, as those which are unfit for rational,
noble, generous Spirits to come under a sense or power of, because they are so
foolish. But these things were we foretold of, that when they came to pass we
should not be troubled or shaken in our Minds. Yea, the Atheism of some, is
made a means to confirm the Faith of others.

things declared in the Gospel may be reduced unto two Heads, as was before
observed; (1.) Such as consist in the confirmation, direction, and improvement
of the moral Principles and Precepts of the Law of Nature. (2.) Such as flow
immediately from the Sovereign Will and Wisdom of God, being no way
communicated unto us, but by Supernatural Revelation only. Such are all the
Effects of the Wisdom and Grace of God, as he was in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself; the Offices of Christ, his Administration of them, and
Dispensation of the Spirit, with the especial Evangelical Supernatural Graces
and Duties which are required in us with respect thereunto. The first sort of
these things many will greatly praise and highly extol. And they will declare
how consonant they are to Reason, and what Expressions suitable unto them may
be found in the Ancient Philosophers. But it is evident that herein also they
fall under a double Inconvenience; For (1.) mostly they visibly transgress what
they boast of as their Rule, and that above others. For where shall we meet
with any, at least with many of these sort of Men, who in any measure comply
with that Modesty, Humility, Meekness, Patience, Self-denial, Abstinence,
Temperance, Contempt of the World, Love of Mankind, Charity and Purity, which
the Gospel requires under this Head of Duties? Pride, Ambition, Insatiable
desires after Earthly Advantages and Promotions, Scoffing, Scorn and Contempt
of others, Vanity of Converse, Envy, Wrath, Revenge, Railing, are none of the
Moral Duties required in the Gospel. And (2.) no pretense of an esteem for any
one part of the Gospel, will shelter Men from the Punishment due to the
rejection of the whole, by whom any essential part of it is refused. And this
is the condition of many. The Things which most properly belong to the
Mysteries of the Gospel, or the unsearchable Riches of the Grace of God in
Christ Jesus, are foolishness unto them; and the Preaching of them is called
Canting and Folly. And some of these, although they go not so far as the Friar
at Rome, who said, That St. Paul fell into great excesses in these things; yet
they have dared to accuse his Writings of Darkness and Obscurity, for no other
reason, so far as I can understand, but because he insists on the Declaration
of these Spiritual Mysteries. And it is not easy to express what contempt and
reproach is cast by some Preachers on the Preaching of them. But it is not
amiss that some have proclaimed their own shame herein, and have left it on
Record to the abhorrency of Posterity.

Esa. 53. 1, 2, 3. Suppose a Man of good Reputation for Wisdom and Sobriety,
should go unto others, and inform them, and that with Earnestness, Evidence of
Love to them, and care for them, with all kind of Motives to beget a belief of
what he proposes, that by such ways as he prescribeth`, they may exceedingly
increase their Substance in this World, until they exceed the wealth of Kings,
a thing that the Minds of Men in their Contrivance and Designs are intent upon;
if in this case they follow not his Advice, it can be for no other reason, but
because they judge the things proposed by him, to be no way suited or expedient
unto the end promised, that is to be foolish things; And this is the state of
things with respect unto the Mysteries of the Gospel. Men are informed in and
by the ways of God's Appointment, how great and glorious they are, and what
blessed consequents there will be of a Spiritual reception of them. The Beauty
and Excellency of Christ, the inestimable Privilege of Divine Adoption, the
great and precious Promises made unto them that do believe; the glory of the
World to come; the necessity and excellency of Holiness and Gospel-Obedience
unto the attaining of Everlasting Blessedness, are Preached unto Men, and
pressed on them with Arguments and Motives filled with Divine Authority and
Wisdom: Yet after all this we see, how few Eventually do apply themselves with
any industry to receive them, or at least actually do receive them; for many
are called but few are chosen. And the Reason is, because indeed unto their
darkened Minds, these things are Foolishness, whatsoever they pretend unto the
contrary.

will never receive the things of the Spirit of God, so the Apostle adds a
reason why he cannot; and that is taken from the manner whereby alone they may
be usefully and savingly received, which they cannot attain unto; Because they
are Spiritually discerned. In this whole Chapter he insists on an Opposition
between a Natural and a Spiritual Man, Natural things and Spiritual things,
Natural light and knowledge and Spiritual. The Natural Man he informs us, will
by a Natural light discern Natural things. The things of a Man knows the
Spirit of a Man. And the Spiritual Man by a Spiritual light received from Jesus
Christ, discerns Spiritual Things. For none knows the things of God, but
the Spirit of God, and he to whom He will reveal them. This Ability the Apostle
denies unto a Natural Man. And this he proves (1) Because it is the Work of the
Spirit of God, to endow the Minds of Men with that ability, which there were no
need of, in case Men had it of themselves by Nature. And (2) (as he shows
plentifully elsewhere) The Light it self, whereby alone Spiritual things can be
Spiritually discerned, is wrought, effected, created in us, by an Almighty Act
of the Power of God, 2. Cor. 4. 6.

a Natural Impotency whence it cannot receive them, for want of Light in it
self; (2) That which affects the Mind by the Will and Affections, a Moral
Impotency, whereby it cannot receive the things of the Spirit of God, because
unalterably it will not; and that because from the unsuitableness of the Object
unto its Will and Affections, and the Mind by them, they are Foolishness unto
it.

(1) There is in unregenerate Men a In nullo gloriandum, quia nihil nostrum
est, Cyprian. lib. 3. ad Quirin.

Fide perdita, spe relicta, intelligentia obcaecata, voluntate captiva, homo
qua in se reparatur non invenit. lib. 1. de. Vocat. Gent. cap. 3.

Hieron. in Prove. cap. 16.


Natural Impotency, through the immediate depravation of the faculties of the
Mind, or understanding, whereby a Natural Man is absolutely unable without an
especial Renovation by the Holy Ghost to discern Spiritual things in a saving
manner. Neither is this Impotency, although absolutely and naturally
insuperable, and although it have in it also the nature of a punishment, any
excuse or Alleviation of the sin of Men when they receive not Spiritual things,
as proposed unto them; for although it be our misery, it is our sin; it is the
misery of our Persons, and the sin of our Natures. As by it there is an
inconformity in our Minds to the Mind of God, it is our sin; as it is a
consequent of the Corruption of our Nature by the fall, it is an Effect of sin;
and as it exposes us unto all the ensuing evil of sin and unbelief, it is both
the punishment and cause of Sin. And no man can plead his sin or fault, as an
excuse of another sin in any kind. This Impotency is Natural; because it
consists in the deprivation of the Light and Power that was Originally in the
faculties of our Minds or Understandings, and because it can never be taken
away or cured but by an immediate communication of a new Spiritual power and
Ability unto the Mind it self by the Holy Ghost in its Renovation, so curing
the Depravation of the Faculty it self. And this is consistent with what was
before declared, the Natural Power of the Mind to receive Spiritual things: For
the Power respects the Natural Capacity of the faculties of our Minds; this
Impotency the Depravation of them with respect unto Spiritual Things.

Moral Impotency, which is reflected on them greatly from the Will and
Affections, whence the Mind never will receive Spiritual things; that is, it
will always and unchangeably reject and refuse them, and that because of
various Lusts, Corruptions and Prejudices invincibly fixed in them, causing
them to look on them as Foolishness. Hence it will come to pass that no Man
shall be judged and perish at the last day merely on the acount of his Natural
Impotency. Every one to whom the Gospel has bin preached, and by whom it is
refused, shall be convinced of positive actings in their Minds, rejecting the
Gospel for the Love of Self, Sin, and the World. Thus our Savior tells the
Jews, that no Man can come unto him unless the Father draw him, Joh. 6. 44.
Such is their Natural Impotency that they cannot, nor is it to be cured but by
an immediate Divine Instruction or Illumination, as it is written, they shall
be all taught of God, v. 45. But this is not all, he tells them elsewhere; you
will not come unto me that you may have Life, Joh. 5. 40. The present thing in
question was not the Power or Impotency of their Minds, but the obstinacy of
their Wills and Affections which Men shall principally be judged upon at the
last day. For this is the Condemnation that light is come into the World, and
Men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. Joh. 3. 19.
Hence it follows;

(3.) That the Will and Affections being more corrupted than the Understanding,
as is evident from their Opposition unto, and defeating of its manifold
Convictions; no Man does actually apply his Mind to the receiving of the things
of the Spirit of God to the utmost of that Ability which he has. For all
unregenerate Men are invincibly impeded therein, by the corrupt stubbornness
and perverseness of their Wills and Affections. There is not in any of them a
due improvement of the capacity of their Natural Faculties, in the use of
means, for the discharge of their Duty toward God herein. And what has been
pleaded, may suffice for the vindication of this Divine Testimony, concerning
the disability of the Mind of Man in the State of Nature, to understand and
receive the Things of the Spirit of God in a spiritual and saving manner,
how-ever they are proposed unto it; which those who are otherwise minded may
despise whilst they please, but are no way able to answer or evade.

Paraphrase and Exposition of this place which One has given of late; But such
things as these, they that are led only by the Light of Humane Reason, the
Learned Philosophers, etc. do absolutely despise, and so hearken not after the
Doctrine of the Gospel, for it seems folly to them. Nor can they by any study
of their own come to the knowledge of them; for they are only to be had by
understanding the Prophesies of the Scripture, and other such Means which
depend on Divine Revelation, the Voice from Heaven, Descent of the Holy Ghost,
Miracles, etc. (1.) The Natural Man is here allowed to be the Rational Man, the
Learned Philosopher, one walking by the Light of Humane Reason, which complies
not with their Exception to this Testimony, who would have only such an one, as
is sensual and given up unto brutish Affections to be intended. But yet
neither is there any ground (though some countenance be given to it by Hierome)
to fix this Interpretation unto that Expression. If the Apostle may be allowed
to declare his own Mind, he tells us, That he intends every one of what sort
and condition soever, who has not received the Spirit of Christ. (2.) (...),
is paraphrased by, does absolutely despise; which neither the Word here, nor
elsewhere, nor its disposal in the present Connection will allow of, or give
countenance unto. The Apostle in the whole Discourse gives an account why so
few received the Gospel, especially of those who seemed most likely so to do,
being Wise and Learned Men; and the Gospel being no less than the Wisdom of
God. And the Reason hereof he gives from their disability to receive the things
of God, and their hatred of them, or opposition to them, neither of which can
be cured but by the Spirit of Christ. (3.) The Apostle treats not of what Men
could find out by any study of their own, but of what they did, and would do,
and could do no otherwise, when the Gospel was proposed, declared, and preached
unto them. They did not, they could not receive, give assent unto, or believe
the Spiritual Mysteries therein revealed. (4.) This Preaching of the Gospel
unto them, was accompanied with, and managed with those Evidences mentioned;
namely, the Testimonies of the Prophesies of Scripture, Miracles, and the like,
in the same way and manner, and unto the same degree as it was toward them by
whom it was received and believed. In the outward means of Revelation and its
Proposition, there was no difference. (5.) The proper meaning of (...)
receives not, is given us in the ensuing Reason and Explanation of it; (...),
he cannot know them; that is, unless he be spiritually enabled thereunto by the
Holy Ghost. And this is farther confirmed in the Reason subjoyned, because they
are spiritually discerned. And to wrest this unto the outward means of
Revelation, which is directly designed to express the internal manner of the
Mind's reception of things revealed, is to wrest the Scripture at pleasure. How
much better does the Description given by Chrysostom of a Natural and Spiritual
Man, give Light unto and determine the sense of this place. (...). A Natural
Man is He who lives in or by the Flesh, and has not his Mind as yet enlightened
by the Spirit; but only has that inbred Humane Understanding which the Creator
has endued the Minds of all Men withal. And (...). The Spiritual Man is he who
lives by the Spirit, having his Mind enlightened by him; having not only an
inbred Humane Understanding, but rather a Spiritual Understanding b^stowed on
him graciously; which the Holy Ghost endues the Minds of Believers withal. But
we proceed.

Spiritual Things spiritually, that is in the Minds of Natural Men by reason of
their Spiritual Blindness, or that Darkness which is in them; It remains that
we consider what is the Power and Efficacy of this Darkness to keep them in a
constant and unconquerable Aversation from God and the Gospel. To this purpose
some Testimonies of Scripture must be also considered. For notwithstanding all
other Notions and Disputes in this matter, for the most part complyant with the
Inclinations and Affections of corrupted Nature, by them must our Judgments be
determined, and into them is our Faith to be resolved. I say then, that this
Spiritual Darkness has a Power over the Minds of Men to alienate them from
God; that is, this which the Scripture so calls, is not a mere Privation,
with an Impotency in the Faculty ensuing thereon; but a depraved Habit, which
powerfully, and as unto them in whom it is, unavoidably influenceth their Wills
and Affections into an opposition unto Spiritual Things; the Effects whereof
the World is visibly filled withal at this Day. And this I shall manifest first
in General, and then in Particular Instances. And by the whole it will be made
to appear, that not only the Act of believing and turning unto God, is the sole
Work and Effect of Grace, which the Pelagians did not openly deny, and the
Semi-pelagians did openly grant; but also that all Power and Ability for it,
properly so called, is from Grace also.

Col. 1. 13. We are said to be delivered, (...); from the Power of Darkness.
The word signifies such a Power as consists in Authority or Rule, that bears
sway, and commands them who are obnoxious unto it. Hence the Sins of Men,
especially those of a greater Guilt than ordinary, are called Works of
Darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. not only such as are usually perpetrated in the dark,
but such as the darkness also of Men's Minds does incline them unto and
naturally produce. That also which is here called the Power of Darkness, is
called the Power of Satan, Acts 26. 18. For I acknowledge that it is not only or
merely the internal Darkness, or blindness of the Minds of Men in the State of
Nature that is here intended, but the whole State of Darkness, with what is
contributed thereunto by Satan and the World. This the Prophet speaks of, Isa.
60. 2. Behold, Darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross Darkness the People,
but the Lord shall arise upon thee. Such a Darkness it is as nothing can
dispel, but the Light of the Lord arising on and in the Souls of Men; But all
is resolved into internal Darkness. For Satan has no Power in Men, nor
Authority over them, but what he has by means of this Darkness. For by this
alone does that Prince of the Power of the Air work effectually in the Children
of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. Hereby does he seduce, pervert, and corrupt them;
nor has he any way to fortify and confirm their Minds against the Gospel, but
by increasing this blindness or darkness in them, 2 Cor. 4. 4.

Peter tells us, That the Angels who sinned are kept unto Judgment under Chains
of Darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 4. It is plain that there is an allusion in the words
unto the dealings of Men with stubborn and heinous Malefactors. They do not
presently execute them upon their Offenses, nor when they are first
apprehended. They must be kept unto a solemn day of Trial and Judgment. But yet
to secure them that they make no escape, they are bound with Chains which they
cannot deliver themselves from. Thus God deals with fallen Angels. For although
yet they go to and fro in the Earth, and walk up and down in it, as also in the
Air, in a seeming Liberty and at their pleasure, yet are they under such Chains
as shall securely hold them unto the great Day of their Judgment and Execution.
That they may not escape their appointed Doom, they are held in Chains of
Darkness. They are always so absolutely and universally under the Power of
God, as that they are not capable of the Vanity of a Thought for the subducting
themselves from under it. But whence is it that in all their Wisdom,
Experience, and long-continued Prospect which they have had of their future
eternal Misery, none of them ever have attempted, or ever will, a mitigation of
their Punishment or Deliverance from it, by Repentance and Compliance with the
Wild of God? This is alone from their own Darkness, in the Chains whereof they
are so bound; that although they believe their own everlasting ruin, and
tremble at the Vengeance of God therein, yet they cannot but continue in their
course of Mischief, Disobedience and Rebellion. And although Natural Men are
not under the same obdurateness with them, as having a way of Escape and
Deliverance provided for them, and proposed unto them which they have not; yet
this Darkness is no less effectual to bind them in a State of Sin, without the
powerful Illumination of the Holy Ghost, than it is in the Devils themselves.
And this may be farther manifested by the Consideration of the Instances
wherein it puts forth its Efficacy in them.

enmity against God, and all the Things of God; Col. 1. 21. You were Enemies in
your Minds; Romans 8. 7. The Carnal Minds is enmity against God, it is not
subject unto the Law of God, neither indeed can it be. And the Carnal Mind
there intended, is that which is in every Man who has not received, who is not
made Partaker of the Spirit of God, in a peculiar saving manner, as is at large
declared in the whole Discourse of the Apostle, v. 5. 6, 9, 10, 11. So that the
Pretense is vain and directly contradictory to the Apostle, that it is only one
sort of fleshly sensual unregenerate Men whom he intends. This confidence, not
only in perverting, but openly opposing of the Scripture, is but of a late
date, and that which few of the Ancient Enemies of the Grace of God did rise up
unto. Now God in himself is infinitely Good and Desirable. How great is his
Goodness! How great is his Beauty! Zech. 9. 17. There is nothing in him but
what is suited to draw out, to answer and fill the Affections of the Soul. Unto
them that know him, he is the only Delight, Rest, and Satisfaction. Whence then
does it come to pass that the Minds of Men should be filled and possessed with
enmity against him? Enmity against, and hatred of Him who is absolute and
infinite Goodness, seem incompatible unto our Humane Affections. But they arise
from this Darkness, which is the Corruption and Depravation of our Nature; by
the Ways that shall be declared.

objectively proposed, if not useless, yet not indispensibly necessary, so I
desire to know how this enmity against God, which the Minds of all Natural Men
are filled withal, if we may believe the Apostle, comes to be removed and taken
away, so as that they should love him above all, seeing these things are
absolute extremes and utterly irreconcilable? This must be either by the Power
of the Mind it self upon the proposal of God's Goodness unto it, or by the
effectual Operation in it and upon it of the Spirit of God. Any other way is
not pretended unto; and the latter is that which we contend for. And as to the
former, the Apostle supposes the Goodness of God, and the proposal of this
Goodness of God unto the Minds of Men; not only as revealed in the Works of
Nature, but also in the Law and Gospel, and yet affirms that the Carnal Mind
which is in every Man, is enmity against him. And in Enmity there is neither
Disposition nor Inclination to Love. In such Persons there can be no more true
Love of God, than is consistent with enmity to him and against him

Goodness, without any farther Communications of Christ or the Holy Spirit unto
them, are vain and empty, seeing there never was nor ever will be any one dram
of such Love unto God in the World. For whatever Men may fancy concerning the
Love of God* where this Enmity arising from Darkness is unremoved by the spirit
of Grace and Love, it is but a self pleasing with those false Nations of God
which this Darkness suggests unto them. With these they either please
themselves or are terrified, as they represent Things to their Corrupt Reason
and Phancies. Men in this State destitute of Divine Revelation, did of old seek
aster God, Acts 17. 27. as Men groping in the Dark. And although they did in
some measure find him and know him, so far as that from the Things that were
made they came to be acquainted with his eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1.
20, 21. yet he was still absolutely unto them the unknown God, Acts 17. 23.
whom they ignorantly worshipped; that is, they directed some Worship to him in
the Dedication of their Altars, but knew him not; (...). And that they
entertained all of them false Notions of God, is from hence evident that none
of them, either by virtue of their knowledge of him did free themselves from
gross Idolatry, which is the greatest Enmity unto him; or did not countenance
themselves in many Impie^ies or Sins, from those Notions they had received of
God and his Goodness, Romans 1. 20, 21. The issue of their Disquisitions after
the Nature of God was, that they glorified him not, but became vain in their
Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts were darkened. Upon the common Principles
of the first Being and the chiefest Good, their Fancy or Imaginations raised
such Notions of God, as pleased and delighted them, and drew out their
Affections; which was not indeed unto God and his Goodness, but unto the Effect
and Product of their own Imaginations. And hence it was that those that had the
most raised Apprehensions concerning the Nature, Being, Goodness of God, with
the highest Expressions of a constant Admiration of him and Love unto him, when
by any means the true God indeed was declared unto them as he has revealed
himself, and as he will be known, these great admirers and lovers of Divine
Goodness were constantly the greatest Opposers of him, and Enemies unto him.
And an uncontrollable Evidence this is, That the Love of Divine Goodness, which
some do fancy, in Persons destitute of Supernatural Revelation and other Aids
of Grace, was in the best of them placed on the Products of their own
Imaginations, and not on God himself.

Enmity in the Minds of them who have the Word preached unto them. Even in
these until effectually prevailed on by victorious Grace, either closly or
openly it exerts it self. And how-ever they may be doctrinally instructed in
true Notions concerning God and his Attributes, yet in the Application of them
unto themselves, or in the consideration of their own concernment in them, they
always err in their hearts. All the Practical Notions they have of God, tend to
alienate their Hearts from him; and that either by contempt, or by an undue
dread and terror. For some apprehend him slow and regardless of what they do,
at least one that is not so severely displeased with them, as that it should be
necessary for them to seek a change of their State and Condition. They think
that God is such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50. 21. at least that he does
approve them and will accept them, although they should continue in their sins.
Now this is a Fruit of the highest Enmity against God, though palliated with
the pretense of the most raised Notions and Apprehensions of his Goodness. For
as it is an heinous Crime to imagine an outward shape of the Divine Nature, and
that God is like to Men or Beasts, the height of the Sin of the most gross
Idolaters, Romans 1. 23. Psalm. 106. 20. so it is a Sin of an higher Provocation,
to conceive him so for like unto bestial Men, as to approve and accept of them
in their Sins. Yet this false Notion of God, even when his Nature and Will are
objectively revealed in the Word, this Darkness does and will maintain in the
Minds of Men, whereby they are made obstinate in their sin to the uttermost.
And where this fails, it will on the other hand represent God all Fire and
Fury, inexorable and intractable. See Micah 6. 6. Isa. 33. 14. Genesis 4. 13.

subject unto his Law, neither can so be. So the Apostle informs us that Men
are alienated from the Life of God, or dislike the whole way and work of living
unto him, by reason of the ignorance and blindness that is in them, Ephesians. 4.
18. and it esteems the whole Rule and Measure of it to be foolishness, 1 Cor.
1. 18, 20. But I must not too long insist on Particulars, although in these
days wherein some are so apt to boast in proud swelling words of Vanity,
concerning the Power and Sufficiency of the Mind, even with respect unto
Religion and Spiritual Things, it cannot be unseasonable to declare what is the
Judgment of the Holy Ghost, plainly expressed in the Scriptures in this Matter;
and one Testimony thereof will be of more weight with the Disciples of Jesus
Christ, than a thousand Declamations to the contrary.

Wills or perverse Lusts that are directly contrary to the Will of God, Ephesians.
2. 3. There are (...), the Wills or Lusts of the Mind; that is, the habitual
Inclinations of the Mind unto sensual Objects. It minds earthly things, Phil.
3. 19. And hence the Mind it self is said to be fleshly, Col. 2. 18. As unto
Spiritual Things, it is born of the Flesh, and is Flesh. It likes, savours,
approves of nothing but what is carnal, sensual, and vain. Nothing is suited
unto it, but what is either curious, or needless, or superstitious, or sensual
and earthly. And therefore are Men said to walk in the Vanity of their Minds.
In the whole course of their lives they are influenced by a predominant
Principle of Vanity. And in this state the Thoughts and Imaginations of the
Mind are always set on work to provide sensual Objects for this vain and
fleshly frame; Hence are they said to be evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. This is
the course of a darkened Mind. Its vain frame or inclination, the fleshly Will
of it stirs up vain Thoughts and Imaginations; it minds the things of the
flesh, Romans 8. 5. These thoughts fix on, and represent unto the Mind Objects
suited unto the satisfaction of its Vanity and Lust. With these the Mind
commits folly and lewdness, and the fleshly habit thereof is thereby
heightened and confirmed; and this multiplies Imaginations of its own kind,
whereby Men inflame themselves, Isa. 57. 5. waxing worse and worse. And the
particular bent of these Imaginations, does answer the Predominancy of any
especial Lust in the heart or mind.

profligate in sin, yet proceeding from their Wills and corrupt sensual
Affections, they argue not an Impotency in the Mind to discern and receive
Spiritual Things; but notwithstanding these Enormities of some, the Faculty of
the Mind is still endued with a Power of discerning, judging and believing
Spiritual Things in a due manner.

Answ. 1. We do not discourse concerning the weakness and disability of the
Mind in and about these things, which is as it were a natural Impotency like
blindness in the Eyes, which has been both explained and confirmed before. But
it is a Moral Disability, and that as unto all the Powers of Nature invincible,
as unto the right receiving of Spiritual Things, which ensues on that corrupt
Depravation of the Mind in the state of Nature that the Scripture calls
darkness or blindness, which we intend.

(2.) Our present Testimonies have sufficiently confirmed, that all the
Instances mentioned, do proceed from the Depravation of the Mind. And whereas
this is common unto, and equal in all unregenerate Men, if it produce not in
all Effects to the same degree of Enormity, it is from some Beams of Light, and
secret Convictions from the Holy Spirit, as we shall afterward declare.

(3.) Our only aim is to prove the indispensible necessity of a saving Work of
Illumination on the Mind, to enable it to receive Spiritual Things spiritually,
which appears sufficiently from the Efficacy of this Darkness, whence a Man
has no ability to disintangle or save himself. For also;

Prejudices against Spiritual Things, as proposed unto them in the Gospel. And
from these Prejudices it has neither Light nor Power to extricate it self. No
small part of its Depravation consists in its readiness to embrace them, and
pertinacious adherence unto them. Some few of these Prejudices may be instanced.

(1.) The Mind from the Darkness that is in it, apprehends that Spiritual
Things, the Things of the Gospel as they are proposed, have an utter
inconsistency with true Contentment and Satisfaction. These are the Things
which all Men by various ways do seek after. This is the Scent and Chase which
they so eagerly pursue in different Tracts, and Paths innumerable. Something
they would attain or arrive unto, which should satisfy their Minds and fill
their Desires. And this commonly before they have had any great Consideration
of the Proposals of the Gospel, they suppose themselves in the way at least
unto, by those little Tastes of Satisfaction unto their Lusts, which they have
obtained in the ways of the World. And these hopeful Beginnings they will not
forgo. Isa. 57. 10. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet said
thou not, There is no hope; Thou have found the Life of thine Hand, therefore
thou wast not grieved. They are ready oft-times to faint in the pursuit of
their Lusts, because of the Disappointments which they find in them, or the
Evils that attend them. For which way soever they turn themselves in their
Course, they cannot but see or shrewdly suspect that the end of them is, or
will be Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. But yet they give not over the pursuit
wherein they are engaged; they say not, There is no hope. And the Reason hereof
is, because they find the Life of their Hand. Something or other comes in
daily, either from the Work that they do, or the Company they keep, or the
Expectation they have, which preserves their Hope alive, and makes them
unwilling to forgo their present Condition. They find it to be none of the
best, but do not think there can be a better. And therefore their only design
is to improve or to thrive in it. If they might obtain more Mirth, more Wealth,
more Strength and Health, more Assurance of their Lives, more Power, more
Honor, more suitable Objects unto their sensual Desires, then they suppose it
would be better than it is; but as for any thing which differs from these in
the whole kind, they can entertain no respect for it. In this State and
Condition, Spiritual Things, the spiritual mysterious things of the Gospel are
proposed unto them. At first view they judge that these Things will not assist
them in the pursuit or improvement of their Carnal Satisfactions. And so far
they are in the Right, they judge not amiss. The things of the Gospel will give
neither Countenance nor Help to the Lusts of Men. Nay, it is no hard matter for
them to come to a discovery, that the Gospel being admitted in the Power of it,
will crucify and mortify those corrupt Affections, which hitherto they have
been given up to the pursuit of. For this it plainly declares, Col. 3. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

Objects of their Lusts or Desires, and then those Lusts and Desires
themselves. The former may be considered in their own Nature, so they are
indifferent, or as they are capable of being abused to corrupt and sinful ends.
In the first way, as the Gospel condemns them not, so it adds nothing to them
unto those by whom it is received. It gives not Men more Riches, Wealth, or
Honor, than they had before in the World. It promises no such thing unto them
that do receive it, but rather the contrary. The latter consideration of them,
it condemns and takes away. And for the desires of Men themselves, the avowed
Work of the Gospel is to mortify them. And hereby the naturally corrupt
Relation which is between these Desires and their Objects, is broken and
dissolved. The Gospel leaves Men unless upon extraordinary occasions, their
Names, their Reputations, their Wealth, their Honors, if lawfully obtained and
possessed. But the League that is between the Mind and these things in all
Natural Men must be broken. They must no more be looked on as the Chiefest
Good, or in the place thereof, nor as the Matter of Satisfaction, but must give
place to spiritual, unseen, eternal Things. This secretly alienates the Carnal
Mind, and a Prejudice is raised against it, as that which would deprive the
Soul of all its present Satisfaction, and offers nothing in the room of them
that is suitable to any of its Desires or Affections. For by reason of the
Darkness that it is under the Power of, it can neither discern the Excellency
of the Spiritual and Heavenly Things which are proposed unto it, nor have any
Affections whereunto they are proper and suited, so that the Soul should go
forth after them. Hereby this Prejudice becomes invincible in their Souls. They
neither do, nor can, nor will admit of those things which are utterly
inconsistent with all things wherein they hope or look for Satisfaction. And
Men do but please themselves with Dreams and Fancies, who talk of such a
reasonableness and excellency in Gospel Truths, as that the Mind of a Natural
Man will discern such a suitableness in them unto it self, so as thereon to
receive and embrace them. Nor do any for the most part give a greater Evidence
of the Prevalency of the Darkness and Enmity that is in Carnal Minds against
the Spiritual Things of the Gospel, as to their Life and Power, than those who
most pride and please themselves in such Discourses.

Prejudices against the Mystery of the Gospel in a peculiar manner. The hidden
Spiritual Wisdom of God in it as Natural Men cannot receive, so they do despise
it; and all the parts of its Declaration they look upon as empty and
unintelligible Notions. And this is that Prejudice whereby this Darkness
prevails in the Minds of Men otherwise knowing and learned; it has done so in
all Ages, and in none more effectually than in that which is present. But there
is a Sacred, Mysterious Spiritual Wisdom in the Gospel and the Doctrine of it.
This is Fanatical, Chimerical, and Foolish to the wisest in the World whilst
they are under the Power of this Darkness. To demonstrate the Truth hereof, is
the Design of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 1, and 2. For he directly affirms that
the Doctrine of the Gospel is the Wisdom of God in a Mystery; that this Wisdom
cannot be discerned nor understood by the Wise and Learned Men of the World who
have not received the Spirit of Christ; and therefore that the things of it are
weakness and foolishness unto them. And that which is foolish is to be
despised; yea, Folly is the only object of Contempt. And hence we see that some
with the greatest Pride, Scorn and Contempt imaginable, do despise the Purity,
Simplicity, and whole Mystery of the Gospel, who yet profess they believe it.
But to clear the whole Nature of this Prejudice, some few Things may be
distinctly observed.

absolutely its own, that are proper and peculiar unto it; Such as have no
footsteps in the Law or in the Light of Nature, but are of a pure Revelation
peculiar to the Gospel. Of this Nature are all Things concerning the Love and
Will of God in Christ Jesus. The Mystery of his Incarnation, of his Offices and
whole Mediation, of the Dispensation on the Spirit, and our Participation
thereof, and our Union with Christ thereby; our Adoption, Justification and
Effectual Sanctification thence proceeding: in brief, every thing that belongs
unto the Purchase and Application of Saving-Grace is of this sort. These things
are purely and properly Evangelical, peculiar to the Gospel alone. Hence the
Apostle Paul, unto whom the Dispensation of it was committed, puts that
eminency upon them, that in comparison he resolved to insist on nothing else in
his Preaching, 1 Cor. 2. 2. And to that purpose does he describe his Ministry,
Ephesians. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Law and Light of Nature. Such are all the Moral Duties which are taught
therein. And two things may be observed concerning them; (1.) That they are in
some measure known unto Men aliunde from other Principles. The inbred
concreated Light of Nature does, though obscurely, teach and confirm them. So
the Apostle speaking of Mankind in general, says, (...), Romans 1. 19. That
which may be known of God, is manifested in themselves. The Essential
Properties of God rendering our Moral Duty to him necessary, are known by the
Light of Nature. And by the same Light are Men able to make a judgment of their
Actions, whether they be Good or Evil, Romans 2. 14, 15. And this is all the
Light which some boast of, as they will one day find to their disappointment.
(2.) There is on all Men an obligation unto Obedience answerable to their Light
concerning these things. The same Law and Light which discovers these things,
does also enjoin their Observance. Thus is it with all Men antecedently unto
the Preaching of the Gospel unto them.

In this Estate of Gospel superadds two things unto the Minds of Men. (1.) It
directs us unto a right performance of these things; from a right Principle, by
a right Rule, and to a right End and Purpose, so that they and we in them may
obtain acceptance with God. Hereby it gives them a new Nature, and turns Moral
Duties into Evangelical Obedience. (2.) By a communication of that Spirit which
is annexed unto its Dispensation, it supplies us with strength for their
Performance, in the manner it prescribes.

properly and peculiarly its own. So the Apostle sets down the constant
Entrance of his Preaching, 1 Cor. 15. 3. It reveals its own Mysteries to lay
them as the Foundation of Faith and Obedience. It inlayes them in the Mind, and
thereby conforms the whole Soul unto them; See Romans 6. 17. Gal. 4. 19. Tit. 2.
11, 12. 1 Cor. 3. 11. 2 Cor. 3. 18. This Foundation being laid, without which
it has as it were nothing to do with the Souls of Men, nor will proceed unto
any other thing, with them by whom this its first Work is refused, it then
grafts all Duties of Moral Obedience on this stock of Faith in Christ Jesus.
This is the Method of the Gospel, which the Apostle Paul observes in all his
Epistles. First, He declares the Mysteries of Faith that are peculiar to the
Gospel, and then descends unto those Moral Duties which are regulated thereby.

But the Prejudice we mentioned inverts the Order of these things. Those who
are under the Power of it, when on various accounts they give admittance unto
the Gospel in general, yet they fix their Minds firstly and principally on the
things which have their Foundation in the Law and Light of Nature. These they
know and have some acquaintance with in themselves, and therefore cry them up,
although not in their proper place, nor to their proper end. These they make
the foundation according to the place which they held in the Law of Nature and
Covenant of Works, whereas the Gospel allows them to be only necessary
Superstructions on the Foundation. But resolving to give unto Moral Duties the
Pre-eminence in their Minds, they consider afterward the peculiar Doctrines of
the Gospel with one or other of these Effects: For (1.) some in a manner wholly
despise them, reproaching those by whom they are singularly professed. What is
contained in them, is of no importance in their Judgment, compared with the
more necessary Duties of Morality which they pretend to embrace; and to acquit
themselves of the trouble of a search into them, reject them as unintelligible
or unnecessary. Or (2.) they will by forced Interpretations, enervating the
Spirit, and perverting the Mystery of them, square and fit them to their own
low and Carnal Apprehensions. They would reduce the Gospel and all the
Mysteries of it, to their own Light as some, to Reason as others, to Philosophy
as the rest; And let them who comply not with their weak and carnal Notions of
things, expect all the contemptuous Reproaches which the proud pretenders unto
Science and Wisdom of old, cast upon the Apostles and first Preachers of the
Gospel. Hereby advancing Morality above the Mystery and Grace of the Gospel,
they at once reject the Gospel, and destroy Morality also; for taking it off
from its proper Foundation, it falls into the Dirt, whereof the Conversation of
the Men of this Persuasion is no small Evidence.

Spiritual Things of the Gospel are by many despised and contemned. So God
spoke of Ephraim, Hos. 8. 12. I have written to him the great things of the
Law, but they were counted as a strange thing. The things intended were, (...),
the great, manifold, various things of the Law. That which the Law was then
unto that People, that is the Gospel now unto us. The Torah was the entire
Means of God's communicating his Mind and Will unto them, as his whole Counsel
is revealed unto us by the Gospel. These things he wrote unto them, or made
them in themselves and their Revelation plain and perspicuous. But when all was
done they were esteemed by them (...), as is also the Gospel, a thing foreign
and alien unto the Minds of Men, which they intend not to concern themselves
in. They will heed the things that are cognate unto the Principles of their
Nature, things morally Good or Evil; but for the hidden Wisdom of God in the
Mystery of the Gospel, it is esteemed by them as a strange thing. And
innumerable other Prejudices of the same Nature does this Darkness fill the
Minds of Men withal, whereby they are powerfully, and as unto any Light or
Strength of their own, invincibly kept off from receiving of Spiritual Things
in a spiritual manner.

You were Darkness, but are Light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. It is therefore the
Mind or Understanding, which is affected with this Darkness, which is vitiated
and depraved by it.

Now the Mind may be considered two ways; (1.) As it is Theoretical or
Contemplative, discerning and judging of things proposed unto it. So it is its
office to find out, consider, discern and apprehend the truth of Things. In the
Case before us, it is the duty of the Mind to apprehend, understand and receive
the Truths of the Gospel as they are proposed unto it, in the manner of, and
unto the end of their proposal. This, as we have manifested, by reason of its
Depravation it neither does nor is able to do, John 1. 5. 2 Cor. 2. 14. (2.) It
may be considered as it is practical, as to the Power it has to direct the
whole Soul, and determine the Will unto actual Operation according to its
Light. I shall not enquire at present whether the Will as to the specification
of its Acts, do necessarily follow the determination of the Mind or practical
Understanding. I am at no more, but that it is the directive Faculty of the
Soul as unto all Moral and Spiritual Operations. Hence it follows;

Mind, and as it is presented. That Good whatever it be which the Mind cannot
discover, the Will cannot choose, nor the Affections cleave unto. All their
actings about and concerning them, are not such as answer their Duty. This our
Savior directs us to the consideration of, Mat. 6. 22, 23. The Light of the
Body is the Eye; if therefore thine Eye be single, the whole Body shall be full
of Light. But if thine Eye be evil, the whole Body shall be full of Darkness;
if therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Darkness?
As the Eye is naturally the Light of the Body, or the means thereof, so is the
Mind unto the Soul. And if Darkness be in the Eye, not only the Eye but the
whole Body is in Darkness, because in the Eye alone is the Light of the whole;
so if the Mind be under Darkness, the whole Soul is so also, because it has no
Light but by the Mind. And hence both is Illumination sometimes taken for the
whole Work of Conversion unto God, and the Spiritual Actings of the Mind by the
Renovation of the Holy Ghost, are constantly proposed, as those which precede
any gracious Actings in the Will, Heart and Life; as we shall show afterward.

(2.) As the Soul can no way by any other of its Faculties receive, embrace or
adhere unto that Good in a saving manner, which the Mind does not savingly
apprehend; so where the Mind is practically deceived, or any way captivated
under the Power of Prejudices, the Will and the Affections, can no way free
themselves from entertaining that evil which the Mind has perversely assented
unto. Thus where the Mind is reprobate or void of a sound Judgment; so as to
call God Evil, and Evil Good; the Heart, Affections, and Conversation will be
conformable thereunto, Romans 1. 28, 29. And in the Scripture, the deceit of the
Mind is commonly laid down as the Principle of all Sin whatever, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
Heb. 3. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 11. 3.

Mind in the state of Nature is so depraved, vitiated and corrupted, that it is
not able upon the proposal of Spiritual Things unto it in the Dispensation and
Preaching of the Gospel, to understand, receive and embrace them in a spiritual
and saving manner, so as to have the sactifying Power of them thereby brought
into and fixed in the Soul, without an internal, especial, immediate,
supernatural, effectual enlightening Act of the Holy Ghost; which what it is,
and wherein it does consist, shall be declared.

Life and Death, Natural and Spiritual, Compared. CHAP. IV.
(1.) Of Death in Sin. All Unregenerate Men Spiritually Dead. (2.) Spiritual
Death twofold. Moral. (3.) Metaphorical. (4.) Life Natural, what it is, and
wherein it consists. (5.) Death Natural, with its necessary Consequents. (6, 7,
8.) The Supernatural Life of Adam in Innocence, in its Principle, Acts, and
Power. (9, 10.) Differences between it and our Spiritual Life in Christ. (11,
12.) Death Spiritual a Privation of the Life we had in Adam; a Negation of the
Life of Christ. (13.) Privation of a Principle of all Life to God. Spiritual
Impotency therein. (14.) Differences between Death Natural and Spiritual. (15,
16, 17.) The Use of Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings. (18, 19, 20, 21.) No
Man perishes merely for want of Power. (22, 23, 24.) No Vital Acts in an
estate of Death; the Way of the Communication of Spiritual Life. (25, 26, 27,
28.) Of what Nature are the best Works of Persons Unregenerate. (29.) No
Disposition unto Spiritual Life under the Power of Spiritual Death.

Unregenerate Men as to their State and Condition is, That they are Spiritually
Dead. And hence in like manner it follows, that there is a necessity of an
internal, powerful, effectual Work of the Holy Ghost on the Souls of Men, to
deliver them out of this State and Condition by Regeneration. And this
principally respects their Wills and Affections, as the Darkness and Blindness
before described does their Minds and Understandings. There is a Spiritual Life
whereby Men live unto God; This they being Strangers unto, and Alienate from,
are spiritually dead. And this the Scripture declares concerning all
Unregenerate Persons, partly in direct words, and partly in other Assertions of
the same importance. Of the first sort the Testimonies are many and express;
Ephesians. 2. 1. You were dead in Trespasses and Sins; v. 5. When you were dead in
sins; Col. 2. 13. And you being dead in your sins, and the uncircumcision of
your flesh; 2 Cor. 5. 14. If one died for all, then were all dead; Romans 5. 15.
Through the offense of one many are dead; v. 12. Death passed on all Men, for
that all have sinned. And the same is asserted in the second Way, where the
Recovery and Restoration of Men by the Grace of Christ is called their
Quickening, or the bestowing of a New Life upon them, For this supposes that
they were dead or destitute of that Life which in this Revivification is
communicated unto them. For that alone can be said to be quickened, which was
dead before. See Ephesians. 2. 5. Joh. 5. 21. Joh. 6. 63.

Death that Unregenerate Persons are under is twofold; (1.) Legal with
reference unto the sentence of the Law. The Sanction of the Law was, that upon
Sin Man should dye. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death,
Genesis 2. 17. Upon this sentence Adam and all his Posterity became dead in Law,
morally dead, or obnoxious unto death penally, and adjudged unto it. This Death
is intended in some of the Places before mentioned; as Romans 5. 12. and it may
be also 2 Cor. 5. 14. For as Christ dyed, so were all dead. He dyed penally
under the sentence of the Law, and all were obnoxious unto death or dead on
that Account. But this is not the Death which I intend, neither are we
delivered from it by Regeneration but by Justification, Romans 8. 1.

Spiritual Death called so Metaphorically from the Analogy and Proportion that
it bears unto death Natural. Of great Importance it is to know the true nature
hereof, and how by Reason thereof Unregenerate Men are utterly disabled from
doing any thing that is spiritually Good, until they are quickened by the
Almighty Power and irresistible Efficacy of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore to
declare this aright we must consider the nature of Life and Death natural, in
Allusion whereunto the Spiritual estate of Unregenerate Men is thus described.

Life in general, or the Life of a Living Creature is, Actus Vivificantis in
Vivificatum per unionem utriusque, The Act of a quickening Principle on a
Subject to be quickened, by Virtue of their Union. And three things are to be
considered in it.

(1) The Principle of Life it self. And this in man is the Rational living
Soul; called (...), Genesis 2. 7. God breathed into his nostrils the breath of
Life, and Man became a living Soul. Having formed the Body of man of the Dust
of the Earth, he designed him a Principle of Life Superior unto that of bruit
Creatures, which is but the Exurgency and Spirit of their Temperature and
Composition, though peculiarly educed by the formative Virtue and Power of the
Holy Ghost, as has been before declared. He creates for him therefore a
separate, distinct, animating soul, and infuseth it into the matter prepared
for its Reception. And as he did thus in the Beginning of the Creation of the
Species or Kind of humane Race in its first Individuals, so he continues to do
the same in the ordinary course of the Works of his Providence for the
continuation of it. For having ordained the Preparation of the Body by
Generation, he immediately infuseth into it the Living Soul, the Breath of Life.

(2) There is the Actus primus, or the quickening act of this Principle on the
Principle quickened in and by Virtue of Union. Hereby the whole man becomes
(...) a Living Soul; (...), a person quickened by a Vital Principle, and enabled
for all naturally Vital Actions.

(3.) There are the Acts of this Life it self. And they are of two sorts. (1)
Such as flow from Life, as Life: (2) Such as proceed from it, as such a Life,
from the Principle of a Rational Soul. Those of the first sort are natural and
necessary; as are all the Actings, and Energies of the Senses, of the
locomotive Faculty, as also what belongs unto the receiving and improving of
Nutriment. These are Acts of Life; whence the Psalmist proves Idols to be dead
things, from the want of them; so far are they from having a Divine Life, as
that they have no Life at all; Psalm. 115. 4, 5, 6, 7. These are Acts of Life as
Life, inseparable from it, and their End is to preserve the Union of the whole,
between the quickening and quickened Principles. (2) There are such Acts of Life
as proceed from the especial nature of this quickening Principle. Such are all
the elicit, and imperate Acts of our Understandings and Wills; all Actions that
are voluntary, rational and peculiarly humane. These proceed from that special
kind of Life, which is given by the especial quickening Principle of a rational
Soul.

Death natural does consist. And three things may be considered in it. (1) The
Separation of the Soul from the Body. Hereby the Act of infusing the living
Soul, cease unto all its Ends. For as a Principle of Life unto the whole, it
operates only by Virtue of its Union with the subject to be quickened by it. (2)
A Cessation of all Vital Actings in the quickened Subject. For that Union from
whence they should proceed is dissolved. (3) As a Consequent of these, there is
in the Body an Impotency for, and an Ineptitude unto all Vital Operations. Not
only do all Operations of Life actually cease, but the Body is no more able to
effect them. There remains in it indeed, Potentia obedientialis, a passive
power to receive Life again, if communicated unto it by an external efficient
Cause. So the body of Lazarus being dead, had a receptive Power of a living
Soul. But an active Power to dispose it self unto Life or Vital Actions, it
has not.

Analogy collect wherein Life and Death Spiritual do consist. And to that End
some things must be previously observed. As 1: That Adam in the state of
Innocence, besides his Natural life whereby he was a Living Soul, had likewise
a Supernatural Life with respect unto its end whereby he lived unto God. This
is called the Life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18.; which Men now in the state of nature
are alienated from; The Life which God requires, and which has God for its
Object and End. And this Life was in him Supernatural; for although it was
concreated in, and with the rational Soul, as a perfection due unto it, in the
state wherein, and with respect unto the End for which it was made; yet it did
not naturally flow from the Principles of the rational Soul; nor were the
Principles, Faculties or Abilities of it inseparable from those of the Soul it
self, being only accidental Perfections of them, inlaid in them by especial
Grace. This Life was necessary unto him, with respect unto the state wherein,
and the End for which he was made. He was made to live unto the living God, and
that in a peculiar manner; to live unto his glory in this World, by the
discharge of the rational and moral Obedience required of him, and to live
afterward in his Glory, and the eternal Enjoyment of him, as his Chiefest Good
and Highest Reward. That whereby he was enabled hereunto, was that Life of God,
which we are alienated from in the state of Nature. 2. In this Life, as in Life
in General three things are to be considered; (1) Its Principle; (2) Its
Operation; (3) Its Virtue; or Habit, Act, and Power.

Quickening Principle belonging unto it. For every Life is an Act of a Quickening
Principle. This in Adam was the Image of God; or an habitual Conformity unto
God his Mind and Will; wherein the Holiness and Righteousness of God himself
was represented, Genesis 1. 26, 27. In this Image he was created, or it was
concreated with him, as a Perfection due to his Nature, in the Condition
wherein he was made. This gave him an habitual disposition unto all duties of
that Obedience that was required of him. It was the Rectitude of all the
faculties of his Soul with respect unto his Supernatural End, Eccles. 7. 20.

(2) There belonged unto it continual Actings, from, or by Virtue of, and
suitable unto this Principle. All the Acts of Adam's Life should have been
subordinate unto his great moral End. In all that he did, he should have lived
unto God, according unto the Law of that Covenant wherein he walked before him.
And an Acting in all things, suitable unto the Light in his Mind, unto the
Righteousness and Holiness in his Will and Affection, that Uprightness or
Integrity, or Order that was in his Soul, was his Living unto God.

Power or Ability to continue the Principle of Life in suitable Acts of it,
with respect unto the whole Obedience required of him; that is, he had a
sufficiency of Ability for the Performance of any Duty, or of all, that the
Covenant required. And in these three did the Supernatural Life of Adam in
Innocence consist. And it is that which the Life whereunto we are restored by
Christ does answer. It answers unto it I say, and supplies its absence with
respect unto the End of living unto God, according unto the New Covenant that
we are taken into. For neither would the Life of Adam be sufficient for us, to
live unto God according to the terms of the New Covenant; nor is the Life of
Grace we now enjoy, suited to the Covenant wherein Adam stood before God.
Wherefore some Differences there are between them, the Principal whereof may be
reduced into two Heads.

Principle of this Life was wholly and entirely in Man himself. It was the
Effect of another Cause, of that which was without him, namely, the Good Will
and Power of God; but it was left to grow on no other Root but what was in Man
himself. It was wholly implanted in his Nature, and therein did its Springs
lie. Actual Excitations by Influence of Power from God, it should have had. For
no Principle of Operation can subsist in an Independence of God, nor apply it
self unto Operation without his Concurence. But in the Life whereunto we are
renewed by Jesus Christ, the Fountain and Principle of it is not in our selves
but in him, as One common Head unto all that are made Partakers of him. He is
our Life, Col. 1. 3. and our Life, (as to the Spring and Fountain of it) is hid
with him in God. For he quickneth us by his Spirit, Romans 8. 10. And our
Spiritual Life as in us consists in the Vital Actings of this Spirit of his in
Us; for, without him we can do nothing, John 15. 3. By Virtue hereof we walk in
newness of Life; Romans 6. 4. We live therefore hereby, yet not so much we, as
Christ lives in us; Gal. 2. 20.

Object of their Vital Acts. For the Life which we now lead by the faith of the
Son of God, has sundry Objects of its Actings, which the other had not. For
whereas all the Actings of our Faith and Love, that is, all our Obedience does
respect the Revelation that God makes of himself and his Will unto us; there
are now New Revelations of God in Christ, and consequently new Duties of
Obedience required of us, as will afterward appear. And other such differences
there are between them. The Life which we had in Adam and that which we are
renewed unto in Christ Jesus, are so far of the same Nature and kind, as our
Apostle manifests in sundry Places, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10. as that they
serve to the same End and Purpose.

twofold Spiritual Life, or Ability of Living unto God, that which we had in
Adam, and that which we have in Christ, we must enquire with reference unto
which of these it is, that Unregenerate Men are said to be Spiritually dead, or
dead in Trespasses and Sins. Now this in the first Place has respect unto the
Life we had in Adam: For the Deprivation of that Life, was in the Sanction of
the Law, Thou shall die the Death. This Spiritual Death is comprised therein,
and that in the Privation of that Spiritual Life, or Life unto God, which
Unregenerate Men, never had, neither de facto, nor de jure, in any state or
condition. Wherefore with respect hereunto they are dead only negatively; they
have it not; but with respect unto the Life we had in Adam, they are dead
privatively, they have lost that Power of Living unto God which they had.

Privation of a Principle of Spiritual Life enabling us to live unto God; (2) A
Negation of all Spiritual Vital Acts; that is, of all Acts and Duties of holy
Obedience acceptable unto God, and tending to the Enjoyment of him. (3) A total
Defect and want of Power for any such Acts whatever. All these are in that
Death which is a Privation of Life, such as this is.

First, there is in it a Privation of a Principle of Spiritual Life, namely of
that which we had before the Entrance of sin, or a Power of living unto God
according to the Covenant of Works; and a Negation of that which we have by
Christ, or a Power of Living unto God according to the Tenor of the Covenant of
Grace. Those therefore who are thus dead have no Principle or First Power of
Living unto God, or the Performance of any Duty to be accepted with him, in
order to the Enjoyment of him, according to either Covenant. It is with them as
to all the Acts and Ends of Life Spiritual, as it is with the Body as to the
Acts and Ends of Life Natural, when the Soul is departed from it. Why else are
they said to be dead?

Natural and Spiritual. In Death Natural the soul it self is utterly removed
and taken from the Body: but in Death Spiritual it continues. A man is still
notwithstanding this Spiritual Death, endowed with an Understanding, Will, and
Affections. And by these are Men enabled to perform their Duty unto God; and
yield the Obedience required of them.

Answ. (1) In Life Spiritual, the Soul is unto the Principle of it, as the Body
is unto the Soul in Life Natural. For in Life Natural the Soul is the quickening
Principle, and the Body is the Principle quickened. When the Soul departs it
leaves the Body with all its own Natural Properties, but utterly deprived of
them which it had by Virtue of its Union with the Soul. So in Life Spiritual
the Soul is not in and by its Essential Properties the quickening Principle of
it, but it is the Principle that is quickened. And when the quickening Principle
of Spiritual Life departs, it leaves the Soul with all its Natural Properties
entire as to their Essence, though morally corrupted. But of all the Power and
Abilities which it had by Virtue of its Union with a quickening Principle of
Spiritual Life, it is deprived. And to deny such a quickening Principle of
Spiritual Life superadded unto us by the Grace of Christ, distinct and separate
from the Natural Faculties of the Soul, is upon the matter to renounce the
whole Gospel. It is all one, as to deny that Adam was created in the Image of
God, which he lost, and that we are renewed unto the Image of God by Jesus
Christ. Hence. ( 2ly) Whatever the Soul acts in Spiritual things by its
Understanding, Will, and Affections, as deprived of, or not quickened by this
Principle of Spiritual Life, it does it Naturally not Spiritually, as shall be
instantly made to appear.

There is therefore in the first Place a Disability or Impotency unto all
Spiritual things to be performed in a Spiritual manner, in all Persons not born
again by the Spirit, because they are Spiritually dead. Whatever they can do;
or however Men may call what they do, unless they are endowed with a quickening
Principle of Grace, they can perform no Act Spiritually vital, no Act of Life,
whereby we live to God; or that is absolutely accepted with him. Hence it is
said, the Carnal Mind is enmity against God, it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can it be, Romans 8. 7. so then, they that are in the flesh
cannot please God. v. 8. Men may cavil whilst they please about this carnal
Mind, and contend that it is only the sensitive part of the Soul, or the
Affections as corrupted by Prejudices and depraved habits of Vice. Two things
are plain in the Text. First, that this Carnal Mind, is in all mankind whoever
they be, who are not partakers of the Spirit of God, and his Quickening Power.
Secondly; that where it is, there is a Disability of doing any thing that
should please God; which is the Sum of what we contend for, and which Men may
with as little a disparagement of their Modesty deny, as reject the Authority
of the Apostle. So our Savior as to one Instance tells us, that no Man can
come unto him unless the Father draw him. Joh. 6. 4. 4. And so is it
figuratively expressed where all Men being by Nature compared unto evil Trees,
it is affirmed of them, that they cannot bring forth Good fruit unless their
Nature be changed; Mat. 7. 18. Chap. 12. 33. And this Disability as to Good is
also compared by the Prophet unto such Effects, as lie under a Natural
Impossibility of Accomplishment, Jerem. 13. 24. We contend not about
Expressions. This is that which the Scripture abundantly instructs us in.
There is no Power in Men by Nature whereby they are of themselves, upon the
mere proposal of their Duty in Spiritual Obedience, and Exhortations from the
Word of God unto the Performance of it accompanied with all the Motives which
are meet and suited to prevail with them thereunto, to perceive, know, will, or
do any thing in such a Way or Manner, as that it should be accepted with God,
with respect unto our Spiritual Life unto him according to his Will, and future
Enjoyment of him, without the Efficacious Infusion into them, or Creation in
them, of a new gracious Principle or Habit enabling them thereunto; and that
this is accordingly wrought in all that believe by the Holy Ghost, we shall
afterward declare.

But it will be Objected; and has against this Doctrine been ever so, since
the days of Pelagius, that a supposition hereof renders all Exhortations,
Commands, Promises, and Threatenings, which comprize the whole Way of the
external communication of the Will of God unto us, vain and useless. For to
what purpose is it to exhort Blind Men to see, or Dead Men to live, or to
promise Rewards unto them upon their so doing? Should Men thus deal with
stones, would it not be vain and ludicrous, and that because of their Impotency
to comply with any such proposals of our Mind unto them. And the same is here
supposed in Men? as to any Ability in Spiritual things.

Answ. (1) There is nothing in the highest Wisdom required in the Application
of any Means to the producing of an Effect, Magnum aliquid Pelagiani se scire
putant quando dicunt, non Juberet Deus quod seit non posse ab homine fieri,
quis hoc nesciat? sed ideo Jubet aliqua quae non possumus ut noverimus quid ab
illo petere debeamus. Ipsa enim est fides quae orando impetrat, quod lex
imperat. August. de Great. and lib. Arbit. cap. 16.

O homo cognosce in praeceptione quid debeas habere; in coruptione cognosce tuo
te vitio non habere; in oratione cognosce unde accipias quod vis habere. Idem
de Corrupt, and Great. Cap. 3.

Mandando impossibilia non praevaricatores Deus homines fecit sed humiles, ut
omne os obturetur and reus fiat totus mundus Deo; accipientes igitur mandatum,
and sentientes defectum elamabimus ad coelum Bernard. Sermon. 50. in Cant.

Quamvis dicamus Dei donum esse obedientiam, tamen homines exhortamur ad eam:
sed illis qui Veritatis Exhortationem obedienter audiunt, ipsum domum Dei datum
est, hoc est, obedienter audire; illi autem qui non sic audit non est datum.
August. de Dono perseverant. Cap. 14.


but that in their own Nature they are suited thereunto; and that the Subject
to be wrought upon by them, is capable of being affected, according as their
Nature requires. And thus Exhortations with Promises and Threatenings are in
their kind, as Moral Instruments, suited and proper to produce the Effects of
Faith and Obedience in the Minds of Men. And the Faculties of their Souls,
their Understandings, Wills, and Affections, are meet to be wrought upon by
them unto that End. For by Men's rational Abilies they are able to discern their
Nature, and judge of their Tendency. And because these Faculties are the
Principle and Subject of all actual Obedience, it is granted that there is in
Man a Natural, remote Passive Power to yield Obedience unto God, which yet can
never actually put forth it self without the effectual working of the Grace of
God, not only enabling, but working in them to will and to do.

Exhortations, Promises, and Threatenings, respect not primarily our present
Ability, but our Duty. Their End is, to declare unto us, not what we can do,
but what we ought to do. And this is done fully in them. On the other hand,
make a general Rule, that what God commands, or Exhorts us unto, with Promises
made unto our Obedience, and Threatenings annexed unto a supposition of
Disobedience, that we have power in and of our selves to do, or that we are of
our selves able to do; and you quite evacuate the Grace of God, or at least,
make it only useful for the more easy discharge of our Duty, not necessary
unto the very being of Duty it self, which is the Pelagianism Anathematized by
so many Councils of old. But in the Church it has hitherto been believed, that
the Command directs our Duty, but the Promise gives strength for the
performance of it.

Vehicula Gratiae, the means of communicating Spiritual Life and Strength unto
Men. And he has appointed them unto this end, because considering the Moral
and Intellectual Faculties of the Minds of Men, they are suited thereunto.
Hence these Effects are ascribed unto the Word, which really are wrought by the
Grace communicated thereby, Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23. And this in their
Dispensation under the Covenant of Grace, is their proper end. God may
therefore wisely make use of them, and command them to be used toward Men,
notwithstanding all their own disability savingly to comply with them, seeing
he can, will, and does himself make them effectual unto the end aimed at.

That if Men are thus utterly devoid of a Principle of Spiritual Life, of all
Power to live unto God; that is, to repent, believe, and yield obedience; is it
righteous that they should perish eternally, merely for their disability, or
their not doing that which they are not able to do? This would be to require
Brick and to give no Straw; yea, to require much where nothing is given. But
the Scripture everywhere charge the Destruction of Men upon their wilful
sin, not their weakness or disability.

Answ. (1.) Men's Disability to live to God is their sin. Whatever therefore
ensues thereon, may be justly charged on them. It is that which came on us by
the Sin of our Nature in our first Parents; all whose Consequents are our sin
and our misery, Romans 5. 12. Had it befallen us without a guilt truly our own,
according to the Law of our Creation and Covenant of our Obedience, the Case
would have been otherwise. But on this Supposition, (sufficiently confirmed
elsewhere) those who perish, do but feed on the Fruit of their own Ways.

Power in sundry things, as to some degrees and measures of them, to comply
with his Mind and Will, which they voluntarily neglect. And this of it self is
sufficient to bear the Charge of their eternal ruin. But;

(3.) No Man is so unable to live unto God, to do any thing for him, but that
withal he is able to do any thing against him. There is in all Men by Nature a
depraved vicious habit of Mind wherein they are alienated from the Life of God.
And there is no command given unto Men for Evangelical Faith or Obedience, but
they can and do put forth a free positive Act of their Wills in the rejection
of it, either directly or interpretatively, in preferring somewhat else before
it. As they cannot come to Christ unless the Father draw them, so they will not
come that they may have Life; wherefore their Destruction is just and of
themselves.

This is the Description which the Scripture gives us, concerning the Power,
Ability, or Disability of Men in the State of Nature as unto the Performance of
Spiritual Things. By some it is traduced as Fanatical and senseless, which the
Lord Christ must answer for, not we. For we do nothing but plainly represent
what he has expressed in his Word, and if it be foolishness unto any, the Day
will determine where the blame must lie.

actual cessation of all Vital Acts. From this defect of Power, or the want of
a Principle of Spiritual Life, it is, that Men in the state of Nature can
perform no Vital Act of Spiritual Obedience; nothing that is spiritually Good,
or Saving, or Accepted with God according to the Tenor of the New Covenant;
which we shall in the second place a little explain.

The whole course of our Obedience to God in Christ is the Life of God, Ephesians.
4. 18. That Life which is from him in a peculiar manner, whereof he is the
especial Author, and whereby we live unto him which is our End. And the Gospel
which is the Rule of our Obedience, is called the words of this Life, Acts 5.
20. That which guides and directs us how to live to God. Hence all the Duties
of this Life are Vital Acts, spiritually Vital Acts, Acts of that Life whereby
we live to God.

Dead Works. Where Persons are dead in sin, their Works are dead Works. They
are so all of them, either in their own Nature, or with respect unto them by
whom they are performed, Heb. 9. 14. They are dead Works because they proceed
not from a Principle of Life, are unprofitable as dead things, Ephesians. 5. 11.
and end in death eternal, Jam. 1. 15.

We may then consider how this Spiritual Life which enableth us unto these
Vital Acts is derived and communicated unto us. (1.) The original Spring and
Fountain of this Life is with God; Psalm. 36. 9. With thee is the Fountain of
Life; The sole Spring of our Spiritual Life is in an especial way and manner in
God. And hence our Life is said to be hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. that
is, as in its Eternal producing and preserving Cause. But it is thus also with
respect unto all Life whatever. God is the living God, all other things are in
themselves but dead Things; their Life, whatever it be, is in him efficiently
and eminently, and in them is purely derivative. Wherefore;

especial Nature of it is specificated and discerned from a Life of any other
kind, in that the fullness of it is communicated unto the Lord Christ as
Mediator, Col. 1. 19. And from his fullness we do receive it. John 1. 16. There
is a Principle of Spiritual Life communicated unto us from his fullness thereof,
whence he quickneth whom he pleases. Hence he is said to be our Life, Col. 3.
4. And in our Life, it is not so much we who live, as Christ that lives in us,
Gal. 2. 20. because we act nothing but as we are acted by Virtue and Power from
him, 1 Cor. 15. 10.

Fountain of this Life being in God, and the fullness of it being laid up in
Christ for us, He communicates the Power and Principle of it unto us by the
Holy Ghost, Romans 8. 11. That he is the immediate efficient Cause hereof, we
shall afterward fully evince and declare. But yet he does it so, as to derive
it unto us from Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. For he is the Life, and without
him, or Power communicated from him, we can do nothing, John 15. 5.

4ly; This Spiritual Life is communicated unto us by the Holy Ghost according
unto, and in order for the Ends of that New Covenant. For this is the Promise
of it, That God will first write his Law in our Hearts, and then we shall walk
in his Statutes; that is, the Principle of Life must precede all vital Acts.
From this Principle of Life thus derived and conveyed unto us, are all those
vital Acts whereby we live to God. Where this is not, as it is not in any that
are dead in sin, for from the want hereof are they denominated dead, no Act of
Obedience unto God can so be performed, as that it should be an Act of the Life
of God; and this is the way whereby the Scripture does express it. The same
thing is intended, when we say in other words, that without an infused habit of
internal inherent Grace, received from Christ by an efficacious Work of the
Spirit no Man can believe or obey God, or perform any Duty in a saving manner,
so as it should be accepted with Him. And if we abide not in this Principle, we
let in the whole poisonous Flood of Pelagianism into the Church. To say that we
have a sufficiency in our selves, so much as to think a good thought, to do any
thing as we ought, any Power, any Ability, that is our own, or in us by Nature,
however externally excited and guided by Motives, Directions, Reasons,
Encouragements of what sort soever, to believe or obey the Gospel savingly in
any one Instance, is to overthrow the Gospel and the Faith of the Catholic
Church in all Ages.

But it may be Objected; That whereas many unregenerate Persons may and do
perform many duties of Religious Obedience, if there be nothing of Spiritual
Life in them, then are they all sins, and so differ not from the worst things
they do in this World, which are but Sins; And if so, unto what end should they
take pains about them? Were it not as good for them to indulge unto their Lusts
and Pleasures, seeing all comes to one end? It is all sin, and nothing else;
why do the Dispensers of the Gospel press any Duties on such as they know to be
in that estate? What advantage shall they have by a compliance with them? Were
it not better to leave them to themselves and wait for their Conversion, than
to spend time and labor about them to no purpose?

Answ. (1.) It must be granted, That all the Duties of such Persons are in some
sense sins. Manifestissime patet in impiorum animis nullam habitare virtutem;
sed omnia opera eorum immund esse atque polluta, habentium sapientiam non
spiritalem sed animalem, non caelestem sed terrenam. Prosper. ad Collat. cap.
28.

Omne etenim probitatis opus nisi semine verae exoritur fidei, peccatum est,
inque erratum vertitur, and sterilis eumulat sibi gloria poenam. Prosper. de
Ingratis. cap. 16.

Multa laudibilia atque miranda possunt in homine reperiri, quae sine
charitatis medullis habent quidem pietatis similitudinem. s^d non habent
veritatem. Idem. ad Russin. de lib. Arbit.


It was the saying of Austin, That the Virtues of Unbelievers are splendida
peccata. This some are now displeased with; but it is easier to censure him
than to confute him. Two things attend in every Duty that is properly so. (1.)
That it is accepted with God: And (2.) that it is sanctified in them that do
it; but neither of these are in the Duties of Unregenerate Men. For they have
not Faith; And without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. And
the Apostle also assures us; That unto the defiled and unbelieving, that is,
all unsanctified Persons not purified by the Spirit of Grace, All things are
unclean, because their Consciences and Minds are defiled, Tit. 1. 15. So their
Praying is said to be an abomination, and their Plowing sin. It does not
therefore appear what is otherwise in them or to them. But as there are Good
Duties which have sin adhering to them, Isa. 64. 6. so there are sins which
have good in them. For bonum oritur ex integris, malum ex quocunque defectu.
Such are the Duties of Men unregenerate. Formally, and unto them they are sin,
materially and in themselves they are good. This gives them a difference from,
and a preference above such sins, as are every way sinful. As they are Duties
they are good, as they are the Duties of such Persons they are evil, because
necessarily defective in what should preserve them from being so. And on this
ground they ought to attend unto them, and may be pressed thereunto.

materially and in it self, though vitiated from the Relation which it has to
the Person by whom it is performed, is approved and has its Acceptance in its
proper place. For Duties may be performed two ways. (1.) In hypocrisy and
pretense, so they are utterly abhorred of God in matter and manner; that is
such a poisonous Ingredient as vitiates the whole, Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. Hos.
1. 4. (2.) In Integrity according unto present Light and Conviction, which for
the substance of them are approved. And no Man is to be exhorted to do any
thing in Hypocrisy; see Matthew. 10. 21. And on this account also, that the
Duties themselves are acceptable, Men may be pressed to them. But (3ly,) it
must be granted, that the same Duty for the substance of it in general, and
performed according to the same Rule as to the outward manner of it, may be
accepted in or from one, and rejected in or from another. So was it with the
Sacrifices of Cain and Abel. And not only so, but the same rejected Duty may
have Degrees of evil, for which it is rejected, and be more sinful in and unto
one than unto another. But we must observe that the difference does not relate
merely unto the different States of the Persons by whom such are performed; as
because one is in the state of Grace, whose Duties are accepted; and another in
the state of Nature, whose Duties are rejected as their Persons are. For
although the Acceptance of our Persons be a necessary condition for the
Acceptance of our Duties, as God first had respect unto Abel, and then unto
his Offerings; yet there is always a real specifical diference between the
Duties themselves, whereof one is accepted and the other rejected, although, it
may be unto us, it be every way imperceptible. As in the Offerings of Cain and
Abel, that of Abel was offered in Faith, the defect whereof in the other caused
it to be refused. Suppose Duties therefore to be every way the same as to the
Principles, Rule and Ends, or whatever is necessary to render them good in
their kind; and they would be all equally accepted with God, by whomsoever they
are performed, for he is no accepter of Persons. But this cannot be, but where
those that perform them are partakers of the same Grace. It is therefore the
Wills of Men only that vitiate their Duties, which are required of them as
good; and if so they may justly be required of them. The defect is not
immediately in their State, but in their Wills and their Perversity.

Will of God is the Rule of all Men's Obedience. This they are all bound to
attend unto; and if what they do through their own defect prove eventually sin
unto them, yet the Commandment is just and holy, and the observance of it
justly prescribed unto them. The Law is the moral cause of the performance of
the Duties it requires, but not of the sinful manner of their performance. And
God has not lost his right of commanding Men, because they by their sin have
lost their Power to fulfill his Commands. And if they equity of the Command does
arise from the proportioning of strength that Men have to answer it, He that by
contracting the highest moral Disability that depraved habits of Mind can
introduce, or a course of sinning produce in him, is freed from owning
obedience unto any of God's Commands; seeing all confess that such an habit of
sin may be contracted, as will deprive them in whom it is, of all Power of
Obedience. Wherefore;

Preachers of the Gospel and others have sufficient warrant to press upon all
Men, the Duties of Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, although they know that in
themselves they have not a sufficiency of Ability for their due performance.
For (1.) it is the Will and Command of God that so they should do, and that is
the Rule of all our Duties. They are not to consider what Man can do or will
do, but what God requires. To make a judgment of Men's Ability, and to
accommodate the Commands of God unto them accordingly, is not committed unto
any of the Sons of Men. (2.) They have a double End in pressing on Men the
observance of Duties, with a supposition of the State of Impotency described.
(1.) To prevent them from such courses of sin, as would harden them, and so
render their Conversion more difficult if not desperate. (2.) To exercise a
means appointed of God for their Conversion, or the Communication of
Saving-Grace unto them. Such are God's Commands, and such are the Duties
required in them. In and by them God does use to communicate of his Grace unto
the Souls of Men, not with respect unto them as their Duties, but as they are
ways appointed and sanctified by him unto such ends. And hence it follows that
even such Duties as are vitiated in their performance, yet are of advantage
unto them by whom they are performed. For (1.) by attendance unto them, they
are preserved from many sins. (2.) In an especial manner from the great sin of
despising God, which ends commonly in that which is unpardonable. (3.) They are
hereby made useful unto others, and many ends of God's Glory in the World. (4.)
They are kept in God's Way, wherein they may gradually be brought over unto a
real Conversion unto him.

Spiritual Death, there is not in them who are under the Power of it any
Disposition, active and inclining unto Life Spiritual. There is not so in a
dead Carcass unto Life Natural; It is a Subject meet for an External Power to
introduce a Living Principle into; so the dead Body of Lazarus was quickened and
animated again by the introduction of his Soul. But in it self it had not the
least active Disposition nor Inclination thereunto. And no otherwise is it with
a Soul dead in Trespasses and Sins. There is in it Potentia Obedientialis, a
Power rendering it meet to receive the Communications of Grace and Spiritual
Life. But a Disposition thereunto of its own it has not. There is in it a
remote Power, in the nature of its Faculties meet to be wrought upon by the
Spirit and Grace of God. But an immediate Power disposing and enabling it unto
Spiritual Acts it has not. And the reason is, because Natural Corruption
cleaves unto it, as an invincible unmovable Habit constantly inducing unto
evil, wherewith the least Disposition unto Spiritual Good is not inconsistent.
There is in the Soul in the Scripture Language (which some call Canting) the
Body of the Sins of the Flesh, 2 Col. 11. which unless it be taken away by
Spiritual Circumcision through the virtue of the Death of Christ, it will lie
dead in to Eternity. There is therefore in us that which may be quickened and
saved. And this is all we have to boast of by Nature. Though Man by Sin be made
like the Beasts that perish, being brutish and foolish in his Mind and
Affections; yet he is not so absolutely, he retains that living Soul, those
intellectual Faculties which were the Subject of Original Righteousness, and
are meet to receive again the Renovation of the Image of God by Jesus Christ.

good Duties performed by Men Unregenerate, and that in a tendency unto living
unto God, which argues a Disposition to Spiritual Good. So Balaam desired to
die the Death of the Righteous, and Herod heard John Baptist gladly, doing many
things willingly. And great Endeavors after Conversion unto God, we find in
many who never attain thereunto. So that to say there is no Disposition unto
Spiritual Life in any Unregenerate Person, is to make them all equal, which is
contrary to Experience.

Answ. (1.) There is no doubt but that Unregenerate Men may perform many
external Duties, which are good in themselves, and lie in the order of the
outward Disposal of the means of Conversion. Nor is it questioned but they may
have real Designs, Desires, and Endeavors after that which is presented unto
them as their chiefest Good. But so far as these Desires or Actings are merely
Natural, there is no Disposition in them unto Spiritual Life, or that which is
Spiritually Good: So far as they are Supernatural, they are not of themselves.
For;

(2.) Although there are no preparatory Inclinations in Men, yet there are
preparatory Works upon them. Those who have not the Word, yet may have
Convictions of Good and Evil, from the Authority of God in their Consciences,
Romans 2. 14, 15. And the Law in the Dispensation of it, may work Men unto many
Duties of Obedience; much more may the Gospel so do. But whatever Effects are
hereby produced, they are wrought by the Power of God exerted in the
Dispensation of the Word. They are not educed out of the natural Faculties of
the Minds of Men, but are Effects of the Power of God in them and upon them.
For we know that in the flesh there dwells no good thing; And all
Unregenerate Men are no more; for that which is born of the flesh is flesh.

(3.) The Actings thus effected and produced in Men Unregenerate, are neither
Fruits of, nor Dispositions unto Spiritual Life. Men that are spiritually dead,
may have Designs and Desires to free themselves from dying Eternally; but such
a desire to be saved, is no saving Disposition unto Life.

The Nature, Causes, and Means of Regeneration. CHAP. V.
(1.) Description of the State of Nature, necessary unto a right understanding
of the Work of the Spirit in Regeneration. (2.) No possibility of Salvation
unto Persons living and dying in a state of Sin. (3.) Deliverance from it by
Regeneration only. (4.) The Holy Ghost the peculiar Author of this Work. (5.)
Differences about the Manner and Nature of it. (6.) Way of the Ancients in
explaining the Doctrine of Grace; the present Method proposed. (7.) Conversion
not wrought by Moral Swasion only. (8, 9, 10.) The Nature and Efficacy of Moral
Swasion, wherein they consist. (11.) Illumination preparatory unto Conversion.
(12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.) The Nature of Grace morally effective only,
opened; not sufficient of Conversion. (19, 20.) The first Argument disproving
the working of Grace in Conversion to be by Moral Swasion only. (21, 22.) The
Second. (23, 24.) The Third. (25.) The Fourth. (26, 27, 28.) Wherein the Work
of the Spirit in Regeneration positively does consist; the use and end of
outward means. (29.) Real internal efficiency of the Spirit in this Work. (30,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35.) Grace victorious and irresistible, the Nature of it
explained. (36.) Proved. (37, 38, 39, 40.) The manner of God's working by Grace
on our Wills further explained. Testimonies concerning the Actual Collation of
Faith by the Power of God. (41, 42, 43, 44.) Victorious efficacy of internal
Grace proved by sundry Testimonies of Scripture. (45, 46, 47, 48, 49.) From the
nature of the Work wrought by it, in Vivification and Regeneration. (50, 51,
52, 53, 54.) Regeneration considered with respect unto the distinct Faculties
of the Soul. The Mind. (55.) The Will. (56, 57.) The Affections.

Work of Regeneration, the precedent account of the Subject of it, or the State
and Condition of them that are to be Regenerated, was necessarily to be
premised. For upon the knowledge thereof, does a due Apprehension of the Nature
of that Work depend. And the occasion of all the Mistakes and Errors that have
been about it, either of old or of late, has been a misunderstanding of the
true state of Men in their lapsed condition, or of Nature as depraved. Yea, and
those by whom this whole Work is derided, do now countenance themselves therein
by their Ignorance of that state, which they will not learn either from the
Scripture or Experience; For, Natura sic apparet vitiata ut hoc majoris vitii
sit non videre, as Austin speaks. It is an Evidence of the Corruption of
Nature, that it disenables the Minds of Men to discern their own Corruption. We
have previously discharged this work so far as it is necessary unto our present
purpose. Many other things might be added in the Explication of it, were that
our direct Design. Particularly having confined my self to treat only
concerning the Depravation of the Mind and Will, I have not insisted on that of
the Affections, which yet is effectual to retain unregenerate Men under the
Power of sin; though it be far enough from Truth that the whole Corruption of
Nature consists therein, as some weakly and Athologically have Imagined. Much
less have I treated concerning that increase and heightning of the Depravation
of Nature which is attracted by a Custom of sinning, as unto all the perverse
Ends of it. Yet this also the Scripture much insists upon, as that which
naturally and necessarily ensues in all in whom it is not prevented by the
effectual transforming Grace of the Spirit of God. And it is that which seals
up the Impossibility of their turning themselves to God. Jerome. 13. 23. Romans 3.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. But that the whole Difficulty of
Conversion should arise from Men's contracting an Habit or Custom of sinning, is
false, and openly contradictory to the Scripture. These things are Personal
Evils and befall Individuals through their own default in various Degrees. And
we see that amongst Men under the same use of means, some are converted unto
God, who have been deeply immersed in an habitual course of open sins, whilst
others kept from them by the Influence of their Education upon their
Inclinations and Affections, remain uncoverted. So was it of old between the
Publicans and Harlots on the one hand, and the Pharisees on the other. But my
design was only to mention that which is common unto all; Or wherein all Men
Universally are equally concerned, who are partakers of the same Humane Nature
in its lapsed Condition. And what we have herein declared from the Scriptures
will guide us in our Enquiry after the work of the Holy Spirit of Grace in our
Deliverance from it.

Living and Dying in this Estate cannot be saved. This hitherto has been
allowed by all that are called Christians, nor are we to be moved that some who
call themselves so, do begin to laugh at the disease and Despise the Remedy of
our Nature. Among those who lay any serious and real claim unto Christianity,
there is nothing more certain, nor more acknowledged, than that there is no
Deliverance from a state of misery for those who are not delivered from a state
of sin. And he who denies the necessary perishing of all that live and dye in
the state of Corrupted Nature, denies all the use of the Incarnation and
Mediation of the Son of God. For if we may be saved without the Renovation of
our Natures, there was no need, nor use of the New Creation of all things by
Jesus Christ, which principally consists therein. And if Men may be saved under
all the Evils that came upon us by the fail, then did Christ dye in vain.
Besides, it is frequently expressed that Men in that state are Enemies to God,
alienated from him, Children of Wrath, under the Curse; and if such may be
saved, so may Devils also. In brief, it is not consistent with the Nature of
God, his Holiness, Righteousness or Truth, with the Law or Gospel, nor possible
in the nature of the thing it self, that such persons should enter into, or be
made possessors of Glory and Rest with God. A Deliverance therefore out of and
from this Condition is indispensibly necessary to make us meet for the
inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Joh. 3. 3. Except a Man be born again, or from above, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. Whatever sense the Kingdom of God is taken in either for that
of Grace here, or of Glory hereafter, it is all the same as unto our present
purpose. There is no Interest in it to be obtained, no Participation of the
Benefits of it, unless a man be born again, unless he be Regenerate. And this
Determination of our Savior, as it is absolute and decretory, so it is
applicable unto and equally comprizeth every Individual of mankind. And the
Work intended by their Regeneration or in being born again, which is the
Spiritual Conversion and Quickening of the Souls of Men, is everywhere ascribed
unto them that shall be saved. And although Men may have through their
ignorance and prejudices false Apprehensions about Regeneration and the Nature
of it, or wherein it does consist; yet so far as I know, all Christians are
agreed, that it is the way and means of our Deliverance from the state of Sin
or Corrupted Nature, or rather our Deliverance it self. For this both express
Testimonies of Scripture, and the Nature of the thing it self, put beyond
Contradiction, Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5. And those by whom it is exposed unto scorn, who
esteem it a ridiculous thing for any one to enquire whether he be Regenerate or
no, will one day understand the necessity of it; although it may be not before
it is too late to obtain any Advantage thereby.

immediate Author and Cause of this work of Regeneration. And herein again as I
suppose, we have in general the Consent of all. Nothing is more in words
acknowledged than that all the Elect of God are sanctified by the Holy Ghost.
And this Regeneration is the Head, Fountain or Beginning of our Sanctification
virtually comprizing the whole in it self, as will afterward appear. However
that it is a part thereof, is not to be denied. Besides, as I suppose it is
equally confessed to be an Effect or Work of Grace, the Actual Dispensation
whereof is solely in the hand of the Holy Spirit. This I say is in words
acknowledged by all; although I know not how some can reconcile this Profession
unto other notions and sentiments which they declare concerning it: For setting
aside what Men do herein themselves, and what others do toward them in the
Ministry of the Word, and I cannot see what remains as they express their loose
Imaginations, to be ascribed unto the Spirit of God. But at present we shall
make use of this general concession that Regeneration is the Work of the Holy
Ghost, or an Effect of his Grace. Not that we have any need so to do, but that
we may avoid contesting about those things wherein Men may shroud their false
Opinions under general ambiguous Expressions, which was the constant practice
of Pelagius and those who followed him of Old. But the Scripture is express in
Testimonies to our purpose. What our Savior calls being born again, John 3. 3.
He calls being born of the Spirit, ver. 5. 6. because he is the sole principal
efficient Cause of this new birth. For it is the Spirit that quickneth, Joh. 6.
v. 63. Romans 8. 11. And God saves us, according to his mercy by the washing of
Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. whereas therefore
we are said to be born of God, or to be begotten again of his own will; John 1.
13. Jam. 1. 18. 1 John 3. 9. it is with respect unto the especial and peculiar
Operation of the Holy Spirit.

Pelagians themselves, both those of old, and those at present, at least in
general; nor has any as yet been so hardy as to deny Regeneration to be the
Work of the holy Spirit in us; unless we must except those deluded Souls who
deny both him and his Work. Our sole Enquiry therefore must be after the manner
and nature of this work; for the nature of it depends on the manner of the
working of the Spirit of God herein. This I acknowledge was variously contended
about of old; and the truth concerning it, has scarce escaped an open
Opposition in any Age of the Church. And at present this is the great Ball of
Contention, between the Jesuits and the Jansenists, the latter keeping close
to the Doctrine of the principal Ancient Writers of the Church, the former
under new Notions, Expressions and Distinctions endeavoring the Reinforcement
of Pelagianism, whereunto some of the Elder Schoolmen led the way, of whom our
Bradwardine so long ago complained. But never was it with so much Impotence and
Ignorance traduced and reviled as it is by some among our selves. For a sort of
Men we have who by stories of wandering Jews, Rhetorical Declamations pert
Cavillings and proud Revilings of those who dissent from them, think to scorn
and banish Truth out of the World; though they never yet durst attempt to deal
openly and plainly with any one Argument that is pleaded in its defense and
confirmation.

Austin, Hilary, Prosper, and Fulgentius, do represent the whole Work of the
Spirit of God toward the Souls of Men under certain Heads or Distinctions of
Grace. And herein were they followed by many of the more sober Schoolmen; and
others of late without number. Frequent mention we find in them of Grace, as
preparing, preventing, Working, Co-working and Confirming. Under these Heads do
they handle the whole Work of our Regeneration or Conversion unto God. And
although there may be some Alteration in Method and ways of Expression, which
may be varied as they are found to be of Advantage unto them that are to be
instructed; yet for the substance of the Doctrine, they taught the same which
has been preached amongst us since the Reformation, which some have ignorantly
traduced as novel. And the whole of it is nobly and elegantly exemplifyed by
Austin in his Confessions, wherein he gives us the Experience of the Truth he
had taught in his own Soul. And I might follow their footsteps herein, and
perhaps should for some Reasons have chosen so to have done; but that there
have been so many differences raised about the Explication and Application of
these Terms and Distinctions; and the Declaration of the nature of the Acts and
Effects of the Spirit of Grace intended in them; as that to carry the Truth
through the intricate perplexities which under these notions have been cast
upon it, would be a longer Work than I shall here engage into; and too much
divert me from my principal intention. I shall therefore in general refer the
whole Work of the Spirit of God with respect unto the Regeneration of sinners
unto two Heads. First, that which is preparatory for it; and secondly, that
which is effective of it. That which is preparatory for it, is the Conviction
of sin; This is the Work of the Holy Spirit. John 16. 8. 9. And this also may
be distinctly referred unto three Heads. (1) A Discovery of the True Nature of
Sin, by the ministry of the Law, Romans 7. 7. (2) An Application of that
discovery made in the Mind or Understanding unto the Conscience of the sinner.
(3) The Excitation of Affections suitable unto that Discovery and Application;
Acts 2. 37. But these Things so far as they belong unto our present Design have
been before insisted on. Our principal Enquiry at present is after the Work it
self, or the nature and manner of the working of the Spirit of God in and on
the Souls of Men in their Regeneration. And this must be both negatively and
positively declared.

Moral Swasion only. By Swasion we intend such a persuasion as, may, or may not
be effectual; so absolutely we call that only persuasion whereby a Man is
actually persuaded. Concerning this we must consider, (1) What it is that is
intended by that Expression and wherein its Efficacy does consist; and (2.)
prove that the whole Work of the Spirit of God in the Conversion of sinners
does not consist therein. And I shall handle this matter under this Notion, as
that which is known unto those who are conversant in these things from the
writings of the ancient and modern Divines. For it is to no purpose to
endeavor the reducing of the extravagant confused Discourses of some present
Writers unto a certain and determinate stating of the things in difference
among us. That which they seem to aim at and conclude may be reduced unto these
Heads, (1.) That God administers Grace unto all in the Declaration of the
Doctrine of the Law and Gospel. (2.) That the Reception of this Doctrine, the
Belief and Practice of it, is enforced by Promises and Threatenings. (3.) That
the things revealed taught and commanded, are not only good in themselves, but
so suited unto the Reason and Interest of Mankind, as that the Mind cannot but
be disposed and inclined to receive and obey them, unless overpowered by
Prejudices and a Course of Sin. (4.) That the Consideration of the Promises and
Threatenings of the Gospel, is sufficient to remove these prejudices and reform
that Course. (5.) That upon a compliance with the Doctrine of the Gospel and
Obedience thereunto, Men are made partakers of the Spirit with other
Privileges of the New Testament, and have a Right unto all the Promises of the
present and future Life. Now this being a perfect systeme of Pelagianism,
condemned in the ancient Church as absolutely exclusive of the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, will be fully removed out of our way in our present
Discourse, though the loose confused expressions of some be not considered in
particular. For if the Work of our Regeneration does not consist in a Moral
Swasion, which as we shall see contains all that these Men will allow to Grace,
their whole Fabric falls to the ground of its own accord.

Moral Swasion two things may be considered. (1.) The Means, Instrument, and
Matter of it, and this is the Word of God; the Word of God or the Scripture in
the Doctrinal Instructions, Precepts, Promises, and Threatenings of it. This is
that, and this is that alone whereby we are commanded, pressed, persuaded to
turn our selves and live to God. And herein we comprize the whole, both the Law
and the Gospel, with all the Divine Truths contained in them, as severally
respecting the especial Ends whereunto they are designed. For although they are
distinctly and peculiarly suited to produce distinct Effects on the Minds of
Men, yet they all jointly tend unto the general end of guiding Men how to live
unto God, and to obtain the enjoyment of him. As for those Documents and
Instructions which Men have concerning the Will of God, and the Obedience which
he requires of them from the Light of Nature, with the Works of Creation and
Providence, I shall not here take them into Consideration. For either they are
solitary or without any super-addition of instructive Light by Revelation, and
then I utterly deny them to be a sufficient outward means of the Conversion of
any one Soul; or they may be considered as improved by the written Word as
dispensed unto Men, and so they are comprised under it, and need not to be
considered apart. We will therefore suppose that those unto whom the Word is
declared, have antecedaneously thereunto, all the help which the Light of
Nature will afford.

principal way of the Application of this means to produce its Effect on the
Souls of Men, is the Ministry of the Church. God has appointed the Ministry
for the Application of the Word unto the Minds and Consciences of Men for their
Instruction and Conversion. And concerning this we may observe two things. (1.)
That the Word of God thus dispensed by the Ministry of the Church, is the only
ordinary outward means which the Holy Ghost makes use of in the Regeneration
of the Adult unto whom it is preached. (2.) That it is every way sufficient in
its own kind; that is, as an outward means. For the Revelation which is made of
God and his Mind thereby, is sufficient to teach Men all that is needful for
them to believe and do, that they may be converted unto God, and yield him the
Obedience that he requires. Hence two things do ensue:

(1.) That the use of those means unto Men in the state of Sin, if they are not
complied withal, is sufficient on the grounds before laid down, to leave them
by whom they are rejected inexcusable; so Isa. 5. 3, 4, 5. Prove. 29. 1. 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15. Joh.

(2.) That the effect of Regeneration or Conversion unto God, is assigned unto
the Preaching of the Word, because of its efficacy thereunto in its own kind
and way as the outward means thereof, 1 Cor. 4. 15. James 1. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 23.

Moral Work does consist. To which purpose we may observe;

1. That in the use of this Means for the Conversion of Men, there is
preparatory unto that wherein this Moral Persuasion does consist, an
Instruction of the Mind in the knowledge of the Will of God and its duty toward
him. The first regard unto Men in the Dispensation of the Word unto them, is
their Darkness and Ignorance, whereby they are alienated from the Life of God.
This therefore is the first End of Divine Revelation; namely, to make known the
Counsel and Will of God unto us; see Matthew. 4. 15, 16. Luke 4. 18, 19. Acts 26.
17, 18. Acts 20. 20, 21, 26, 27. By the Preaching of the Law and the G^spel,
Men are instructed in the whole Counsel of God, and what he requires of them.
And in their Apprehension hereof does the Illumination of their Minds consist,
whereof we must treat distinctly afterward. Without a supposition of this
Illumination there is no use of the Persuasive Power of the Word; for it
consists in affecting the Mind with its Concernment in the things that it
knows, or wherein it is instructed. Wherefore we suppose in this Case, that a
Man is taught by the Word, both the Necessity of Regeneration, and what is
required of himself thereunto.

knowledge of the Will of God, as revealed in the Law and the Gospel; there is
accompanying the Word of God in the Dispensation of it, a powerful persuasive
E^^^cacy unto a compliance with it, and observance of it. For Instance; Suppose
a Man to be convinced by the Word of God of the Nature of Sin, of his own
sinful Condition; of his danger from thence with respect unto the Sin of
Nature, on which account he is a Child of Wrath, and of his actual Sin, which
further renders him obnoxious unto the Curse of the Law, and the Indignation of
God; of his Duty hereon to turn unto God, and the way whereby he may so do;
there are in the Precepts, Exhortations, Expostulations, Promises and
Threatenings of the Word, especially as dispensed in the Ministry of the Church,
Powerful Motives to affect, and Arguments to prevail with the Mind and Will of
such a Man, to endeavor his own Regeneration or Conversion unto God, rational
and cogent above all that can be objected unto the contrary. On some it is
acknowledged that these things have no effect; they are not moved by them, they
care not for them, they do despise them, and live and die in rebellion against
the Light of them, having their Eyes blinded by the God of this World. But this
is no Argument that they are not powerful in themselves; although indeed it is
that they are not so toward us of themselves, but only as the Holy Spirit is
pleased to act them toward us. But in these Motives, Reasons, and Arguments,
whereby Men are in and from the Word, and the Ministry of it, urged and pressed
unto Conversion to God, does this Moral Persuasion whereof we speak consist.
And the efficacy of it, unto the end proposed, arises from the things ensuing,
which are all resolved into God himself.

Truth of the things from whence these Motives and Arguments were taken. The
Foundation of all the Efficacy of the Dispensation of the Gospel lies in an
evidence, that the things proposed in it are not cunningly devised Fables, 2
Pet. 1. 16. Where this is not admitted, where it is not firmly assented unto,
there can be no persuasive Efficacy in it. But where this is, namely a
prevalent Persuasion of the Truth of the Things proposed, there the Mind is
under a Disposition unto the things whereunto it is persuaded. And hereon the
whole Efficacy of the Word in and upon the Souls of Men, is resolved into the
Truth and Veracity of God. For the things contained in the Scripture are not
proposed unto us merely as true, but as Divine Truths, as immediate Revelations
from God, which requires not only a rational, but a sacred Religious respect
unto them. They are Things that the Mouth of the Lord has spoken.

(2.) There is a proposal unto the Wills and Affections of Men in the Things so
assented unto, on the one hand as Good, Amiable, and Excellent, wherein the
chiefest Good, Happiness, and utmost End of our Natures are comprised, to be
pursued and attained; and on the other of things Evil and Terrible, the utmost
Evil that our Nature is obnoxious unto, to be avoided. For this is urged on
them, that to comply with the Will of God in the proposals of the Gospel, to
conform thereunto, to do what he requires, to turn from Sin unto him, is good
unto Men, best for them, assuredly attended with present Satisfaction and
future Glory. And therein is also proposed the most noble Object for our
Affections, even God himself as a Friend, as reconciled unto us in Christ, and
that in a way suited unto his Holiness, Righteousness, Wisdom and Goodness,
which we have nothing to oppose unto, nor to lay in the Balance against. The
way also of the Reconciliation of Sinners unto God by Jesus Christ is set out,
as that which has such an Impress of Divine Wisdom and Goodness upon it, as
that it can be refused by none, but out of a direct enmity against God himself.
Unto the enforcing of these things on the Minds of Men, the Scripture abounds
with Reasons, Motives, and Arguments, the rendering whereof effectual, is the
principal end of the Ministry. On the other hand it is declared and evidenced,
that Sin is the great Debasement of our Natures, the Ruin of our Souls, the
only Evil in the World, in its Guilt and Punishment; that a Continuance in a
state of it, with a Rejection of the Invitation of the Gospel unto Conversion
to God, is a thing foolish, unworthy of a rational Creature, and that which
will be everlastingly pernicious. Whereas therefore in the judgment of every
rational Creature, Spiritual Things are to be preferred before Natural, Eternal
Things before Temporal, and that these things are thus disposed of in infinite
Goodness, Love and Wisdom, they must needs be apt to affect the Wills, and take
the Affections of Men. And herein the Efficacy of the Word on the Minds and
Consciences of Men is resolved into the Authority of God. These Precepts, these
Promises, these Threatenings are his, who has right to give them and power to
execute them. And with his Authority, his Glorious Greatness, and his Infinite
Power come under consideration. So also does his Goodness and Love in an
especial manner, with many other things, even all the known Properties of his
Holy Nature, all which concur in giving Weight, Power, and Efficacy unto these
Motives and Arguments.

of these Motives in the preaching of the Word. Herein by some the Rhetorical
Faculty of them by whom it is dispensed, is of great consideration. For hereby
are they able to prevail very much on the Minds of Men. Being acquainted with
the Inclinations and Dispositions of all sorts of Persons, the nature of their
Affections and Prejudices, with the Topics or kinds and heads of Arguments
meet to affect them and prevail with them; as also the ways of insinuating
Persuasive Motives to their Minds, they express the whole in words elegant,
proper, expressive, and suited to allure, draw, and engage them unto the Ways
and Duties proposed unto them. (...). Athanas. de Semente.
Herein do some place the principal Use and Efficacy of the Ministry in the
dispensation of the Word; with me it is of no consideration. For our Apostle
rejects it utterly from any place in his Ministry; 1 Cor. 2. 4. My Speech and
my Preaching was not with enticing words of Man's Wisdom, but in the
demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. Some of late have put in faint and
weak Exceptions unto the latter Clause, as though not an evidence of the
powerful presence of the Spirit of God in the Dispensation of the Gospel were
intended therein, but the power of working Miracles, contrary to the whole
scope of the place, and consent of the best Expositors. But that by the first
Clause, the Persuasive Act of Humane Oratory, is excluded from Use and Efficacy
in the preaching of the Gospel, none as yet has had the impudence to deny. But
let this also be esteemed to be as useful and efficacious in this Work, as to
the end of Preaching in the Conversion of the Souls of Men, as any can imagine,
it shall be granted. Only I shall take leave to resolve the Efficacy of
Preaching into two other Causes.

Institution of God: He has appointed the Preaching of the Word to be the
Means, the only outward ordinary Means for the Conversion of the Souls of Men,
1 Cor. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20. Mar. 16. 15, 16. Romans 1. 16. And the Power or
Efficacy of any thing that is used unto an End in Spiritual Matters, depends
solely on its Divine Appointment unto that End.

Especial Gifts that the Spirit of God does furnish the Preachers of the Gospel
withal, to enable them unto an effectual discharge of their Work, Ephesians. 4. 11,
12, 13. whereof we shall treat afterward. All the Power therefore that these
things are accompanied withal, is resolved into the sovereignty of God. For he
has chosen this way of Preaching for this End, and he bestows these Gifts on
whom he pleases. From these things it is that the Persuasive Motives which the
Word abounds withal unto Conversion o^ turning to God from Sin, have that
peculiar Efficacy on the Minds of Men which is proper unto them.

Motives of the Word are left unto a mere Natural Operation, with respect unto
the Ability of them by whom it is dispensed; but moreover that it is blessed of
God, and accompanied with the Power of the Holy Spirit, for the producing of
its Effect and End upon the Souls of Men. Only the Operation of the Holy Ghost,
on the Minds and Wills of Men in and by these means, is supposed to extend no
further, but unto Motives, Arguments, Reasons and Considerations, proposed unto
the Mind, so to influence the Will and the Affections. Hence his Operation is
herein Moral, and so Metaphorical, not real, proper, and Physical. Now
concerning this whole Work, I affirm these two things.

does make use of it in the Regeneration or Conversion of all that are Adult,
and that either immediately in and by the Preaching of it, or by some other
Application of Light and Truth unto the Mind derived from the Word; For by the
Reasons, Motives, and Persuasive Arguments which the Word affords, are our
Minds affected, and our Souls wrought upon in our Conversion unto God, whence
it becomes our reasonable Obedience. And there are none ordinarily converted,
but they are able to give some account by what Considerations they were
prevailed on thereunto. But;

2. We say that the whole Work, or the whole of the Work of the Holy Ghost in
our Conversion does not consist herein; but there is a real, Physical Work,
whereby he infuseth a gracious Principle of Spiritual Life into all that are
effectually Converted, and really Regenerated, and without which there is no
Deliverance from the State of Sin and Death which we have described; which
among others may be proved by the ensuing Arguments.

Real, Physical Work of the Spirit on the Souls of Men in their Regeneration.
That all he does, consists not in this Moral Swasion, the ensuing Reasons do
sufficiently evince.

1. If the Holy Spirit works no otherwise on Men in their Regeneration or
Conversion, but by Non est igitur Gratia Dei in liberi Arbitrii natura, etc. in
lege at^ue Doctrina sicut Pelagius desipit. sed ad singulos actus datur illius
voluntate de quo scriptum est; Pluvium voluntarium segregabis Deus haereditati
tuae. Quia and liberum Arbitrium ad diligendum Deum primi peccati granditate
perdid^mus; and lex Dei atque doctrina ou ^mvis sancta and justa, tamen
occidit, si non vivificet Spiritus, per quem fit non ut audiendo sed ut
obediendo, neque ut lectione sed ut dilectione teneatur. Quapropter ut in Deum
^r^damus and pie vivamus, non volentis neque currentis sed miserentis est Dei;
non quia velle non debemus and curr^re, sed quia ipse in nobis and velle
operatur and currere, Non ergo gratiam dicamus esse Doctrinam, sed agnos^amus
Gratiam quae facit prodesse Doctrinam; quae Gratia si desit, videmus etiam
obesse Doctrinam. August. Epist. 107. ad Vitalem.
proposing unto them, and urging upon them, Reasons, Arguments, and Motives to
that purpose; then after his whole Work, and notwithstanding it, the Will of
Man remains absolutely indifferent whether it will admit of them or no; or
whether it will convert it self unto God upon them or no; for the whole of this
Work consists in proposing Objects unto the Will, with respect whereunto it is
left undertermined whether it will choose and close with them or no. And indeed
this is that which some plead for. For they say, That in all Men, at least all
unto whom the Gospel is Preached, there is that Grace present, or with them,
that they are able to comply with the Word if they please, and so believe,
repent, or do any Act of Obedience unto God according to his Will. And if they
will, they can refuse to make use of this Assistance, Aid, Power, or Grace, and
so continue in their Sins. What this Grace is, or whence Men have this Power
and Ability, by some is not declared. Neither is it much to be doubted but that
many do imagine that it is purely Natural; only they will allow it to be called
Grace, because it is from God who made us. Others acknowledge it to be the Work
or Effect of Grace Internal, wherein part of the difference lay, between the
Pelagians and Semi-pelagians of old. But they all agree that it is absolutely
in the Power of the Will of Man to make use of it or not; that is, of the whole
Effect on them, or product in them of this Grace communicated in the way
described. For notwithstanding any thing wrought in us or upon us thereby, the
Will is still left various, flexible, and undetermined. It is true, that
notwithstanding the Grace thus Administered, the Will has Power to refuse it
and to abide in Sin. But that there is no more Grace wrought in us, but what
may be so refused, or that the Will can make use of that Grace for Conversion,
which it can refuse, is false.

our selves, and not to the Grace of God. For that Act of our Wills, on this
Supposition, whereby we convert unto God, is merely an Act of our own, and not
of the Grace of God. This is evident, for if the Act it self were of Grace,
then would it not be in the Power of the Will to hinder it. (2.) This would
leave it absolutely uncertain, notwithstanding the purpose of God, and the
purchase of Christ, whether ever any one in the World should be Converted unto
God or no. For when the whole Work of Grace is over, it is absolutely in the
Power of the Will of Man whether it shall be effectual or no; and so absolutely
uncertain; which is contrary to the Covenant, Promise, and Oath of God, unto
and with Jesus Christ. (3.) It is contrary to express Testimonies of Scripture
innumerable, wherein actual Conversion unto God is ascribed unto his Grace, as
the immediate Effect thereof. This will further appear afterward. God works
in us to will and to do, Phil. 2. 13. The Act therefore it self of willing in
our Conversion, is of God's Operation; and although we will our selves, yet it
is he who causes us to Will, by working in us to will and to do. And if the
Act of our Will in Believing and Obedience, in our Conversion to God, be not
the effect of his Grace in us, he does not work in us both to will and to do of
his own good Pleasure.

Moral Persuasion, how-ever advanced or improved, and supposed to be effectual,
yet it confers no new real supernatural strength unto the Soul. For whereas it
works, yea, the Spirit or Grace of God therein and thereby, by Reasons,
Motives, Arguments, and Objective Considerations and no otherwise, it is able
only to excite and draw out the strength which we have, delivering the Mind and
Affections from Prejudices and other Moral Impediments: Real Aid, Sed quid
illud est quo corporeorum sensuum pulsantur, in agro cordis cui impend^tur ista
cultura, nec radicem potest figere nec germen emittere, nisi ille summus and
verus Agricola potentia^ sui operis adhibuerit, and ad vitalem profectum ea
quae sent plantata perduxerit. Epist. ad Demetriadem.
and internal Spiritual Strength, neither is nor can be conferred thereby. And
he who will acknowledge that there is any such internal spiritual strength
communicated unto us, must also acknowledge that there is another Work of the
Spirit of God in us and upon us, than can be effected by these Persuasions. But
thus it is in this case as some suppose. The Mind of Man is affected with much
Ignorance, and usually under the Power of many Prejudices, which by the corrupt
course of things in the World, possess it from its first actings in the state
of Infancy. The Will and the Affections likewise are vitiated with depraved
Habits, which by the same means are contracted. But when the Gospel is proposed
and preached unto them, the Things contained in it, the Duties it requires, the
Promises it gives, are so rational or so suited unto the Principles of our
Reason, and the subject Matter of them is so good, desirable and beautiful unto
an intellectual Appetite, that being well conveyed unto the Mind, they are able
to discard all the Prejudices and Disadvantages of a corrupt course under which
it has suffered, and prevail with the Soul to desist from sin, that is, a
course of sinning, and to become a new Man in all virtuous Conversation. And
that this is in the Liberty and Power of the Will, is irrefragably proved by
that Sophism of Biel out of Scotus and Occam, which contains the substance of
what they plead in this Cause. Omni dictamini rectae rationis potest voluntas
se conformare; sed diligore Deum super omnia est dictamen rectae rationis;
ratio enim dictat inter omnia diligenda esse aliquid sum diligendum. Item
homo errans potest diligere creaturam super omnia, ergo etiam Deum; mirum enim
valde esset, quod voluntas se conformare possit dictamini erroneo and non
recto. Biel. 2. sent. distinc. 27. q. Art. 4.
Yea, thus to do, is so suitable unto the rational Principles of a
well-disposed Mind, that to do otherwise, is the greatest folly and madness in
the World. Especially will this Work of Conversion be unquestionably wrought,
if the Application of these means of it, be so disposed in the Providence of
God, as that they may be seasonable, with respect unto the Frame and Condition
of the Mind whereinto they are applied. And as sundry things are necessary to
render the means of Grace thus seasonable and congruous unto the present Frame,
Temper, and Disposition of the Mind, so in such a Congruity much of its
Efficacy does consist. And this, as it is said, is the Work of the Holy Ghost,
and an Effect of the Grace of God. For if the Spirit of God did not by the
Word, prevent, excite, stir up and provoke the Minds of Men; did he not help
and assist them when endeavoring to turn to God, in the removal of Prejudices
and all sorts of Moral Impediments, Men would continue and abide, as it were,
dead in Trespasses and Sins, at least their endeavors after Deliverance would
be weak and fruitless.

Hoc piarum mentium est, ut nihil sibi tribuant, sed totum Gratiae Dei; undo
quantumcunque aliquis det Gratiae Dei, etiamsi subtrahat potestati naturae aut
liberi arbitrii a pietate non recedit; cum vero aliquid Gratiae Dei subtrahitur
and Naturae tribuitur quod Gratiae est, ibi potest periculum intervenire.
Cassander. lib. Consult. Art. 68.
This is all the Grace, all the Work of the Spirit of God in our Regeneration
and Conversion, which some will acknowledge, so far as I can learn from their
Writings and Discourses. But that there is more required thereunto, I have
before declared. As also it has been manifested what is the true and proper
use and efficacy of these means in this Work. But to place the whole of it
herein, is that which Pelagius contended for of old; Yea, he granted a greater
Use and Efficacy of Grace, than I can find to be allowed in the present
confused Discourses of some on this Pelagiana haeresiae quo dogmate Catholicam
fidem destruere adorta sit, and quibus impietatum venenis viscera Ecclesiae
atque ipsa vitalia corporis Christi voluerit occupare, notiora sunt quam ut
opere Narrationis indigeant. Ex his tamen una est blasphemia, nequissimum and
subtilissimum germen aliarum, qua dicunt Gratiam Dei secundum merita hominum
dari. ^^um enim primo tantam naturae humanae vellent astruere sanitatem ut per
solum liberum arbitrium posset assequi Dei regnum; eo quod tam plene ipso
conditionis suae praesidio juvaretur; ut habens naturaliter rationalem
intellectum facile bonum eligeret malumque vitaret. Et ubi in utraque part
libera essent opera voluntatis, non facultatem his qui mali sunt deesse, sed
studium. Cum ergo ni dixi totam justitiam hominis ex naturali vellent
rectitudine ac possibilitate subsistere, atque hanc definitionem doctrina sana
respueret, damnatum a Catholicis sensum and multis postea haereticae fraudis
varietatibus coloratum, hoc apud se ingenio servaverunt, ut ad incipiendum, and
ad proficiendum, and ad perserverandum in bono necessariam homini Dei Gratiam
profiterentur. Sed in hac professione quomodo vasa irae molirentur irrepere,
ipsa Dei Gratia vasis misericordiae revelavit. Intellectum est enim,
saluberrimeque perspectum hoc tantum eos de Gratia confiteri, quod quaedam
libero Arbitrio sit Magistra, seque per cohorlationes, per Legem, per
Doctrinam, per Creaturam, per Contemplationem, per Miracula, perque terrores
extrinscus judicio ejus ostendat; quo unusquisque secundum Voluntatis suae
motum, si quaesurit inveniat, si petierit, recipiat; si pulsaverit introeat.
Prosp. ad Ruffin. de lib. Arbit.
Subject. Wherefore it is somewhat preposterous to endeavor an imposition of
such rotten Errors upon the Minds of Men, and that by crude Assertions, without
any pretense of proof, as is the way of many. And that the sole Foundation of
all their Harangues, namely, the suitableness of Gospel. Principles and
Promises unto our Wisdom and Reason, antecedently unto any saving Work of the
Spirit on our Minds, is directly contradictory to the Doctrine of our Apostle,
shall afterward be declared. But it may be it will be said, That it is not so
much what is Pelagian, and what is not, as what is Truth and what is not, that
is to be enquired after. And it is granted, that this is and ought to be our
first and principal Enquiry. But it is not unuseful to know in whose steps they
tread, who at this day oppose the doctrine of the Effectual Grace of Christ;
and what Judgment the Ancient Church made of their Principles and Opinions.

really and efficiently, especially by illumination, internal excitations of
the Mind and Affections; and if thereon the Will do put forth its Act, and
thereby determine it self in the choice of that which is good, in believing and
repenting; then the Grace thus administered concurs with it, helps and aids it
in the perfecting of its Act, so that the whole Work is of Grace. So pleaded
the Semi-Pelagians, and so do others continue to do. But all this while, the
way whereby Grace or the Spirit of God works this Illumination, excites the
Affections and Aids the Will, is by Moral Persuasion only, on real strength
being communicated or infused, but what the Will is at perfect liberty to make
use of or to refuse at pleasure. Now this in effect is no less than to
overthrow the whole Grace of Jesus Christ, and to render it useless. For it
ascribes unto Man the Honor of his Conversion, his Will being the principal
cause of it. It makes a Man to beget himself anew, or to be born again of
himself; to make himself differ from others, by that which he has not in an
especial manner received. It takes away the Analogy that there is between the
forming of the Natural Body of Christ in the Womb, and the forming of his
Mystical Body in Regeneration. It makes the Act of living unto God by Faith and
Obedience, to be a mere Natural Act, no Fruit of the Mediation or Purchase of
Christ, and allows the Spirit of God no more Power nor Efficacy in or toward
our Regeneration, than is in a Minister who preaches the Word, or in an
Orator, who eloquently and pathetically persuades to Virtue and dehorts from
Vice. And all these consequences it may be will be granted by some amongst us,
and allowed to be true; to that pass are things come in the World, through the
confident pride and ignorance of Men. But not only it may be, but plainly and
directly the whole Gospel and Grace of Christ are renounced where they are
admitted.

all that we Inaniter and perfunctorie potius quam veraciter pro eis ut
doctrinae cui adversantur credendo consentiant, Deo fundimus preces, si ad ejus
non pertinet Gratiam convertere ad fidem suam, ipsi fidei contrarias
voluntates. August. Epist. 107.
pray for, either for our selves or others, when we beg effectual Grace for
them or our selves. There was no Argument that the Ancients more pressed the
Pelagians withal, than that the Grace which they acknowledged, did not answer
the Prayers of the Church, or what we are taught in the Scripture to pray for.
We are to pray only for what God has promised, and for the communication of it
unto us in that way whereby he will work it and effect it. Now he is at a great
indifferency in this Matter, who only prays that God would persuade him or
others, to believe and to obey, to be converted or to convert himself. The
Church of God has always prayed that God would work these things in us; and
those who have a real concernment in them, do pray continually that God would
effectually work them in their Hearts. They pray that he would convert them,
that he would create a clean heart, and renew a right Spirit in them; that he
would give them Faith for Christ's sake, and increase it in them; and that in
all these things he would work in them by the exceeding greatness of his Power
both to will and to do according to his good pleasure. And there is not a
Pelagian in the World who e're once prayed for Grace, or gracious Assistance
against Sin and Temptation, with a sense of his want of it, but that his
Prayers contradicted his Profession. To think that by all these Petitions, with
others innumerable dictated unto us in the Scripture, and which a Spiritual
Sense of our Wants will engage into, we desire nothing but only that God would
persuade, excite and stir us up to put forth a Power and Ability of our own, in
the performance of what we desire, is contrary unto all Christian Experience.
Yea, for a Man to lie praying with Importunity, Earnestness, and Fervency, for
that which is in his own Power, and can never be effected but by his own Power,
is fond and ridiculous. And they do but mock God who pray unto him to do that
for them which they can do for themselves, and which God cannot do for them but
only when and as they do it for themselves. Suppose a Man to have a Power in
himself to believe and repent; suppose these to be such Acts of his Will as God
does not, indeed cannot by his Grace work in him, but only persuade him
thereunto, and show him sufficient Reason why he should so do; to what purpose
should this Man, or with what congruity could he pray that God would give him
Faith and Repentance. This some of late, as it seems, wisely observing, do
begin to scoff at and reproach the Prayers of Christians. For whereas in all
their Supplications for Grace, they lay the Foundation of them in an humble
Acknowledgment of their own vileness and impotency unto any thing that is
spiritually Good, yea, and a natural aversation from it, and a sense of the
Power and Working of the Remainder of in-dwelling Sin in them; hereby exciting
themselves unto that earnestness and importunity in their requests for Grace,
which their Prima Divini muneris Gratia est, ut erudiat nos ad nostrae
humilitatis Confessionem, and agnoscere faciat, quod si quid boni agimus per
illum possumus, sine quo nihil possumus. Prosp. sentent. 105. ex Augustinio.
Condition makes necessary, (which has been the constant practice of
Christians since there was one in the World); this is by them derided and
exposed to contempt. In the room therefore of such despised Prayers, I shall
supply them with an Ancient Form that is better suited unto their Principles.
Quicunque tribuit sibi bonum quod facit, etiamsi videtur nihil mali manibus
operari, jam cordis innocentiam perdidit in quo se largitori bonorum praetulit.
Hieron. in cap. 16. Proverb.
The Preface unto it is, Ille ad Deum digne elevat manus, ille Orationem bon^
Conscienti^ effundit qui potest dicere: The Prayer follows; Tu nosti Domine
quam Sanctae and Purae and Mundae sint ab omni malitia, and iniquitate, and
rapina quas ad te extendo manus. ^^uemadmodum justa and munda labia and ab omni
mendacio libera quibus offero tibi Deprecationes, O bone Domine Jesus, etsi ego
admisi und^ me damnare potes, tu non amisisti unde salvare soles. -- Verum est
Conscientia mea meretur Damnationem, and poenit^ntia mea non sufficit ad
satisfactionem. Sed certum est quod Misericordia tua superat omnem ossensionem.
Parce ergo mihi Domine, qui es salus vera and non vis mort^m peccatoris:
miserere Domine peccatrici animae meae, solve vincula ejus, sana vulnera ejus.
Ecce misericors Deus coram te exhibeo animam meam, virtutum muneribus
desolatam, catenis vitiorum ligatam, pondere peccatorum gravatam, delictorum
sordibus foedatam, discissam Vuln^ribus Doemonum* putidam and foetidam ^^eribus
criminum: his and aliis gravioribus malis quae tu melius vides quam ego,
obstrictam, oppressam, circumdatam, obvolutam, bonorum omnium relevamine
destitutam, etc.
ut mihi miserearis. This Prayer Pelagius taught a Widow to make, as it was
objected unto him in the Diospolitan Synod, that is at Lydia in Palestine, cap.
6. only he taught her not to say that she had no deceit in her Heart, as one
among us does wisely and humbly vaunt that he knows of none in his, so every
way perfect is the Man. Only to balance this of Pelagius, I shall give these
Men another Prayer, but in the Margen, not declaring whose it is, lest they
should censure him to the Gallows. Whereas therefore it seems to be the
Doctrine of some, that we have no Grace from Christ but only that of the Gospel
teaching us our Duty, and proposing a Reward; I know not what they have to pray
for, unless it be Riches, Wealth, and Preferments, with those things that
depend thereon.

Operation of Grace where it is solitary, that is, where it is asserted
exclusively to an internal Physical work of the Holy Spirit, is not suited to
effect and produce the Work of Regeneration or Conversion unto God, in Persons
who are really in that state of Nature which we have before described. The most
effectual Persuasions cannot prevail with such Men to convert themselves, no
more than Arguments can prevail with a blind Man to see, or with a dead Man to
rise from the Grave, or with a lame Man to walk steadily. Wherefore the whole
Description before given from the Scripture of the state of lapsed Nature, must
be disproved and removed out of the way, before his Grace can be thought
sufficient to be for the Regeneration and Conversion of Men in that Estate. But
some proceed on other Principles; Men, they say, have by Nature certain Notions
and Principles concerning God, and the Obedience due unto him; which are
demonstrable by the Light of Reason, and certain Abilities of Mind to make use
of them unto their proper End. But they grant, at least some of them do, that
however these Principles may be improved and acted by those Abilities, yet they
are not sufficient, or will not eventually be effectual to bring Men unto the
Life of God, or to enable them so to believe in him, love him, and obey him, as
that they may come at length unto the enjoyment of him; at least they will not
do this safely and easily, Gratia qua Christi populus sumus hoc cohibetur
Limine nobiscum, and formam hanc ascribitis illi; Vt cunctos vocet illa quidem
invitetque, neque ullum Praeterieus studeat communem adferre salutem Omnibus,
and totum peccato absolvere Mundum. Sed proprio quenque Arbitrio parere
vocanti, Judicioque suo, mota se extendere mente Ad lucem oblatam, quae se non
substrahat ulli; Sed cupidos recti juvet illustretque volentes. Hinc adjutoris
Domini bonitate Magistra Crescere virtutum studia, ut quid quisque petendum
Mandatis didicit jugi sectetur amore. Prosp. de Ingratis cap. 10.
but through much danger and confusion; wherefore * God out of his Goodness and
Love to Mankind, has made a further Revelation of himself by Jesus Christ in
the Gospel, with the especial way whereby his Anger against Sin is averted, and
Peace made for Sinners, which Men had before only a confused Apprehension and
Hope about. How the things received, proposed, and prescribed in the Gospel,
are so good, so rational, so every way suited unto the Principles of our
Beings, the Nature of our intellectual Constitutions, or the Reason of Men, and
those fortified with such rational and powerful Motives, in the Promises and
Threatenings of it, representing unto us on the one hand the chiefest Good which
our Nature is capable of, and on the other the highest evil to be avoided that
we are obnoxious unto, that they can be refused or rejected by none, but out of
a brutish love of Sin, or the efficacy of depraved Habits contracted by a
vicious course of living. And herein consists the Grace of God toward Men,
especially as the Holy Ghost is pleased to make use of these things in the
Dispensation of the Gospel by the Ministry of the Church. For when the Reason
of Men is by these means excited so far as to cast off Prejudice, and enabled
thereby to make a right Judgment of what is proposed unto it, it prevails with
them to convert to God, to change their Lives, and yield Obedience according to
the Rule of the Gospel that they may be saved.

And no doubt this were a notable Systeme of Christian Doctrine, especially as
it is by some Rhetorically blended, or Theatrically represented in feigned
Stories and Apologues, were it not defective in one or two things; For, first,
it is exclusive of a supposition of the fall of Man, at least as unto the
Depravation of our Nature which ensued thereon; and, Secondly, of all real
Effective Grace dispensed by Jesus Christ; Ploremus coram Domino qui fecit nos
and homines and salvos. Nam si ille nos fecit homines, nos autem ipsi nos
fecimus salvos, aliquid illo melius fecimus; melior est enim salvus homo quam
quilibet homo. Si ergo te Deus fecit hominem, and tu te fecisti bonum hominem,
quod tu fecisti melius est. Aug. de Verb. Apost. Sermon. 10.
which render it a Fantastic Dream, Natura humana etiamsi in illa integritate
in qua est condita, permaneret, nullo modo seipsam creatore suo non adjuvante
servaret. Vnde cum sine Dei Gratia salutem non posset custodire quam accepit,
quomodo sine Dei Gratia potest recuperare quam perdidit. Prosp. Sentent. 308.
alien from the Design and Doctrine of the Gospel. But it is a fond thing to
discourse with Men about either Regeneration or Conversion unto God, by whom
these things are denied.

Such a Work of the Holy Spirit we must therefore enquire after, as wherey the
Mind is effectually renewed, the Heart changed, the Affections sanctified, all
actually and effectually, or no Deliverance will be wrought, obtained, or
ensue, out of the Estate described. For notwithstanding the utmost improvement
of our Minds and Reasons that can be imagined, and the most eminent proposal of
the Truths of the Gospel, accompanied with the most powerful enforcements of
Duty and Obedience that the Nature of the things themselves will afford; yet
the Mind of Man in the state of Nature, without a supernatural Elevation by
Grace, is not able so to apprehend them, as that its Apprehension should be
Spiritual, Saving, or Proper unto the Things apprehended. And notwithstanding
the Perception which the Mind may attain unto in the Truth of Gospel-Proposals;
and the Conviction it may have of the necessity of Obedience, yet is not the
Will able to apply it self unto any Spiritual Act thereof, without an Ability
wrought immediately in it by the Power of the Spirit of God; or rather unless
the Spirit of God by his Grace do effect the Act of willing in it. Wherefore
not to multiply Arguments, we conclude, That the most effectual use of outward
means alone, is not all the Grace that is necessary unto, nor all that is
actually put forth in the Regeneration of the Souls of Men.

Regeneration of the Souls of Men, does not consist, namely, in a supposed
congruous Persuasion of their Minds where it is alone:

(1.) I shall proceed to show wherein it does consist, and what is the true
Nature of it. And to this purpose I say, (1.) Whatever efficacy that Moral
Operation, which accompanies, or is the Effect of the Preaching of the Word, as
blessed and used by the Holy Spirit, is of or may be supposed to be of, or is
possible that it should be of in and toward them that are unregenerate, we do
willingly ascribe unto it. We grant that in the Work of Regeneration, the Holy
Spirit toward those that are Adult, does make use of the Word, both the Law
and the Gospel, and the Ministry of the Church in the Dispensation of it, as
the ordinary means thereof; yea, this is ordinarily the whole external means
that is made use of in this Work, and an efficacy proper unto it, it is
accompanied withal. Whereas therefore some content that there is no more
needful to the Conversion of Sinners, but the Preaching of the Word unto them
who are congruously disposed to receive it, and that the whole of the Grace of
God consists in the effectual Application of it unto the Minds and Affections
of Men, whereby they are enabled to comply with it, and turn unto God by Faith
and Repentance; they do not ascribe a greater Power unto the Word, than we do
by whom this Administration of it is denied to be the total Cause of
Conversion. For we assign the same Power to the Word as they do, and more also,
only we affirm that there is an Effect to be wrought in this Work, which all
this Power, if alone, is insufficient for. But in its own kind is it sufficient
and effectual, so far as that the effect of Regeneration or Conversion unto God
is ascribed thereunto. This we have declared before.

Moral, At vero Omnipotens hominem cum Gratia salvat,
Ipsa suum consummat opus cui tempus agendi
Semper adest, quae gesta velit non moribus illi
Fit mora, non causis anceps suspenditur ullis.
Nec quod sola potest cura officioque Ministri
Exequitur, famulisve vicem committit agendi.
Qui quamvis multa admoneant mandata vocantis,
Pulsant non intrant animas, Deus ergo sepultos
Suscitat and solvit peccati compede vinctos.
Ille obscuratis Cordibus dat intellectum.
Ille ex injustis justos facit, indit amorem
Quo redametur amans; and amor quem conferet ipse est.
Hunc itaque Affectum quo sumunt mortua Vitam,
Quo tenebrae fiunt lumen, quo immunda vilescunt;
Quo stulti sapere incipiunt aegrique valescunt
Nemo alii dat, nemo sibi.
Prosp. de Ingrat. cap. 15.
but a Physical immediate Operation of the Spirit by his Power and Grace, or
his powerful Grace upon the Minds or souls of Men in their Regeneration. This
is that which we must cleave to, or all the Glory of God's Grace is lost, and
the Grace administered by Christ neglected. So is it asserted, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
That we may know what is the exceeding greatness of his Power toward us who
believe, according to the working of his Mighty Power; which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the Dead. The Power here mentioned, has an
exceeding Greatness ascribed unto it, with respect unto the Effect produced by
it. Legant ergo and intelligant, intueantur and fateantur, non lege atque
Doctrina insonante forinsecus, sed intima atque occulta, mirabili atque
inessabili potestate operari Deum in cordibus hominum non solum veras
Revelationes, sed etiam bonas Voluntates. August. lib. de Great. Christ. adv.
Pelagium and Caelest. cap. 24.
The Power of God in it self is as unto all Acts equally Infinite, he is
Omnipotent. But some Effects are greater than others, and carry in them more
than ordinary Impressions of it. Such is that here intended, whereby God makes
Men to be Believers, and preserves them when they are so. And unto this Power
of God, there is an Actual Operation or Efficiency ascribed, the working of his
mighty Power. And the Nature of this operation or efficiency is declared to be
of the same kind with that which exerted in the raising of Christ from the
Dead. And this was by a real Physical Efficiency of Divine Power. This
therefore is here testified, That the Work of God toward Believers, either to
make them so, or preserve them such, for all is one as unto our present
purpose, consists in the acting of his Divine Power by a real internal
Efficiency. So God is said to fulfill in us all the good pleasure of his
Goodness, and the Work of Faith with Power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. 2 Pet. 1. 3. And
hence the Work of Grace in Conversion is constantly expressed by words denoting
a real internal Efficiency, such are Creating, Quickening, Forming, Giving a new
Heart, whereof afterward. Wherever this Work is spoken of, with respect unto
an Active Efficiency it is ascribed unto God. He Creates us anew, he Quickens
us, he Begets us of his own Will; but where it is spoke of with respect unto
us, there it is passively expressed; we are Created in Christ Jesus, we are new
Creatures, we are Born again; and the like; which one Observation is sufficient
to evert the whole Hypothesis of Arminian Grace. Unless a Work wrought by
Power, and that real, and immediate be intended herein, such a Work may neither
be supposed possible, nor can be expressed. Wherefore it is plain in the
Scripture, That the Spirit of God works internally, immediately, efficiently in
and upon the Minds of Men in their Regeneration. The New Birth is the Effect of
an Act of his Power and Grace; or, no Man is born again but it is by the inward
Efficiency of the Spirit.

(3.) This Internal Efficiency of the Holy Spirit on the Minds of Men, as to
the Event, is Quid est omnis qui audivit a Patre, and didicit, venit ad me;
nisi nullus est qui audiat and discat a Patre and non veniat ad me? Si enim
omnis qui audivit a Patre and didicit, venit, profecto omnis qui non venit non
audivit a Patre nec didicit: nam si audisset and didicisset veniret, -- Haec
itaque Gratia quae occulte humanis Cordibus divina largitate tribuitur, a nullo
duro cord respuitur, ideo quippe tribuitur ut Cordis duritia primitus
auferatur. Augustine. de Praedestinatione Sanctorum, lib. 1. cap. 8.
infallible, victorious, irresistible, or always efficacious. But in this
Assertion, we suppose that the measure of the Efficacy of Grace, and the End to
be attained, are fixed by the Will of God. As to that End whereunto of God it
is designed, it is always prevalent or effectual and cannot be resisted; or,
it will effectually work what God designs it to work; for wherein he will work
none shall let him; and who has resisted his Will? There are many motions of
Grace even in the Hearts of Believers, which are thus far resisted, as that
they attain not that effect which in their own Nature have a tendency unto.
Were it otherwise, all Believers would be perfect. But it is manifest in
Experience, that we do not always answer the Inclinations of Grace, at least
as unto the Degree which it moves toward. But yet even such Motions also, if
they are of and from Saving Grace, are effectual so far, and for all those ends
which they are designed unto in the Purpose of God; for his Will shall not be
frustrate in any Instance. And where any Work of Grace is not effectual, God
never intended it should be so, nor did put forth that Power of Grace which was
necessary to make it so. O qualis est artifex ille Spiritus! nulla ad discendum
mora agitur in omne quod voluerit. Mox enim ut eligeret ment^n docet; solumque
tetigisse docuisse est. Nam humanum subito ut illustrat immutat affectum;
abnegat hoc repent quod erat, exhibet repent quod non erat. Gregor. Hom. 30.
in Evangel.
Wherefore in or toward whomsoever the Holy Spirit puts forth his Power, or
acts his Grace for their Regeneration, it removes all Obstacles, overcomes all
Oppositions, and infallibly produces the Effect intended. This Proposition
being of great importance to the Glory of God's Grace, and most signally
opposed by the Patrons of corrupted Nature and Man's free Will in the state
thereof, must be both explained and confirmed. We say therefore;

Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; draw me, and I shall run after thee. He
does neither act in them any otherwise than they themselves are meet to be
moved and move, to be acted and act, according to their own Nature, Power and
Ability. He draws us with the Cords of a Man. And the Work it self is expressed
by persuading, God persuade Japhet; and alluring; I will allure Her into the
Wilderness and speak comfortably: For as it is certainly effectual, so it
carries no more repugnancy unto our Faculties, than a prevalent Persuasion
does. So does;

Enthusiastical Impressions; nor acts absolutely upon us as he did in
extraordinary Prophetical Inspirations of old, where the Minds and Organs of
the Bodies of Men were merely Passive Instruments, moved by him above their own
natural capacity and activity, not only as to the Principle of Working, but as
to the manner of Operation. But he works on the Minds of Men, in and by their
own natural Actings, through an immediate influence and impression of his
Power. Create in me a clean Heart, O God. He works to will and to do.

(3.) He therefore offer no Christus non dicit, duxerit, ut illic aliquo modo
intelligamus praecedere voluntatem; sed dicit traxerit, quis autem trahitur si
jam volebat; and tamen nemo venit nisi velit, trahitur ergo miris modis ut
velit, ab illo qui novit intus in ipsis hominum cordibus operari; non ut
homines quod fieri non potest, nolentes credant, sed ut volentes ex nolentibus
fiant. August. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 19.

Idem de Great. and lib. Arbit. cap. 16.


Violence or Compulsion unto the Will. This that Faculty is not naturally
capable to give Admission unto. If it be compelled it is destroyed. And the
mention that is made in the Scripture of compelling (compel them to come in)
respects the certainty of the Event, not the manner of the Operation on them.
But whereas the Will in the depraved Condition of Fallen Nature, is not only
habitually filled and possessed with an aversation from that which is good
Spiritually, ( alienated from the Life of God) but also continually acts an
Opposition unto it, as being under the Power of the Carnal Mind which is Enmity
against God; And whereas this Grace of the Spirit in Conversion does prevail
against all this Opposition, and is effectual and victorious over it; it will
be enquired how this can any otherwise be done, but by a kind of Violence and
Compulsion; seeing we have evinced already that Moral Persuasion and Objective
Allurement is not sufficient thereunto? Answ. It is acknowledged, That in the
Work of Conversion unto God, though not in the very Act of it, there is a
Reaction between Grace and the Will, their Acts being contrary, and that Grace
is therein victorious; and yet no Violence or Compulsion is offered unto the
Will, For;

ad idem. The Enmity and Opposition that is acted by the Will against Grace, is
against it as objectively proposed unto it. So do Men resist the Holy Ghost;
that is, in the external Dispensation of Grace by the Word. And if that be
alone, they may always resist it; the Enmity that is in them will prevail
against it; Ye always resist the Holy Ghost. The Will therefore is not forced
by any Power put forth in Grace, in that way wherein it is capable of making
opposition unto it, but the prevalency of Grace is of it as it is internal,
working really and physically, which is not the Object of the Wills opposition;
for it is not proposed unto it, as that which it may accept or refuse, but
works effectually in it.

Act of Conversion, (as even sundry of the Schoolmen acknowledge) acts not but
as it is acted, moves not but as it is moved, and therefore is passive therein
in the sense immediately to be explained: And if this be not so, it cannot be
avoided, but that the Act of our turning unto God is a mere natural Act, and
not spiritual or gracious. For it is an Act of the Will not enabled thereunto
antecedently by Grace. Wherefore it must be granted, and it shall be proved,
that in Order of Nature, the Acting of Grace in the Will in our Conversion is
antecedent unto its own acting; though in the same instant of time wherein the
Will is moved, it moves; and when it is acted, it acts it self, and preserves
its own Liberty in its exercise. There is therefore herein an inward almighty
secret Act of the Power of the Holy Ghost, producing or effecting in us the
Will of Conversion unto God, so acting our Wills, as that they also act
themselves, and that freely. So Austin, cont. Duas Epistol. Pelag. lib. 1. cap.
19. Trahitur (homo) miris modis ut velit, ab illo qui novit intus in ipsis
cordibus hominum operari, non ut homines, quod fieri non possit, nolentes
credant, sed ut volentes ex nol^ntibus fiant. The Holy Spirit who in his Power
and Operation is more intimate, as it were, unto the Principles of our Souls
than they are to themselves, does with the Preservation, and in the Exercise of
the liberty of our Wills, effectually work our Regeneration and Conversion unto
God. This is the substance of what we plead for in this Cause, and which
declares the Nature of this Work of Regeneration, as it is an inward Spiritual
Work. I shall therefore confirm the Truth proposed with evident Testimonies of
Scripture, and Reasons contained in them or educed from them.

Work of Conversion it self, and in especial the Act of believing, or Restat ut
ipsam fidem unde omnis Justi^i^ sumit initium, non humano, quo isti
extolluntur, tribuamus arbitrio, nec ullis precedentibus meritis, quoniam inde
incipiunt bon^ quaecunque sunt merita s^d grataitum Dei donum esse fateamur, si
gratiam veram, id est, sine Meritis cogitemus. August. Epist. 105.

Nollem Ergohis tam claris testimoniis repugnare, and tamen volens a seipso
sibi esse quod credit, quasi componit cum Deo ut partem fidei sibi vendicet,
atque illi partem relinquat; and quod est elatius, primam tollit ipse,
sequentem dat illi; and in eo ^uod dicit esse amborum, priorem se, posteri^rem
facit Deum. August. de Praedest. Sanct. cap. 2.


Faith it self is expressly said to be of God, to be wrought in us by him, to be
given unto us from him. The Scripture says not that God gives us Ability or
Power to believe only, namely, such a Power a we may make use of if we will,
or do otherwise; but Faith, Repentance, and Conversion themselves are said to
be the Work and Effect of God. Indeed there is nothing mentioned in the
Scripture concerning the communicating of Power remote or next unto the Mind of
Man, to enable him to believe antecedently unto actual believing. A remote
Power, if it may be so called, in the Capacities of the Faculties of the Soul,
the Reason of the Mind, and Liberty of the Will, we have given an account
concerning. But for that which some call a next Quando Deus docet per Spiritus
Gratiam, it a docet ut quod quisque didicerit non tantum cognoscendo videat.
sed etiam volendo appetat agendoque perficiat. Et ipso Divino Docendi modo
etiam ipsa Voluntas, and ipsa operatio non sola volendi and operandi naturalis
possibilitas adjuvatur. Si enim solum posse nostrum hac Gratia Juvaretur, ita
diceret Dominus, omnis qui audiverit a Patre and didicit poest venire ad me.
August. de Great. Christ. Contra Pelagium, cap. 14.
Power, or an ability to believe in order of Nature Antecedent unto Believing
it self, wrought in us by the Grace of God, the Scripture is silent. The
Apostle Paul says of himself, (...), Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things, or
prevail in all things, through Christ who enableth me; where a Power or Ability
seems to be spoken of antecedent unto Acting. But this is not a Power for the
first Act of Faith, but a Power in them that believe. Such a Power I
acknowledge, which is acted in the Cooperation of the Spirit and Grace of
Christ, with the Grace which Believers have received, unto the performance of
all Acts of Holy Obedience, whereof I must treat elsewhere. Believers have a
stock of Habitual Grace, which may be called Indwelling Grace, in the same
sense wherein Original Corruption is called Indwelling-Sin. And this Grace, as
it is necessary unto every Act of Spiritual Obedience, so of it self without
the renewed Co-working of the Spirit of Christ, it is not able nor sufficient
to produce any Spiritual Act. This working of Christ upon, and with the Grace
we have received, is called enabling of us. But with Persons Unregenerate, and
as to the first Act of Faith, it is not so.

in potentia before. There must therefore be in us a Power to believe before we
do so actually. Answ. The Act of God working Faith in us, is a Creating Act.
For we are his Workmanship created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 10. And he that
is in Christ Jesus is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Now the effects of Creating
Acts are not in Potentia any-where but in the Active Power of God; so was the
World it self before its actual existence. This is termed Potentia Logica;
which is no more but a Negation of any contradiction to Existence; not Potentia
Physica, which includes a disposition unto actual existence. Notwithstanding
therefore all these Preparatory Works of the Spirit of God, which we allow in
this Matter, there is not by them wrought in the Minds and Wills of Men, such a
next Power, as they call it, as should enable them to believe without further
Actual Grace working Faith it self. Wherefore with respect to believing, the
first Act of God is to work in us to will; Phil. 1. 13. He works in us to
will. Now to will to believe, is to believe. This God works in us by that Grace
which Austin and the Schoolmen call Gratia Operans, because it works in us,
without us, the Will being merely moved and passive therein. That there is a
Power or Faculty of believing, given unto all Men unto whom the Gospel is
preached, or who are called by the outward Dispentation of it, some do pretend.
And that because those unto whom the Word is so Pr^ac^ed, if they do not
actually believe, shall perish eternally, as is positively declared in the
Gospel, Mark 16. 16. But this they could not justly do, if they had not
received a Power or Faculty of Believing.

Answ. 1. Those who believe not upon the Proposal of Christ in the Gospel, are
left without remedy in the guilt of those other Sins, for which they must
perish eternally; If you believe not, says Christ, that I am he, you shall die
in your sins, John 8. 12.

(2.) The Impotency that is in Men as to the act of believing, is contracted by
their own fault, both as it arises from the Original Depravation of Nature,
and as it is increased by corrupt Prejudices and contracted Habits of Sin;
wherefore they justly perished, of whom yet it is said, That they could not
believe, John 12. 39.

(3.) There is none by whom the Gospel is refused, but they put forth an Act of
the Will in its Rejection, which all Men are free unto and able for. I would
have gathered you but you would not, Mat. 23. 37. You will not come to me that
you may have life.

could not believe, John 12. 39. And of all natural Men, that they cannot
perceive the Things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. neither is it given unto all to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but some only, Matthew. 11. 25. And those to
whom it is not so given, have not the Power intended. Besides, Faith is not of
all, have not Faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. But it is peculiar to the Elect of God,
Tit. 1. 1. Acts 13. 48. And these Elect, are but some of those that are called,
Mat. 20. 16.

Act of Willing may be considered two ways. (1.) As it wrought in the Will
subjectively, and so it is formally only in that Faculty. And in this sense the
Will is merely passive, and only the Subject moved or acted. And in this
respect the Act of God's Grace in the Will, is an Act of the Will. But (2.) it
may be considered as it is efficiently also in the Will, as being acted it acts
it self. So it is from the Will as its Principle, and is a Vital Act thereof,
which gives it the Nature of Obedience. Thus the Will in its own Nature is
mobilis; fit and meet to be wrought upon by the Grace of the Spirit, to Faith
and Obedience; with respect unto the Creating Act of Grace working Faith in us,
it is mota, moved and acted thereby. And in respect of its own elicit Act, as
it so acted and moved, it is movens, the next efficient cause thereof.

Si quis sine Gratia Dei credentibus, volentibus, desiderantibus, conantibus
misericordiam dicit conferri; non autem divinitus ut credamus, velimus, per
infusionem and inspirationem Spiritus Sancti in nobis fieri confitetur,
anathema sit. Conc. Arausic. 2. Can. 6.

Datur potestas ut Filii Dei fiant qui credunt in eum, cum hoc ipsum datur ut
credant in eum. Quae potestas nisi detur a Deo nulla esse potest ex libero
Arbitrio, quia nec liberum in how erit quod liberator non liberaverit. August.
lib. 1. cont. Duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 3.


actual collation of Faith upon us by the Spirit and Grace of God, which must
needs be effectual and irresistible; for the contrary implies a contradiction,
namely, that God should work what is not wrought; Phil. 1. 29. To you it is
given on the behalf of Christ; not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake. To believe on Christ, expresses Saving-Faith it self. This is
given unto us. And how is it given us? Even by the Power of God working in us
to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Chap. 1. 13. Restat ut ipsam fidem
unde omnis Justitia sumit initium, non humano, quo isti extolluntur, tribuamus
arbitrio, nec ullis precedentibus meritis, quoniam jude incipiunt bona
quaecunque sunt merita, sed gratuitum Dei donum esse fateamur, si gratiam
veram, id est, sine Meritis cogitemus. August. Epist. 105.
Our Faith is our coming to Christ. And no Man, says he, can come unto me,
except it be given him of my Father, Joh. 6. 65. All Power in our selves for
this end is utterly taken away; no Man can come unto me. How-ever we may
suppose Men to be prepared or disposed, whatever Arguments may be proposed
unto them, and in what season soever to render things congruous and agreeable
unto their Inclinations, yet no Man of himself can believe, can come to Christ,
unless Faith it self be given unto him; that is be wrought in him by the Grace
of the Father, Col. 2. 11. So it is again asserted, and that both negatively
and positively; Ephesians. 2. 8. By Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the Gift of God. Our own Ability, be it what it will,
how-ever assisted and excited, and God's Gift are contra-distinguished. If it
be our selves it is not the Gift of God; if it be the Gift of God, it is not of
our selves. And the manner how God bestows this Gift upon us, is declared v.
10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. Good
Works, or Gospel-Obedience, are the things designed. These must proceed from
Faith, or they are not acceptable with God, Heb. 11. 6. And the way whereby
this is wrought in us, or a Principle of Obedience, is by a Creating Act of
God; we are his Workmanship created in Jesus Christ. In like manner God is said
to give us Repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. Acts 11. 18. This is the whole of what we
plead. God in our Conversion, by the exceeding greatness of his Power, as he
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead, actually works Faith and
Repentance in us; gives them unto us, bestows them on us, so that they are mere
Effects of his Grace in us. And his working in us, infallibly produces the
Effect intended, because it is actual Faith that he works; and not only a Power
to believe, which we may either put forth and make use of, or suffer to be
fruitless according to the pleasure of our own Wills.

way whereby he does it, or the manner how he is said to effect them in us,
make it evident that he does it by a Power infallibly efficacious, and which
the Will of Man does never resist. For this way is such, as that he thereby
takes away all Repugnancy, all Resistance, all Opposition, every thing that
lies in the way of the Effect intended; Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will
circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thine Seed, to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and all thy Soul, that thou may live. A denial of the
Work here intended, is expressed Chap. 29. 4. The Lord has not given you an
Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear unto this day. What it is
to have the Heart circumcised, the Apostle declares, Col. 2. 11. It is the
putting off of the Body of the Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ;
that is, our Conversion to God. It is the giving an Heart to perceive, and Eyes
to see, and Ears to hear, that is, Spiritual Light and Obedience by the removal
of all Obstacles and Hindrances. This is the immediate Work of the Spirit of
God himself. No Man ever circumcised his own heart. No Man can say he began to
do it by the Power of his own Will, and then God only helped him by his Grace.
As the Act of outward Circumcision on the body of a Child, was the Act of
another, and not of the Child who was only passive therein, but the Effect was
in the Body of the Child only; so is it in this Spiritual Circumcision. It is
the Act of God whereof our Hearts are the Subject. And whereas it is the
Blindness, Obstinacy, and Stubbornness in Sin, that is in us by Nature, with
the Prejudices which possess our Minds and Affections, which hinder us from
Conversion unto God, by this Circumcision they are taken away. For by it, the
Body of the Sins of the Flesh is put off. And how should the Heart resist the
Work of Grace, when that whereby it should resist is effectually taken away?

A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and
I will take away the stony heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an
Heart of Flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. To which may be added,
Jer. 24. 7. And I will give them an Heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and
they shall be my People, and I will be their God; so they shall return unto me
with their whole Heart. As also Isa. 44. 3, 4, 5. I will pour Water upon him
that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy
Seed, and my Blessing on thy Offspring, and they shall spring up as among the
Grass, as Willows by the Watercourse. One shall say I am the Lord's. So Jer.
31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts.
I shall first enquire two things about these Concurrent Testimonies. (1.) Is it
lawful for us, is it our duty to pray that God would do and effect what he had
promised to do, and that both for our selves and others? For our selves, that
the Work of our Conversion may be renewed, carried on and consummated in the
way and by the means whereby it was begun; that so he who has begun the good
Work in us, may perfect it to the Day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 6. For those
who are Converted and Regenerated, and are persuaded on good and infallible
grounds that so they are, may yet pray for those things which God promises to
work in their first Conversion. And this is, because the same Work is to be
preserved and carried on in them by the same Means, the same Power, the same
Grace wherewith it was begun. And the Reason is, because this Work, as it is
merely the Work of Conversion, is immediately perfected and completed as to
the being of it; yet as it is the beginning of a Work of Sanctification, it is
continually to be renewed and gone over again, because of the remainder of Sin
in us, and the imperfection of our Grace. For others that it may be both begun
and finished in them. And do we not in such Prayers desire, That God would
really, powerfully, effectually, by the internal Efficiency of his Spirit, take
away all Hindrances, Oppositions, and Repugnancy in our Minds and Wills, and
actually collate upon us, give unto us, and work in us, a new Principle of
Obedience, that we may assuredly love, fear, and trust in God always? Or, do
we only desire that God would so help us, as to leave us absolutely
undetermined, whether we will make use of his help or no? Did ever any pious
Soul couch such an Intention in his Supplications? He knows not how to pray,
who prays not that God would by his own immediate Power, work those things in
him which he thus prays for. And unto this Prayer also Grace effectual is
antecedently required. Semper quidem adjutorium Gratiae nobis est a Deo
poscendum, sed nec ipsum quod possumus viribus nostris assignem. Neque enim
haberi potest ipse saltem orationis affectus nisi Divinitus fuerit attributus.
Vt ergo desideremus adjutorium Gratiae, hoc ipsum quoque est Gratiae, ipsa
namque incipit effundi ut incipiat posci. Fulgent. Epist. 6. ad Theod.
Wherefore I enquire, (Secondly) Whether God does really effect and work in any
the things which he here promises that he will Work and Effect? If he does
not, where is his Truth and Faithfulness? It is said that he does so, and will
do so, provided that Men do not refuse his tender of Grace, nor resist his
Operations, but comply with them. But this yields no relief.

not to refuse the Grace of Conversion, but to comply with it? Is it not to
believe, to obey, to convert our selves; so then God promises to Convert us,
on condition that we Convert our selves; to work Faith in us on condition that
we do believe; and a new Heart, on condition that we make our Hearts new our
selves. To this are all the Adversaries of the Grace of God brought by those
Conditions which they feign of its Efficacy to preserve the Sovereignty of
Free Will in our Conversion, that is, unto plain and open Contradictions, which
have been charged sufficiently upon them by others, and from which they could
never extricate themselves. (2.) Hoc promittit Deus quod ipse facit; non enim
ipse promittit and alius facit, quod jam non est promittere sed praedicere.
Ideo non ex operibus sed ex vocante, ne ipsorum sit, non Dei. August. de
Spirit. and Lit. cap. 24.
Where God promises thus to work, as these Testimonies do witness, and does
not effectually do so; it must be either because he cannot or because he will
not; if it be said, that he does it not, because he will not, then this is that
which is ascribed unto God; that he promises indeed to take away our stony
Heart, and to give us a new Heart with his Law written in it, but he will not
do so, which is to overthrow his Faithfulness and to make him a liar. If they
say it is, because he cannot, seeing that Men oppose and resist the Grace
whereby he would work this Effect; then where is the wisdom of promising to
work that in us, which he knew he could not effect without our compliance, and
which he knew that we would not comply withal? But it will be said, that God
promises to work and effect these things, but in such a way as he has
appointed; that is, by giving such supplies of Grace as may enable us
thereunto, which if we refuse to make use of, the fault is merely our own.
Answ. It is the things themselves that are promised, and not such a
communication of means to effect them, as may produce them, or may not, as the
consideration of the places will manifest: whereof observe;

Subject spoken of in these Promises, is the Heart. And the Heart in the
Scripture is taken for the whole rational Soul, not absolutely, but as all the
Faculties of the Soul are one common Principle of all our Moral Operations.
Hence it has such Properties assigned unto it as are peculiar to the Mind or
Understanding, as to see, perceive, to be wise, and to understand; and on the
contrary, to be blind and foolish; sometimes such as belong properly to the
Will and Affections, as to Obey, to Love, to Fear, to Trust in God. Wherefore
the Principle of all our Spiritual and Moral Operations is intended hereby.

Antecedent unto the effectual working of the Grace of God in us: It is said to
be stony. The heart of stone. It is not absolutely, that it is said so to be
but with respect unto some certain End. This End is declared to be our walking
in the ways of God, or our fearing of him. Wherefore our Hearts by Nature, as
unto living to God, or his Fear, are a stone, or stony; and who has not
Experience hereof from the Remainders of it still abiding in them? And two
things are included in this Expression. (1.) An ineptitude unto any actings
toward that End. Whatever else the Heart can do of it self, in things Natural
or Civil, in outward things; as to the end of living unto God, it can of it
self without his Grace, do no more than a Stone can do of it self, unto any end
whereunto it may be applied. (2.) An obstinate, stubborn Opposition unto all
things conducing unto that End. Its hardness or obstinacy in Opposition to the
pliableness of an heart of flesh, is principally intended in this Expression.
And in this stubbornness of the Heart, consists all that Repugnancy to the
Grace of God, which is in us by Nature, and whence all that Resistance does
arise, which some say is always sufficient to render any Operation of the
Spirit of God by his Grace fruitless.

Impotency and Emmity which is in our Natures unto Conversion and Spiritual
Obedidience, God says, Haec Gratia quae occulte humanis cordinus divina
largitate tribuitur, a nullo duro cord respuitur; Ideo quippe tribuitur, ut
cordis durities primitus auferatur. August. de Praedest. Sanctor. cap. 8.
He will take away; that is, he will do so in them who are to be converted
according to the purpose of his Will, and whom he will turn unto himself. He
does not say that he will endeavor to take it away, nor that he will use such
or such means for the taking of it away, but absolutely that he will take it
away. He does not say that he will persuade with Men to remove it or do it
away, that he will aid and help them in their so doing, and that so far as that
it shall wholly be their own fault if it be not done, which no doubt it is,
where it is not removed; but positively that he himself will take it away.
Wherefore the Act of taking it away, is the Act of God by his Grace, and not
the Act of our Wills, but as they are acted thereby; and that such an Act as
whose Effect is necessary. It is impossible that God should take away the stony
Heart, and yet the stony Heart not be taken away. What therefore God promises
herein, in the removal of our Natural Corruption, is as unto the Event
infallible, and as to the manner of Operation irresistible.

takes from us in the Cure of our Original Disease, so what he bestows on
us, or works in us, is here also expressed; and this is a new Heart and a new
Spirit. I will give you a new Heart. And withal it is declared what benefit we
do receive thereby. For those who have this new Heart bestowed on them, or
wrought in them, they do actually by virtue thereof, fear the Lord and walk in
his ways. For so it is affirmed in the Testimonies produced, and no more is
required thereunto, as nothing less will effect it. There must therefore be in
this new Heart thus given us a Principle of all Holy Obedience unto God, the
creating of which Principle in us is our Conversion to him; for God does
convert us, and we are converted. And how is this new Heart communicated unto
us? I will, says God, give them a new Heart. That is, it may be, he will do
what is to be done on his part that they may have it. But we may refuse his
Assistance and go without it. No, says he, I will put a new Spirit within
them; which expression is capable of no such limitation or condition. And to
make it more plain yet, he affirms that he will write his Law in our Hearts. It
is confessed that this is spoken with respect unto his writing of the Law of
old in Tables of Stone. As then he wrote the Letter of the Law in the Tables of
Stone, so that thereon and thereby they were actually engraven therein; so by
writing the Law, that is, the matter and substance of it in our Hearts, it is
as really fixed therein, as the Letter of it was of old in the Tables of Stone.
And this can be not otherwise, but in a Principle of Obedience and Love unto
it, which is actually wrought of God in us. And the Aids or Assistances which
some Men grant, that are left unto the power of our own Wills to use or not to
use, have no Analogy with the writing of the Law in Tables of Stone. And the
end of the Work of God described, is not a Power to obey, which may be exerted
or not. But it is Actual Obedience in Conversion, and all the Fruits of it. And
if God does not in these Promises declare a real Efficiency of Internal Grace,
taking away all Repugnancy of Nature unto Conversion, curing its Depravation
actually and effectually, and communicating infallibly a Principle of Spiritual
Obedience, I know not in what words such a Work may be expressed. And whatever
is excepted as to the suspending of the Efficacy of this Work upon conditions
in our selves, it falls immediately into gross and sensible contradictions. And
an especial Instance of this Work we have Acts 16. 14.

Powerful, Internal, Effectual Grace which we plead, such as wherein the Mind
and Will of Man can act nothing in or toward Conversion of God, but as they
are acted by Grace. The Reason why some despise, some oppose, some deride the
Work of the Spirit of God in our Regeneration or Conversion, or fancy it to be
only an outward Ceremony, or a moral change of Life and Conversation, is their
ignorance of the corrupted and depraved Estate of the Souls of Men, in their
Minds, Wills, and Affections by Nature. For if it be such as we have described,
that is such as in the Scripture it is represented to be, they cannot be so
brutish as once to imagine that it may be cured, or that Men may be delivered
from it, without any other Aid but that of those rational Considerations, which
some would have to be the only means of our Conversion to God. We shall
therefore enquire what that Grace is, and what it must be whereby we are
delivered from it.

vivification or quickening. We are by Nature dead in Trespasses and Sins as
has been proved, and the Nature of that Death at large explained. In our
deliverance from thence we are said to be quickened, Ephesians. 5. 5. Though Dead,
we hear the Voice of the Son of God and live, John 5. 25. Being made alive unto
God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 11. Now no such Work can be wrought in us,
but by an effectual communication of a Principle of Spiritual Life, and nothing
else will deliver us. Some think to evade the Power of this Argument, by
saying, That all these Expressions are Metaphorical, and arguings from them are
but fulsome Metaphors. And it is well if the whole Gospel be not a Metaphor
unto them. But if there be not an impotency in us by Nature unto all Acts of
Spiritual Life; like that which is in a dead Man unto the Acts of Life Natural;
if there be not an alike Power of God required unto our Deliverance from that
Condition, and the working in us a Principle of Spiritual Obedience, as is
required unto the raising of him that is dead, they may as well say, That the
Scripture speaks not truly, as that it speaks metaphorically. And that it is
Almighty Power, the exceeding greatness of God's Power that is put forth and
exercised herein, we have proved from Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. Col. 2. 12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. 2 Pet. 1. 3. And what do these Men intend by this quickening, this
raising us from the Dead by the Power of God? A persuasion of our Minds by
rational Motives taken from the Word, and the Things contained in it? But was
there ever heard of such a monstrous Expression, if there be nothing else in
it? What could the Holy Writers intend by calling such a Work as this by a
quickening of them who were dead in Trespasses and Sins, through the mighty
Power of God, unless it were by a noise of insignificant words, to draw us off
from a right understanding of what is intended? And it is well if some are not
of that Mind.

Habits of Grace. And on such a Supposition a Man is no longer a Believer, than
he is in the Actual Exercise of Faith. For there is nothing in him from whence
he should be so denominated. But this would plainly overthrow the Covenant of
God, and all the Grace of it. Others expressly deny all gracious supernatural
infused Habits, though they may grant such as are or may be acquired by the
frequent Acts of those Graces or Virtues whereof they are the Habits. But the
Scripture gives us another Description of this Work of Regeneration, for it
consists in the Renovation of the Image of God in us, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Be
renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, and put on that new Man, which after God is
created in Righteousness and true Holiness. That Adam in innocence had a
supernatural Ability of living unto God, habitually residing in him, is
generally acknowledged. And although it were easy for us to prove, that
whereas he was made for a supernatural End, namely to live to God and to come
to the enjoyment of him, it was utterly impossible that he should answer it or
comply with it by the mere strength of his natural Faculties, had they not been
endued with a supernatural Ability, which with respect unto that End, was
created with them and in them. Yet we will not contend about Terms. Let it be
granted that he was created in the Image of God, and that he had an Ability to
fulfill all God's Commands, and that in himself, and no more shall be desired.
This was lost by the Fall. When this is by any denied it shall be proved. In
our Regeneration there is a Renovation of this Image of God in us. Renewed in
the Spirit of our Minds. And it is renewed in us by a Creating Act of Almighty
Power, which after God, or according to his likeness, is created in
Righteousness and true Holiness. There is therefore in it an Implantation of a
new Principle of Spiritual Life, of a Life unto God in Repentance Faith and
Obedience, or Universal Holiness according to Gospel Truth, or the Truth which
came by Jesus Christ, John 1. 18. And the Effect of this Work is called Spirit;
Joh. 8. 5. That which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. It is the Spirit of God
of whom we are born; that is, our new Life is wrought in us by his Efficiency.
And that which in us is so born of him, is Spirit; not the Natural Faculties of
our Souls, they are once Created, once Born, and no more; but a new Principle
of Spiritual Obedience, whereby we live unto God. And this is the product of
the internal immediate Efficiency of Grace.

This will the better appear if we consider the Faculties of the Soul
distinctly, and what is the especial Work of the Holy Spirit upon them in our
Regeneration or Conversion to God. (1.) The leading conducting Faculty of the
Soul is the Mind or Understanding. Now this is corrupted and vitiated by the
Fall, and how it continues depraved in the State of Nature, has been declared
before. The sum is, that it is not able to discern Spiritual Things in a
Spiritual manner, for it is possessed with Spiritual Blindness or Darkness, and
is filled with enmity against God and his Law, esteeming the things of the
Gospel to be foolishness, because it is alienated from the Life of God through
the ignorance that is in it: We must therefore enquire what is the Work of the
Holy Spirit on our Minds in turning of us to God, whereby this Depravation is
removed, and this vicious State cured; whereby we come to see and discern
Spiritual Things in a Spiritual manner; that we may savingly know God and his
Mind as revealed in and by Jesus Christ. And this is several ways declared in
the Scripture.

The Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may know
him that is True; which he does by his Spirit. Man by Sin is become like the
Beasts that perish which have no Understanding, Psalm. 49. 12, 20. Men have not
lost their natural intellective Faculty or Reason absolutely; It is continued
unto them with the free though impaired use of it, in things Natural and Civil.
And it hat an advance in Sin. Men are wise to do evil. Prorsus si Dei
adjutorium desuerit, nibil boni agere poteris; agis quidem illo non adjuvante
libera voluntate, sed male; ad hoc idonea est Voluntas tua quae vocatur libera,
and male agendo fit damnabilis ancilla. August. Sermon. 13. de Verb. Apostol.
But it is lost as to the especial use of it in the saving knowledge of God and
his Will; to do good they have no knowledge, Jer. 4. 22. For naturally, there is
none that understands that seeks after God, Romans 3. 17. It is corrupted not
so much in the Root and Principle of its Acting, as with respect unto their
proper Object, Term, and End. Wherefore although this giving of an
Understanding, be not the creating in us anew of that Natural Faculty; yet it
is that gracious work in it, without which that Faculty in us as depraved, will
no more enable us to know God savingly, than if we had none at all. The Grace
therefore here asserted in the giving of an Understanding, is the causing of
our natural Understandings to understand savingly. This David prays for, Psalm.
119. 34. Give me Understanding and I shall keep thy Law. The whole Work is
expressed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the knowledge of him, the eyes of your understanding being opened,
that you may know what is the hope of his calling, etc. That the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation, is the Spirit of God working those Effects in us, we
have before evinced. And it is plain, that the Revelation here intended is
subjective, in the enabling us to apprehend what is revealed, and not objective
in new Revelations which the Apostle prayed not that they might receive. And
this is further evidenced by the ensuing Description of it, the eyes of your
Understanding being opened. There is an Eye in the Understanding of Man, that
is, the natural Power and Ability that is in it to discern Spiritual Things.
But this Eye is sometimes said to be blind, sometimes to be darkness, sometimes
to be shut or closed. And nothing but the impotency of our Minds to know God
savingly, or discern things spiritually when proposed unto us, can be intended
thereby. It is the Work of the Spirit of Grace to open this eye, Luke 4. 18.
Acts 26. 18. Erat Lux vera quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc
mundum; quod ideo dictum est, quia nullus hominum illuminatur, nisi illo lumine
Veritatis quod Deus est, ne quisquam putaret ab eo se illuminari a quo aliquid
audit ut discat; non dico si quenquam magnum hominem sed nec si angelum ei
contingat habere Doctorem. Adhibetur enim sermo Veritatis extrinsecus vocis
ministerio corporali; Verumtamen neque qui plantat est aliquid, neque qui
rigat; sed qui incrementum dat Deus. Audit quippe homo dicentem vel hominem vel
angelum, sed ut sentiat and cognoscat verum esse quod dicitur, illo lumine
intus men's aspergitur quod aeternum manet, quod etiam in tenebris lucet.
August. de peccator. Merit. and Remiss. lib. 1. cap. 25.
And this is the powerful effectual removal of that depravation of our Minds
with all its Effects, which we before described. And how are we made Partakers
hereof? It is of the Gift of God, freely and effectually working of it. For
(1.) he gives us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation to that End. And (2.)
works the thing it self in us. He gives us an Heart to know him, Jer. 24. 7.
without which we cannot so do, or he would not himself undertake to work it in
us for that end. There is therefore an effectual, powerful, creating Act of the
Holy Spirit put forth in the Minds of Men in their Conversion unto God,
enabling them Spiritually to discern Spiritual Things; wherein the Seed and
Substance of Divine Faith is contained.

Renovation of our Minds; renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, Ephesians. 4. 23.
which is the same with being renewed in knowledge, Col. 3. 10. And this
Renovation of our Minds, has in it a transforming Power, to change the whole
Soul into an obediential frame toward God, Romans 12. 2. And the work of
renewing our Minds is peculiarly ascribed unto the Holy Spirit. Tit. 3. 5. The
renewing of the Holy Ghost. Some Men seem to fancy, yea, do declare, that there
is no such Depravation in or of the Mind of Man, but that he is able by the use
of his Reason to apprehend receive and discern those Truths of the Gospel which
are objectively proposed unto it. But of the use of Reason in these Matters,
and its Ability to discern and judge of the sense of Propositions, and force of
Inferences in Things of Religion, we shall treat afterward. At present I only
enquire whether Men Unregenerate be of themselves able Spiritually to discern
Spiritual Things, when they are proposed unto them in the Dispensation of the
Gospel, so as their knowledge may be saving in and unto themselves and
acceptable unto God in Christ, and that without any especial internal effectual
Work of the Holy Spirit of Grace in them and upon them? if they say they are,
as they plainly plead them to be, and will not content themselves with an
Ascription unto them of that Notional Doctrinal Knowledge, which none deny them
to be capable of, I desire to know, to what purpose are they said to be renewed
by the Holy Ghost; to what purpose are all those gracious actings of God in
them before recounted? He that shall consider what on the one hand the
Scripture teaches us concerning the Blindness, Darkness, Impotency of our
Minds with respect unto Spiritual things when proposed unto us, as in the state
of nature; and on the other, what it affirms concerning the work of the Holy
Ghost in their Renovation and change, in giving them new Power, new Ability, a
new Active Understanding, will not be much moved with the groundless confident
unproved Dictates of some concerning the Power of Reason in it self to
apprehend and discern Religious Things, so far as we are required in a way of
Duty. This is all one as if they should say, That if the Sun shine clear and
bright, every blind Man is able to see.

Light unto our Minds, and that so, as that we see by it, or perceive by it the
things proposed unto us in the Gospel usefully and savingly; 2 Cor. 4. 6. God
who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus
Christ. Did God no otherwise work on the Minds of Men, but by an external
objective proposal of Truth unto them, to what purpose does the Apostle mention
the Almighty Act of Creating Power, which he put forth and exercised in the
first production of Natural Light out of Darkness? What Allusion is there
between that Work, and the doctrinal proposal of Truth to the Minds of Men? It
is therefore a confidence not to be contended with, if any will deny that the
Act of God in the Spiritual Illumination of our Minds, be not of the same
Nature as to Efficacy and Efficiency, with that whereby he created Light at the
beginning of all things. And because the Effect produced in us is called Light,
the Act it self is described by shining. God has shined into our Hearts, that
is, our Minds, so he conveighs Light unto them by an Act of Omnipotent
Efficiency. And as that which is so wrought in our Minds is called Light, so
the Apostle leaving his Metaphor plainly declares what he intends hereby;
namely, the actual knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ;
that is, as God is revealed in Christ by the Gospel, as he declares v. 4.
Having therefore (1.) compared the Mind of Man by Nature with a respect unto a
Power of discerning Spiritual Things, to the state of all things under Darkness
before the Creation of Light: And, (2.) the powerful working of God in
Illumination, unto the Act of his Omnipotency in the Production or Creation of
Light Natural, He ascribes our Ability to know, and our actual Knowledge of God
in Christ unto his real Efficiency and Operation. And these things in part
direct us toward an apprehension of that Work of the Holy Spirit upon the
Minds of Men in their Conversion unto God, whereby their Depravation is cured,
and without which it will not so be. By this means and no otherwise, do we who
were Darkness become Light in the Lord, or come to know God in Christ savingly,
looking into and discerning Spiritual Things with a proper intuitive sight,
whereby all the other Faculties of our Souls are guided and influenced unto the
Obedience of Faith.

Will and its Depravation by Nature, that we are said to be dead in Sin. And
herein is seated that peculiar obstinacy, whence it is that no Unregenerate
Person does, or can answer his own Conviction, or walk up unto his Light in
Obedience. For the Will may be considered two ways. (1.) As a rational vital
Faculty of our Souls. (2.) As a Libertas sine Gratia nihil est nisi contumacia;
non libertas. August. Epist. 89.
free Principle, freedom being of its Essence or Nature. This therefore in our
Conversion to God is renewed by the Holy Ghost, and that by an effectual
implantation in it, of a Principle of Spiritual Life and Holiness in the room
of that Original Righteousness which it lost by the Fall. That he does so, is
proved by all the Testimonies before insisted on. (1.) This is its Renovation
as it is a rational vital Faculty; and of this Vivification see before. (2.) As
it is a free Principle, it is determined unto its Acts in this case by the
powerful Operation of the Holy Ghost, without the least impeachment of its
Liberty or Freedom as has been declared. And that this is so, might be fully
evinced, as by others, so by the ensuing Arguments. For (1.) if the Holy Ghost
does not work immediately and effectually upon the Will, producing the creating
in it a Principle of Faith and Obedience, infallibly determining it in its free
Acts, then is all the Glory of our Conversion to be ascribed unto our selves,
and we make our selves therein, by the obediential actings of our own free will
to differ from others who do not so comply with the Grace of God; which is
denied by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Neither can any purpose of God concerning
the Conversion of any one Soul be certain and determinate, seeing after he has
done all that is to be done, or can be done toward it, the Will remaining
undetermined may not be converted, contrary to those Testimonies of our
Savior, Romans 8. 28. Mat. 11. 25, 26. John 6. 37. Neither can there be an
Original Infallibility in the Promises of God made to Jesus Christ, concerning
the multitudes that should believe in him; seeing it is possible no one may so
do, if it depends on the undetermined Liberty of their Wills whether they will
or no. And then also must Salvation of necessity be of him that wills, and of
him that runs, and not of God that shows mercy on whom he will have mercy,
contrary to the Apostle, Romans 9. 15, 16. And the whole Efficacy of the Grace of
God, is made thereby to depend on the Wills of Men, which is not consistent
with our being the Workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
Ephesians. 2. 10. Nor on this Supposition do Men know what they pray for, when they
pray for their own or other Men's Conversion to God, as has been before
declared. There is therefore necessary such a Work of the Holy Spirit upon our
Wills, as may cure and take away the Depravation of them before described,
sreeing us from the state of Spiritual Death, causing us to live unto God,
determing them in and unto the Acts of Faith and Obedience. And this he does,
whilst, and as he makes us new Creatures, quickens us who are dead in
Trespasses and Sins, gives us a new Heart, and puts a new Spirit within us,
writes his Law in our Hearts, that we may do the Mind of God, and walk in his
ways; works in us to will and to do, making them who were unwilling and
obstinate, to become willing and obedient and that freely and of choice.

Love is implanted upon the Affections by the Spirit of Grace, causing the Soul
with Delight and Complacency to cleave to God and his Ways. This removes and
takes away the Enmity before described with the Effects of it; Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The
Lord thy God will circumcise thine Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed, to love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, that thou may
live. This Circumcision of the Heart consists in the putting off the body of
the sins of the flesh, as the Apostle speaks Col. 2. 11. He Crucifies the Flesh
with the Lusts and Affections thereof. Some Men are inclined to think that all
the Depravation of our Nature consists in that of the sensitive part of the
Soul, or our Affections. The vanity and folly of which Opinion has been before
discovered. Yet it is not denied but that the Affections are signally depraved,
so that by them principally the Mind and Will do act those Lusts that are
peculiarly seated in them, or by them do act according to their perverse and
corrupt Inclinations, Gal. 5. 24. Jam. 1. 14, 15. Wherefore in the Circumcision
of our Hearts, wherein the Flesh with the Lusts Affections and Deeds thereof
are crucified by the Spirit, he takes from them their Enmity, Carnal
Prejudices, and D^praved Inclinations, really though not absolutely and
perfectly; and instead of them, he fills us with Holy Spiritual Love, Joy,
Fear, and Delight, not changing the being of our Affections, but sanctifying
and guiding them by the Principle of Saving-Light and Knowledge before
described, and uniting them unto their proper Object in a due manner. From what
has been spoken in this third Argument, it is evident that the Holy Spirit
designing the Regeneration or Conversion of the Souls of Men works therein
effectually, powerfully, and irresistibly, which was proposed unto confirmation.

Regeneration is a Quis istis corda mutavit, nisi qui finxit singillatim corda
eorum? Quis hujus rigoris duritiem ad obediendi mollivit affectum, nisi qui
potens est de lapidibus Abrahae silios excitare? Prosp. ad Ruffin. de lib.
Arbii.
Work of the Spirit of God, and that not any Act of our own, which is only so,
is intended thereby. I say it is not so our own, as by outward Helps and
Assistance to be educed out of the Principles of our Natures. And herein is the
Scripture express; for mentioning this Work directly with respect unto its
Cause, Ploremus coram Domino qui fecit nos and homines and salvos. Nam si ille
nos fecit homines, nos autem ipsi nos fec^mus salvos, aliquid illo melius
fecimus. Melior enim est salvus homo quam quilibet homo. Si ergo te Deus fecit
hominem and tu te fecisti bonum hominem, quod tu fecisti melius est. Noli te
extollere super Deum, con^itere illi qui fecit te, quia nemo recreat nisi qui
creat, nemo resicit nisi qui fecit. August. de Verbis Apost.
and the manner of its Operation in the effecting of it, it assigns it
positively unto God or his Spirit; 1 Pet. 1. 3. God according to his abundant
Mercy has begotten us again. James 1. 18. Of his own Will begat he us with the
Word of Truth. John 3. 5, 6, 8. Born of the Spirit. 1 John 3. 9. Born of God.
And on the other hand it excludes the Will of Man from any active interest
herein; I mean, as to the first beginning of it. 1 Pet. 1. 23. Born again, not
of Corruptible Seed, but of Incorruptible by the Word of God, Nemo quisquam
hominum sive ad cogitandum, sive ad operandum quodeunque bonum potest esse
idoneus; nisi qui fuerit munere gratuito divinae opitulationis adjutus; ab ipso
namque est initium bonae voluntatis, ab ipso facultas boni operis, ab ipso
perseverantia bonae conversationis. Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monim.
which lives and abides for ever. John. 1. 13. Which were born, not of Blood,
nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man but of God; see Matthew. 16.
17. Titus 3. 5. Ephesians. 2. 9, 10. It is therefore incumbent on them who plead
for the Active Interest of the Will of Man in Regeneration, to produce some
Testimonies of Scriptures where it is assigned unto it, as the effect unto its
proper Cause. Where is it said, that a Man is Born again, or Begotten anew by
himself? And if it be granted, as it must be so, unless violence be offered not
only to the Scripture but to Reason and common Sense, that whatever be our
Duty and Power herein, yet these Expressions must denote an Act of God and not
ours, the substance of what we contend for is granted, as we shall be ready at
any time to demonstrate. It is true, God does command us to circumcise our
Hearts, and to make them New. But he does therein declare our Duty not our
Power; for himself promises to work in us what he requires of us. And that
Power which we have and do exercise in the progress of this Work in
Sanctification and Holiness, proceeds from the infused Principle which we
receive in our Regeneration; Jam divini amor Numinis, Patris Omnipotentis
prolisque beatissimae sancta communicatio; Omnipotens paraclete Spiritus;
Maerentium consolator clementissime, jam cordis mei p^netralibus potenti
illabere virtute, and tenebrosa quaeque laris neglecti latibula, corusci
luminis fulgore pius habitator laetifica, tuique roris abundantia, longo
ariditatis marcentia squalore, visitando faecunda.
for all which Ends we ought to pray for him according to the Example of Holy
Men of old.

The Manner of Conversion explained in the Instance of Augustine. CHAP. VI.
The outward means and manner of Conversion to God, or Regeneration, with the
Degrees of Spiritual Operations on the Minds of Men and their Effects,
exemplified in the Conversion of Augustine, as the Account is given thereof by
himself.

Doctrines of the Gospel, there is none opposed with more violence and
subtilty, than that concerning our Regeneration by the immediate powerful,
effectual Operation of the Holy Spirit of Grace; so there is not scarce any
thing more despised or scorned by many in the World, than that any should
profess that there has been such a Work of God upon themselves, or on any
Occasion declare ought of the way and manner whereby it was wrought. The very
mentioning hereof is grown a Derision among some that call themselves
Christians; and to plead an interest or concern in this Grace, is to forfeit
all a Man's Reputation with many who would be thought wise, and boast themselves
to be rational. Neither is this a practice taken up of late in these declining
times of the World; but seems to have been started and followed from days of
old, possibly from the beginning; yea the Enmity of Cain against Abel was but a
branch of this proud and perverse Inclination. The Instance of Ishmael in the
Scripture is Representative of all such as under an outward profession of the
true Religion, did or do scoff at those who being as Isaac Children of the
Promise do profess and evidence an interest in the internal Power of it which
they are unacquainted withal. And the same practice may be traced in succeeding
Ages. Hence Holy Austin entering upon the Confession of his greater sins,
designing thereby to magnify the Glory and Efficacy of the Grace of God in his
Conversion, provides against this scorn of Men, which he knew he should meet
withal. Rideant, says he, me arrogantes and nondum salubriter prostrati and
elisi per te Deus meus, ego tamen confiteor tibi dedecora mea, in laud tua;
Confess: lib. 4. cap. 1. let Arrogant Men deride or scorn me, who were never
savingly cast down nor broken in pieces by thee my God, yet I will confess my
own shame unto thy praise. Let none be offended with these expressions of being
savingly or wholesomely cast down and broken of God; For in the Judgment of
this great person they are not Fanatical. We may not therefore think it
strange; if the same truth, the same practice, and profession of it, do still
meet with the same Entertainment. Let them deride and scorn it, who were never
humbled savingly, nor broken with a sense of sin, nor relieved by Grace; the
Holy Work of Gods Spirit is to be owned, and the truth to be avowed as it is in
Jesus.

Original Depravation of our nature, we have treated sofar as is needful unto
our present purpose. Yet some things must yet be added concerning the Effects
of that Depravation, which will conduce unto the right understanding of the way
and manner whereby the Spirit of God proceeds for the healing and removal of
it, which we have now under especial consideration. And we may observe;

Psalm. 58. 3. The Wicked are estrang^d from the Womb* they go astray as soon as
they be born, speaking lies. It is to no purpose to say that he speaks of
wicked Men; that is, such who are habitually and profligately so. For whatever
any Man may afterward run into by a course of sin, all Men are Morally alike
from the Womb, and it is an Aggravation of the Wickedness of Men, that it begins
so early and holds on an uninterrupted course. Children are not able to speak
from the Womb, as soon as they are born. Yet here are they said to speak lies.
It is therefore the perverse Acting of Depraved nature in Infancy, that is
intended. For every thing that is irregular, that Answers not the Law of our
Creation and Rule of our Obedience, is a Lie. And among the many Instances
Collected by Austin of such irregular Actings of nature in its infant-state,
one is peculiarly remarkable. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 6. Paulatim sentiebam ubi
essem; and voluntates meas volebam ostendere eis per quos implerentur, and non
poteram: itaque jactabam membra, and voces signa ^imilia voluntatibus meis,
pauca quae poteram and qualia poteram; and cum mihi non ob^emperabatur, vel non
intelligendo, vel ne obesset, indignabar non subditis Majoribus, and liberis
non servientibus, and me de illis slendo vindicabam. This he again repeats.
cap. 7. An pro tempore illo bona erant, flendo petere etiam quod noxie daretur,
indignari acriter non subjectis hominibus liberis, and majoribus; hisque a
quibus genitus est, multisque preterea prudentioribus, non ad nutum voluntatis
obtemperantibus, feriendo nocere mihi quantum potest. quia non obeditur
imperiis quibus perniciose obediretur? Ita imbecillitas membrorum infantilium
innocens est, non animus infantium. Those irregular and perverse Agitations of
mind and of the Will or Appetite, not yet under the Conduct of Reason, which
appear in Infants, with the Indignation and little self-Revenges wherewith they
are accompanied in their disappointments, when all about them do not subject
themselves unto their Inclinations it may be to their hurt, are from the
Obliquity of our nature and effects of that depraved habit of sin, wherewith it
is wholly possessed. And by the frequency of these lesser Actings are the mind
and will prepared for those more violent and impetuous motions, which by the
improving of their natural Capacities, and the incitation of new Objects
presented unto their Corruptions they are exposed unto and filled withal. God
did not Originally thus create our nature, a Condition worse and inferior unto
that of other Creatures; in whose Young Ones there are none of these disorders,
but a regular compliance with their natural instinct prevails in them. And as
the dying of multitudes of Infants notwithstanding the utmost care for their
preservation, whereas the young ones of other Creatures all generally live if
they have whereby their nature may be sustained, argues the imputation of sin
unto them, For Death entered by Sin and passed upon all inasmuch as all have
sinned; so those irregular Actings peculiar unto them, prove sin inherent in
them or the Corruption of their Nature from their Conceptions.

become ready instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans 5. 13. this
perverse Principle acts it self with more evidence frequency and success in the
production of Actual sin, or inordinate actings of the Mind, Will and
Affections. So the wiseman tells us, that Childhood and Youth are Vanity, Eccl.
11. 10. The Mind of Man in the state of Childhood and Youth puts it self forth
in all kinds of vain Actings, in foolish Imaginations, perverse and froward
Appetites, falseness in words, with sensible effects of corrupt Inclinations in
every kind. Austin's first book of Confessions, is an excellent comment on that
Text wherein the Vanity of Childhood and Youth are graphically described, with
pathetical self-reflecting complaints concerning the Guilt of sin which is
contracted in them. Some perhaps may think light of those ways of Folly and
Vanity, wherein Childhood does, or left alone, would consume it self; that
there is no moral evil in those Childish Innocencies. That Good Man was of an
other Mind. Istane est (says he) innocentia puerilis? non est Domine, non est
Oro te Deus meus, nam haec ipsa sunt quae a paedagogis and magistris, a nucibus
pitulis passeribus, ad Prefectos and Reges, aurum, praedia, mancipia haec ipsa
omnino quae succedentibus majoribus aetatibus transeunt. lib. 1. cap, 19. This
is not Innocence, it is not so. The same Principle and Habit of Mind carried
over unto riper Age, and greater Occasions bring forth those greater Sins,
which the lives of Men are filled withal in this World. And who is there who
has a serious Reverence of God, with any due apprehension of his Holiness and
a clear conviction of the Nature of Sin, who is not able to call over such
Actings in Childhood which most think meet to connive at, wherein they may
remember that perversity whereof they are now ashamed. By this means is the
Heart prepared for a further Obduration in Sin by the confirmation of native
Obstinacy.

Actual sins do succeed, such I mean as are against the remaining light of
Nature or committed in Rebellion unto the dictates and guidance of our Minds
and Consciences, the Influence of those Intelligencies of Moral Good and Evil,
which are inseparable from the faculties of our Souls. For although in some
they may be stifled and overborn, yet can they never be utterly obliterated or
extinguished, but will accompany the nature of Man unto Eternity, even in that
condition wherein they shall be of no other use but to add to and increase its
misery. Amongst those we may call over one or two Instances. Lying is such a
sin, which the Depravation of Nature in Youth is prone to exert it self by, and
that on sundry Reasons not now to be enquired into: They go astray from the
womb speaking lies. The first Inducement of our Nature unto Sin, was by a Lie;
and we fell in Adam by giving credit thereunto. And there is in every Sin a
particular Lie. But speaking falsely, contrary unto what they know to be true,
is that which Children are prone unto; though some more than others, according
as other vicious Habits prevail in them, whose Actings they foolishly think to
that^h over and cover thereby. This that holy Person whom we instance in
acknowledges and bewaileth in himself; Non videbam voraginem turpitudinis in
quam projectus eram ab oculis tuis; nam in illis quid jam me turpius fuit,
fallendo innumer abilibus mendaciis, and paedagogum and magistros and parents
amore ludendi* and studio spestandi nngatoria, Lib. 1. Cap. 19. I saw not (O
God) into what a gulf of filth, I was cast out from before thee; for what was
more filthy than I, whilst out of love of Plays, and desire of looking after
vanities, I deceived Teachers and Parents with innumerable Lies. And this the
good man was afterward ex^eedingly humbled for, and from it learned much of
the vileness of his own nature. And we find by experience, that a sense of this
sin, oft-times accompanies the first real Convictions that befall the Souls of
men. For when they seriously reflect upon themselves, or do view themselves in
the Glass of the Law, they are not only sensible of the nature of this Sin, but
also how much they indulged themselves therein, partly whilst they remember
how on the least occasions they were surprised into it, which yet they
neglected to watch against; and partly understanding how sometimes they made it
their business by premeditated falsehoods so to cover other sins, as to escape
rebuke and correction. The mention of these things will probably be entertained
with contempt and scorn in this Age, wherein the most prodigious wickednesses
of men are made but a sport; But God, his Holiness, and his Truth are still the
same, whatever alternations there may be in the World. And the holy Psalmist
seems to have some reflection on this Vice of Youth, when he prays, that God
would take from him the way of Lying. Of the same nature are those lesser
Thesis in despoiling their Parents and Governors of such things which they are
not allowed to take and make use of for themselves. They rob their Father or
Mother, and say it is no transgression, Prove. 28. 24. So says the same Person;
furta etiam faciebam de cellario parentum and de mensis vel gula impuitante,
vel ut haberem quod darem pueris ludum suum mihi quo pariter delectabantur
tamen vendentibus. He sometimes stole from his Parents, either to gratify his
own sensual Appetite, or to give unto his Companions. In such instances does
Original Pravity exert it self in Youth, or Childhood, and thereby both
increase its own power, and fortify the Mind and the Affections against the
Light and Efficacy of Conviction.

subjectively and objectively. Concupiscence gets strength with Age and grows
in violence, as persons arrive to Ability for its Exercise, the Instruments of
it in the faculties of the Soul, Organs of the senses and members of the body,
growing every day more serviceable unto it, and more apt to receive Impressions
from it or to comply with its motions. Hence some charge the sins of Youth on
the Heat of Blood, and the Restlesness of the animal Spirits, which prompt men
unto irregularities and extravagancies. But these are only vehicula
concupiscentiae, things which it makes use of to exert its poison by. For sin
turns every thing in this state unto its own advantage, and abuses even the
Commandment it self to work in us all manner of concupiscence, Romans 7. 8.
Again, the Objects of Lust by the occasions of Life are now multiplied.
Temptations increase with years, and the businesses of the World; but
especially by that corruption of conversation which is among the most. Hence
sundry Persons are in this part of their youth, one way or other overtaken with
some gross actual sin or sins. That all are not so, is a mere Effect or
preventing grace, and not at all from themselves. This the Apostle respects in
his charge; 2 Timothy 2. 22. Flee youthful Lusts; such Lusts as work effectually
and prevail mightily in those that are young, if not subduced by the Grace of
God. And David in a sense and from experience hereof prays, that God would not
remember the sins of his youth, Psalm. 25. 7. And a Reflection from them is
sometimes the Torment of Age; Job. 20. 11. So he in whom we have chosen to
exemplify the Instances of such a Course. He humbly confesses unto God his
falling into and being overtaken with great sins, such as Fornication and
uncleanness in his younger days, in the mire whereof he was long detained. To
this purpose he discourses at large, lib. 2. cap. 1, 2, 3. And of the Reason
of this his humble and public Acknowledgments, he gives this holy Account.
Neque enim tibi Deus meus, sed apud tenarro haec generi meo generi human^,
quantulacunque ex particula incidere potest in istas meas literas. Et ad quid
hoc? ut videlicet ego and quisquis haec legit cogitemus de quam profundo,
clamandum sit ad te, Cap. 3. I d^clare these things, O my God, not unto th^e,
but before he, or in thy presence, unto my own Race, unto Humane kind,
whatever portion thereof may fall on these Writings of Mine. And unto what end?
Namely, that I and every one who shall read these things may consider, out of
what great Depths we are to cry unto thee. So he who lived not to see the Days
wherein humble Confession of sin was made a matter of contempt and scorn.

Event of Men's falling under the power of Temptat^ons and thereby into great
Actual sins.

1. God sometimes takes occasion from them to awaken their Consciences unto a
deep sense not only of that Sin in particular whose guilt they have contracted,
but of their other sins also. The great Physician of their Souls turns this
poison into a Medicine; and makes that wound which they have given themselves,
to be the lancing of a festred sore. For whereas their Oscitancy Prejudices and
Custom of sinning, have taken away the sense of lesser sins, and securethem
from Reflections from them; the stroke on their Consciences from those greater
provocations pierces so deep, as that they are forced to entertain thoughts of
looking out after a Release or Remedy. So did they of old at the Sermon of
Peter, when he charged them with the guilt of a consent to the Crucifying of
Jesus Christ; they were pricked to the Heart and cried out, Men and Brethren
what shall we do; Acts. 2. 36, 37.

Entrance into a further pursuit of sin. The bounds of Restraints, with the
Influence of natural light, being broken up and rejected, Men's lusts being let
Loose do break through all remaining Obstacles, and run out into the greatest
compass of Excess and Riot; observing no present evil to ensue on what they
have done according to their first fears, they are emboldned to greater
wickedness, Eccl. 8. 11. And by this means is their Conversion unto God rendered
more difficult, and Men thus wander away more and more from him unto the
greatest Distance that is recoverable by Grace. For,

Ephesians. 4. 18, 19 Being past feeling, have given themselves over unto
Lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. Custom of sinning
takes away the sense of it. The Course of the World takes away the shame of it;
and Love to it makes Men greedy in the pursuit of it; see Confess. lib. 2. Cap.
6. And this last effect of sin, as incited, provoked, and assisted by
Temptations, has great variety in the Effects and Degrees of it. Hence are the
various courses of unhumbled sinners in the world, wherein the Outrage and
Excess of some seems to Justify others in their more sedate irregularities, and
less conspicuous provocations. Yea some who are not in any better state and
condition as to their Interest in the Covenant of God than others, will yet not
only startle at but really abhor those Outrages of sin and wickedness which
they fall unto: Now this Difference arises not from hence that the nature of
all men is not equally corrupt and depraved, but that God is pleased to make
his Restraining Grace effectual toward some, to keep them within those bounds
of sinning which they shall not pass over, and to permit others so to fall
under a Conjunction of their Lusts and Temptations as that they proceed unto
all manner of Evil. Moreover there are peculiar Inclinations unto some sins, if
not inlaid in, yet much enhaunced and made obnoxious unto incitations by the
Temperature of the body. And some are more exposed unto Temptations in the
World from their outward Circumstances and Occasions of Life. Hereby are some
even precipitated to all manner of Evil. But still the old Man which is Corrupt
according unto deceitful Lusts, is the same naturally in all. All difference as
to Good from Evil, I mean not as to the nature of the things themselves, but as
to Men's interest in them, so as to adhere to the one and avoid the other, is
from the Will of God. Thus he secretly prepares for some a better Temperature
of nature, docile and pliable unto such notices of things as may entertain
their minds, and satisfy them above sensual Delights. And some he disposes in
their Education, Callings, Societies, Aims and Designs in the World, into
ways inconsistent with open Lewdness, which will much balance their
Inclinations, besides his secret internal actings on their Hearts and Minds,
whereof af^erwards. This is excellently expressed by Austin, Confess. lib. 2
Cap. 7. Diligam te Domine, and gratias agam, and confitear nomini tuo, quontam
tant a dimisisli mihi mala and nefaria opera mea. Gratiae tuae deputo and
misericordiae tuae, quod peccata mea tanquam glaciem solvisti; gratiae tuae
deputo and quaecunque non feci mala. Quid enim non facere potui qui etiam
gratuitum ama^i facinus? and omnia mihi dimissa esse fat or, and quae mea
sponte feci mala and quae t^ duce non feci* Quis est hominum qui suam cogitans
infirmitatem, audet viribus suis trib ere c^stitatem atque innocentiam suam, ut
minus amet te, quasi minus necessaria suerit erit misericordia tua, qua
condonas peccata conversis ad te? Qui enim vocatus ad te secutus est vocem
tuam, and vitavit ea quae me de meipso recordan^em and fatentem legit, non me
derideat, ab eo medico aegrum sanari a quo prestitum est ut non oegrotaret, vel
potius ut minus oegrotaret. Et ideo te tantundem imo vero amplius diligat, quia
per quem me videt taatis peccatorum meorum languoriribus exui, per eum se videt
tantis peccatorum lang ^oribus non implicari. I will love thee, O God, and
thank thee and confess unto thy name, because thou have forgiven me my evil and
nefarious Deeds. I impute it to thy Grace and Mercy, that thou have made my
sins to melt away as Ice, and I impute it to thy Grace as to all the evils
which I have not done. For what could not I have done, who loved wickedness for
it self? All I acknowledge are forgiven me both the Evils that I have done on my
own accord, and what through thy guidance I have not done. Who is there who
considering his own weakness, dare ascribe his Chastity or Innocence unto his
own strength, that he may less love thee, as though thy mercy were less
necessary unto him, whereby thou forgivest the sins of them that are converted
to thee. For let not him who being called of thee and having heard thy voice
has avoided the Evils which I have confessed, deride me that being sick was
healed of that Physician, from whom he received the Mercy not to be sick, or
not to be so sick.

recoverable Alienation from God, may somewhat illustrate and set off the Work
of his Grace toward us. And thus far, whatever habit be contracted in a course
of sin, yet the state of Men is absolutely recoverable by the Grace of Jesus
Christ administered in the Gospel; 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10, 11. No state of sin is
absolutely unhealable until God has variously dealt with Men by his Spirit.
His Word must be rejected, and He must be sinned against in a peculiar manner,
before Remission be impossible. All Sins and Blasphemies antecedent thereunto,
may be forgiven unto Men, and that before their Conversion unto God, Matthew. 12.
31, 32. Luke. 12. 10. Wherefore the Manner and Degrees of the Operations of
this Spirit of God on the Minds of Men, toward and in their Conversion, is
that which we shall now enquire into, reducing what we have to offer concerning
it unto certain Heads or Instances.

Celestial Fire, consisting in inbred notices of Good and Evil, of Rewards and
Punishments, of the presence and All-seeing Eye of God, of Help and Assistance
to be had from him, with a Dread of his Excellencies where any thing is
apprehended unworthy of him, or provoking unto him. And where there are any
means of Instruction from supernatural Revelation by the Word preached, or the
care of Parents in private, there they are insensibly improved and increased.
Hereby Men do obtain an objective distinct knowledge of what they had
subjectively and radically, though very imperfectly before. These notices
therefore God oftentimes excites and quickens even in them that are young, so
that they shall work in them some real Regard of, and Applications unto him.
And those great Workings about the things of God and toward him, which are
sometimes found in Children, are not more effects of nature. For that would not
so act it self, were it not by one Occasion or other for that End administered
by the Providence of God, effectually excited. And many can call over such
Divine V^s^tations in their Youth, which now they understand to be so. to this
purpose speaks the Person mentioned; Puer coepi rogare te auxilium and refugium
meum, and in tuam invocationem rum pebam nodos linguae meae, and regavi parvus
non parvo affectu, ne in Schola vapularem. He prayed earnestly to God as a
Refuge, when he was afraid to be b^at at School. And this he resolves into
Instruction, or what he had observed in others. Invenimus homines rogantes te,
and didicimus ab eis, sentientes te ut poteramus esse magnum aliquem qui posset
etiam non apparens sensibus nostris, exaudire nos and subvenire vobis, lib. 1.
cap. 9. And hereunto he add^ some general Instruction which he had from the
Word, Cap. 11. And from the same Principles, when he was a little after
surprised with a fit of sickness, ^e cried out with all earnestness that he
might be Baptized; that so he night, as he thought, go to Heaven; for his
Father was (...) yet a Christian, whence he was not baptized in his Infancy.
Vidisti Domine cum adhuc puer essem, and quodam die pressus stomachi Dolere
repent astuarem pene mo^turus, vidisti Deus meus, quoniam custos meus jam ^ras
quo motu animi and qua fide baptismum Christi tui, Dei and Domini mei
stagitavi, Cap. 11. Such Affections and occasional Actings o^ Soul toward God,
are wrought in many by the Spirit. With the most they wear off and perish, as
they did with him, who after this cast himself into many flagitious Sins. But
in some God does in and by the use of these means, inlay their Hearts with
those Seeds of Faith and Grace which he gradually cherishes and increases.

steady consideration of him, their own distance from him, and obnoxiousness
unto his Righteousness on the account of Sin. It is almost incredible to
apprehend, but that it is testified unto by daily experience, how Men will live
even where the Word is Read and Preached; how they will get a form of speaking
of God, yea and of performing some Duties of Religion, and yet never come to
have any steady thoughts of God, or of their Relation to him, or of their
concernment in his Will. Whatever they speak of God, he is not in all their
Thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. Whatever they do in Religion, they do it not unto him,
Amos 5. 25. They have neither heard his Voice at any time, nor seen his Shape,
John 5. 37. knowing nothing for themselves, which is their Duty, Job 5. 27. And
yet it is hard to convince them that such is their condition. But when God is
pleased to carry on his Work of Light and Grace in them, they can call to mind
and understand how it was with them in their former Darkness. Then will they
acknowledge, that in Truth they never had serious steady thoughts of God, but
only such as were occasional and transient. Wheresore God begins here with
them, and thereby to subduct them from under the absolute Power of the vanity
of their Minds. By one means or other he fixes in them steady thoughts
concerning himself, and their relation unto him. And there are several ways
which he proceeds in for the effecting hereof. As,

amazing Judgments whereby he reveals his Wrath from Heaven against the
ungodliness of Men, Romans 1. 18. So Waldo was affected when his Companion was
stricken dead as he walked with him in the Fields; which proved the occasion of
his Conversion unto God. So the Psalmist describes the Affections and Thoughts
of Men; when they are surprised with a Storm at Sea, Psalm. 107. 25, 26, 27, 28.
An instance whereof we have in the Mariners of Jona's Ship, Chap. 1. 5, 6, 7.
And that Pharaoh who despised one day, saying, Who is the Lord that I should
regard him? Being the next day terrified with Thunder and Lightning, cries out,
Entreat the Lord for me that it may be so no more, Exodus 9. 28. And such like
Impressions from Divine Power, most Men at one time or other have experience of.

2. By Personal Afflictions, Job 33. 19, 20. Psalm. 78. 34, 35. Hos. 5. 15.
Affliction naturally speaks Anger, and Anger respects Sin. It bespeaks it self
to be God's Messenger to call Sin to remembrance, 1 Kings 17. 8. Genesis 42. 21,
22. The time of Affliction is a time of Consideration, Eccles. 7. 14. And if
Men be not obdurate and hardened almost unto practical Atheism by a course of
sinning, they cannot but bethink themselves who sends Affliction, and for what
End it is sent. Hence great thoughts of the Holiness of God, and of his hatred
of Sin, with some sense of Men's own Guilt and especial Crimes will arise. And
these Effects many times prove preparatory and materially dispositive unto
Conversion. And not what these things are in themselves able to operate is to
be considered, but what they are designed unto, and made effectual for by the
Holy Ghost.

3. By remarkable Deliverances and Mercies; So it was with Naaman the Syrian, 2
Kings 2. 15, 16, 17. Sudden changes from great Dangers and Distresses by
unexpected Reliefs, deeply affect the Minds of Men, convincing them of the
Power, Presence, and Goodness of God. And this produces a sense and
acknowledgment of their own unworthiness of what they have received. Hence also
some temporary Effects of submission to the Divine Will and Gratitude do
proceed.

4. An observation of the Conversation of others, has affected many to seek
into the Causes and Ends of it. And this inclines them unto imitation, 1 Pet.
3. 1, 2.

5. The Word in the Reading or Preaching of it is the principal means hereof.
This the Holy Spirit employeth and makes use of in his entrance into this
Work, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. For those Convictions befall not Men from the Word
universally or promiscuously, but as the Holy Spirit wills and designeth. It
is by the Law that Men have the knowledge of Sin, Romans 7. 7. Yet we see by
experience, that the Doctrine of the Law is despised by the most that hear it.
Wherefore it has not in it self a force or virtue always to work conviction
of Sin in them unto whom it is outwardly proposed. Only toward some the Spirit
of God is pleased to put forth an especial Energie in the Dispensation thereof.

wildness of Corrupted Nature unto a stand, and stirs up the Faculties of the
Soul by an effectual though not saving Impression upon them, seriously to
consider of its self, and its Relation unto Him and his Will. And hereby are
Men oft-times incited and engaged unto many Duties of Religion, as Prayer for
the Pardon of Sin, with Resolutions of Amendment; and although these things in
some are subordinated unto a further and more effectual Work of the Spirit of
God upon them, yet with many they prove evanid and fading, their Goodness in
them being as a Morning Cloud, or as the early Dew which passes away, Hos. 6.
4. And the Reasons whence it is that Men cast off these Warnings of God, and
pursue not their own Intentions under them, nor answer what they lead unto are
obvious. For;

The Darkness of their Minds being yet uncured, they are not able to discern
the true Nature of these Divine Intimations and Instructions, but after a while
regard them not, or reject them as the Occasions of needless Scruples and
Fears. (2.) Presumption of their present Condition, that it is as good as it
need be, or as is convenient in their present Circumstances and Occasions,
makes them neglect the improvement of their Warnings. (3.) Profane Societies
and Relations, such as it may be scoff at and deride all tremblings at Divine
Warnings, with ignorant Ministers that undertake to Teach what they have not
learned, are great means of hardening Men in their Sins, and of forfeiting the
benefit of these Divine Intimations. (4.) They will as to all Efficacy, and the
Motions they bring on the Affections of Men, decay, and expire of themselves,
if they are not diligently improved. Wherefore in many they perish through mere
sloth and negligence. (5.) Satan applies all his Engines to the defeatment of
these beginnings of any Good in the Souls of Men. (6.) That which effectually
and utterly overthrows this Work, which causes them to cast off these Heavenly
Warnings, is mere love of Lusts and Pleasures, or the unconquered adherence of
a corrupted Heart unto sensual and sinful Objects, that offer present
satisfaction unto its Carnal Desires. By this means is this Work of the Spirit
of God in the Hearts and Minds of many utterly defeated, to the increase of
their Guilt, an addition to their natural hardness, and the ruin of their
Souls. But in some of them he is graciously pleased to renew his Work, and by
more effectual means to carry it on to Perfection, as shall be afterward
declared.

lib. 2. cap. 3. Such were those which he had in Sicknesses of his own, and in
the death of his dear Friend and Companion, lib. 4. cap. 5, 6, 7. And in all
the several Warnings he had from God, he charge the Want and Guilt of their
non-improvement on his natural blindness, his Mind being not illuminated, and
the corruption of his Nature not yet cured, with the efficacy of evil Society,
and the course of the World in the places where he lived. But it would be
tedious to transcribe the particular Accounts that he gives of these things,
though all of them singularly Worthy of Consideration. For I must say, that in
my Judgment there is none among the Ancient or Modern Divines unto this day,
who either in the Declarations of their own Experiences or their Directions
unto others, have equalled, much less out-gone him, in an accurate search and
observation of all the secret Actings of the Spirit of God on the Minds and
Souls of Men, both toward and in their Recovery or Conversion. And in order
hereunto, scarce any one not Divinely Inspired has so traced the way of the
Serpent, of the effectual working of Original Sin in and on the Hearts of Men,
with the efficacy communicated thereunto by various Temptations and Occasions
of Life in this World. The ways also whereby the deceitfulness of Sin in
compliance with objective Temptations, does seek to elude and frustrate the
Work of God's Grace when it begins to attempt the strong holds of Sin in the
Heart, were exceedingly discovered unto him. Neither has any Man more lively
and expressly laid open the Power of effectual and victorious Grace, with the
manner of its Operation and Prevalency. And all these things by the guidance of
the Good Spirit of God, and attendance unto the Word, did he exemplify from
his own Experience in the whole Work of God toward him. Only it must be
acknowledged that he declares these things in such a way and manner, as also
with such Expressions, as many in our days would cry out on as fulsome and
fanatical.

convinces them of Sin; or he brings them under the Power of a Work of
Conviction.

It is not my Design, nor here in my way to handle the Nature of the Work of
Conviction, the Means Causes and Effects of it. Besides it has been done at
large by others. It is sufficient unto my purpose; (1.) To show the Nature of
it in general. (2.) The Causes of it. (3.) The Ways whereby Men lose their
Convictions, and so become more and more hardened in sin. (4.) How the Holy
Spirit does carry on the Work in some unto complete Conversion unto God.

fixing the vain Mind of a Sinner upon a due consideration of Sin, its Nature,
Tendency and End, with his own concernment therein; and a fixing of a due sense
of sin upon the secure Mind of the Sinner, with suitable Affections unto its
Apprehensions. The Warnings before insisted on, whereby God excites Men to some
steady notices of him and themselves, are like Calls given unto a Man in a
profound sleep, whereat being startled he lifts up himself for a little space,
but oppressed with the Power of his deep slumber, quickly lays him down again,
as Austin expresses it. But this Work of Conviction abides with Men, and they
are no way able speedily to disintangle themselves from it.

Mind of Man which is the Subject of this Work of Conviction, has two things
distinctly to be considered in it. (1.) The Understanding, which is the active
noetical or contemplative Power and Faculty of it. (1.) The Affections wherein
its passive and sensitive Power does consist. With respect hereunto there are
two parts of the Work of Conviction. (1) The Fixing of the Mind, the Rational
contemplative Power of it, upon a due Consideration of Sin. (2) The fixing of a
due sense of Sin on the practical, passive, sensible part of the Mind, that is,
the Conscience and Affections, as was said before.

would not consider, that they would not be wise to consider their latter end.
We find by Experience this folly and vanity in many unto an Astonishment. No
reasons, Arguments, Entreaties by all that is naturally dear to them, no
Necessities can prevail with them to fix their minds on a due consideration of
sin: Moreover Satan now employs all his Engines to beat off the Efficacy and
Power of this Work. And when his Temptations and Delusions are mixed with Men's
natural Darkness and Vanity, the Mind seems to be impregnably fortified against
the power of Conviction For although it be real Conversion unto God. that
overthrows the Kingdom of Satan in us; yet this Work of Conviction raises such
a Combustion in it, that he cannot but fear it will be its End. And this strong
Man armed, would if possible keep his Goods and House in peace. Hence all sorts
of persons have daily Experience in their Children, Servants, Relations, how
difficult, yea how impossible it is to fix their Minds on a due Consideration
of sin, until it be wrought in them by the exceeding Greatness of the power of
the Spirit of God. Wherefore herein consists the first part of this Work of
Conviction; it fixes the mind on a due Consideration of sin. So it is
expressed; Psalm. 51. 3. my sin is ever before me. God reproves Men and sets
their sins in order before their eyes, Psalm. 50. 21. Hence they are
necessitated as it were always to behold them, and that which way soever they
turn themselves. Fain they would cast them behind their backs, or cast out
thoughts of them, but the Arrows of God stick in them and they cannot take off
their Minds from their consideration. And whereas there are three things in
sin; (1) The Original of it and its native inherience in us, as Psalm. 51. 5.
(2) The state of it, or the Obnoxiousness of Men to the Wrath of God on the
Account thereof; Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. (3) The particular sins of Men's Lives; in
the first part of the Work of Conviction the Minds of Men are variously
exercised with respect unto them, according as the Spirit of God is pleased to
engage and fix them.

2. As the Mind is hereby fixed on the Consideration of sin, so a sense of sin
must also be fixed on the Mind, that is, the Conscience and Affections. A bare
Contemplation of the Concernments of sin is of little use in this matter. The
Scripture principally evidenceth this work of Conviction or places it in this
Effect of a sense of sin, in Trouble, Sorrow, Disquietment of Mind, fear of
Ruin and the like; see Acts 2. 37. Acts 24. 25. But this I must not enlarge
upon.

Apostasy, and from under the Power of sin. The principal efficient Cause of
this Work is the Holy Ghost; the preaching of the Word, especially of the Law,
being the Instrument which he makes use of therein. The Knowledge of sin is by
the Law, both the Nature, Guilt, and Curse belonging to it, Romans 7. 7. There is
therefore no Conviction of sin, but what consists in an Emanation of Light and
Knowledge from the Doctrine of the Law, with an Evidence of its Power and a
sense of its Curse. Other Means, as Afflictions, Dangers, Sicknesses, Fears,
Disappointments, may be made use of, to excite, stir up, and put an edge upon
the Minds and Affections of Men; yet it is by one means or other from the Law
of God, that such a discovery is made of sin unto them, and such a sense of it
wrought upon them, as belongs unto this work of Conviction. But it is the
Spirit of God alone that is the principal efficient Cause of it, or he works
these effects on the Minds of Men. God takes it upon himself as his own work to
reprove Men and set their sins in order before their eyes; Psalm. 50, 21. And
that this same Work is done immediately by the Spirit is expressly declared,
John. 16. 8. He alone it is who makes all means effectual unto this End and
Purpose. Without his especial and immediate Actings on us to this End, we may
hear the Law preached all the Days of our Lives and not be once affected with
it.

or Conversion of the Souls of Men, does in this holy wise Providence overruled
all their outward Concernments, so as that they shall be disposed into such
Circumstances, as conduce to to the end aimed at. Either by their own
Inclinations and Choice, or by the Intervention of Accidents crossing their
Inclinations, and frustrateing their Designs, he will lead them into such
Societies, Acquaintances, Relations, Places, means, as he has ordained to be
useful unto them for the great ends of their Conviction and Conversion. So in
particular Austin abounds in his Contemplation on the Holy, Wise Providence
of God, in carrying of him from Carthage to Rome, and from thence to Milan,
where he heard Ambrose preach every Lord's Day, which proved at length the Means
of his through-Conversion to God. And in that whole Course, by his discourse
upon it, he discovers Excellently as on the one hand, the variety of his own
Projections and Designs, his Aims and Ends, which oft-times were perverse and
froward; so on the other, the constant guidance of divine Providence, working
powerfully through all Occurrences toward the blessed End designed for him.
And I no way doubt but that God exercised him unto those distinct Experiences
of Sin and Grace in his own Heart and Ways, because he had designed him to be
the great Champion of the Doctrine of his Grace against all its enemies, and
that not only in his own Age, wherein it met with a fierce Opposition, but also
in all succeeding ages, by his Excellent Labors preserved for the use of the
Church: see Confess. lib. 5. cap. 7. 8, 9, etc. Tu spes mea in terra viventium,
ad mutandum terrarum locum pro salute animae mea, and Carthagini stimulos
quibus inde avellerer admovebas; and Romae illecebras quibus attraberer
proponebas mihi per homines qui diligebant vitam mortuam, hinc insana facientes
inde vana pollicentes; and ad corrigendos gressus meos utebaris occulte and
illorum and mea perversitate, cap. 8. Thou who art my hope in the Land of the
Living, that I might remove from one Country to another, for the Salvation of
my Soul, did both apply goads unto me at Carthage whereby I might be driven
from thence, and proposedst Allurements unto me at Rome, whereby I might be
drawn thither, and this thou did by Men who loved the Dead Life in sin; here
doing things outrageous, there promising things desirable to vain Minds, whilst
thou to correct and reform my ways did secretly make use of their frowardness
and mine.

Power and Efficacy of it, with all the impressions it had made on their
Affections. And some of these wax worse and more profligate in sinning than
ever they were before. For having broken down the Damm of their restraints,
they pour out their lusts like a Flood, and are more senseless than ever of
those Checks and Fears with which before they were bridled and awed; 2 Pet. 2.
20, 21. 22. So the person lately mentioned declares that after many Convictions
which he had digested and neglected, he was grown so obdurate and senseless,
that falling into a fever wherein he thought he should die and go immediately
unto Hell, he had not that endeavor after Deliverance and Mercy as he had many
years before on lesser dangers. And this perverse Effect is variously brought
about.

product of the power of their own Lust. Especially is it so with them who
together with their Convictions receive no Gifts of the Holy Ghost. For as we
observed their Lusts being only checked and controuled, not subdued, they get
new strength by their Restraint, and rebel with success against Conviction.
Such as these fall away from what they have attained suddenly; Math. 13. 5. 21.
One day they seem to lie in Hell by the Terror of their Convictions, and the
next to be hasting toward it by their sins and pollutions. see Luke. 11. 24,
25, 26. Hos. 4. 6. cap. 6. 4.

(2.) This Apostasy is promoted and hastened by others. As (1.) such as
undertaking to be Spiritual Guides and Instructers of Men in their way toward
Rest, who being unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, do heal their wounds
slightly or turn them out of the way. Seducers also it may be interpose their
crafty deceits whereby they lie in wait to deceive, and so turn Men off from
those Good ways of God whereinto they would otherwise enter. So it fell out
with Austin, who beginning somewhat to enquire after God, fell into the society
and heresy of the Manichees, which frustrated all the Convictions which by any
means he had received. (2.) Such as directly and that perhaps with importunity
and violence, will endeavor to draw Men back into the ways of the World, and
the pursuit of their lusts, Pro. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. So the same Person declares
with what earnestness and restless importunities, some of his Companions
endeavored to draw him unto the Spectacles and Plays at Rome. And it is not
easily imagined with what subtilty some persons will entice others into sinful
Courses, nor what violence they will use in their Temptations under a pretense
of Love and Friendship. (3.) The Awe that is put on the Minds of Men in their
Convictions, arising from a Dread of the Terror of the Law, and the Judgments
of God threatened therein, is apt of it self to wear off when the Soul is a
little accustomed unto it, and yet sees no evil actually to ensue, Eccl. 8. 11.
2 Pet. 1. 4.

carry on this work of Conviction toward a further blessed issue, and then two
things ensue thereon in the Minds of them who are so convinced. First, there
will follow great and strange Conflicts between their Corruptions, and their
Convictions. And this does especially manifest it self in them who have been
accustomed unto a course of sinning, or have any particular sin wherein they
delight, and by which they have given satisfaction unto their Lusts. For the
Law coming with Power and Terror on the Conscience, requires a relinquishment
of all sins, at the eternal peril of the Soul. Sin hereby is incited and
provoked, Libera me Domine ab his hostibus meis a quibus me liber are non
valeo. Perversum and pessimum est cor meum, ad deploranda propria peccata mea
est lapideum and aridum, ad resistendum insultantibus molle and luteum, ad
inutilia and noxia pertractanda velox and infatigabile, ad cogitanda salubria
fastidiosum and immobile. Anima mea distort a and depravata est ad percipiendum
bonum; sed ad Voluptatum vitia nimis facilis and prompta, ad salutem
reminiscendam nimis etiam difficilis and pigra. De Contritione cordis lib.
inter oper^ August. cap. 4.
and the Soul begins to see its disability to conflict with that, which before
it thought absolutely in its own power. For Men that indulge themselves in
their sins doubt not but that they can leave them at their pleasure. But when
they begin to make head against them on the command of the Law, they find
themselves to be in the power of that which they Imagined to be in theirs. So
does sin take occasion by the Commandment to work in all Men manner of
Concupiscence; and those who thought themselves before to be alive, do find
that it is sin which lives, and that themselves are dead. Romans 7. 7, 8, 9. Sin
rising up in Rebellion against the Law, discovers its own Power and the utter
Impotency of them in whom it is, to contest with it or destroy it: But yet men's
Convictions in this Condition will discover themselves, and operate two ways or
in a twofold Degree.

Endeavors and Promises of Amendment and Reformation of Life. These Men are
unavoidably cast upon or wrought unto, to pacify the voice of the Law in their
Consciences which bids them do so or perish. But such Endeavors or Promises
for the most part hold only unto the next Occasion of sinning, or Temptation.
An Access of the least outward Advantage or Provocation unto the internal power
of sin, sleights all such Resolutions, and the Soul gives up it self unto the
power of its old Ruler. Such Effects of the Word are described, Hos. 6. 4. So
Austin expresses his own Experience after his great Convictions and before his
full Conversion, lib. 8. cap. 5. Suspirabam ligatus non ferro alieno, sed
ferrea mea voluntate. Velle meum tenebat inimicus, and inde mihi catenam
fecerat and constrinxerat me. Quippe ex voluntate perversa facta est libido,
and dum servitur libidini, facta est consuetudo; and dum consuetudini non
resistitur, facta est necessitas. Quibus quasi ansulis quibusdam sibimet
innexis, unde catenam appellavi, tenebat me obstrictum dura servitus. And he
shows how faint and languid his endeavors were for Reformation and Amendment.
Sarcina seculi velut somno assolet dulciter premebar, and cogitationes quibus
meditabar in te, similes erant Conatibus exp^rgisci volentium, qui tamen
snperati soporis altitudine remerguntur. And he confesses that although
through the urgency of his Convictions he could not but pray that he might be
freed from the power of Sin, yet through the prevalency of that power in him,
he had a secret reserve and desire not to part with that Sin which he prayed
against. cap. 7. Petieram a te castitatem and dixeram da mihi castitatem and
continentiam, sed noli modo, timebam etiam ne me cito exaudires, and cito
sanares a morbo concupiscentiae, quam malebam expleri, quam extingui.

Vere Abyssus peccata mea sunt quia incomprehensibilia profunditate, and inest
imabilia sunt numera and immensitate. O Abyssus abyssum invocans: O peccata
mea, tormenta quibus me servatis abyssus sunt, quia infinita and
incomprehensibilia sunt. Est and tertia abyssus, and est nimis terribilis,
Judicia Dei abyssus multa, quia super omnem sensum occulta. Hae omnes abyssi
terribiles sunt mihi undique, quia timor super timorem and dolor super dolorem.
Abyssus Judiciorum Dei super me, abyssus inferni subtus me, abyssus peccatorum
meorum est intra me. Illam quae super me est timeo ne in me irruat; and me cum
abysso mea, in illam quae subcus me latet, obruat. Lib. de Contritione ^^dis,
int^r opera August. cap. 9.
torn and divided between the Power of Corruption, and the Terror of
Conviction. And this falls out upon a double account. (1.) Upon some occasional
sharpning of former Convictions, when the sense of them has been ready to wear
off. (2.) From the secret insinuation of a Principle of Spiritual Life and
Strength into the Will, whose Nature and Power the Soul is as yet unacquainted
withal. Of both these we have signal Instances in the Person before mentioned;
for after all the means which God had used toward him for his Conversion,
whilst yet he was detained under the Power of Sin, and ready on every
Temptation to revert to his former Courses, he occasionally heard one
Politianus giving an account of the Conversion of two eminent Courtiers who
immediately renounced the World and betook themselves wholly to the Service of
God. This Discourse God was pleased to make use of further to awake him, and
even to amaze him. Lib. 8. cap. 7. Narrabat his Politianus; tu autem Domine
inter verba ejus retorquebas me ad meipsum, aufere^ns me a dorso meo ubi me
posueram, dum nollem me attendere, and consulebas me ante faciem meam, ut
viderem quam turpis essem, quam distortus and sordidus, maculosus and
ulcerosus: and videbam, and horrebam, and quo a me fugerem non erat; and si
conabar a me avertere aspectum, narrabat ille quod narrabat, and tu me (sursus)
opponebas mihi, and imprimebas me in Oculos meos, ut invenirem iniquitatem meam
and odissem. And a little after; It a rodebar intus and confundebar pudore
horribili vehementer, cum Politianus talia loqueretur. The substance of what he
says is; That in and by that Discourse of Politianus, God held him to the
consideration of himself, caused him to see and behold his own filth and
vileness, until he was horribly perplexed and confounded in himself. So it
often falls out in this Work of the Spirit of God. When his first Warnings are
not complied withal, when the Light he communicates is not improved; upon the
return of them they shall be mixed with some sense of Severity.

Principle of Grace or Spiritual Life unto the Will. This therefore being
designed to rule and bear sway in the Soul, begins its conflict effectually to
eject Sin out of its Throne and Dominion. For whereas when we come under the
Power of Grace, Sin can no longer have dominion over us, Romans 6. 12. So the
Spirit begins now to lust against the Flesh, as Gal. 5. 17. aiming at and
intending a complete Victory or Conquest. There was upon bare conviction a
Contest before in the Soul, but it was merely between the Mind and Conscience
on the one hand, and the Will on the other. The Will was still absolutely bent
on Sin, only some Head was made against its Inclinations by the Light of the
Mind before Sin, and rebukes of Conscience after it. But the Conflict begins
now to be in the Will it self. A new Principle of Grace being infused
thereinto, opposes those habitual Inclinations unto Evil, which were before
predominant in it. This fills the Mind with Amazement, and in some brings them
to the very door of Despair, because they see not how nor when they shall be
delivered. So was it with the Person instanced in Lib. 8. Cap. 5. Voluntas nova
quae mihi esse caeperit, ut te gratis colerem fruique te vellem, Deus sola
certa jucunditas, nondum erat idonea ad superandam priorem vetustate roboratam.
Ita duae voluntates meae, una vetus, alia nova, illa carnalis, illa spiritalis
confligebant inter se, atque discordando dissipabant animam meam. Sic
intelligebam meo ipso experimento id quod legeram, quomod caro concupisceret
adversus spiritum and spiritus adversus carnem; Ego quidem in utroque, sed
magis ego in eo quod in me approbabam quam in eo quod in me improbabam. Ibi
enim magis jam non ego, quia ex magna part id patiebar invitus, quod faciebam
volens. The New Will which began to be in me, whereby I would love thee, O my
God the only certain sweetness, was not yet able to overcome my former Will,
confirmed by long continuance. So my two Wills, the one Old, the other New, the
one Carnal, the other Spiritual, conflicted between themselves, and rent my
Soul by their disagreement. Then did I understand by experience in my self what
I hard read, how the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts
against the Flesh. I was my self on both sides, but more in that which I
approved in my self than in what I condemned in my self. I was not more in that
which I condemned, because for the most part I suffered unwillingly what I did
willingly. This Conflict between Grace and Sin in the Will he most excellently
expresses, Cap. 9, 10, 11. delivering those things which more or less are
evident in the Experience of those who have passed through this Work. His
Fluctuations, his Promises, his Hopes and Fears, the Ground he got and lost,
the pangs of Conscience and travel of Soul which he underwent in the new Birth,
are all of them graphically represented by him.

tumult and distress of the Soul, God oftentimes quiets it by some suitable
Word of Truth administered unto it, either in the Preaching of the Gospel, or by
some other means disposed in his Providence unto the same End. In the midst of
this storm and disorder he comes and says, Peace be still. For together with
his Word, he communicates some influence of his Grace, that shall break the
rebellious strength, and subdue the Power of Sin, and give the Mind
satisfaction in a full Resolution for its everlasting Relinquishment. So was it
with him mentioned, when in the condition described he was hurried up and down
almost like a distracted Person, whilst he suffered the Terrors of the Lord,
sometimes Praying, sometimes Weeping, sometimes alone, sometimes in the company
of his Friends, sometimes walking, and sometimes lying on the Ground, he was by
an unusual occurrence warned to take up a Book and read: The Book next him was
that of Paul's Epistle, which taking up and opening, the place he first fixed
his eyes upon, was Romans 13. 13, 14. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Immediately on the reading of these Words,
there was an end put unto his perplexing Conflict. He found his whole Soul by
the Power of Almighty Grace subdued wholly to the Will of God, and fixed unto a
prevalent Resolution of adhering to him with a relinquishment of Sin, with an
assured composure upon the account of the success he should have therein
through Jesus Christ. Immediately he declared what he had done, what had
befallen him, first to his Friend, then to his Mother, which proved the
occasion of Conversion to the one, and inexpressible joy to the other. The end
of the Story deserves to be reported in his own words; Arripui librum, aperui,
legi, -- nec ultra volui legere nec opus erat. Statim quippe cum fine hujusce
sententiae quasi luce securitatis infusa cordi meo, omnes dubitationis tenebrae
defugerunt. Tum interjecto aut digito aut nescio quo alio signo codicem clausi,
and tranquillo cum vultu indicavi Alipio. At ille quid in se ageretur quod ego
nesciebam sic indicavit. Petit videre quid legissem; ostendi, and attendit
etiam ultra quam ego legeram, and ignorabam quid sequeretur. Sequebatur vero,
infirmum autem in fide assumite. Quod ille ad se retulit mihique aperuit; Sed
tali admonitione firmatus est, placitoque and proposito, bono and
congruentissimo suis moribus, quibus a me in melius jam olim valde longeque
distabat, sine ulla turbulenta cunctatione conjunctus est. Inde ad matrem
ingredimur, indicamus, gaudet; Narramus quemadmodum gestum sit, exultat and
triumphat, and benedicit tibi, qui potens es ultra quam petimus aut
intelligimus facere, Lib. 8. Cap. 12. Having read these Verses I would read no
more, nor was there any need that so I should do. For upon the end of that
Sentence, as if a Light of Peace or Security had been infused into my Heart,
all darkness of doubts fled away; marking the Book with my Finger put into it,
or by some other sign, I shut it, and with a quiet countenance declared what
was done to Alipius. And hereupon he also declared what was at Work in himself,
whereof I was ignorant. He desired to see what I had read, which when I had
showed him, he looked further than I had read, nor did I know what followed.
But it was this, he that is weak in the Faith receive, which he applied unto
himself and declared it unto me; confirmed by this Admonition, with a firm
purpose and suitable to his manners, wherein he formerly much excelled me, he
was joined to me without any turbulent delay. We go in hereon unto my Mother,
and declare what was done; She rejoices; We make known the manner of it how it
was done; she exulteth and triumphs, and blesses thee, O God, who art able
to do for us more than we know how to ask or understand. And these things does
the Holy Man express to bear witness, as he says, Adversus typhum humani
generis, to repress the swelling pride of Mankind. And in the Example of
Alipius we have an Instance, how variously God is pleased to effect this Work
in Men, carrying some through strong Convictions, deep Humiliations, great
Distresses, and perplexing Terrors of Mind, before they come to Peace and Rest;
leading others gently and quietly without any visible disturbances, unto the
saving Knowledge of himself by Jesus Christ.

Conviction, is a dread and fear as to their Eternal Condition. There does
befall them an apprehension of that Wrath which is due to their Sins, and
threatened in the Curse of the Law to be inflicted on them. This fills them with
afflictive Perturbations of Mind, with Dread and Terror, Consternation and
Humbling of their Souls thereon. And what befalls the Minds of Men on this
account, is handled by some distinctly under the Names or Titles of, Dolor
legalis, timor servilis, attritio mentis, compunctio cordis, humiliatio animae;
Legal sorrow, servile fear, attrition of Mind, compunction and humiliation, and
the like. And as these things have been handled most of them by Modern Divines,
and cast into a certain series and dependence on one another, with a discovery
of their Nature and Degrees, and how far they are required in order unto
sincere Conversion and sound Believing; so they are all of them treated on in
their way by the Schoolmen, as also they were before them by many of the
Fathers. The charge therefore of Novelty which is laid by some against the
Doctrine of these Things, arises from a fulsome mixture of Ignorance and
Confidence. Whether therefore all things that are delivered concerning these
things be right or no, sure enough I am that the whole Doctrine about them for
the substance of it, is no newer than the Gospel, and that it has been taught
in all Ages of the Church. What is needful to be received concerning it, I
shall reduce to the ensuing Heads.

Conviction of Sin being ordinarily by the Law, either immediately or by Light
and Truth thence derived; there does ordinarily accompany it a deep sense and
apprehension of the eternal danger which the Soul is liable unto, on the
account of the guilt of the Sin whereof it is convinced. For the Law comes with
its whole Power upon the Mind and Conscience. Men may be partial in the Law the
Law will not be partial. It does not only convince by its Ligh^, but also at
the same time condemns by its Authority. For what the Law speaks, it speaks
unto them that are under the Law. It takes Men under its Power, and then
shutting them under Sin, it speaks unto them in great severity. This is called
the coming of the Commandment, and slaying of a Sinner, Romans 7. 9.

(2.) This Apprehension will ordinarily ingenerate disquieting and perplexing
Affections in the Minds of Men; nor can it be otherwise where it is fixed and
prevalent. As, (1.) Sorrow and Shame, for and of what they have done. Shame was
the first thing wherein Conviction of Sin discovered it self, Genesis 3. 7. And
Sorrow always accompanies it, Acts 2. 36. Hearing these things (...), they
were pierced with perplexing Grief in their Heart. Their eyes are opened to see
the Guilt and Sense of Sin, which pierces them through with dividing Sorrow.
(2.) Fear of Eternal Wrath; This keeps the Soul in bordage, Heb. 2. 14. and is
accompanied with torment. The Person so convinced, believes the threatening of
the Law to be true and trembles at it. An eminent Instance whereof we have in
our first Parents also, Genesis 3. 16. (3.) Perplexing unsatisfactory Enquiries
after Means and Ways for deliverance out of this present Distress and from
future Misery. What shall we do? What shall we do to be saved is the restless
enquiry of such Persons, Mich. 6. 8. Acts 2. Acts. 14.

(3.) These things will assuredly put the Soul on many Duties, as Prayer for
Deliverance, Abstinence from Sin, endeavors after a general change of Life; in
all which and the like, this Conviction puts forth and variously exercises its
power.

mere working of the Passions of the Minds of Men upon the rational
Consideration of their State and Condition, which yet cannot but be grievous
and afflictive. These Things may be so proposed unto Men and pressed on them,
as that they shall not be able to avoid their Consideration, and the
Conclusions which naturally follow on them. And yet they may not be in the
least affected with them as we see by experience. Wherefore we say moreover
that the Law or the Doctrine of it, when the Consciences of Men are effectually
brought under its Power, is accompanied with a secret Virtue from God called a
Spirit of Bondage, which causes a sense of the Curse of it to take a deep
impression on the Soul, to fill it with fear and dread, yea sometimes with
horror and despair. This the Apostle calls the Spirit of Bondage unto Fear,
Romans 8. 15. and declares at large how all that are under the Law, that is, the
convincing and condemning Power of it are in bondage, nor does the Law in the
Administration of it, lead or gender unto any thing else but Bondage, Gal. 4.
22, 23, 24.

substance of these things is ordinarily found in those who are converted unto
God, when grown up unto the use of Reason and capable of Impressions from
external Administrations. Especially are they evident in the Minds and
Consciences of such as have been engaged in any open sinful couse or practice.
But yet no certain Rule or Measure of them can be prescribed as necessary in or
unto any antecedaneously unto Conversion. To evince the Truth hereof two things
may be observed; (1.) That Perturbations, Sorrows, Dejections, Dread, Fears,
are no Duty unto any; only they are such things as sometimes ensue or are
immitted into the Mind upon that which is a Duty indispensible, namely
conviction of Sin. They belong not to the Precept of the Law, but to its Curse.
They are no part of what is required of us, but of what is inflicted on us.
There is a Gospel-Sorrow and Humiliation after believing that is a Duty, that
is both commanded and has Promises annexed unto it. But this Legal Sorrow is
an Effect of the Curse of the Law and not of its Command. (2.) God is pleased
to exercise a Prerogative and Sovereignty in this whole Matter, and deals with
the Souls of Men in unspeakable variety. Some he leads by the Gates of Death
and Hell unto Rest in his Love, like the People of old through the waste and
howling Wilderness into Canaan, and the Paths of others he makes plain and
easy unto them. Some walk or wander long in Darkness, in the Souls of others
Christ is formed in the first gracious Visitation.

Measure or Degree of these Accidents or Consequents of Conviction to be
prescribed unto any as antecedaneously necessary to sincere Conversion and
sound Believing: but these two things in general are so; (1.) Such a Conviction
of Sin, that is of a state of Sin, of a course of Sin, of actual Sins, against
the Light of Natural Conscience, as that the Soul is satisfied that it is
thereby obnoxious unto the Curse of the Law and the Wrath of God. Thus at least
does God conclude and shut up every one under Sin on whom he will have Mercy;
for every Mouth must be stopped, and all become guilty before God, Romans 3. 19.
Gal. 3. 22. without this no Man ever did nor will ever sincerely believe in
Jesus Christ. For he calls none unto him, but those who in some measure are
weary or thirsty, or one way or other seek after Deliverance. The whole he
tells us, that is, those who so conceit themselves, have no need of a
Physician, they will neither enquire after him nor care to go unto him when
they are invited so to do; see Isa. 32. 2. (2.) A due apprehension and resolved
Judgment that there is no way within the compass of a Man's own contrivance to
find out, or his ability to make use of and to walk in, nor any other way of
God's appointment or approbation, which will deliver the Soul in and from the
State and Condition wherein it is, and that which it fears, but only that which
is proposed in the Gospel by Jesus Christ.

Revelation of Jesus Christ, and the Righteousness of God in him, John 1. 13.
And in order hereunto he ought; (1.) To own the Sentence of the Law under which
he suffers, justifying God in his Righteousness, and the Law in its Holiness,
whatever be the issue of this Dispensation toward himself, Romans 3. 19, 20.
Chap. 7. 12, 13. For God in this Work intends to break the stubbornness of
Men's Hearts, and to hide Pride from them, Romans 3. 4. (2.) Not hastily to
believe every thing that will propose it self unto him as a Remedy or Means of
Relief, Mich. 6. 6, 7. The things which will present themselves in such a Case
as means of Relief are of two sort. (1.) Such as the Fears and Superstitions of
Men have suggested or will suggest. That which has raised all the false
Religion which is in the World, is nothing but a contrivance for the
satisfaction of Men's Consciences under Convictions. To pass by Gentilism, This
is the very Life and Soul of Popery. What is the meaning of the Sacrifice of
the Mas^, of Purgatory, of Pardons, Penances, Indulgences, Abstinences, and the
like things innumerable, but only to satisfy Conscience by them perplexed with
a sense of Sin? Hence many among them after great and outrageous wickednesses,
do betake themselves to their highest Monastical Severity. The Life and Soul of
Superstition consists in endeavors to quiet and charm the Consciences of Men
convinced of Sin. (2.) That which is pressed with most vehemence and
plausibility, being suggested by the Law it self in a way of escape from the
danger of its Sentence, as the sense of what it speaks represented in a natural
Conscience, is legal Righteousness to be sought after in amendment of Life.
This proposes it self unto the Soul, as with great importunity, so with great
Advantages to further its Acceptance. For (1.) the matter of it is
unquestionably necessary, and without it in its proper place and with respect
unto its proper End, there is not sincere Conversion unto God. (1.) It is
looked on as the sense of the Law, or as that which will give satisfaction
thereunto. But there is a deceit in all these things, as to the end proposed;
and if any amendment of Life be leaned on to that purpose, it will prove a
broken Reed and pierce the Hand of him that rests upon it. For although the Law
require at all times an abstinence from sin, and so for the future, which in a
Sinner is amendment of Life; yet it proposes it not as that which will deliver
any Soul from the guilt of Sin already contracted, which is the State under
Consideration. And if it win upon the Mind to accept of its Terms unto that end
or purpose, it can do no more, nor will do less than shut up the Person under
its Curse.

attained such a degrec of Sorrow for Sin and Humiliation, as is necessary unto
them that are called to believe in Jesus Christ. There was indeed more reason
of giving caution against Temptations of this kind in former days, when
Preachers of the Gospel dealt more severely, I wish I may not also say, more
sincerely with the Consciences of Convinced Sinners, that it is the manner of
most now to do. But it is yet possible that herein may lie a mistake; seeing no
such Degrees of these things as some may be troubled about, are prescribed for
any such end, either in the Law or Gospel. (2.) That those who persuade them to
believe, know not how great Sinners they are, but yet they know that Christ
called the greatest; and it is an undervaluation of the Grace of Christ to
suppose that the greatest Sins should disappoint the Effects of it in any that
sincerely come unto him.



(1.) This is the proper and peculiar Work of the Gospel, and ever was so form
the first giving of the Promise. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and
Truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1. 18. Romans 1. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 23. Jam. 1. 18.
Ephesians. 3. 8, 9, 10.

(2.) To this purpose it is necessary that the Gospel, that is, the Doctrine of
it concerning Redemption, Righteousness and Salvation by Jesus Christ, be
declared and made known to Convinced Sinners. And this also is an effect of
Sovereign Wisdom and Grace, Romans 10. 13, 14, 15.

(3.) The Declaration of the Gospel is accompanied with a Revelation of the
Will of God, with respect unto the Faith and Obedience of them unto whom it is
declared. This is the Work of God, the Work which he requires at our hands,
that we believe in him whom he has sent, Joh. 6. And this Command of God unto
Sinners to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ for Life and Salvation, the Gospel
teaches us to press from the manifold Aggravations which attend the Sin of not
complying therewith. For it is, as therein declared; (1.) A Rejection of the
Testimony of God, which he gives unto his Wisdom, Love, and Grace, with the
excellency and certainty of the way of Salvation of Sinners by Jesus Christ,
which is to make God a Layar, 1 John 5. 10. Joh. 3. 32, 33. (2.) A Contempt of
Love and Grace, with the way and means of their communication to lost Sinners
by the Blood of the Son of God, which is the highest provocation that can be
offered unto the Divine Majesty.

(4.) In the Declaration of the Gospel the Lord Christ is in an especial manner
proposed, as crucified and lifted up for the especial Object of our Faith, John
3. 14, 15. Gal. 3. 1. And this Proposition of Christ has included in it an
Invitation unto all Convinced Sinners to come unto him for Life and Salvation,
Isa. 45. 2. Chap. 65. 1.

(5.) The Lord Christ being proposed unto Sinners in the Gospel, and their
acceptance or receiving of him being urged on them, it is withal declared for
what end he is so proposed. And this is in general to save them from their
Sins, Mat. 1. 21. or the Wrath to come whereof they are afraid, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
For in the Evangelical Proposition of him there is included; (1.) That there is
a Way yet remaining for Sinners, whereby they may escape the Curse of the Law,
and the Wrath of God which they have deserved, Psalm. 130. 4. Job 33. 24. Acts
4. 12. (2.) That the Foundation of these Ways lies in an Atonement made by
Jesus Christ unto the Justice of God, and Satisfaction to his Law for Sin, Romans
3. 25. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal. 3. 13. (3.) That God is well-pleased with this
Atonement, and his Will is that we should accept of it, and acquiesce in it, 2
Cor. 5. 18, 19. Isa. 53. 11, 12. Romans 5. 10, 11.

(6.) It is proposed and promised, that through and upon their believing, that
is, on Christ as proposed in the Gospel for the only way of Redemption and
Salvation, Convinced Sinners shall be pardoned, justified, and acquitted before
God, discharged of the Law against them, through the imputation unto them of
what the Lord Christ has done for them and suffered in their stead, Romans 8. 3.
and 10. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.

(7.) To prevail with and win over the Souls of Men unto a consent to receive
Christ on the Terms wherein he is proposed; that is, to believe in him, and
trust unto him, to what he is, has done and suffered, and continues to do for
pardon of Sin, Life and Salvation, the Gospel is filled with Arguments,
Invitation, Encouragements, Exhortations, Promises, all of them designed to
explain and declare the Love, Grace, Faithfulness, and Good Will of God herein.
In the due management and improvement of these parts of the Gospel, consists
the principal Wisdom and Skill of the Ministers of the New Testament.

(8.) Among these various Ways or Means of the Declaration of himself and his
Will, God frequently causes some especial Word, Promise or Passage to fix it
self on the Mind of a Sinner, as we saw it in the Instance before insisted on.
Hereby the Soul is first excited to exert and act the Faith wherewith it is
endued, by the effectual working of the Spirit of God before described. And by
this means are Men directed unto Rest Peace and Consolation, in that variety of
Degrees wherein God is pleased to communicate them.

(9.) This Acting of Faith on Christ through the Promise of the Gospel, for
Pardon, Righteousness and Salvation, is inseparably accompanied with, and that
Faith is the Root and infallible cause of an universal Engagement of Heart unto
all Holy Obedience to God in Christ, with a Relinquishment of all known Sin,
necessarily producing a through-Change and Reformation of Life, and
Fruitfulness in Obedience. For as upon a discovery of the Love of God in
Christ, the Promises whereby it is exhibited unto us being mixed with Faith,
the Soul of a poor Sinner will be filled with Godly Sorrow and Shame for its
former Sins, and will be deeply humbled for them; so all the Faculties of it
being now renewed and inwardly changed, it can no more refrain from the Love of
Holiness, and from an Engagement into a watchful course of Universal Obedience
unto God, by such free Actings as are proper unto it, than one that is new born
can refrain from all Acts of Life Natural, In Motion desire of Food and the
like. Vain and foolish therefore are the Reproaches of some, who in an high
course of a Worldly Life and Profane, do charge others with Preaching a
Justification by Faith alone in Christ Jesus unto a neglect of Holiness,
Righteousness and Obedience of God, which such Scoffers and fierce Despisers of
all that are good do so earnestly plead for. Those whom they openly reflect
upon, do unanimously teach, That the Faith which does not purify the Heart and
reform the Life, which is not fruitful in good Works, which is not an effectual
Cause and Means of Repentance and newness of Life, is not genuine nor pleadable
unto Justification, but empty, dead, and that which if trusted unto, will
eternally deceive the Souls of Men. They do all of them press the indispensible
necessity of Universal Holiness, Godliness, Righteousness or Obedience to all
the Commands of God on surer Principles, with more cogent Arguments, in a more
clear compliance with the Will, Grace, and Love of God in Christ, than any they
pretend unto, who ignorantly and falsely traduce them, as those who regard them
not. And as they urge an Obediential Holiness, which is not defective in any
Duty either toward God or Man, which they either plead for or pretend unto; so
it contains that in it which is more Sublime, Spiritual, and Heavenly, than
what they are either acquainted with or do regard; which in its proper place
shall be made more fully to appear.

Primitive Times of the Church, were upon their Confession or Profession hereof
admitted into Church-Society, and a Participation of all the Mysteries thereof.
And this being the common way whereby any were added unto the Fellowship of the
Faithful, it was an effectual Means of intense Love without dissimulation
among them all, on the account of their joint Interest in the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And I shall shut up this Discourse with one Instance hereof,
given us by Austin in the Conversion and Admission into Church-Society, of
Victorinus a Platonical Philosopher; as he received the Story from
Simplicianus, by whom he was Baptized; Ut ventum est ad horam profitendae fidei
quae verbis certis retentisque memoriter, de loco eminentiore in conspectu
populi fidelis Romae reddi solet ab eis qui accessuri sunt ad gratiam tuam,
oblatum esse dicebat Victorino a Presbyteris, ut secretius redderet, sicut non
nullis qui verecundia trepidaturi videbantur offerri mos erat; illum autem
maluisse salutem suam in conspectu sanctae multitudinis profiteri, non enim
erat salus quam docebat in Rheterica and tamen eam public professus erat.
Quanto minus vereri debuit Mansuetam gregem tuam pronuncians verbum tuum, qui
non verebatur in verbis suis turbas insanorum? Itaque ubi ascendit ut redderet,
omnes sibimet invicem ut eum noverant, instrepurent nomen ejus strepitu
congratulationis. Quis autem ibi eum non noverat? Et sonuit presso sonitu per
ora cunctorum, Victorinus, Victorinus; cito sonuerunt exultatione quia videbant
eum, cito siluerunt intention ut audirent eum; pronunciat ille fidem veracem
praeclara fiducia, and volebant eum omnes rapere intro in cor suum; and
rapiebant amando and gaudeno. Hae rapientium manus erant; Lib. 8. Cap. 2. Not a
few things concerning the Order, Discipline, and fervent Love of the Primitive
Christians in their Church-Societies, are intimated and represented in these
words, which I shall not here reflect upon.

second Great Work of the Spirit of God in the New Creation. This is a summary
Description of his Forming and Creating the Members of that Mystical Body whose
Head is Christ Jesus. The latter part of our Discourse concerning the external
manner of Regeneration or Conversion unto God, with the gradual Preparation for
it and Accomplishment of it in the Souls of Men, is that Subject which many
Practical Divines of this Nation, have in their Preaching and Writings much
insisted on and improved, to the great Profit and Edification of the Church of
God. But this whole Doctrine, with all the Declarations and Applications of it,
is now by some among our selves derided and exposed to Scorn, although it be
known to have been the constant Doctrine of the most Learned Prelates of the
Church of England. And as the Doctrine is exploded, so all experience of the
Work it self in the Souls of Men, is decried as Fanatical and Enthusiastical.

To obviate the Pride and Wantonness of this filthy Spirit, I have in the
summary Representation of the Work it self now given, confirmed the several
Instances of it, with the Experience of the Great and Holy Man so often named.
For whereas some of those by whom this Doctrine and Work are despised, are
puffed up with a conceit of their Excellency in the Theatrical Scoptical
Faculty of these Days, unto a contempt of all by whom they are contradicted in
the most importune of their Dictates; yet if they should swell themselves until
they break, like the Frog in the Fable, they would never prevail with their
fondest Admirers, to admit them into a competition with the immortal Wit, Grace
and Learning of that Eminent Champion of the Truth, and Light of the Age
wherein he lived.

BOOK IV.
The Nature of Sanctification and Gospel Holiness explained. CHAP. I.
(1) Regeneration the Way whereby the Spirit forms living Members for the
Mystical Body of Christ. (2) Carried on by Sanctification, 2 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
opened. (3) God the only Author of our Sanctification and Holiness. (4) And
that as the God of Peace. (5) Sanctification described. (6) A diligent enquiry
into the nature whereof, with that of Holiness, proved necessary. (7)
Sanctification twofold: 1. By External Dedication; 2. By Internal
Purification. (8) Holiness peculiar to the Gospel and its Truth. (9) Not
discernible to the eye of Carnal Reason. (10) Hardly understood by Believers
themselves. (11) It passes over into Eternity. (12) Has in it a present
Glory. (13) Is all that God requires of us, and in what sense. (14) Promised
unto us. (15) How we are to improve the Command for Holiness.

Regeneration or Conversion of Gods Elect, the Nature and Manner whereof we
have before described, consists the second part of the Work of the Holy Spirit
in order unto the completing and perfecting of the New Creation. As in the
former he prepared a Natural Body for the Son of God, wherein he was to obey
and suffer according to his Will, so by this latter he prepares him a Mystical
Body, or members spiritually living, by uniting them unto Him who is their Head
and their Life, Col. 3. 4. For as the Body is one, and has many members, and
all the members of that one Body, being many, are one Body, so also is Christ,
1 Cor. 12. 12. Nor does he leave this work in that Beginning of it whereof we
have treated, but unto him also it belongs to continue it, to preserve it, and
to carry it on to perfection. And this he does in our Sanctification, whose
Nature and Effects we are in the next place to enquire into.

Thessalonians, Chap. 5. having closely compiled a great number of weighty
particular Evangelical Duties, and annexed sundry Motives and Enforcements unto
them, closes all his holy Prescriptions with a fervent Prayer for them, v. 23.
And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and let your whole spirit and
soul, and body, be preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Or, as I had rather read the words, And God himself even the God of peace
sanctify you throughout, that your whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be
preserved blameless. The Reason hereof is, because all the Graces and Duties
which he had enjoined them did belong unto their Sanctification, which though
their own Duty was not absolutely in their own Power, but was a Work of God in
them and upon them. Therefore that they might be able thereunto and might
actually comply with his Commands, he prays that God would thus sanctify them
throughout. That this shall be accomplished in them and for them, he gives them
assurance from the Faithfulness (and consequently Power and Unchangeableness
which are included therein) of him who had undertaken to effect it, v. 24.
Faithful is he that calls you, who will also do it. Now whereas this
Assurance did not arise nor was taken from any thing that was peculiar unto
them, but merely from the consideration of the Faithfulness of God himself, it
is equal with respect unto all that are effectually called. They shall all
infallibly be sanctified throughout, and preserved blameless to the Coming of
Jesus Christ. This therefore being the great privilege of Believers, and their
eternal safety absolutely depending thereon, it requires our utmost Diligence
to search into the Nature and Necessity of it; which may be done from this and
the like places of Scripture.

Author of our Sanctification, who only is so, is asserted to be God. He is the
Eternal Spring and only Fountain of all Holiness; there is nothing of it in any
Creature but what is directly and immediately from him. There was not in our
first Creation. He made us in his own image. And to suppose that we can now
sanctify or make our selves holy, is proudly to renounce and cast off our
principal Dependence upon him. We may as wisely and rationally contend, that we
have not our Being and our Lives from God, as that we have not our Holiness
from him, when we have any. Hereunto are the proud Opinions of educeing an
Holiness out of the principles of Nature to be reduced. I know all men will
pretend that Holiness is from God, it was never denied by Pelagins himself. But
many with him would have it to be from God in a way of Nature, and not in a way
of especial Grace. It is this latter way which we plead for, and what is from
our selves, or educed by any means out of our Natural Abilities, is not of God
in that way. For God as the Author of Grace, and the best of corrupted Nature
are opposed, as we shall see further afterward; And therefore (2) is He that
is the Author of our Sanctification so emphatically here expressed, (...), Even
God himself; if he does it not none other can do it; it is no otherwise to be
wrought nor effected: There is no other way whereby it may be brought about,
nor does it fall under the power or efficacy of any means absolutely whatever,
but it must be wrought by God himself. He does it of Himself, from his own
Grace; by Himself, or his own Power; for Himself, or his own Glory: And that
(3) under this especial consideration, as he is the God of Peace.

Apostle, and by him frequently, Romans 15. 33. chap. 16. 20. 2 Cor. 13. 11.
Phil. 4. 9. Heb. 13. 20. Were it unto our present purpose to discourse
concerning the general nature of Peace, I might show how it is comprehensive of
all Order, Rest and Blessedness, and all that is in them. On this account the
enclosure of it in this Title unto God as its only Possessour and Author,
belongs to the Glory of his Sovereign Diadem. Every thing that is contrary unto
it, is evil, and of the evil One; yea, all that is evil is so, because of its
contrariety unto peace. Well therefore may God be styled the God of Peace. But
these things I may not here stay to explain; although the words are so
comprehensive and expressive of the whole work of Sanctification, and that
Holiness which is the effect thereof, as that I shall choose to found my whole
Discourse concerning this subject upon them. That which offers it self unto our
present design from this expression, is the peculiar respect unto the Work of
our Sanctification which lies in this especial Property of God. Wherefore he is
said to sanctify us as the God of peace. (1) Because it is a fruit and effect
of that peace with himself which he has made and prepared for us by Jesus
Christ. For he was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, destroying the
Enmity which entered by sin, and laying the Foundation of Eternal Peace. From
hence it is, that he will sanctify us or make us Holy, without a respect
whereunto he would no more do so, than he will sanctify again the Angels that
have sinned, for whom there is no peace made, nor Atonement. (2) God, by the
Sanctification of our Natures and Persons preserves that peace with himself in
its Exercise, which he made and procured by the Mediation of Christ; without
which it could not be kept, nor continued. For in the Duties and Fruits
thereof, consist all those Actings toward God which a State of Reconciliation,
Peace, and Friendship do require. It is Holiness that keeps up a sense of Peace
with God, and prevents those spiritual breaches which the remainders of our
Enmity would occasion. Hence God as the Author of our Peace is the Author of
our Holiness. God even God himself, the God of Peace does sanctify us: How
this is done immediately by the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Love and Peace, and
wherein the nature of this work does consist, are the things which must
afterward be more fully declared. And he is here said to sanctify us (...),
that is, universally and completely; carrying on the work until it comes to
perfection. For two things are intended in that Expression. 1. That our whole
Nature is the subject of this work, and not any one Faculty or Part of it. 2.
That as the work it self is sincere and universal, communicating all parts of
real Holiness unto our whole Natures, so it is carried on to Compleatness and
Perfection. Both these in the ensuing words the Apostle expresses as the end
and design of his Prayer for them, and the Effect of the work of Grace which he
prayed for. For (1) the Subject of this Sanctification he makes to be our whole
Natures, which he distributes unto our entire spirits, Souls and Bodies; and
(2.) The End of the whole is, the preservation of of us blameless in the peace
of God unto the coming of Christ, which will both of them be immediately more
fully spoken unto. Wherefore,

Sanctification as here described, is the immediate Work of God by his Spirit
upon our whole Natures, proceeding from the peace made for us by Jesus Christ,
whereby being changed into his likeness, we are kept entirely in peace with
God, and are preserved unblameable, or in a state of gracious Acceptance with
him, according to the Terms of the Covenant, unto the End.

Holiness, with the Necessity of them both, we must on many Accounts with our
utmost Diligence enquire and search into. This both the Importance of the Truth
it self, and the Opposition thatis made unto it, render necessary. Besides,
whereas we are in the Declaration of the especial Operations of the Holy Ghost,
although he be not so denominated originally from this peculiar Work, as though
he should be called Holy merely because he is the Author of Holiness in all
that are made partakers of it, which we have before disproved; yet there is a
general consent, in words at least, among all who are called Christians, that
this is his immediate and proper Work, or that he is the only sanctifier of all
them that do believe: And this I shall take as yet for granted, although some
among us, who not only pretend high to the preaching of Holiness (whatever be
their practice) but reproach others as weakening the necessity of it, do talk at
such a rate as if in the Holiness which they pleaded for, he had nothing to do
in a peculiar manner. For it is no news to meet with queint and gilded
Discourses about Holiness, intermixed with scoffing reflections on the work of
the Holy Ghost therein. This Work therefore of his we are in an especial manner
to attend unto; unless we would be found among the number of such as those who
own themselves and teach their Children, That the Holy Ghost sanctifies all the
Elect of God, and yet not only despise the work of Holiness in themselves, but
deride those who plead an interest therein as an effect of the sanctification
of the Spirit. For, such fruits of secret Atheism does the world abound
withal. But our principal Duty in this world, is to know aright what it is to
be Holy, and so to be indeed.

Twofold sanctification, and consequently of a twofold Holiness. The first is
common unto Persons and Things, consisting in the peculiar Dedication
Consecration or Separation of them unto the Service of God by his own
Appointment, whereby they become Holy. Thus the Priests and Levites of Old, the
Arc, the Altar, the Tabernacle, and the Temple, were sanctified and made Holy.
And indeed in all Holiness whatever there is a peculiar Dedication and
Separation unto God. But in the sense mentioned, this was solitary and alone;
no more belonged unto it but this sacred separation, nor was there any other
effect of this Sanctification. But (secondly) There is another kind of
Sanctification and Holiness, wherein this Separation to God is not the first
thing done or intended, but a Consequent and Effect thereof. This is real and
internal, by the Communicating of a principle of Holiness unto our Natures,
attended with its Exercise in Acts and Duties of Holy Obedience unto God. This
is that which in the first place we enquire after, and how far Believers are
therein and thereby peculiarly separated and dedicated unto God, shall be
afterward declared. And unto what we have to deliver concerning it we shall
make way by the ensuing observations.

Doctrine, Truth, and Grace of the Gospel; for Holiness is nothing but the
implanting, writing, and realizing of the Gospel in our souls. Hence it is
termed (...), Ephesians. 4. 24. The Holiness of Truth, which the Truth of the
Gospel ingenerates, and which consists in a conformity thereunto; and the
Gospel it self is (...), Tit. 1. 1. The Truth which is according unto
Godliness, which declares that Godliness and Holiness which God requires. The
prayer also of our Savior for our Sanctification is conformed thereunto, John
17. 17. Sanctify them in (or by) thy Truth, thy word is Truth. And he
sanctified himself for us, to be a sacrifice, that we might be sanctified in
the Truth. This alone is that Truth which makes us free, John 8. 12. that is
from sin and the Law, unto Righteousness in Holiness. It belongs neither to
nature nor the Law, so as to proceed from them, or to be effected by them.
Nature is wholly corrupted and contrary unto it. The Law indeed for certain
Ends was given by Moses, but all Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. There
neither is, nor ever was in the world, nor ever shall be, the least dram of
Holiness, but what flowing from Jesus Christ, is communicated by the Spirit,
according to the Truth and promise of the Gospel. There may be something like
it as to its outward Acts and effects, (at least some of them) something that
may wear its Livery in the world, that is but the fruit of men's own Endeavors
in Compliance with their convictions, but Holiness it is not, nor of the same
kind or nature with it. And this men are very apt to deceive themselves withal.
It is the design of corrupted Reason to debase all the glorious mysteries of
the Gospel, and all the concernments of them. There is nothing in the whole
Mystery of Godliness, from the Highest crown of it, which is the Person of
Christ, God manifested in the flesh, unto the lowest and nearest effect of his
Grace, but it labors to deprave, dishonor, and debase. The Lord Christ, it
would have in his whole person to be but a mere man, in his Obedience and
suffering to be but an Example, in his doctrine to be confined unto the
Capacity and Comprehension of Carnal Reason, and the Holiness which he
communicates by the Sanctification of his Spirit, to be but that Moral virtue
which is common among men as the fruit of their own Endeavors. Herein some
will acknowledge that men are guided and directed to a great Advantage by the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and thereunto excited by motions of the Holy Ghost
himself put forth in the Dispensation of that Truth; but any thing else in it,
more excellent, more mysterious, they will not allow. But these low and carnal
imaginations are exceedingly unworthy of the Grace of Christ, the Glory of the
Gospel, the mystery of the Recovery of our Nature, and healing of the wound it
received by the entrance of sin, with the whole design of God in our
Restoration into a state of Communion with himself Moral virtue is indeed the
best thing amongst men that is of them. It far exceeds in worth, use, and
satisfaction; all that the Honors, Powers, Profits, and Pleasures of the World
can extend unto. And it is admirable to consider, what instructions are given
concerning it, what expressions are made of its excellency, what Encomiums of
its use and beauty by Learned contemplative men among the Heathen, the wisest
of whom did acknowledge, that there was yet something in it which they could
only admire, and not comprehend. And very eminent instances of the practice of
it were given in the lives and conversations of some of them. And as the
examples of their Righteousness, Moderation, Temperance, Equanimity in all
Conditions, rise up at present unto the shame and reproach of many that are
called Christians, so they will be called over at the last day, as an
Aggravation of their Condemnation. But to suppose that this Moral virtue,
whatever it be really in its own nature, or however advanced in the
imaginations of men, is that Holiness of Truth which Believers receive by the
Spirit of Christ, is to debase it, to overthrow it, and to drive the souls of
men from seeking an interest in it. And hence it is that some pretending highly
a friendship and respect unto it, do yet hate, despise, and reproach what is
really so, pleasing themselves with the empty name, or withered Carcass of
virtue, every way inferior as interpreted in their practice to the
Righteousness of Heathens. And this in the first place should stir up our
diligence in our enquiries after its true and real nature, that we decive not
our selves with a false appearance of it, and that unto our ruin.

Evangelical Holiness, as it is a fruit or effect in us of the Spirit of
Sanctification, because it is abstruse and Mysterious, and (be it spoken with
the good leave of some, or whether they will or no) undiscernable unto the eye
of carnal Reason. We may say of it in some sense as Job of Wisdom; whence
comes Wisdom, and where is the place of understanding, seeing it is hid from
the eyes of all living, and kept close from the fowls of Heaven; Destruction
and death say, we have heard the same thereof with our ears: God understands
the way thereof, and he knows the place thereof. And unto man he said, behold
the fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding,
Chap. 28. 20, 21, 22, 23. 28. This is that wisdom whose ways, residence, and
paths, are so hidden from the natural Reason, and understandings of men. No
man, I say, by their mere Sight and Conduct can know and understand aright the
true nature of Evangelical Holiness; and it is therefore no wonder if the
Doctrine of it be despised by many as an Enthusiastical fancy. It is of the
things of the Spirit of God, yea it is the principal effect of all his
Operations in us and toward us. And these things of God knows no man but the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. It is by him alone that we are enabled to know the
things that are freely given unto us of God, v. 12, as this is, if ever we
receive any thing of him in this world, or shall do so to Eternity. Eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
that God has prepared for them that love him: The comprehension of these
things is not the work of any of our natural faculties, but God reveals them
unto us by his Spirit, v. 9. 10. Hence it often falls out as it did in the Jews
and Pharisees of old, That those who are most zealous and industrious for and
after a Legal Righteousness, walking in a strict attendance unto Duties
proportionable unto Light and Convictions, pretending to be it and bearing some
resemblance of it, are the most fierce and implacable Enemies of true
Evangelical Holiness. They know it not, and therefore hate it; they have
embraced something else in its place and stead, and therefore despise and
persecute it, as it befalls them who embrace Error for Truth in any kind.

own Interest and concernment therein. As we know not of our selves the things
that are wrought in us of the Spirit of God, so we seldom attend as we ought
unto his instructing of us in them. It may seem strange indeed, that whereas
all Believers are sanctified and made Holy, that they should not understand nor
apprehend what is wrought in them and for them, and what abides with them: But
alas, how little do we know of our selves, of what we are, and whence are our
Powers and Faculties even in things natural? Do we know how the members of the
Body are fashioned in the womb? We are apt to be seeking after and giving
Reasons for all things, and to describe the progress of the production of our
Natures from first to last, so as if not to satisfy our selves, yet to please
and amuze others; for vain man would be wise, although he be like the wild
Asses Colt. The best issues of our Consideration hereof is that of the
Psalmist: Thou, O God, have possessed my reins, thou have covered me in my
Mothers womb; I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well. My substance was
not hid from thee when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the Earth. Thine Eyes did see my substance yet being unperfect,
and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them, Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15, 16. By
diligent consideration of these things we may obtain a firm foundation to stand
on, in an Holy Admiration of the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of that Sovereign
Architect, who has raised this Fabric unto his own Glory; and what we further
attempt is Vanity and Curiosity. How little do we know of these Souls of ours,
and all that we do so, is by their Powers and Operations, which are
Consequential unto their Beings. Now these things are our own naturally, they
dwell and abide with us; they are we, and we are they, and nothing else; yet is
it no easy thing for us to have a reflex and intimate acquaintance with them.
And is it strange if we should be much in the dark unto this new Nature, this
new Creature, which comes from above, from God in Heaven, wherewith our natural
Reason has no Acquaintance? It is New, it is wonderful, it is a work
supernatural, and is known only by supernatural Revelation.

Besides there are other things which pretend to be this Gospel Holiness and
are not, whereby unspeakable Multitudes are deluded and deceived. With some any
Reformation of Life and Abstinence from flagitious sins with the performance of
the Common Duties of Religion, is all which they suppose is required under this
Head of their Duty. Others contend with violence to substitute Moral Virtues by
which they know not themselves what they intend, in the room thereof. And there
is a work of the Law, which in the fruits of it internal and external in the
works of Righteousness and Duties, which is hardly and not but by spiritual
Light and Measures to be distinguished from it. This also adds to the
difficulty of understanding it aright, and should to our diligent enquiry into
it.

Eternity and Glory. Death has no power over it to destroy it, or divest us of
it. For (1) Its Acts indeed are transient, but its Fruits abide for ever in
their Reward. They who dye in the Lord rest from their Labors and their works
follow them, Rev. 14. 13. God is not unrighteous to forget their labor of
love, Heb. 6. 10. There is not any Effect or Fruit of Holiness, not the least,
not the giving of a cup of cold water to a Disciple of Christ in the name of a
Disciple, but it shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and abide for ever in
its Eternal Reward. Nothing shall be lost, but all the fragments of it shall be
gathered up and kept safe for ever. Every thing else how specious soever it be
in this world shall be burnt up and consumed as hay and stubble; when the
least, the meanest, the most secret Fruit of Holiness, shall be gathered as
Gold and Silver, durable substance, into Gods Treasury, and become a part of
the Riches of the Inheritance of the Saints in Glory. Let no soul fear the Loss
of any Labor in any of the Duties of Holiness, in the most secret contest
against sin, for inward Purity, for outward Fruitfulness, in the Mortification
of sin, Resistance of Temptations, Improvement of Grace, in Patience,
Moderation, Self-denial, Contentment, all that you do know, and what you do not
know, shall all be revived, called over, and abide Eternally in your Reward.
Our Father who now sees in secret will one day reward openly. And the more we
abound in these things the more will God be glorified in the Recompense of
Reward. But this is not all, nor that which I intend. It abides (2) for ever,
and passes over into Glory in its Principle or Nature. The Love wherewith we
now adhere to God, and by which we act the Obedience of Faith toward the
Saints fails not, it ends not when Glory comes on, but is a part of it, 1
Cor. 13. 8. It is true some Gifts shall be done away as useless in a state of
Perfection and Glory, as the Apostle there discourses; and some Graces shall
cease as to some especial Acts and peculiar Exercise, as Faith and Hope so far
as they respect things unseen and future. But all those Graces whereby Holiness
is constituted and wherein it does consist, for the substance of them as they
contain the Image of God, as by them we are united and do adhere unto God in
Christ, shall in their present nature improved into perfection, abide for ever.
In our knowledge of them therefore have we our principal insight into our
Eternal Condition in Glory: And this is as a firm foundation of Consolation, so
a part of our chiefest Joy in this World. Is it not a matter of unspeakable Joy
and Refreshment that these poor Bodies we carry about us, after they have been
made a prey unto death, dust, worms, and corruption, shall be raised and
restored to Life and Immortality, freed from pains, sickness, weakness,
weariness, and vested with those Qualities in conformity to Christ's glorious
Body, which yet we understand not? It is so also that these Souls which now
animate and rule in us, shall be delivered from all their Darkness, Ignorance,
Vanity, Instability, and Alienation from things Spiritual and Heavenly. But
this is not all. These poor low Graces which no live and are acting in us shall
be continued, preserved, purified and perfected, but in their nature be the
same as now they are, as our Souls and Bodies shall be. That Love whereby we
now adhere to God as our chiefest Good, that Faith whereby we are united to
Christ our everlasting Head, that Delight in any of the Ways or Ordinances of
God, wherein he is enjoyed according as he has promised his presence in them;
that Love and Good Will which we have for all those in whom is the Spirit, and
on whom is the Image of Christ, with the entire Principle of spiritual Life and
Holiness which is now begun in any of us, shall be all purified, enhanced,
perfected, and pass into Glory. That very Holiness which we here attain, those
Inclinations and Dispositions, those Frames of Mind, those Powers and Abilities
in Obedience and Adherence unto God, which here contend with the weight of
their own weakness and imperfections, with the Opposition that is continually
made against them by the Body of Death that is utterly to be abolished, shall
be gloriously perfected into immutable Habits, unchangeably acting our Souls in
the enjoyment of God. And this also manifests of how much concernment it is
unto us, to be acquainted with the Doctrine of it, and of how much more to be
really interested in it. Yea,

Spiritual and Heavenly Glory in it in this World. From hence is the Church the
Kings Daughter said to be all Glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. Her inward
adorning with the Graces of the Spirit making her beautiful in Holiness, is
called Glory, and is so; so also the progress and increase of Believers herein,
is called by our Apostle their being changed from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
from one degree of glorious Grace unto another. As this next unto the
Comeliness of the Righteousness of Christ put upon us by the free Grace of God,
is our only beauty in his sight, so it is such as has a real Spiritual Glory
in it. It is the First Fruits of Heaven; and as the Apostle argues concerning
the Jews, that if the first fruits were holy, then is the whole lump holy, so
may we on the other side, if the whole weight, as he calls it, and fullness of
our future Enjoyments be Glory, then are the First Fruits in their Measure so
also. There is in this Holiness, as we shall see further afterward, a Ray of
Eternal Light, a Principle of Eternal Life, and the entire nature of that Love
whereby we shall eternally adhere unto God. The Divine Nature, the new immortal
Creature, the Life of God, the Life of Christ, are all comprised in it. It
represents unto God the Glory of his own Image renewed in us; and unto the Lord
Christ the fruits of his Spirit and Effect of his Mediation, wherein he sees of
the travail of his Soul, and is satisfied. There is therefore nonothing more to
be abhorred, than those carnal low and unworthy thoughts which some men vent of
this glorious Work of the Holy Spirit, who would have it wholly to consist in a
Legal Righteousness or Moral Virtue.

(6) This is that which God indispensibly requires of us. The full prosecution
of this Consideration we must put off unto our Arguments for the Necessity of
it, which will ensue in their proper place. At present I shall show, that not
only God requires Holiness indispensibly in all Believers, but also that this
is All which he requires of them or expects from them: For it comprizeth the
whole Duty of man. And this surely renders it needful for us both to know
what it is, and diligently to apply our selves unto the obtaining an assured
participation of it. For what Servant who has any sense of his Relation and
Duty, if he be satisfied that his Master requires but one thing of him, will
not endeavor an Acquaintance with it, and the Performance of it. Some indeed
say that their Holiness (such as it is) is the Chief or only Design of the
Gospel. If they intend that it is the first principal Design of God in and by
the Gospel, and that not only as to the Preceptive part of it, but also as unto
its Doctrinal and Promissory parts, whence it is principally and emphatically
denominated, it is a fond Imagination. Gods great and first design in and by
the Gospel is eternally to Glorify himself, his Wisdom, Goodness, Love, Grace,
Righteousness and Holiness by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. And in order to this
his great and supreme end, he has designed the Gospel, and designs by the
Gospel, which gives the Gospel its Design; (1) To reveal that Love and Grace of
his unto lost sinners, with the way of its Communication through the Mediation
of his Son Incarnate, as the only means whereby he will be glorified, and
whereby they may be saved, Acts 26. 18. (2) To prevail with men in and by the
Dispensation of its Truth, and Encouragement of its Promises, to renounce their
sins and all other Expectations of Relief or Satisfaction, and to betake
themselves by Faith unto that way of Life and Salvation which is therein
declared unto them, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. Col. 1. 25, 26, 27, 28. (3) To be
the means and Instrument of conveying over unto them, and giving them a Title
unto, and a Right in that Grace and Mercy, that Life and Righteousness which is
revealed and tendered unto them thereby, Mark 16. 16. (4) To be the way and
means of communicating the Spirit of Christ with Grace and Strength unto the
Elect, enabling of them to believe and receive the Atonement, Gal. 3. 2. (5)
Hereby to give them Union with Christ as their Spiritual and Mystical Head, us
also to fix their Hearts and Souls in their choycest Actings in their Faith,
Trust, Confidence and Love immediately on the Son of God as Incarnate and their
Mediator, Joh. 14. 1. Wherefore the first and principal End of the Gospel
toward us, is to invite and encourage lost sinners unto the Faith and
Approbation of the Way of Grace Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, without a
Compliance wherewith in the first place, the Gospel has no more to do with
sinners, but leaves them to Justice the Law and themselves. But now upon a
supposition of these things, and of our giving Glory to God by Faith in them,
the whole that God requires of us in the Gospel in a way of Duty is, that we
should be Holy, and abide in the use of those means whereby Holiness may be
attained and improved in us. For if he requires any other thing of us it must
be on one of these four Accounts: 1. To make Atonement for our sins; or 2. To
be our Righteousness before him; or 3. To merit Life and Salvation by; or 4. To
supererogate in the behalf of others. No other end can be thought of, besides
what are the true ends of Holiness whereon God should require any thing of us.
And all the false Religion that is in the world leans on a supposition that God
does require somewhat of us with respect unto these ends.

But (1) He requires nothing of us (which we had all the Reason in Atonement
or satisfaction for our sins, that might compensate the injuries we had done
him by our Apostasy and Rebellion. For whereas we had multiplied sins against
him, lived in an Enmity and Opposition to him, and had contracted insupportable
and immeasurable Debts upon our own Souls, Terms of peace being now proposed,
who could think but that the first thing required of us would be, that we
should make some kind of satisfaction to Divine Justice for all our enormous
and heinous provocations? Yea who is there that indeed does naturally think
otherwise? so he apprehended who was contriving a way in his own mind how he
might come to an Agreement with God. Micah 6. 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come
before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God? shall I come before him
with Burnt-Offerings, with Calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with
Thousands of Rams, or with ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my
firstborn for my Transgression, the fruit of my Body for the sin of my Soul.
This or something of this nature seems to be but a very reasonable Enquiry for
a Guilty self-condemned sinner, when first he entertains thoughts of an
Agreement with the Holy sin-avenging God? And this was the foundation of all
that cruel and expensive Superstition that the World was in bondage unto for so
many Ages. Mankind generally thought that the principal thing which was
required of them in Religion, was to atone and pacify the wrath of the Divine
Power, and to make a Compensation for what had been done against him. Hence
were their Sacrifices of Hecatombs of Beasts, of Mankind, of their Children,
and of themselves, as I have elsewhere declared. And the same principle is
still deep rooted in the minds of convinced sinners; and many an Abbey,
Monastery, College and Almes-house has it founded. For in the fruits of this
Superstition the Priests which set it on work, always shared deeply. But quite
otherwise in the Gospel there is declared and tendered unto sinners, an absolute
free pardon of all their sins, without any satisfaction or Compensation made or
to be made on their part, that is by themselves, namely on the Account of the
Atonement made for them by Jesus Christ. And all Attempts or Endeavors after
Works or Duties of Obedience in any respect satisfactory to God for sin, or
meritorious of pardon, do subvert and overthrow the whole Gospel. See 2 Cor. 5.
18, 19, 20, 21. Wherefore in Answer to the Enquiry before mentioned the Reply
in the Prophet is, that God looks for none of these things, and that all such
Contrivances were wholly vain; He has showed thee O man, what is good, and
what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly and to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God? v. 8. which last Expression comprizeth the whole of
our Covenant-Obedience, Genesis 17. 1. as the two former are eminent Instances of
it in particular.

Righteousness for our Justification for the future; that this also he would
have done we might have justly expected. For a Righteousness we must have or we
cannot be accepted with him. And here also many are at a loss, and resolve that
it is a thing fond and inconvenient to think of peace with God without some
Righteousness of their own on the Account whereof they may be Justified before
him; and rather than they will forgo that apprehension they will let go all
other thoughts of Peace and Acceptance. Being ignorant of the Righteousness of
God, they go about to establish their own Righteousness, and do not submit
themselves unto the Righteousness of God; nor will they acquies^e in it that
Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes, as
Romans 10. 3, 4. But so it is, that God requires not this of us in the Gospel;
for we are Justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is in
Christ Jesus. Romans 3. 24. And we do therefore conclude, that a man is justified
by Faith, without the works of the Law, v. 28. so Romans 8. 3, 4. Neither is
there any mention in the whole Gospel, of God's requiring a Righteousness in us
upon the Account whereof we should be justified before him, or in his sight.
For the Justification by works mentioned in James consists in the evidencing
and Declaration of our Faith by them.

purchase or Merit for our selves Life and Salvation. For we are saved by Grace
through Faith, not of works lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. God does
save us neither by nor for the works of Righteousness which we have done, but
according to his own Mercy, Titus 3. 5. so that although on the one side, the
wages of sin is Death, there being a proportion in Justice between sin and
punishment; yet there is none between our Obedience and our Salvation; and
therefore Eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans
6. 23. God therefore requires nothing at our hands under this Notion or
Consideration; nor is it possible that in our Condition any such thing should
be required of us. For whatever we can do is due beforehand on other Accounts,
and so can have no prospect to merit what is to come. Who can merit by doing
his duty? our Savior does so plainly prove the contrary as none can further
doubt of it than of his Truth and Authority, Luke 17. 10. Nor can we do any
thing that is acceptable to him, but what is wrought in us by his Grace. And
this overthrowes the whole Nature of merit which requires, that that be every
way our own whereby we would deserve somewhat else at the hands of another, and
not his more than ours. Neither is there any proportion between our Duties and
the Reward of the eternal Enjoyment of God. For besides that they are all weak,
imperfect, and tainted with sin, so that no one of them is able to make good
its own station for any End or Purpose in the strictness of Divine Justice,
they altogether come infifinitely short of the desert of an Eternal Reward by
any Rule of Divine Justice. And if any say that this merit of our works depends
not on, nor is measured by strict Justice, but wholly by the Gracious
Condescension of God who has appointed and promised so to reward them; I
answer in the first place, that this perfectly overthrowes the whole Nature of
Merit: For the Nature of Merit consists entirely and absolutely in this, that
to him that works the Reward is reckoned of Debt, and not of Grace, Romans 4.
4. And these two are contrary and inconsistent; for what is by Grace is no more
of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; and what is of Works is no more of
Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work. Romans 11. 6. And those who go about to
found a Merit of ours in the Grace of God, do endeavor to unite and reconcile
those things which God has everlastingly separated and opposed. And I say (
secondly) that although God does freely, graciously and bountifully reward our
Duties of Obedience, and upon the Account of his Covenant and Promise he is
said to be, and he is Righteous in his so doing, yet he every where declares
that what he so does, is an Act of mere Grace in himself, that has not respect
unto any thing but only the Interposition and Mediation of Jesus Christ. In
this sense God in the Gospel requires of us nothing at all.

(4.) Much less does he require of any, that they should do such supererogation
therein, redound to the Advantage and benefit of others. This monstrous fiction
which has outdone all the Pharisaisme of the Jews we are engaged for to the
Church of Rome, as a pretense given to the piety, or rather covering of the
impiety of their Votaries. But seeing on the one hand that they are themselves
who pretend to these Works but flesh, and so cannot on their own Account be
Justified in the sight of God, so it is extreme pride and cursed
self-confidence for them to undertake to help others by the merit of those
works whose worth they stand not in need of; concerning which it will be one
day said unto them, Who has required these things at your hands? But now
whereas God requires none of these things of us, nothing with respect unto any
of these Ends, such is the perverseness of our Minds by Nature, that many think
that God requires nothing else of us, or nothing of us but with respect unto
one or other of these Ends; nor can they in their Hearts conceive why they
should perform any one Duty toward God, unless it be with some kind of regard
unto these things. If they may do any thing whereby they may make some
Recompense for their sins that are past, at least in their own Minds and
Consciences, if any thing whereby they may procure an Acceptance with God, and
the Approbation of their state and Condition, they have something which as they
suppose may quicken and animate their Endeavors. Without these Considerations,
Holy Obedience is unto them a thing Lifeless and useless. Others will labor
and take pains both in ways of outward Mortification and profuse Munificence
in any way of Superstitious Charity, whilst they are persuaded or can persuade
themselves that they shall merit Eternal Life and Salvation thereby, without
much being beholding to the Grace of God in Christ Jesus. Yea all that has the
Face or pretense of Religion in the Papacy, consists in a supposition, that all
which God requires of us, he does it with respect unto these ends, of
Atonement, Justification, Merit and Supererrogation. Hereunto do they apply
all that remains of the Ordinances of God amongst them, and all their own
Inventions are managed with the same Design. But by these things is the Gospel
and the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ made of none effect. Herein then I say
lies the express Opposition that is between the Wisdom of God in the mystery of
the Gospel, and the (...), the Wisdom of the Flesh, or our Carnal Reason. God
in his dealing with us by the Gospel, takes upon his own Grace and Wisdom the
providing of an Atonement for our sins, a Righteousness whereby we may be
Justified before him, and the Collation of Eternal Life upon us, all in and by
him who of God is made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctification and
Redemption. But withal he indispensibly requires of us Holiness and universal
Obedience for the ends that shall be declared afterward. This way, thinks the
Wisdom of the Flesh or Carnal Reason is mere foolishness as our Apostle
testifies, 1 Cor. 1. 18, 23. But such a foolishness it is, that is wiser than
men, v. 25. that is a way so excellent and full of Divine Wisdom, that men are
not able to comprehend it. Wherefore in Opposition hereunto Carnal Reason
concludes, that either what God requires of us is to be done with respect unto
the ends mentioned, some or other, or all of them, or that it is no great
matter whether it be done or no. Neither can it discern of what use our
Holiness or Obedience unto God should be if it serve not unto some of these
purposes. For the necessity of Conformity to God, of the Renovation of his
Image in us before we are brought unto the enjoyment of him in Glory, the
Authority of his Commands, the Reverence of his Wisdom, appointing the way of
Holiness and Obedience as the means of expressing our Thankfulness, glorifying
him in the World, and of coming to Eternal Life, it has no regard unto. But
the first true saving Light that shines by the Gospel from Jesus Christ into
our Souls begins to undeceive us in this matter. And there is no greater
Evidence of our receiving an Evangelical Baptism, or of being baptized into
the spirit of the Gospel, than the clear Compliance of our minds with the
Wisdom of God herein. When we find such constraining motives unto Holiness upon
us, as will not allow the least subducting of our Souls from an universal
attendance unto it, purely on the Ends of the Gospel without respect unto those
now discarded, it is an Evidence that the Wisdom of God has prevailed against
that of the flesh in our minds.

Wherefore Holiness with the fruits of it, with respect unto their proper Ends,
which shall afterward be declared, is all that God requires of us. And this
he declares in the tenor of the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. I am God
Almighty, walk before me and be thou perfect. This is that, and this is all
that I require of thee, namely thy Holy Obedience; for all other things wherein
thou art concerned I take them all upon my own Almighty Power or
All Sufficiency; as he says elsewhere, that the whole of Man is to fear God
and keep his Commandments. And the consideration hereof taken singly and by
its self, is sufficient with all that have any regard unto God, or their own
Eternal welfare, to convince them of what importance these things are unto them.

Command with an Expectation of our compliance with it from our own Ability and
Power; God moreover has promised to sanctify us, or to work this Holiness in
us, the Consideration whereof will give us yet a nearer Prospect into its
nature. He that requires it of us, knows that we have it not of our selves.
When we were in our best condition by nature in the state of Original Holiness,
vested with the Image of God, we preserved it not. And is it likely that now in
the state of lapsed and depraved nature it is in our own power to restore our
selves, to re-introduce the Image of God into our Souls and that in a far more
eminent manner than it was at first created by God? What needed all that
Contrivance of Infinite Wisdom and Grace for the Reparation of our nature by
Jesus Christ, if Holiness wherein it does consist be in our own Power, and
educed out of the natural faculties of our Souls? There can be no more fond
Imagination befall the minds of men, than that defiled Nature is able to
cleanse it self, or depraved Nature to rectify it self, or we who have lost
that Image of God which he created in us, and with us, should create it again
in our selves by our own endeavors. Wherefore when God commands and
requires us to be Holy, he commands us to be that which by nature and of our
selves we are not; and not only so, but that which we have not of our selves a
Power to attain unto. Whatever therefore is absolutely in our own Power, is not
of that Holiness which God requires of us. For what we can do our selves,
there is neither Necessity nor Reason why God should promise to work in us by
his Grace. And to say, that what God so promises to work he will not work or
effect indeed, but only persuade and prevail with us to do it, is through the
pride of Unbelief to defy the Truth and Grace of God, and with the Spoils of
them to adorn our own Righteousness and Power. Now God has multiplied his
Promises to this purpose, so that we shall need to call over only some of them
in way of Instance. Jerem. 31. 33. I will put my Law in your inward parts, and
write it in your hearts, and will be your God and ye shall be my People. Chap.
32. 39, 40. I will give them one Heart and one Way, that they may fear me for
ever, and I will put my fear in their Hearts that they shall not depart from
me. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. A new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony Heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. V. 25. I
will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your
filthiness: V. 29. I will also save you from all your uncleanness. The whole of
our Sanctification and Holiness is comprised in these Promises. To be cleansed
from the Defilements of sin whatever they be, to have an Heart inclined,
disposed, enabled, to fear the Lord always, and to walk in all his Ways and
Statutes accordingly, with an internal habitual Conformity of the whole Soul
unto the Law of God, is to be sanctified or to be Holy. And all this God
promises directly to work in us and to accomplish himself. In the Faith of
these Promises and for the fulfilling of them, the Apostle prays for the
Thessalonians, as we observed at our Entrance, That the God of Peace himself
would sanctify them throughout, whereby their whole Spirits Souls and Bodies
might be preserved blameless to the coming of Jesus Christ. And hence is
evident what we before observed, that what is absolutely in our own power is
not of the nature of, nor does necessarily belong unto Holiness whatever it be.
The best of the Intellectual or Moral Habits of our minds which are but the
natural Improvement and Exercise of our facultyes, neither are nor can be our
Holiness; nor do the best of our Moral Duties as merely and only so, belong
thereunto. By these Moral Habits and Duties we understand the Powers Faculties
or Abilities of our Souls exercised with respect and in Obedience unto the
Commands of God, as excited, persuaded, and guided by outward Motives, Rules,
Arguments and Considerations. Plainly, all the Power we have of our selves to
obey the Law of God, and all that we do in the pursuit and exercise of that
Power, upon any Reasons, Motives or Considerations whatever, which may all be
resolved into fear of Punishment and hope of Reward, with some present
satisfactions of mind, on the Account of Ease in Conscience within, or outward
Reputation, whether in Abstinence from sin or the Performance of Duties, are
intended hereby, and are not that Holiness which we enquire after. And the
Reason is plain, even because those things are not wrought in us by the power
of the especial Grace of God in the pursuit of the especial Promise of the
Covenant as all true Holiness is. If any shall say, that they are so wrought in
us they do expressly change the nature of them. For thereby those Powers would
be no more natural but supernatural; and those Duties would be no more merely
Moral but Evangelical and spiritual, which is to grant all we contend for:
Wherefore that which men call Moral Virtue is so far from being the whole of
internal Grace or Holiness, that if it be no more than so, it belongs not at
all unto it, as not being effected in us by the especial Grace of God according
to the Tenor and Promise of the Covenant.

And we may here divert a little to consider what ought to be the frame of our
minds in the pursuit of Holiness with respect unto these things; ^^ct. 14.
namely what regard we ought to have unto the Command on the one hand, and to
the Promise on the other; to our own Duty and to the Grace of God. Some would
separate these things as inconsistent. A Command they suppose leaves no room
for a Promise, at least not such a Promise as wherein God should take on
himself to work in us what the Command requires of us. And a Promise they think
takes off all the influencing Authority of the Command. If Holiness be our Duty
there is no room for Grace in this matter; and if it be an effect of Grace
there is no place for Duty. But all these arguings are a fruit of the Wisdom of
the Flesh, beforementioned, and we have before disproved them. The Wisdom that
is from above teaches us other things. It is true our Works and Grace are
opposed in the matter of Justification as utterly inconsistent; If it be of
Works it is not of Grace, and if it be of Grace it is not of Works, as our
Apostle argues, Romans 11. 6. Our Duty and Gods Grace are no where opposed in the
matter of Sanctification, yea the one does absolutely suppose the other.
Neither can we perform our Duty herein without the Grace of God; nor does God
give us this Grace unto any other End but that we may rightly perform our Duty.
He that shall deny either that God Commands us to be Holy in a way of Duty, or
promises to work Holiness in us in a way of Grace, may with as much modesty
reject the whole Bible. Both these therefore we are to have a due regard unto,
if we intend to be Holy. And (1) our regard unto the Command consists in
three things. 1. That we get our Consciences always affected with the
Authority of it, as it is the Command of God. This must afterward be enlarged
on. Where this is not there is no Holiness. Our Holiness is our Obedience; and
the formal nature of Obedience arises from its respect unto the Authority of
the Command. 2. That we see and understand the Reasonableness, the Equity, the
Advantage of the Command. Our Service is reasonable Service; the ways of God
are Equal; and in the keeping of his Commands there is great Reward: If we
judge not thus, if we rest not herein, and are thence filled with Indignation
against every thing within us or without us that opposes it, or rises up
against it, whatever we do in compliance with it in a way of Duty, we are not
Holy. 3. That hereon we love and delight in it because it is Holy, J^^t* and
Good, because the things it requires are Upright, Equal, Easy and Pleasant to
the new Nature, without any regard to the false Ends before discovered. And (2)
We have a due regard unto the Promise to the same End, when 1. We walk in a
constant sense of our own inability to comply with the Command in any one
instance from any power in our selves. For we have no Sufficiency of our selves
our Sufficiency is of God. For him who is otherwise-minded his Heart is lifted
up. 2. When we adore that Grace which has provided Help and Relief for us.
Seeing without the Grace promised we could never have attained unto the least
part or Degree of Holiness, and seeing we could never deserve the least Dram of
that Grace, how ought we to adore and continually praise that infinite Bounty
which has freely provided us of this supply. 3. When we Act Faith in Prayer
and Expectation on the Promise for Supplies of Grace enabling us unto Holy
Obedience. And 4. When we have especial Regard thereunto with respect unto
especial Temptations and particular Duties. When on all such Occasions we
satisfy not our selves with a respect unto the Promise in general, but
exercise Faith in particular on it for Aid and Assistance, then do we regard
it in a due manner.

Holy Ghost who is the immediate peculiar Sanctifier of all Believers and the
Author of all Holiness in them. I suppose I need not insist upon the
Confirmation of this Assertion in general. I have proved before that he is the
immediate Dispenser of all Divine Grace, or the immediate Operator of all
Divine gracious Effects in us, whereof this is the Chief. Besides, it is such
an avowed and owned Principle among all that are called Christians, namely,
That the Holy Ghost is the Sanctifier of all God's Elect; that as it is not
questioned, so it need not in general be further proved; Those who are less
experienced in these things may consult Psalm. 51. 10, 11, 12. Ezekiel. 11. 19. chapter
36. 25, 26, 27. Romans 8. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Isa. 4.
4. chap. 44. 3, 4. Titus 3. 4, 5. But it is the Nature and Manner of his Work
herein, with the Effect produced thereby that we are to enquire into. For as
this belongs unto our general Design of declaring the Nature, Power and
Efficacy of all the gracious Divine Operations of the Holy Spirit, so it will
give us an Acquaintance in particular with that work and the fruits of it
wherein we are so highly concerned.

CHAP. II. Sanctification a Progressive Work.
(1, 2) Sanctification described. (3) With the Nature of the Work of the Holy
Sirit therein; which is (4) Progressive. (5) The Way and Means whereby Holiness
is increased in Believers; (6) Especially by Faith and Love, whose Exercise is
required in all Duties of Obedience: As also (7) those Graces whose Exercise is
Occasional. (8) The growth of Holiness expressed in an Allusion unto that of
Plants, with an insensible Progress. (9) Renders Grace therein to be greatly
admired; and is discerned in the answerableness of the Work of the Spirit in
Sanctification and Supplication. (10) Objections against the Progressive Nature
of Holiness removed.

Way-marks that may guide us in our progress or future Enquiry into the Nature
and Glory of it. And so I say that:

Sanctification is an immediate Work of the Spirit of God on the Souls of
Believers, purifying and cleansing of their Natures from the pollution and
uncleanness of sin, renewing in them the Image of God, and thereby enabling
them from a spiritual and habitual Principle of Grace to yield obedience unto
God according unto the Tenor and Terms of the New Covenant, by virtue of the
Life and Death of Jesus Christ. Or more briefly; It is the Universal Renovation
of our Natures by the Holy Spirit into the Image of God, through Jesus Christ.
Hence it follows, that our Holiness which is the Fruit and Effect of this
Work, the Work as terminated in us, as it comprizeth the renewed Principle or
Image of God wrought in us, so it consists in an Holy Obedience unto God by
Jesus Christ according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace, from the
Principle of a Renewed Nature. Our Apostle expresses the whole more briefly
yet, namely, He that is in Christ Jesus is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. For
herein he expresses both the Renovation of our Natures, the Endowment of them
with a new Spiritual Principle of Life and Operation, with Actings toward God
suitable thereunto. I shall take up the first general Description of it, and in
the Consideration of its Parts give some account of the Nature of the Work and
its Effects; and then shall distinctly prove and confirm the true Nature of it
wherein it is opposed or call into question.

(1) It is as was before proved and is by all confessed, the Work in us of the
Spirit of God. It is the Renovation of the Holy Ghost whereby we are saved. And
a real, internal, powerful physical work it is, as we have proved before
abundantly, and shall afterward more fully confirm. He does not make us holy
only by persuading us so to be. He does not only require us to be holy, propose
unto us Motives unto Holiness, give us Convictions of its necessity, and
thereby excite us unto the pursuit and attainment of it; though this he does
also by the Word and Ministration thereof. It is too high an impudency for any
one to pretend an owning of the Gospel, and yet to deny a Work of the Holy
Ghost in our Sanctification. And therefore both the Old and New Pelagians did
and do avow a Work of his herein. But what is it that really they ascribe unto
him? merely the Exciting our own Abilities, aiding and assisting us in and unto
the Exercise of our own native Power, which when all is done leaves the Work to
be our own and not his, and to us must the Glory and Praise of it be ascribed.
But we have already sufficiently proved that the things thus promised of God,
and so effected, are really wrought by the exceeding greatness of the Power of
the Spirit of God; and this will yet afterward be made more particularly to
appear.

Sanctification differs from that of Regeneration as on other Accounts so
especially on that of the Manner of their being wrought. The work of
Regeneration is Instantaneous, consisting in one single creating Act. Hence it
is not capable of Degrees in any subject. No One is more or less Regenerate
than Another; every one in the world is absolutely so, or not so, and that
equally, although there are Degrees in their state on other Reasons. But this
work of Sanctification is progressive and admits of Degrees. One may be more
sanctified and more holy than another, who is yet truly sanctified and truly
holy. It is begun at once, and carried on gradually. But this Observation being
of great importance, and such as if rightly weighed will contribute much Light
unto the Nature of the whole work of Sanctification and Holiness, I shall
divert in this Chapter unto such an Explanation and Confirmation of it as may
give an understanding and furtherance herein.

1. An Increase and Growth in Sanctification or Holiness is frequently in the
Scripture enjoyed us, and frequently promised unto us. So speaks the Apostle
Peter in a way of Command: 2 Pet. 3. 18. Fall not, be not cast down, from your
own steadfastness; but grow, or increase, in Grace. It is not enough that we
decay not in our Spiritual Condition, that we be not diverted and carried off
from a steady Course in Obedience by the Power of Temptations, but an endeavor
after an Improvement, an Increase, a thriving in Grace that is in Holiness, is
required of us. And a Compliance with this Command is that which our Apostle so
commends in the Thessalonians; 2 Epist. Chap. 1. v. 3. namely, the exceeding
growth of their Faith, and abounding of their Love; that is, the thriving and
increase of those Graces in them; that which is called increasing with the
increase of God, Col. 2. 19. or the Increase in Holiness which God requires,
accepts, approves, by supplies of spiritual strength from Jesus Christ our
Head, as it is there expressed.

The Work of Holiness in its beginning is but like seed cast into the Earth;
namely the seed of God whereby we are born again. And it is known how seed that
is cast into the Earth does grow and increase. Being variously cherished and
nourished it is in its nature to take root and to spring up, bringing forth
fruit. So is it with the Principle of Grace and Holiness. It is small at first,
but being received in good and honest Hearts, made so by the Spirit of God, and
there nourished and cherished, it takes root and brings forth fruit. And both
these, even the first planting and the increase of it are both equally from God
by his Spirit. He that begins this good Work does also perform it to the Day of
Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 6. And this he does two ways.

(1) By Increasing and Strengthening those Graces of Holiness which we have
received and been engaged in the exercise of. There are some Graces whose
Exercise does not depend on any outward Occasions, but they are and that in
their actual Exercise absolutely necessary unto the least Degree of the Life of
God; such are Faith and Love. No man does, no man can live to God but in the
Exercise of these Graces. Whatever Duties toward God men may perform, if they
are not enlivened by Faith and Love, they belong not unto that Spiritual Life
whereby we live to God. And these Graces are capable of Degrees, and so of
Increase. For so we read expressly of little Faith, and great Faith, weak and
strong Faith, both true and the same in the substance, but differing in
Degrees. So also is there fervent Love, and that which comparatively is but
cold. These Graces therefore in carrying on the work of Sanctification are
gradually increased. So the Disciples prayed our Savior that he would increase
their Faith, Luke 17. 5. That is, add unto its Light, confirm it in its
Assent, multiply its Acts, and make it strong against its Assaults, that it
might work more effectually in difficult Duties of Obedience which they had an
especial regard unto, as is evident from the Context. For they pray for this
Increase of Faith upon the Occasion of our Saviors enjoining frequent
forgiveness of offending Brethren, a Duty not at all easy nor pleasing to
Flesh and Blood. And the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that they may be
rooted and grounded in Love, chap. 3. 17. that is, that by the increase and
strengthening of their Love, they may be more established in all the Duties of
it. See 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12, 13.

Holiness, in the increase of them in us the work of Sanctification is carried
on and universal Holiness increased. And this is done by the Holy Spirit
several ways.

First, By exciting them unto frequent Actings. Frequency of Acts does
naturally increase and strengthen the Habits whence they proceed. And in these
spiritual Habits of Faith and Love it is so moreover by Gods Appointment. They
grow and thrive in and by their exercise, Hos. 6. 3. The want thereof is the
principal means of their decay. And there are two ways whereby the Holy
Spirit, excites the Graces of Faith and Love unto frequent Acts.

(1) He does it Morally, by proposing their Objects suitably and seasonably
unto them. This he does by his Ordinances of Worship especially the preaching
of the Word. God in Christ, the Promises of the Covenant and other proper
Objects of our Faith and Love, being proposed unto us, these Graces are drawn
out unto their Exercise. And this is one principal Advantage which we have by
attendance on the Dispensation of the Word in a due Manner; namely, that by
presenting those Spiritual Truths which are the Object of our Faith unto our
Minds, and those Spiritual Good Things which are the Object of our Love unto
our Affections, both these Graces are drawn forth into frequent actual
Exercise. And we are greatly mistaken if we suppose we have no Benefit by the
Word beyond what we retain in our Memories, though we should labor for that
also. Our chief Advantage lies in the Excitation which is thereby given unto
our Faith and Love to their proper Exercise. And hereby are these Graces kept
alive which without this would decay and wither. Herein does the Holy Spirit
take the things of Christ and show them unto us, Joh. 16. 14, 15. He represents
them unto us in the Preaching of the Word as the proper Objects of our Faith
and Love. And so brings to remembrance the things spoken by Christ, Chap. 14.
26. that is, in the Dispensation of the Word he minds us of the gracious Words
and Truths of Christ, proposing them to our Faith and Love. And herein lies the
secret profiting and thriving of Believers under the preaching of the Gospel,
which it may be they are not sensible of themselves. By this means are many
Thousands of Acts of Faith and Love drawn forth, whereby those Graces are
exercised and strengthened, and consequently Holiness is increased. And the
Word by the Actings of Faith being mixed with it, as Hebr. 4. 2. increases it
by its incorporation.

(2) The Spirit does it really and internally. He dwells in Believers,
preserving in them the Root and Principle of all their Grace by his own
immediate Power. Hence all Graces in their Exercise are called the fruits of
the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23. He brings them forth from the Stock that he has
planted in the Heart. And we cannot Act any one Grace without his Effectual
Operation therein. God works in us both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Phil. 1. 13. That is, there is no part of our Wills singly and
separately from him in Obedience, but it is the Operation of the Spirit of God
in us so far as it is Spiritual and Holy: He is the immediate Author of every
good or gracious Acting in us. For in us, that is in our Flesh (and of our
selves we are but Flesh) there dwells no Good. Wherefore the Spirit of God
dwelling in Believers, does effectually excite and stir up their Graces unto
frequent Exercise and Actings whereby they are increased and strengthened. And
there is nothing in the whole Course of our Walking before God that we ought to
be more careful about, than that we grieve not, that we provoke not this good
and Holy Spirit whereon he should withold his gracious Aids and Assistances
from us. This therefore is the first way whereby the work of Sanctification is
gradually carried on by the Holy Ghost exciting our Graces unto frequent
Actings; whereby they are increased and strengthened.

Secondly, He does it by supplying Believers with Experiences of the Truth and
Reality and Excellency of the things that are believed. Experience is the Food
of all Grace which it grows and thrives upon. Every Taste that Faith obtains
of Divine Love and Grace, or how Gracious the Lord is, adds to its measure and
stature. Two things therefore must briefly be declared: (1) That the Experience
of the Reality, Excellency, Power and Efficacy of the things that are believed,
is an effectual means of increasing Faith and Love: (2) That it is the Holy
Ghost which gives us this Experience. For the First, God himself expostulates
with the Church how its Faith came to be so weak when it had so great
Experience of Him, or of his Power and Faithfulness, Isa. 40. 27, 28. Have thou
not heard, have thou not known? How then say thou that God has forsaken
thee? And our Apostle affirms that the Consolations which he had experimentally
received from God, enabled him unto the discharge of his Duty toward others in
trouble, 2 Cor. 7. 4. For herein we prove, or do really approve of, as being
satisfied in, the good and acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 2. And
this is that which the Apostle prays for in the behalf of the Colossians,
chap. 2. v. 2. I may say, that he who knows not how Faith is encouraged and
strengthened by especial Experiences of the Reality, Power, and spiritual
Efficacy on the Soul of the things believed, never was made partaker of any of
them. How often does David encourage his own Faith and others from his former
Experiences which were pleaded also by our Lord Jesus Christ to the same
purpose, in his great Distress, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. Secondly, That it is the Holy
Ghost who gives us all our Spiritual Experiences needs no other Consideration
to evince but only this, that in them consists all our Consolation. His Work
and Office it is to administer Consolation unto Believers, as being the only
Comforter of the Church. Now he administreth Comfort no other way but by giving
unto the Minds and Souls of Believers, a Spiritual sensible Experience of the
Reality and Power of the things we do believe. He does not comfort us by Words,
but by Things. Other means of Spiritual Consolation I know none, and I am sure
this never fails. Give unto a Soul an Experience, a Taste of the Love and Grace
of God in Christ Jesus, and be its Condition what it will, it cannot refuse to
be comforted. And hereby does he shed abroad the Love of God in our Hearts,
Romans 5. 5. whereby all Graces are cherished and increased.

Thirdly, He does it by working immediately an Actual Increase of these graces
in us. I have showed that these are capable of improvement and of an Addition
of Degrees unto them. Now they are Originally the immediate Work and product of
the Spirit of God in us, as has been abundantly evinced. And as he first works
and creates them, so he increases them. Hereby they that are feeble become as
David, Zech. 12. 8. That is, those whose Graces were weak, whose Faith was
infirm, and whose Love was languid, shall by the supplies of the Spirit and the
increase given by him unto them, become strong and vigorous. To this purpose
are Promises multiplied in the Scripture, which in our constant Supplications
we principally respect. This is that which the Schoolmen after Austin call
Gratiam corroborantem, that is the working of the Holy Spirit in the increasing
and strengthening of Grace received. See Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. Col. 1, 10, 11. Isa.
40. 29. And this is the principal Cause and Means of the gradual Increase of
Holiness in us, or the carrying of the Work of Sanctification, Psalm. 138. 8.

(2) There are Graces whose Exercise is more Occasional and not always
actually necessary as unto the Life of God: That is, it is not necessary that
they be always in actual Exercise, as Faith and Love are to be. With respect
unto these Holiness is increased by the Addition of one to another, until we
are brought on several Occasions to the Practice and Exercise of them all. For
the Addition of the new Exercise of any Grace belongs unto the gradual carrying
on of the Work of Sanctification. And hereunto all things that befall us in
this World, all our Circumstances are laid in a subserviency by the Wisdom of
God. All our Relations, all our Afflictions, all our Temptations, all our
Mercies, all our Enjoyments, all Occurrences are suited to a continual adding
of the Exercise of one Grace to another wherein Holiness is increased. And if
we make not use of them to that purpose, we miss of all the Benefit and
Advantage we might have of them, and disappoint what lies in us the Design of
Divine Love and Wisdom in them. This is given us in Charge, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
Besides all this, giving all diligence add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue
Knowledge, and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to
Patience Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly-kindness, and to
Brotherly-kindness Charity. The end why this Injunction is given us, is that we
may escape the Corruption that is in the World through Lust, v. 3. that is have
all our Corruptions thoroughly subdued and our Souls thoroughly sanctified. To
this end are the Promises given us, and a Divine spiritual Nature is bestowed
upon us. But will that suffice, or is there no more required of us unto that
End? Yes says the Apostle, this great Work will not be effected, unless you
use your utmost Diligence and Endeavor to add the Exercise of all the Graces
of the Spirit One to Another as Occasion shall require. There is a Method in
this Concatenation of Graces from first to last, and an especial Reason for
each particular, or why the Apostle requires that such a Grace should be added
unto such a one in the Order laid down, which at present I shall not enquire
into. But in general he intends that every Grace is to be exercised according
to its proper season, and especial Occasion. Hereby also is the Work of
Sanctification gradually carried on and Holiness increased. And this Addition
of one Grace unto another, with the Progress of Holiness thereby, is also from
the Holy Ghost. And three ways there are whereby he accomplisheth his Work
herein. (1) By Ordering things so toward us, and bringing of us into such
Conditions, as wherein the Exercise of these Graces shall be required and
necessary. All the Afflictions of Trials which he brings the Church into have
no other End or Design. So the Apostle James expresses it: Chap. 1. 2, 3, 4.
My Brethren, count it all Joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations; knowing
this, that the trial of your Faith works Patience. But let Patience have its
perfect Work, that you may be perfect and entire wanting Nothing. These
Temptations are Trials upon Afflictions, Troubles, Persecutions and the like.
But take them in any other sense, it is the same unto our purpose. These are
all guided unto us by Christ and his Spirit; for it is he who rebukes and
chastens us. But what is his End therein? It is that Faith may be exercised,
and Patience employed, and one Grace added unto another that they may carry us
on toward Perfection. So he brings us into that Condition as wherein we
shall assuredly miscarry, if we add not the Exercise of one Grace unto
another. (2) In this state of things he effectually minds us of our Duty and
what Graces ought to be put upon their Exercise. We may dispute whether it be
better to Act Faith or to Despond; to add Patience under the Continuance of
our Trials, or to trust unto our selves and irregularly to seek after
Deliverance, or divert unto other satisfactions. Then does he cause us to hear
a Word behind us saying, this is the way walk in it, when we turn to the right
hand, and when we turn to the left, Isa. 30. 21. When we are at a loss and know
not what to do, and are ready it may be to consult with flesh and blood and to
divert to irregular courses, he speaks effectually to us, saying, No, that is
not your way; but this is it, namely to Act Faith, Patience, Submission to God,
adding one Grace to another, binding our Hearts thereby to our Duty. (3) He
actually excites and sets all needful Graces at work in the Way and Manner
before spoken unto. This then is to be fixed, that all this Increase of
Holiness is immediately the Work of the Holy Ghost who therein gradually
carries on his Design of sanctifying us throughout in our whole Spirit Souls
and Bodies. There is in our Regeneration and Habitual Grace received, a Nature
bestowed on us capable of Growth and Increase, and that is all; if it be left
unto its self it will not thrive, it will decay and dye. The actual supplies of
the Spirit are the waterings that are the immediate Cause of its increase. It
wholly depends on continual Influences from God. He cherishes and improves the
work he has begun with new and fresh supplies of Grace every moment. Isa. 27.
3. I the Lord water it every moment. And it is the Spirit which is this Water
as the Scripture every where declares. God the Father takes on him the Care in
this matter; he watches over his Vineyard to keep it. The Lord Christ is the
Head Fountain and Treasure of all actual supplies: And the Spirit is the
Efficient Cause communicating them unto us from him. From hence it is that any
Grace in us is kept alive one Moment, that it is ever acted in one single Duty,
that ever it receives the least measure of Increase or strengthening. With
respect unto all these it is that our Apostle says, Nevertheless I live, yet
not I but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. Spiritual Life and living by it in
all the Acts of it are immediately from Christ.

I concern not my self much how Moral Virtue that is no more is preserved and
sustained in the Minds and Lives of men, though I am not ignorant of the
Precepts Directions and Instructions which are given unto that End by some of
old, and some of late. But for Grace and Holiness we have infallible Assurance,
that the Being, Life, Continuance, and all the Actings of it in any of the Sons
of men, depend merely and only upon their Relation unto that Spring and
Fountain of all Grace which is in Christ, and the continual Supplies of it by
the Holy Spirit whose Work it is to communicate them, Col. 3. 3. John 15. 5.
Col, 2. 19.

There is no man who has any Grace that is true and saving, that has any
seed, any beginning of Sanctification or Holiness, but that the Holy Spirit by
his watchful Care over it, and Supplies of it, is able to preserve it, to
extricate it from Difficulties, to free it from Opposition, and to increase it
unto its full measure and perfection. Wherefore let the hands that hang down be
lifted up and the feeble knees be strengthened; we have to do with him who will
not quench the smoking flax not break the bruised reed. And on the other side,
there is none who has received Grace in such a Measure, nor has so confirmed
it by constant uninterrupted Exercise, as that he can preserve it one Moment,
or Act it in any one Instance or Duty without the continual Supplies of new
Actual Grace and Help from him, who works in us to will and to do. For says
our Lord Christ unto his Apostles and in them to all Believes, the best and
strongest of them, without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. And they who of
themselves can do nothing that is in a way of living unto God, cannot of
themselves preserve Grace, act it, and increase it, which are the greatest
things we do, or are wrought in us in this World. Wherefore God has in
infinite Wisdom so ordered the Dispensation of his Love and Grace unto
Believers, that all of them living upon the continual supplies of his Spirit
none may have cause on the one hand to faint or despond, nor Occasion on the
other unto self-confidence, or Elation of mind, that so no flesh may glory in
its self, but he that gloryeth may glory in the Lord. And therefore as he
greatly encourages the weak, the fearful, the faint, the disconsolate and
dejected, and that by the Engagement of all the holy Properties of his Nature
in and unto their Assistance, Isa. 35. 3, 4, 5, 6. Chap. 40. 27, 28, 29, 30,
31. So he warns them who suppose themselves strong, steadfast and immovable,
not to be high-minded but fear, Romans 11. 20. because the whole issue of things
depends on his Sovereign Supplies of Grace. And seeing he has promised in the
Covenant to continue faithfully these Supplies unto us, there is ground of
Faith given unto all, and Occasion of Presumption administered unto none.

Beginning of Grace Sanctification and Holiness be from God, but the carrying
of it on and the Increase of it also be from him, and not only so in general,
but that all the Actings of Grace, and every Act of it, be an immediate Effect
of the Holy Spirit, then what need is there that we should take any pains in
this thing our selves, or use our own Endeavors to grow in Grace or Holiness
as we are commanded; If God works all himself in us, and without his
effectual Operation in us we can do nothing, there is no place left for our
Diligence, Duty, or Obedience.

Ans. 1. This Objection we must expect to meet withal at every turn. Men will
not believe there is a consistency between Gods effectual Grace, and our
diligent Obedience; that is, they will not believe what is plainly, clearly,
distinctly revealed in the Scripture, and which is suited unto the Experience
of all that truly believe, because they cannot it may be comprehend it within
the compass of Carnal Reason. 2. Let the Apostle answer this Objection for this
once, 2 Pet. 1. 3. His Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain
to Life and to Godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to
Glory and Virtue; whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these ye might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having
escaped the Corruption that is in the World through lust. If all things that
pertain unto Life and Godliness, among which doubtless is the Preservation and
Increase of Grace, be given unto us by the power of God; if from him we receive
that Divine Nature, by virtue whereof our Corruptions are subdued, then I pray
what need is there of any Endeavors of our own? The whole work of
Sanctification is wrought in us, it seems, and that by the Power of God: We
therefore may let it alone, and leave it unto him whose it is, whilst we are
negligent, secure and at ease. Nay, says the Apostle, this is not the use
which the Grace of God is to be put unto. The Consideration of it is or ought
to be the principal Motive and Encouragement unto all Diligence for the
Increase of Holiness in us. For so he adds immediately, v. 5. (...), but also
for this cause, or because of the gracious Operations of the Divine Power in
us; giving all Diligence, add to your Faith Virtue as before. These Objectors
and this Apostle were very diversely minded in these matters; what they make an
insuperable discouragement unto Diligence in Obedience, that he makes the
greatest Motive and Encouragement thereunto. 3. I say from this Consideration,
it will unavoidably follow, that we ought continually to wait and depend on God
for supplies of his Spirit and Grace, without which we can do nothing: That God
is more the Author by his Grace of the good we do than we are our selves ( not
I, but the Grace of God that was with me) that we ought to be careful that by
our Negligences and sins we provoke not the Holy Spirit to withold his Aids
and Assistances, and so to leave us to our selves, in which condition we can do
nothing that is spiritually Good; These things I say will unavoidably follow on
the Doctrine before declared; and if any one be offended at them, it is not in
our power to tender them Relief.

Similitude by which the Scripture so frequently represents the gradual
Improvement of Grace and Holiness. And this is the growth of Trees and Plants.
Hos. 14. 5, 6. I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly and
cast forth his Roots as Lebanon, his branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon. Isa. 44. 3, 4. I will
pour water on him that is thirsty and stoods upon the dry ground, I will pour
my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine Offspring, and they shall
spring up as among the grass, as the Willowes by the Watercourse. And so in
other places very many. And we may know that this Similitude is singularly
instructive, or it would not have been so frequently made use of to this
purpose. Some few Instances tending to Administer Light in this matter, I shall
briefly reflect upon.

(1) These Trees and Plants have the Principle of their growth in themselves.
They do not grow immediately from external adventitious Aid and Furtherance;
they grow from their own seminal virtue and radical Moisture. It is no
otherwise in the Progress of Sanctification and Holiness. It has a Root, a
Seed, a Principle of Growth and Increase in the Soul of him that is sanctified.
All Grace is immortal Seed, and contains in it a living growing Principle. That
which has not in its self a Life and power of Growth is not Grace. And
therefore what Duties soever any men do perform, whereunto they are either
guided by Natural Light, or which they are urged unto by Convictions from the
Word, if they proceed not from a Principle of Spiritual Life in the Heart, they
are no fruits of Holiness nor do belong thereunto. The Water of Grace which is
from Christ, is a Well of Water springing up unto Everlasting Life in them on
whom it is bestowed. Joh. 4. 14. It is therefore of the Nature of Holiness to
thrive and grow, as it is of a Tree or Plant that have their seminal Virtue in
themselves after their kind.

(2) A Tree or Plant must be watered from above or it will not thrive and grow
by virtue of its own seminal power. If a Drowth comes it will wither or decay.
Wherefore, where God mentions this growth he ascribes it unto his watering. I
will be as the Dew, and I will pour water, is the especial Cause of it. It is
so in this carrying on of Holiness. There is a Nature received capable of
Increase and growth; but if it be left unto its self it will not thrive, it
will decay and dye. Wherefore God is unto it as the Dew, and pours water on it
by the actual supplies of the Spirit, as we have showed before.

(3) The growth of Trees and Plants is secret and imperceptible; nor is
discerned but in the Effects and Consequences of it. The most watchful Eye can
discern little of its motion. Crescit Occulto velut arbor avo: It is no
otherwise in the progress of Holiness. It is not immediately discernible either
by themselves in whom it is, or by others that make Observation of it. It lies
only under the Eye of him by whom it is wrought: Only by the Fruits and Effects
of it is made manifest. And some indeed, especially in some seasons, do plainly
and evidently thrive and grow, springing up like the Willowes by the
Watercourse. Though their growth in its self is indiscernible, yet it is
plain they have grown. Such we ought all to be. The growth of some I say is
manifest on every Trial, on every occasion; their profiting is visible to all.
And as some say that the growth of Plants is not by a constant insensible
progress, but they increase by sudden Gusts and Motions, which may sometimes
be discerned in the Openings of Budds and Flowers; so the growth of Believers
consists principally in some intense vigorous actings of Grace on great
Occasions; as of Faith, Love, Humility, Self-denial, Bounty. And he who has
not some Experience of such actings of Grace in especial Instances, can have
little Evidence of his Growth. Again there are Trees and Plants that have the
Principle of Life and Growth in them, but yet are so withering and unthrifty
that you can only discern them to be alive. And so it is with too many
Believers: They are all Trees planted in the Garden of God, some thrive, some
decay for a season, but the growth of the best is secret.

progressive Work, that Holiness is gradually carried on in us by it toward
Perfection. It is neither wrought nor completed at once in us as is
Regeneration; nor does it cease under any Seize or in any Condition of
Life, but is thriving and carried on. A River continually fed by a Living
Fountain may as soon end its streams before it come to the Ocean, as a stop be
put to the Course and Progress of Grace before it issues in Glory. For the path
of the Just is as the shining Light, that shines more and more to the perfect
day, Prove. 4. 18. So is their Path wherein they are led and conducted by the
Holy Spirit, even as the Morning Light which after it once appears, thought it
may be sometimes clouded, yet fails not until it arrive unto its Perfection.
And as the Wisdom, Patience, Faithfulness and Power which the Holy Spirit of
God exercises herein are unutterable, so are they constantly admired by all
that are interested in them: So are they by the Psalmist, Psalm. 66. 8, 9. Psalm.
31. 17. Who is there who has made any diligent Observation of his own Heart
and Ways, and what have been the workings of the Grace of God in him and
toward him to bring him unto the Stature and Measure whereunto he is arrived,
that does not admire the watchful Care and powerful workings of the Spirit of
God therein? The Principle of our Holiness as in us is weak and infirm, because
it is in us; in some to so low a Degree as is oft-times unto themselves
imperceptible. This he preserves and Cherishes that it shall not be
overpowered by Corruptions and Temptations. Among all the glorious works of
God, next unto that of Redemption by Jesus Christ, my Soul does most admire
this of the Spirit in preserving the Seed and Principle of Holiness in us, as a
spark of living Fire in the midst of the Ocean, against all Corruptions and
Temptations wherewith it is impugned. Many Breaches are made in and upon our
Course of Obedience by the Incursions of Actual sins, these he cures and makes
up, healing our backslidings and repairing our Decays. And he acts the Grace
we have received by constant fresh Supplies. He wants much of the Comfort and
Joy of a Spiritual Life, who does not diligently observe the Ways and Means
whereby it is preserved and promoted. And it is no small part of our sin and
folly when we are negligent herein.

All Believers are no doubt in some measure convinced hereof, not only from the
Testimonies given unto it in the Scripture, but also from their own Experience.
And there is nothing in themselves which they may more distinctly learn it
from, than the Nature and Course of their Prayers, with the workings of their
Hearts, Minds and Affections in them. Let profane Persons deride it whilst
they please, it is the Spirit of God as a Spirit of Grace that enables
Believers to pray and make Intercession according to the mind of God. And
herein as he is the Spirit of Supplications, he copyeth out and expresses what
he works in them as the Spirit of Sanctification. In teaching us to pray, he
teaches us what and how he works in us. And if we wisely consider his
working in our Hearts by Prayer, we may understand much of his working upon our
Hearts by Grace. It is said, that he who searches the Hearts, that is God
himself, knows the mind of the Spirit in the Intercessions he works in us,
Romans 8. 27. There are secret powerful Operations of the Spirit in Prayer, that
are discernible only to the great searcher of Hearts. But we also ought to
enquire and observe so far as we may, what he leads us unto and guides us
about, which is plainly his work in us. I do not think that the Spirit works
Supplications in us by an immediate, supernatural, Divine Afflatus so as he
inspired the Prophets of old, who oft-times understood not the things uttered
by themselves, but enquired afterward diligently into them. But I do say, (let
the proud carnal World despise it whilst they please, and at their peril) that
the Spirit of God does graciously in the Prayers of Believers carry out and act
their Souls and Minds in Desires and Requests which for the matter of them are
far above their natural Contrivances and Invention. And he who has not
Experience hereof is a greater stranger unto these things than will at length
be unto his Advantage. By a diligent Observance hereof we may know of what kind
and nature the work of the Holy Ghost in us is, and how it is carried on. For
how in general does the Holy Spirit teach us and enable us to pray? It is by
these three things. (1) By giving us a spiritual Insight into the Promises of
God and the Grace of the Covenant, whereby we know what to ask upon a spiritual
view of the Mercy and Grace that God has prepared for us. (2) By acquainting
us with and giving us an Experience of our wants with a deep sense of them,
such as we cannot bear without Relief. (3) By Creating and stirring up desires
in the new Creature for its own Preservation Increase and Improvement. And in
Answer unto these things consists his whole work of Sanctification in us. For
it is his effectual Communication unto us of the Grace and Mercy prepared in
the Promises of the Covenant through Jesus Christ; hereby does he supply our
spiritual wants, and sets the new Creature in Life and Vigor. So are our
Prayers an Extract and Copy of the Work of the Holy Spirit in us given us by
himself. And therefore by whomsoever he is despised as a Spirit of
Supplication, he is so as a Spirit of Sanctification also. Now consider what it
is that in your Prayers you most labor about? Is it not that the Body, the
Power, the whole Interest of Sin in you may be weakened, subdued, and at length
destroyed? Is it not that all the Graces of the Spirit may be renewed daily,
increased and strengthened, so as that you may be more ready and prepared for
all Duties of Obedience? And what is all this but that Holiness may be
gradually Progressive in your Souls, that it may be carried on by new Supplies
and Additions of Grace, until it come to Perfection?

Progressive, or that Holiness does so grow and thrive wherever it is in
sincerity. For as for themselves they have found Grace more vigorous active and
flourishing in former days than of late; the streams of it were fresher and
stronger at the Spring of Conversion than since they find them to be in their
Course. Hence are those complaints among many of their Leanness, their
Weakness, their Deadness, their Barrenness. Nor were many of the Saints in the
Scripture without such Complaints. And many may cry, Oh that it were with us as
in our former Days, in the days of our youth! Complaints of this nature do
every where abound, and some are ready to conclude upon this Consideration,
that either sincere Holiness is not so growing and progressive as is pretended,
or that indeed they have no interest therein. Yea the like may be said upon a
diligent Observation of others, Churches and single Professors; what Evidence
do they give, that the work of Holiness is thriving in them? does it not appear
rather to be Retrograde and under a constant Decay?

I shall so far consider and remove this Objection, as that the Truth which we
have asserted suffer not from it, and so be left as an empty Notion; nor yet
those altogether discouraged who come not up unto a full compliance with it.
And this I shall do in the ensuing Rules and Observations.

(1) It is one thing what Grace or Holiness is suited unto in its own nature,
and what is the Ordinary or Regular way of the procedure of the Spirit in the
work of Sanctification according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace;
Another what may occasionally fall out by Indisposition and Irregularity or any
other obstructing Interposition in them in whom the work is wrought. Under the
first Consideration the Work is thriving and progressive, in the latter the
Rule is liable to sundry Exceptions. A Child that has a Principle of Life, a
good natural Constitution and suitable food, will grow and thrive. But that
which has Obstructions from within, or Distempers and Diseases, or Falls and
Bruises, may be weak and thriftless. When we are Regenerate we are as Newborn
Babes, and ordinarily if we have the sincere milk of the Word we shall grow
thereby. But if we our selves give way to Temptations, Corruptions,
Negligences, Conformity to the World, is it any wonder if we are lifeless and
thriftless? It suffices to confirm the Truth of what we have asserted, that
every one in whom is a Principle of spiritual Life, who is born of God, in whom
the work of Sanctification is begun, if it be not gradually carried on in him,
if he thrive not in Grace and Holiness, if he go not from strength to strength,
it is ordinarily from his own sinful Negligence and Indulgence unto carnal
Lusts, or Love of this present World. Considering the time we have had and the
Means we have enjoyed, what grown, what flourishing Plants in Faith, Love,
Purity, Self-denial, and universal Conformity to Christ might many of us have
been, who now are weak, withering, fruitless and sapless, scarce to be
distinguished from the thorns and briars of the world? It is time for us rather
to be casting off every weight and the sin that does so easily beset us, to be
by all means stirring up our selves unto a vigorous Recovery of our first Faith
and Love with an abundant growth in them, than to be complaining that the work
of Holiness does not go on, and that before our wounds become incurable.

(2) It is one thing to have Holiness really thriving in any Soul, another for
that Soul to know it and to be satisfied in it; and these things may be
separated; whereof there are many Reasons. But before I name them I must
premise one necessary Observation; and that is, Whereas this Rule is proposed
for the Relief of such as are at a loss about their Condition, and know not
whether Holiness be thriving in them or no, that these have no concernment
herein, who may at any time if they please give themselves an Account how
matters go with them and on what grounds. For if men do indulge unto any
predominant Lust, if they live in the neglect of any known Duty, or the
practice of any way of Deceit, if they suffer the World to devour the choycest
Increase of their Souls, and Formality to eat out the Spirit Vigor and Life of
Holy Duties, or any of these in a remarkable manner, I have nothing to offer
unto them to manifest that Holiness may thrive in them although they discern it
not. For undoubtedly it does not do so, nor are they to entertain any hopes but
that whilst they abide in such a Condition, it will decay more and more. Such
are to be awaked with violence like men falling into a deadly Lethargy, to be
snatched as brands out of the Fire, to be warned to recover their first Faith
and Love, to repent and do their first works, lest their End should be
darkness and sorrow for evermore. But as unto those who walk with God humbly
and in sincerity, there may be sundry Reasons given whence it is that Holiness
may be thriving in them, and yet not be discerned by them so to be. And
therefore though Holiness be wrought within our selves and only there, yet
there may be seasons wherein sincere humble Believers may be obliged to believe
the increase and growth of it in them when they perceive it not, so as to be
sensible of it. For (1) It being the Subject of so may Gospel-Promises it is a
proper Object of Faith, or a thing that is to be believed. The Promises are
God's Explanations of the Grace of the Covenant, both as to its nature and the
manner of its Operation. And they do not abound in any concernment of it more
than this, that those who are partakers of it shall thrive and grow thereby.
With what Limitations they are bounded, and what is required on our part that
we may have them fulfilled toward us, shall be afterward declared. But their
accomplishment depends on God's Faithfulness and not on our sense of it. Where
therefore we do not openly lay an Obstruction against it, as in the case now
mentioned, we may, we ought to believe that they are fulfilled toward us,
although we are not continually sensible thereof. And (2) It is our Duty to
grow and thrive in Holiness. And what God requires of us, we are to believe
that he will help us in, and does so, whatever be our own present sense and
Apprehension. And he who on these grounds can believe the growth of Holiness in
himself, though he have no sensible Experience thereof, is in my judgment in as
Good, and perhaps a more safe Condition than he who through the vigorous
working of Spiritual Affections is most sensible thereof. For it is certain,
that such a one does not by any wilful Neglect, or Indulgence unto any sin,
obstruct the growth of Holiness; for he that does so cannot believe that it
does thrive in him, or is carried on, whatever his Presumptions may be. And the
Life of Faith whereof this is a part is every way a safe Life. Besides, such a
Person is not in that Danger of a vain Elation of mind, and Carelessness
thereon, as others may be. For wherein we live by Faith and not at all by Sense
we will be humble and fear always: Such a one not finding in himself the
Evidence of what he most desires, will be continually careful that he drive it
not further from him. But the Reasons of this Difficulty are:

1. The Work it self, as has been before declared at large, is secret and
mysterious; And therefore as in some, I hope in many, there is the Reality and
Essence of Holiness who yet can find nothing of it in themselves, nor perhaps
any one else, but only Jesus Christ who is of quick understanding in the fear
of the Lord; so it may in the same secret manner thrive as to its degrees in
them who yet perceive it not. There is not any thing in our whole Course that
we ought to be more awake unto, than a diligent Observation of the Progress and
Decays of Grace; for as the knowledge of them is of the same importance unto
us with that of our Duties, and Comforts, so they are very hardly and
difficultly to be discerned; nor will be so truly for our Good and Advantage,
without our utmost Diligence and Spiritual Wisdom in their Observation. Hence,
as we before observed, it is compared in the Scripture frequently unto the
growth of Plants and Trees; Hos. 14. 5, 6. Isa. 44. 3, 4. Now we know that in
those of them which are the most thrifty and flourishing, though we may
perceive they are grown, yet we cannot discern their growing. And the Apostle
tells us, that as the outward man perishes so the inward man is renewed day by
day, 2 Cor. 4. 16. The perishing of the Outward man is by those natural Decays
whereby it continually tends unto Death and Dissolution. And we know many of us
how hardly these insensible Decays are discerned: Unless some great and
violent disease befall us, we rather know that we are enfeebled and weakened by
Age and Infirmities, than perceive when or how. So is the Inward man renewed in
Grace. It is by such secret Ways and Means as that its Growth and Decays are
hardly to be apprehended. And yet he who is negligent in this Enquiry walks at
all peradventures with God, knows not whereabout he is in his way, whether he
be nearer or further off from his Journeys End, than he was before. Write that
man a fruitless and a thriftless Christian, who calls not himself to an Account
about his Increases and Decays in Grace. David knew this work to be of so
great Importance as that he would not trust to himself and ordinary Assistances
for the discharge of it, but earnestly calls in God to undertake it for him,
and to acquaint him with it, Psalm. 139. 23, 24.

2. There may be some perplexing Temptations befall the Mind of a Believer, or
some Corruption take advantage to break loose for a season, it may be for a
long season, which may much gall the Soul with its suggestions, and so trouble
disturb and unquiet it, as that it shall not be able to make a right Judgment
of its Grace and Progress in Holiness. A Ship may be so tossed in a storm at
Sea as that the most skillful Mariners may not be able to discern whether they
make any way in their intended Course and Voyage, whilst they are carried on
with Success and speed. In such cases Grace in its Exercise is principally
engaged in an Opposition unto its Enemy which it has to conflict withal; and
so its thriving other ways is not discernible. If it should be enquired, how
we may discern when Grace is exercised and thrives in Opposition unto
Corruptions and Temptations; I say, that as great Winds and Storms do sometimes
contribute to the Fruit-bearing of Trees and Plants, so do Corruptions and
Temptations unto the Fruitfulness of Grace and Holiness. The wind comes with
violence on the Tree, ruffles its boughs, it may be breaks some of them, beats
off its Budds, looseneth and shakes its Roots, and threatens to cast the whole
to the ground: But by this means the Earth is opened and loosed about it, and
the Tree gets its Roots deeper into the Earth, whereby it receives more and
fresh nourishment, which renders it fruitful, though it bring not forth Fruit
visibly it may be not till a good while after. In the Assaults of Temptations
and Corruptions, the Soul is woefully ruffled and disordered, its Leaves of
Profession are much blasted, and its beginnings of Fruit-bearing much broken
and retarded; but in the mean-time it secretly and invisibly casts out its
roots of Humility, Self-abasement, Mourning, in hidden and continual laboring
of Faith and Love after that Grace whereby Holiness does really increase, and
way is made for future visible Fruitfulness. For,

3. God who in Infinite Wisdom manageth the New Creature or whole Life of Grace
by his Spirit, does so turn the streams of it, and so renew and change the
especial kinds of its Operations, as that we cannot easily trace his paths
therein, and may therefore be often at a loss about it, as not knowing well
what He is doing with us. For Instance, it may be the Work of Grace and
Holiness has greatly put forth and evidenced it self in the Affections which
are renewed by it. Hence Persons have great Experience of Readiness unto,
Delight and Cheerfulness in Holy Duties, especially those of Immediate
Intercourse with God. For Affections are quick and vigorous for the most part
in the Youth of Profession: And the Operations of them being sensible unto them
in whom they are, and their Fruits visible, they make Persons seem always
fresh and green in the ways of Holiness. But it may be after a while it seems
good to the Sovereign Disposer of this Affair to turn as it were the streams of
Grace and Holiness into another Channel. He sees that the Exercise of Humility,
Godly Sorrow, Fear, diligent Conflicting with Temptations, that it may be
strike at the very root of Faith and Love, are more needful for them. He will
therefore so order his Dispensations toward them, by Afflictions, Temptations,
Occasions of Life in the world, as that they shall have new work to do, and
all the Grace they have be turned into a new Exercise. Hereon it may be they
find not that sensible vigor in their Spiritual Affections, nor that Delight
in Spiritual Duties, which they have done formerly. This makes them sometimes
ready to conclude that Grace is decayed in them, that the Springs of Holiness
are drying up, and they know neither where nor what they are. But yet it may be
the real Work of Sanctification is still thriving and effectually carried on in
them.

(3ly.) It is acknowledged that there may be, that there are in many great
Decays in Grace and Holiness; that the work of Sanctification goes back in
them, and that, it may be, universally and for a long season. Many Actings of
Grace are lost in such Persons, and the things that remain are ready to dye.
This the Scripture abundantly testifies unto, and gives us instances of. How
often does God charge his People with Backsliding, Barrenness, Decays in
Faith and Love? And the Experience of the Days wherein we live sufficiently
confirm the Truth of it. Are there not open and visible Decays in many, as to
the whole Spirit, all the Duties and Fruits of Holiness? Cannot the best among
us contribute somewhat to the Evidence hereof from our own Experience? What
shall we say then, is there no sincere Holiness where such Decays are found?
God forbid; But we must enquire the Reasons whence this comes to pass, seeing
this is contrary to the gradual Progress of Holiness in them that are
sanctified, which we have Asserted. And I answer two things unto it:

1. That these Decays are Occasional and Preternatural, as to the true Nature
and Constitution of the New Creature, and a disturbance of the Ordinary Work of
Grace. They are Diseases in our spiritual State, which it is not to be measured
by. Are you dead and cold in Duties, backward in Good Works, careless of your
Hearts and Thoughts, addicted to the World? These things belong not to the
State of Sanctification but are Enemies unto it, Sicknesses and Diseases in the
Spiritual Constitution of the Persons in whom they are.

2. Although our Sanctification and Growth in Holiness be a Work of the Holy
Spirit, as the Efficient Cause thereof, yet is it our own Work also in a way of
Duty. He has prescribed unto us what shall be our part, what he expects from
us, and requires of us that the Work may be regularly carried on unto
Perfection, as was before declared. And there are two sorts of things which if
we attend not unto in a due Manner, the orderly progress of it will be
obstructed and retarded. For

(1) The Power and Growth of any Lust or Corruption and a compliance from them
with Temptations which is inseparable from the prevalency of any sin in us,
lies directly against this Progress. If we allow or approve of any such thing
in us, if we indulge unto any actings of sin, especially when known and grown
frequent, in any one kind, when we neglect the use of the best Means for the
constant Mortification of sin, which every enlightened Soul understands to be
necessary thereunto, there is and will be increased an universal decay in
Holiness, and not only in that particular Corruption which is so spared and
indulged. A Disease in any one of the Vitals or principal parts of the Body
weakens not only the part wherein it is, but the whole Body it self and
vitiates the whole Constitution by a sympathy of parts. And any particular Lust
indulged unto, vitiates the whole Spiritual Health, and weakens the Soul in all
Duties of Obedience.

(2) There are some things required of us to this End, that Holiness may thrive
and be carried on in us. Such are the constant use of all Ordinances and Means
appointed unto that End, a due Observance of Commanded Duties in their Season,
with a Readiness for the Exercise of every especial Grace in its proper
circumstances. Now if we neglect these things, if we walk at all peradventures
with God, attending neither to Means nor Duties, nor the Exercise of Grace as
we should, we are not to wonder if we find our selves Decaying, yea ready to
dye. Does any man wonder to see a person formerly of a sound Constitution grown
weak and sickly, if he openly neglect all Means of health, and contract all
sorts of Diseases by his Intemperance? Is it strange that a Nation should be
sick and faint at heart, that Grey-hairs should be sprinkled upon it, that it
should be poor and decaying, whilst Consuming Lusts with a strange Neglect of
all envigorating Means do prevail in it? No more is it that a Professing people
should decay in Holy Obedience whilst they abide in the Neglects expressed.

Having vindicated this Assertion, I shall yet add a little further
Improvement of it. And

1. If the Work of Holiness be such a Progressive thriving Work in its own
nature, if the Design of the Holy Ghost in the use of Means be to carry it on
in us and increase it more and more unto a perfect Measure, then is our
Diligence still to be continued to the same End and Purpose. For hereon depends
our growth and thriving. It is required of us that we give all Diligence unto
the Increase of Grace, 2 Pet. 1. and that we abound therein, 2 Cor. 8. 7.
abounding in all Diligence; and not only so, but that we show the same
Diligence unto the End, Heb. 6. 11. Whetever Diligence you have used in the
attaining or improving of Holiness, abide in it unto the End, or we cast our
selves under Decays, and endanger our Souls. If we slack or give over as to
our Duty, the Work of Sanctification will not be carried on in a way of Grace.
And this is required of us, this is expected from us, that our whole Lives be
spent in a Course of diligent Compliance with the Progressive Work of Grace in
us. There are three Grounds on which men do or may neglect this Duty whereon
the Life of their Obedience and all their Comforts do depend.

(1) A Presumption or Groundless Persuasion that they are already perfect. This
some pretend unto in a proud and foolish Conceit destructive of the whole
Nature and Duty of Evangelical Holiness or Obedience. For this on our parts
consists in our willing Compliance with the Work of Grace gradually carried on
unto the measure appointed unto us. If this be already attained, there is an
End of all Evangelical Obedience, and men return again to the Law unto their
Ruin. See Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. It is an excellent Description of the Nature of
our Obedience which the Apostle gives us in that place. All Absolute Perfection
in this Life is rejected as unattainable. The End proposed is Blessedness and
Glory with the Eternal Enjoyment of God, and the Way whereby we press toward
it which comprizeth the whole of our Obedience, is by continual uninterrupted
following after, pressing, reaching out, a constant Progress, in and by our
utmost Diligence.

(2) A foolish Supposition that being interested in a state of Grace, we need
not now be so solicitous about exact Holiness and Obedience in all things as we
were formerly whilst our minds hung in suspense about our Condition. But so
much as any one has this Apprehension or Persuasion prevailing in him, or
influencing of him, so much has he cause deeply to question whether he have
yet any thing of Grace or Holiness or no. For this Persuasion is not of him who
has called us. There is not a more effectual Engine in the hand of Satan
either to keep us off from Holiness, or to stifle it when it is attained, nor
can any thoughts arise in the Hearts of men more opposite to the nature of
Grace; For which cause the Apostle rejects it with Detestation: Romans 6. 1, 2.

(3) Weariness and Despondencies arising from Oppositions. Some find so much
difficulty in, and Opposition to the Work of Holiness and its Progress, from
the Power of Corruptions, Temptations, and the Occasions of Life in this World,
that they are ready to faint and give over this Diligence in Duties and
Contending against Sin. But the Scripture does so abound with Encouragements
unto this sort of Persons, as we need not to insist thereon.

CHAP. III. Believers the only Object of Sanctification, and Subject of Gospel
Holiness.
(1) Believers the only Subject of the Work of Sanctification. (2) How men come
to believe, if Believers alone receive the Spirit of Sanctification. (3) The
principal Ends for which the Spirit is promised, with their Order in their
Accomplishment. (4) Rules to be observed in praying for the Spirit of God, and
his Operations therein. (5) That Believers only are Sanctified or Holy proved
and confirmed. (6) Mistakes about Holiness both Notional and Practical
discovered. (7) The Proper Subject of Holiness in Believers.

personal Subject of this Work of Sanctification; or who and of what sort those
Persons are that are made Holy. Now these are All and Only Believers. All who
unseignedly believe in God through Jesus Christ are sanctified, and no other.
Unto them is Evangelical Holiness confined. It is for them and them only that
our Savior prays for this Mercy Grace or Privilege; Joh. 17. 17. Sanctify
them by thy Truth; And concerning them he affirms, for their sakes I sanctify
my self, that they also may be sanctified through the Truth; v. 19. And whereas
in the Verses foregoing he had immediate Respect unto his Apostles and present
Disciples, that we may know that neither his Prayer nor this Grace are confined
or limited unto them, he adds, Neither pray I for these alone, that is in this
Manner, and for these Ends, but for them also which shall believe on me through
their World, v. 20. It was therefore the Prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ that
all Believers should be sanctified; and so also was it his Promise; John 7. 38,
39. He that believes on me as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall
slow rivers of living water; But this he spoke of the Spirit which they that
believe on him should receive. And it is with respect principally unto this
Work of Sanctification that he is compared unto flowing and living Water as
has been declared before: It is for Believers, the Church that was in God the
Father and in Jesus Christ, that is by Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. that our Apostle
prays, that the God of Peace would sanctify them throughout, chap. 5. 23.

Objection of some importance is to be removed out of our way. For on this
Supposition that the Spirit of Sanctification is given only unto Believers, it
may be enquired, How men come so to be. For if we have not the Spirit until
after we do Believe, then is Faith it self of our selves. And this is that
which some plead for; namely, that the Gift of the Holy Ghost unto all Ends and
Purposes for which he is promised, is consequential unto Faith with the
Profession and Obedience thereof, being as it were its Reward. See Crell. de
Sp. S. cap. 5. To this purpose it is pleaded, that the Apostle Peter
encourages men unto Faith and Repentance with the Promise that thereon they
should receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 38. And so is that also of
our Savior, John 14. 17. that the World, that is Unbelievers cannot receive
the Spirit of Truth; so that our Faith and Obedience is required as a necessary
Qualification unto the receiving of the Holy Ghost; and if they are so
absolutely, then are they of our selves and not wrought in us by the Grace of
God, which is express Pelagianisme.

Ans. I could dwell long on this Enquiry concerning the especial Subject of the
Holy Spirit, seeing the right understanding of many places of Scripture does
depend thereon. But because I have much work yet before me, I will reduce what
I have to offer on this Head into as narrow a Compass as possibly I may. In
Answer therefore to this Objection I say:

1. That the Holy Spirit is said to be promised and received with respect unto
the Ends which he is promised for, and the Effects which he works when he is
received. For although he be himself but one, the one and self-same Spirit, and
he Himself is promised, given forth and received as we have declared, yet he
has many and diverse Operations. And as his Operations are diverse, or several
sorts and kinds, so our receiving of him as to the Manner of it is diverse also,
and suited unto the Ends of his Communications unto us. Thus in some sense he
is promised unto and received by Believers, in another he is promised and
received to make men so, or to make them believe. In the first way there may be
some Activity of Faith in a way of Duty, whereas in the latter, we are passive,
and receive him only in a way of Grace.

Four Heads. (1) Regeneration, (2) Sanctification, (3) Consolation, (4)
Edification. There are indeed very many distinct Operations and Distributions
of the Spirit, as I have in part already discovered, and shall yet further go
over them in particular Instances. But they may be reduced unto these general
Heads, or at least they will suffice to exemplify the different Manner and
Ends of the receiving of the Spirit. And this is the plain Order and Method of
these things, as the Scripture both plainly and plentifully testifies. (1) He
is promised and received as to the Work of Regeneration unto the Elect; (2) as
to the Work of Sanctification unto the Regenerate; (3) as to the Work of
Consolation unto the Sanctified; and (4) as unto Gifts for Edification unto
Professors, according to his Sovereign Will and Pleasure.

(1) He is promised unto the Elect and received by them as to his Work of
Regeneration. That this is his Work in us wholly and entirely, I have proved
before at large. Hereunto the Qualifications of Faith and Obedience are no way
required as previously necessary in us. In order of Nature our receiving of the
Spirit is antecedent to the very Seed and Principle of Faith in us, as the
Cause is to the Effect, seeing it is wrought in us by him alone; and the
Promises concerning the Communications of the Spirit unto this End have been
before explained and vindicated. Hereby does Holy Ghost prepare an Habitation
for himself, and make way for all the following Work which he has to do in us
and toward us unto the Glory of God, and the perfecting of our Salvation, or
the making of us meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12.

(2) He is promised and received as a Spirit of Sanctification unto and by them
that are Regenerate; That is unto Believers and only unto them. This will be
fully confirmed immediately. And this puts an Issue to the principal
difficulty of the foregoing objection. It is no way inconsistent that Faith
should be required previously unto the receiving of the Spirit as a Spirit of
Sanctification; though it be not so as he is the Author of Regeneration. The
same Spirit first works Faith in us, and then preserves it when it is
wrought. Only to clear the Manner of it we may observe. 1. That Sanctification
may be considered two ways. (1) As to the Original and essential Work of it,
which consists in the preservation of the Principle of spiritual Life and
Holiness communicated unto us in our Regeneration. (2) As to those renewed
Actual Operations whereby it is carried on, and is gradually progressive as
has been declared. 2. Faith also or believing may be considered in this matter
two ways. (1) As to its Original Communication Infusion or Creation in the
Soul, for it is the gift or work of God. In this respect, that is, as to the
Seed, Principle and Habit of it, it is wrought in us, as all other Grace is, in
Regeneration. (2) As to its actings in us, or as unto Actual Believing or the
Exercise of Faith and the Fruits of it, in a constant Profession and Holy
Obedience. Sanctification in the first sense respects Faith also in the first.
That is, the Preservation of the Seed, Principle, Grace, Habit of Faith in us,
belongs unto the Sanctifying Work of the Holy Spirit. And so Believers only are
sanctified. And in the latter sense it respects Faith in the latter also; That
is, the progress of the Work of Sanctification in us is accompanied with the
Actings and Exercise of Faith. But both ways Faith is a necessary
Qualification in and unto them that are sanctified. Believers therefore are the
Adequate Subject of the Work of Sanctification, which is all that at present is
under our Consideration.

(3) The Spirit is also promised as a Comforter, or as a Spirit of Consolation.
In this sense or for this End and Work, he is not promised unto them that are
Regenerate merely as such. For many may be Regenerate who are not capable of
Consolation, nor do need it; as Infants who may be and are many of them
sanctified from the Womb. Nor is he so promised unto them that are Believers
absolutely, who have the Grace or Habit of Faith wrought in them; for so many
have who are not yet exercised, nor brought into that Condition wherein
Spiritual Consolations are either proper or needful unto them. The Spirit is
promised as a Comforter unto Believers, as engaged in the Profession of the
Gospel, and meeting with Conflicts inward and outward on the Account thereof.
The first Promise of the Holy Ghost as a Comforter was made to the Disciples
when their Hearts were filled with sorrow on the departure of Christ; and this
is the Measure of all others, John 16. 7. And this is evident both from the
Nature of the thing it self, and from all the Promises which are given
concerning him to this End and Purpose. And it will be wholly in vain at any
time to apply spiritual Consolations unto any other sort of Persons. All men
who have any interest in Christian Religion, when they fall into Troubles and
Distresses be they of what sort they will, are ready to enquire after the
things that may relieve and refresh them. And whereas there are many things in
the Word suited unto the Relief and Consolation of the distressed, they are apt
to apply them unto themselves, and others also are ready to comply with them in
the same Charitable Office as they suppose. But no true Spiritual Consolation
was ever administered by the Word unto any but Exercised Believers, however the
Minds of men may be for the present a little relieved, and their Affections
refreshed by the things that are spoken unto them out of the Word. For the Word
is the Instrument of the Holy Ghost; nor has it any Efficacy but as he is
pleased to use it and apply it. And he uses it unto this End and unto no
other, as being promised as a Spirit of Consolation only to sanctified
Believers. And therefore when Persons fall under spiritual Convictions and
Trouble of Mind or Conscience upon the Account of Sin and Guilt, it is not our
first work to tender Consolation unto them, whereby many in that Condition are
deluded, but to lead them on to Believing, that being justified by Faith they
may have peace with God, which is their proper Relief. And in that state God is
abundantly willing that they should receive strong Consolation, even as many as
fly for Refuge to the Hope that is set before them.

(4) The Spirit of God is promised and received as to Gifts for the Edification
of the Church. This is that which is intended, Acts 2. 38, 39. And his whole
Work herein we shall consider in its proper place. The Rule and Measure of the
Communication of the Spirit for Regeneration is Election. The Rule and Measure
of the Communication of the Spirit for Sanctification is Regeneration. And the
Rule and Measure of his Communication as a Spirit of Consolation, is
Sanctification, with the Afflictions, Temptations and Troubles of them that are
sanctified; What then is the Rule and Measure of his Communication as a Spirit
of Edification? I answer; Profession of the Truth of the Gospel and its
Worship, with a Call unto the benefiting of others, 1 Cor. 12. 7. And here two
Rules must be observed. (1) That he carries not his Gifts for Edification out
of the Pale of the Church, or Profession of the Truth and Worship of the
Gospel. (2) That he uses a Sovereign and not a Certain Rule in this
Communication, 1 Cor. 12. 11, 13. so as that he is not wanting unto any true
Professors in proportion to their Calls and Opportunities.

2ly, Whereas the Spirit of Sanctification is promised only unto them that are
Regenerate and do believe, May we in our Prayers and Supplications for him
plead those Qualifications as Arguments and Motives for the further
Communications of him unto us. Ans. 1. We cannot properly plead any
Qualification in our selves, as though God were Obliged with respect unto them,
to give a man increase of Grace ex congruo much less ex condigno. When we have
done all, we are unprofitable Servants. As we begin so we must proceed with God
merely on the Account of Sovereign Grace. 2. We may plead the Faithfulness and
Righteousness of God as engaged in his Promises. We ought to pray that he would
not forsake the Work of his own hands, that he who has begun the good work in
us, would perfect it unto the day of Jesus Christ; that with respect unto his
Covenant and Promises he would preserve that New Creature, that Divine Nature
which he has formed and implanted in us. 3. Upon a sense of the Weakness of
any Grace we may humbly profess our sincerity therein, and pray for its
increase. So cried the poor man with tears, Lord I believe, help thou mine
unbelief, Matthew. 9. 24. And the Apostles in their Prayer, Lord increase our
Faith, Luke 17. 5. owned the Faith they had, and prayed for its increase by
fresh supplies of the Holy Spirit.

Again 3ly, May Believers in Trouble pray for the Spirit of Consolation with
respect unto their Troubles, it being unto such that he is promised? Ans. (1)
They may do so directly, and ought so to do; yea when they do it not it is a
sign they turn aside unto broken Cisterns that will yield them no Relief. (2)
Troubles are of two sorts, Spiritual and Temporal. Spiritual Troubles are so
either Subjectively, such as are all inward Darknesses, and Distresses on the
Account of sin; or 2ly, Objectively, such are all Persecutions for the Name of
Christ and the Gospel: It is principally with respect unto these that the
Spirit is promised as a Comforter, and with regard unto them are we principally
to pray for him as so promised. (3) In those outward Troubles which are Common
unto Believers with other men, as the death of Relations, Losses of Estate or
Liberty, they may and ought to pray for the Spirit as a Comforter, that the
Consolations of God administered by him, may out-ballance their outward
Troubles, and keep up their hearts unto other Duties.

4ly, May all Sincere Professors of the Gospel pray for the Spirit with respect
unto his Gifts, for the Edification of others, seeing unto such he is promised
for that End? Ans. 1. They may do so but with the ensuing Limitations. (1) They
must do it with express Submission to the Sovereignty of the Spirit himself,
who divides to every one as he will. (2) With respect unto that Station and
Condition wherein they are placed in the Church by the Providence and call of
God. Private persons have no warrant to pray for Ministerial Gifts, such as
should carry them out of their Stations without a Divine Direction going before
them. (3) That their End be good and right to use them in their respective
places unto Edification. So ought Parents and Masters of Families, and all
Members of Churches, to pray for those Gifts of the Spirit whereby they may
fill up the Duties of their Places and Relations.

From the Consideration of this Order of the Dispensation of the Spirit, we may
be directed how to pray for him, which we are both commanded and encouraged to
do, Luke 11. 13. For we are to pray for him with respect unto those Ends and
Effects for which he is promised: And these are those which are before
expressed, with all those particular Instances which may be reduced unto them.
We might therefore hence give Direction in some Enquiries, which indeed deserve
a larger Discussion if our present Design would admit of it; one only I shall
instance in.

May a Person who is yet Unregenerate pray for the Spirit of Regeneration to
effect that Work in him? For whereas as such he is promised only unto the
Elect, such a Person not knowing his Election, seems to have no foundation to
make such a Request upon. Ans. (1.) Election is no Qualification on our part
which we may consider or plead in our Supplications, but only the secret
Purpose on the part of God of what himself will do, and is known unto us only
by its Effects. (2) Persons convinced of sin, and a state of sin, may and ought
to pray, that God by the Effectual Communications of his Spirit unto them would
deliver them from that Condition. This is one way whereby we flee from the
wrath to come. (3) The especial Object of their Supplications herein is
Sovereign Grace, Goodness and Mercy, as declared in and by Jesus Christ. Such
Persons cannot indeed plead any especial Promise as made unto them. But they
may plead for the Grace and Mercy declared in the Promises, as indefinitely
proposed unto sinners. It may be they can proceed no further in their
Expectations but unto that of the Prophet; who knows if God will come and
give a Blessing; Joel 2. 14. yet is this a sufficient ground and encouragement
to keep them waiting at the Throne of Grace. So Paul after he had received his
Vision from Heaven continued in great distress of mind praying until he
received the Holy Ghost, Acts 9. 11, 17. (4) Persons under such Convictions
have really sometimes the seeds of Regeneration communicated unto them, and
then as they ought, so they will continue in their Supplications for the
Increase and Manifestation of it.

It is evident that by these Observations the foregoing Objection is utterly
removed out of the way; and there is no disadvantage arises unto the Doctrine
of the Free and Effectual Grace of God, by confining this Work of
Sanctification and Holiness unto Believers only. None are sanctified, none are
made Holy but those who truly and savingly Believe in God through Jesus
Christ; which I shall now further confirm.

Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. The Faith discoursed
of by the Apostle is that whereby the Fathers received the Promises, walked
with God and obtained the Inheritance, the Faith of Abraham; that is true
saying justifying Faith. This Faith constitutes all them in whom it is true
Believers, and without it it is impossible to please God. Now Holiness wherever
it is pleases God, and therefore without Faith it is impossible we should have
any interest in it. This is the Will of God even our Sanctification, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 3. and walking therein we please God, v. 7. All that pleases God in us, is
our Holiness, or some part of it, and it principally consists in an Opposition
unto all that displeases him. That which he commands pleases him, and that
which he forbids displeases him; and our Holiness consists in a Compliance
with the one, and an Opposition unto the other. Wherefore that any others but
Believers should have any thing which really belongs unto this Holiness, the
Apostle declares it to be impossible. Some would except against this sense of
the words from the ensuing Reason which the Apostle gives of his Assertion
which contains the nature of the Faith intended. For he that comes unto God
must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him. For this is that, they say, which the Light of Nature directs unto, and
therefore there is no other Faith necessarily required that a man may please
God but only that which is included in the right use and exercise of Natural
Reason. But this Exception will no way evade the Force of this Testimony. For
the Apostle discourses concerning such a Coming unto God, and such a Belief in
him, as is guided, directed and ingenerated in us, by the Promises which it
rests upon and is resolved into. Now these Promises all and every one of them,
include Jesus Christ with a respect unto him and his Grace. And therefore the
Faith intended is that which is in God through Christ as revealed and exhibited
in the Promises, and this Coming unto God is a Fruit and Effect thereof.

(2) Our Lord Jesus Christ affirms that men are sanctified by the Faith that is
in him, Acts 26. 18. That they may receive Forgiveness of sins and an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified by the Faith that is in me. If there
were any other way or means whereby men might be sanctified or made Holy, he
would not have confined it unto the Faith that is in him. At least there is no
other way to attain that Holiness which may bring them unto the Heavenly
Inheritance, or make them meet for it, Col. 1. 11. which alone we enquire
after. And indeed there can be no greater Contempt cast on the Lord Jesus and
on the Duty of Believing in him, whereunto he makes this one of his principal
Motives, than to Imagine that without Faith in him any one can be made Holy.

(3.) Faith is the Instrumental Cause of our Sanctification, so that where it
is not, no Holiness can be wrought in us. God purifyeth our hearts by Faith,
Acts 15. 9. and not otherwise. And where the Heart is not purifyed there is no
Holiness. All the Duties in the world will not denominate him Holy whose Heart
is not purified; nor will any such Duties be holy themselves seeing unto the
unclean all things are unclean. All the Obedience that is accepted with God is
the Obedience of Faith, Romans 1. 7. thence it springs and therewith is it
animated. So is it expressed, 1 Pet. 1. 21, 22. You who by Christ do believe in
God, and have purifyed your Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit. It
is from Faith in God through Jesus Christ, acting it self in Obedience unto the
Gospel, that we purify or cleanse our Souls which is our Sanctification. See
Col. 2. 12, 13, 14. Chap. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

(4) All Grace is Originally entrusted in and with Jesus Christ. The Image of
God being lost in Adam, whatever was prepared or is used for the Renovation of
it in our Natures and Persons, wherein Gospel Holiness does consist, was to be
treasured up in him as the second Adam, by whom many are to be made alive, who
dyed in the first. It pleased the Father that in him all Fullness should dwell,
as the Fullness of the Godhead in and for his own Divine Personal Subsistence,
so the Fullness of all Grace for Supplies unto us; that of his Fullness we might
receive Grace for Grace. He is made the Head unto the whole New Creation, not
only of Power and Rule but of Life and Influence. God has given him for a
Covenant to the People, and communicates nothing that belongs properly to the
Covenant of Grace, as our Sanctification and Holiness do, unto any but in and
through him. And we receive nothing by him but by virtue of Relation unto him,
or especial Interest in him, or union with him. Where there is an especial
Communication, there must be an especial Relation whereon it does depend, and
whence it does proceed. As the Relation of the Members unto the Head is the
Cause and Means why Vital spirits are thence derived unto them. We must be in
Christ as the Branch is in the Vine or we can derive nothing from him. Joh. 15.
4. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in the Vine, no
more can ye except ye abide in me. Whatever any way belongs unto Holiness is
our Fruit, and nothing else is Fruit but what belongs thereunto. Now this our
Savior affirms that we can bring forth nothing of, unless we are in him, and
do abide in him. Now our being in Christ and abiding in him is by Faith;
without which we can derive nothing from him, and consequently never be
partakers of Holiness in the least Degree. But these things must be afterward
spoken unto more at large. It is therefore undenyably evident that Believers
only are sanctified and Holy, all others are unclean, nor is any thing they do
Holy, or so esteemed of God.

Notional and Practical. For (1) There are some who would carry Holiness beyond
the Bounds of an especial Relation unto Christ; or would carry that Relation
beyond the only Bond of it, which is Faith. For they would have it to be no
more than Moral Honesty or Virtue, and so cannot with any Modesty deny it unto
those Heathens who endeavored after them according to the Light of Nature. And
what need then is there of Jesus Christ? I can and do commend Moral Virtues
and Honesty as much as any man ought to do, and am sure enough there is no
Grace where they are not; yet to make any thing to be our Holiness that is not
derived from Jesus Christ, I know not what I do more abhor. An Imagination
hereof dethrones Christ from his Glory, and overthrowes the whole Gospel. But
we have a sort of men who plead that Heathens may be eternally saved, so large
and indulgent is their Charity, and in the mean time endeavor by all means
possible to destroy temporally at least all those Christians who stoop not to a
compliance with all their Imaginations. (2) Others there are who proceed much
further and yet do but deceive themselves in the Issue. Notions they have of
good and evil by the Light of Nature. As they come with men into the world, and
grow up with them as they come to the Exercise of their Reason, so they are not
stifled without offering violence to the Principles of Nature by the power of
sin; as it comes to pass in many, Ephesians. 4. 19. 1 Timothy 4. 2. Romans 1. 31. Chap.
2. 14, 15. These Notions therefore are in many improved in Process of time by
Convictions from the Law; and great Effects are produced hereby. For where the
Soul is once effectually convinced of Sin Righteousness and Judgment, it
cannot but endeavor after a Deliverance from the one, and an Attainment of the
other; that so it may be well with it at the Last Day. And here lie the Springs
or Foundations of all the Moral Differences that we see amongst Mankind. Some
give themselves up unto all Abominations, Lasciviousness, Uncleanness,
Drunkenness, Frauds, Oppressions, Blasphemies, Persecutions, as having no
bounds fixed unto their Lusts, but what are given them by their own Impotency,
or dread of Humane Laws. Others endeavor to be Sober, Temperate, Just, Honest,
and Upright in their dealings, with a sedulous performance of Religious Duties.
This difference arises from the different Power and Efficacy of Legal
Convictions upon the Minds of men. And these Convictions are in many variously
improved according to the Light they receive in the Means of Knowledge which
they do enjoy, or the Errors and Superstitions which they are misguided unto.
For on this latter account do they grow up in some, into Penances, Vows,
uncommanded Abstinencyes, and various Self-macerations; with other painful and
costly Duties. Where the Light they receive is in the general according unto
Truth, there it will engage men into Reformation of Life, a Multiplication of
Duties, Abstinence from sin, Profession, Zeal, and a Cordial Engagement into
one way or other in Religion. Such Persons may have good Hopes themselves that
they are Holy, they may appear to the World so to be, and be accepted in the
Church of God as such, and yet really be utter strangers from true Gospel
Holiness. And the Reason is, because they have missed it in the Foundation; and
not having in the first place obtained an Interest in Christ, have built their
house on the sand, whence it will fall in the time of trouble. If it be said,
that all those who come up unto the Duties mentioned are to be esteemed
Believers, if therewith they make Profession of the true Faith of the Gospel, I
willingly grant it. But if it be said, that necessarily they are so indeed, and
in the sight of God, and therefore are also sanctified and Holy, I must say the
contrary is expressly denied in the Gospel, and especial Instances given thereof.

Wherefore let them wisely consider these things who have any Conviction of the
Necessity of Holiness. It may be they have done much in the pursuit of it, and
have labored in the Duties that materially belong unto it. Many things they
have done, and many things forborne, upon the Account of it; and still continue
so to do. It may be they think that for all the World they would not be found
among the number of unholy persons at the Last Day. This may be the Condition
of some, perhaps of many, who are but yet young, and but newly engaged into
these ways upon their Convictions. It may be so with them who for many days
and years have been so following after a Righteousness in a way of Duty. But
yet they meet with these two evils in their ways. (1) That Duties of Obedience
seldom or never prove more easy, familiar or pleasant unto them, than they did
at first, but rather are more grievous and burdensome every day. (2) That they
never come up unto a satisfaction in what they do, but still find that there
is somewhat wanting. These make all they do burdensome and unpleasant unto
them, which at length will betray them into Backsliding and Apostasy. But yet
there is somewhat worse behind; All they have done, or are ever able to do on
the bottom upon which they stand, will come to no Account, but perish with them
at the great Day. Would we prevent all these fatal evils, would we engage in a
real, thriving, everlasting Holiness, let our first business be to secure a
Relation unto Jesus Christ, without which nothing of it will ever be attained.

To close this discourse, I shall only from it obviate a putid Calumny cast by
the Papists, Quakers and others of the same Confederacy against the Grace of
God, upon the Doctrine of the free Justification of a sinner, through the
Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. For with a shameless Impudence they
clamor on all by whom it is asserted, as those who maintain Salvation to be
attained through a mere External Imputation of Righteousness, whilst those so
saved are unclean and unholy, as the Quaker, or negligent of the Duties of
Righteousness and Obedience, as the Papists and others slanderously report. For
the frontless impudence of this Calumny is sufficiently evident from hence,
that as we assert Sanctification and Holiness to be peculiar only unto
Believing justified Persons, that is that Faith and Holiness are inseparable
habitually or actually or in both regards; so in like manner that all such
Persons are infallibly sanctified and made Holy.

What it is that is sanctified in them, or what is the proper Seat and Subject
of this Work, is in the next place to be declared. For it is not a mere
External Denomination as things were called Holy under the Old Testament, nor
any transient Act, nor any series or Course of Actions that we plead about; but
that which has, as a real Being and Existence, so a constant abiding or
Residence in us. Hence he that is Holy is always so, whether he be in the
Actual Exercise of the Duties of Holiness or no; though an Omission of any of
them in their proper season is contrary unto and an impeachment of Holiness, as
to its Degrees. Now this subject of Sanctification is the Entire Nature or
whole Person of a Believer. It is not any one Faculty of the Soul or Affection
of the Mind, or Part of the Body that is sanctified, but the whole Soul and
Body, or the entire Nature of every Believing Person. And hereby is the Work of
Sanctification really distinguished from any other mere common Work which may
represent it, or pretend unto it. For all such Works are partial; either they
are in the Mind only by Light and Notions of Truth, or on the Affections only
in Zeal and Devotion, or on the Mind and Conscience in the Convictions of Sin
and Duty, but further they proceed not. But true Holiness consists in the
Renovation of our whole Persons, which must be demonstrated.

(1) That our entire Nature was Originally created in the Image of God I have
proved before, and it is by all acknowledged. Our whole Souls, in the Rectitude
of all their Faculties and Powers in order unto the Life of God and his
Enjoyment, did bear this Image. Nor was it confined unto the Soul only. The
Body also, not as to its shape figure or natural use, but as an Essential part
of our Natures, was interested in the Image of God by a Participation of
Original Righteousness. Hence the whole Person was a meet Principle for the
Communication of this Image of God unto others, by the means of Natural
Propagation, which is an act of the entire Person. For a Person created and
abiding in the Image of God, begetting another in his own Image and Likeness,
had by virtue of the Covenant of Creation begotten him in the Image of God
also; that is, had communicated unto him a Nature upright and pure.

(2) By the Entrance of sin this Image of God, so far as it was our
Righteousness and Holiness before him, was utterly defaced and Lost. This also
I have sufficiently evidenced before. It did not depart from any one Power,
Part, or Faculty of our Souls, but from our whole Nature. Accordingly the
Scripture describes (1) the Depravation of our Natures distinctly in all the
Powers of it. In particular the Corruption that ensued on our Minds, Wills and
Affections upon the loss of the Image of God, I have before declared and
vindicated. And (2) in reference unto the first Actings of all these Faculties
in things Moral and Spiritual, the Scripture adds that all the Thoughts and
Imaginations of our Hearts are evil and that continually, Genesis 6. 5. All the
Original first Actings of the Powers of our Souls in or about things Rational
and Moral are always evil. For an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.
That which is lame and distorted, can act nothing that is straight and regular.
Hence (3) All the Outward Actions of Persons in this State and Condition are
evil, unfruitful works of Darkness. And not only so but the Scripture (4) in
the Description of the Effects of this Depravation of our Nature, calls in the
Body and the members of it unto a partnership in all this Obliquity and Sin.
The members of the Body are Servants unto Uncleanness and Iniquity, Romans 6. 19.
And the engagement of them in all the Course and Actings of Depraved Nature is
particularly declared by our Apostle out of the Psalmist, Romans 3. 12, 13, 14,
15. They are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable,
there is none that does good no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher,
with their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps is under their
lips, whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to
shed blood, in all ways of evil.

This being the State of our whole Nature in its Depravation, our
Sanctification, wherein alone its Reparation in this Life does consist, must
equally respect the whole. Some suppose that it is our Affections only in their
Deliverance from corrupt Lusts and Prejudices, with their direction unto
Heavenly Objects, that are the Subject of this Work. For the Mind or rational
Intellectual Power of the Soul, is in its self they say pure, noble, untainted,
and needs no other Aid but to be delivered from the Prejudices and Obstructions
of its Operations, which are cast upon it by the Engagements and Inclinations
of corrupt Affections, and a vicious course of Conversation in the World,
received by uninterrupted Traditions from our Fathers; from whence it is not
able to extricate or deliver it self, without the Aid of Grace. But they have
placed their Instance very unhappily. For among all things that belong unto our
Nature, there is not any one which the Scripture so charge this Depravation
of it upon, as the Mind. This in particular is said to be fleshly, to be Enmity
against God, to be filled with Vanity, Folly and Blindness, as we have at large
before evinced. Nor is there any thing concerning which the Work of
Sanctification and Renovation is so expressly affirmed as it is concerning the
Mind. It is declared by the Renovation of our Minds, Romans 12. 2. or being
Renewed in the spirit of our Minds, Ephesians. 4. 23. that we put on the New man
that is renewed in knowledge, Col. 3. 10. with other Expressions of the like
nature. It is therefore our Entire Nature that is the Subject of Evangelical
Holiness; For to manifest in particulars.

(1) Hence it is called the New Man, Ephesians. 4. 24. Put on the New Man, which
after God is created in Righteousness and Holiness. As the Principle of Sin and
corrupted Nature in us is called the Old Man for no other Reason but that it
possesses all the Active Powers of the whole Man, so that he neither does nor
can do any thing but what is influenced thereby; so this Principle of Holiness
in us, the Renovation of our Natures is called the New Man, because it
possesses the whole Person with respect unto its proper Operations and Ends.
And it extends it self as large as the Old Man or the Depravation of our
Natures, which takes in the whole Person Soul and Body with all their Faculties
and Powers.

(2) The Heart in the Scripture is taken for the whole Soul and all the
Faculties of it, as they are one Common Principle of all Moral Operations; as
I have proved before: Whatever therefore is wrought in and upon the Heart under
this Consideration, is wrought upon the whole Soul. Now this is not only said
to be affected with this Work of Sanctification, or to have Holiness wrought in
it, but the principal Description that is given us of this Work, consists in
this, that therein and thereby a New Heart is given unto us or created in us,
as it is expressed in the Promise of the Covenant. This therefore can be
nothing but the possessing of all the Powers and Faculties of our Souls with a
New Principle of Holiness and Obedience unto God.

(3) There is especial mention made of the effecting of this Work on our Souls
and Bodies with their Powers and Faculties distinctly. This I have already
proved in the Declaration of the Work of our Regeneration or Conversion to God,
which is only preserved, cherished, improved, and carried on to its proper End
in our Sanctification. The Nature also of that spiritual Light which is
communicated unto our Minds, of Life unto our Wills, of Love unto our
Affections, has been declared. Therefore does it follow thence unavoidably
that the whole Person is the Subject of this Work, and that Holiness has its
residence in the whole Soul entirely.

(4) We need go no further for the proof hereof than unto that Prayer of the
Apostle for the Thessalonians which we insisted on at the beginning of this
Discourse, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. The God of Peace himself sanctify you (...),
throughout; that is, in your whole Natures or Persons, in all that you are and
do, that you may not in this or that part but be every whit clean and Holy
throughout. And to make this the more evident that we may know what it is which
he prays may be sanctified, and thereby preserved blameless to the coming of
Christ, he distributes our whole Natures into the two Essential parts of Soul
and Body. And in the former he considers two things, (1) the Spirit, (2) the
Soul peculiarly so called. And this distinction frequently occurrs in the
Scripture, wherein that by the Spirit the Mind or Intellectual Faculty is
understood, and by the Soul the Affections, is generally acknowledged, and may
evidently be proved. These therefore the Apostle prays may be sanctified and
preserved Holy throughout and entirely, Fieri non potest ut sanctificato
Spiritu non sit sanctum etiam Corpus, quo sanctificatus utitur Spiritus.
August. lib. de Bono Viduitat.
and that by the Infusion of an Habit of Holiness into them, with its
Preservation and Improvement, whereof more afterward. But this is not all. Our
Bodies are an Essential part of our Natures, and by their union with our Souls
are we constituted individual Persons. Now we are the Principles of all our
Operations, as we are Persons; Every Moral Act we do, is the Act of the whole
Person. The Body therefore is concerned in the Good and Evil of it. It became a
subject of the Depravation of our Nature by Concomitancy and Participation; and
is considered as one entire Principle with the Soul of communicating Original
Defilement from Parents unto Children. Besides it is now subject in that
Corruption of its Constitution which it is fallen under as a punishment of sin,
unto many disorderly Motions that are Incentives and Provocations unto sin.
Hence sin is said to reign in our mortal Bodies, and our Members to be servants
unto unrighteousness, Romans 6. 12. 19. Moreover by its Participation in the
Defilement and Punishment of sin, the Body is disposed and made obnoxious unto
Corruption and Destruction. For Death entered by Sin and no otherwise. On all
these Accounts therefore it is necessary on the other hand, that the Body
should be interested in this Work and Privilege of Sanctification and
Holiness. And so it is (1) By Participation. For it is our Persons that are
sanctified and made Holy, ( sanctify them throughout); and although our Souls
are the first proper Subject of the infused Habit or Principle of Holiness, yet
our Bodies as essential parts of our Natures are Partakers thereof. (2) By a
peculiar Influence of the Grace of God upon them also, as far as they have any
influence into Moral Operations. For the Apostle tells us, that our Bodies are
Members of Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 15. and so consequently have influences of Grace
from him as our Head. (3) In the Work of Sanctification the Holy Ghost comes
and dwells in us. And hereon our Bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost which
is in us, 1 Cor. 3. 19. And the Temple of God is Holy; although I confess this
rather belongs unto the Holiness of peculiar Dedication unto God, whereof we
shall treat afterward. And hereby (1) are the Parts and Members of the Body
made Instruments and Servants of Righteousness unto Holiness, Romans 6. 19. do
become meet and fit for to be used in the Acts and Duties of Holiness, as being
made clean and sanctified unto God. (2) Hereby are they disposed and prepared
unto a blessed Resurrection at the Last Day, which shall be wrought by the
Spirit of Christ which dwelt in them and sanctified them in this Life, Romans 8.
10, 11. Phil. 3. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 4. 14, 16, 17.

Our whole Persons therefore and in them our whole Natures are the Subject of
this Work, and true Holiness invests the whole of it. Now whether this
universal Investiture of our Nature in all the Faculties and Powers of it, by a
new Principle of Holiness and Obedience unto God, whereby it is renewed unto
his Image, do belong unto that Moral Virtue which some so plead for as to
substitute it in the Room of Gospel-Holiness, they may do well to consider who
are the Patrons of that Cause. For if it does not, then does not it self belong
unto that Holiness which the Gospel teaches, requires, promises and
communicates, whatever else it be. And moreover, it is practically worthy
consideration that men deceive not themselves with a partial work in Conviction
only, or Change of the Affections also, in stead of this Evangelical
Sanctification. It is often and truly spoken unto, how men may have their
Minds enlightened, their Affections wrought upon, and their Lives much changed,
and yet come short of real Holiness. The best trial of this Work is by its
Universality with respect unto its Subject. If any thing remain unsanctified in
us sin may there set up its Throne and maintain its Sovereignty. But where this
Work is true and real however weak and imperfect it may be as unto its
Degrees, yet it possesses the whole Person, and leaves not the least hold
unto sin, wherein it does not continually combat and conflict with it. There is
saving Light in the Mind, and Life in the Will, and Love in the Affections, and
Grace in the Conscience suited to its Nature; there is nothing in us whereunto
the Power of Holiness does not reach according to its measure. Men may
therefore if they please deceive themselves by taking up with some Notions in
their Minds, some Devotions in their Affections, or some good and virtuous
Deeds in their Conversations, but Holiness does not consist therein.

And Lastly, men may hence see how vainly they excuse themselves in their Sins,
their Passions, Intemperances and the like disorders of Mind, from their
Constitutions and Inclinations; for true Sanctification reaches unto the Body
also. It is true, Grace does not so change the natural Constitution as to make
him that was sickly, healthy and strong; nor so as to make him who was
Melancholy, to be Sanguine or the like; it alters not the course of the
Blood, the animal spirits, with the Impressions they make on our Minds. But
consider these things Morally, and as the whole Person is a Principle of
Spiritual and Moral Operations, and so it does work that Change and Alteration
on the whole Person, as to cure Morally sinful distempers, as of Passion,
Elation of Mind, and Intemperancies, which men were before more than ordinarily
inclined unto by their Tempers and Constitutions. Yea from the Efficacy of it
upon our whole Persons, in the curing of such habitual inordinate and sinful
distempers, lies the principal discovery of its Truth and Reality. Let no men
therefore pretend that Grace and Holiness do not change men's Constitutions,
thereby to excuse and palliate their disorderly Passions before men, and to
keep themselves from being humbled for them before God. For although it do not
so naturally and physically, yet it does so Morally, so that the Constitution
it self shall be no more such a fomes and Incentive unto disorderly Passions,
as it has been. If Grace has not cured that Passion, Pride, Causeless Anger,
Inveterate Wrath, Intemperance, which men's Constitutions peculiarly incline
unto, I know not for my part what it has done, nor what a number of outward
Duties do signify. The Spirit and Grace of Christ causes the Wolf to dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie down with the Kid, Isa. 11. 6. It will
change the most wild and savage Natures into Meekness, Gentleness and Kindness;
Examples whereof have been multiplied in the World.

CHAP. IV. The Defilement of Sin wherein it consists, with its Purification.
(1) Purification the first proper Notion of Sanctification. (2) Institution of
Baptism confirming the same Apprehension. (3) A Spiritual Defilement and
Pollution in Sin. (4) The Nature of that Defilement, or wherein it does
consist. (5) Depravations of Nature and Acts with respect unto Gods Holiness,
How and Why called Filth and Pollution. (6) Twofold Pravity and Defilement of
Sin. Its Aggravations. We cannot purge it of our selves; nor could it be done
by the Law, nor by any Ways invented by men for that End.

Sanctification it self, in a further Explication of the Description before
given. And the first thing we ascribe unto the Spirit of God herein, which
constitutes the first part of it, is the Purifying and cleansing of our Natures
from the Pollution of Sin. Purification is the first proper Notion of internal
real Sanctification. And although in order of Time it do not precede the other
Acts and parts of this Work, yet in order of Nature it is first proposed and
apprehended. To be unclean absolutely, and to be Holy, are universally opposed.
Not to be purged from sin, is an Expression of an unholy Person, as to be
cleansed is of him that is holy. And this Purification or the effecting of this
Work of Cleansing is ascribed unto all the Causes and Means of Sanctification.
As (1) unto the Spirit who is the principal Efficient of the whole. Not that
Sanctification consists wholly herein, but firstly and necessarily it is
required thereunto; Prove. 30. 12. Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you, and you shall be clean, from all your filthiness and from all your
Idols will I cleanse you. That this sprinkling of clean Water upon us, is the
Communication of the Spirit unto us for the End designed, I have before
evinced. It has also been declared wherefore he is called Water or compared
thereunto. And the next Verse shows expressly that it is the Spirit of God
which is intended. I will put my Spirit within you and cause you to walk in my
Statutes. And that which he is thus in the first place promised for, is the
Cleansing of us from the Pollution of sin, which in order of Nature is preposed
unto his enabling us to walk in Gods Statutes, or to yield holy Obedience unto
him.

To the same purpose among many others is that Promise, Isa. 4. 4. When the
Lord shall have washed away the filth of the Daughters of Zion, and shall have
purged the blood of Jerusalem, by the Spirit of Judgment and the Spirit of
Burning. Upon what ground the Spirit is compared to Fire and thence here called
a Spirit of Burning has been also declared. In brief, Fire and Water were the
Means whereby all things were purified and cleansed Typically in the Law, Numb.
31. 23. And the Holy Spirit being the principal Efficient Cause of all
spiritual cleansing is compared to them both, by which his Work was signified,
and called by their names. See Mal. 3. 2, 3. And Judgment is frequently taken
for Holiness. The Spirit of Judgment therefore and the Spirit of Burning is the
Spirit of Sanctification and Purification. And he is here promised for the
Sanctification of the Elect of God. And how shall he effect this Work? He shall
do it in the first place by washing away their filth and purging away their
blood; that is, all their spiritual sinful Defilements.

(2) The Application of the Death and Blood of Christ unto our Souls for our
Sanctification by the Holy Ghost, is said to be for our cleansing and purging,
Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word; He gave
himself that he might redeem us from all Iniquity and purify unto himself a
peculiar people zealous of Good Works, Tit. 2. 14. For the Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all our sins, 1 John 1. 7. For he loved us and washed
us from our sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1. 5. The Blood of Jesus Christ purges
our Consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. Respect I
acknowledge in some of these places may be had unto the Expiation of the Guilt
of sin by the Blood of Christ as offered in Sacrifice, for so in himself he
purged our sins, Heb. 1. 3. But as they all suppose a Defilement in sin, so the
most of them respect its cleansing by the Application of the Virtue of the
Blood of Christ unto our Souls and Consciences in our Sanctification.

And (3) moreover where Sanctification is enjoined us as our Duty it is
prescribed under this Notion of cleansing our selves from sin. Wash you, make
you clean, Isa. 1. 16. O Jerusalem wash thine Heart from wickedness that thou
may be saved, Jer. 4. 14. Having therefore these promises let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and the spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Every man that has this hope in him purifieth
himself; 1 John 3. 3. Psalm. 119. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 20. and the like Expressions of
this Duty occur in other places.

Promises and Precepts and in the Confirmation of them we have the Institution
of the Ordinance of Baptism, the Outward way and Means of our Initiation into
the Lord Christ and the Profession of the Gospel, the great Representation of
the Inward washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. Now this Baptism in the First
place expresses the outward putting away the filth of the flesh, by external
washing with material water, 1 Pet. 3. 21. And that which answers hereunto can
be in nothing but the inward purifying of our Souls and Consciences by the
Grace of the Spirit of God; that is, says our Apostle, the putting off the
Body of the sins of the flesh, Col. 2. 11. which contains the whole Defilement
and Corruption of sin. And this also was typed out unto us by all the Legal
Purifications of Old. Wherefore we shall do three things in the Explication of
this first Branch of our Sanctification. (1) Show, That there is a spiritual
Pollution and Defilement in Sin. (2) Declare What it is, or wherein it does
consist: And (3) Manifest how it is removed or washed away, and Believers made
Holy thereby.

Divine Revelations and Expressions. And in the whole Representation made unto
us in the Scripture, of the Nature of Sin, of our Concernment therein, of the
Respect of God toward us on the Account thereof; of the Way and Means whereby
we may be delivered from it; there is nothing so much inculcated, as its being
filthy, abominable, full of defilement and pollution, which is set forth both
in the plain Expressions and various Similitudes. On the Account hereof is it
said to be abhorred of God, the abominable thing which his Soul hates, which
he cannot behold, which he cannot but hate and detest, and is compared to
Blood, Wounds, Sores, Leprosy, Scum, loathsome Diseases. With respect hereunto
is it so frequently declared that we must be washed, purged, purified,
cleansed, as in the Testimonies before cited; before we can be accepted with
him, or be brought to the Enjoyment of him. And the work of the Spirit of
Christ in the Application of his Blood unto us for the taking away of sin, is
compared to the Effects of Fire, Water, Soap, Nitre, every thing that has a
purifying cleansing Faculty in it. These things so frequently occurr in the
Scripture and Testimonies concerning them are so multiplied that it is
altogether needless to produce particular Instances. This is evident and
undeniable, that the Scripture which regulates our Conceptions about Spiritual
things, expressly declares all sin to be uncleanness, and every sinner to be
defiled thereby, and all unsanctified persons to be wholly unclean; and how far
these Expressions are Metaphorical, or wherein the Metaphor does consist, must
be afterward declared.

Besides, there is no Notion of Sin and Holiness whereof Believers have a more
sensible spiritual Experience. For although they may not, or do not comprehend
the Metaphysical Notion or Nature of this Pollution and Defilement of Sin, yet
they are sensible of the Effects it produces in their Minds and Consciences.
They find That in sin which is attended with shame and self-Abhorrency and
requires deep Abasement of Soul. They discern in it or in themselves on the
Account of it, an unsuitableness unto the Holiness of God, and an unfitness
thereon for Communion with him. Nothing do they more earnestly labor after in
their Prayers and Supplications than a cleansing from it by the Blood of
Christ; nor are any Promises more precious unto them, than those which express
their Purification and purging from it. For these are they which next unto
their Interest in the Atonement made by the Sacrifice of Christ, give them
boldness in their approaches unto God. So our Apostle fully expresses it, Heb.
10. 19, 20, 21, 22. Having therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the
Blood of Jesus, by a New and Living Way which he has consecrated for us
through the Veyl that is to say his flesh, and having an High Priest over the
House of God, let us draw near with a true Heart in full Assurance of Faith,
having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience and our Bodies washed with
pure Water. The Foundation of all our Confidence in our Access unto God, the
Right and Title we have to approach unto him is laid in the Blood of Christ,
the Sacrifice he offered, the Atonement he made, and the Remission of sins
which he obtained thereby, which Effect of it he declares, v. 19. Having
boldness by the Blood of Jesus. The way of our Access is by pleading an
Interest in his Death and Suffering, whereby an Admission and Acceptance is
consecrated for us, v. 20. by a new and living way which he has consecrated.
And our encouragement to make use of this Foundation, and to engage in this
Way, is taken from his discharge of the Office of an High Priest in our behalf.
And having an High Priest over the House of God let us draw near.

But besides all this, when we come to an Actual Address unto God, that we may
make use of the Boldness given us in the full Assurance of Faith, it is
moreover required that our hearts be sprinkled and our bodies washed; that is
that our whole Persons be purifyed from the Defilement of sin by the
Sanctification of the Spirit. And this Experience of Believers, we cannot only
oppose unto, and plead against the stupidity of such Persons by whom these
things are derided, but conclude from it, that those who are unacquainted with
it in some Degree of sincerity, are wholly uninterested in that Evangelical
Holiness which we enquire after. We need not therefore further labor in the
Confirmation of that concerning which the Testimonies of Scripture are so
multiplied, and whereof we have such undoubted Experience.

The Nature of this Defilement of Sin must be enquired into. Ans. (1) By some
it is reckoned unto Guilt. For whereas the inseparable Effects of Guilt, are
Shame and Fear, whereby it immediately evidenced it self in our first Parents,
and shame in particular is from this filth of sin, it may be esteemed an
Adjunct thereof. Hence sin was said to be purged by Sacrifices when its Guilt
was expiated: And Christ is said to purge our sins by himself, that is when he
offered himself a Sacrifice for us, Heb. 1. 3. And therefore it is granted that
so far as the Filth of sin was taken away, not by Actual Purification but by
Legal Expiation, it is sin with its Guilt that was intended. But the Scripture
as we have showed intends more hereby, even such an internal inherent
Defilement as is taken away by real actual Sanctification and no otherwise. (2)
There are some especial sins which have a peculiar Pollution and Defilement
attending them, and which thereon are usually called uncleanness in a peculiar
manner. The ground hereof is in that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 18. Flee
Fornication. Every sin that a man does is without the Body: but he that
commits Fornication sins against his own Body; All sins of that Nature
have a peculiar Defilement and filth accompanying them. And Holiness is
sometimes mentioned in an Opposition unto this especial Pollution, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
3. But yet this is not that which we enquire after, although it be included in
it, as one especial kind of it. That we now consider always inseparably
attends every sin as sin, as an Adjunct or Effect of it. It is the uncleanness
of all sin and not the sin of uncleanness which we intend. And for the
discovery of its proper Nature we may observe:

(1) That the Pollution of Sin is that Property of it whereby it is directly
opposed unto the Holiness of God, and which God expresses his Holiness to be
contrary unto. Hence he is said to be of purer eyes than to behold iniquity or
to look on evil, Hab. 1. 13. It is a thing vile and loathsome under the Eyes of
his Holiness, Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6. So speaking concerning it he uses that
pathetical Dehortation, O do not that abominable thing which my soul hates;
Jerem. 44. 4. and with respect unto his own Holiness it is, that he sets it
forth by the names of all things which are vile, filthy, loathsome, offensive,
every thing that is Abominable. It is so to him as he is infinitely Pure and
Holy in his own Nature. And that Consideration which ingenerates shame and
self-Abhorrency on the Account of the Defilement of sin, is taken peculiarly
from the Holiness of God. Hence it is that Persons are so often said to blush,
to be ashamed, to be filled with Confusion of Face, to be vile, to be Abased in
their own sight, under a Sense and Apprehension of this filth of sin.

(2) The Holiness of God is the Infinite Absolute Perfection and Rectitude of
his Nature, as the Eternal Original Cause and Pattern of Truth, Uprightness and
Rectitude in all. And this Holiness does God exert as in all he does naturally
and necessarily, so particularly in his Law, which is therefore Good, Holy and
Perfect, because it represents the Holiness of God which is impressed on it.
God might not have made any Creature nor given a Law, which are free Acts of
his Will. But on supposition he would do so, it was absolutely necessary from
his own Nature that this Law of his should be Holy. And therefore whatever is
contrary unto or different from the Law of God, is so unto and from the
Holiness of God himself. Hence it follows,

(3) That this Defilement and Pollution of Sin is that Pravity, Disorder and
shameful Crookedness that is in it, with respect unto the Holiness of God as
expressed in the Law.

Sin is either Original or Actual. Original Sin is the Habitual Inconformity of
our Natures unto the Holiness of God expressed in the Law of Creation. Actual
Sin is our Inconformity to God and his Holiness expressed in the particular
Commands of the Law: The Nature of all sin therefore consists in its Enmity,
its Inconformity to the Rule. Now this Rule, which is the Law, may be
considered two ways, which give a Two-sold respect or inseparable Consequent
or Adjunct unto every sin.

(1) As it expresses the Authority of God in its Precepts and and Sanction.
Hence Guilt inseparably follows every sin, which is the Respect it induces on
the sinner unto the Law, upon the Account of the Authority of the Lawgiver.
The Act of sin passes away, but this Guilt abides on the Person and must do
so, until the Law be satisfied and the sinner thereon absolved. This naturally
produces Fear which is the first Expression of a sense of Guilt. So Adam
expressed it upon his sin: I heard thy Voice and was afraid, Genesis 3. 10.

(2) The Law may be considered as it expresses the Holiness of God and his
Truth which it was necessary from the Nature of God that it should do. Hence
there is in sin a peculiar Inconformity to the Holiness of God, which is the
Macula, the spot, stain and filth of it, which are inseparable from it, whilst
God is Holy, unless it be purged and done away as we shall show. And this is
inseparably attended with shame which is the Expression of a sense of this
filth of sin. So Adam upon his sin had his Eyes open to see his Nakedness, and
was filled with shame. This is the Order of these things. God who is the Object
of our Obedience and Sin, is considered as the Supreme Lawgiver. On his Law he
has impressed his Authority and his Holiness. Sin with respect unto his
Authority is attended with Guilt; and this in the Conscience of the sinner
produces Fear. As it respects the Holiness of God it is attended with Filth or
uncleanness, and this produces shame. And the Ultimate Effects of it, are on
the first Account Poena Sensus, on the other Poena Damni: This therefore is the
spot, the stain, the Pollution of sin, which is purged in our Sanctification.
The perverse Disorder, and shameful Crookedness that is in sin with respect
unto the Holiness of God.

And herein there is a real filthiness, but spiritual; which is compared with
and opposed unto things materially and carnally so. Not that which goes into a
man, Meats of any sort, defile him, says our Savior, but that which comes
out of the Heart, that is spiritually with respect unto God, his Law and
Holiness. And as men are taught the Guilt of sin by their own Fear which is the
inseparable Adjunct of it, so are they taught the Filth of sin by their own
Shame which unavoidably attends it. To instruct us herein is one End of the Law
and the Gospel. For in the Renovation of the Law which was added to the Promise
because of Transgressions, Gal. 3. 19. and in the Institutions annexed unto it,
God designed to instruct us further in them both, with the Ways whereby we may
be freed from them. In the Doctrine of the Law with the Sanction and Curse of
it, and the Institution of Sacrifices to make Atonement for sin, God declared
the Nature of Guilt and its Remedy. By the same Law, and by the Institution of
sundry Ordinances for Purification and cleansing, as also by determining sundry
Ceremonial Defilements, he makes known the Nature of this Filth and its Remedy.
To what End were so many Meats and Drinks, so many Diseases and Natural
Distempers, so many external fortuitous Accidents as touching the Dead and the
like, made Religiously unclean by the Law? It was to no other but to teach us
the Nature of the spiritual Defilement of sin. And to the same End together
with a Demonstration of the Relief and Remedy thereof were the Ordinances of
Purification instituted, which as they were Outward and Carnal purged those
Uncleanness as they also were Outward and Carnal made so by the Law. But
Internal and Spiritual things were taught and presigured hereby, yea wrought
and effected by virtue of their Typical Relation to Christ as the Apostle
teaches, Heb. 9. 13, 14. For it the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the Ashes
of an Heyfer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifyeth to the purifying of the Flesh,
how much more shall the Blood of Christ purge our Consciences from dead Works
to serve the Living God. And hence the whole Work of Sanctification is
expressed by opening a Fountain for sin and for uncleanness; that is, the
purging of them away, Zech. 13. 1. So is it in the Gospel, where the Blood of
Christ is said to purge our sins with respect to Guilt, and to wash our Souls
with respect to Filth. Yea so inseparable is this Filth from sin, and Shame
from Filth, that wherever abides a sense of sin, there is a sense of this Filth
with Shame. The very Heathen who had only the workings of their own Minds and
Consciences for their Guide, were never able to quit themselves from a sense of
this Pollution of sin. And thence proceeded all those ways of Lustration,
Purgation and Cleansing, by Washings, Sacrifices and Mysterious Ceremonious
Observances which they had invented. It remains therefore only that we enquire
a little into the Reasons and Causes why this pravity of sin, and discrepancy
from the Holiness of God, is such a Defilement of our Natures, and so
inseparably attended with shame. For without the Consideration hereof, we can
never understand the true Nature of Sanctification and Holiness. And it will
also then yet further appear how openly they betray their prodigious Ignorance
of these things, who contend that all Grace consists in the Practice of Moral
Virtues. And we may to this Purpose observe,

That the Spiritual Beauty and Comeliness of the Soul consists in its
Conformity unto God. Grace gives Beauty. Hence it is said of the Lord Christ,
That he is fairer or more beautiful than the Children of Men, and that because
Grace was poured into his lips, Psalm. 45. 2. And when the Church is furnished
or adorned with his Graces, he affirms her to be Fair and Comely, Cant. 1. 5.
chap. 6. 4. chap. 7. 6. Christ by washing of it takes away its spots and
wrinkles, rendering it beautiful, that is Holy, and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.
27. And this Beauty Originally consisted in the Image of God in us, which
contained the whole Order, Harmony, and Symmetry of our Natures in all their
Faculties and Actions with respect unto God, and our utmost End. That therefore
which is contrary hereunto, as is all and every sin, has a Deformity in it, or
brings Spots, Stains and Wrinkles on the Soul. There is in sin all that is
contrary to spiritual Beauty and Comeliness, to inward Order and Glory, and
this is the Filth and Pollution of it.

(2) Holiness and Conformity to God is the Honor of our Souls. It is that
alone which makes them truly Noble. For all Honor consists in an Accession
unto Him who is the only Spring and absolute Possessour of all that is so, in
whom alone is Originally and Perfectly all Being and Substance. Now this we
have alone by Holiness, or that Image of God wherein we were created. Whatever
is contrary hereunto is base, vile and unworthy. This is sin, which is
therefore the only base thing in Nature. Hence it is said of some great Sinners
that they had debased themselves to Hell, Isa. 57. 9. This belongs to the
Pollution of Sin; that it is base, vile, unworthy, dishonouring the Soul,
filling it with shame in its self and contempt from God. And there are no
Persons who are not absolutely hardened, but are in their own Minds and
Consciences sensible of this Baseness of sin, as they are also of the Deformity
that is in it. When men's Eyes are opened to see their Nakedness, how vile and
base they have made themselves by sin, they will have a sense of this Pollution
not easily to be expressed. And from hence it is, that sin has the Propertyes
and Effects of Uncleanness in the sight of God and in the Conscience of the
sinner. God abhorrs, loathes it, accounts it an abominable thing, as that which
is directly contrary to his Holiness, which as impressed on the Law is the Rule
of Purity, Integrity, spiritual Beauty and Honor. And in the Conscience of the
sinner it is attended with Shame, as a thing deformed, loathsome, vile, base
and dishonorable. See Jer. 2. 26.

In all in whom it is, I say unless they are blind and obdurate it fills them
with shame. I speak not of such as are little or not at all spiritually
sensible of sin or any of its propertyes, who fear not because of its Guilt,
nor are disquieted by its Power, not acquainted with its Fomes or Disposition
to evil, and so not ashamed of its filth; much less of such as are given over
to all uncleanness with Delight and Greediness, wallowing in the pollution of
it like the Sow in the Mire, who not only do the things which god abhors,
but also have pleasure in them that do them. But those I intend who have the
least real Conviction of the nature and tendency of sin, who are all in one
Degree or other ashamed of it as a filthy thing. And a Casting off of outward
shame, that is so from its Object, or Shame with respect unto the Conscience
and Judgment of Humane Kind, as those do who proclaim their sins as Sodom and
hide them not, is the highest Aggravation of sinning and Contempt of God; and
the casting out of inward shame, with respect unto the Divine Omniscience, the
highest Evidence of a Reprobate Mind. But in all others who have more Light and
spiritual Sense it produces shame and self-abhorrency, which has always a
respect unto the Holiness of God, as Job 42. 5, 6. They see that in sin which
is so vile, base and filthy, and which renders them so, that like unto men
under a loathsome Disease they are not able to bear the sight of their own
sores, Psalm. 38. 5. God detesteth, abhors and turns from sin as a
loathsome thing, and Man is filled with shame for it, it is therefore filthy.
Yea no tongue can express the Sense which a Believing Soul has of the
uncleanness of sin with respect unto the Holiness of God. And this may suffice
to give a little Prospect into the Nature of this Defilement of sin, which the
Scripture so abundantly insisteth on, and which all Believers are so sensible
of.

Habitual in all the Faculties of our Souls by Nature, as they are the
Principle of our Spiritual and Moral Operations. They are all shamefully and
loathsomely depraved, out of Order, and no way correspondent unto the Holiness
of God. Hence by Nature we are wholly unclean; who can bring a clean thing out
of that which is unclean? And this uncleanness is graphically expressed under
the Similitude of a wretched polluted Infant, Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5. (2) That which
is Actual in all the Actings of our Faculties as so defiled, and as far as they
are so defiled. For 1. Be any sin of what Nature it will, there is a Pollution
attending of it. Hence the Apostle advises to cleanse our selves from all
Pollutions of Flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. The sins that are internal and
spiritual, as Pride, self-Love, Covetousness, Unbelief, have a pollution
attending them as well as those which are fleshly and sensual. 2. So far as any
thing of this Pravity or Disorder mixeth it self with the best of our Duties,
it renders both us and them unclean. Isa. 64. 6. We are all as an unclean
thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags.

(2ly,) This Uncleanness as it is Habitual, respecting our Natural Defilement,
is equal in and unto every one that is born into the World. We are by Nature
all alike polluted and that to the utmost of what our Nature is capable. But
with respect unto Actual sins it is not so. For in them it has various Degrees
and Aggravations even as many as sin it self has. (1) The Greater the sin is
from its Nature or Circumstances, the greater is the Defilement wherewith it is
attended. Hence there is no sin expressed under such Terms of filthiness and
abhorrences as Idolatry, which is the greatest of sins. See Ezekiel. 16. 36, 37.
Or, (2) There is an Aggravation of it when the whole Person is defiled, as it
is in the Case of Fornication before instanced in. (3) It is heightened by a
Continuance in sin, whereby an Addition is made to its Pollution every Day, and
which is called Wallowing in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2. 22.

I have in this whole Discourse but touched upon this Consideration of sin
which the Scripture so frequently mentions and inculcates. For as all the first
Institutions of Divine Worship recorded therein had some respect hereunto, so
the last Rejection of obstinate sinners mentioned in it is, Let him that is
filthy or unclean be filthy still, Revel. 22. 11. Neither is there any Notion
of sin whereby God would convey an Apprehension of its Nature and an Abhorrency
thereof unto our Minds and Consciences, so frequently insisted on as is this of
its Pollution. And in order to our use of it unto the Discovery of the Nature
of Holiness we may yet observe these three things. (1) Where this Uncleanness
abides unpurged there neither is nor can be any true Holiness at all, Ephesians.
4. 22, 23, 24. For it is universally opposed unto it, it is our unholiness.
Where therefore it is absolute and purified in no Measure or Degree, there is
no Work of Sanctification, no Holiness so much as begun. For in the purging
hereof, it makes its entrance upon the Soul, and its Effects therein is the
first Beginning of Holiness in us. I acknowledge that it is not in any at once
absolutely and perfectly taken away in this World. For the Work of purging it
is a continued Act commensurate unto the whole Work of our Sanctification. And
therefore they who are truly sanctified and Holy, are yet deeply sensible of
the Remainder of it in themselves, do greatly bewayl it, and earnestly
endeavor after the removal of it. But there is an initial, real, sincere, and
(as to all the Faculties of the Soul) universal purging of it which belongs to
the Nature and Essence of Holiness, begun and carried on though not absolutely
perfected in this Life. And men who pretend unto a Grace and Holiness that
should consist in Moral Virtue only, without a supposition of and respect unto
the Purification of this Pollution of sin, do but deceive their own Souls and
others, so far as any are forsaken of God to give credit unto them. The Virtues
of men not purged from the Uncleanness of their Natures, are an Abomination to
the Lord, Tit. 1. 15. (2) Unless this uncleanness of sin be purged and washed
away, we can never come unto the Enjoyment of God. Nothing that defiles shall
in any wise enter into the New Jerusalem, Revel. 21. 27. To suppose that an
Unpurified Sinner can be brought unto the blessed Enjoyment of God, is to
overthrow both the Law and the Gospel, and to say that Christ dyed in vain. It
is therefore of the same importance with the Everlasting Salvation of our
Souls, to have them purged from sin. (3) We are not able of our selves without
the especial Aid Assistance and Operation of the Spirit of God, in any Measure
or Degree to free our selves from this Pollution neither that which is Natural
and Habitual, nor that which is Actual. It is true, it is frequently prescribed
unto us as our Duty. We are commanded to Wash our selves, to Cleanse our selves
from sin, to Purge our selves from all our Iniquities and the like, frequently.
But to suppose that whatever God requires of us, that we have Power of our
selves to do, is to make the Cross and Grace of Jesus Christ of none Effect.
Our Duty is our Duty constituted unalterably by the Law of God, whether we have
power to perform it or no, seeing we had so at our first Obligation by and unto
the Law, which God is not obliged to bend unto a conformity to our Warpings,
nor to suit unto our sinful Weaknesses. Whatever therefore God works in us
in a Way of Grace he prescribes unto us in a Way of Duty, and that because
although he do it in us, yet he also does it by us, so as that the same Work is
an Act of his Spirit and of our Wills as acted thereby. Of our selves therefore
we are not able by any endeavors of our own, nor ways of our own finding out,
to cleanse our selves from the Defilement of sin. If I be wicked, says Job,
why then labor I in vain? if I wash my self with Snow-water, and make my hand
never so clean, yet shall thou plunge me in the Ditch, and mine own Clothes
shall make me to be abhorred, Chap. 9. 29, 30, 31. There may be Ways and Means
used whereby an Appearance of Washing and Cleansing may be made. But when
things come to be tried in the sight of God, all will be found filthy and
unclean. In vain says the Prophet shall thou take to thy self Soap and much
Nitre, thou shall not be purged, Jer. 2. 22. The most probable means of
Cleansing, and the most effectual in our Judgment however multiplied shall
fail in this Case. Some speak much of washing away their sins by the Tears of
Repentance. But Repentance as prescribed in the Scripture is of another Nature
and Assigned unto another End. And for men's Tears in this matter they are but
Soap and Nitre which howsoever multiplied will not produce the Effect intended.
And therefore does God in places of Scripture innumerable take this to himself
as the immediate Effect of his Spirit and Grace, namely to cleanse us from our
Sins and our Iniquities. (4) The Institutions of the Law for this End to purge
Uncleanness could not of themselves reach thereunto. They did indeed purify
the unclean Legally, and sanctified persons as to the purifying of the flesh,
Heb. 9. 13. so that they should not on their account be separated from their
Privileges in the Congregation and the Worship of God. But of themselves they
could go no further, Heb. 10. 2. only they did Typifie and signify that
whereby sin was really cleansed. But the real stain is too deep to be taken
away by any outward Ordinances or Institutions. And therefore God as it were
rejecting them all, promises to open another Fountain to that purpose, Zech.
13. 1. Wherefore,

(5) There is a great Emptiness and Vanity in all those Aids and Reliefs which
the Papal Church has invented in this Case. Sensible they are of the spot and
stain that accompanyes sin, of its Pollution and Defilement, which none can
avoid the Conscience of who are not utterly hardened and blinded. But they are
ignorant of the true and only Means and Remedy thereof. And therefore as in the
Work of Justification being ignorant of the Righteousness of God, and going
about to establish their own Righteousness, they submit not themselves to the
Righteousness of God, as the Apostle spoke of their predecessors; so in the
Work of Sanctification being ignorant of the Ways of the working of the Spirit
of Grace and Efficacy of the Blood of Christ, they go about to set up their own
Imaginations, and submit not themselves unto a Compliance with the Grace of
God. Thus in the first place they would, at least the most of them would, have
the whole uncleanness of our Natures to be washed away by Baptism, Virtute
Operis operati. The Ordinance being administered without any more to do; or any
previous Qualifications of the Person internal or external the filth of
Original Sin is washed away; though it fell not out so with Simon Magus who
notwithstanding he were baptized by Philip the Evangelist, and that upon his
visible Profession and Confession, yet continued in the Call of Bitterness and
Bond of Iniquity, and was therefore certainly not cleansed from his sins. But
there is a cleansing in Profession and Signification, and there is a Cleansing
in the Reality of Sanctification. The former does accompany Baptism when it is
rightly administered. With respect hereunto are men said to be purged from their
old sins, that is to have made a Profession and have had a fair Representation
thereof in being made partakers of the outward sign of it; 2 Pet. 1. 9. as also
to escape the Pollutions of the World, and the Lusts of the flesh; Chap. 2. 18,
20. But all this may be, and yet sin not be really purged: For not only the
Outward Washing of Regeneration in the Pledge of it, but the Internal
Renovation of the Holy Ghost is required thereunto. Tit. 3. 5. But having thus
shifted themselves of the Filth of Original sin as easily as a man may put off
his Clothes when they are foul, they have found out many ways whereby the
ensuing Defilements that attend Actual sins may be purged or done away. There
is the sprinkling of Holy Water, Confession to a Priest, Penances, in Fasting
and some other Abstinences that are supposed to be of wonderful virtue to this
End and Purpose. And I do acknowledge that the one Art of Confession is really
the greatest Invention to accommodate the Inclinations of all Flesh, that ever
this World was acquainted withal. For as nothing is so suited unto all the
Carnal Interests of the Priests be they what they will, nor so secures them a
Veneration in the midst of their Looseness and worthless Conversation; so for
the People, who for the most part have other Business to do than long to
trouble themselves about their sins, or find it uneasy to be conversant about
their Guilt and the Consequences of it in their Minds, it is such an expedite
Course of absolute Exoneration that they may be free for other sins or
Businesses, to deposite them wholly and safely with a Priest, that nothing
equal unto it could ever have been invented. For the Real Way of dealing with
God by Jesus Christ in these things, with Endeavors of a Participation in the
Sanctifying Cleansing Work of the Holy Ghost is long, and very irksome to Flesh
and Blood, besides that it is intricate and foolish unto Natural Darkness and
Unbelief. But yet so falls out, that after all these Inventions they can come
to no perfect Rest or Satisfaction in their own Minds. They cannot but find by
Experience that their Sores sometimes break forth through all these sorry
Coverings unto their Annoyance; and their Defilements yet fill them with Shame
as well as the Guilt of sin does with Fear. Wherefore they betake themselves to
their Sheat-Anchor in this storm, in the Relief which they have provided in
another World; when, let men find themselves never so much mistaken they cannot
complain of their disappointments. This is in their Purgatory, whereunto they
must trust at last for the cancelling of all their odd scores, and Purging away
that filth of sin which they have been unwilling to part withal in this World.
But as this whole Business of Purgatory is a groundless Fable, an Invention set
up in competition with, and opposition unto the Sanctification of the Spirit
and Cleansing Virtue of the Blood of Christ, as a matter of unspeakable more
Profit and Secular Advantage unto those who have its mannagement committed unto
them; so it is as great an Encouragement unto Unholiness and a continuance in
Sin, for those who believe it, and at the same time love the Pleasures of sin,
which are the Generality of their Church, as ever was or can be found out or
made use of. For, to come with a plain downright Disswasure from Holiness and
Encouragement unto Sin, is a Design that would absolutely defeat it self, nor
is capable of making Impressions on them who retain the Notion of a Difference
between Good and Evil. But this Side-wind, that at once pretends to relieve men
from the Filth of sin, and keeps them from the only Ways and Means whereby it
may be cleansed, insensibly leads them into a quiet pursuit of their Lusts
under an Expectation of Relief when all is past and done. Wherefore setting
aside such vain Imaginations, we may enquire into the true Causes and Ways of
our Purification from the Uncleanness of sin described, wherein the First part
of our Sanctification and the Foundation of our Holiness does consist.

CHAP. V. The Filth of Sin purged by the Spirit and Blood of Christ.
(1) Purification of the Filth of sin, the first part of Sanctification, how it
is effected. (2) The Work of the Spirit therein. (3) Efficacy of the Blood of
Christ to that Purpose. (4) The Blood of his Sacrifice intended. (5) How that
Blood cleanses Sin. Application unto it, and Application of it by the Spirit.
(6) Wherein that Application consists. (7, 8, 9.) Faith the Instrumental Cause
of our Purification, with the use of Afflictions to the same purpose. Necessity
of a Due Consideration of the Pollution of Sin. (10) Considerations of the
Pollution and Purification of Sin practically improved. (11) Various Directions
for a due Application unto the Blood of Christ for Cleansing. (12) Sundry
Degrees of Shamelesness in Sinning. (13) Directions for the Cleansing of Sin
continued. (14) Thankefulness for the Cleansing of Sin. (15) With other Uses of
the same Consideration. (16) Union with Christ how consistent with the
Remainders of Sin. (17) From all that, Differences between Evangelical Holiness
and the Old Nature asserted.

purging of the Souls of them that Believe from the Defilements of Sin, is in
the Scripture assigned unto several Causes of different Kinds. For the Holy
Spirit, the Blood of Christ, Faith and Afflictions, are all said to cleanse us
from our sins but in several Ways and with distinct Kinds of Efficacy. The
Holy Spirit is said to do it as the principal Efficient Cause; The Blood of
Christ as the Meritorious procuring Cause; Faith and Affliction as the
Instrumental Causes; the one Direct and Internal, the other External and
Occasional.

Spirit of God communicated unto us, has been before in General confirmed by
many Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures. And we may gather also from what has
been spoken wherein this Work of his does consist. For whereas the Spring and
Fountain of all the Pollution of Sin lies in the Depravation of the Faculties
of our Natures which ensued on the Loss of the Image of God, he renews them
again by his Grace. Tit. 3. 5. Our want of due answering unto the Holiness of
God as represented in the Law, and exemplified in our Hearts Originally, is a
principal Part and universal Cause of our whole Pollution and Defilement by
sin. For when our Eyes are opened to discern it, this is that which in the
first place fills us with shame and self-Abhorrency, and that which makes us
so unacceptable yea so loathsome to God. Who is there who considers aright
the Vanity, Darkness and Ignorance of his Mind, the Perverseness and
Stubbornness of his Will, with the Disorder Irregularity and Distemper of his
Affections with respect unto things Spiritual and Heavenly, who is not ashamed
of, who does not abhor himself? This is that which has given our Nature its
Leprosy and defiled it throughout. And I shall crave leave to say, that he who
has no Experience of Spiritual shame and self-Abhorrency upon the Account of
this Inconformity of his Nature and the Faculties of his Soul unto the Holiness
of God, is a great stranger unto this whole Work of Sanctification. Who is
there that can recount the Unsteadiness of his Mind in Holy Meditation, his Low
and unbecoming Conceptions of Gods Excellencies, his Proneness to foolish
Imaginations and Vanities that Profit not, his Aversation to Spirituality in
Duty and fixedness in Communion with God, his Proneness to things Sensual and
Evil, all arising from the spiritual Irregularity of of our Natural Facultyes,
but if ever he had any due Apprehensions of Divine Purity and Holiness, that is
not sensible of his own Vileness and Baseness, and is not oft-times deeply
affected with shame thereon? Now this whole Evil Frame is cured by the
effectual working of the Holy Ghost in the rectfying and Renovation of our
Natures. He gives a New Understanding, a New Heart, New Affections, renewing
the whole Soul into the Image of God, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10. The way
whereby he does this has been before so fully declared in our opening of the
Doctrine of Regeneration, that it need not be here repeated. Indeed our
Original Cleansing is therein, where mention is made of the Washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. Therein is the Image of God restored unto our Souls.
But we consider the same Work now as it is the Cause of our Holiness. Look then
how far our Minds, our Hearts, our Affections are renewed by the Holy Ghost, so
far are we cleansed from our spiritual habitual Pollution. Would we be cleansed
from our Sins, that which is so frequently promised that we shall be, and so
frequently prescribed as our Duty to be, and without which we neither have nor
can have any thing of true Holiness in us, we must labor after and endeavor
to grow in this Renovation of our Natures by the Holy Ghost. The more we have
of saving Light in our Minds, of Heavenly Love in our Wills and Affections, of
a constant Readiness unto Obedience in our Hearts; the more Pure are we, the
more cleansed from the Pollution of sin. The Old Principle of Corrupted Nature
is unclean and defiling, shameful and loathsome. The New Creature, the
Principle of Grace implanted in the whole Soul by the Holy Ghost is Pure and
purifying, Clean and Holy.

2ly, The Holy Ghost does Purify and Cleanse us by strengthening our Souls by
his Grace unto all Holy Duties, and against all Actual sins. It is by Actual
Sins that our Natural and Habitual Pollution is increased. Hereby some make
themselves base and vile as Hell. But this also is prevented by the Gracious
Actings of the Spirit. Having given us a Principle of Purity and Holiness, he
so acts it in Duties of Obedience and in Opposition unto Sin, as that he
preserves the Soul free from Defilements, or Pure and Holy according to the
Tenor of the New Covenant, that is in such Measure and to such a Degree as
Universal Sincerity does require. But it may be yet said, that indeed hereby he
makes us Pure, and prevents many future Defilements, yet how is Soul freed from
those it had contracted before this work upon it, or those which it may and
does unavoidably afterward fall into; for as there is no man does good and
sins not, so there is none who is not more or less defiled with Sin, whilst
they are in the Body here in this World. The Apostle answers this Objection
or Enquiry, 1 John 1. 7, 8, 9. If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves
and the Truth is not in us. But if Sin be in us we are defiled, and how shall
we be Cleansed? God is just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. But how may this be done, by what means may it be
accomplished? The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.

Blood of Christ in the Second place which is the Meritorious procuring, and so
the Effective Cause that immediately purges us from our sins, by an especial
Application of it unto our Souls the Holy Ghost. And there is not any Truth
belonging unto the Mystery of the Gospel which is more plainly and evidently
asserted, as has in part been made to appear before. The Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. He has washed us from our sins in his
own Blood, Revel. 1. 5. The Blood of Christ purges our Consciences from dead
Works that we may serve the Living God, Heb. 9. 14. He gave himself for his
Church that he might wash and cleanse it, Ephesians. 5. 26. To Purify to himself a
peculiar People, Tit. 2. 14. Besides, whatever is spoken in the whole Scripture
concerning purifying the Unclean, the Leprous, the Defiled, by Sacrifices or
other Institutions of the Old Testament, it is all Instructive in and Directive
unto the Purifying Nature of the Blood of Christ, from whence alone these
Institutions had their Efficacy; and the Virtue of it is promised under that
Notion, Zech. 13. 1. And this the Faith and Experience of all Believers does
confirm; for they are no Imaginations of their own, but what being built on the
Truth and Promises of God, yield sensible Spiritual Relief and Refreshment unto
their Souls. This they believe, this they pray for, and find the Fruits and
Effects of it in themselves. It may be some of them do not, it may be few of
them do comprehend distinctly the Way whereby, and the Manner how the Blood of
Christ so long since shed and offered, should cleanse them now from their sins.
But the Thing it self they do believe as it is revealed, and find the use of it
in all wherein they have to do with God. And I must say, (let Profane and
Ignorant Persons, whilst they please, deride what they understand not, nor are
able to disprove) that the Holy Spirit of God which leads Believers into all
Truth and enableth them to pray according to the Mind and Will of God, does
guide them in and by the working and Experience of Faith to pray for those
things the depths of whose Mysteries they cannot comprehend. And he who well
studyeth the things which he is Taught of the Spirit to ask of God, will find a
Door opened into much spiritual Wisdom and Knowledge. For (let the World rage
on) in those Prayers which Believers are taught, and enabled unto by the Holy
Ghost helping of them as a Spirit of Supplications, there are Two things
inexpressible. (1) The Inward Laboring and Spiritual Working of the Sanctified
Heart and Affections toward God, wherein consist those Sighs and Groans that
cannot be uttered. Romans 8. 26. God alone sees and knows and understands the
fervent Workings of the New Creature when acted by the Holy Ghost in
Supplications. And so it is added in the next words, Verse. 27. An he who
searches the Hearts knows (...), what is the meaning of the Spirit, what it
savours and inclines unto. It is not any distinct or separate Acting of the
Spirit by himself that is intended, but what and how he works in the Hearts of
Believers as he is a Spirit of Grace and Supplication. And this is known only
unto him who is the Searcher of Hearts, and as he is so. And he knows what is
the bent, frame, inclination and acting of the Inward Man in Prayer from the
Power of the Spirit, which they themselves in whom they are wrought do not
fathom nor reach the Depth of. This he does in the Subject of Prayer, the
Hearts and Minds of Believers, the Effects of his Operation in them are
inexpressible. (2) As to the Object of Prayer or things prayed for, he does in
and by the Word so represent and exhibit the Truth, Reality, Subsistence, Power
and Efficacy of spiritual Mysterious things unto the Faith and Affections of
Believers, that they have a real and Experimental sense of, do mix Faith with,
and are affected by those things now made nigh, now realized unto them, which
it may be they are not able Doctrinally and distinctly to explain in their
proper Notions. And thus do we oft-times see Men low and weak in their Notional
Apprehension of things, yet in their Prayers led into Communion with God in the
Highest and Holiest Mysteries of his Grace, having an Experience of the Life
and Power of the Things themselves in their own Hearts and Souls. And hereby do
their Faith, Love, Affiance and Adherence unto God, act and Exercise
themselves. So is it with them in this matter of the actual present purifying
of the Pollutions of sin by the Blood of Jesus Christ, the Way whereof we shall
now briefly enquire into.

Blood of Christ herein, is intended the Blood of his Sacrifice, with the Power
Virtue and Efficacy thereof. And the Blood of a Sacrifice fell under a double
Consideration. (1) As it was offered unto God to make Atonement and
Reconciliation: (2) As it was sprinkled on other things for their Purging and
Sanctification. Part of the Blood in every Propitiatory Sacrifice was still to
be sprinkled round about the Altar, Levit. 1. 11. And in the Great Sacrifice of
Expiation, some of the Blood of the Bullock was to be sprinkled before the
Mercy-seat seven time; Levit. 16. 14. This our Apostle fully expresses in a
great and signal Instance, Heb. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22. For when Moses had spoken
every Precept to all the People according to the Law, he took the Blood of
Calves and of Goats, with Water and Scarletwooll and Hyssop, and sprinkled both
the Book and all the People, saying This is the Blood of the Testament which he
has enjoined unto you, and almost all things are by the Law purged with Blood.
Wherefore the Blood of Christ as it was the Blood of his Sacrifice has these
two Effects, and falls under this double Consideration. (1) As he offered
himself by the Eternal Spirit unto God to make Atonement for Sin, and procure
Eternal Redemption. (2) As it is sprinkled by the same Spirit on the
Consciences of Believers to purge them from Dead works, as v. 12, 13, 14. And
hence it is called with respect unto our Sanctification the Blood of
Sprinkling, Heb. 12. 24. For we have the Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience through the sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 2.

2. The Blood of Christ in his Sacrifice is still always and continually in
the same Condition, of the same Force and Efficacy as it was in that hour
wherein it was shed. The Blood of other Sacrifices was always to be used
immediately upon its Effusion; for if it were Cold and congealed, it was of no
Use to be offered or to be sprinkled; Levit. 17. 11. Blood was appointed to
make Atonement as the Life or Animal Spirits were in it. But the Blood of the
Sacrifice of Christ is always hot and warm, having the same Spirits of Life
and Sanctification still moving in it. Hence the Way of approach which we have
to God thereby is said to be (...), Heb. 10. 20; always Living, and yet
always as Newly slain. Every one therefore who at any Time has an especial
actual Interest in the Blood of Christ as Sacrificed, has as real a
Purification from the Defilement of sin as he had Typically who stood by the
Priest and had Blood or Water sprinkled on him. For the Holy Ghost diligently
declares that whatever was done Legally, Carnally or Typically, by any of the
Sacrifices of Old at any time as to the Expiation or Purification of sin, that
was all done really and Spiritually by that one Sacrifice, that is the Offering
and Sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, and abides to be so done continually.
To this Purpose is the Substance of our Apostles Discourse in the Ninth and
Tenth Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews. And they had Various sorts of
Sacrifices wherein to this End the Blood of them was sprinkled, they being
Propitiatory in their Offering. As (1) There was the (...) or continual
Burnt-Offering of a Lamb or Kid for the whole Congregation Morning and Evening,
whose Blood was sprinkled as at other Times. And hereby the Habitual
Purification of the Congregation, that they might be Holy to the Lord, and
their Cleansing from the daily incursions of secret and unknown sins was
signified and carried on. (2) On the Sabbath Day this Juge Sacrificium was
doubled Morning and Evening, denoting a Peculiar and abounding Communication of
Mercy and purging Grace through the Administration of Instituted Ordinances on
that Day. (3) There was the Great Annual Sacrifice at the Feast of Expiation,
when by the Sacrifice of the Sin-Offering and the Scapegoat the whole
Congregation were purged from all their known and great sins, and recovered
into a state of Legal Holiness. And other stated Sacrifices there were. (4)
There were Occasional Sacrifices for every one according as he found his
Condition to require. For those who were Clean one Day, yea one Hour, might by
some Miscarriage or surprizal be Unclean the next; but there was a Way
continually ready for any Man's Purification, by his Offering unto that
Purpose. Now the Blood of Christ must continually and upon all Occasions answer
unto all these, and accomplish Spiritually what they did Legally effect and
Typically represent. This our Apostle asserts and proves; Heb. 1. v. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. Thereby is the gradual carrying on of our Sanctification habitually
effected, which was signified by the continual Daily Sacrifice. From thence is
especial Cleansing Virtue communicated unto us by the Ordinances of the Gospel,
as is expressly affirmed, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. denoted by the doubling of the
Daily Sacrifice on the Sabbath. By it are we purged from all our sins whatever,
great or small, as was typified in the Great Sacrifice on the Day of Expiation.
And unto him have we continual recourse upon all Occassions of our spiritual
Defilements whatever. So was his Blood as to its purifying Virtue to answer and
accomplish all Legal Institutions. Especially it does so that of the Ashes of
the red Heyfer, Numb. 19. which was a standing Ordinance whereby every one who
was any way defiled might immediately be cleansed: And he who would not make
Application thereunto was to be cut off from the People, v. 20. And it is no
otherwise with respect unto the Blood of Christ, in our Spiritual Defilements;
Thence is it called a Fountain opened for sin and uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1. And
he who neglects to make Application thereunto, shall perish in his Uncleanness
and that Eternally.

Blood of Christ thus Cleanse us from our sins, or what it is that is done
thereby. (2) How we come to be made Partakers of the Benefit thereof, or come
to be interested therein.

As to the First, it must be observed what has been declared before, that the
Uncleanness we Treat of is not Physical or Corporeal, but Moral and Spiritual
only. It is the Inconformity of Sin unto the Holiness of God as represented in
the Law, whence it is Loathsome to God, and attended with Shame in us. Now
wherever there is an Interest obtained in the Purifying Virtue of the Blood of
Christ, it does (by the Will, Law Appointment of God) do these two Things. 1.
It takes away all loathsomeness in the sight of God, not from sin in the
Abstract, but from the Sinner; so that he shall be as one absolutely washed and
purified before him. See Isa. 1. 16, 18. Psalm. 51. 7. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. 2.
It takes away shame out of the Conscience, and gives the Soul Boldness in the
presence of God, Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. When these things are done, then is
sin purged and our Souls are cleansed.

(2ly,) It may be enquired, How we are to apply our selves unto the Blood of
Christ for our Purification, or how we may come continually to partake of the
Virtue of it as it is sprinkled unto that Purpose. Now because what we do
herein is wrought in us by the Spirit of God, my Principal Design being to
declare his Work in our Sanctification, I shall at once declare both his Work
and our Duty in the following Instances.

1. It is he who discovers unto us and spiritually convinces us of the
Pollution of Sin, and of our Defilements thereby. Something indeed of this Kind
will be wrought by the Power of Natural Conscience awakened and excited by
Ordinary outward Means of Conviction. For wherever there is a sense of Guilt
there will be in some kind a sense of Filth; as Fear and Shame are inseparable.
But this sense alone will never guide us to the Blood of Christ for Cleansing.
Such a sight and Conviction of it as fill us with self-Abhorrency and
Abasement, as may cause us to loath our selves for the Abomination that is in
it, is required of us. And this is the Work of the Holy Ghost belonging to that
peculiar Conviction of sin which is from him alone. Joh. 16. 8. I mean, that
self-abhorrency, shame and Confusion of Face with respect unto the Filth of
sin, which is so often mentioned in the Scripture as a Gracious Duty, as
nothing is an higher Aggravavation of sin than for men to carry themselves with
a Carnal Boldness with God and in his Worship, whilst they are unpurged from
their Defilements. In a sense hereof the Publican stood afar off as one
ashamed, and destitute any Confidence for a nearer Approach. So the Holy Men of
Old professed to God, that they blushed and were ashamed to lift up their Faces
unto him. Without this Preparation whereby we come to know the Plague of our
own Hearts, the Infection of our Leprosy, the Defilement of our Souls, we
shall never make Application unto the Blood of Christ for Cleansing in a due
Manner. This therefore in the First place is required of us, as the First Part
of our Duty, and First Work of the Holy Ghost herein.

2. The Holy Ghost proposes declares and presents unto us the only true
Remedy, the only Means of Purification. When Ephraim saw his sickness and Judah
his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian and sent to King Jareb, yet would
he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound, Hos. 5. 13. When men begin to
discern their Defilements they are apt to think of many Ways for their
purging. What false Ways have been invented to this Purpose has been before
declared; and every one is ready to find out a Way of his own; every one will
apply his own Soap and his own Nitre. Though the only Fountain for Cleansing be
nigh unto us, yet we cannot see it until the Holy Ghost open our Eyes as he
did the Eyes of Hagar; He it is who shows it unto us, and leads us unto it.
This is an Eminent Part of his office and Work. The principal End of his
sending and consequently of his whole Work was to Glorify the Son; as the End
and Work of the Son was to Glorify the Father. And the great Way whereby he
Glorifieth Christ is by showing such things unto us, Joh. 16. 14. And without
his Discovery we can know nothing of Christ, nor of the things of Christ; for
he is not sent in vain to show us the things that we can see of our selves. And
what is more so of Christ than his Blood and its Efficacy for the purging of
our sins? We never therefore discern it spiritually and in a due Manner but by
him. To have a true spiritual sense of the Defilement of Sin, and a gracious
View of the Cleansing Virtue of the Blood of Christ, is an eminent Effect of
the Spirit of Grace. Something like it there may be in the Workings of an
awakened Natural Conscience, with some Beams of outward Gospel Light falling on
it: But there is nothing in it of the Work of the Spirit. This therefore
Secondly we must endeavor after if we intend to be cleansed by the Blood of
Christ.

3. It is he who works Faith in us, whereby we are actually interested in the
purifying Virtue of the Blood of Christ. By Faith we receive Christ himself,
and by Faith do we receive all the Benefits of his Mediation, that is, as they
are tendered unto us in the Promises of God. He is our Propitiation through
Faith in his Blood as offered; and he is our Sanctification through Faith in
his Blood as sprinkled. And particular acting of Faith on the Blood of Christ,
for the cleansing of the Soul from sin, is required of us. A renewed Conscience
is sensible of a Pollution in every sin, and is not freed from the shame of it
without a particular Application unto the Blood of Christ. It comes by Faith to
the Fountain set open for sin and Uncleanness, as the sick man to the Pool of
Healing Waters, and waits for a season to be cleansed in it. So David on the
Defilement he had contracted by his great sins, addresseth himself unto God
with that Prayer, Purge me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean, wash me and I
shall be whiter than snow; Psalm. 51. 7. He alludeth unto the purging of the
Leprous person, the Ordinance whereof is Instituted, Levit. 14. 5, 6, 7; or
that more general Institution for the Purification of all Legal Uncleanness, by
the Water of Separation made of the Ashes of red Heyfer, Numb. 19. 4, 5, 6.
which our Apostle has respect unto, Heb. 9. 14. For both these Purifications
were made by the Sprinkling of Blood or Water with Hyssop. It is plain I say he
alludeth unto these Institutions, but it is as plain they are not the things
which he intends. For there was not in the Law any purging by Hyssop for
Persons guilty of such sins as he lay under. And therefore he professes in the
close of the Psalm, that Sacrifice and Burnt-Offering god would not accept, in
his Case, v. 16. It was therefore that which was signified by those
Institutions which he made his Application unto; namely, really to the Blood of
Christ, by which he might be Justified from all things, from which he could not
be Justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13. 39. and so likewise purifyed. In
like manner do all Believers make an actual Application unto the Blood of
Christ for the purging away of their sins, which until it is done they have a
Conscience of sin, that is condemning them for sin, and filling them with Shame
and Fear, Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3.

Application by Faith unto the Blood of Christ for Cleansing, the Mystery
whereof is scorned by many as a thing Fanatical and unintelligible, consists in
these Four things. (1) A spiritual View and Due Consideration of the Blood of
Christ in his Sacrifice, as proposed in the Promises of the Gospel for our
Cleansing and Purification. Look unto me, says he, and be saved, Isa, 45. 22.
which respects the whole Work of our Salvation and all the Means thereof. Our
way of coming unto our Interest therein is by Looking to him, namely as he is
proposed unto us in the Promise of the Gospel. For as the Serpent was lifted up
by Moses in the Wilderness, so was he in his Sacrifice on the Cross lifted up,
Joh. 3. 14. And so in the Gospel is he represented unto us, Gal. 3. 1. And the
Means whereby they were healed in the Wilderness, was by looking unto the
Serpent that was lifted up. Herein then does Faith first Act it self, by a
spiritual View and due Consideration of the Blood of Christ, as proposed unto
us in the Gospel for the only Means of our Purification. And the more we abide
in this Contemplation, the more Effectual will our success be in our
Application thereto. (2) Faith actually relyeth on his Blood, for the real
effecting of the great Work and End for which it is proposed unto us. For God
sets him forth, as to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood as offered,
Romans 3. 25. so to be our Sanctification through Faith in his Blood as
sprinkled. And the Establishing of this especial Faith in our Souls is that
which the Apostle aims at in his excellent Reasoning, Heb. 9. 13, 14. And his
Conclusion unto that Purpose is so evident, that he encourages us thereon to
draw nigh in the full Assurance of Faith, Heb. 10. 22. (3) Faith works herein
by Fervent Prayer, as it does in its whole Address unto God, with Respect unto
his Promises; because for all these things God will be sought unto by the House
of Israel. By this Means the Soul brings it self nigh unto its own Mercy. And
this we are directed unto Heb. 4. 15, 16. (4) An Acquiescency in the Truth and
Faithfulness of God, for Cleansing by the Blood of Christ, whence we are freed
from discouraging perplexing shame, and have Boldness in the Presence of God.

4. The Holy Ghost actually Communicates the cleansing Purifying Virtue of the
Blood of Christ unto our Souls and Consciences, whereby we are freed from shame
and have Boldness toward God. For the whole work of the Application of the
Benefits of the Mediation of Christ unto Believers, is his properly. And these
are the things which Believers aim at and intend in all their servent
Supplications for the Purifying and Cleansing of their Souls by the sprinkling
and washing of the Blood of Christ; the Faith and Persuasion whereof give them
Peace and Holy Boldness in the presence of God, without which they can have
nothing but shame and Confusion of Face in a sense of their own Pollutions.

Meritorious Cause of our Purification as it was offered, in that thereby he
procured for us Eternal Redemption, with all that was conducing or needful
thereunto, and how thereby he Expiated our sins, belongs not unto this place to
declare. Nor shall I insist upon the more mysterious Way of Communicating
cleansing Virtue unto us from the Blood of Christ, by Virtue of our Union with
him. What has been spoken may suffice to give a little insight into that
Influence which the Blood of Christ has into this first part of our
Sanctification and Holiness. And as for those who affirm, that it no otherwise
cleanses us from our sins, but only because we Believing his Doctrine
confirmed by his Death and Resurrection, do amend our Lives, turning from Sin
unto Righteousness and Holiness, they renounce the Mystery of the Gospel, and
all the proper Efficacy of the Blood of Christ.

Faith is the Instrumental Cause of our Purification. Purifying their Hearts by
Faith, Acts 15. 9. The two unfailing Evidences of sincere Faith are, that
within it purifyeth the Heart, and without it works by Love. These are the
Touchstone whereon Faith may, yea ought to be tried. We purify our Souls in
obeying the Truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1. 20. That is, by Believing which
is our Original Obedience unto the Truth. And hereby are our Souls purified:
Unbelievers and Unclean are the same. Tit. 1. 15. For they have nothing in them
whereby they might be Instrumentally cleansed. And we are Purified by Faith.
Because (1) Faith it self is the principal Grace whereby our Nature is restored
unto the Image of God, and so freed from our Original Defilement; Col. 3. 10.
Joh. 17. 3. (2) It is by Faith on our part whereby we receive the Purifying
Virtue and Influences of the Blood of Christ whereof we have before Discoursed.
Faith is the Grace whereby we constantly adhere and cleave unto Christ. Deuteronomy.
4. 4. Josh. 23. 8. Acts 11. 10. And if the Woman who touched his Garment in
Faith, obtained Virtue from him to heal her Issue of Blood, shall not those who
cleave unto him continually derive Virtue from him for the healing of their
spiritual Defilements. (3) It is by the Working of Faith principally, whereby
those Lusts and Corruptions which are Defiling, are mortified, subdued, and
gradually wrought out of our Minds. All actual Defilements spring from the
Remainders of defiling Lusts, and their depraved Workings in us, Heb. 12. 15.
Jam. 1. 14. How Faith works to the correcting and subduing of them, by
deriving supplies of the Spirit and Grace to that End from Jesus Christ, as
being the Means of our abiding in him whereon alone those supplies do depend,
Joh. 15. 3, 4, 5. as also by the Acting of all other Graces which are contrary
to the Polluting Lusts of the Flesh and destructive of them, is usually
declared, and we must not too far enlarge on these things. (4) Faith takes in
all the Motives which are proposed unto us, to stir us up unto our utmost
Endeavors and Diligence in the use of all Means and Ways for the preventing
of the Defilements of sin, and for the Cleansing our Minds and Consciences from
the Relicts of Dead Works. And these Motives which are great and many may be
reduced unto Two Heads: (1) A Participation of the Excellent Promises of God at
the Present; the Consideration hereof brings a singular Enforcement on the
Souls of Believers to endeavor after universal Purity and Holiness, 2 Cor. 7.
1. And (2) the future Enjoyment of God in Glory, whereunto we cannot attain
without being purifyed from sin, 1 John 3. 1. Now these Motives which are the
Springs of our Duty in this Matter, are received and made Efficacious by Faith
only.

Afflictions of all sorts. Hence they are called Gods Furnace, and his
Fining-Pot, Isa. 31. 9. Chap. 48. 10. whereby he takes away the Dross and
Filth of the Vessels of his House. They are called Fire that tries the Ways
and Works of Men, consuming their Hay and Stubble, and purifying their Gold and
Silver, 1 Cor. 3. 13. And this they do through an Efficacy unto the Ends
communicated unto them, in the design and by the Spirit of God. For by and in
the Cross of Christ, they were cut off from the Curse of the First Covenant,
whereunto all Evil and Trouble did belong, and implanted into the Covenant of
Grace. The Tree of the Cross being cast into the Waters of Affliction has
rendered them Wholesome and Medicinal. And as the Lord Christ being the Head of
the Covenant, all the Afflictions and Persecutions that befall his Members are
Originally his, Isa. 63. 9. Acts 9. 5. Col. 1. 24. so they all tend to work us
unto a Conformity unto him in Purity and Holiness. And they work toward this
Blessed End of purifying the Soul several ways. For (1) They have in them some
Tokens of Gods Displeasure against sin, which those who are Exercised by them
are led by the Consideration of unto a fresh View of the Vileness of it. For
although Afflictions are an Effect of Love, yet it is of Love mixed with Care,
to obviate and prevent Distempers. Whatever they are else they are always
Chastisements; and Correction respects Faults. And it is our safest course in
every Affliction to lodge the Adequate Cause of it in our own Deserts; as the
Woman did, 1 King. 17. 18. and as God directs, Psalm. 81. 30, 31, 32. Lament. 3.
33, 34. And this is one Difference between his Chastiments and those of the
Fathers of our Flesh; that he does it not for his Pleasure, Heb. 12. 9, 10. Now
a View of sin under Suffering makes men loath and abhor themselves for it,
and to be ashamed of it. And this is the first step toward our Purifying of
our selves by any Ways appointed for it. Self-pleasing in Sin is the highest
Degree of our Pollution; and when we loath our selves for it, we are put into
the Way at least of seeking after a Remedy. (2) Afflictions take off the Beauty
and Allurements of all Created Good Things and their Comforts, by which the
Affections are solicited to commit Folly and Lewdness with them; that is to
embrace and cleave unto them inordinately, whence many Defilements do enensue
Gal. 6. 14. This God designs them for, even to wither all the Flowrings of this
World in the Minds of men, by discovering their Emptiness, Vanity and
Insufficiency to give Relief. This intercepts the disorderly intercourse which
is apt to be between them and our Affections whereby our Minds are polluted.
For there is a Pollution attending the least inordinate Actings of our Mind and
Affections toward Objects either in their own nature sinful, or such as may
be rendered so by an Excess in us toward them, whilst we are under the Command
of Loving the Lord our God with all our Minds, Souls, and strength, and that
always: (3) Afflictions take off the Edge, and put a Deadness on those
Affections whereby the Corrupt Lusts of the Mind and Flesh, which are the
Spring and Cause of all our Defilements do act themselves. They curb those
Vigorous and Brisk Affections which were always ready pressed for the service
of Lust, and which sometimes carry the Soul into the pursuit of sin, like the
Horse into the Battle with Madness and Fury. They are no more such prepared
Channels for the Fomes of Concupiscence to empty it self into the Conversation,
nor such Vehicles for the spirits of Corrupted Lusts and Inclinations. God I
say by Afflictions brings a kind of Death unto the World and the Pleasures of
it upon the Desires and Affections of the Soul, which render them unserviceable
unto the Remainder of Defiling Lusts and Corruptions. This in some indeed
endures but for a season, as when in Sickness, Wants, Fears, Distresses,
Losses, Sorrows, there is a great appearance of Mortification, when yet the
strength of sin and the Vigor of Carnal Affections do speedily revive upon the
least outward Relief. But with Believers it is not so, but by all their
Chastisements they are really more and more delivered from the Pollutions of
Sin, and made Partakers of Gods Holiness, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. (4) God does by
them excite, stir up and draw forth all the Graces of the Spirit into a
constant Diligent and Vigorous Exercise, and therein the Work of cleansing the
Soul from the Pollution of sin is carried on. A time of Affliction is the
Especial season for the peculiar Exercise of all Grace. For the Soul can then
no otherwise support or relieve it self. For it is cut short or taken off from
other Comforts and Reliefs, every sweet thing being made bitter unto it. It
must therefore live not only by Faith and Love, and Delight in God, but in some
sense upon them. For if in their Exercise, Supportment and Comfort be not
obtained we can have none. Therefore does such a Soul find it necessary to be
constantly abounding in the Exercise of Grace, that it may in any measure be
able to support it self under its Troubles or Sufferings. Again, there is no
other Way whereby a Man may have a sanctified Use of Afflictions, or a good
Issue out of them, but by the assiduous Exercise of Grace. This God calls for,
this he designs, and without it Afflictions have no other End but to make men
Miserable; and they will either have no Deliverance from them, or such a one as
shall tend to their farther Misery and Ruin.

And so have we taken a View of the First Part of our Sanctification and
Holiness, which I have the more largely insisted on, because the Consideration
of it is utterly neglected by them who frame us an Holiness to consist only in
the Practice of Moral Virtue. And I do not know but what has been delivered
may be looked on as Fanatical and Enthusiastical. Yet is there no other Reason
why it should be so, but only because it is taken from the Scripture. Neither
does that so much insist on any Consideration of Sin and Sanctification, as
this of the Pollution of the one, and the Purifying of it by the other. And to
whom the Wisdom and Words of the Holy Ghost are displeasing, we cannot in these
things give any satisfaction. And yet I could easily demonstrate, that they
were well known to the Ancient Writers of the Church, and for the substance of
them were discerned and discussed by the Schoolmen in their Manner. But where
men hate the Practice of Holiness, it is to no Purpose to teach them the Nature
of it.

State and Condition by Nature. It is useful for us all to be looking back
into it; and it is necessary for them who are under it to be fully acquainted
with it. Therein are we wholly defiled, polluted, and every way unclean. There
is a Spiritual Leprosy spread all over our Natures, which renders us loathsome
to God, and puts us in a state of separation from him. They who were Legally
unclean were separated from the Congregation, and therein all the Pledges of
Gods Gracious Presence, Numb. 5. 2. It is so Virtually with all them who are
spiritually defiled, under that Pollution which is Natural and Universal; they
are abhorred of God and separated from him, which was signified thereby. And
the Reason why so many Laws with so great severity and exactness were given
about the Cleansing of a Leprous person, and the Judgment to be made thereon,
was only to declare the Certainty of the Judgment of God, that no unclean
person should approach unto him. Thus is it with all by Nature, and whatever
they do of themselves to be quit of it, it does but hide and not cleanse it.
Adam cured neither his Nakedness nor the shame of it by his Fig Leaves. Some
have no other Covering of their Natural Filth but outward Ornaments of the
Flesh, which increase it, and indeed rather proclaim it than hide it. The
Greatest Filth in the World is covered with the greatest Bravery. See Isa. 3.
16. 17. Whatever we do of our selves in answer unto our Convictions, is a
Covering not a Cleansing. And if we dye in this Condition unwashed, uncleansed,
unpurified, it is utterly impossible that ever we should be admitted into the
Blessed Presence of the Holy God, Rev. 21. 27. Let no man deceive you then with
Vain Words. It is not the doing of a few Good Works, it is not an outward
Profession of Religion, that will give you an Access with Boldness and Joy unto
God. Shame will cover you when it will be too late. Unless you are washed by
the Spirit of God, and in the Blood of Christ from the Pollutions of your
Natures, you shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6, 9, 10, 11. Yea you
will be an horrid spectacle unto Saints and Angels, yea to your selves, unto
one another, when the shame of your Nakedness shall be made to appear, Isa. 66.
24. If therefore you would not persih and that Eternally, if you would not
perish as base defiled Creatures, an abhorring unto all flesh, Then when your
Pride, and your Wealth, and your Beauty, and your Ornaments, and your Duties,
will stand you in no stead, look out betimes after that only way of purifying
and cleansing your Souls, which God has ordained. But if you love your
Defilements, if you are proud of your Pollutions, if you satisfy your selves
with your outward Ornaments; whether Moral, of Gifts, Duties, Profession,
Conversation; or Natural, of Body, Wealth, Apparel, Gold and Silver; there is
no Remedy, you must perish for ever, and that under the Consideration of the
Basest and Vilest part of the Creation.

Fountain set open for Sin and Uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1. But it falls out
with many, as the Wise man speaks; The Labor of the Foolish wearyeth every
one of them, because he knows not how to go to the City, Eccles. 10. 15. Men
weary themselves and pine away under their Pollutions, because they cannot find
the Way; they know not how to go to the Cleansing Fountain. I shall therefore
direct them from First to Last according to the best skill I have.

1. Labor after an Acquaintance with it, to know it in its Nature and Effects.
Although the Scripture so abounds in the Assertion and Declaration of it as we
have showed, and Believers find a sense of it in their Experience, yet men in
common take little Notice of it. Somewhat they are affected with the Guilt of
sin, but little or not at all with its Filth. So they can escape the
Righteousness of God which they have provoked, they regard not their
unanswerableness unto his Holiness whereby they are Polluted. How few indeed do
enquire into the Pravity of their Natures, that Vileness which is come upon
them by the Loss of the Image of God, or do take themselves to be much
concerned therein? How few do consider aright that Fomes and filthy Spring
which is continually bubling up crooked, perverse, defiled Imaginations in
their Hearts, and influencing their Affections unto the Lewdness of depraved
Concupiscence? Who meditates upon the Holiness of God in a due Manner, so as to
ponder what we our selves ought to be, how Holy, how Upright, how Clean, if we
intend to please him or enjoy him? With what Appearances, what Outsides of
things are most men satisfied? Yea how do they please themselves in the shades
of their own Darkness and Ignorance of these things, when yet an
unacquaintedness with this Pollution of sin is unavoidably ruinous unto their
Souls? See the Danger of it, Revel. 3. 16, 17, 18. Those who would be cleansed
from it must first know it; and although we cannot do so aright without some
convincing Light of the Spirit of God, yet are there Duties required of us in
Order thereunto. As (1) To Search the Scripture, and to consider seriously what
it declares concerning the Condition of our Nature after the Loss of the Image
of God. Does it not declare that it is shamefully naked, destitute of all
Beauty and Comeliness, wholly polluted and defiled? And what is said of that
nature which is common unto all, is said of every one who is Partaker of it.
Every one is gone aside, every one is become altogether filthy, or stinking,
Psalm. 53. 3. This is the Glass wherein every man ought to Contemplate himself,
and not in foolish flattering Reflections from his own Proud Imaginations; And
he that will not hence learn his Natural Deformity, shall live Polluted and dye
Accursed. (2) He who has received the Testimony of the Scripture concerning
his corrupted and polluted Estate, if he will be at the Pains to try and
Examine himself by the Reasons and Causes that are assigned thereof, will have
a farther View of it. When men read, hear, or are instructed in what the
Scripture teaches concerning the Defilement of Sin, and giving some Assent to
what is spoken, without an Examination of their own state in particular, or
bringing their Souls unto that Standard and Measure, they will have very little
advantage thereby; Multitudes learn that they are polluted by Nature which they
cannot gainsay, but yet really find no such thing in themselves. But when men
will bring their own Souls to the Glass of the Perfect Law, and consider how it
is with them in respect of that Image of God wherein they were at first
created, what manner of Persons they ought to be with respect unto the Holiness
of God, and what they are, how Vain are their Imaginations, how Disorderly are
their Affections, how Perverse all the Actings of their Minds, they will be
ready to say with the Leprous Man, Unclean, unclean. But they are but few who
will take the pains to search their own Wounds, it being a matter of smart and
trouble to corrupt and carnal Affections. Yet (3) Prayer for Light and
Direction herein is required of all as a Duty. For a Man to know himself, was
of Old esteemed the highest Attainment of Humane Wisdom. Some men will not so
much as enquire into themselves, and some men dare not, and some neglect the
doing of it from spiritual sloth and other deceitful Imaginations. But he that
would ever be purged from his sins, must thus far make bold with himself, and
dare to be thus far Wise. And in the use of the Means before prescribed,
considering his own Darkness and the Treacheries of his Heart, he is to pray
fervently that God by his Spirit would guide and assist him in his search after
the Pravity and Defilement of his Nature. Without this he will never make any
great or useful Discoveries. And yet the discerning hereof is the first
Evidence that a Man has received the least Ray of Supernatural Light. The
Light of a Natural Conscience will convince Men of, and reprove them for actual
sins as to their Guilt, Romans 2. 14, 15. But the mere Light of Nature is dark
and confused about its own Confusion. Some of the Old Philosophers discerned in
general that our Nature was disordered, and complained thereof: But as the
Principal Reason of their Complaints was because it would not throughout serve
the Ends of their Ambition, so of the Causes and Nature of it, with respect
unto God and our Eternal Condition, they knew nothing of it at all. Nor is it
discerned but by a Supernatural Light proceeding immediately from the Spirit of
God. If any therefore have an Heart or Wisdom to know their own Pollution by
sin, without which they know nothing of themselves unto any Purpose, let them
pray for that Directing Light of the Spirit of God, without which they can
never attain to any useful Knowledge of it.

2. Those who would indeed be purged from the Pollution of Sin, must endeavor
to be affected with it suitably to the Discovery which they have made of it.
And as the proper Effect of the Guilt of sin is Fear, so the proper Effect of
the Filth of sin is Shame. No man who has read the Scriptures, can be ignorant
how frequently God calls on men to be ashamed and confounded in themselves for
the Pollutions and Uncleanness of their sin. So is it expressed in Answer
unto what he requires. O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to
thee my God, because of our Iniquities, Ezra 9. 6. And by another Prophet, We
lie down in our shame, and our Confusion covers us, for we have sinned
against the Lord our God, Jerem. 3. 25. And many other such Expressions are
there of this Affection of the Mind with respect unto the Pollution of sin. But
we must observe, that there is a Twofold shame with respect unto it. (1) That
which is Legal, or the product of a mere Legal Conviction of Sin. Such was that
in Adam immediately after his Fall. And such is that which God so frequently
calls open and profligate sinners unto; A shame accompanied with Dread and
Terror, and from which the sinner has no Relief, unless in such sorry
Evasions as our First Parents made use of. And (2) There is a shame which is
Evangelical, arising from a mixed Apprehension of the Vileness of sin, and the
Riches of Gods Grace in the Pardon and Purifying of it. For although this
latter gives Relief against all terrifying discouraging Effects of shame, yet
it increases those which tend to genuine self-Abasement and Abhorrency. And
this God still requires to abide in us, as that which tends to the Advancement
of his Grace in our Hearts. This is fully Expressed by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 16.
60, 61, 62, 63. I will remember my Covenant with thee in the Days of thy
Youth, and I will establish unto thee an Everlasting Covenant; then shall thou
remember thy Ways and be ashamed, and I will establish my Covenant with thee,
and thou shall know that I am the Lord, that thou may remember and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God. There is
a shame and Confusion or face for sin, that is a Consequent yea an Effect of
Gods renewing his Covenant, and thereby giving in the full Pardon of sin, as
being pacified. And the Apostle asks the Romans what Fruit they had in those
things whereof they were now ashamed, Chap. 6. 21. Now, after the Pardon of
them they were yet ashamed, from the Consideration of their Filth and Vileness.
But it is shame in the First sense that I here intend, as antecedent unto the
First Purification of our Natures. This may be thought to be in all men; but it
is plainly otherwise, and men are not at all ashamed of their Sins, which they
manifest in Various Degrees. For,

senceless and stupid; no Instruction, nothing that befalls them will fix any
real shame upon them. Of some particular Facts they may be ashamed, but for any
thing in their Natures they slight and despise it. If they can but preserve
themselves from the known Guilt of such sins as are punishable amongst Men, as
to all other things they are secure. This is the Condition of the Generality of
men living in sin in this World. They have no inward shame for any thing
between God and their Souls, especially not for the Pravity and Defilement of
their Natures, no although they hear the Doctrine of it never so frequently.
What may outwardly befall them that is shameful they are concerned in; but for
their Internal Pollutions between God and their Souls they know none.

(2) Some have a Boldness and Confidence in their Condition as that which is
well and pure enough. There is a Generation that is pure in their own Eyes, yet
are they not washed from their Filthiness, Prove. 30. 12. Although they were
never sprinkled with the pure Water of the Covenant, or cleansed by the Holy
Spirit; although their Consciences were never purged from dead Works by the
Blood of Christ, nor their Hearts purified by Faith, and so are no Way washed
from their Filthiness; yet do they please themselves in their Condition as pure
in their own Eyes, and have not the least sense of any Defilement. Such a
Generation were the Pharisees of Old, who esteemed themselves as clean as their
Hands and Cups that they were continually washing, though within they were
filled with all manner of Defilements, Isa. 65. 4, 5. And this Generation is
such as indeed despise all that is spoken about the Pollution of Sin and its
Purification; and deride it as Enthusiastical; or a fulsome Metaphor not to be
understood.

(3) Others proceed farther, and are so far from taking shame to themselves for
what they are, or what they do, as that they openly Boast of and Glory in the
most shameful sins that Humane Nature can contract the Guilt of. They proclaim
their Sins, says the Prophet, like Sodom, where all the People consented
together in the Perpetration of Unnatural Lusts. They are not at all ashamed
but Glory in the things, which because they do not here, will hereafter fill
them with Confusion of Face, Jerem. 6. 15. Chap. 8. 12. And where once Sin gets
this Confidence, wherein it compleats a Conquest over the Law, the inbred
Light of Nature, the Convictions of the Spirit, and in a word God himself, then
is it ripe for Judgment. And yet is there a higher Degree of shamelesness in
sin. For,

(4) Some content not themselves with Boasting in their own Sins, but also they
approve and delight in all those who give up themselves unto the like Outrage
in Sinning with themselves. This the Apostle expresses as the highest Degree
of shameless sinning, Romans 1. 32. Who knowing the Judgment of God, that they
which Commit such things are worthy of Death, not only do the same, but have
Pleasure in them that do them. When open Profligate Sinners do as it were make
themselves up into Societyes, encouraging and approving one another in their
Abominable Courses, so that no Company pleases them but such as have obtained
an Impudence in sinning, then is the greatest Defiance given unto the Holiness
and Righteousness of God.

Now such as these will never seek after Cleansing. For why should they do so
who are sensible of no Spiritual Pollution, nor have the least touch of shame
with respect thereunto? It is Necessary therefore unto the Duty of Purifying
our Souls, that we be affected with shame for the Spiritual Defilements which
our Nature under the Loss of the Image of God is even rolled in. And where this
is not, it will be but lost Labor that is spent in the Invitation of men to
the Cleansing Fountain.

Cleanse or Purify themselves by any Endeavors that are merely their own, or
by any Means of their own finding out. According unto men's Convictions of the
Defilements of sin, so have and always will their Endeavors be after
Purification, Hos. 5. 13. And indeed it is the Duty of Believers to purify
themselves more and more in the Exercise of all Purifying Graces, and the use
of all Means appointed of God for that Purpose, 2 Cor. 7. 1. And their neglect
thereof is the highest Disadvantage, Psalm. 38. 5. But men in the state of
Nature, concerning whom we now treat, are no way able to cleanse their Natures,
or purge themselves. He only who can restore, repair, and renew their Natures
unto the Likeness of God, can cleanse them. But here many fall into Mistakes.
For when by Reason of their Convictions they can no longer satisfy and please
themselves in the Pollution of sin, they go about by Vain attempts of their
own to purify their Souls, Hos. 5. 13. Jerem. 2. 22. Job 9. 30, 31. their own
Sorrow, and Repentance, and Tears of Contrition, and that sorry Amendment of
Life they can attain unto, shall do this Work for them. And every especial
defiling Act, or every renewed sense of it, shall have an especial Act of Duty
for its Cleansing. But though these things are Good in themselves, yet there is
required more Wisdom to the right stating of them, as to their Causes,
Respects, Ends, and Use, than they are furnished withal. Hence are they so
frequently abused and turned into an effectual Means not only of keeping Men
off and at a Distance from Christ, but also from a due and acceptable
Performance of the very Duties themselves pretended unto. For Legal Sorrow or
Repentance, or mere Legal Convictions, being trusted unto, will infallibly keep
the Soul from coming up unto that Evangelical Repentance which alone God
accepts. And mere Reformation of Life rested in, proves opposite to Endeavors
for the Renovation of our Natures. But let these Duties be performed however in
what Manner you please, they are utterly insufficient of themselves to cleanse
our Natural Defilements. Nor will any seek duly for that which alone is
effectual unto this Purpose, until they are fully convinced hereof. Let
therefore Sinners hear and know whether they will or will not believe it, that
as by Nature they are wholly desiled and polluted with those Abominations of
Sin which render them Loathsome in the sight of God, so they have no Power by
any Endeavors or Duties of their own to Cleanse themselves; but by all they
do to this End, they do but farther plunge themselves into the Ditch, and
increase their own Defilements; yet are all those Duties necessary in their
proper Place and unto their proper End.

4. It is therefore their Duty to acquaint themselves with that only Remedy in
this Case, that only Means of Cleansing which God has appointed, and which he
makes Effectual. One great End of the Revelation of the Will of God from the
Foundation of the World of his Institutions and Ordinances of Worship, was to
direct the Souls and Consciences of Men in and unto the Way of their Cleansing,
which as it argues his Infinite Love and Care, so the great Importance by the
Matter it self. And one Principal Means which Satan from the Beginning made use
of to keep men in their Apostasy from God, and to encourage them therein, was
by supplying them with innumerable Ways of Purifications suited to the
Imaginations of their dark unbelieving and superstitious Minds. And in like
manner when he designed to draw men off from Christ and the Gospel under the
Papacy, he did it principally by the suggestion of such present and future
Purgatories of Sin as might comply with their Lusts and Ignorance; of so great
Importance is it therefore to be acquainted with the only true real Way and
Means hereof. And there are two Considerations that are suited to excite the
Diligence of Sinners in this Enquiry. 1. The Weight that is laid on this Matter
by God himself. 2. The Difficulty of attaining an Acquaintance with it. And (1)
as has been observed, any one by considering the Legal Institutions of Old
will see what weight God lays hereon. No Sacrifice had any respect unto sin,
but there was somewhat Peculiar in it that was for its Cleansing. And there
were sundry Ceremonious Ordinances which had no other End but only to purify
from Uncleanness. (2) Among all the Promises of the Old Testament concerning
the Establishment of the New Covenant and the Grace thereof, which are Many and
Precious, there are none more Eminent than those which concern our Cleansing
from sin by the Administration of the Spirit, through the Blood of Christ. Some
of them have been mentioned before. Which also farther manifests the Care that
God has taken for our Instruction herein. (3) There is nothing more pressed on
us, nothing more frequently proposed unto us in the Gospel than the Necessity
of our Purification and the only Way of Effecting it. If therefore either
Instructions, or Promises, or Precepts, or all concurring, may evidence the
Importance of a Duty, then is this manifested to partake therein. And those who
will prefer the Guidance of Carnal Reason and vain Traditions before these
Heavenly Directions, shall live in their Ignorance and dye in their Sins. 2ly,
The Difficulty of attaining an Acquaintance with it, is to be duly considered.
It is a part of the Mystery of the Gospel, and such a part as is among those
which the Wisdom of the World or Carnal Reason esteems Foolishness. It is not
easily admitted nor received, that we can no otherwise be cleansed from our
sins but by the sprinkling of that Blood which was shed so long ago. Yet this
and no other way does the Scripture propose unto us: To fancy that there is any
cleansing from sin but by the Blood of Christ, is to overthrow the Gospel. The
Doctrine hereof are Persons therefore obliged to enquire after and come to the
knowledge of, that being satisfied with its Truth and that this is the only Way
of Cleansing Sin appointed and blessed by God himself, their Minds may be
exercised about it, and so be taken off from resting on those Vain Medicines
and Remedies, which (having) nothing else to fix upon) their own Hearts, and
others blind Devotions, would suggest unto them.

5. But now the great Enquiry is, How a sinful Defiled Soul may come to have
an interest in, or be partaker of, the purifying Virtue and Efficacy of the
Blood of Christ? Ans. (1) The purifying Virtue and Force of the Blood of
Christ, with the Administration of the Spirit for its Application to make it
effectual unto our Souls and Consciences, is proposed and exhibited unto us in
the Promises of the Covenant, 2 Pet. 1. 4. This all the Instances (which need
not be recited) before produced do testify unto; (2) The only Way to be made
partaker of the good things presented in the Promises, is by Faith. So Abraham
is said to have received the Promises, Heb. 11. 17. and so are we also, and to
receive Christ himself. Now this is not from their being proposed unto us, but
from our Believing of that which is proposed, as it is expressed of Abraham,
Romans 4. 19, 20, 21. Chap. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. The whole use, benefit and Advantage
of the Promises depends absolutely on our mixing them with Faith, as the
Apostle declares, Heb. 4. 1. Where they are mixed with Faith, there they profit
us, there we really receive the thing promised. Where they are not so mixed
they are of no use, but to aggravate our sins and Unbelief. I know that by some
men the whole Nature and Work of Faith is derided. They say it is nothing but a
strong fixing of the Imagination upon what is said. However, we know that if a
man promise us any thing seriously and solemnly which is absolutely in his
Power, we trust unto his Word or believe him, considering his Wisdom Honesty
and Ability. This we know is not a mere fixing of the Imagination, but it is a
real and useful Confidence or Trust. And whereas God has given unto us great
and precious Promises, and that under several Confirmations, especially that of
his Oath and Covenant, if we do really believe their Accomplishment, and that
it shall be unto us according to his Word upon the Account of his Veracity,
Divine Power, Righteousness and Holiness; why shall this be esteemed a
Fanatical fixing of the Imagination? If it be so, it was so in Abraham our
Example, Romans 4. 19, 20, 21. But this Blasphemous Figment designed to the
overthrow of the Way of Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, shall be elsewhere
more fully examined. God, as was said, gives unto us great and precious
Promises, that by them we might be made partakers of the Divine Nature. These
Promises he requires us to receive, and to mix them with Faith; that is,
trusting to and resting on his Divine Power and Veracity, ascribing unto him
thereby the Glory of them, to believe that the things promised unto us shall be
accomplished, which is the Means by Gods Appointment whereby we shall be really
made partakers of them. Such was the Faith of Abraham, so celebrated by our
Apostle; and such was all the true and saving Faith that ever was in the World
from the Foundation of it. Wherefore (3) This is the only Way and Means to
obtain an Interest in the Cleansing Virtue of the Blood of Christ. God has
given this Power and Efficacy unto it by the Covenant. In the Promise of the
Gospel it is proposed and tendered unto us. Faith in that Promise is that alone
which gives us an Interest in it, makes us partakers of it and renders it
actually Effectual unto us, whereby we are really Cleansed from sin. (4) There
are Two things which concur unto the Efficacy of Faith to this Purpose: 1.
The Excellency of the Grace or Duty it self. Despise their Ignorance who tell
you this is but a deceitful fixing of the Imagination, for they know not what
they say. When men come to the real Practice of this Duty, they will find what
it is to discard all other Ways and pretenses of Cleansing, what it is
sincerely and really to give unto God, against all Difficulties and
Oppositions, the Glory of his Power, Faithfulness, Goodness and Grace, what it
is to approve of the Wisdom and Love of God in finding out this Way for us, and
the Infiniteness of his Grace in providing it when we were lost and under the
Curse, and to be filled with an holy Admiration of him on that Account, all
which belong unto the Faith mentioned, neither is it nor can it be acted in a
due manner without them; and when you understand these things, you will not
think it so strange that God should appoint this Way of Believing only as the
Means to interest us in the purifying Virtue of the Blood of Christ. 2. Hereby
are we as has been shown united unto Christ, from whom alone is our Cleansing;
He that declares another Way must make another Gospel.

6. Faith in this Case will act it self in and by fervent Prayer. When David
had by Sin brought himself into that Condition wherein he stood in need of a
new universal Purification, how earnest is he in his Supplications that God
would again purge and cleanse him, Psalm. 51. And when any Soul is really coming
over to the Way of God for his washing in the Blood of Christ, he will not be
more earnest and fervent in any Supplication than in this; and herein and
hereby does Christ communicate of the purging Efficacy of his Blood unto us.
And these things may in some measure suffice for the Direction and Guidance of
those who are yet wholly under the Pollution of Corrupted Nature, how they may
proceed to get themselves cleansed according to the Mind of God. Not that this
Order or Method is prescribed unto any; only these are the Heads of those
things which in one Degree or other are wrought in the Souls of them whom
Christ will and does Cleanse from their Sins.

Instruction also may be hence taken for them concerning whom our Apostle
says, Such were you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor.
6. 9. Such as are freed from the general Pollution of Nature by the Washing of
Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. Those I mean who have
been made partakers of that cleansing purifying Work of the Holy Ghost, which
we have described; several Duties are incumbent on them with respect hereunto.
As,

(1) Continual self-abasement in the Remembrance of that woeful defiled state
and Condition from whence they have been delivered. This Consideration is one
of them which principally does influence the Minds of Believers unto Humility,
and hides Pride from them. For what should Creatures of such a base and
defiled Extraction have to boast of in themselves? It is usual I confess, for
Vile men of the most Contemptible Beginnings, when they are greatly exalted in
the World, to out-goe others in Pride and Elation of Mind, as they are behind
them in the Advantages of Birth and Education. But this is esteemed a vile
thing amongst men; and it is but one Potsheard of the Earth boasting it self
against another. But when Believers shall consider what was their vile and
polluted Estate with respect unto God when first he had regard unto them, it
will cause them to walk humbly in a deep sense of it, or I am sure it ought so
to do. God calls his People to self-Abasement, not only from what they are,
but from what they were, and whence they came. So he ordained that Confession
to be made by him that offered the First Fruits of his Fields and Possessions;
A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, or a Syrian, that is, Laban was ready
to destroy my Father, a poor helpless man that went from one Country to
another for Bread. How is it of Sovereign Mercy that I am now in this State and
Condition of Plenty and Peace? Deuteronomy. 16. 4, 5. And in particular, God
wonderfully binds upon them the sense of that defiled Natural Extraction
whereof we speak, Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4, 5. And when David upon his great Sin and his
Repentance took in all humbling self-abasing Considerations, here he fixes the
Head of them, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me. His Original natural defilement was that which in the First
place influenced him into self-Abasement. So our Apostle frequently calls the
Saints to a Remembrance of their former Condition before they were purged,
Ephesians. 2, 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 6. 8, 9. and therewith are the Minds of all true
Believers greatly affected and greatly humbled. When they consider what was
their Natural State and Condition, universally leprous and polluted, with what
Remainders of it do still abide, it casts them on the Earth, and causes them
to lay their mouths in the Dust. Hence proceed their great and deep
Humiliations of themselves, and Confessions of their own Vileness in their
Prayers and Supplications. Considering the Holiness of God with whom they have
to do, unto whom they do approach, they are no way able to express what low
Thoughts and Apprehensions they have of themselves. Even God himself does teach
them to use figurative Expressions whereby to declare their own Vileness by
Nature, which abound in the Scripture. It is true, all Declarations hereof in
Prayer and Confession of Sin are derided and scorned by some, who seem to
understand nothing of these things, yea to Glory that they do not. Whatever is
spoken to express as they are able to the deep sense any have of their Natural
Defilement with the Remainder of it, their shame and self-Abasement with
respect unto the Holiness of God, is reputed either as false and Hypocritical,
or that it contains such things as for which men ought to be hanged; such
prodigious Impudence in proclaiming a sencelesness of the Holiness of God, and
of the Vileness of Sin, have we lived to see and hear of. But when we have to
deal with God, who puts no trust in his Servants, and charge his Angels with
Folly, what shall we say? What Lowliness becomes then who dwell in Houses of
Clay, whose Foundation is in the Dust, and who are crushed before the Moth?

(2) That Initial Deliverance which Believers have from their Original
Pollution of Sin, is a Matter and Cause of everlasting Thankfulness. When our
Lord Jesus Christ cleansed the Ten Lepers, he manifests how much it was their
Duty to return unto him with their thankful Acknowledgement, though Nine of
them failed therein, Luke 17. 17. And when of Old any one was cleansed from a
carnal Defilement, there was an Offering enjoined him to testify his
Gratitude. And indeed, the Consideration hereof is that which in an eminent
manner influenceth the Minds of Believers in all their Grateful Ascriptions of
Glory, Honor, and Praise to Jesus Christ. To him, say they, who loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own Blood, to him be Glory and Dominion for ever
and ever, Revel. 1. 5, 6. And there are three Things which concur to this
Duty. (1) A due Valuation of the Causes and Means of our Purification, namely,
the sprinkling of the Blood of Christ in the Sanctification of the Spirit. As
these alone have effected this great Work, so they alone were able so to do.
Had we not been washed in the Blood of Christ, we must have lived and dyed in
our Pollutions, and have lain under them to Eternity. For the Fire of Hell will
never purge the Defilements of sin, much less will the fictitious Fire of
Purgatory cleanse any from them. How ought we then to prize, value and admire
both the Virtue or Efficacy of the Blood of Christ, and the Love from whence it
was given for us, and is applied unto us. And because this Valuation and
Admiration are Acts of Faith, the very Work it self also of cleansing our Souls
is carried on by them. For by the Exercise of Faith do we continually derive
Virtue from Christ to this purpose, as the Woman did by touching of his Garment
for the stopping of her Issue of Blood. (2) Inward Joy and Satisfaction in our
Freedom from that shame which deprived us of all Boldness and Confidence in
God. This Internal Joy belongs unto the Duty of Thankfulness. For therein is
God glorified when we are graciously sensible of the Effects of his Love and
Kindness toward us. Every Grace then glorifies God, and expresses our
Thankfulness for his Love, when a Soul finds it self really affected with a
sense of its being washed from all its loathsome Defilements in the Blood of
Christ, and, being thereby freed from discouraging oppressing shame, to have
Filial Boldness in the presence of God. (3) Acknowledgment in a way of Actual
Praise.

Pollution attending every actual Sin, whether internal of the Heart and Mind
only, or external in Sin perpetrated, averse to Holiness and contrary to the
carrying on of the Work of Sanctification in us. And sundry things, Believers
whose Concernment alone this is, may learn from hence also. As,

(1) How they ought to Watch against Sin and all the Motions of it, though
never so secret. They all of them defile the Conscience. And it is an Evidence
of a Gracious Soul to be watchful against sin on this Account. Convictions
will make men wary where they are prevalent, by continual Representations of
the Danger and Punishment of sin: And these are an allowable Motive to
Believers themselves to abstain from it in all known Instances. The
Consideration of the Terror of the Lord, the Use of the Threatenings both of
the Law and Gospel, declare this to be our Duty. Neither let any say, that this
is servile fear; that Denomination is taken from the frame of our Minds, and
not from the Object feared. When men so fear as thereon to be discouraged and
to incline unto a Relinquishment of God, Duty, and Hope, that Fear is servile
whatever be the Object of it. And that Fear which keeps from Sin, and excites
the Soul to cleave more firmly to God, be the Object of it what it will, is no
servile Fear, but an holy Fear of due Reverence unto God and his Word. But this
is the most genuinely gracious fear of sin, when we dread the defilement of it,
and that Contrariety which is in it to the Holiness of God. This is a Natural
Fruit of Faith and Love. And this Consideration should always greatly possess
our Minds; and the truth is, if it do not so, there is no assured Preservative
against sin. For together with an Apprehension of that spiritual Pollution
wherewith sin is accompanied, Thoughts of the Holiness of God, of the Care and
Concernment of the sanctifying Spirit, of the Blood of Christ, will continually
abide in our Minds, which are all efficaciously preservative against Sin. I
think that there is no more forceable Argument unto Watchfulness against all
sin unto Believers in the whole Book of God, than that which is managed by our
Apostle, with especial respect unto one kind of sin, but may in Proportion be
extended unto all, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Chap. 6. 15, 19. Moreover, where this is
not, where the Soul has no respect to the Defilement of sin, but only
considers how it may shift with the Guilt of it, innumerable things will
interpose, partly arising from the abuse of Grace, partly from Carnal Hopes and
foolish Resolutions for aftertimes, as will set it at Liberty from that
watchful Diligence in universal Obedience which is required of us. The Truth
is, I do not believe that any one that is awed only with respect to the Guilt
of sin and its Consequents, does keep up a firm Integrity with regard to inward
and outward actings of his Heart and Life in all things. But where the Fear of
the Lord and of Sin is influenced by a deep Apprehension of the Holiness of the
one and the Pollution that inseparably attends the other, there is the Soul
kept always upon its best Guard and Defense.

(2) How we ought to walk humbly before the Lord all our Days. Notwithstanding
our utmost Watchfulness and Diligence against sin, there is yet no man that
lives and sins not. Those who pretend unto a Perfection here, as they
manifest themselves to be utterly ignorant of God and themselves, and despise
the Blood of Christ, so for the most part they are left visibly and in the
sight of men to confute their own Pride and Folly. But to what purpose is it to
hide our selves from our selves when we have to do with God? God knows and our
own Souls know, that more or less we are defiled in all that we do. The best
of our Works and Duties brought into the presence of the Holiness of God, are
but as filthy rags. And Man even every man of himself drinks in Iniquity
like water. Our own Clothes are ready to defile us every day. Who can express
the Motions of Lust that are in the Flesh, the irregular actings of Affections,
in their inordinate risings up to their Objects, the Folly of the Imaginations
of our Hearts and Minds, which as far as they are not Principled by Grace are
only evil, and that continually; with the vanity of our Words, yea with a
mixture of much corrupt Communications, all which are defiling, and have
Defilements attending of them? I confess I know not that my Heart and Soul
abhorrs any Eruption of the Diabolical pride of man, like that whereby they
reproach and scoff at the deepest Humiliations and self-Abasements which poor
sinners can attain unto in their Prayers, Confessions and Supplications. Alas!
that our Nature should be capable of such a Contempt of the Holiness of God,
such an Ignorance of the infinite distance that is between him and us, and be
so senceless of our own Vileness, and of the abominable Filth and Pollution
that is in every Sin, as not to tremble at the despising of the lowest
Abasements of poor sinners before the Holy God. Behold his Soul which is lifted
up is not upright in him, but the Just shall live by his Faith.

(3) How we ought continually to endeavor after the wasting of Sin in the Root
and Principle of it. There is a Root of sin in us which springs up and defiles
us. Every man is tempted (that is chiefly and principally) of his own Lust, and
seduced, and then when Lust has conceived it brings forth Sin. It is the
Flesh that lusts against the Spirit, and which brings forth corrupted and
corrupting, polluted and polluting Fruits. This Principle of Sin, of Aversation
from God, of Inclination unto things Sensual and Present, however wounded,
weakened, dethroned, impaired, yet still abides in all Believers. And it is the
Foundation, the Spring, the Root, the next Cause of all sin in us, which
tempts, enticeth, draws aside, conceives and brings forth. And this has in us
all, more or less degrees of Strength, Power and Activity, according as it is
more or less mortified by Grace, and the Application of the Virtue of the Death
of Christ unto our Souls. And according to its strength and power, so it
abounds in bringing forth the defiled Acts of sin. Whilst this retains any
considerable Power in us, it is to no purpose to set our selves merely to watch
against the Eruptions of Actual sins in the Frames of our Hearts, in the
Thoughts of our Minds, or outward Actions. If we would preserve our selves from
multiplying our Defilements, if we would continually be perfecting the Work of
Holiness in the Fear of the Lord, it is this we must set our selves against.
The Tree must be made good if we expect good Fruit, and the evil Root must be
dug up, or evil Fruit will be brought forth. That is, our main Design should
be to crucify and destroy the Body of the sins of the flesh that is in us, the
Remainders of the Flesh or In-dwelling sin, by the Ways and Means which shall
afterward be declared.

(4) Hence also is manifest the Necessity we have of continual Applications to
Jesus Christ for cleansing Virtue from his Spirit, and the sprinkling of his
Blood on our Consciences in the Efficacy of it to purge them from dead works.
We defile our selves every day, and if we go not every day to the Fountain that
is open for sin and for uncleanness, we shall quickly be all over Leprous. Our
Consciences will be filled with dead Works, so that we shall no way be able to
serve the Living God, unless they are daily purged out. How this is done has
been at large before declared. When a Soul filled with self-Abasement, under a
sense of its own Defilements, applies it self unto Christ by Faith for
cleansing, and that constantly and continually, with a Fervency answering its
sense and Convictions, it is in its Way and proper Course. I am persuaded no
true Believer in the World is a stranger unto this Duty. And the more any one
abounds therein, the more genuine is his Faith evidenced to be, and the more
Humble is his Walk before the Lord.

Defilement of sin, How, if it be so, Believers can be united unto Jesus
Christ, or be Members of that Mystical Body whereof he is the Head, or obtain
Fellowship with him. For whereas he is absolutely pure, holy, and perfect, how
can he have Union or Communion with them who are in any thing defiled? There is
no Fellowship between Righteousness and Unrighteousness, no Communion of Light
and Darkness, and what can there be between Christ and those that are defiled
with sin? And because he is holy, harmless and undefiled, he is said to be
separate from sinners.

Many things must be returned unto this Objection, all concurring to take away
the seeming difficulty that is in it. As,

(1) It must be granted, that where men are wholly under the Power of their
Original Defilement, they neither have nor can have either Union or Communion
with Christ. With respect unto such Persons, the Rules before mentioned are
universally true and certain: There is no more Communion between them and Jesus
Christ, than is between Light and Darkness, as the Apostle speaks expressly, 1 John 1. 6. Whatever Profession they may make of his Name, whatever Expectations
they may unduely raise from him in their own Minds, he will say unto them at
the last day, Depart from me, I never knew you. No person therefore whatever,
who has not been made Partaker of the washing of Regeneration and the
Renovation of the Holy Ghost, can possibly have any Union with Christ. I do not
speak this as though our purifying were in order of Time or Nature antecedent
unto our Union with Christ, for indeed it is an Effect thereof. But it is such
an Effect as immediately and inseparably accompanyeth it; so that where the one
is not, there is not the other. The Act whereby he unites us unto himself, is
the same with that whereby he cleanses our Natures.

(2) Whatever our Defilements are or may be, he is not defiled by them. They
adhere only unto a capable Subject, which Christ is not. He was capable to have
the Guilt of our sins imputed to him, but not the Filth of one sin adhering to
him. A Member of a Body may have a putrified Sore. The Head may be troubled at
it, and grieved with it, yet is not defiled by it. Wherefore, where there is a
Radical Original Cleansing by the Spirit of Regeneration and Holiness, whereby
any one is meet for Union and Communion with Christ, however he may be affected
with our partial Pollutions, he is not defiled by them* He is able (...),
compati, condolere, he suffers with us in his Compassion; but he is not liable
(...), to be defiled with us, or for us. The Visible Mystical Body of Christ
may be defiled by corrupt Members, Heb. 12. 15. but the Mystical Body cannot be
so, much less the Head.

(3) The Design of Christ when he takes Believers into Union with himself, is
to purge and cleanse them absolutely and perfectly; and therefore the present
remainders of some Defilements are not absolutely inconsistent with that Union.
He gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing
of Water by the Word, that he may present it unto himself a Glorious Church not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. This he aims at, and this he will, in his
own Way and in his own Time, perfectly accomplish. But it is not done at once,
it is a Progressive Work, that has many degrees. God did never sanctify any
Soul at once, unless by Death. The Body must dye by reason of Sin. Every
Believer is truly and really sanctified at once, but none is perfectly
sanctified at once. It is not therefore necessary unto Union that we should be
completely sanctified, though it is that we should be truly sanctified.
Complete Sanctification is a necessary Effect of Union in its proper Time and
Season. See Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

(4) Where the Work of Sanctification and Spiritual Cleansing is really begun
in any, there the whole Person is, and is thence denominated Holy. As therefore
Christ the Head is Holy, so are all the Members Holy according to their
Measure. For although there may be Defilements adhering unto their Actions, yet
their Persons are sanctified. So that no unholy Person has any Communion with
Christ, no Member of his Body is unholy, that is, absolutely so, in such a
state as thence to be denominated Unholy.

(5) Our Union with Christ is immediately in and by the New Creature in us, by
the Divine Nature which is from the Spirit of Holiness, and is Pure and Holy.
Hereunto and hereby does the Lord Christ communicate himself unto our Souls and
Consciences; and hereby have we all our Intercourse with him. Other Adherences
that have any Defilement in them, and consequently are opposite unto this
Union, he daily works out by virtue hereof, Romans 8. 10. The whole Body of
Christ therefore, and all that belongs unto it is holy, though those who are
Members of this Body are in themselves oft-times polluted, but not in any thing
which belongs to their Union. The Apostle describes the twofold Nature, or
Principle that is in Believers, the New Nature by Grace, and the Old of Sin, as
a double Person, Romans 7. 19, 20. And it is the former, the renewed, (and not
the latter, which he calls I also, but corrects as it were that Expression,
calling it Sin which dwells in him,) that is the subject of the Union with
Christ, the other being to be destroyed.

(6) Where the Means of Purification are duly used, no Defilement ensues on
any sin that Believers fall into, which does or can totally obstruct Communion
with God in Christ according to the Tenor of the Covenant. There were many
things under the Old Testament, that did Typically and Legally defile men that
were liable unto them. But for all of them there were provided Typical and
Legal Purifications, which sanctified them as to the purifying of the Flesh.
Now no man was absolutely cut off or separated from the People of God for his
being so defiled; but he that being defiled did not take care that he might be
Purifyed according to the Law, He was to be cut off from among the People. It
is in like manner in things Spiritual and Evangelical. There are many sins
whereby Believers are defiled. But there is a Way of Cleansing still open unto
them. And it is not merely the Incidence of a Defilement, but the Neglect of
Purification that is inconsistent with their state and Interest in Christ. The
Rule of Communion with God, and consequently of Union with Christ in its
Exercise, is expressed by David, Psalm. 19. 12, 13. Who can understand his
Errors, cleanse thou me from secret sins; keep back thy Servant also from
presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me, then shall I be upright,
and I shall be innocent from the great transgression. The Design of the
Psalmist is to be preserved in such a state and Condition, as wherein he may be
upright before God. To be upright before God is that which God requires of us
in the Covenant, that we may be accepted with him, and enjoy the Promises
thereof, Genesis 17. 1. He that is so, will be freed from that great
Transgression, or that Abundance of sin which is inconsistent with the
Covenant, Love and Favor of God. And hereunto three things are required. 1. A
constant humble Acknowledgement of Sin; Who can understand his Errors? 2. Daily
Cleansing from those Defilements which the least and most secret sins are
accompanied withal. Cleanse thou me from secret sins; and 3. A Preservation
from Presumptuous sins, or Wilful sins committed with an high hand. Where
these thing are, there a man is upright, and has the Covenant-ground of his
Communion with God. And whilst Believers are preserved within these Bounds,
though they are defiled by sin, yet is there not any thing therein inconsistent
with their Union with Christ.

(7) Our Blessed Head is not only pure and Holy, but he is also Gracious and
Merciful, and will not presently cut off a Member of his Body, because it is
sick or has a sore upon it. He is himself passed through his Course of
Temptations, and is now above the reach of them all. Does he therefore reject
and despise those that are Tempted, that labor and suffer under their
Temptations? It is quite otherwise, so that on the Account of his own present
state his Compassions do exceedingly abound toward all his that are Tempted.
It is no otherwise with him as to their Sins and Defilements. These he himself
was absolutely freed from in all his Temptations and Sufferings, but we are
not. And he is so far from casting us away on that Account, while we endeavor
after Purification, as that it draws out his Compassions toward us. In
brief, he does not unite us to himself because we are perfect, but that in his
own Way and Time he may make us so; not because we are clean, but that he may
cleanse us, for it is the Blood of Jesus Christ with whom we have Fellowship,
that cleanses us from all our sins.

Lastly, to wind up this Discourse, There is hence sufficiently evidenced a
Comprehensive Difference between a Spiritual Life unto God by Evangelical
Holiness, and a Life of Moral Virtue though pretended unto God also. Unto the
first, the Original and continual Purification of our Nature and Persons by the
Spirit of God and Blood of Christ is indispensibly required. Where this Work is
not, there neither is nor can be any thing of that Holiness which the Gospel
prescribes, and which we enquire after. Unless the Purification and Cleansing
of sin belongs necessarily unto the Holiness of the New Covenant, all that God
has taught us concerning it in the Old Testament and the New, by his
Institution of Legal purifying Ordinances, by his Promises to wash purify and
cleanse us, by his Precepts to get our selves cleansed by the Means of our
Purification, namely, his Spirit and the Blood of Christ, by his Instructions
and Directions of us to make use of those Means of our Cleansing, by his
Declarations that Believers are so washed and cleansed from all their
Defilements of their sins, are things Fanatical, Enthusiastic Notions, and
Unintelligible Dreams. Until men can rise up to a Confidence enabling them to
own such horrible Blasphemies, I desire to know, whether these things are
required unto their Morality? If they shall say they are so, they give us a new
Notion of Morality never yet heard of in the World; and we must expect until
they have further cleared it, there being little or no signification in the
great swelling words of Vanity which have hitherto been lavished about it: But
if they do not belong thereunto, as it is most certain, the most improved
Moralists, that are only so, whether in Notion or Practice, have no regard unto
them; then is their Life of Moral Virtues (were it as real in them as it is
with notorious Vanity pretended) cast out from all Consideration in a serious
Disquisition after Evangelical Holiness. And what has been spoken may suffice
to give us some Light into the Nature of this First Act of our Sanctification
by the Spirit, which consists in the Cleansing of our Souls and Consciences
from the Pollutions of Sin both Original and Actual.

CHAP. VI. The Positive Work of the Spirit in the Sanctification of Believers.
(1) Differences in the Acts of Sanctification as to Order. (2) The Manner of
the Communication of Holiness by the Spirit. (3) The Rule and Measure whereof
is the Revealed Will of God. (4) As the Rule of its Acceptance is the Covenant
of Grace. (5) The Nature of Holiness as Inward. (6) Righteousness Habitual and
Actual. (7) False Notions of Holiness removed. (8) The Nature of a Spiritual
Habit. (9) Applied unto Holiness, with its Rules and Limitations. (10) Proved
and Confirmed. (11) Illustrated, and (12) Practically improved. (13) The
Properties of Holiness as a Spiritual Habit, declared. (14) 1. Spiritual
Dispositions unto Suitable Acts; (15, 16.) How expressed in the Scripture. (17)
With their Effects. (18) Contrary Dispositions unto Sin and Holiness how
consistent. (19) 2. Power; (20) The Nature thereof; or what Power is required
in Believers, unto Holy Obedience. (21) With its Properties and Effects in
Readiness and (22) Facility. (23) Objections thereunto answered, and (24) An
Enquiry on these Principles after true Holiness in our selves, directed. (25)
Gospel Grace distinct from Morality, and (26) All other Habits of the Mind.
(27, 28, 29.) Proved by many Arguments, especially its Relation unto the
Mediation of Christ. (30) The Principal Difference between Evangelical Holiness
and all other Habits of the Mind, proved by the Manner and Way of its
Communication from the Person of Christ as the Head of the Church, and the
peculiar Efficiency of the Spirit therein. (31) Moral Honesty not Gospel
Holiness.

Cleansing of our Natures and Persons, does not in Order of Time go before
those other Acts which leave a real and positive Effect upon the Soul, which we
now enter upon the Description of; nor absolutely in Order of Nature. Yea, much
of the Means whereby the Holy Ghost purifieth us, consists in this other Work
of his which now lies before us. Only we thus distinguish them and cast them
into this Order, as the Scripture also does, for the Guidance of our
Understanding in them, and furtherance of our Apprehension of them.

We therefore now proceed unto that part of the Work of the Holy Spirit,
whereby he Communicates the great permanent positive Effect of Holiness unto
the Souls of Believers, and whereby he guides and assists them in all the Acts,
Works and Duties of Holiness whatever, without which, what we do is not so,
nor does any way belong thereunto. And this part of his Work we shall reduce
unto two Heads, which we shall first propose, and afterward clear and
vindicate.

And our First Assertion is, That in the Sanctification of Believers, the Holy
Ghost does work in them, in their whole Souls, their Minds, Wills and
Affections, a gracious supernatural Habit, Principle, and Disposition of Living
unto God, wherein the Substance or Essence, the Life and Being of Holiness does
consist. This is that spirit which is born of the Spirit, that new Creature,
that new and Divine Nature which is wrought in them, and whereof they are made
partakers. Herein consists that Image of God whereunto our Natures are repaired
by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby we are made conformable unto
God, firmly and steadfastly adhering unto him through Faith and Love. That
there is such a Divine Principle, such a gracious supernatural Habit, wrought
in all them that are Born again, has been fully proved in our Assertion and
Description of the Work of Regeneration. It is therefore acknowledged, that the
first supernatural Infusion or Communication of this Principle of spiritual
Light and Life, preparing, sitting and enabling all the Faculties of our Souls
unto the Duties of Holiness, according to the Mind of God, does belong unto the
Work of our first Conversion. But the preservation, cherishing and increase of
it belongs unto our Sanctification, both its Infusion and Preservation being
necessarily required unto Holiness. Hereby is the Tree made good, that the
Fruit of it may be good, and without which it will not so be. This is our new
Nature, which arises not from precedent Actions of Holiness, but is the Root
of them all. Habits acquired by a multitude of Acts, whether in things Moral
or Artificial, are not a new Nature, nor can be so called, but a readiness for
Acting from Use and Custom. But this Nature is from God its Parent, it is that
in us which is born of God. And it is Common unto, or the same in all
Believers, as to its Kind and Being, though not as to Degrees and Exercise. It
is that we cannot learn, which cannot be taught us but by God only, as he
teaches other Creatures in whom he planteth a natural Instinct. The Beauty and
Glory hereof as it is absolutely inexpressible, so have we spoken somewhat to
it before. Conformity to God, Likeness to Christ, Compliance with the Holy
Spirit, Interest in the Family of God, Fellowship with Angels, Separation from
Darkness and the World, do all consist herein.

Matter of our Holiness consists in our Actual Obedience unto God, according to
the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace. For God promises to write his Law in our
Hearts, that we may fear him and walk in his Statutes. And concerning this in
general we may observe two things.

1. That there is a certain fixed Rule and Measure of this Obedience, in a
Conformity and Answerableness whereunto it does consist. This is the Revealed
Will of God in the Scripture, Micah 6. 8. Gods Will I say as revealed unto us
in the Word is the Rule of our Obedience. A Rule it must have, which nothing
else can pretend to be. The secret Will or hidden Purposes of God are not the
Rule of our Obedience, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. much less are our own Imaginations,
Inclinations or Reasons so; neither does any thing, though never so specious,
which we do in Compliance with them or by their Direction, belong thereunto,
Col. 2. 19, 20, 21, 22. But the Word of God is the Adequate Rule of all Holy
Obedience. (1) It is so materially. All that is commanded in that Word belongs
unto our Obedience, and nothing else does so. Hence are we so strictly required
neither to add unto it nor to diminish or take any thing from it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
Chap. 12. 32. Josh. 1. 7. Prove. 36. 6. Revel. 22. 18. (2) It is so formally;
that is, we are not to do only what is commanded, all that is commanded, and
nothing else, but whatever we do we are to do it because it is commanded, or it
is no part of our Obedience or Holiness, Deuteronomy. 6. 24, 25. Chap. 29. 19. Psalm.
119. 9. I know there is an inbred Light of Nature as yet remaining in us,
which gives great Direction as to Moral Good and Evil, commanding the one and
forbidding the other, Romans 2. 14, 15. But this Light, however it may be made
subservient and subordinate thereunto, is not the Rule of Gospel Holiness as
such, nor any part of it. The Law which God by his Grace writes in our Hearts,
answers unto the Law that is written in the Word that is given unto us; and as
the first is the only Principle, so the latter is the only Rule of our
Evangelical Obedience. For this End has God promised that his Word and his
Spirit shall always accompany one another, the one to quicken our Souls, and
the other to guide our Lives, Isa. 59. 20. And the Word of God may be
considered as our Rule in a threefold Respect. 1. As it requires the Image of
God in us. The Habitual Rectitude of our Nature with respect unto God and our
Living to him, is Enjoined us in the Word, yea and wrought in us thereby. The
whole Renovation of our Natures, the whole Principle of Holiness before
described, is nothing but the Word changed into Grace in our Hearts; for we are
born again by the incorruptible seed of the Word of God. The Spirit works
nothing in us, but what the Word first requires of us. It is therefore the
Rule of the inward Principle of spiritual Life, and the growth thereof is
nothing but its increase in Conformity to that Word. 2. With respect unto all
the Actual Frames, Designs and Purposes of the Heart, All the internal Actings
of our Minds, All the Volitions of the Will, all the Motions of our Affections
are to be regulated by that Word which requires us to Love the Lord our God
with all our Minds, all our Souls, and all our Strength. Hereby is their
Regularity or Irregularity to be tried. All that Holiness which is in them
consists in their Conformity to the Revealed Will of God. 3. With respect unto
all our outward Actions and Duties, private, public, of Piety, of
Righteousness, toward our selves or others, Titus 2. 12. This is the Rule of
our Holiness. So far as what we are and what we do answers thereunto, so far
are we holy and no further. Whatever Acts of Devotion or Duties of Morality may
be performed without respect hereunto, belong not to our Sanctification.

2. As there is a Rule of our Performance of this Obedience, so there is a Rule
of the Acceptance of our Obedience with God. And this is the Tenor of the New
Covenant, Genesis 17. 1. What answers hereunto is accepted, and what does not so
is rejected, both as to the Universality of the whole, and the Sincerity that
accompanyes each particular Duty in it. And these two things, Universality and
Sincerity, answer now as to some certain Ends the Legal Perfection at first
required of us. In the Estate of Original Righteousness, the Rule of our
Acceptance with God in our Obedience was the Law and Covenant of Works. And
this required that it should be absolute, perfect in Parts and Degrees, without
the least intermixture of sin with our good, or interposition of it in the
least Instance, which was inconsistent with that Covenant. But now although we
are renewed again by Grace in the Image of God really and truly, yet not
absolutely nor perfectly, but only in part. We have yet remaining in us a
contrary Principle of Ignorance and Sin, which we must always conflict
withal, Gal. 5. 16, 17. Wherefore God in the Covenant of Grace is pleased to
accept of that Holy Obedience which is universal as to all Parts, in all known
Instances of Duty, and sincere as to the Manner of their Performance. What in
particular is required hereunto, is not our present Work to declare. I only aim
to fix in general the Rule of the Acceptance of this Holy Obedience. Now the
Reason hereof is not, that a Lower and more imperfect kind of Righteousness,
Holiliness and Obedience, will answer all the Ends of God and his Glory now
under the New Covenant, than would have done so under the Old. Nothing can be
imagined more distant from the Truth, or more dishonorable to the Gospel, nor
that seems to have a nearer approach unto the making of Christ the Minister of
sin. For what would he be else, if he had procured that God would accept of a
weak imperfect Obedience, accompanied with many failings infirmities and sins,
being in nothing complete, in the Room and stead of that which was complete,
perfect and absolutely sinless, which he first required of us? Yea, God having
determined to exalt and glorify the Holy Properties of his Nature in a more
eminent and Glorious manner under the New Covenant than the Old, for which
Cause and End alone it is so exalted and preferred above it, it was necessary
that there should be a Righteousness and Obedience required therein, far more
complete, eminent and glorious than that required in the other. But the Reason
of this Difference lies solely herein, that our Evangelical Obedience which is
accepted with God, according to the Tenor of the New Covenant, does not hold
the same place which our Obedience should have had under the Covenant of Works.
For therein it should have been our Righteousness absolutely before God, that
whereby we should have been Justified in his sight, even the Works of the Law,
and for which in a due Proportion of Justice we should have been Eternally
rewarded. But this place is now filled up by the Righteousness and Obedience of
Christ our Mediator, which being the Obedience of the Son of God, is far more
eminent and glorious, or tends more to the Manifestation of the Properties of
Gods Nature, and therein the Exaltation of his Glory, than all that we should
have done had we abode steadfast in the Covenant of Works. Whereunto then, it
may be some will say, serves our Holiness and Obedience, and what is the
Necessity of it. I must defer the answering of this Enquiry unto its proper
place, where I shall prove at large the Necessity of this Holiness, and
demonstrate it from its proper Principles and Ends. In the mean time, I say
only in general, that as God requires it of us, so he has appointed it as the
only means whereby we may express our Subjection to him, our Dependence on him,
our Fruitfulness and Thankfulness, the only Way of our Communion and
Intercourse with him, of using and improving the Effects of his Love, the
Benefits of the Mediation of Christ, whereby we may glorify him in this World,
and the only orderly way whereby we may be made meet for the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light, which is sufficient in general to manifest both its Necessity
and its use. These things being then in general premised, I shall comprize what
I have further to offer in the Declaration and Vindication of
Gospel-Sanctification and Holiness, in the two ensuing Assertions.



2. There is an immediate Work or effectual Operation of the Holy Spirit by his
Grace, required unto every Act of holy Obedience, whether internal only in
Faith and Love, or external also; that is, unto all the holy Actings of our
Understandings, Wills and Affections, and unto all Duties of Obedience in our
Walking before God.

The First of these Assertions I affirm not only to be true, but of so great
weight and importance, that our Hope of Life and Salvation depends thereon, and
it is the second great Principle constituting our Christian Profession. And
there are Four things that are to be confirmed concerning it. (1) That there is
such an Habit or Principle supernatural, Infused or Created in Believers by the
Holy Ghost, and always abiding in them. (2) That according to the Nature of
all Habits it inclines and disposes the Mind, Will and Affections, unto Acts
of Holiness suitable unto its own Nature, and with regard unto its proper End,
and to make us meet to live unto God. (3) It does not only incline and dispose
the Mind, but gives it Power, and enables it to live unto God in all Holy
Obedience. (4) That it differs specifically from all other Habits Intellectual
or Moral, that by any Means we may acquire or attain; or spiritual Gifts that
may be conferred on any Persons whatever.

spiritual supernatural Life of Evangelical Holiness, and a Course of Moral
Virtue, which some to the rejection of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, do
endeavor to substitute in the Room thereof. Such a Spiritual, Heavenly,
Supernatural Life, so denominated from its Nature, Causes, Acts and Ends, we
must be partakers of in this World, if ever we mind to attain Eternal Life in
another.



First therefore I say, it is a gracious supernatural Habit, or a Principle of
spiritual Life. And with respect hereunto I shall briefly do these three
things. 1. Show what I mean by such an Habit. 2. Prove that there is such an
Habit required unto Holiness, yea that the Nature of Holiness consists therein.
3. Declare in general the Properties of it.

Essence and form of Holiness, that from which any one is truly and really
made and denominated Holy; or what is the formal Reason of that Holiness which
our Nature is partaker of in this World. This must be something peculiar,
something excellent and sacred, as that which constitutes the great and only
Difference that is between Mankind, on their own part, in the sight of God,
with respect unto Eternity. Every one that has this Holiness pleases God, is
accepted with him, and shall come to the Enjoyment of him. And every one that
has it not, is rejected of him here and hereafter.

And this Holiness in the first place does not consist in any single Acts of
Obedience unto God, though good in their own Nature, and acceptable unto him.
For such Acts may be performed, yea many of them, by unholy persons, with
Examples whereof the Scripture abounds. Cain's Sacrifice and Ahab's
Repentance, were signal single Acts of Obedience materially; yet no Acts of
Holiness formally, nor did either make or denominate them Holy. And our Apostle
tells us, that men may give all their Goods to the Poor, and their Bodies to be
burned, and yet be nothing, 1 Cor. 13. yet in single Acts who can go further?
Such Fruits may spring from Seed that has no Root. Single Acts may evidence
Holiness, as Abraham's Obedience in sacrificing his Son, but they constitute
none Holy; nor will a series, a Course, a Multiplication of Acts and Duties of
Obedience either constitute or denominate any one so, Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14,
15. All the Duties, a series and Multiplication whereof are there rejected for
want of Holiness, were good in themselves, and appointed of God. Nor does it
consist in an Habitual Disposition of Mind unto any outward Duties, of Piety,
Devotion or Obedience, however obtained or acquired. Such Habits there are both
Intellectual and Moral. Intellectual Habits are Arts and Sciences. When men by
Custom, Usuage, and frequent Acts in the Exercise of any Science, Art or
Mystery, do get a ready Facility in and unto all the Parts and Duties of it,
they have an Intellectual Habit therein. It is so in things Moral, as to
Virtues and Vices. There are some seeds and sparks of Moral Virtues remaining
in the Ruins of depraved Nature, as of Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, and the
like. Hence God calls on profligate Sinners to remember and show themselves
Men, or not to act contrary to the Principles and Light of Nature, which are
inseparable from us as we are Men, Isa. 46. 8. These Principles may be so
excited in the Exercise of Natural Light, and improved by Education,
Instruction and Example, until persons by an assiduous diligent performance of
the Acts and Duties of them, may attain such a Readiness unto them and Facility
in them, as is not by any outward Means easily changed or diverted; and this is
a Moral Habit; in like manner in the Duties of Piety and Religion, in Acts of
outward Obedience unto God, men by the same Means may so accustom themselves
unto them, as to have an habitual Disposition unto their Exercise. I doubt not
but that it is so unto an high Degree with many superstitious Persons. But in
all these things, the Acts do still precede the Habits of the same nature and
kind, which are produced by them and not otherwise. But this Holiness is such
an Habit or Principle as is antecedent unto all Acts of the same kind, as we
shall prove. There never was by any, nor ever can be, any Act or Duty of true
Holiness performed, where there was not in Order of Nature antecedently an
Habit of Holiness in the Persons by whom they are performed. Many Acts and
Duties for the substance of them good and approveable, may be performed without
it, but no one that has the proper Form and Nature of Holiness can be so. And
the Reason is, because every Act of true Holiness must have something
supernatural in it from an internal renewed Principle of Grace, and that which
has not so, be it otherwise what it will, is no Act or Duty of true Holiness.

HABIT; not as though it were absolutely of the same kind with acquired Habits,
and would in all things answer to our Conceptions and Descriptions of them: But
we only call it so, because in its Effects and Manner of Operation, it agrees
in sundry things with acquired intellectual or moral Habits. But it has much
more Conformity unto a natural unchangeable Instict, than unto any acquired
Habit. Wherefore, God charge it on men, that in their Obedience unto him they
did not answer that instinct which is in other Creatures toward their Lords
and Benefactors, Isa. 1. 3. and which they cordially observe, Jerem. 8. 7. But
herein God teaches us more than the Beasts of the Earth, and makes us wiser
than the Fowls of Heaven, Job 35. 11.

This therefore is that which I intend; A Virtue, a Power, a Principle of
Spiritual Life and Grace, wrought, created, infused into our Souls, and in-laid
in all the Faculties of them, constantly abiding, and unchangeably residing in
them, which is antecedent unto, and the next Cause of all Acts of true Holiness
whatever. And this is that as was said, wherein the nature of Holiness does
consist, and from which in those that are Adult, the actual Discharge of all
Duties and Works of Holiness is inseparable. This abides always in and with
all that are sanctified, whence they are always Holy, and not only so when
they are actually exercised in the Duties of Holiness. Hereby are they prepared
disposed and enabled unto all Duties of Obedience, as we shall show
immediately, and by the Influence hereof into their Acts and Duties do they
become Holy, and no otherwise.



(1) That this Habit or Principle thus wrought and abiding in us, does not, if
I may so say, Firm its own Station, or abide and continue in us by its own
natural Efficacy, in adhering unto the Faculties of our Souls. Habits that are
acquired by many Actions, have a natural Efficacy to preserve themselves,
until some Opposition that is too hard for them, prevail against them, which
is frequently (though not easily) done. But this is preserved in us, by the
constant powerful Actings and Influence of the Holy Ghost. He which works it
in us, does also preserve it in us. And the Reason hereof is because the Spring
of it is in our Head Christ Jesus; it being only an Emanation of Virtue and
Power from him unto us by the Holy Ghost; if this be not actually and always
continued, whatever is in us, would dye and wither of its self. See Ephesians. 4.
16. Col. 3. 3. Joh. 4. 14. It is in us as the Fructifying Sap is in a Branch of
the Vine or Olive. It is there really and formally, and is the next Cause of
the Fruit-bearing of the Branch. But it does not live and abide by its self,
but by a continual Emanation and Communication from the Root. Let that be
intercepted and it quickly withers. So is it with this Principle in us, with
respect unto its Root Christ Jesus.

(2) Though this Principle or Habit of Holiness be of the same kind or Nature
in all Believers, in all that are sanctified, yet there are in them very
distinct Degrees of it. In some it is more strong, lively, vigorous and
flourishing, in others more weak, feeble and unactive, and this in so great
variety, and on so many Occasions, as cannot here be spoken unto.

(3) That although this Habit and Principle is not acquired by any or many Acts
of Duty or Obedience, yet is it in a way of Duty preserved, increased,
strengthened and improved thereby. God has appointed that we should live in
the Exercise of it, and in and by the Multiplication of its Acts and Duties, is
it kept alive and stirred up, without which it will be weakened and decay.

spiritual Habit or Principle of spiritual Life wrought in Believers, wherein
their Holiness does consist. Some few Testimonies of many shall suffice as to
its present Confirmation.

The Work of it is expressed, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will Circumcise thy
Heart, to love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart and all thy Soul, that thou
may live. The End of Holiness is that we may live, and the principal Work of
Holiness is, to love the Lord our God with all our Hearts and Souls. And this
is the Effect of Gods circumcising our Hearts, without which it will not be.
Every Act of Love and Fear, and consequently of every Duty of Holiness
whatever, is consequential unto Gods circumcising of our Hearts, But it should
seem that this Work of God is only a removal of Hindrances, and does not
express the Collation of the Principle which we assert. I answer, that although
it were easy to demonstrate, that this Work of circumcising our Hearts cannot
be effected without an implantation of the Principle pleaded for in them, yet
it shall suffice at present to evince from hence, that this Effectual Work of
God upon our Hearts is antecedently necessary unto all Acts of Holiness in us.
But herewithall, God writes his Law in our Hearts. Jerem. 31. 33. I will put my
Law in their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts. The Habit or Principle
which we have described, is nothing but a Transcript of the Law of God,
implanted and abiding on our Hearts, whereby we comply with and answer unto the
whole Will of God therein. This is Holiness in the Habit and Principle of it.
This is more fully expressed, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. A new Heart will I give you,
and a new Spirit will I put within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. The whole of all that actual
Obedience, and all those Duties of Holiness which God requires of us, is
contained in these Expressions; ye shall walk in my Statutes, and keep my
Judgments to do them. Antecedent hereunto, and as the Principle and Cause
thereof, God gives a new Heart and a new Spirit. This new Heart is an Heart
with the Law of God written in it, as before mentioned; and this new spirit is
the habitual Inclination of that heart unto the Life of God, or all Duties of
Obedience. And herein the whole of what we have asserted, is confirmed; namely,
that antecedently unto all Duties and Acts of Holiness whatever, and as the
next Cause of them, there is by the Holy Ghost, a new spiritual Principle or
habit of Grace, communicated unto us, and abiding in us, from whence we are
made and denominated holy.

Joh. 3. 6. There is a Work of the Spirit of God upon us in our Regeneration,
we are born again of the Spirit. And there is the Product of this Work of the
Spirit of God in us, that which is born in this new Birth, and that is spirit
also. It is something existing in us, that is of a spiritual Nature and
spiritual Efficacy. It is something abiding in us, acting in a continual
Opposition against the Flesh or Sin; as Gal. 5. 17. and unto all Duties of
Obedience unto God. And until this spirit is formed in us, that is, our whole
Souls have a furnishment of spiritual Power and Ability, we cannot perform any
one Act that is spiritually good, not any one Vital Act of Obedience. This
Spirit or spiritual Nature, which is born of the Spirit, by which alone we are
enabled to live to God, is that Habit of Grace or Principle of holiness which
we intend. And so also is it called a New Creature. He that is in Christ is a
new Creature, 1 Cor. 5. 17. It is something, that by an almighty creating Act
of the Power of God by his Spirit, that has the Nature of a living Creature,
is produced in the Souls of all that are in Christ Jesus. And as it is called
the new Creature, so it is also a Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1. 4. and a Nature is
the Principle of all Operations; And this is what we plead for. The Spirit of
God creates a new Nature in us, which is the Principle and next Cause of all
Acts of the Life of God. Where this is not, whatever else there may be, there
is no Evangelical Holiness. This is that whereby we are enabled to live unto
God, to fear him, to walk in his Ways, and to yield Obedience according to his
Mind and Will. See Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10, 11. this the Scripture
plentifully testifies unto; but withal I must add, that as to the proper
Nature or Essence of it, no Mind can apprehend it, no Tongue can express it,
none can perfectly understand its glory; some few things may be added to
illustrate it.

Union with Jesus Christ the Head of the Church. Originally and efficiently the
Holy Spirit dwelling in him and us, is the Cause of this Union. But formally
this new Principle of Grace is so. It is that whereby we become members of his
bones and of his flesh, Ephesians. 5. 30. As Eve was of Adam; she was one with him
because she had the same Nature with him, and that derived from him, which the
Apsotle alludeth unto, so are we of him, partakers of the same Divine Nature
with him. Thus he that is Joined unto the Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
that is, of one and the same spiritual Nature with him, Heb. 2. 11, 14. How
excellent is this Grace which gives us our Interest in, and Continuity unto the
Body of Christ, and to his Person as our Head. It is the same Grace in the kind
thereof which is in the holy Nature of Christ, and renders us one with him.

(2) Our Likeness and Conformity unto God consists herein. For it is the
Reparation of his Image in us, Ephesians. 4. 23, 24. Col. 3. 10. Something I hope I
apprehend concerning this Image of God in Believers, and of their Likeness unto
him, how great a Privilege it is, what honor safety and security depend
thereon, what Duties are required of us on the Account thereof: But perfectly
to conceive or express the Nature and Glory of it, we cannot attain unto, but
should learn to adore the Grace whence it does proceed and is bestowed on us,
to admire the Love of Christ, and the Efficacy of his Mediation, whereby it is
renewed in us; but the thing it self is ineffable.

(3) It is our Life, our spiritual Life, whereby we live to God. Life is the
Foundation and sum of all Excellencies: Without this we are dead in
Trespasses and sins, and how we are quickened by the holy Ghost, has been
declared. But this is the internal Principle of Life, whence all Vital Acts in
the Life of God do proceed. And whereas we know not well what is the true Form
and Essence of Life Natural, only we find it, discern it, and judge of it by
its Effects; much less do we know the Form and Essence of Life Spiritual, which
is far more Excellent and Glorious. This is that Life which is hid with Christ
in God, Coloss. 3. 3. In which words the Apostle draws a Veil over it, as
knowing that we are unable steadfastly to beholds its Glory and Beauty.

practically to call over these general Considerations of its Nature; and our
own Concernment in this Truth, which is no empty Notion, will be therein
declared. And,

First, We may learn hence, not to satisfy our selves, or not to rest in any
Acts or Duties of Obedience, in any good Works, how good and useful soever in
themselves, nor howsoever multiplied by us, unless there be a Vital Principle
of Holiness in our Hearts. A few honest Actions, a few useful Duties do
satisfy some persons that they are as holy as they should be, or as they need
to be. And some men's Religion has consisted in the multiplying of outward
Duties, that they might be meritorious for themselves and others. But God
expressly rejects not only such Duties, but the greatest multitude of them,
and their most frequent Reiteration, if the heart be not antecedently purified
and sanctified, if it be not possessed with the Principle of Grace and Holiness
insisted on; Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Such Acts and Duties may be the
Effects of other Causes, the Fruits of other Principles. Mere Legal Convictions
will produce them, and put men upon a Course of them. Fears, Afflictions,
Terrors of Conscience, Dictates of Reason improved by Education and confirmed
by Custom, will direct, yea compel men unto their Observance. But all is lost,
men do but labor in the Fire about them, if the Soul be not prepared with this
spiritual Principle of habitual Holiness wrought in it immediately by the Holy
Ghost. Yet we must here observe these two things.

(1) That so far as these Duties, be they of Morality or Religion, of Piety or
Divine Worship, are good in themselves, they ought to be approved, and men
encouraged in them. There are sundry ways whereby the best Duties may be
abused and misapplyed, as when men rest in them, as if they were meritorious,
or the matter of their Justification before God. For this as is known, is an
effectual Means to divert the Souls of sinners from Faith in Christ for Life
and Salvation, Romans 9. 31, 32. Chap. 10. 3, 4. And there are Reasons and Causes
that render them unacceptable before God, with respect unto the Persons by whom
they are performed; as when they are not done in Faith, for which Cain's
Sacrifice was rejected; and when the Heart is not previously sanctified and
prepared with a spiritual Principle of Obedience. But yet on neither of these
grounds or pretenses can we, or ought we to condemn or undervalue the Duties
themselves, which are good in their own nature, nor take off men from the
performance of them, yea it were greatly to be desired that we could see more
of the Fruits of Moral Virtues, and Duties of Religious Piety among
unsanctified Persons than we do. The World is not in a Condition to spare the
good Acts of bad men. But this we may do, and as we are called we ought to
do: When men are engaged in a course of Duties and good Works, on Principles
that will not abide and endure the trial, or for Ends that will spoil and
corrupt all they do, we may tell them, (as our Savior did the Young man, who
gave that great Account of his Diligence in all Legal Duties) one thing is yet
wanting unto you; you want Faith, or you want Christ, or you want a spiritual
Principle of Evangelical Holiness, without which all you do will be lost, and
come to no account at the last Day. The due Assertion of Grace never was nor
never can be an Obstruction unto any Duty of Obedience. Indeed, when any will
give up themselves unto such Works or Actings under the Name of Duties and
Obedience unto God, which although they may make a specious show and appearance
in the World, yet are evil in themselves, or such as God requires not of men,
we may speak against them, deny them, and take men off from them. So
Persecution has been looked on as a good Work, men supposing they did God good
service when they slew the Disciples of Christ, and men giving their Goods unto
pious Uses, as they were called, (indeed impious Abuses) to have others pray
for their Souls, and expiate their sins, when they were gone out of this World.
These and the like other innumerable pretended Duties may be judged, condemned,
exploded, without the least fear of deterring men from Obedience.

(2) That wherever there is this Principle of Holiness in the Heart, in those
that are Adult, there will be the Fruits and Effects of it in the Life, in all
Duties of Righteousness, Godliness and Holiness. For the main Work and End of
this Principle is to enable us to comply with that Grace of God, which teaches
us to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, and
Righteously, and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. That which we
press for, is the great Direction of our Savior, make the Tree good, and the
Fruit will be so also. And there can be no more vile and sordid Hypocrisy,
than for any to pretend unto inward habitual Sanctification, whilst their
Lives are barren in the Fruits of Righteousness and Duties of Obedience.
Wherever this Root is, there it will assuredly bear Fruit.

Secondly, It will appear from hence, whence it is that men propose and steer
such various Courses with respect unto Holiness. All men who profess themselves
to be Christians, are agreed, in words at least, that Holiness is absolutely
necessary unto them that would be saved by Jesus Christ. To deny it, is all one
as openly to renounce the Gospel. But when they should come to the practice of
it, some take one false Way some another, and some Actually despise and reject
it. Now all this arises from Ignorance of the true Nature of Evangelical
Holiness on the one hand, and Love of Sin on the other. There is nothing
wherein we are spiritually and eternally concerned, that is more frequently
insisted on, than is the true Nature of Sanctification and Holiness. But the
thing it self, as has been declared, is deep and mysterious, not to be
understood without the Aid of spiritual Light in our Minds. Hence some would
have Moral Virtue to be Holiness, which as they suppose they can understand by
their own Reason, and practice in their own Strength, and I heartily wish that
we could see more of the Fruits of it from them. But real Moral Virtue will
hardly be abased into an Opposition unto Grace; the Pretense of it will be so
easily, and is so every day. Some on the other hand place all Holiness in
superstitious Devotions, in the strict Observance of Religious Duties which Men
and not God have appointed. And there is no end of their Multiplication of
them, nor measure of the Strictness of some in them. The Reason why men give up
themselves unto such soul-deceiving Imaginations, is their Ignorance and hatred
of that only true real Principle of Evangelical Holiness which we have
discoursed. For, what the World knows not in these things, it always hates.
And they cannot discern it clearly, or in its own Light and Evidence; for it
must be spiritually discerned. This the Natural man cannot do, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
And in that false Light of Corrupted Reason wherein they discern and judge it,
they esteem it foolishness or Fancy. There is not a more Foolish and Fanatical
thing in the World with many, than that internal habitual Holiness which we are
in the Consideration of. And hence are they lead to despise and to hate it. But
here the Love of Sin secretly taken place, and influenceth their Minds. This
universal Change of the^ ^oul in all its Principles of Operation into the Image
and Likeness of God, tending to the Extirpation of all sins and vicious Habits,
is that which men fear and abhor. This makes them take up with Morality and
superstitious Devotion, any thing that will pacify a Natural Conscience, and
please themselves or others with a Reputation of Religion. It is therefore
highly incumbent on all that would not wilfully deceive their own Souls unto
their Eternal Ruin, to enquire diligently into the true Nature of Evangelical
Holiness, and above all to take care that they miss it not in the Foundation,
in the true Root and Principle of it, wherein a mistake will be pernicious.

Thirdly, It is moreover evident from hence, that it is a greater matter to be
truly and really holy than most Persons are aware of. We may learn eminently,
how great and Excellent a Work this of Sanctification and Holiness is, from the
Causes of it. How emphatically does our Apostle ascribe it unto God even the
Father, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Even the God of Peace himself sanctify you. It is so
great a Work as that it cannot be wrought by any but the God of Peace himself.
What is the immediate Work of the Spirit therein, what the Influence of the
Mediation and Blood of Christ into it, has been already in part declared, and
we have yet much more to add in our Account of it. And these things do
sufficiently manifest, how Great, how Excellent and Glorious a Work it is. For
it does not become Divine and Infinite Wisdom, to engage the immediate Power
and Efficacy of such glorious Causes and Means, for the producing of any
ordinary or common Effect. It must be somewhat as of great Importance unto the
Glory of God, so of an Eminent Nature in it self. And that little Entrance
which we have made into an Enquity after its Nature, manifests how Great and
Excellent it is. Let us not therefore deceive our selves with the Shadows and
Appearances of things in a few Duties of Piety, or Righteousness, no nor yet
with many of them, if we find not this great Work at least begun in us. It is
sad to see what trifling there is in these things amongst men. None indeed are
contented to be without a Religion, and very few are willing to admit it in its
Power.

Fourthly, Have we received this Principle of Holiness and of spiritual Life,
by the gracious Operation of the Holy Ghost; there are among many others three
Duties incumbent on us, whereof we ought to be as careful as of our Souls. And
the First is, Carefully and diligently by all Means to cherish and preserve it
in our hearts. This Sacred Depositum of the New Creature, of the Divine Nature,
is entrusted with us, to take care of, to cherish and improve. If we willingly
or through our neglect suffer it to be wounded by Temptations, weakened by
Corruptions, or not exercised in all known Duties of Obedience, our Guilt is
great, and our Trouble will not be small. And then Secondly, It is equally
incumbent on us, to evidence and manifest it by its Fruits in the Mortification
of corrupt Lusts and Affections, in all Duties of Holiness, Righteousness,
Charity and Piety in the World. For that God may be glorified hereby, is one of
the Ends why he indues our Natures with it. And without these visible Fruits,
we expose our entire Profession of Holiness to reproach. And in like manner is
it required, that we be thankful for what we have received.

Nature of an Habit, so also has it the Properties thereof. And the first
Property of an Habit is, that it inclines and disposes the Subject wherein it
is, unto Acts of its own kind, or suitable unto it. It is directed unto a
certain End, and enclines unto Acts or Actions which tend thereunto, and that
with evenness and Constancy. Yea Moral Habits are nothing but strong and firm
Dispositions and Inclinations uuto Moral Acts and Duties of their own kind; as
Righteousness, or Temperance, or Meekness. Such a Disposition and Inclination
therefore there must be in this new spiritual Nature or Principle of Holiness
which we have described, wherewith the Souls of Believers are in-laid and
furnished by the Holy Ghost in their Sanctification. For,

certain End, to enable us whereunto, it is bestowed on us. Although it be a
great Work in it self, that wherein the Renovation of the Image of God in us
does consist, yet is it not wrought in any but with respect unto a further End
in this World. And this end is, that we may Live to God; We are made like unto
God, that we may live unto God. By the Depravation of our Natures we are
alienated from this Life of God, this Divine spiritual Life, Ephesians. 4. 18. we
like it not, but have an Aversation unto it. Yea, we are under the Power of a
Death that is universally opposed unto that Life; For, to be carnally minded is
death, Romans 8. 6. that is, it is so with respect unto the Life of God, and all
the Acts that belong thereunto. And this Life of God has two parts. (1) The
outward Duties of it, (2) The inward Frame and Actings of it. For the First;
Persons under the Power of Corrupted Nature may perform them, and do so, but
without Delight, Constancy or Permanency. The Language of that Principle
whereby they are Acted is, Behold what a Wearyness it is, Mal. 1. 13. and such
Hypocrites will not pray always. But as to the Second, for the internal
actings of Faith and Love, whereby all outward Duties should be quickened and
animated, they are utter strangers unto them, utterly alienated from them. With
respect unto this Life of God, a Life of spiritual Obedience unto God, are our
Natures thus spiritually renewed, or furnished with this spiritual Habit and
Principle of Grace. It is wrought in us, that by virtue thereof we may live to
God, without which we cannot do so in any one single Act or Duty whatever. For,
they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. Wherefore, the first
Property and inseparable Adjunct of it is, that it enclineth and disposes the
Soul wherein it is, unto all Acts and Duties that belong to the Life of God, or
unto all the Duties of holy Obedience, so that it shall attend unto them, not
from Conviction or external Impression only, but from an internal genuine
Principle so inclining and disposing them thereunto. And these things may be
illustrated by what is contrary unto them. There is in the state of Nature a
Carnal Mind; which is the Principle of all Moral and Spiritual Operations in
them in whom it is; And this Carnal Mind has an Enmity, or is Enmity against
God; it is not subject unto the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7.
that is, the Bent and Inclination of it lies directly against spiritual things,
or the Mind and Will of God, in all things which concern a Life of Obedience
unto himself. Now as this Principle of Holiness is that which is introduced
into our Souls in Opposition unto, and to the Exclusion of the Carnal Mind; so
this Disposition and Inclination of it, is opposite and contrary unto the
Enmity of the Carnal Mind, as tending always unto Actions spiritually good,
according to the Mind of God.

Disposition of Heart and Soul, which I place as the first Property or Effect
of the Principle of Holiness before declared and explained, is in the Scripture
called, Fear, Love, Delight, and by the names of such other Affections as
express a constant regard and inclination unto their Objects. For these things
do not denote the Principle of Holiness it self, which is seated in the Mind,
or Understanding and Will, whereas they are the names of Affections only; but
they signify the first Way whereby that Principle does act it self in an holy
Inclination of the Heart unto Spiritual Obedience. So when the People of Israel
had engaged themselves by solemn Covenant, to hear and do whatsoever God
commanded, God adds concerning it, Oh that there were such an Heart in them,
that they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
that is, that the Bent and Inclinations of their Hearts were always unto
Obedience. It is that which is intended in the Promise of the Covenant, Jerem.
32. 39. I will give them one Heart, that they may fear me, which is the same
with the new Spirit, Ezekiel. 11. 19. The new Heart, as has been declared, is the
new Nature, the new Creature, the new spiritual supernatural Principle of
Holiness; The first Effect, the first Fruit hereof is, the Fear of God always,
or a New spiritual Bent and Inclination of Soul unto all the Will and Commands
of God. And this new Spirit, this Fear of God, is still expressed as the
inseparable Consequent of the new Heart, or the writing of the Law of God in
our Hearts, which are the same. So it is called, Fearing the Lord and his
goodness, Hos. 3. 5. In like manner it is expressed by Love, which is the
Inclination of the Soul unto all Acts of Obedience unto God and Communion with
him, with Delight and Complacency. It is a Regard unto God and his Will, with a
Reverence due unto his Nature, and a Delight in him suited unto that
Covenant Relation wherein he stands unto us.

spiritually minded: To be Spiritually minded is Life and Peace, Romans 8. 6.
that is, the bent and inclination of the Mind unto spiritual things, is that
whereby we Live to God, and enjoy Peace with him, it is Life and Peace. By
Nature we savor only the things of the flesh, and mind Earthly things, Phil.
3. 19. our Minds or Hearts are set upon them, disposed toward them, ready for
all things that lead us to the Enjoyment of them, and Satisfaction in them.
But, hereby we mind the things that are above, or set our Affections on them,
Coloss. 3. 3. By virtue hereof David professes, that his Soul followed hard
after God; Psalm. 63. 8. or inclined earnestly unto all those Ways whereby he
might live unto him, and come unto the Enjoyment of him: Like the Earnestness
which is in him who is in the pursuit of something continually in his Eye, as
our Apostle expresses it, Phil. 3. 13, 14. By the Apostle Peter it is compared
unto that natural inclination which is in those that are hungry unto Food, 1
Pet. 2. 2. As newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that you may
grow thereby; which is a constant unalterable Inclination.

This therefore is that which I intead. Every Nature has its Disposition unto
Actings suitable unto it. The Principle of Holiness is such a Nature, a New or
Divine Nature; wherever it is, it constantly inclines the Soul unto Duties and
Acts of Holiness; it produces a constant Disposition unto them. And as by the
Principle it self, the contrary Principle of Sin and Flesh is impaired and
subdued, so by this gracious Disposition, the Inclination unto sin which is in
us, is weakened, impaired, and gradually taken away.

Holiness is, it does dispose or incline the whole Soul unto Acts and Duties of
Holiness, and that (1) Universally or impartially; (2) Constantly or Evenly.
(3) Permanently, unto the End. And where these things are not, no
Multiplication of Duties will either make or Denominate any Person Holy.

(1) There is no Duty of Holiness whatever, but there is a Disposition in a
sanctified heart unto it. There is a respect unto all Gods Commands. Some of
them may be more contrary unto our natural Inclinations than others, some more
cross unto our present secular Interests, some attended with more Difficulties
and disadvantages than others; and some may be rendered very hazardous by the
circumstances of Times and Seasons. But however, if there be a gracious
Principle in our Hearts, it will equally incline and dispose us unto every one
of them in its proper place and season. And the Reason hereof is, because it
being a new Nature, it equally enclines unto all that belongs unto it, as all
Acts of Holy Obedience do. For every Nature has an equal Propensity unto all
its natural Operations, in their Times and Seasons. Hence our Savior tried the
rich Young Man, who gave an Account of his Duties and Righteousness, with one
that lay close unto his secular Interests and worldly Satisfactions. This
immediately carried him off, and evidenced that all he had done besides, was
not from an internal Principle of spiritual Life. Any other Principle or Cause
of Duties and Obedience, will upon Solicitations give way unto an habitual
Reserve of one thing or other that is contrary thereunto. It will admit either
of the Omission of some Duties, or of the Commission of some Sin, or of the
retaining of some Lust. So Naaman, who vowed Obedience upon his Conviction of
the Power of the God of Israel, would nevertheless upon the solicitation of
his Worldly interest, have a Reserve to bow in the house of Rimmon. So
Omissions of Duties that are dangerous, in a way of Profession, or the Reserve
of some corrupt Affections, Love of the World, Pride of Life, will be admitted
upon any other Principle of Obedience, and that habitually. For even those who
have this real spiritual Principle of Holiness, may be surprised into actual
Omission of Duties, Commission of sins, and a temporary indulgence unto Corrupt
Affections. But habitually they cannot be so. An habitual Reserve for any thing
that is sinful or Morally evil, is eternally inconsistent with this Principle
of Holiness. Light and Darkness, Fire and Water, may as soon be reconciled in
one. And hereby is it distinguished from all other Principles, Reasons or
Causes, whereon men may perform any Duties of Obedience toward God.

constantly and evenly. He in whom it is fears always, or is in the Fear of
the Lord all the day long. In all instances, on all Occasions, it equally
disposes the Mind unto Acts of Holy Obedience. It is true, that the Actings of
Grace which proceed from it, are in us sometimes more intense and vigorous than
at other times. It is so also, that we are our selves sometimes more watchful,
and diligently intent on all Occasions of acting Grace, whether in Solemn
Duties, or in our general Course, or on particular Occasions, than we are at
some other times. Moreover, there are especial Seasons wherein we meet with
greater Difficulties and Obstructions from our Lusts and Temptations than
ordinary, whereby this holy Disposition is intercepted, and impeded. But
notwithstanding all these things, which are contrary unto it, and obstructive
of its Operations, in it self and its own Nature it does constantly and evenly,
incline the Soul at all Times and on all Occasions, unto Duties of Holiness.
Whatever falls out otherwise, is Accidental unto it. This Disposition is like a
Stream that arises equally from a living Fountain, as our Savior expresses
it; John 4. 14. A Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life. As this
stream passes in its Course it may meet with Oppositions, that may either stop
it or divert it for a season: But its Waters still press forward continually.
Hereby does the Soul set God always before him, and walk continually as in his
sight. Men may perform Duties of Obedience unto God, yea many of them, yea be
engaged into a constant Course of them as to their outward performance, on
other Grounds, from other Principles, and by virtue of other Motives. But
whatever they are, they are not a new Nature in and unto the Soul, and so do
not dispose men constantly and evenly unto what they lead unto. Sometimes their
Impressions on the Mind are strong and violent, there is no withstanding of
them but the Duties they require must instantly be complied withal. So is it
when Convictions are excited by Dangers or Afflictions, strong Desires, or the
like. And again, they leave the Soul unto its own Formality and Course, without
the least impression from them toward any Duties whatever. There is no Cause
nor Principle, or Reason of Obedience, besides this one insisted on, that will
evenly and constantly incline unto the Acts of it. Men proceeding only upon the
Power of Convictions, are like those at Sea, who sometimes meet with storms or
vehement winds which sit them for their Course, and would seem immediately to
drive them as it were with Violence into their Port or Harbor, but quickly
after they have an utter Calm, no breath of Air stirs to help them forward;
and then it may be after a while another gust of wind befalls them, which they
again suppose will dispatch their Voyage; but that also quickly fails them.
Where this Principle is, Persons have a natural Current which carries them on
quickly, evenly, and constantly; And although they may sometimes meet with
Storms, Tempests, and Cross winds, yet the Stream, the Current which is
natural, at length works its way, and holds on its course through all
external occasional impediments.

permanent herein, and abides for ever. It will never cease inclining and
disposing the whole Soul unto Acts and Duties of Obedience, until it comes
unto the End of them all in the Enjoyment of God. It is living Water, and
whosoever drinks of it, shall never thirst any more, that is, with a total
indigence of Supplies of Grace, but it is a Well of Water springing up into
everlasting Life, Joh. 4. 14. It springs up, and that as always without
intermission, because it is living water from which Vital Acts are inseparable,
so permanently without ceasing, it springs up into Everlasting Life, and
fails not until those in whom it is, are safely lodged in the Enjoyment of
it. This is expressly promised in the Covenant. I will put my Fear in their
Hearts, and they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32. 40. They shall never do so
in whom is this Fear, which is permanent and Endless. It is true, that it is
our Duty, with all Care and Diligence, in the use of all Means, to preserve,
cherish and improve both the Principle it self, and its actings in these Holy
Dispositions. We are to show all Diligence unto the full Assurance of Hope unto
the End; Heb. 6. 11. And in the use of Means and the Exercise of Grace is it,
that it is infallibly kept and preserved, Isa. 40. 31. And it is also true,
that sometimes, in some Persons, upon the fierce interpositions of Temptations,
with the violent and deceitful working of Lusts, the Principle it self may
seem for a Season to be utterly stifled, and this Property of it to be
destroyed; as it seems to have been with David under his sad Fall and decay.
Yet such is the Nature of it, that it is immortal, everlasting, and which shall
never absolutely dye; such is the Relation of it unto the Covenant-Faithfulness
of God, and Mediation of Christ, as that it shall never utterly cease or be
extinguished. It abides disposing and enclining the Heart unto all Duties of
Holy Obedience unto the grave. Yea ordinarily, and where its genuine Work and
Tendency is not interrupted by cursed Negligence or Love of the World, it
thrives and grows continually unto the End. Hence some are not only Fruitful,
but Fat and flourishing in their Old Age, and as the outward man decays, so
in them the inward man is daily renewed in Strength and Power. But as unto all
other Principles of Obedience whatever, as it is in their own nature to decay
and wither, all their actings growing insensibly weaker and less efficacious,
so for the most part either the increase of Carnal Wisdom, or the Love of the
World, or some powerful Temptations at one time or other put an utter end unto
them, and they are of no use at all. Hence there is not a more secure
Generation of sinners in the World, than those who have been acted by the Power
of Conviction unto a course of Obedience in the performance of many Duties. And
those of them who fall not openly to Profaneness or Lasciviousness, or Neglect
of all Duties of Religion, do continue in their Course, from what they have
been habituated unto, finding it complyant with their present Circumstances and
Conditions in the World, as also having been preserved from such Ways and
Practices as are inconsistent with their present course by the power of their
former Convictions. But the Power of these Principles, of Conviction,
Education, Impressions from Afflictions, Dangers, Fears, all in one, dye before
men, and if their eyes were open, they might see the End of them.

In this manner therefore, does the New Divine Nature that is in Believers,
dispose and incline them, impartially, evenly and permanently unto all Acts and
Duties of Holy Obedience.



There are yet in them Inclinations and Dispositions to sin, proceeding from
the Remainders of a contrary habitual Principle. This the Scripture calls the
Flesh, Lust, the sin that dwells in us, the Body of Death; being what yet
remains in Believers of that vicious corrupted Depravation of our Nature,
which came upon us by the loss of the Image of God, disposing the whole Soul
unto all that is evil. This yet continues in them, enclining them unto Evil,
and all that is so, according to the Power and Efficacy that is remaining unto
it in various Degrees. Sundry things are here observable; as (1) This is that
which is singular in this Life of God. There are in the same Mind, Will and
Affections, namely, of a Person Regenerate, contrary Habits and inclinations,
continually opposing one another, and acting adversly about the same Objects
and Ends. And this is not from any Jarrings or Disorder between the distinct
Faculties of the Soul it self, as in Natural men there are adverse Actings
between their Wills and Affections on the one hand bent unto sin, and the Light
of their Minds and Consciences on the other, prohibiting the committing of sin,
and condemning its Commission, which Disorder is discernible in the Light of
Nature, and is sufficiently canvased by the Old Philosophers. But these
contrary Habits, Inclinations and Actings are in the same Faculties. (2) As
this cannot be apprehended but by virtue of a previous Conviction and
acknowledgement, both of the total Corruption of our Nature by the Fall, and
the Initial Renovation of it by Jesus Christ, wherein these contrary Habits and
Dispositions do consist, so it cannot be denied without an open Rejecting of
the Gospel, and Contradiction to the Experience of all that do Believe, or know
any thing of what it is to live to God. We intend no more but what the Apostle
so plainly asserts, Gal. 5. 17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the Flesh; that is, in the Mind, Will and Affections of
Believers, and these are contrary the one unto the other; they are contrary
Principles attended with contrary Inclinations and Actings, so that ye cannot
do the things that ye would. (3) There cannot be contrary Habits merely Natural
or Moral in the same Subject, with respect unto the same Object, at the same
time; at least they cannot be so in any high Degree, so as to incline and act
contrary one to another with Urgency or Efficacy. For violent Inclinations unto
sin, and a Conscience fiercely condemning for sin, whereby sinners are
sometimes torn and even distracted, are not contrary Habits in the same
Subject. Only Conscience brings in from without the Judgment of God, against
what the Will and Affections are bent upon.

Habits of spirit and flesh, of Grace and Sin, with their adverse inclinations
and actings. Only they cannot be in the highest Degree at the same time, nor be
equally prevalent or predominant in the same instances. That is, Sin and Grace
cannot bear rule in the same Heart at the same time, so as that it should be
equally under the conduct of them both. Nor can they have in the same Soul
contrary Inclinations equally efficacious; for then would they absolutely
obstruct all sorts of Operations whatever. Nor have they the same influence
into particular Actions, so as that they should not be justly denominated from
one of them either gracious or sinful. But by Nature the vicious depraved
Habit of sin, or the flesh, is wholly predominant and universally prevalent,
constantly disposing and enclining the Soul to sin. Hence all the Imaginations
of men's hearts are evil, and that continually: And, they that are in the Flesh
cannot please God. There dwells no good thing in them, nor can they do any
thing that is good; and the Flesh is able generally to subdue the Rebellions of
Light, Convictions and Conscience, against it. But, upon the Introduction of
the New Principle of Grace and Holiness in our Sanctification, this Habit of
sin is weakened, impaired, and so disenabled, as that it cannot nor shall
incline unto sin with that Constancy and Prevalency as formerly, nor press unto
it ordinarily with the same Urgency and Violence. Hence in the Scripture it is
said to be dethroned by Grace, so as that it shall not reign or lord it over
us, by hurrying us into the pursuit of its uncontrollable inclinations, Romans 6.
12. Concerning these things the Reader may consult my Treatises of the
Remainder of Indwelling sin, and the Mortification of it in Believers.

flesh, this Principle of Sin, however it may be dethroned, corrected, impaired
and disabled, yet is it never wholly and absolutely dispossessed and cast out
of the Soul in this Life. There it will remain, and there it will work, seduce
and tempt, more or less, according as its remaining Strength and Advantages
are. By Reason hereof, and the Opposition that hence arises against it, the
Principle of Grace and Holiness cannot, nor does perfectly and absolutely,
incline the Heart and Soul unto the Life of God and the Acts thereof, so as
that they in whom it is should be sensible of no Opposition made thereunto, or
of no contrary motions and inclinations unto sin. For, the Flesh will lust
against the Spirit, as well as the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are
contrary. This is the Analogy that is between these two States. In the state
of Nature, the Principle of sin or the Flesh is predominant and bears rule in
the Soul, but there is a Light remaining in the Mind, and a Judgment in the
Conscience, which being heightened with Instructions and Convictions do
continually oppose it, and condemn Sin both before and after its commission. In
them that are Regenerate it is the Principle of Grace and Holiness that is
predominant and bears rule: But there is in them still a Principle of Lust
and sin, which rebels against the Rule of Grace, much in the proportion that
Light and Convictions rebel against the Rule of sin in the Unregenerate. For
as they hinder men from doing many evils, which their ruling Principle of sin
strongly inclines them unto, and puts them on many Duties that it likes not; so
do these on the other side in them that are Regenerate: They hinder them from
doing many good things which their ruling Principle inclines unto, and carry
them into many Evils which it does abhor.

universally unto all Acts of Holy Obedience. And these inclinations are
predominant unto any other, and keep the Soul pointed to Holiness continually.
This belongs unto its Nature, and where there is a Cessation or Interruption in
these inclinations, it is from the prevailing Re-action of the Principle of
Sin, it may be, advantaged by outward Temptations and Incentives, which an holy
Soul will constantly contend against. Where this is not, there is no Holiness.
The Performance of Duties, whether of Religious Worship, or of Morality, how
frequently, sedulously and usefully soever, will denominate no man Holy, unless
his whole Soul be disposed and possessed with prevalent inclinations unto all
that is spiritually Good, from the Principle of the Image of God renewed in
him. Outward Duties of what sort soever, may be multiplied upon Light and
Conviction, when they spring from no root of Grace in the Heart, and that which
so rises up will quickly wither, Math. 13. And this free, genuine, unforced
Inclination of the Mind and Soul evenly and universally unto all that is
Spiritually Good, unto all Acts and Duties of Holiness, with an inward
laboring to break through and to be quit of all Opposition, is the first Fruit
and most pregnant Evidence of the Renovation of our Natures by the Holy Ghost.

It may be enquired, ^ct. 28.
Whence it is, (if the Habit or inherent Principle of Holiness do so constantly
incline the Soul unto all Duties of Holiness and Obedience) that David prays,
that God would incline his Heart unto his Testimonies, Psalm. 119. 36. For it
should seem from hence to be a new Act of Grace that is required thereunto, and
that it does not spring from the Habit mentioned, which was then eminent in the
Psalmist.

Ans. (1) I shall show afterward, that notwithstanding all the Power and
Efficacy of Habitual Grace, yet there is required a new Act of the Holy Spirit
by his Grace, unto its actual Exercise in particular instances. (2) God
enclines our Hearts to Duties of Obedience principally by strengthening,
increasing, and exciting the Grace we have received, and which is inherent in
us. But we neither have, nor ever shall have in this World, such a stock of
spiritual Strength, as to do any thing as we ought, without Renewed
Co-operations of Grace.

Thirdly, There is Power accompanying this Habit of Grace as well as Propensity
or Inclination. It does not merely dispose the Soul to holy Obedience, but
enables it unto the Acts and Duties of it. Our Living unto God, our walking in
his Ways and Statutes, keeping his Judgments, which things express our whole
Actual Obedience, are the Effects of the New Heart that is given unto us,
whereby we are enabled unto them, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. But this must be somewhat
further and distinctly declared. And (1) I shall show, That there is such a
Power of holy Obedience in all that have the Principle of Holiness wrought in
them by the Sanctification of the Holy Spirit, which is inseparable from it;
and (2) show, What that Power is, or wherein it does consist.

That by Nature we have no Power unto, or for any thing that is Spiritually
good, or to any Acts or Duties of Evangelical Holiness, has been sufficiently
proved before. When we were yet without strength in due time Christ dyed for
the Ungodly, Romans 5. 6. Until we are made partakers of the Benefits of the
Death of Christ in and by his sanctifying Grace, as we are ungodly, so we are
without strength, or have no Power to live to God. But, as was said, this has
been formerly fully and largely confirmed in our Declaration of the impotency
of our Nature by Reason of its Death in Sin, and so need not here to be further
insisted on.

a Power and Ability given unto us of living unto God, or performing all the
Duties of acceptable Obedience. This is the first Act of that Spiritual Habit,
arising out of it and inseparable from it. It is called Strength or Power, Isa.
40. 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, that is, for
and unto Obedience, or walking with God without Weariness; Strength they have,
and in their Walking with God it is renewed or increased. By the same Grace are
we strengthened with all might according to the glorious Power of God, Col. 1.
11. or strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, Ephesians. 3. 16.
whereby we can do all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4. 13.
In our Calling or Conversion to God, all things are given unto us by his Divine
Power which pertain unto Life and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. every thing that is
needful to enable us unto a holy Life. The Habit and Principle of Grace that
is wrought in Believers, gives them new Power and spiritual Strength unto all
Duties of Obedience. The Water of the Spirit therein, is not only a Well of
Water abiding in them, but it springs up into everlasting Life, Joh. 4. 14.
or enables us continually to such gracious Actings as have a Tendency
thereunto. There is a sufficiency in the Grace of God bestowed on them that
Believe, to enable them unto the Obedience required of them. So God told our
Apostle, when he was ready to faint under his Temptations, that his Grace was
sufficient for him, 2 Cor. 12. 9. or there is a Power in all that are
sanctified, whereby they are able to yield all holy Obedience unto God. They
are alive unto God, alive to Righteousness and Holiness. They have a Principle
of spiritual Life; and where there is Life, there is Power in its Kind and for
its End. Whence there is not in our Sanctification only a Principle or inherent
Habit of Grace bestowed on us, whereby we really and habitually as to State and
Condition differ from all unregenerate persons whatever, but there belongs
moreover thereunto, an active Power or an Ability for and unto spiritual holy
Obedience, which none are partakers of but those who are so sanctified. And
unto this Power there is a respect in all the Commands or Precepts of
Obedience, that belong to the New Covenant. The Commands of each Covenant
respect the Power given in and by it. Whatever God required or does require of
any, by virtue of the Old Covenant or the Precepts thereof, it was on the
Account of, and proportionate unto, the strength given under and by that
Covenant. And that we have lost that strength by the Entrance of sin, exempts
us not from the Authority of the Command; and thence it is that we are
righteously obliged to do, what we have no Power to perform. So also the
Command of God under the new Covenant, as to all that Obedience which he
requires of us, respects that Power which is given and communicated unto us
thereby. And this is that Power which belongs unto the New Creature, the Habit
and Principle of Grace and Holiness, which as we have proved, is wrought by the
Holy Ghost in all Believers.

Nature of this spiritual Power, what it is, and wherein it does consist. Now
this cannot be clearly understood without a due Consideration of that Impotency
unto all spiritual good which is in us by Nature, which it cures and takes
away. This we have before at large declared, and thither the Reader is
referred. When we know what it is to be without Power or Strength in Spiritual
things, we may thence learn what it is to have them: To this purpose we may
consider, that there are three things or Faculties in our Souls, which are the
Subject of all Power or Impotency in spiritual things; namely, our
Understandings, Wills and Affections. That our spiritual Impotency arises from
their Depravation has been proved before; and what Power we have for holy
spiritual Obedience, it must consist in some especial Ability communicated
distinctly unto all these Faculties. And our Enquiry therefore is, What is this
Power in the Mind, what in the Will, and what in the Affections. And,

(1) This power in the Mind consists in a spiritual Light and Ability to
discern spiritual Things in a spiritual Manner, which Men in the state of
Nature are utterly devoyd of, 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14. The Holy Spirit in the first
Communication of the Principle of spiritual Life and Holiness, shines into our
Hearts, to give us the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. yea this strengthening of the Mind by saving Illumination,
is the most eminent Act of our Sanctification. Without this there is a Veil,
with Fear and Bondage upon us, that we cannot see into spiritual things. But
where the Spirit of God is, where he comes with his sanctifying Grace, there is
Liberty; And thereby we all with open face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
See Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.

Wherefore, all sanctified Believers have an Ability and Power in the renewed
Mind and Understanding, to see, know, discern and receive spiritual Things, the
Mysteries of the Gospel, the Mind of Christ, in a due and spiritual Manner. It
is true, they have not all of them this Power and Ability in the same Degree;
but every one of them has a sufficiency of it, so as to discern what concerns
themselves and their Duties necessarily. Some of them seem indeed to be very
low in Knowledge, and in comparison of others very Ignorant. For there are
different Degrees in these things, Ephesians. 4. 7. And some of them are kept in
that Condition by their own Negligence and Sloth. They do not use as they
ought, nor improve those Means of Growing in Grace and in the Knowledge of
Jesus Christ, which God prescribes unto them; as Heb. 6. 14, 15, 16. But every
one who is truly sanctified, and who thereby has received the least Degree of
saving Grace, has Light enough to understand the spiritual Things of the
Gospel in a spiritual Manner. When the Mysteries of the Gospel are Preached
unto Believers, some of them may be so declared as that those of meaner
Capacities and Abilities may not be able to comprehend aright the Doctrine of
them, which yet is necessary to be so proposed for the Edification of those who
are more grown in Knowledge. Nevertheless, there is not any the meanest of
them, but has a spiritual insight into the things themselves intended, so far
as they are necessary unto their Faith and Obedience in the Condition wherein
they are. This the Scripture gives such abundant Testimony unto, as to render
it unquestionable. For we have received the Spirit of God, that we may know the
things that are freely given us of God. By virtue of what we have received, we
know or discern Spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 12. So we know the mind of Christ,
v. 15. This is the substance of that double Testimony, 1 John 2. 20, 27. This
abiding Unction is no other but that habitual inherent Grace which we plead
for, and by it as it is an holy Light in our Mind we know all things; The
Understanding that is given us to know him that is True, 1 John 5. 20. Only it
is their Duty continually to endeavor the improvement and enlargement of the
Light they have, in the daily Exercise of the spiritual Power they have
received, and in the use of Means; Heb. 5. ult,

Power in the Will consists in its Liberty, Freedom and Ability to consent
unto, choose and embrace spiritual Things. Believers have Free Will unto that
which is spiritually Good. For they are freed from that Bondage and slavery
unto sin which they were under in the state of Nature: Whatever some dispute
concerning the Nature of Free Will, that it consists in an Indifferency unto
Good or Evil, one thing or another, with a Power of applying it self unto all
its Operations, whatever their Objects be, as the Scripture knows nothing of
it, so it is that which we cannot have, and if we could, it would be no
advantage at all unto us, yea we had much better be without it. Have it indeed
we cannot, for a supposition of it includes a Rejection of all our Dependence
on God, making all the springs of our Actions to be absolutely and formally in
our selves. Neither, considering the Prejudices, Temptations and Corruptions
that we are possessed and exercised with, would such a flexibility of Will be
of any Use or Advantage unto us, but would rather certainly give us up to the
Power of Sin and Satan. All that the Scripture knows about Freewill, is that
in the state of Nature antecedent unto the Converting sanctifying Work of the
Spirit, all men whatever are in bondage unto sin, and that in all the Faculties
of their Souls. They are sold under sin, are not subject unto the Law of God,
nor can be; can neither think, nor will, nor do, nor desire, nor love any
thing that is spiritually Good, according to the Mind of God. But as unto what
is Evil, perverse, unclean, that they are free and open unto, ready for, prone
and inclined, and every way able to do. On the other side, in those who are
renewed by the Holy Ghost and sanctified, it acknowledges and teaches a
freedom of Will, not in an Indifferency and Flexibility unto Good and Evil, but
in a Power and Ability to like, love, choose, and cleave unto God and his Will
in all things. The Will is now freed from its Bondage unto sin, and being
enlarged by Light and Love, wills and chooses freely the things of God,
having received spiritual Power and Ability so to do. It is the Truth, that
is, Faith in the Gospel, the Doctrine of the Truth, which is the Means of this
Freedom. The Truth that makes you free, Joh. 8. 32. And it is the Son of God by
his Spirit who is the principal Efficient cause of it. For if the Son make us
free, then are we free indeed, v. 36. and otherwise we are not, whatever we
pretend. And this freedom unto spiritual Good we have not of our selves in the
state of Nature; for if we have, then are we free indeed, and there would be no
need that the Son should make us free.

Free Will, is reduced unto these Heads. 1. Whether there be a Power in Man,
indifferently to Determine himself, his Choice and all his Actings, to this, or
that, Good or Evil, one thing or another, independently on the Will, Power and
Providence of God, and his Disposal of all future Events. This indeed we deny,
as that which is inconsistent with the Prescience, Authority, Decrees and
Dominion of God; and as that which would prove certainly ruinous and
destructive to our selves. 2. Whether there be in men unregenerate, not renewed
by the Holy Ghost, a Freedom, Power and Ability unto that which is spiritually
good, or to Believe and Obey according to the Mind and Will of God. This also
we deny, as that which is contrary to innumerable Testimonies of Scripture, and
absolutely destructive of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. Whether the
Freedom of Will that is in Believers, do consist in an indifferency and freedom
from any Determination only, with a power equally ready for Good or Evil,
according as the Will shall determine it self; or whether it consist in a
Gracious Freedom and Ability to choose, will and do that which is spiritually
Good, in Opposition to the Bondage and slavery unto sin, wherein we were before
detained. This last is that Liberty and Power of the Will which we assert with
the Scripture in persons that are sanctified. And a Liberty this is every way
consistent with all the Operations of God, as the Sovereign first Cause of all
things; every way complyant with, and an Effect of the special Grace of God,
and the Operations of the Holy Ghost; a Liberty whereby our Obedience and
Salvation are secured, in Answer to the Promises of the Covenant. And who, that
understands himself, would change this real, useful, gracious free will,
given by Jesus Christ the Son of God, when he makes us free, and an Effect of
Gods writing his Law in our Hearts, to cause us to walk in his Statutes, that
Property of the new Heart whereby it is able to consent unto, choose and
embrace freely the things of God, for that fictitious imaginary freedom, yea
for it if it were real, of an Indifferency unto all things, and an Equal Power
unto every thing, whether it be Good or Evil. I say then, that by the Habit of
Grace and Holiness infused into us by the Spirit of Sanctification, the Will is
freed, enlarged, and enabled to answer the Commands of God for Obedience,
according to the Tenor of the New Covenant. This is that freedom, this is that
Power of the Will which the Scripture reveals and regards, and which by all the
Promises and Precepts of it we are obliged to use and exercise, and no other.

Affections, which naturally are the principal servants and instruments of Sin,
are hereby engaged unto God, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. And from what has been thus far
discoursed, the sense of our former Assertion is evident, as also the Nature of
the Principle of Holiness insisted on.

The Holy Ghost in our Sanctification does work effect and create in us, a new,
holy, spiritual, vital Principle of Grace, residing in all the Faculties of our
Souls, according as their especial Nature is capable thereof, after the manner
of a permanent and prevalent Habit, which he cherishes, preserves,
increases, and strengthens continually, by effectual supplies of Grace from
Jesus Christ, disposing, enclining, and enabling the whole Soul unto all Ways,
Acts and Duties of Holiness, whereby we live to God; opposing, resisting, and
finally conquering whatever is opposite and contrary thereunto. This belongs
Essentially unto Evangelical Holiness, yea herein does the Nature of it
Formally and Radically consist. This is that from whence Believers are
denominated Holy, and without which none are so, or can be so called.

Secondly; The Properties of this Power are Readiness and Facility. Wherever it
is, it renders the Soul ready unto all Duties of Holy Obedience, and renders
all Duties of holy Obedience easy unto the Soul.

1. It gives Readiness, by removing and taking away all those encumbrances
which the Mind is apt to be clogged with and hindered by, from Sin, the World,
spiritual Sloth, and Unbelief. This is that which we are exhorted unto in a way
of Duty, Heb. 12. 1. Luke 12. 35. 1 Pet. 1. 13. chap. 4. 1. Ephesians. 6. 14.
Herein is the Spirit ready though the Flesh be weak, Mark 14. 35. And those
Encumbrances which give an unreadiness unto Obedience to God, may be considered
two ways. (1) As they are in their full power and efficacy, in persons
Unregenerate; whence they are unto every good work reprobate; Tit. 1. 13. Hence
proceed all those prevalent Tergiversations against a Compliance with the Will
of God, and their own Convictions, which bear sway in such persons. Yet a
little slumber, a little sleep, a little folding of the hands to sleep, Prove.
6. 10. By these do men so often put off the Calls of God, and perniciously
procrastinate from time to time a full Compliance with their Convictions. And
whatever particular Duties such Persons do perform, yet are their Hearts and
Minds never prepared or ready for them; but the encumbrances mentioned, do
influence them into spiritual Disorders in all that they do. (2) These
Principles of Sloth and Vnreadiness do oft-times partially influence the Minds
of Believers themselves unto great Indispositions unto spiritual Duties; So the
Spouse states her case, Cantic. 5. 2, 3. By reason of her Circumstances in the
World, she had an unreadiness for that Converse and Communion with Christ,
which she was called unto. And it is so not unfrequently with the Best of men
in this World. A spiritual unreadyness unto holy Duties, arising from the Power
of Sloth or the Occasions of Life, is no small part of their sin and Trouble.
Both these are removed by this spiritual Power of the Principle of Life and
Holiness in Believers. The total prevailing Power of them, such as is in
persons unregenerate, is broken by the first Infusion of it into the Soul,
wherein it gives an habitual fitness and Preparation of Heart unto all Duties
of Obedience unto God. And by various Degrees it freeth Believers from the
Remainders of the Encumbrances which they have yet to conflict with; and this
it does three ways. As (1) it weakeneth and takes off the bent of the Soul
from Earthly things, so as they shall not possess the Mind as formerly, Col. 3.
2. How it does this, was declared before, and when this is done, the Mind is
greatly eased of its Burden, and some way ready unto its Duty. (2) It gives an
insight into the Beauty, the Excellency and Glory of Holiness and all Duties of
Obedience. This they see nothing of who being unsanctified, are under the Power
of their Natural Darkness. They can see no Beauty in Holiness, no form nor
Comeliness why it should be desired; and it is no wonder if they are unfree to
the Duties of it, which they are but as it were compelled unto. But the
spiritual Light wherewith this Principle of Grace is accompanied, discovers an
Excellency in Holiness and the Duties of it, and in the Communion with God
which we have thereby, so as greatly to incline the mind unto them, and prepare
it for them. (3) It causes the Affections to cleave and adhere unto them with
Delight. How do I love thy Law, says David, my delight is in thy Statutes,
they are sweeter unto me than the Honeycomb. Where these three things concur,
that the Mind is freed from the powerful Influences of carnal Lusts and Love
of this World, where the Beauty and Excellency of Holiness and the Duties of
Obedience lie clear in the Eyes of the Soul, and where the Affections cleave
unto spiritual things as commanded, then will be that Readiness in Obedience
which we enquire after.

Facility or Easiness in the Performance of all Duties of Obedience. Whatever
men do from an Habit, they do with some kind of Easiness. That is easy to
them which they are accustomed unto, though hard and difficult in its self. And
what is done from Nature is done with Facility. And the Principle of Grace as
we have showed, is a new Nature, an infused Habit with respect unto the Life of
God, or all Duties of Holy Obedience. I grant, there will be Opposition unto
them even in the Mind and Heart it self, from sin and Satan, and Temptations
of all sorts, yea and they may sometimes arise so high, as either to defeat our
purposes and intentions unto Duties, or to clogge us in them, to take off our
Chariot-wheels, and to make us drive heavily. But still it is in the Nature of
the Principle of Holiness to make the whole Course of Obedience and all the
Duties of it easy unto us, and to give us a Facility in their Performance. For
(1) it introduces a suitableness between our Minds and the Duties we are to
perform. By it is the Law written in our Hearts; that is, there is an
Answerableness in them unto all that the Law of God requires. In the state of
Nature, the great things of the Law of God are a strange thing unto us, Hos. 8.
12. there is an enmity in our Minds against them; Romans 8. 7. There is no
suitableness between our Minds and them. But this is taken away by the
Principle of Grace. Thereby do the Mind and Duty answer one another, as the Eye
and a lightsome Body. Hence the Commands of Christ are not grievous unto them
in whom it is, 1 John 5. 3. They do not appear to contain any thing uncouth,
unreasonable, burdensome, or any way unsuited to that new Nature whereby the
Soul is influenced and acted. Hence all the Ways of Wisdom are unto Believers
as they are in themselves, Pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.
17.

The great Notion of some in these days is, about the suitableness of
Christian Religion unto Reason. And to make good their Assertion in the
principal Mysteries of it, because Reason will not come to them, they bring
them by violence unto their Reason. But it is with respect unto this renewed
Principle alone that there is a suitableness in any of the things of God unto
our Minds and Affections. (2) It keeps up the Heart or whole Person unto a
frequency of all Holy Acts and Duties. And frequency gives facility in every
kind. It puts the Soul upon reiterated Actings of Faith and Love, or renewed
holy Thoughts and Meditations. It is a Spring that is continually bubling up in
them, on the frequent Repetition of the daily Duties of Prayer, Reading, holy
Discourse; as on closing with all Opportunities and Occasions of Mercy,
Benignity, Charity and Bounty amongst men. Hereby is the Heart so accustomed
unto the Yoke of the Lord, and made so conversant in his Ways, that it is
natural and easy to it to bear them, and to be engaged in them. And it will be
found by Experience, that the more Intermissions of Duties of any sort we fall
under, the more difficulty we shall find in the performance of them. (3) It
engages the Assistance of Christ and his Spirit. It is the Divine Nature, the
New Creature which the Lord Christ cares for; in and by its Actings in all
Duties of Obedience does its Life consist: Therein also is it strengthened and
improved. For this cause does the Lord Christ continually come in by the
Supplies of his Spirit unto its Assistance. And when the strength of Christ is
engaged, then and there is his Yoke easy and his Burden light.

Facility or Easiness in the Course of Obedience, and in the Duties of it. They
meet with secret Unwillingnesses in themselves, and great Oppositions on other
Accounts, whence they are apt to be faint and weary, yea are almost ready to
give over. It is hard to them to pray continually, and not to faint; to stand
in their Watch night and day against the Inrodes of their spiritual
Adversaries, to keep themselves from the Insinuations of the World, and up unto
those Sacrifices of Charity and Bounty that are so well-pleasing to God: Many
Weights and Burdens are upon them in their Course; many Difficulties press
them, and they are ready to be beset round about, every moment. Wherefore, they
think that the Principle of Grace and Holiness does not give the Facility and
Easiness mentioned, or that they were never made Partakers of it.

I answer: (1) Let these Persons examine themselves, and duly consider whence
these Obstructions and Difficulties they complain of do arise: If they are from
the inward Inclinations of their Souls, and unwillingness to bear the Yoke of
Christ, only they are kept up unto it by their Convictions which they cannot
cast off, then is their Condition to be bewailed. But if themselves are
sensible and convinced, that they arise from Principles which as far as they
are within them they hate and abhor, and long to be freed from, and as they
are from without are such as they look on as Enemies unto them, and do watch
against them; then what they complain of is no more, but what in one Degree or
other, all that Believe have Experience of. And if their Impediments do arise
from what they know themselves to be opposite unto them, and that Principle
whereby they are acted, then notwithstanding this Objection it may be in the
Nature of the Principle of Holiness to give Facility in all the Duties of it.

constant and assiduous in the Performance of all those Duties which they now
complain that they find so much difficulty in. The Principle of Grace and
Holiness gives Facility in all Duties of Obedience, but in the proper Way and
Order. It first gives Constancy and Assiduity, and then Easiness: If men comply
not with its Guidance and Inclination in the former, it is in vain for them to
expect the latter. If we are not constant in all Acts of Obedience, none of
them will ever be easy unto us. Let not those who can omit proper and due
Seasons of Meditation, Prayer, Hearing, Charity, Moderation in all things,
Patience, Meekness and the like, at their pleasure, on the least Occasions,
Excuses, or Diversions, ever think or hope to have the Ways of Obedience
smooth, its Paths pleasant, or its Duties easy. Let him never think to attain
any Readiness, Delight or Facility in any Art or Science, who is always
beginning at it, touching upon it sometimes. As this is the way in all sorts of
things Natural and Spiritual, to be always learning, and never to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth; so in the Practice of Holy Obedience; if men are as it
were always beginning, one while performing, another intermitting the Duties
of it, fearing or being unwilling to engage into a constant, equal, assiduous
Discharge of them, they will be always striving, but never come unto any
Readiness or Facility in them.

(3) The Difficulty and Burdensomeness complained of, may proceed from the
Interposition of perplexing Temptations, which weary, disquiet and distract the
Mind. This may be and frequently is so, and yet our Assertion not impeached. We
only say, that set aside extraordinary Occasions, and sinful Neglects, this
Principle of Grace and Holiness does give that suitableness to the Mind unto
all Duties of Obedience, that constancy in them, that love unto them, as make
them both easy and pleasant.

Habit or Principle of Holiness in our own Minds, that we be not deceived by
any thing that falsely pretends thereunto. As,

(1) Let us take heed, that we deceive not our selves, as though it would
suffice unto Gospel-Holiness, that we have occasionally good Purposes of
leaving Sin and living unto God, then when something urges upon us more than
ordinary, with the Effects which such Purposes will produce. Afflictions,
Sicknesses, Troubles, sense of great Guilt, fear of Death, and the like, do
usually produce this Frame. And although it is most remote from any pretense
unto Evangelical Obedience, yet I could not but give a Caution against it,
because it is that whereby the Generality of men in the World do delude
themselves into Eternal Ruin. It is rare to find any that are so stubbornly
Profligate, but at one time or another, they project and design, yea promise
and engage unto a Change of their Course, and Amendment of their Lives, doing
sundry things it may be in the pursuit of those Designs and Purposes. For they
will thereon abstain from their old Sins, with whose haunt they are much
perplexed, and betake themselves unto the Performance of those Duties from
whence they expect most Relief unto their Consciences, and whose Neglect does
most reflect upon them. Especially will they do so when the hand of God is upon
them in Afflictions and Dangers, Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. And this produces
in them that kind of Goodness, which God says, is like the Morning Cloud or
the Early Dew, things that make a fair Appearance of something, but immediately
vanish away, Hos. 6. 4. Certainly there need not much pains to convince any
man, how unspeakably this comes short of that Evangelical Holiness which is a
Fruit of the Sanctification of the Spirit. It has neither the Root of it, nor
any Fruit that does so much as resemble it. But it is to be lamented, that such
Multitudes of Rational Creatures, living under the Means of Light and Grace,
should so vainly and woefully delude their own Souls. That which they aim at and
intend, is to have that in them whereby they may be accepted with God. Now not
to insist on what will absolutely frustrate all the Designs of such persons,
namely, their want of Faith in Christ, and an Interest in his Righteousness
thereby, which they are regardless of; all that they project and design is as
far beneath that Holiness which God requires of them, and which they think
hereby to obtain, as the Earth is beneath the Heavens. All that they do in this
kind is utterly lost, it will never be either a Righteousness unto them or an
Holiness in them. But this Deceit is frequently rebuked; God only by his Grace
can remove and take it away from the Minds of Men.

(2) And we may Learn hence, not to be imposed on by Gifts though never so
useful, with a plausible Profession thereon. These things go a great way in
the World, and many deceive both themselves and others by them. Gifts are from
the Holy Ghost in an especial manner; and therefore greatly to be esteemed.
They are also frequently useful in and unto the Church; For the Manifestation
of the Spirit is given unto men to profit withal. And they put men on such
Duties as have a great show and Appearance of Holiness. By the help of them
alone may men pray and preach, and maintain spiritual Communication among them
with whom they do converse. And as Circumstances may be ordered, they put
sundry persons on a frequent performance of these Duties; and so keep them up
to an Eminency in Profession. But yet when all is done, they are not Holiness,
nor are the Duties performed in the strength of them alone, Duties of
Evangelical Obedience accepted of God in them by whom they are performed; and
they may be where there is nothing of Holiness at all. They are not indeed only
consistent with Holiness, but subservient unto it, and exceeding promoters of
it in Souls that are really Gracious. But they may be alone without Grace, and
then are they apt to deceive the Mind with a pretense of being and doing what
they are not, nor do. Let them be called to an Account by the Nature and
Properties of that Habit and Principle of Grace which is in all true Holiness
as before explained, and it will quickly appear how short they come thereof.
For, as their Subject where they have their Residence, is the mind only, and
not the Will or Affections, any further but as they are influenced or
restrained by Light, so they do not renew nor change the Mind it self, so as to
transform it into the Image of God. Neither do they give the Soul a general
Inclination unto all Acts and Duties of Obedience, but only a Readiness for
that Duty which their Exercise does peculiarly consist in. Wherefore, they
answer no one Property of true Holiness, and we have not seldom seen
Discoveries made thereof.

Morality or a Course of Moral Duties, when it is alone, maintain any pretense
hereunto. We have had Attempts to prove, that there is no specifical Difference
between Common and Saving Grace, but that they are both of the same Kind,
differing only in Degrees. But some, as though this ground were already gained,
and needed no more contending about, do add without any Consideration of these
petty distinctions of Common and Saving Grace, that Morality is Grace, and
Grace is Morality and nothing else. To be a Gracious Holy man according to the
Gospel, and to be a Moral man, is all one with them. And as yet it is not
declared, whether there be any Difference between Evangelical Holiness and
Philosophical Morality. Wherefore, I shall proceed to the Second Thing
proposed; And this is, further to prove, That this Habit or Gracious Principle
of Holiness is specifically distinct from all other Habits of the Mind
whatever, whether Intellectual or Moral, Connate or Acquired, as also from all
that Common Grace and the Effects of it, whereof any Persons not really
sanctified may be made partakers.

The Truth of this Assertion is indeed sufficiently evident from the
Description we have given of this spiritual Habit, its Nature and Properties.
But whereas there are also other Respects giving further Confirmation of the
same Truth, I shall call over the most important of them, after some few things
have been premised. As,

1. An Habit of what sort soever it be, qualifies the Subject wherein it is, so
that it may be denominated from it, and make the Actions proceeding from it to
be suited unto it, or to be of the same Nature with it. As Aristotle says,
Virtue is an Habit which makes him that has it Good or Virtuous, and his
Actions good. Now all Moral Habits are seated in the Will. Intellectual Habits
are not immediately affective of Good or Evil, but as the Will is influenced by
them. These Habits do incline, dispose and enable the Will to act according to
their Nature. And in all the Acts of our Wills, and so all external Works which
proceed from them, two things are considered. First, the Act it self, or the
Work done; and Secondly, the End for which it is done. And both these things
are respected by the Habit it self, though not immediately, yet by virtue of
its Acts. It is moreover necessary and natural, that every Act of the Will,
every Work of a Man be for a certain End. Two things therefore are to be
considered in all our Obedience; (1) The Duty it self we do, and (2) The End
for which we do it. If any Habit therefore does not incline and dispose the
Will unto the proper End of Duty, as well as unto the Duty it self, it is not
of that Kind from whence true Gospel Obedience does proceed. For the End of
every Act of Gospel Obedience, which is the Glory of God in Jesus Christ, is
Essential unto it. Let us then take all the Habits of Moral Virtue, and we
shall find, that however they may incline and dispose the Will unto such Acts
of Virtue as materially are Duties of Obedience, yet they do it not with
respect unto this End. If it be said, that such Moral Habits do so incline the
Will unto Duties of Obedience with respect unto this End, then is there no need
of the Grace of Jesus Christ or the Gospel, to enable men to Live unto God,
according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, which some seem to aim at.

End that gives all our Duties their special Nature, this is twofold:

(1) The next; and (2) The ultimate; or it is particular or universal. And
these may be different in the same Action. As a man may give Alms to the poor,
his next Particular End may be to Relieve and Cherish them: This End is good,
and so far the Work or Duty it self is good also. But the ultimate and General
End of this Action may be Self, Merit, Reputation, Praise, Compensation for sin
committed, and not the Glory of God in Christ; which vitiates the whole. Now
Moral Habits, acquired by Endeavors answerable unto our Light and Convictions,
or the Dictates of Enlightened Reason, with Resolutions and Perseverance, may
incline and dispose the Will unto Actions and Works, that for the Substance of
them are Duties, and are capable of having particular Ends that are good, but a
want of Respect unto the General End allows them not to be any part of Gospel
Obedience. And this is applicable unto all Moral Habits and Duties whatever.
But the difference asserted, is farther manifested,

First, From the especial Fountain and Spring of Holiness, which constitutes
its Nature of another Kind than any Common Grace or Morality can pretend unto:
And this is Electing Love, or Gods Purpose of Election. Ephesians. 1. 4. He has
chosen us in Christ before the Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy
and unblameable before him in Love. God chooses us from Eternity, that we
should be Holy; that is, with a Design and Purpose to make us so. He sets some
men apart in his Eternal Purpose, as those unto whom he will communicate
Holiness. It is therefore an especial Work of God, in the pursuit of an
especial and eternal Purpose. This gives it its especial Nature, and makes it,
as was said, of another Kind than any Effect of Common Grace whatever. That is
Holiness, which God works in men by his Spirit, because he has chosen them,
and nothing else is so. For he chooses us unto salvation through the
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Salvation is the End that God
aims at in his choosing of us, in subordination unto his own Glory; which is
and must be the Vltimate End of all his Purposes and Decrees, or of all the
free Acts of his Wisdom and Love. The Means which he has ordained, whereby we
shall be brought unto this Salvation so designed in his Eternal Purpose, is the
sanctification of the Spirit. Gospel Holiness therefore is the Effect of that
Sanctification of the Spirit, which God has designed as the especial Way and
Means on their part, of bringing the Elect unto Salvation. And his choosing of
them is the Cause and Reason why he does so sanctify them by his Spirit. And,
where our Sanctification is comprised under our Vocation, because therein and
thereby we are sanctified by the sanctifying Principle of Holiness communicated
unto us, it is not only reckoned as an Effect and Consequent of our
Predestination, but is so conjoined thereunto, as to declare, that none others
are partakers of it, but those that are Predestinate; Romans 8. 30.

And this Consideration is of it self sufficient to Evince, that this Holiness
whereof we treat, differs essentially from all other Habits of the Mind, and
Actions proceeding from them, as having an especial Nature of its own. Whatever
there may be in any men, of Virtue and Piety, or whatever their Endeavors may
be, in Ways of Honesty and Duty toward God and Men, if the Power and
Principle of it in them be not a Fruit of Electing Love, of the Spirit of
Sanctification, given of God for this certain End, that we may attain the
Salvation whereunto we are chosen, it belongs not unto this Holiness.
Wherefore, the Apostle Peter giving us in charge, to use all Diligence whereby
we may make our Calling and Election sure, that is, unto our Souls, and in our
own Minds, prescribes as the Means of it, the Exercise and Increase of those
Graces which are its proper Effects, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 10. And the Reason why
we see so many glorious Professions of Faith and Obedience utterly to fail as
we do, is because the Faith so professed was not the Faith of the Elect of God,
Tit. 1. 1. And the Obedience of it was not the Fruit of that Spirit of
Sanctification which God gives to man, to make his Purpose of Election
infallibly Effectual; that so the Purpose of God which is according to Election
might stand; Romans 11. And the Election, or those Elected might obtain the Grace
and Glory designed for them, Romans 11. 5. 7. And it is an Evidence of much
spiritual Sloth in us, or that which is worse, namely that our Graces and
Obedience are not genuine and of the true Heavenly Race, if we endeavor not to
satisfy our selves, that they are real Effects of Electing Love.

Election, seeing such only are genuine and Durable. I answer, it may be done
three ways.

(1) By their Growth and Increase. This in ordinary Cases, setting aside the
Seasons of prevalent Temptations and Desertions, is the best Evidence hereof.
Waters that proceed from a living Fountain, increase in their progress, because
of the continual Supplies which they have from their Spring; when those which
have only Occasional Beginning, from showers of Rain or the like, do
continually decay until they are dried up. The Graces that come from this
Eternal Spring, have continual supplies from it, so that if they meet with no
violent Obstructions, (as they may do sometimes for a season) they do
constantly increase and thrive. And therefore no man can secure his spiritual
Comforts one Moment under a sensible decay of Grace. For such a decay is a very
sufficient Reason why he should call the Truth of all his Grace into Question.
Where the Spirit of Sanctification is, as given in pursuit of the Purpose of
Election, it is a Well of Water springing up into Everlasting Life, Joh. 4. 14.
The quietness and satisfaction of Professors under a Decay of Grace, is a
Soul-ruining security, and has nothing in it of Spiritual Peace.

much stirred up unto diligent Actings and Exercise of Grace, out of a sense of
that Electing Love from whence all Grace does proceed. It is the Nature of
Grace that is the Fruit of Election, greatly to affect the Heart and Mind with
a sense of the Love that is therein: So the Apostle says expressly, that one
Grace exciteth and stirs up another, from a sense of the Love of God, which
sets them all on work, Romans 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. So God is said to draw us with
Loving Kindness, because he has loved us with everlasting love, Jerem. 31. 3.
That is, he gives us such a sense of his everlasting Love, as thereby to draw
us after him in Faith and Obedience. Those Principles of Duties in us which are
excited only by Fear, Awe, Hope, and the jealous Observances of an awakened
Conscience, will scarce at any time evince this heavenly Extract unto a
spiritual Understanding. That Grace which proceeds from especial Love, will
carry along an holy quickening sense of it, and thereby be excited unto its due
Exercise. And we do what we can to famish and starve our Graces, when we do not
endeavor their Supplies by Faith on that Spring of Divine Love from whence
they proceed.

chosen in Christ, and predestined to be like unto him, those Graces of
Holiness have the most evident and legible Characters of Electing Love upon
them, which are most Effectual in working us unto a Conformity to him. That
Grace is certainly from an Eternal Spring, which makes us like unto Jesus
Christ. Of this sort are Meekness, Humility, Patience, Self-denial, Contempt of
the World, Readiness to pass by Wrongs, to Forgive Enemies, to Love and do
Good unto all, which indeed are despised by the most, and duly regarded but by
few. But I return.

Secondly; The especial procuring Cause of this Holiness is the Mediation of
Christ. We are not in this Matter concerned in any thing, let men call it what
they please, Virtue or Godliness or Holiness, that has not an especial
Relation unto the Lord Christ, and his Mediation. Evangelical Holiness is
purchased for us by him, according to the Tenor of the Everlasting Covenant,
is promised unto us on his Account, actually impetrated for us by his
Intercession, and communicated unto us by his Spirit. And hereby we do not only
cast off all the Moral Virtues of the Heathens from having the least
concernment herein, but all the Principles and Duties of Persons professing
Christianity, who are not really and actually implanted into Christ. For he it
is who of God is made unto us Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. And this he is on
several Accounts, the Heads whereof may be called over.

Sanctification, with respect unto his sacerdotal Office, because we are
purified, purged, washed and cleansed from our Sins by his Blood, in the
Oblation of it, and the Application of it unto our Souls, as has been at large
declared. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Tit. 2. 14. 1 John 1. 7. Heb. 9. 14. All that we
have Taught before, concerning the Purification of our Minds and Consciences by
the Blood of Christ, is peculiar unto Gospel-Holiness, and distinguishes it
Essentially from all Common Grace, or Moral Virtues. And they do but deceive
themselves, who rest in a Multitude of Duties, it may be animated much with
Zeal, and set off with a Profession of the most rigid Mortification, whose
Hearts and Consciences are not thus purged by the Blood of Christ.

actual sanctification of our Natures, in the Communication of Holiness unto us
by his Intercession. His Prayer, Joh. 17. 17. is the blessed Spring of our
Holiness. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. There is not any
thing of this Grace wrought in us, bestowed on us, communicated unto us,
preserved in us, but what is so in Answer unto, and Compliance with the
Intercession of Christ. From his Prayer for us, is Holiness begun in us;
Sanctify them, says he, by thy Truth. Thence is it kept alive and preserved
in us: I have, says he to Peter, prayed for thee, that thy Faith should not
fail, and through his Intercession are we saved to the uttermost. Nothing
belongs to this Holiness, but what in the Actual Communication of it is a
peculiar Fruit of Christ's Intercession: What is not so, what men may be made
partakers of upon any more general Account, belongs not thereunto. And if we
really design Holiness, or intend to be Holy, it is our Duty constantly to
improve the Intercession of Christ for the Increase of it. And this we may do
by especial Applications to him for that Purpose. So the Apostles prayed him,
to increase their Faith, Luke 17. 3. And we may do so, for the Increase of our
Holiness. But the Nature of this Application unto Christ, for the Increase of
Holiness, by virtue of his Intercession, is duly to be considered. We are not
to pray unto him, that he would intercede for us, that we may be Sanctified.
For as he needs not our minding for the Discharge of his Office, so he
intercedes not Orally in Heaven at all, and always does so Vertually by his
Appearance in the Presence of God with the Virtue of his Oblation or Sacrifice.
But whereas the Lord Christ gives out no Supplies of Grace unto us, but what he
receives from the Father for that End by virtue of his Intercession, we apply
our selves unto him under that Consideration; namely, as he who upon his
Intercession with God for us, has all stores of Grace to give us supplies from.

Rule and Measure of Holiness unto us; the Instrument of working it in us, is
His Word and Doctrine; which he taught the Church as the great Prophet of it.
The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. The
inbred dictates of the Light and Law of Nature in their greatest Purity, are
not the Rule or Measure of this Holiness; much less are these Rules and Maxims
which men deduce, partly right and partly wrong, from them, of any such use.
Nor is the Written Law it self so. It is the Rule of Original Holiness, but not
the adequate Rule of that Holiness whereunto we are restored by Christ. Neither
are both these in Conjunction, the Dictates of Nature and the Law written, the
Instrument of working Holiness in us. But it is the Doctrine of the Gospel
which is the Adequate Rule and immediate Instrument of it. My meaning is, That
the Word, the Gospel, the Doctrine of Christ in the Preceptive part of it, is
so the Rule of all our Obedience and Holiness, as that all which it requires
belongs thereunto, and nothing else but what it requires does so; and the
Formal Reason of our Holiness consists in Conformity thereunto, under this
Consideration, that it is the Word and Doctrine of Christ. Nothing belongs
unto Holiness materially, but what the Gospel requires; and nothing is so in
us formally, but what we do because the Gospel requires it. And it is the
Instrument of it, because God makes use of it alone as an external Means for
the Communicating of it unto us, or the Ingenerating of it in us. Principles of
Natural Light, with the Guidances of an awakened Conscience, do direct unto,
and exact the performance of many material Duties of Obedience. The written Law
requires of us all Duties of Original Obedience, and God does use these things
variously for the preparing of our Souls unto a right Receiving of the Gospel.
But there are some Graces, some Duties belonging unto Evangelical Holiness,
which the Law knows nothing of: Such are the Mortification of sin, Godly
Sorrow, daily Cleansing of our Hearts and Minds; not to mention the more
sublime and spiritual Acts of Communion with God by Christ, with all that Faith
and Love which is required in us toward him. For although these things may be
contained in the Law radically, as it requires universal Obedience unto God,
yet are they not so formally. And it is not used as the Means to beget Faith
and Holiness in us: This is the Effect of the Gospel only. Hence it is said to
be the Power of God unto Salvation; Romans 1. 16. or that whereby God puts forth
the Greatness of his Power unto that Purpose; the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build us up, and give us an Inheritance among them that are sanctified,
Acts 20. 30. It is that by whose Preaching Faith comes; Romans 10. 17. and by
the Hearing whereof we receive the Spirit, Gal. 3. 2. It is that whereby we are
begotten in Christ Jesus; 1 Cor. 4. 15. Jam. 1. 17. 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25. And
all that is required of us in the way of external Obedience, is but that our
Conversation be such as becomes the Gospel.

Touchstone for our Holiness, to try whether it be genuine, and of the right
Kind or no. If it be, it is nothing but the seed of the Gospel quickened in our
Hearts, and bearing Fruit in our Lives. It is the Delivery up of our Souls into
the Mould of the Doctrine of it, so as that our Minds and the Word should
Answer one another, as Face does unto Face in Water. And we may know whether it
be so with us or no, two ways. For (1) if it be so, none of the Commands of
the Gospel will be grievous unto us, but easy and pleasant. A Principle suited
unto them all, enclining unto them all, connatural unto them, as proceeding
from them, being implanted in our Minds and Hearts, it renders the Commands
themselves so suited unto us, so useful, and the Matter of them so desirable,
that Obedience is made pleasant thereby. Hence is that satisfaction of Mind,
with Rest and Joy, which Believers have in Gospel Duties, yea the most
Difficult of them; with that Trouble and Sorrow which ensues upon their
Neglect, Omission, or their being deprived of Opportunities for them. But in
the strictest Course of Duties that proceeds from any other Principle, the
Precepts of the Gospel, or at least some of them, on the Account of their
Spirituality, or Simplicity, are either esteemed grievous or despised. (2) None
of the Truths of the Gospel will seem strange unto us. This makes up the
Evidence of a genuine Principle of Gospel-Holiness, when the Commands of it are
not grievous, nor the Truths of it strange or uncouth. The Mind so prepared
receives every Truth, as the Eye does every Increase of Light, naturally and
pleasantly, until it come unto its proper measure. There is a Measure of Light
which is suited unto our Visive Faculty, what exceeds it, dazles and amazes,
rather than enlightens; but every Degree of Light, which tends unto it, is
connatural and pleasant to the Eye. So is it with the sanctified Mind and
spiritual Truth: There is a Measure of Light issuing from spiritual Truths,
that our Minds are capable of; what is beyond this Measure, belongs to Glory;
and the gazing after it will rather dazzle than enlighten us: And such is the
issue of over-strained Speculations, when the Mind endeavors an Excess as to
its Measure. But all Light from Truth which tends to the filling up of that
Measure, is pleasant, and natural to the sanctified Mind. It sees Wisdom,
Glory, Beauty, and Usefulness, in the most spiritual, sublime and mysterious
Truths, that are revealed in and by the Word; laboring more and more to
comprehend them, because of their Excellency. For want hereof, we know how the
Truths of the Gospel are by many despised, reproached, scorned, as those which
are no less foolishness unto them, to be believed, than the Precepts of it are
grievous to be obeyed.

(4) He is so, as he is the Exemplary Cause of our Holiness. The design of God
in working Grace and Holiness in us, is that we may be conformed unto the Image
of his Son, that he may be the Firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8. 29. And
our Design in the attaining of it, is first that we may be like him, and then
express or show forth the Virtues of him who has called us out of Darkness
into his Mavelous Light, unto his Glory and Honor, 1 Pet. 2. 9. To this End
is he proposed in the Purity of his Natures, the Holiness of his Person, the
Glory of his Graces, the Innocence and usefulness of his Conversation in the
World, as the great Idea and Exemplar, which in all things we ought to conform
our selves unto. And as the Nature of Evangelical Holiness consists herein,
namely, in an universal Conformity unto him, as he is the Image of the
Invisible God, so the Proposal of his Example unto us, is an effectual Means of
ingenerating and increasing it in us.

naturally and morally to instruct and affect our Minds, things are peculiarly
designed and instituted of God to be our Examples, He requiring of us, that
from them we should learn both what to do, and what to avoid, their Force and
Efficacy is increased. This the Apostle instructs us in at large, 1 Cor. 10. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Now both these concur in the Example of Holiness that is
given us in the Person of Christ. For,

First, He is not only in himself morally considered, the most perfect,
absolute, glorious Pattern of all Grace, Holiness, Virtue, Obedience, to be
chosen and preferred above all others, but he is only so; there is no other
complete Example of it. As for those Examples of Heroical Virtue, or Stoical
Apathie which are boasted of among the Heathens, it were an easy matter to
find such Flaws and Tumors in them, as would render them not only uncomely but
deformed and monstrous. And in the Lives of the best of the Saints, there is
declared what we ought expressly to avoid, as well as what we ought to follow;
and in some things we are left at a loss, whether it be safe to conform unto
them or no, seeing we are to be followers of none any further than they were so
of Jesus Christ, and wherein they were so; neither in what they were or did,
absolutely our Rule and Example in its self, but only so far as therein they
were conformable unto Christ. And the best of their Graces, the highest of
their Seize, and the most perfect of their Duties, have their Spots and
Imperfections; so that although they should have exceeded what we can attain
unto, and are therefore meet to be proposed unto our Imitation, yet do they
come short of what we aim at, which is to be Holy as God is Holy. But in this
our great Exemplar, as there was never the least show of variableness from the
Perfection of Holiness, ( for he did no sin, neither was there any guile found
in him, yea in him was Light and no Darkness at all) so were all his Graces,
all his Actings of them, all his Duties, so absolute and complete, as that we
ought to aim no higher, nor to propose any other Pattern unto our selves. And
who is it, that aiming at any Excellency, would not design the most absolute
and perfect Example. This therefore is to be found as unto Holiness in Christ,
and in him alone.

Secondly, He is appointed of God for this Purpose. One End why God sent his
Son to take our Nature upon him, and to converse in the World therein, was that
he might set us an Example in our own Nature, in one who was like unto us in
all things, sin only excepted, of that Renovation of his Image in us, of that
Return unto him from Sin and Apostasy, of that Holy Obedience which he
requires of us. Such an Example was needful, that we might never be at a loss
about the Will of God in his Commands, having a glorious Representation of it
before our Eyes; and this could be given us no otherwise but in our own Nature.
The Angelical Nature was not suited to set us an Example of Holiness and
Obedience, especially as to the Exercise of such Graces as we principally stand
in need of in this World. For what Examples could Angels set unto us in
themselves, of Patience in Afflictions, of Quietness in Sufferings, seeing
their Nature is incapable of such things. Neither could we have had an Example
that was perfect and complete in our own Nature, but only in One who was Holy,
Harmless, Undefiled and separate from Sinners. To this End therefore among
others did God send his own Son to take our Nature on him, and therein to
represent unto us the perfect Idea of that Holiness and Obedience which he
requires of us. It is evident therefore, that these two Considerations of an
Instructive Example, that is has a moral aptitude to incite the Mind unto
Imitation, and that it is instituted of God unto that Purpose, are both found
Eminently in this of Christ.

First) as God has appointed the Consideration of Christ as an especial
Ordinance unto the Increase of Holiness in us, so his Holy Obedience as
proposed unto us, has a peculiar Efficacy unto that purpose beyond all other
Instituted Examples. For (1) we are often called to behold Christ, and to look
upon him; or it is promised that we shall do so, Isa. 45. 22. Zech. 12. 10. Now
this beholding of Christ or looking on him, is the Consideration of him by
Faith unto the Ends for which he is exhibited, proposed and set forth of God in
the Gospel, and Promises thereof. This therefore is an especial Ordinance of
God, and is by his Spirit made effectual. And these Ends are two: 1.
Justification, 2. Salvation, or Deliverance from Sin and Punishment. Look,
says he, unto me, and be saved. This was he on the Cross, and is still so in
the Preaching of the Gospel, wherein he is evidently crucified before our eyes,
Gal. 3. 1. lifted up as the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, Joh. 3. 14, 15.
That we looking on him by Faith, as bearing our sins in his own Body on the
Tree, 1 Pet. 1. 24. and receiving the Atonement made thereby, Romans 5. 11. may
through Faith in him be Justified from all our Sins, and saved from the Wrath
to come. But this we intend not. For (2) He is of God proposed unto us in the
Gospel, as the great Pattern and Exemplar of Holiness; so as that by Gods
Appointment our beholding and looking on him in the Way mentioned, is a Means
of the Increase and growth of it in us. So our Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
We all with open face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even by the Spirit of the
Lord. That which is proposed unto us, is the Glory of the Lord; or the Glory of
God in the Face of Jesus Christ, Chap. 4. v. 6. that is, God gloriously
manifesting himself in the Person of Christ. This are we said to behold with
open face; The Veil of Types and Shadows being taken off and removed, Faith
does now clearly and distinctly view and consider Jesus Christ as he is
represented unto us in the glass of the Gospel; that is, the Evidences of the
Presence of God in him and with him, in his Work, Purity and Holiness. And the
Effect hereof is, that we are through the Operation of the Spirit of God
changed into the same Image, or made Holy, and therein like unto him.

Secondly,) There is peculiar Force and Efficacy by the way of Motive in the
Example of Christ, to incline us unto the Imitation of him, that is not to be
found in any other Example on any Occasion whatever. Because, (1) Whatever is
proposed unto us, in what he was, or what he did, as our Pattern and Example,
he was it, and did it, not for his own sake, but out of free and mere Love unto
us. That pure Nature of his, which we ought to be laboring after a Conformity
unto, 1 John 3. 3. and which he will at length bring us unto, Phil. 3. 21. he
took it upon him by an infinite Condescension, merely out of Love unto us, Heb.
2. 14, 15. Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7. And all the Actings of Grace in him, all the
Duties of Obedience which he performed, all that glorious Compliance with the
Will of God in his Sufferings which he manifested, proceed all from his Love
unto us, Joh. 17. 19. Gal. 2. 20. These things being in themselves truly
Honorable and Excellent, yea, being only so; the Holiness and Obedience which
God requires of us consisting in them, being by the Appointment of God
proposed unto our Imitation in the Example of Jesus Christ, how must it needs
influence and prevail on gracious Souls to endeavor a Conformity unto him
therein, to be as he was, to do as he did, seeing he was what he was, and did
what he did, merely out of Love unto us, and for no other End. And (2) Every
thing which we are to imitate in Christ, is other ways also beneficial unto
us. For we are in its Place and Way even saved thereby. By his Obedience we are
made Righteous, Romans 5. 19. There is no Grace nor Duty of Christ, which he did
perform, but we have the Advantage and Benefit of it. And this increases the
Efficacy of this Example. For who would not strive to obtain these things in
himself, of whose being in Christ he has so great Advantage.

Sanctification unto us, and is the Cause of Evangelical Holiness in us. And
certainly we are the most of us much to blame, that we do not more abound in
the use of this Means unto the End mentioned. Did we abide more constantly in
the beholding or Contemplation of the Person of Christ, of the Glory and Beauty
of his Holiness, as the Pattern and great Example proposed unto us, we should
be more transformed into his Image and Likeness. But it is so fallen out, that
many who are called Christians, delight to be talking of, and do much admire
the virtuous Sayings and Actions of the Heathen, and are ready to make them the
Object of their Imitation, whilst they have no thoughts of the Grace that was
in our Lord Jesus Christ, nor do endeavor after Conformity thereunto. And the
Reason is, because the Virtue which they seek after and desire, is of the same
Kind with that which was in the Heathen, and not of that Grace and Holiness
which was in Christ Jesus. And thence also it is that some, who, not out of
Love unto it, but to decry other important Mysteries of the Gospel thereby, do
place all Christianity in the Imitation of Christ, do yet indeed in their
practice despise those Qualities and Duties wherein he principally manifested
the Glory of his Grace. His Meekness, Patience, Self-denial, Quietness in
bearing Reproaches, Contempt of the World, Zeal for the Glory of God,
Compassion to the Souls of men, Condescentions to the Weaknesses of all, they
regard not. But there is no greater Evidence, that whatever we seem to have of
any thing that is good in us, is no part of Evangelical Holiness, than that it
does not render us conformable to Christ.

Faith on Christ with respect unto this End. Let none be guilty practically of
what some are falsely charged withal as to Doctrine. Let none divide in the
Work of Faith, and Exercise themselves but in the one half of it. To Believe in
Christ for Redemption, for Justification, for Sanctification, is but one half
of the Duty of Faith. It respects Christ only as he died and suffered for us,
as he made Atonement for our sins, Peace with God, and Reconciliation for us,
as his Righteousness is imputed unto us unto Justification. Unto these Ends
indeed is he firstly and principally proposed unto us in the Gospel, and with
respect unto them are we exhorted to receive him, and to believe in him. But
this is not all that is required of us. Christ in the Gospel is proposed unto
us as our Pattern and Example of Holiness. And as it is a cursed Imagination,
that this was the whole End of his Life and Death, namely, to exemplify and
confirm the Doctrine of Holiness which he taught; so to neglect his so being
our Example, in considering him by Faith to that End, and laboring after
Conformity to him, is evil and pernicious. Wherefore, let us be much in the
Contemplation of what he was, what he did, how in all Instances of Duties and
Trials he carried himself, until an Image or Idea of his perfect Holiness is
implanted in our Minds, and we are made like unto him thereby.

Evangelical Holiness with respect unto the Lord Christ, from all other Natural
or Moral Habits or Duties, and whereby he is made Sanctification unto us, is,
that from him, his Person as our Head, the Principle of spiritual Life and
Holiness in Believers is derived; and by virtue of their Union with him, real
Supplies of spiritual Strength and Grace, whereby their Holiness is preserved,
maintained and increased, are constantly communicated unto them. On the stating
and proof hereof, the whole difference about Grace and Morality does depend,
and will issue. For if that which men call Morality be so derived from the Lord
Christ by virtue of our Union with him, it is Evangelical Grace; if it be not,
it is either nothing, or somewhat of another Nature and Kind; for Grace it is
not, nor Holiness neither. And all that I have to prove herein, is, that the
Lord Jesus Christ is an Head of Influence, the Spring or Fountain of spiritual
Life unto his Church, wherein I know my self to have the Consent of the Church
of God in all Ages. And I shall confine the proof of my Assertion unto the
ensuing Positions, with their Confirmation.

First, Whatever Grace God promises unto any, bestows on them or works in
them, it is all so bestowed and wrought, in, by and through Jesus Christ, as
the Mediator or middle Person between God and them. This the very Notion and
Nature of his Office of Mediator, and his Interposition therein between God and
us, does require. To affirm, that any good thing, any Grace, any Virtue is
given unto, or bestowed on us, or wrought in us by God, and not immediately
through Christ; or that we Believe in God, yield Obedience unto him, or Praise
with Glory, not directly by Christ; is utterly to overthrow his Mediation.
Moses indeed is called a Mediator between God and the People, Gal. 3. 19. as he
was an Internuntius, a Messenger to declare the Mind of God to them, and to
return their Answers unto God; but to limit the Mediatory Work of Christ unto
such an Interposition only, is to leave him but one Office, that of a Prophet,
and to destroy the principal Uses and Effects of his Mediation toward the
Church. In like manner, because Moses is called (...), a Savior or Redeemer,
Acts 7. 35. metaphorically, with respect unto his Use and Employment in that
mighty Work of the Deliverance of the People out of Egypt; some will not
allow, that the Lord Christ is a Redeemer in any other sense, subverting the
whole Gospel, with the Faith and Souls of men. But in particular what there is
of this nature in the Mediation of Christ, in his being the middle Person
between God and us, may be declared in the ensuing Assertions.

Fountain, the supreme efficient Cause of all Grace and Holiness. For He alone
is originally and essentially Holy, as he only is Good, and so the first Cause
of Holiness and Goodness to others. Hence he is called the God of all Grace, 1
Pet. 5. 10. The Author, Possessour and Bestower of it. He has Life in himself,
and quickens whom he pleases, Joh. 5. 26. With him is the Fountain of Life,
Psalm. 36. 9. as has been declared before. This I suppose needs no further
Confirmation with them who really acknowledge any such thing as Grace and
Holiness. These things, if any, are among those perfect Gifts which are from
above, coming down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness nor
shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17.

fullness communicates unto his Creatures, either by the way of Nature, or by
the way of Grace. In our first Creation God implanted his Image on us, in
Uprightness and Holiness, in and by the making or Creation of our Nature: And
had we continued in that State, the same Image of God should have been
communicated by natural Propagation. But since the Fall and entrance of Sin,
God no more communicates Holiness unto any by way of Nature, or natural
Propagation. For if he did so, there would be no Necessity that every one who
is born must be born again, before he enter into the Kingdom of God; as our
Savior affirms there is, Joh. 3. 3. For he might have Grace and Holiness
from his first Nativity. Nor could it be said of Believers, that they are born
not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God,
John 1. 13. For Grace might be propagated unto them by those natural Means. It
was the old Pelagian Figment, That what we have by Nature we have by Grace,
because God is the Author of Nature. So he was as it was pure, but it is our
own as it is corrupt; and what we have thereby, we have of our selves in
Contradiction to the Grace of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh;
and we have nothing else by Natural Propagation.

Mediator and Head of the Church, John 1. 18. In the Old Creation all things
were made by the Eternal Word, the Person of the Son, as the Wisdom of God,
Joh. 1. 3. Col. 1. 16. There was no immediate Emanation of Divine Power from
the Person of the Father, for the production of all or any created Beings, but
in and by the Person of the Son, their Wisdom and Power being one and the same
as acted in him. And the supportation of all things in the course of Divine
Providence is his immediate Work also; whence he is said to uphold all things
with the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. And so it is in the New Creation, with
respect unto his Person as Mediator. Therein was he the Image of the Invisible
God, the Firstborn of every Creature, having the preeminence in all things;
and he is before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1. 15, 17, 18.
In the raising of the whole New Creation, which is by a new spiritual Life and
Holiness communicated unto all the parts of it, the Work is carried on
immediately by the Person of Christ the Mediator, and none has any share
therein but what is received and derived from him. This is plainly asserted,
Ephesians. 2. 10. So the Apostle disposes of this matter; the Head of every man is
Christ, and the Head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11. 3. which is so in respect of
Influence, as well as of Rule. As God does not Immediately govern the Church,
but in and by the Person of Christ, whom he has given to be Head over all
things thereunto; so neither does he administer any Grace or Holiness unto any,
but in the same order; For, the Head of every man is Christ, and the Head of
Christ is God.

Grace, spiritual Strength and Holiness in Believers, yea that Grace whereby
they are enabled to Believe, and are made Holy, and does really sanctify them
more and more, that they may be preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. This has been so fully confirmed in the whole of what has been
discoursed both concerning Regeneration and Sanctification, as that it must not
be here again insisted on. Wherefore, all this Grace according unto the former
Assertions is Communicated unto us through and by Christ, and no otherwise.

Secondly, Whatever is wrought in Believers by the Spirit of Christ, it is in
their Union to the Person of Christ, and by virtue thereof. That the Holy
Spirit is the immediate efficient Cause of all Grace and Holiness, I have
sufficiently proved already, unto them to whom any thing in this kind will be
sufficient. Now the End why the Holy Spirit is sent, and consequently of all
that he does as he is so sent, is to glorify Christ; and this he does by
receiving from Christ, and communicating thereof unto others, Joh. 16. 13, 14,
15. And there are two Works of this kind which he has to do, and does effect.
1. To unite us to Christ: And, 2. To Communicate all Grace unto us from Christ,
by virtue of that Union.

(1) By him are we united unto Christ, that is his Person, and not a Light
within us as some think, nor the Doctrine of the Gospel as others with an equal
folly seem to imagine. It is by the Doctrine and Grace of the Gospel that we
are united, but it is the Person of Christ whereunto we are united. For he that
is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. because by that one Spirit
he is joined unto him. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, 1
Cor. 12. 13. implanted into the Body, and united unto the Head. And therefore,
if we have not the Spirit of Christ, we are none of his, Romans 8. 9. We are
therefore his, that is, united unto him, by a Participation of his Spirit. And
hereby Christ himself is in us, for Jesus Christ is in us, except we be
Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13. 5. That is, he is in us by his Spirit that dwells in
us, Romans 8. 9, 11. 1 Cor. 6. 19. It may therefore be enquired, Whether we
receive the Spirit of the Gospel from the Person of Christ, or no. And this is
the Enquiry, which nothing but the extreme Ignorance or Impudence of some could
render seasonable or tolerable, seeing formerly no Christian ever doubted of
it, nor is he so now, who does disbelieve it. It is true, we receive him by the
Preaching of the Gospel, Gal. 3. 2. But it is no less true, that we receive him
immediately from the Person of Christ. For no other Reason is he called so
frequently the Spirit of Christ; that is, the Spirit which he gives, sends,
bestows, or Communicates. He receives of the Father the Promise of the Holy
Ghost, and sheddeth him forth. Acts 2. 33.

Spirit, then we must be Holy and Obedient before we so receive him, wherein
our Union does consist. For certainly, Christ does not unite ungodly and impure
Sinners unto himself, which would be the greatest dishonor unto him
imaginable. We must therefore be holy, obedient, and like unto Christ, before
we can be united unto him, and so consequently before we receive his Spirit, if
thereby we are united to him.

An. 1. If this be so, then indeed are we not beholding in the least unto the
Spirit of Christ that we are Holy and Obedient, and like to Christ. For he that
has the Spirit of Christ, is united unto him: And he who is united to him,
has his Spirit, and none else. Whatever therefore is in any man, of Holiness,
Righteousness or Obedience, antecedent unto Union with Christ, is no especial
Effect of his Spirit. Wherefore, in this case we must purify our selves,
without any Application of the Blood of Christ unto our Souls, and we must
sanctify our selves, without any Especial Work of the Spirit of God on our
Nature. Let them that can, satisfy themselves with these things, for my part,
I have no esteem or valuation of that Holiness as Holiness, which is not the
immediate Effect of the Spirit of Sanctification in us.

2. It is granted, that Ordinarily, the Lord Christ, by the Dispensation of his
Word, by Light and Convictions thence ensuing, does prepare the Souls of men in
some measure for the Inhabitation of his Spirit. The Way and Manner hereof has
been fully before declared.

3. It is denied, that on this Supposition, the Lord Christ does unite impure
or ungodly Sinners unto himself, so as that they should be so united, and
continue impure and ungodly. For in the same instant whereby any one is united
unto Christ, and by the same Act whereby he is so united, he is really and
habitually purified and sanctified. For, where the Spirit of God is, there is
Liberty, and Purity, and Holiness. All Acts and Duties of Holiness, are in
order of Nature consequential hereunto; but the Person is quickened, purified,
and sanctified in its Union.

Whereas therefore the Spirit of Christ communicated from him, for our Union
with him, is the Cause and Author of all Grace and Evangelical Holiness in us,
it is evident, that we receive it directly from Christ himself, which gives it
the Difference from all other Habits and Acts pleaded for.

Spirit is, to communicate all Grace unto us from Christ, by virtue of that
Union. I shall take it for granted, until all that has been before discoursed
about the Work of the Holy Spirit in our Regeneration and Sanctification, be
disproved, that he is the Author of all Grace and Holiness; and when that is
disproved, we may part with our Bibles also, as Books which do openly and
palpably mislead us. And what he so works in us, he does it in pursuit of his
first Communication unto us, whereby we are united unto Christ, even for the
Edification, Preservation, and further Sanctification of the Mystical Body,
making every Member of it meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And
in those Supplies of Grace which he so gives, acted by us in all Duties of
Obedience, consists all the Holiness which I desire any acquaintance withal,
or a participation of.

mystical spiritual Body whereof Christ is the Head, and his Church are the
Members of it. There is therefore an Union between them in things spiritual,
like unto that which is between the head and members of the Body of a Man in
things natural. And this the Scripture, because of the Weight and Importance of
it, with its singular Use unto the Faith of Believers, does frequently express.
God has given him to be the head over all things to the Church, which is his
Body, the Fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. For as the
Body is one and has many Members, and all the Members of that Body being many
are one Body; so also is Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. Christ is the Head, from whom
the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted, by that which every Joint
supplyeth, according to the ehe effectual working of every part, makes
increase of the Body, unto the edifying of it self in Love, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
And the same Apostle speaks again to the same purpose; Col. 2. 19. Not holding
the Head, from which the Body by joints and bands, having nourishment
ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God. Now it has
been always granted, by all them who acknowledge the Divine Person of the Son
of God, or the Union of the Humane Nature unto the Divine in his Person, that
the Lord Jesus is the Head of his Church, in the double sense of that word; For
he is the Political Head of it in a way of Rule and Government; and he is the
Really Spiritual Head as unto Vital Influences of Grace unto all his Members.
The Romanists indeed cast some disturbance on the former, by interposing
another immediate Ruling, Governing Head, between him and the Catholic Church;
yet do they not deny, but that the Lord Christ in his own Person, is yet the
absolute supreme King, Head and Ruler of the Church. And the latter the
Socinians cannot grant; for denying his Divine Person, it is impossible to
conceive, how the Humane Nature subsisting alone by it self, should be such an
immense Fountain of Grace, as from whence there should be an Emanation of it
into all the Members of the mystical Body; But by all other Christians this
has hitherto been acknowledged; and therefore there is nothing belongs unto
Gospel Grace or Holiness, but what is Originally derived from the Person of
Christ, as he is the Head of the Church. And this is most evidently expressed
in the places before alleged. For, 1 Cor. 12. 12. it is plainly affirmed,
that it is between Christ and the Church as it is between the Head and the
Members of the same natural Body. Now not only the whole Body has guidance and
direction in the disposal of it self from the Head, but every Member in
particular has influences of Life actually, and Strength from thence, without
which it can neither act nor move, nor discharge its place or Duty in the Body.
So also is Christ, says the Apostle; not only has the whole mystical Body of
the Church, Guidance and Direction from him, in his Laws, Rules, Doctrine and
Precepts, but spiritual Life and Motion also: And so has every Member thereof.
They all receive from him Grace for Holiness and Obedience, without which they
would be but withered and dead Members in the Body: But he has told us, that
because he lives, we shall live also, Joh. 14. 19. For the Father having given
him to have Life in himself, Joh. 5. 26. whereon he quickens with spiritual
Life whom he will, v. 23. from that Fountain of spiritual Life which is in him,
supplies of the same Life are given unto the Church, and therefore, because he
lives, we live also; that is, a spiritual Life here, without which we shall
never live Eternally hereafter. And Ephesians. 4. 16. the Relation of Believers
unto Christ being stated exactly, to answer the Relation and Union of the
Members of the Body unto the Head, it is expressly affirmed, that as in the
Natural Body there are Supplies of Nourishment and natural Spirits communicated
from the Head unto the Members, by the subserviency of all the parts of the
Body, designed unto that purpose, to the Growth and Increase of the whole in
every part; so from Christ the Head of the Church, which he is in his Divine
Person as God and Man, there is a Supply of spiritual Life, Strength and
Nourishment, made unto every Member of the Body, unto its Increase, Growth and
Edification; for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,
Chap. 5. 30. being made out of him, as Eve was out of Adam; yet so continuing
in him, as to have all our Supplies from him; we in him, and he in us, as he
speaks, Joh. 14. 20. And Col. 2. 19. it is expressly affirmed, that from him
the Head, there is Nourishment ministered unto the Body, unto its Increase with
the Increase of God. And what this Spiriritual Nourishment supplied unto the
Souls of Believers for their Increase and Growth, from Christ their Head, can
be, but the Emanation from his Person, and Communication with them of that
Grace which is the Principle and Spring of all Holiness and Duties of
Evangelical Obedience, none have as yet undertaken to declare. And if any do
deny it, they do what lies in them to destroy the Life and overthrow the Faith
of the whole Church of God. Yea, upon such a blasphemous Imagination, that
there could be an Intercision for one Moment, of Influences of spiritual Life
and Grace from the Person of Christ unto the Church; the whole must be supposed
to dye and perish, and that Eternally.

instructive Allusions, which are made use of to this purpose. The principal of
them is, that both laid down and declared by our Savior himself, Joh. 15. 1.
4, 5. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. Abide in me, and I
in you: As the Branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, and ye are the
Branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit, for without me (or severed from me, apart from me) ye can do nothing.
The Natural in-being of the Vine and Branches in each other, is known unto all,
with the Reason of it; and so is the Way whereby the in-being of the Branches
in the Vine, is the Cause and Means of their Fruit-bearing. It is no otherwise,
but by the Communication and Derivation of that Succus, i. e. Juice and
Nourishment, which alone is the Preservative of Vegetative Life, and the next
Cause of Fruit-bearing. In this Juice and Nourishment all Fruit is Virtually,
yea also as to the first matter and substance of it: In and by the Branch it is
only formed into its proper Kind and Perfection. Let any thing be done to
intercept this Communication from the Vine unto any Branch, and it not only
immediately loses all its Fruit-bearing Power and Virtue, but its self also
withers and dies away. And there is a mutual acting of the Vine and Branches
in this matter. Unto the Vine it self it is Natural from its own Fullness to
communicate Nourishment unto the Branches; it does it from the Principle of its
Nature. And unto the Branches it is also Natural, to draw and derive their
Nourishment from the Vine. Thus is it, says the Lord Christ unto his
Disciples, between me and you. I am the Vine, says he, and ye are the
Branches; and there is a mutual in-being between us, I am in you, and ye are in
me, by virtue of our Union. That now which is expected from you is, that you
bring forth Fruit; that is, that you live in Holiness and Obedience unto the
Glory of God: Unless you do so, you are no true real Branches in me, whatever
outward Profession you may make of your so being. But how shall this be
effected? How shall they be able to bring forth Fruit? This can be no otherwise
done, but by their abiding in Christ; and thereby continually deriving
spiritual nourishment, that is, Grace and supplies of Holiness from him. For,
says he, (...), separate, or apart from me, ye can do nothing of this kind.
And that is, because nothing becomes Fruit in the Branch that was not
Nourishment from the Vine. Nothing is Duty, nothing is Obedience in Believers,
but what is Grace from Christ communicated unto them. The Preparation of all
fructifying Grace is in Christ, as the Fruit of the Branches is naturally in
the Vine. And the Lord Christ does spiritually and voluntarily communicate of
this Grace unto all Believers, as the Vine communicates its Juice unto the
Branches naturally: And it is the new Nature of Believers to derive it from him
by Faith. This being done, it is in them turned into particular Duties of
Holiness and Obedience. Therefore it is evident, that there is nothing of
Evangelical Holiness in any one Person whatever, but what is in the Virtue
Power and Grace of it, derived immediately from Jesus Christ, by virtue of
Relation unto him, and Union with him: And it may be enquired, Whether this be
so with Moral Virtue or no. The same is taught by our Apostle, under the
Similitude of an Olive Tree and its Branches, Romans 11. As also, where he is
affirmed to be a living Stone, and Believers to be built on him, as lively
Stones into a spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5.

Joh. 1. 15. He is full of Grace and Truth. And of his fullness have all we
received, and grace for grace. It is of the Person of Christ, or the Word made
Flesh, the Son of God Incarnate, that the Holy Ghost speaks. He was made
Flesh, and dwelt among us, full of Grace and Truth. It is not the Fullness of
the Deity, as it dwelt in him personally, that is here intended, but that which
was in him as he was made flesh, that is, in his Humane Nature as inseparably
united unto the Divine: An All-fulness that he received by the good pleasure or
voluntary Disposal of the Father; Col. 1. 19. and therefore belongs not unto
the Essential Fullness of the Godhead. And as to the Nature of this Fullness, it
is said to consist in Grace and Truth; that is, the Perfection of Holiness, and
Knowledge of the whole Mind, Counsel and Mystery of the Will of God. Of this
Fullness do we receive Grace for Grace, all the Grace in every Kind whereof we
are made partakers in this World. That this Fullness in Christ, expresses the
unconceivable Fullness of his Humane Nature, by virtue of his indissolute
Personal Union with all Graces in their perfection, wherein he received not the
Spirit by measure, Joh. 3. 34. is as I suppose by all Christians acknowledged,
I am sure cannot be denied without the highest Impiety and Blasphemy. Hence
therefore, the Holy Ghost being witness, do we derive and receive all our
Grace, every one according to his Measure, Ephesians. 4. 7. Wherefore, Grace is
given unto the Lord Christ in an immeasurable Perfection, by virtue of his
Personal Union; Col. 2. 9. and from him is it derived unto us, by the gracious
Inhabitation of his Spirit in us, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Ephesians. 4. 30. according unto the
Degree of participation allotted unto us. This in the substance of it is
contained in this Testimony. There was and is in Jesus Christ a Fullness and
Perfection of all Grace; in us, of our selves, or by any thing that we have by
Nature, or natural Generation, by Blood, or the Flesh, or the Will of Man, ( v.
13.) there is none at all. Whatever we have, is received and derived unto us
from the Fullness of Christ, which is an inexhaustible Fountain thereof, by
Reason of his Personal Union.

Life, and our Life to be hid with him in God; Col. 3. 3. Life is the Principle
of all Power and Operation. And the Life here intended, is that whereby we live
to God, the Life of Grace and Holiness. For the Actings of it consist in the
setting of our Affections on heavenly things, and mortifying our Members that
are on the Earth. This Life Christ is; He is not so Formally; for if he were,
then it would not be our Life, but his only. He is therefore so Efficiently, as
that he is the immediate Cause and Author of it, and that as he is now with God
in Glory. Hence it is said, that we live, that is, this Life of God, yet so as
that we live not of our selves, but Christ lives in us, Gal. 1. 20. And he
does no otherwise live in us, but by the Communication of vital Principles, and
a Power for vital Acts, that is Grace and Holiness from himself unto us. If he
be our Life, we have nothing that belongs thereunto, that is, nothing of Grace
of Holiness, but what is derived unto us from him.

Grace and Holiness from Christ, or we have it of our selves. The old Pelagian
Fiction, that we have them from Christ, because we have them by yielding
Obedience unto his Doctrine, makes our selves the only Spring and Author of
them, and on that Account very justly condemned by the Church of old, not only
as false, but as blasphemous. Whatever therefore is not thus derived, thus
conveyed unto us, belongs not unto our Sanctification or Holiness, nor is of
the same Nature or Kind with it. Whatever Ability of Mind or Will may be
supposed in us, what Application soever of Means may be made for the exciting
and exercise of that Ability, whatever Effects, in Virtues, Duties, all Offices
of Humanity and Honesty, or Religious Observances, may be produced thereby from
them, and wrought by us, if it be not all derived from Christ, as the Head and
Principle of spiritual Life unto us, it is a thing of another nature than
Evangelical Holiness.

Thirdly; The immediate efficient Cause of all Gospel Holiness, is the Spirit
of God. This we have sufficiently proved already. And although many Cavils have
been raised against the Manner of his Operation herein, yet none have been yet
so hardy, as openly to deny that this is indeed his Work: For so to do, is
upon the matter expressly to renounce the Gospel. Wherefore, we have in our
foregoing Discourses, at large vindicated the manner of his Operations herein,
and proved, that he does not educe Grace by Moral Applications unto the natural
Faculties of our Minds, but that he creates Grace in us by an immediate
Efficiency of Almighty Power. And what is so wrought and produced, differs
Essentially from any Natural or Moral Habits of our Minds, however acquired or
improved.

Fourthly; This Evangelical Holiness is a Fruit and Effect of the Covenant of
Grace. The Promises of the Covenant unto this purpose, we have before on other
Occasions insisted on. In them does God declare, That he will cleanse and
purify our Natures, that he will write his Law in our Hearts, put his Fear in
our inward parts, and cause us to walk in his Statutes, in which things our
Holiness does consist. Whoever therefore has any thing of it, he does receive
it in the Accomplishment of these Promises of the Covenant. For there are not
two ways whereby men may become Holy, one by the Sanctification of the Spirit
according to the Promise of the Covenant, and the other by their own Endeavors
without it; though indeed Cassianus with some of the Semi-Pelagians, dreamed
somewhat to that purpose. Wherefore, that which is thus a Fruit and Effect of
the Promise of the Covenant, has an especial Nature of its own, distinct from
whatever has not that Relation unto the same Covenant. No man can ever be made
partaker of any the least Degree of that Grace or Holiness which is promised in
the Covenant, unless it be by virtue and as a Fruit of that Covenant. For if
they might do so, then were the Covenant of God of none Effect; for what it
seems to promise in a peculiar Manner, may on this Supposition be attained
without it, which renders it an empty Name.

Fifthly; Herein consists the Image of God, whereunto we are to be renewed.
This I have proved before, and shall afterward have Occasion to insist upon.
Nothing less than the entire Renovation of the Image of God in our Souls, will
constitute us Evangelically Holy. No series of Obediential Actings, no
Observance of Religious Duties, no Attendance unto Actions amongst men as
Morally virtuous and useful, how exact soever they may be, or how constant
soever we may be unto them, will ever render us lovely or holy in the sight of
God, unless they all proceed from the Renovation of the Image of God in us, or
that Habitual Principle of spiritual Life and Power which renders us
conformable unto him.

Practice of Moral Virtue is all the Holiness which is required of us in the
Gospel; neither understanding what they say, nor whereof they do affirm. But
yet this they do with so great a Confidence, as to despise and scoff at any
thing else which is pleaded to belong thereunto. But this Pretense,
notwithstanding all the swelling words of vanity wherewith it is set off and
vended, will easily be discovered to be weak and frivolous. For,

Name or Expression it self is foreign to the Scripture, not once used by the
Holy Ghost, to denote that Obedience which God requires of us in and according
to the Covenant of Grace. Nor is there any sense of it agreed upon, by them who
so magisterially impose it on others. Yea, there are many express Contests
about the signification of these words, and what it is that is intended by
them; which those who contend about them are not ignorant of, and yet have they
not endeavored to reduce the sense they intend unto any Expression used
concerning the same matter in the Gospel, but all men must needs submit unto
it, that at least the main parts, if not the whole of Religion, consists in
Moral Virtue, though it be altogether uncertain what they intend by the one or
the other. These are they who scarce think any thing intelligible, when
declared in the words of the Scripture, which one has openly traduced as a
ridiculous Jargon. They like not, they seem to abhor the speaking of
Spiritual Things, in the Words which the Holy Ghost teaches, the only Reason
whereof is, because they understand not the things themselves. And whilst they
are foolishness unto any, it is no wonder, the terms whereby they are declared,
seem also so to be. But such as have received the Spirit of Christ, and do know
the Mind of Christ, (which profane Scoffers are sufficiently remote from) do
best receive the Truth and apprehend it, when declared, not in the Words which
Man's Wisdom teaches, but which are taught by the Holy Ghost. It is granted, to
be the Wisdom and Skill of men further to explain and declare the Truths that
are taught in the Gospel, by sound and wholesome words of their own, which yet
all of them, as to their Propriety and Significancy, are to be tried and
measured by the Scripture it self. But we have a new Way of teaching spiritual
Things sprung up among some, who being ignorant of the whole Mystery of the
Gospel, and therefore despising it, would debase all the glorious Truths of it,
and the Declaration made of them, into dry, barren, sapless, Philosophical
Notions and Terms, and those the most common, obvious and vulgar, that ever
obtained among the Heathen of old. Virtuous Living they tell us is the Way to
Heaven; but what this Virtue is, or what is a Life of Virtue, they have added
as little in the Declaration of, as any Persons that ever made such a Noise
about them.

Moral, has by Usage obtained a double Signification, with respect unto an
Opposition unto other things which either are not so, or are more than so. For
sometimes it is applied unto the Worship of God, and so is opposed unto
Instituted. That Religious Worship which is prescribed in the Decalogue, or
required by the Law of Creation, is commonly called Moral, and that in
Opposition unto those Rites and Ordinances which are of a superadded Arbitrary
Institution. Again, it is opposed unto things that are more than merely moral,
namely, Spiritual, Theological or Divine. So the Graces of the Spirit, as
Faith, Love, Hope, in all their Exercise, whatever they may have of Morality in
them, or however they may be exercised in and about moral Things and Duties,
yet because of sundry Respects wherein they exceed the Sphere of Morality, are
called Graces and Duties, Theological, Spiritual, Supernatural, Evangelical,
Divine, in Opposition unto all such Habits of the Mind and Duties, which being
required by the Law of Nature, and as they are so required, are merely moral.
In neither sense can it with any tolerable Congruity of speech be said, that
Moral Virtue is our Holiness, especially the whole of it. But because the
Duties of Holiness, have the most of them a Morality in them, as Moral is
opposed to Instituted, some would have them have nothing also in them, as Moral
is opposed to Supernatural and Theological. But that the Principle and Acts of
Holiness are of another special Nature, has been sufficiently now declared.

Moral Virtue do intend by it. Many seem to design no more but that Honesty and
Integrity of Life which was found among some of the Heathens, in their virtuous
Lives and Actions. And indeed, it were heartily to be wished, that we might see
more of it amongst some that are called Christians. For, many things they did
were Materially good, and useful unto Mankind: But let it be supposed to be
never so exact, and the Course of it most diligently attended unto; I defy it,
as to its being the Holiness required of us in the Gospel, according unto the
terms of the Covenant of Grace; and that because it has none of those
Qualifications which we have proved Essentially to belong thereunto. And I
defy all the men in the World to prove, that this Moral Virtue is the sum of
our Obedience to God, whilst the Gospel is owned for a Declaration of his Will
and our Duty. It is true, all the Duties of this Moral Virtue are required of
us, but in the Exercise of every one of them there is more required of us than
belongs unto their Morality, as namely, that they be done in Faith, and Love to
God through Jesus Christ; and many things are required of us as necessary parts
of our Obedience, which belong not thereunto at all.

Morality, as that it should be of the same extent with the Light and Law of
Nature, or the Dictates of it, as rectified and declared unto us in the
Scripture. And this I confess requires of us the Obedience which is due toward
God by the Law of our Creation, and according to the Covenant of Works
materially and formally. But what is this unto Evangelical Holiness and
Obedience? Why it is alleged, that Religion before the Entrance of Sin and
under the Gospel is one and the same, and therefore there is no difference
between the Duties of Obedience required in the one and the other. And it is
true, that they are so far the same, as that they have the same Author, the
same Object, the same End, and so also had the Religion under the Law, which
was therefore so far the same with them. But that they are the same as to all
the Acts of our Obedience, and the Manner of their Performance, is a vain
Imagination. Is there no Alteration made in Religion by the Interposition of
the Person of Christ to be Incarnate, and his Mediation? No Augmentation of the
Object of Faith? No Change in the Abolishing of the Old Covenant, and the
Establishment of the New; the Covenant between God and Man being that which
gives the especial form and kind unto Religion, the Measure and Denomination of
it? No Alteration in the Principles, Aids, Assistances, and whole Nature of our
Obedience unto God? The whole Mystery of Godliness must be renounced, if we
intend to give way unto such Imaginations. Be it so then, that this Moral
Virtue and the Practice of it, do contain and express all that Obedience
materially considered, which was required by the Law of Nature in the Covenant
of Works, yet, I deny it to be our Holiness or Evangelical Obedience; and that
as for many other Reasons, so principally, because it has not that respect
unto Jesus Christ which our Sanctification has.

Moral Virtue they intend no Exclusion of Jesus Christ, but include a respect
unto him, I desire only to ask, whether they design by it such an Habit of
Mind, and such Acts thence proceeding, as have the Properties before described,
as to their Causes, Rise, Effects, Use, and Relation unto Christ and the
Covenant, as are expressly and plainly in the Scripture assigned unto
Evangelical Holiness? Is this Moral Virtue, that which God has predestined
or chosen us unto before the Foundation of the World? Is it that which he
works in us in the pursuit of Electing Love? Is it that which gives us a new
Heart, with the Law of God written in it? or is it a Principle of spiritual
Life, disposing, enclining, enabling us to live to God according to the Gospel,
produced in us by the effectual Operation of the Holy Ghost, not educed out of
the natural Powers of our own Souls by the mere Applications of external Means?
Is it that which is purchased and procured for us by Jesus Christ, and the
Increase whereof in us he continues to intercede for? Is it the Image of God
in us, and does our Conformity unto the Lord Christ consist therein? If it be
so, if Moral Virtue answer all these Properties and Adjuncts of Holiness, then
the whole Contest in this matter is, whether the Holy Spirit or these men be
wisest, and know best how to express the things of God Rationally and
Significantly. But if the Moral Virtue they speak of, be inconcerned in these
things, if none of them belong unto it, if it may and does consist without it,
it will appear at length to be no more as to our Acceptance before God, than
what one of the greatest Morallists in the World complained that he found it
when he was dying, a mere empty Name. But this fulsome Pelagian Figment of an
Holiness or Evangelical Righteousness, whose Principle should be Natural
Reason, and whose Rule is the Law of Nature as explained in the Scripture,
whose Use and End is Acceptance with God, and Justification before him,
whereof those who plead for it, the most of them, seem to understand no more
but outward Acts of Honesty, nor do practice so much, being absoluely opposite
unto and destructive of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, being the mere
Doctrine of the Quakers, by whom it is better and more intelligibly expressed,
than by some new Patrons of it amongst us; will not in the Examination of it
create any great Trouble, unto such as look upon the Scripture to be a
Revelation of the Mind of God in these things.

CHAP. VII. Of the Acts and Duties of Holiness.
(1) Actual inherent Righteousness in Duties of Holiness and Obedience,
explained. The Work of the Holy Spirit with respect thereunto. (2) Distribution
of the Positive Duties of Holiness. (3) Internal Duties of Holiness. (4)
External Duties, and their Difference. (5) Effectual Operation of the Holy
Spirit Necessary unto every Act of Holiness. (6) Dependence on Providence with
respect unto things Natural, and on Grace with respect unto things
Supernatural, compared. (8) Arguments to prove the Necessity of Actual Grace,
unto every Duty of Holiness. (15) Contrary Designs and Expressions of the
Scripture and some men, about Duties of Holiness.

Acts and Duties of Holy Obedience. For what we have before treated of, chiefly
concerns the Principle of it as habitually resident in our Souls, and that both
as unto its first Infusion into us, as also its Preservation and Increase in
us. But we are not endued with such a Principle or Power to Act it at our
pleasure, or as we see good, but God moreover, works in us to will and to
do, of his own good pleasure. And all these Acts and Duties of Holiness or
Gospel Obedience, are of two sorts; or may be referred unto two Heads. (1) Such
as have the Will of God in Positive Commands for their Object, which they
respect in Duties internal and external, wherein we do what God requires. (2)
Such as respect Divine Prohibitions, which consist in the Actings of Grace or
Holiness, in an Opposition unto or the Mortification of Sin. And what is the
Work of the Holy Spirit, what is the Aid which he affords us in both these
sorts of Duties, must be declared.

Positive Divine Commands, fall under a double Distinction. For, 1. They are in
their own Nature either Internal only; Or, 2. External also. There may be
internal Acts of Holiness, that have no external Effects. But no external Acts
or Duties are any part of Holiness, which are only so and no more; for it is
required thereunto, that they be quickened and sanctified by internal Acting of
Grace. Two Persons may therefore at the same time perform the same Commanded
Duties, and in the same outward Manner, yet may it be the Duty of Evangelical
Holiness in the one, and not in the other; as it was with Cain and Abel, with
the other Apostles and Judas. For if Faith and Love be not acted in either of
them, what they do, is Duty but Equivocally, properly it is not so.

internal only, I intend all Acts of Faith, Love, Trust, Hope, Fear, Reverence,
Delight, that have God for their immediate Object, but go not forth, nor exert
themselves in any external Duties; and in these does our spiritual Life unto
God principally consist. For they are as the first Acts of Life, which
principally evidence the Strength or Decays of it. And from these we may take
the best Measure of our spiritual Health, and interest in Holiness. For we may
abound in outward Duties, and yet our Hearts be very much alienated from the
Life of God. Yea sometimes men may endeavor to make up what is wanting with
them, by a multitude of outward Duties, and so have a Name to live when they
are dead, wherein the true Nature of Hypocrisy and Superstition does consist.
Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. But when the internal Actings of Faith, Fear, Trust
and Love, abound and are constant in us, they evidence a vigorous and healthy
Condition of Soul.

external also are of two sorts; or are distinguished with respect unto their
Objects, and End. For, (1) God himself is the Object and End of some of them,
as of Prayer and Praises, whether private or more solemn. And of this nature
are all those which are commonly called, Duties of the first Table, all such as
belong unto the Sanctification of the Name of God in his Worship. (2) Some
respect Men of all sorts in their various Capacities, and our various Relations
unto them, or have Men for their Object, but God for their End. And among these
also I include those which principally regard our selves, or our own Persons.
The whole of what we intend, is summarily expressed by our Apostle, Tit. 2. 12.

internal only, or external also, whether their proper Object be God, or
selves, or other Men, so far as they are Acts of Holiness, and are accepted
with God, they proceed from a peculiar Operation of the Holy Spirit in us. And
herein to make our Intention the more evident, we may distinctly observe.

(1) That there is in the Minds, Wills and Affections of all Believers, a
Meetness, Fitness, Readiness and habitual Disposition unto the Performance of
all Acts of Obedience toward God, all Duties of Piety, Charity, and
Righteousness, that are required of them, and hereby are they internally and
habitually distinguished from them that are not so. That it is so with them,
and whence it comes be so, we have before declared. This Power and Disposition,
is wrought and preserved in them by the Holy Ghost.

(2) No Believer can of himself act, that is, actually exert or exercise this
Principle, or Power of a spiritual Life, in any one Instance of any Duty,
internal or external, toward God or Men, so as that it shall be an Act of
Holiness, or a Duty accepted with God. He cannot I say do so of himself, by
virtue of any Power habitually inherent in him. We are not in this World
entrusted with any such spiritual Ability from God, as without further actual
Aid and Assistance, to do any thing that is Good: Therefore,

(3) That which at present I design to prove is, That the Actual Aid,
Assistance and internal Operation of the Spirit of God, is necessary, required
and granted, unto the producing of every holy Act of our Minds, Wills and
Affections, in every Duty whatever. Or, notwithstanding the Power or Ability
which Believers have received in, or by Habitual Grace, they still stand in
need of Actual Grace, in, for, and unto every single gracious holy Act or Duty
toward God. And this I shall now a little further explain, and then confirm.

natural Lives with respect unto Gods Providence, so it is in our spiritual
Lives with respect unto his Grace. He has in the Works of Nature endowed us
with a vital Principle, or an Act of the quickening Soul upon the Body, which
is quickened thereby. By virtue hereof, we are enabled unto all vital Acts,
whether Natural and Necessary, or Voluntary according to the Constitution of
our Beings, which is Intellectual. God breathed into man the Breath of Life,
and he became a living Soul, Genesis 2. 7. giving him a Principle of Life, he was
fitted for, and enabled unto all the proper Acts of that Life. For, a Principle
of Life, is an Ability and Disposition unto Acts of Life. But yet whosoever is
thus made a living Soul, who is endued with this Principle of Life, he is not
able Originally, without any motion or Acting from God as the first Cause, or
independently on him, to exert or put forth any vital Act: That which has not
this Principle, as a dead Carkase, has no meetness unto vital Actions, nor is
capable either of Motion or Alteration, but as it receives Impressions from an
outward Principle of Force, or an inward Principle of Corruption. But he in
whom it is, has a Fitness, Readiness and habitual Power for all vital Actions,
yet so as without the Concurrence of God in his Energetical Providence, moving
and Acting of him, he can do nothing. For, in God we live, and move, and have
our being, Acts 17. 28. And if any one could of himself perform an Action
without any Concourse of Divine Operation, he must himself be absolutely the
first and only Cause of that Action, that is, the Creator of a New Being.

spiritual Life. We are by the Grace of God through Jesus Christ, furnished
with a Principle of it, in the Way and for the Ends before described. Hereby
are we enabled and disposed to Live unto God in the Exercise of spiritually
vital Acts, or the performance of Duties of Holiness. And he who has not this
Principle of spiritual Life, is spiritually dead, as we have at large before
manifested, and can do nothing at all that is spiritually Good. He may be moved
unto, and as it were compelled by the Power of Convictions, to do many things
that are materially so. But that which is on all Considerations spiritually
good, and accepted with God, he can do nothing of. The Enquiry is, What
Believers themselves, who have received this Principle of spiritual Life, and
are Habitually sanctified, can do as to Actual Duties, by virtue thereof,
without a new immediate Assistance and working of the Holy Spirit in them. And
I say, they can no more do any thing that is spiritually good, without the
particular Concurrence and Assistance of the Grace of God unto every Act
thereof, than a man can naturally act, or move, or do any thing in an absolute
Independency on God, his Power and Providence. And this proportion between the
Works of Gods Providence and of his Grace, the Apostle expresses, Ephesians. 2.
10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which
God has before ordained that we should walk in them. God at the Beginning made
all things by a creating Power, producing them out of Nothing, and left them
not merely to themselves and their own Powers when so created, but he upholds,
supports, sustains and preserves them in the Principles of their Beings and
Operations, acting powerfully in and by them, after their several Kinds.
Without his Supportment of their Beings by an Actual incessant Emanation of
Divine Power, the whole Fabric of Nature would dissolve into Confusion and
nothing. And without his Influence into, and Concurrence with their Ability for
Operation by the same Power, all things would be dead and deformed, and not one
Act of Nature be exerted. So also is it in this Work of the New Creation of all
things by Jesus Christ. We are the Workmanship of God, he has formed and
fashioned us for himself by the Renovation of his Image in us. Hereby are we
sitted for good Works, and the Fruits of Righteousness, which he has appointed
as the Way of our Living unto him. This New Creature, this Divine Nature in us,
he supporteth and preserves, so as that without his continual influential
Power it would perish and come to nothing. But this is not all; He does
moreover act it, and effectually concur to every singular Duty, by new
supplies of Actual Grace. So then, that which we are to prove, is; That there
is an Actual Operation of the Holy Ghost in us, necessary unto every Act and
Duty of Holiness whatever, without which none either will or can be produced or
performed by us, which is the Second Part of his Work in our Sanctification:
And there are several Ways whereby this is confirmed unto us.

First; The Scripture declares, that we our selves, cannot in and by our
selves, that is, by virtue of any strength or power that we have received, do
any thing that is spiritually Good. So our Savior tells his Apostles, when
they were sanctified Believers, and in them all that are so; without me ye can
do nothing, John 15. 3. (...), So, without me, Seorsim a me, so separated from
me, as a Branch may be from the Vine. If a Branch be so separated from the Root
and Body of the Vine, as that it receives not continual supplies of Nourishment
from them, if their Influence into it, be by any Means intercepted, it proceeds
not in its Growth, it brings forth no Fruit, but is immediately under decay: It
is so, says our Savior, with Believers in respect unto him. Unless they have
continual uninterrupted influences of Grace, and spiritually vital Nourishment
from him, they can do nothing. Without me, expresses a Denial of all the
spiritual Aid that we have from Christ. On supposition hereof, we can do
nothing; that is, by our own Power, or by virtue of any Habit or Principle of
Grace we have received. For when we have received it, what we can do thereby
without further actual Assistance, we can do of our selves. You can do nothing;
that is, which appertains to Fruit-bearing unto God. In things Natural and
Civil we can do somewhat, and in things Sinful too much; we need no Aid or
Assistance for any such purpose. But in Fruit-hearing unto God we can do
nothing. Now every Act of Faith and Love, every Motion of our Minds or
Affections toward God, is a part of our Fruit-bearing, and so unquestionably
are all external Works and and Duties of Holiness and Obedience. Wherefore, our
Savior himself being Judge, Believers who are really sanctified, and made
partakers of Habitual Grace, yet cannot of themselves, without new actual Aid
and Assistance of Grace from him, do any thing that is spiritually Good, or
acceptable with God.

Cor. 3. 4, 5. And such trust have we through Christ to Godward; not that we
are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. It is a great and eminent Grace which he declares that
he was acting, namely, Trust in God through Christ in the Discharge of his
Ministry, and for the blessed Success thereof: But he had no sooner expressed
it, than he seems to be jealous lest he should appear to have assumed something
to himself, in this Work, or the Trust he had for its Success. This no man was
ever more cautious against, and indeed it was incumbent on him so to be,
because he was appointed to be the principal Minister and Preacher of the Grace
of Jesus Christ. Therefore I say, he adds a Caution against any such
Apprehensions, and openly renounceth any such Power, Ability, or Sufficiency in
himself, as that by virtue thereof he could act so excellent a Grace, or
perform so great a Duty. Not that we are sufficient of our selves; And in this
matter, he has not only in places innumerable asserted the Necessity and
Efficacy of Grace, with our impotency without it, but in his own Instance he
has made such a Distinction between what was of himself, and what of Grace,
with such an open Disclaimure of any Interest of his own in what was
Spiritually good, distinct from Grace, as should be sufficient with all sober
Persons, to determine all differences in this Case. See 1 Cor. 15. 10. Gal. 2.
21. and this place. I assume no such thing to my self, I ascribe no such thing
unto any other, as that I or they should have in our selves a sufficiency unto
any such purpose. For our Apostle knew nothing of any sufficiency that needed
any other thing to make it effectual. And he does not exclude such a
sufficiency in our selves with respect unto eminent Actings of Grace, and
greater Duties, but with respect unto every good Thought, or whatever may have
a tendency unto any spiritual Duty. We cannot conceive, we cannot engage in the
Beginning of any Duty by our own sufficiency. For it is the beginning of Duties
which the Apostle expresses by thinking; our Thoughts and Projections being
Naturally the first thing that belongs unto our Actions. And this he does as it
were on purpose to obviate that Pelagian Fiction, that the Beginning of Good
was from our selves, but we had the help of Grace to perfect it. But what then!
if we have no such sufficiency, to what purpose should we set about the
thinking or doing of any thing that is good? Who will be so unwise as to
attempt that which he has no strength to accomplish? And does not the Apostle
hereby deny, that he himself had performed and Holy Duties, or Acted any Grace,
or done any thing that was good, seeing he had no sufficiency of himself so to
do? to obviate this cavil he confines this denial of a sufficiency unto our
selves, we have it not of our selves. But, says he, our sufficiency is of God,
that is, we have it by Actual supplies of Grace, necessary unto every Duty; and
how God Communicates this sufficiency, and how we receive it, he declares,
Chap. 9. v. 8. God is able to make all Grace abound toward you, that ye
always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work.
God manifests the abounding of Grace toward us, when he works an effective
sufficiency in us, which he does so as to enable us to abound in good works, or
Duties of Holiness. These are those supplies of Grace which God gives us unto
all our Duties, as He had promised unto him in his own ease, Chap. 12. 9. And
this is the first Demonstration of the Truth proposed unto Consideration,
namely the Testimonies given in the Scripture, that Believers themselves cannot
of themselves perform any Acts or Duties of Holiness, any thing that is
spiritually good. Therefore these things are Effects of Grace, and and must be
wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, who is the immediate Author of all Divine
Operations.

Secondly, All Actings of Grace, all good Duties are actually ascribed unto the
Operation of the Holy Ghost. The particular Testimonies hereunto, are so
multiplied in the Scripture, as that it is not convenient nor indeed possible
to call them over distinctly, some of them in a way of instance may be insisted
on, and reduced unto three heads.

led, guided, acted by the Spirit, to live in the Spirit, to walk after the
Spirit, to do things by the Spirit that dwells in us. For nothing in general
can be intended in these expressions, but the Actings of the Holy Spirit of God
upon our Souls, in a Compliance wherewith, as acting when we are acted by him,
our Obedience unto God according to the Gospel does consist, Gal. 5. 16. Walk
in the Spirit. To walk in the Spirit, is to walk in Obedience unto God
according to the supplies of Grace which the Holy Ghost administers unto us;
for so it is added, that we shall not then fulfill the lusts of the flesh;
that is, we shall be kept up unto Holy Obedience and the avoydance of sin. So
are we said to be led by the Spirit, ver. 18. being acted by him, and not by
the vicious depraved principles of our corrupted Nature, Romans 8. 4. Walk not
after the flesh but after the Spirit. To walk after the flesh is to have the
principles of indwelling sin, acting its self in us unto the production and
perpetration of actual sins. Wherefore to walk after the Spirit, is to have the
Spirit acting in us, to the effecting of all gracious Acts and Duties. And this
is given unto us in command, that we neglect not his motions in us, but comply
with them in a way of Diligence and Duty; see ver. 14. 15. So are we enjoined,
to attend unto particular Duties through the Holy Ghost that dwells in us, 2 Timothy 1. 14. that is, through his Assistance, without which we can do nothing.

led, and acted by him, so he is declared to be the Author of all gracious
Actings in us, Galat. 5. 22. 23. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance. All these things
are wrought and brought forth in us by the Spirit, for they are his fruits. And
not only the Habit of them, but all their Actings, in all their Exercise are
from him. Every Act of Faith is Faith, and every Act of Love is Love, and
consequently no Act of them is of our selves, but every one of them is a fruit
of the Spirit of God. So in another place he adds an universal affirmative,
comprehending all instances of particular Graces and their Exercise, Ephesians. 5.
9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all Goodness, and Righteousness and Truth.
Unto these three heads, all Actings of Grace, all Duties of Obedience, all
parts of Holiness may be reduced. And it is through the supplies of the Spirit,
that he trusts for a good issue of his Obedience, Phil. 1. 19. So is it
expressly in the Promise of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments and do them. This is the whole that God requires of us, and it is
all wrought in us by his Spirit. So also Chap. 11. 19, 20. Jerem. 32. 39, 40.
All the Obedience and Holiness that God requires of us in the Covenant, all
Duties and Actings of Grace, are promised to be wrought in us by the Spirit,
after we are assured that of our selves we can do nothing.

Graces and their Exercise, are assigned unto his acting and working in us,
Gal. 5. 5. We through the Spirit wait for the Hope of Righteousness by Faith.
The hope of the Righteousness of Faith, is the thing hoped for thereby. All
that we look for or expect in this World or hereafter, is by the Righteousness
of Faith. Our quiet waiting for this, is an especial Gospel Grace and Duty.
This we do not of our selves, but through the Spirit, Phil. 3. 3. We worship
God in the Spirit, love the brethren in the Spirit, Col. 1. 8. we purify our
souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the
Brethren, 1 Pet. 1. 22. See Ephesians. 1. 17. Act. 19. 31. Romans 5. 5. Romans 8. 15. 22,
26. 1 These. 1. 6. Romans 14. 17. Chap. 15. 13, 16. of Faith it is said
expressly, that it is not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 7, 8.

Thirdly; There are Testimonies that are express unto the Position as before
laid down, Phil. 2. 13. It is God who works in you both to will and to do of
his good pleasure. The things thus wrought, are all things that appertain unto
our Obedience and Salvation, as is evident from the Connection of the words with
v. 12. Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling. Hereunto two things are
required: (1) Power for such Operations, or for all the Duties of Holiness and
Obedience that are required of us. That this we are endued withal, that this
is wrought in us, bestowed upon us, by the Holy Ghost, has been before
abundantly confirmed. But when this is done for us, is there ought else yet
remaining to be done? Yea, (2) There is the Actual Exercise of the Grace we
have received. How may this be Exercised? All the whole work of Grace consists
in the internal Acts of our Wills, and external Operations in Duties suitable
thereunto. This therefore is incumbent on us, this we are to look unto in our
selves; it is our Duty so to do, namely to stir up and exercise the Grace we
have received in and unto its proper Operations. But it is so our Duty, as that
of our selves we cannot perform it. It is God who works effectually in us all
those gracious Acts of our Wills, and all holy Operations in a way of Duty.
Every Act of our Wills, so far as it is Gracious and Holy, is the Act of the
Spirit of God efficiently, He works in us to will, or the very Act of
willing. To say he does only persuade us, or excite and stir up our Wills by
his Grace to put forth their own Acts, is to say he does not do what the
Apostle affirms him to do. For, if the gracious Actings of our Wills be so our
own as not to be his, he does not work in us to will, but only persuades us so
to do. But the same Apostle utterly excludes this pretense, 1 Cor. 15. 10. I
labored abundantly, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. He had
a Necessity incumbent on him, of declaring the great labor he had undergone,
and the pains he had taken in preaching of the Gospel: But yet immediately,
least any one should apprehend, that he ascribed any thing to himself, any
gracious holy Actings in those Labors, he adds his usual Epanorthosis, Not I;
let me not be mistaken; it was not I, by any power of mine, by any thing in me,
but it was all wrought in me by the free Grace of the Spirit of God. Not I, but
Grace, is the Apostles Assertion. Suppose now, that God by his Grace does no
more but aid, assist, and excite the Will in its Actings, that he does not
effectually work all the gracious Actings of our Souls in all our Duties; the
Proposition would hold on the other hand, Not Grace, but I, seeing the
principal Relation of the Effect is unto the next and immediate Cause, and
thence has it its Denomination. And as he works them, To Will in us, so also
To Do; that is, Effectually to perform those Duties whereunto the gracious
actings of our Wills are required.

Author of our Sanctification, works also in us all gracious Acts of Faith,
Love and Obedience, wherein the first Part of our Actual Holiness and
Righteousness does consist. And the Truth thus confirmed, may be further
improved unto our Instruction and Edification.

(1) It is easily hence discernible, How contrary are the Designs and
Expressions of the Scripture, and the Notions of some Men among us. There is
not any thing that is good in us, nothing that is done well by us in the way of
Obedience, but the Scripture expressly and frequently assigns it unto the
immediate Operations of the Holy Spirit in us. It does so in general as to all
gracious Actings whatever, and not content therewith, it proposes every Grace,
and every Holy Duty, distinctly affirming the Holy Ghost to be the immediate
Author of them. And when it comes to make mention of us, it positively indeed
prescribes our Duty to us, but as plainly lets us know, that we have no power
in or from our selves to perform it. But some men speak, and preach, and write
utterly to another purpose. The Freedom, Liberty, Power and Ability of our own
Wills; the Light, Guidance, and Direction of our own Minds Reasons; and from
all, our own Performance of all the Duties of Faith and Obedience, are the
(...) of their Discourses; and that in Opposition unto what is a^^^bed in the
Scriptures unto the Immediate Operations of the Holy Ghost. They are all for
Grace, Not I, but Grace, not I but Christ, without him we can do nothing: These
are all for our Wills; not Grace but our Wills do all. It is not more plainly
affirmed in the Scripture, that God created Heaven and Earth, that he sustains
and preserves all things by his Power, than that he creates grace in the Hearts
of Believers; preserves it, acts it, and makes it effectual, working all our
Works for us, and all our Duties in us. But Evasions must be found out,
strange, forced, uncouth senses, be put upon plain, frequently repeated
Expressions, to secure the Honor of our Wills, and to take care, that all the
Good we do, may not be assigned to the Grace of God. To this purpose
Distinctions are coined, Evasions invented, and such an Explanation is given of
all Divine Operations, as renders them useless and insignificant. Yea, it is
almost grown, if not Criminal, yet weak and ridiculous in the Judgment of
some, That any should assign those Works and Operations to the Spirit of God,
which the Scripture does, in the very words that the Scripture uses. To lessen
the Corruption and Depravation of our Nature by Sin; to extol the Integrity
and Power of our Reasons; to maintain the Freedom and Ability of our Wills in
and unto things spiritually Good; to resolve the Conversion of men unto God,
into their Natural good Dispositions, Inclinations and the right use of their
Reason; to render Holiness to be only a Probity of Life, or Honesty of
Conversation, upon rational Motives and Considerations; are the things that men
are now almost wearied with the Repetition of. Scarce a Person that has
Confidence to commence for Reputation in the World, but immediately he
furnishes himself with some new tinkling Ornaments for these old Pelagian
Figments. But whoever shall take an impartial View of the Design and constant
Doctrine of the Scripture in this matter, will not be easily carried away with
the plausible Pretenses of men exalting their own Wills and Abilities, in
Opposition to the Spirit and Grace of God by Jesus Christ.

Gospel Obedience, of all the Acts of our Souls therein, and of the Duties that
belong thereunto. It is commonly granted, that there is a great difference
between the Acts and Duties that are truly gracious, and those which are
called by the same name, that are not so, as in any Duties of Faith, of Prayer,
of Charity. But this difference is supposed generally to be in the Adjuncts of
those Duties, in some properties of them, but not in the kind, nature or
substance of the Acts of our minds in them. Nay it is commonly said, that
whereas wicked men are said to believe, and do many things gladly in a way of
Obedience; what they so do, is for the substance of the Acts they perform, the
same with those of them who are truly Regenerate and Sanctified. They may
differ in their Principle and End, but as to their Substance or Essence they
are the same. But there is no small mistake herein. All gracious Actings of our
Minds and Souls, whether internal only, in Faith, Love, or Delight, or whether
they go out unto external Duties required in the Gospel, being wrought in us by
the immediate Efficacy of the Spirit of Grace, differ in their Kind, in their
Essence and substance of the Acts themselves, from whatever is not so wrought
or effected in us. For whatever may be done by any one, in any acting of common
Grace, or performance of any Duty of Obedience, being educed out of the power
of the Natural Faculties of men, excited by Convictions, as directed and
enforced by Reasons and Exhortations, or assisted by common Aids of what nature
soever, they are natural as to their kind, and they have no other substance or
Being but what is so. But that which is wrought in us by the especial Grace of
the Holy Ghost in the way mentioned, is supernatural, as being not educed out
of the Powers of our natural Faculties, but an immediate Effect of the Almighty
supernatural Efficacy of the Grace of God. And therefore the sole Reason why
God accepts and rewards Duties of Obedience in them that are sanctified, and
regards not those which for the outward Matter and Manner of Performance are
the same with them, (as unto Abel and his Offering he had respect, but he had
no respect unto Cain and his Offering, Genesis 4. 4, 5.) is not taken from the
State and Condition of the Persons that perform them only, though that also
have an influence thereinto; but from the Nature of the Acts and Duties
themselves also. He never accepts and rejects Duties of the same Kind
absolutely with respect unto the Persons that do perform them. The Duties
themselves are of a different Kind. Those which he accepts are supernatural
Effects of his own Spirit in us, whereon he rewards and crowns the Fruits
of his own Grace. And as for what he rejects, whatever Appearance it may have
of a Compliance with the outward Command, it has nothing in it that is
supernaturally Gracious, and so is not of the same Kind with what he does
accept.

CHAP. VIII. Mortification of Sin, the Nature and Causes of it.
(1) Mortification of Sin, the Second Part of Sanctification. (2) Frequently
prescribed and enjoined as a Duty. (3) What the Name signifies, with the Reason
thereof: (4) As also that of Crucifying Sin. (5) The Nature of the
Mortification of Sin, explained. (6) In-dwelling Sin in its Principle,
Operations and Effects, the Object of Mortification. (7) Contrariety between
Sin and Grace. (8) Mortification a Part-taking with the whole Interest of Grace
against Sin. (9) How Sin is Mortified, and why the Subduing of it is so called.
(10) Directions for the right Discharge of this Duty. (13) Nature of it unknown
to many. (15) The Holy Spirit the Author and Cause of Mortification in us. (21)
The Manner of the Operation of the Spirit in the Mortification of Sin. (22)
Particular Means of the Mortification of Sin. (23) Duties necessary unto the
Mortification of Sin, directed unto by the Holy Ghost. (24) Mistakes and Errors
of Persons failing in this matter. (28) How Spiritual Duties are to be managed,
that Sin may be mortified. (33) Influence of the Virtue of the Death of Christ,
as applied by the Holy Spirit, into the Mortification of Sin.

Sanctification by the Holy Ghost, which consists in, and is called,
Mortification of Sin. As what we have already insisted on, concerns the
Improvement and Practice of the Principle of Grace, wherewithal Believers are
endued; so what we now propose, concerns the Weakening, Impairing and
Destroying of the Contrary Principle of Sin in its Root and Fruits, in its
Principle and Actings. And whereas the Spirit of God is every where said to
sanctify us; we our selves are commanded, and said constantly to mortify our
Sins. For Sanctification expresses Grace communicated and received in general;
Mortification Grace as so received, improved and acted unto a certain End. And
I shall be brief in the handling of it, because I have formerly published a
small Discourse on the same Subject. And there are two things that I shall
speak unto: (1) The Nature of the Duty it self. (2) The Manner how it is
wrought in us by the Holy Ghost; which I principally intend.

Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your Members that are on the Earth, Fornication,
Uncleanness, inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness which
is I^^atry. (...), may be supplied. Mortify your Members that are on the
Earth; that is, your carnal earthly Affections, avoiding, or by avoiding
Fornication, etc. And so a distinction is made between carnal Affections and
their Fruits: Or, the special sins mentioned, are instances of these carnal
Affections; Mortify your carnal Affections, namely, Fornication and the like;
wherein there is a Metonymy of the Effect for the Cause. And they are called
our Members, (1) Because, as the whole Principle of sin, and Course of sinning
which proceeds from it, being called the Body of Sin, Romans 6. 6. or the Body
of the Sins of the Flesh, Col. 2. 11. with respect thereunto these particular
Lusts are here called the members of that Body, Mortify your members; For,
that he intends not the Parts or Members of our Natural Bodies, as though they
were to be destroyed, as they seem to imagine who place Mortification in
outward Afflictions and Macerations of the Body, he adds, (...), that are on
the Earth, that is, Earthly, carnal and sensual. (2) These Affections and
Lusts, the Old man, that is, our depraved Nature, uses naturally and readily,
as the Body does its Members: And, which adds Efficacy unto the Allusion, by
them it draws the very Members of the Body into a compliance with it, and the
service of it; against which we are cautioned by our Apostle, Romans 6. 12. Let
not therefore sin reign in your mortal Bodies, (that is, our natural Bodies)
that ye should obey it in the Lusts thereof; which Exhortation he pursues v.
19. as ye have yielded your Members servants unto Uncleanness and to Iniquity,
unto Iniquity, even so now yield your Members servants to Righteousness unto
Holiness. Which some neglecting, do take the Members of Christ, that is, of
their own Bodies, which are the Members of Christ, and make them the members of
an Harlot, 1 Cor. 6. 15. And many other Commands there are to the same purpose,
which will afterward occur.

Name of it, whereby it is exressed. 2. The Nature of it, wherein it consists.
3. The Means and Way whereby it is effected and wrought.

First; For the Name, it is two ways expressed, and both of them Metaphorical.
(1) By (...), and (...), which we render to mortify our selves. The first is
used Col. 3. 5. (...), which is mortify, that is, Extinguish and destroy all
that Force and Vigor of Corrupted Nature, which enclines to earthly carnal
things, opposite unto that spiritual Heavenly Life and its actings, which we
have in and from Christ, as was before declared: (...) is eneco, morte macto,
to kill, to affect with or destroy by Death. But yet this word is used by our
Apostle not absolutely to destroy, and to kill, so as that which is so
mortified or killed should no more have any Being, but that it should be
rendered useless as unto what its strength and vigor would produce. So he
expresses the Effects of it in the passive word, (...); Romans 4. 19. He
considered not his own Body now dead, now mortified. The Body of Abraham was
not then absolutely dead, only the natural Force and Vigor of it was
exceedingly abated. And so he seems to mollify this Expression, Heb. 11. 12.
(...); which we well render, of one, and him as good as Dead; (...) intimating
a Respect unto the thing treated of. So that (...) to mortify, signifies a
continued Act, in taking away the Power and Force of any thing, until it comes
to be (...), dead, unto some certain Ends or Purposes, as we shall see it is in
the Mortification of sin. Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the
Deeds of the Body, ye shall live; (...), another word to the same purpose, it
signifies as the other does, to put to death. But it is used in the Present
Tense, to denote that it is a work which must be always doing; If ye do
mortify, that is, If you are always and constantly employed in that work. And
what the Apostle here calls (...), the Deeds of the Body, he therein expresses
the Effect for the Cause Metonymically: For he intends (...), as he expresses
the same thing, Gal. 5. 24. The Flesh with its Affections and Lusts; whence all
the corrupt Deeds wherein the Body is instrumental, do arise.

Crucifying. Romans 6. 6. Our old Man is Crucified with him. Gal. 2. 20. I am
crucified with Christ; Chap. 5. 20. They that are Christ's have crucified the
Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts. Chap. 6. 14. By the Lord Jesus Christ,
the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the World. Now as perhaps there may
be something intimated herein, of the Manner of mortification of sin, which is
Gradually carried on unto its final Destruction, as a Man dies on the Cross;
yet that which is principally intended, is the Relation of this Work and Duty
to the Death of Christ, whence we and our sins are said to be crucified with
him, because we and they are so by virtue of his Death; And herein do we
always bear about in the Body, (...), the dying of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4. 10. representing the Manner of it, and expressing its Efficacy.

Secondly: Thus is this Duty expressed, whose Nature in the next place we shall
more particularly enquire into, and declare, in the ensuing Observations.

1. Mortification of Sin is a Duty always incumbent on us, in the whole Course
of our Obedience. This the Command testifies, which represents it as an
always present Duty. When it is no longer a Duty to grow in Grace, it is so
not to mortify Sin. No man under Heaven can at any Time say, that he is
exempted from this Command, nor on any Pretense. And he who cease from this
Duty, lets go all Endeavors after Holiness. And as for those who pretend unto
an absolute Perfection, they are of all Persons living the most impudent, nor
do ever in this Matter open their mouths, but they give themselves the Lie. For,

2. This Duty being always incumbent on us, argues undenyably the abiding in
us of a Principle of Sin whilst we are in the Flesh, which with its Fruits is
that which is to be mortified. This the Scripture calls the sin that dwells
in us, the evil that is present with us, the Law of the Members, evil
Concupiscence, Lust, the Flesh, and the like. And thereunto are the Properties
and Actings of folly, deceit, tempting, seducing, rebelling, warring,
captivating, ascribed. This is not a place to dispute the Truth of this
Assertion, which cannot with any Reputation of Modesty be denied by any who own
the Scripture, or pretend to an Acquaintance with themselves. But yet through
the Craft of Satan, with the Pride and Darkness of the Minds of men, it is so
fallen out, that the want of a true understanding hereof, is the Occasion of
most of those pernicious Errors wherewith the Church of God is at present
pestered; and which practically keeps men off from being seriously troubled for
their sins, or seeking out for Relief by Jesus Christ. Thus one has not feared
of late openly to profess, that he knows of no deceit or evil in his own
Heart, though a wiser than he, has informed us, that he who trusts his own
Heart is a Fool, Proverb. 28. 26.

In-dwelling sin, which is the Object of this Duty of Mortification, falls
under a threefold Consideration. 1. Of its Root and Principle: 2. Of its
Disposition and Operations: 3. Of its Effects. These in the Scripture are
frequently distinguished, though mostly under Metaphorical Expressions. So are
they mentioned together distinctly, Romans 6. 6. Our old Man is crucified with
Christ, that the Body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. (1) The Root or Principle of sin, which by Nature possesses all the
Faculties of the Soul, and as a depraved Habit enclines unto all that is evil,
is the Old man, so called in Opposition unto the New man which after God is
created in Righteousness and true Holiness. (2) There is the Inclination,
actual Disposition and Operations of this Principle or Habit, which is called
the Body of sin with the Members of it. For, under those Expressions sin is
proposed as in procinctu, in a Readiness to Act its self, and enclining unto
all that is evil. And this also is expressed by the Affections and Lusts of the
Flesh, Gal. 4. 25. Deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4. 24. The Old man is Corrupt,
according unto the deceitful Lusts, the Wills of the Flesh, and the Mind. (3)
There are the Effects, Fruits and Products of these things, which are Actual
sins, whereby as the Apostle speaks, we serve sin, as bringing forth the Fruits
of it; that we should not henceforth serve sin. And these Fruits are of two
sorts: 1. Internal, in the Figments and Imaginations of the Heart, which is the
first way whereby the Lusts of the Old man do act themselves. And therefore, of
those that are under the Power or Dominion of sin, it is said, that every
Figment or Imagination of their Hearts are evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. For
they have no other Principle whereby they are acted, but that of Sin, and
therefore all the Figments of their Hearts must be necessarily evil. And with
respect hereunto, our Savior affirms, that all Actual sins proceed out of the
Heart, Math. 15. 19. because there is their Root, and there are they first
formed and framed. 2. External, in Actual sins, such as those enumerated by our
Apostle; Col. 3. 5. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. All these things together, make up the
complete Object of this Duty of Mortification. The old man, the body of Death
with its Members, and the Works of the flesh, or the Habit, Operations an
Effects of Sin, are all of them intended, and to be respected herein.

Principle, its Operations and Effects, are opposed and directly contrary unto
the Principle, Operations, and Fruits of Holiness, as wought in us by the
Spirit of God, which we have before described. (1) They are opposed in their
Principle. For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts
against Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, Gal. 5. 17. These
are those two adverse Principles, which maintain such a Conflict in the Souls
of Believers, whilst they are in this world, and which is so Graphically
described by our Apostle, Romans 7. so the Old and New man are opposed and
contrary. (2) In their Actings; The Lusting of the Flesh, and the Lusting or
desires of the Spirit, Walking after the Flesh, and Walking after the Spirit,
living after the Flesh, and living in the Spirit are opposed also. This is the
Opposition that is between the Body of Sin with its Members, and the Life of
Grace; Who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1, 4, 5. We
are Debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh; for if ye live after the
flesh ye shall die; but if ye by the Spirit, do mortify the Deeds of the
Flesh ye shall live, ver. 11, 12, 13. By this walking after the Flesh, I
understand not, at least not principally, the committing of Actual Sins, but a
Compliance with the Principle or Habit of sin prevailing in Depraved
unsanctified Nature, allowing it a predominancy in the Hearts and Affections.
It is when men are disposed to Act according to the Inclinations, Lustings,
Motions, Wills and Desires of it. Or it is to bend that way Habitually in our
Course and Conversation, which the Flesh inclines and leads unto. This
Principle does not indeed Equally bring forth Actual sins in all, but has
various Degrees of its Efficacy, as it is advantaged by Temptations, controlled
by Light, or hampered by Convictions. Hence all that are under the Power of
Sin, are not all equally vicious and sinful. But after the flesh goes the bent
of the Soul, and the generality of its Actings. To walk after the Spirit,
consists in our being given up to Rule and Conduct, or walking according to the
Dispositions and Inclinations of the Spirit, that which is born of the Spirit,
Namely, a Principle of Grace implanted in us by the Holy Ghost, which has at
large insisted on before. And (3) The External Fruits and Effects of these two
Principles are contrary also, as our Apostle expressly and at large declares,
Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. For whereas in the Enumeration of the Works of
the Flesh, he reckons up Actual sins, as Adultery, Fornication, and the like,
in the Account he gives of the Fruits of the Spirit, he insists on Habitual
Graces, as Love, Joy, Peace, he expresses them both Metaphorically. In the
former he has repect unto the vicious Habits of those Actual Sins; and in the
latter, unto the Actual Effects and Duties of those Habitual Graces.

Mortification consists in a constant taking part with Grace, in its Principle,
Actings and Fruits, against the Principle Acts and Fruits of Sin. For the
Residence of these contrary Principles being in, and their Actings being by the
same Faculties of the Soul, as the one is increased, strengthened, and
improved, the other must of necessity be weakened and decay. Wherefore the
Mortification of Sin must consist in these three things. (1) The cherishing and
improving of the Principle of Grace and Holiness which is implanted in us by
the Holy Ghost, by all the ways and means which God has appointed thereunto,
which we have spoken unto before. This is that which alone can undermine and
ruin the power of Sin, without which all Attempts to weaken it are vain and
fruitless. Let men take never so much pains to Mortify, Crucify or Subdue
their sins, unless they endeavor in the first place to weaken and impair its
strength by the increase of Grace, and growing therein, they will labor in the
fire, where this work will be consumed. (2) In frequent actings of the
Principles of Grace in all Duties Internal and External. For where the
Inclinations, Motions, and Actings of the Spirit in all Acts, Duties, and
Fruits of Holy Obedience, are vigorous and kept in constant Exercise, the
contrary Motions and Actings of the Flesh are defeated. (3) In a due
Application of the Principle, Power, and Actings of Grace, by way of opposition
unto the Principle, Power, and Actings of Sin. As the whole of Grace is opposed
unto the whole of Sin; so there is no particular Lust whereby Sin can act its
power, but there is a particular Grace ready, to make effectual Opposition unto
it, whereby it is mortified. And in this Application of Grace in its Actings in
Opposition unto all the Actings of sin, consists the Mystery of this great Duty
of Mortification. And where men being ignorant hereof, have yet fallen under a
Conviction of the Power of Sin, and been perplexed therewith, they have found
out foolish ways innumerable, for its Mortification, wickedly opposing
External, Natural, bodily Force and Exercise, unto an Internal, Moral, Depraved
Principle which is no way concerned therein. But hereof we must treat more
afterward under the third Head concerning the Manner how this work is to be
carried on, or this Duty performed.

Mortification, Killing, or putting to Death, on sundry accounts. First and
principally, from that Life, which because of its Power, Efficacy and Operation
is ascribed unto Indwelling Sin. The state of the Soul by reason of it is a
state of Death. But whereas Power and Operations, are the proper Adjuncts or
Effects of Life, for their sakes life is ascribed unto sin, on whose account
sinners are dead. Wherefore this corrupt Principle of Sin in our depraved
Nature, having a constant, powerful inclination, and working Actually ^^wards
all evil; it is said Metaphorically to Live, or to have a Life of its own.
Therefore is the Opposition that is made unto it for its ruin and Destruction,
called Mortification, or Killing, being its Deprivation of that strength, and
efficacy whereby, and wherein it is said to live. Secondly, It may be so called
because of the Violence of that contest which the Soul is put unto in this
Duty. All other Duties that we are called unto in the course of our Obedience,
may be performed in a more easy, gentle, and plain manner. Though it is our
Work and Duty to conflict with all sorts of Temptations, yea to wrestle with
Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places, yet in
this which we have with our selves, which is wholly within us and from us,
there is more of Warring, Fighting, Captivating, Wounding, Crying out for Help
and Assistance, a deep sense of such a violence as is used in taking away the
Life of a mortal Enemy, than in any thing else we are called unto. And Thirdly,
the end aimed at in this Duty, is Destruction, as it is of all killing. Sin, as
was said, has a Life, and that such a Life, as whereby it not only Lives, but
Rules and Reigns in all that are not born of God. By the entrance of Grace into
the Soul it loses its Dominion, but not its Being; its Rule, but not its
Life. The utter Ruin, Destruction and gradual Annihilation of all the
Remainders of this cursed Life of Sin, is our Design and Aim in this Work and
Duty, which is therefore called Mortification. The design of this Duty wherever
it is in sincerity, is to leave sin neither Being, nor Life, nor Operation.

Directions, as our manner is, may be taken from what we have discoursed
concerning the Nature of this Duty, Directive of our own Practices.

And (1) It is evident from what has been discoursed, that it is a Work which
has a Gradual Progress, in the proceed whereof we must continually be
Exercised. And this respects in the first place the Principle of sin it self.
Every day, and in every Duty an especial eye is to be had unto the Abolition
and Destruction of this Principle. It will no otherwise dye, but by being
Gradually and constantly weakened, spare it and it heals its wounds and
recovers strength. Hence many who have attained to a great Degree in the
Mortification of sin, do by their negligence suffer it in some Instances or
other so to take head again, that they never recover their former state whilst
they live.

Withering Professors among us, decayed in their Graces, fruitless in their
lives, and every way conformed to the world. There are some indeed who being
under the Power of that Blindness and Darkness, which is a Principal part of
the Depravation of our Nature, do neither see nor discern the Inward secret
Actings and Motions of sin; its Deceit and Restlesness, its mixing its self one
way or other in all our Duties, with the Defilement and Guilt wherewith these
things are accompanied; who judge that God scarce takes notice of any thing but
outward Actions, and it may be not much of them neither, so as to be displeased
with them, unless they are very foul indeed, which yet he is easily entreated
to pass by and excuse, who judge this Duty superfluous, despising both the
Confession and Mortification of Sin, in this Root and Principle of it. But
those who have received most Grace and Power from above against it, are of all
others the most sensible of its Power and Guilt, and of the Necessity of
Applying themselves continually unto its Destruction.

(2) With respect unto its Inclinations and Operations, wherein it variously
exerts its Power, in all particular instances we are continually to watch
against it, and to subdue it. And this concerns us in all that we are and do;
in our Duties, in our Calling, in our Conversation with others, in our
Retirements, in the frames of our Spirits, in our Streights, in our Mercies, in
the use of our Enjoyments, in our Temptations. If we are negligent unto any
Occasion we shall suffer by it. This is our Enemy, and this is the War we are
engaged in. Every mistake, every neglect is perilous.

And, (3) The End of this Duty with respect unto us, expressed by the Apostle
is, that henceforth we should not serve sin; which referres unto the
Perpetration of Actual Sins, the bringing forth of the Actual Fruits of the
Flesh internal or external also. In whosoever the Old man is not crucisied with
Christ, let him think what he will of himself, he is a servant of Sin. If he
have not received Virtue from the Death of Christ, if he be not wrought unto a
Conformity to him therein, whatever else he may do or attain, however he may in
any thing, in many things, change his Course, and reform his Life, he serves
sin and not God. Our great Design ought to be, that we should no longer serve
sin, which the Apostle in the ensuing Verses gives us many Reasons for. It is
indeed the worst service that a Rational Creature is capable of, and will have
the most doleful End. What therefore is the only Way and Means whereby we may
attain this End; namely, that although Sin will abide in us, yet that we may
not serve it, which will secure us from its Danger? This is that Mortification
of it which we insist upon, and no other. If we expect to be freed from the
service of Sin, by its own giving over to press its Dominions upon us, or by
any Composition with it, or any other way but by being always killing or
destroying of it, we do but deceive our own Souls.

Nature of this Duty is not sufficiently understood, or not sufficiently
considered. Men look upon it as an easy Task, and that which will be carried
on with a little Diligence, and ordinary Attendance. But do we think it is for
nothing, that the Holy Ghost expresses the Duty of opposing Sin, and weakening
its Power by Mortification, killing or putting to death? Is there not somewhat
peculiar herein, beyond any other Act or Duty of our Lives? Certainly there is
intimated a great Contest of Sin, for the preservation of its Life. Every thing
will do its utmost to preserve its Life and Being. So will Sin do also; and if
it be not constantly pursued with Diligence and Holy Violence, it will escape
our Assaults. Let no man think to kill sin with few, easy or gentle strokes.
He who has once smitten a Serpent, if he follow not on his blow until it be
slain, may repent that ever he begun the quarrel. And so will he who undertakes
to deal with Sin, and pursues it not constantly to death; Sin will after a
while revive, and the Man must dye. It is a great and fatal Mistake, if we
suppose this Work will admit of any remisseness or intermission. Again, the
Principle to be slain is in our selves, and so possessed of our Faculties, as
that it is called our selves. It cannot be killed without a sense of pain and
trouble. Hence it is compared to the cutting off of Right Hands, and the
plucking out of Right Eyes. Lusts that pretend to be useful to the State and
Condition of men, that are pleasant and satisfactory to the Flesh, will not be
mortified without such a Violence as the whole Soul shall be deeply sensible
of. And sundry other things might be insisted on, to manifest how men deceive
themselves, if they suppose this Duty of Mortification is that which they may
carry on in a negligent careless Course and Manner. Is there no Danger in this
Warfare? no Watchfulness, no Diligence required of us? Is it so easy a thing
to kill an Enemy who has so many Advantages of force and fraud? Wherefore, if
we take care of our Souls, we are to attend unto this Duty, with that Care,
Diligence, Watchfulness, and earnest Contention of spirit, which the Nature of
it does require.

fatal Mistake where we make the Object of this Duty to be only some particular
Lusts, or the Fruits of them in Actual sins, as was before observed. This is
the way with many. They will make Head against some Sins, which on one Account
or other they find themselves most concerned in; but if they will observe their
Course, they shall find with how little success they do it. For the most part
Sin gets ground upon them, and they continually groan under the Power of its
Victories. And the Reason is, because they mistake their Business. Contests
against particular sins, are only to comply with Light and Convictions.
Mortification with a Design for Holiness, respects the Body of Sin, the Root
and all its Branches: The first will miscarry, and the latter will be
successful. And herein consists the Difference between that Mortification
which men are put upon by Convictions from the Law, which always proves
fruitless, and that wherein we are acted by the Spirit of the Gospel: The first
respects only particular sins, as the Guilt of them reflects upon Conscience;
the latter, the whole Interest of Sin as opposed to the Renovation of the Image
of God in us.

Thirdly: That which remains further to be demonstrated is, That the Holy
Spirit is the Author of this Work in us, so that although it is our Duty, it is
his Grace and Strength whereby it is performed; as also the Manner how it is
wrought by him, which is principally intended.

For the first, we have the truth of it asserted, Romans 8. 13. If ye through the
Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Flesh. It is we that are to mortify the
Deeds of the Flesh; it is our Duty, but of our selves we cannot do it, it must
be done in or by the Spirit. Whether we take the Spirit here for the Person of
the Holy Ghost, as the Context seems to require, or take it for the gracious
Principle of spiritual Life in the Renovation of our Nature, not the Spirit
himself, but that which is born of the Spirit, it is all one as to our purpose;
the Work is taken from our own Natural Power or Ability, and resolved into the
Grace of the Spirit.

Chapter, from the 7th Verse unto the end, he declares the Nature, Properties,
and Efficacy of In-dwelling sin, as the Remainders of it do still abide in
Believers. And whereas a twofold Conclusion might be made from the Description
he gives of the Power and Actings of this sin, or a double Question arise, unto
the great Disconsolation of Believers, he does in this Chapter remove them
both, manifesting that there was no cause for such Conclusions or Exceptions,
from any thing by him delivered. The first of these is, that if such, if this
be the Power and Prevalency of In-dwelling sin, if it so obstruct us in our
doing that which is good, and impetuously incline unto evil; what will become
of us in the End, how shall we answer for all the Sin and Guilt which we have
contracted thereby? We must, we shall therefore perish under the Guilt of it.
And the second Conclusion which is apt to arise from the same Consideration is,
that seeing the Power and Prevalency of Sin is so great, and that we in our
selves are no way able to make Resistance unto it, much less to overcome it, it
cannot be, but that at length it will absolutely prevail against us, and bring
us under its Dominion, unto our everlasting Ruin. Both these Conclusions the
Apostle obviates in this Chapter, or removes them if laid as Objections against
what he had delivered. And this he does,

Concession, that they will both of them be found true toward all who live and
dye under the Law, without an Interest in Jesus Christ. For, affirming that
there is no condemnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus, he grants, that
those who are not so cannot avoid it. Such is the Guilt of this sin, and such
are the Fruits of it in all in whomsoever it abides, that it makes them
obnoxious unto Condemnation. But,

(2) There is a Deliverance from this Condemnation, and from all liableness
thereunto, by free Justification in the Blood of Christ, v. 1. For those who
have an Interest in him, and are made partakers thereof, although sin may
grieve them, trouble and perplex them, and by its Deceit and Violence cause
them to contract much Guilt in their surprizals, yet they need not despond, or
be utterly cast down; there is a stable ground of Consolation provided for
them, in that there is no Condemnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus.

(3) That none may abuse this Consolation of the Gospel, to countenance
themselves unto a Continuance in the service of sin, he gives a Limitation of
the Subjects unto whom it does belong, namely, all them and only them who walk
not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, v. 1. As for those who give up
themselves unto the Conduct of this Principle of In-dwelling sin, who comply
with its Motions and Inclinations, being acted wholly by its Power, let them
neither flatter nor deceive themselves, there is nothing in Christ nor the
Gospel to free them from Condemnation. It is they only who give up themselves
to the Conduct of the Spirit of Sanctification and Holiness, that have an
interest in this Privilege.

(4) As to the other Conclusion, taken from the Consideration of the Power and
Prevalency of this Principle of sin, he prevents or removes it, by a full
Discovery how and by what means that Power of it shall be so broken, its
strength abated, its prevalency disappointed, and its self destroyed, as that
we need not fear the Consequents of it before mentioned; but rather may secure
our selves, that we shall be the death thereof, and not that the death of our
Souls. Now this is, says he, by the Law or Power of the Spirit of Life, which
is in Christ Jesus, v. 2. And thereon he proceeds to declare, that it is by the
effectual working of this Spirit in us alone, that we are enabled to overcome
this spiritual Adversary. This being sufficiently evident, it remains only
that we declare, the Way and Manner how he produces this Effect of his Grace.

Inhabitation of the Spirit in us. He dwells in the Persons of Believers as in
his Temple, and so he prepares it for himself. Those Defilements or Pollutions
which render the Souls of men unmeet Habitations for the Spirit of God, do all
of them consist in sin inherent and its Effects. These therefore he will remove
and subdue, that he may dwell in us suitably unto his Holiness. Romans 8. 11. If
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Christ from the Dead shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his
Spirit that dwells in you. Our mortal Bodies, are our Bodies as obnoxious
unto Death by reason of sin; as v. 10. And the Quickening of these mortal
Bodies, is their being freed from the Principle of Sin, or Death and its Power,
by a contrary Principle of Life and Righteousness. It is the freeing of us from
being in the Flesh, that we may be in the Spirit, v. 9. And by what Means is
this effected? It is by the Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the Dead; that
is, of the Father, which also is called the Spirit of God, the Spirit of
Christ, v. 9. For he is equally the Spirit of the Father and the Son. And he is
described by this Periphrasis, both because there is a similitude between that
Work as to its Greatness and Power which God wrought in Christ when he raised
him from the Dead, and what he works in Believers in their Sanctification,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. and because this Work is wrought in us by virtue of the
Resurrection of Christ. But under what especial Consideration does he effect
this Work of mortifying sin in us? It is as he dwells in us. God does it by
his Spirit as he dwells in us. As it is a work of Grace, it is said to be
wrought by the Spirit; and as it is our Duty, we are said to work it through
the Spirit, v. 13. And let men pretend what they please, if they have not the
Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, they have not mortified any sin, but do yet
walk after the flesh, and, continuing so to do, shall dye.

Spring of Mortification in us as it is a Grace, so the Consideration of it is
the principal Motive unto it as it is a Duty. So our Apostle pressing unto it,
does it by this Argument; Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, which is in you, which you have of God? 1 Cor. 6. 19. To which we may
add that weighty Caution which he gives us to the same purpose; 1 Cor. 3. 16.
Know you not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells
in you? if any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the
Temple of God is Holy, which Temple are ye.

Whereas therefore in every Duty two things are principally considered. First,
The Life and Spring of it, as it is wrought in us by Grace: Secondly, The
principal Reason for it and Motive unto it, as it is to be performed in our
selves by the way of Duty: Both these as to this matter of Mortification, do
center in this Inhabitation of the Spirit. For, (1) It is he who mortifies and
subdues our Corruptions, who quickens us unto Life, Holiness and Obedience, as
he dwells in us, that he may make and prepare an Habitation meet for himself.
And, (2) The principal Reason and Motive which we have to attend unto it, with
all Care and Diligence as a Duty, is that we may thereby preserve his
Dewlling Place so as becomes his Grace and Holiness. And indeed, whereas (as
our Savior tells us) they are things which arise from and come out of the
Heart, that defile us, there is no greater nor more forcible Motive to contend
against all the defiling Actings of sin, which is our Mortification, than this,
that by the Neglect hereof the Temple of the Spirit will be defiled, which we
are commanded to watch against under the severe Commination of being destroyed
for our Neglect therein.

remainders of this sin in us, and they are accompanied with their Defilements,
how can it be supposed, that the Holy Ghost will dwell in us, or in any one
that is not perfectly Holy? I answer, (1) That the great Matter which the
Spirit of God considers in his Opposition unto sin, and that of sin to his
Work, is Dominion and Rule. This the Apostle makes evident, Romans 6. 12, 13, 14.
Who, or what shall have the principal Conduct of the Mind and Soul, ( Chap. 8.
7, 8, 9.) is the matter in Question. Where sin has the Rule, there the Holy
Ghost will never dwell. He enters into no soul as his Habitation, but at the
same instant he dethrones sin, spoils it of its Dominion, and takes the Rule of
the soul into the hand of his own Grace. Where he has effected this Work, and
brought his Adversary into subjection, there he will dwell, though sometimes
his Habitation be troubled by his subdued Enemy. (2) The souls and minds of
them who are really sanctified, have continually such a sprinkling with the
Blood of Christ, and are so continually purified by virtue from his sacrifice
and oblation, as that they are never unmeet Habitations for the holy Spirit of
God.

Manner of the actual Operation of the Spirit of God in effecting this Work, or
how he mortifies sin, or enables us to mortify it, is to be considered. And an
Acquaintance herewith depends on the Knowledge of the sin that is to be
mortified, which we have before described. It is the vicious corrupt Habit, and
Inclination unto sin, which is in us by Nature, that is the principal Object of
this Duty; or, the Old man which is corrupt according unto deceitful Lusts.
When this is weakened in us as to its Power and Efficacy, when its strength is
abated, and its Prevalency destroyed, then is this Duty in its proper
Discharge, and Mortification carried on in the soul.

Now this the Holy Ghost does, First, By implanting in our Minds and all their
Faculties, A contrary Habit and Principle, with contrary Inclinations,
Dispositions and Actings, namely, a Principle of spiritual Life and Holiness,
bringing forth the Fruits thereof. By means hereof is this work effected. For
sin will no otherwise dye, but by being killed and slain: And whereas this is
gradually to be done, it must be by Warring and Conflict. There must be
something in us that is contrary unto it, which opposing of it, conflicting
with it, does insensibly and by Degrees, (for it dies not at once) work out its
Ruin and Destruction. As in a Chronical Distemper, the Disease continually
Combats and Conflicts with the Powers of Nature, until having insensibly
improved them, it prevails unto its Dissolution. So is it in this matter. These
adverse Principles with their Contrariety, Opposition, and Conflict, the
Apostle expressly asserts and describes, as also their contrary Fruits and
Actings, with the Issue of the whole, Gal. 5. 16, 17. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25. The contrary Principles are the Flesh and Spirit, and their contrary
Actings are in Lusting and Warring one against the other, ver. 16. Walk in the
Spirit and ye shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh: Not to fulfill the
lusts of the flesh is to Mortify it; for it neither will nor can be kept alive
if its Lusts be not fulfilled. And he gives a fuller Account hereof ver. 17.
For the Flesh Lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit Lusts against the
Flesh, and these are contrary one to the other. If by the Spirit, the Spirit of
God himself be intended, yet he Lusts not in us, but by virtue of that spirit
which is born of him, that is, the New Nature or Holy Principle of Obedience
which he works in us. And the way of their mutual Opposition unto one
another, the Apostle describes at large in the following verses, by instancing
in the contrary Effects of the one and the other. But the Issue of the whole
is, v. 24. They that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh with its Affections
and Lusts. They have crucified it, that is, fastened it unto that Cross, where
at length it may expire. And this is the way of it, namely, the Actings of the
Spirit against it, and the Fruits produced thereby. Hence he shuts up his
discourse with that Exhortation, If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the
Spirit. That is, if we are endowed with this Spiritual Principle of Life, which
is to live in the Spirit, then let us Act, Work and Improve that spiritual
Principle unto the Ruin and Mortification of sin.

first way whereby the Spirit of God Mortifieth sin in us, and in a compliance
with it under his conduct do we regularly carry on this work and Duty: That is,
we Mortify sin, by cherishing the Principle of Holiness and Sanctification in
our Souls, laboring to increase and strengthen it by growing in Grace, and by
a constancy and frequency in acting of it in all Duties, on all Occasions,
abounding in the Fruits of it. Growing, Thriving, and Improving in universal
Holiness, is the great way of the Mortification of sin. The more vigorous the
Principle of Holiness is in us, the more weak, infirm, and dying will be that
of sin. The more frequent and lively are the Actings of Grace, the feebler and
seldomer will be the Actings of Sin. The more we abound in the Fruits of the
Spirit, the less shall we be concerned in the Works of the Flesh. And we do
but deceive our selves if we think sin will be mortified on any other terms.
Men when they are galled in their Consciences, and disquieted in their Minds
with any Sin or Temptation thereunto, wherein their Lusts or Corruptions, are
either influenced by Satan, or entangled by Objects, Occasions, and
Opportunities, do set themselves oft-times in good earnest to oppose and
subdue it, by all the ways and means they can think upon. But all they do is
in vain, and so they find it at last unto their cost and sorrow. The reason is,
because they neglect this course, without which never any one sin was truly
Mortified in the world, nor ever will so be. The course I intend is, that of
laboring universally to improve a Principle of Holiness, not in this or that
way, but in all Instances of Holy Obedience. This is that which will ruin sin,
and without it nothing else will contribute any thing thereunto. Bring a man
unto the Law, urge him with the Purity of its Doctrine, the Authority of its
Commands, the Severity of its Threatenings, the dreadful Consequences of its
transgression. Suppose him convinced hereby of the evil and danger of sin, of
the necessity of its Mortification and Destruction. Will he be able hereon to
discharge this Duty, so as that sin may dye, and his soul may live? The Apostle
assures us of the contrary, Romans 7. 7, 8, 9. The whole Effect of the
Application of the Law in its power unto indwelling sin, is but to irritate,
provoke, and increase its guilt. And what other probable way besides this unto
this End, can any one fix upon.

Secondly, The Holy Ghost carries on this work in us as a Grace, and enableth
us unto it as our Duty, by those actual Supplies and Assistances of Grace,
which he continually communicates unto us. For the same Divine Operations, the
same Supplies of Grace which are necessary unto the positive Acts and Duties of
Holiness, are necessary also unto this End, that sin in the Actual Motions, and
Lustings of it may be Mortified; So the Apostle issues his long Account of the
Conflict between sin and the Soul of a Believer, and his complaint thereon,
with that Good word, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7. 25.
namely, who supplies me with gracious Assistance against the Power of sin.
Temptation is successful only by sin, Lam. 1. 14. And it was with respect
unto an especial Temptation, that the Lord Christ gives that Answer unto the
Apostle, My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12. 9. It is the Actual
Supply of the Spirit of Christ that does enable us to withstand our
Temptations and subdue our Corruptions. This is the (...), Phil. 1. ver. 19. An
Additional supply as occasion requires beyond our constant daily provision; or
(...) Heb. 4. ver. 16. Grace given in to help seasonably upon our cry made for
it. Of the Nature of these Supplies, we have discoursed before. I shall now
only observe, that in the Life of Faith and Dependence on Christ, the
Expectation and Derivation of these supplies of Grace and spiritual strength,
is one principal part of our Duty. These things are not empty Notions as some
Imagine. If Christ be an Head of Influence unto us, as well as of Rule, as the
Head natural is to the Body; If he be our Life, if our Life be in him, and we
have nothing but what we do receive from him, if he gives unto us supplies of
his Spirit, and increases of Grace, and if it be our Duty by Faith to look for
all these things from him, and that be the means of receiving them, which
things are all expressly and frequently affirmed in the Sripture; then is this
Expectation and Derivation of spiritual strength continually from him, the way
we are to take for the Actual Mortification of sin. And therefore if we would
be found in a successeful discharge of this Duty, it is required of us; (1)
That we endeavor diligently in the whole Course of our lives after these
continual supplies of Grace, that is, that we wait for them in all those ways
and means whereby they are communicated. For although the Lord Christ gives
them out freely and bountifully, yet our Diligence in Duty, will give the
measure of receiving them. If we are negligent in Prayer, Meditation, Reading,
Hearing of the Word, and other Ordinances of Divine Worship, we have no ground
to expect any great supplies to this End. And, (2) That we live and abound in
the Actual Exercise of all those Craces, which are most directly opposite unto
those peculiar Lusts or Corruptions that we are most exercised withal, or
obnoxious unto. For Sin and Grace do try their Interest and Prevalency in
particular Instances. If therefore any are more than ordinarily subject unto
the Power of any Corruption, as Passion, inordinate Affections, Love of the
World, Distrust of God; unless he be constant in the Exercise of those Graces
which are Diametrically opposed unto them, they will continually suffer under
the Power of Sin.

Thirdly, It is the Holy Spirit which directs us unto and helps us in the
Performance of those Duties which are appointed of God unto this End, that they
may be Means of the Mortification of sin. Unto the right use of those Duties
(for such there are) two things are required: 1. That we know them aright, in
their Nature and Use, as also that they are appointed of God unto this End: And
then, 2. That we perform them in a due manner. And both these we must have from
the Spirit of God: He is given to Believers, to lead them into all Truth; he
teaches and instructs them by the Word, not only what Duties are incumbent on
them, but also how to perform them, and with respect unto what Ends.

(First,) It is required, that we know them aright, in their Nature, Use and
Ends. For want hereof, or through the Neglect of looking after it, all sorts of
men have wandered after foolish Imaginations about this Work, either as to the
Nature of the Work it self, or as to the Means whereby it may be effected. For
it being a Grace and Duty of the Gospel, thence only is it truly to be
learned, and that by the Teachings of the Spirit of God. And it may not be
amiss to give some Instances of the Darkness of men's Minds and their Mistakes
herein.

somewhat of this nature is necessary, arising from the Observation of the
Disorder of our Passions, and the Exorbitancy of the Lives of most in the
World, is suited even to the Light of Nature, and was from thence variously
improved by the Philosophers of old. To this purpose did they give many
Instructions about denying and subduing the disorderly Affections of the Mind,
conquering Passions, moderating Desires, and the like. But whilst their
Discoveries of sin rose no higher than the actual Disorder they found in the
Affections and Passions of the Mind, whilst they knew nothing of the
Depravation of the Mind it self, and had nothing to oppose unto what they did
discover, but moral Considerations, and those most of them notoriously
influenced by Vainglory and Applause, they never attained unto any thing of
the same Kind with the due Mortification of sin.

Papacy, and take a View of the great Appearance of this Duty which is therein,
and we shall find it all disappointed, because they are not led unto, nor
taught the Duties whereby it may be brought about by the Spirit of God. They
have by the Light of the Scripture a far clearer Discovery of the Nature and
Power of sin, than had the Philosophers of Old. The Commandment also being
variously brought and applied unto their Consciences, they may be, and
doubtless are and have been, many of them, made deeply sensible of the Actings
and Tendency of In-dwelling sin. Hereon ensues a Terror of Death and Eternal
Judgment. Things being so stated, Persons who were not profligate, nor had
their Consciences seared, could not refrain from contriving ways and means how
Sin might be mortified and destroyed. But whereas they had lost a true
Apprehension of the only Way whereby this might be effected, they betook
themselves unto innumerable false ones of their own. This was the Spring of all
the Austerities, Disciplines, Fastings, self-Macerations, and the like, which
are exercised or in use among them. For although they are now in Practice
turned mostly to the Benefit of the Priests, and an Indulgence unto Sin in the
Penitents, yet they were invented and set on foot at first, with a Design to
use them as Engines for the Mortification of sin; and they have a great
Appearance in the Flesh unto that End and Purpose. But yet when all was done,
they found by Experience that they were insufficient hereunto; Sin was not
destroyed, nor Conscience pacified by them. This made them betake themselves to
Purgatory. Here they have Hopes all will be set right, when they are gone out
of this World, from whence none could come back to complain of their
Disappointments. These things are not spoken to condemn even External
Severities and Austerities, in Fastings, Watchings and Abstinencies in their
proper place. Our Nature is apt to run into extremes; Because we see the vanity
of the Papists in placing Mortification of Sin, in an outward Shadow and
Appearance of it, in that Bodily Exercise which profits not; we are apt to
think that all things of that Nature are utterly needless, and cannot be
subordinate unto spiritual Ends. But the truth is, I shall much suspect their
internal Mortification, (pretend what they will) who always pamper the Flesh,
indulge to their sensual Appetite, conform to the World, and lead their Lives
in Idleness and Pleasures. Yea it is high time, that Professors by
joynt-consent should retrench that Course of Life, in Fullness of Diet, Bravery
of Apparel, Expense of Time, in vain Conversation, which many are fallen into.
But these outward Austerities of themselves, I say, will never effect the End
aimed at: For as to the most of them, they being such as God never appointed
unto any such End or Purpose, but being the Fruit of men's own Contrivances and
Inventions; let them be insisted on and pursued unto the most imaginable
Extremities, being not blessed of God thereunto, they will not contribute the
least toward the Mortification of Sin. Neither is there either Virtue or
Efficacy in the residue of them, but as they are subordinated unto other
spiritual Duties. So Hierome gives us an honest Instance in himself, telling
us, that whilst he lived in his horrid Wilderness in Judea, and lodged in his
Cave, his Mind would be in the Sports and Revels at Rome.

Quakers amongst our selves. That which first recommended them, was an
Appearance of Mortification, which it may be also some of them really intended,
though it is evident they never understood the Nature of it. For in the height
of their outward Appearances, as they came short of the sorry Weeds, begging
Habits, macerated Countenances, and severe Looks of many Monks in the Roman
Church, and Devices among the Mahumetans; so they were so far from restraining
or mortifying their real Inclinations, as that they seemed to excite and
provoke themselves to exceed all others in Clamours, Railings, evil Speakings,
Reproaches, Calumnies, and malicious Treating of those who dissented from them,
without the least Discovery of an Heart filled with Kindness and Benignity unto
Mankind, or love unto any but themselves; in which Frame and state of things,
Sin is as secure from Mortification as in the Practice of open Lusts and
Debaucheries. But supposing that they made a real industrious Attempt for the
Mortification of sin, what success have they had, what have they attained unto?
Some of them have very wisely slipped over the whole Work and Duty of it, into a
pleasing Dream of Perfection. And generally finding the fruitlesness of their
Attempt, and that indeed Sin will not be mortified by the Power of their Light
within, nor by their Resolutions, nor by any of their austere outward
Appearances, nor peculiar Habits or Looks, which in this matter are openly
Pharisaical, they begin to give over their Design. For who among all that
pretend to any Reverence of God, do more openly indulge themselves unto
Covetousness, Love of the World, Aemulation, Strife, Contentions among
themselves, severe Revenges against others, than they do; not to mention the
Filth and Uncleanness they begin mutually to charge one another withal. And so
will all self-devised ways of Mortification end. It is the Spirit of God alone
who leads us into the Exercise of those Duties whereby it may be carried on.

Duties to be used unto this End be rightly performed, in Faith, unto the Glory
of God. Without this, a Multiplication of Duties is an increase of Burden and
Bondage, and that is all. Now that we can perform no Duty in this way or
manner, without the especial Assistance of the Holy Spirit, has been
sufficiently before evinced: And the Duties which are appointed of God in an
especial manner unto this End, are Prayer, Meditation, Watchfulness,
Abstinence, Wisdom or Circumspection with reference unto Temptations and their
prevalency. Not to go over these Duties in particular, nor to show wherein
their especial Efficacy unto this End and Purpose does consist, I shall only
give some general Rules concerning the Exercising of our Souls in them, and
some Directions for their right performance.

Respect unto this End. It will not suffice that we are Exercised in them in
general, and with regard only unto this general End. We are to apply them unto
this particular Case, designing in and by them the Mortification and Ruin of
sin. Especially, when by its especial Actings in us, it discovers it self in a
peculiar Manner unto us. No man who wisely considers himself, his State and
Condition, his Occasions and Temptations, can be wholly ignorant of his
especial Corruptions and Inclinations, whereby he is ready for halting, as the
Psalmist speaks. He that is so, lives in the dark to himself, and walks at
peradventures with God, not knowing how he walks, nor whither he goes. David
probably had respect hereunto, when he said, I have kept the Ways of the Lord,
and have not wickedly departed from my God; for all his Judgments were before
me, and I did not put away his Statutes from me. I was also upright before him,
and I kept my self from mine Iniquity, Psalm. 18. 21, 22, 23. He could have done
nothing of all this, nor have preserved his Integrity in walking with God, had
he not known, and kept a continual Watch upon his own Iniquity, or that working
of Sin in him which most peculiarly inclined and disposed him unto Evil. Upon
this Discovery are we to apply these Duties in a particular Manner to the
weakening and Ruin of the Power of Sin. And as they are all useful and
Necessary, so the Circumstances of our Condition will direct us, which of them
in particular we ought to be most conversant in. Sometimes Prayer and
Meditation claim this place, as when our Danger arises solely from our selves,
and our own perverse Inclinations, disorderly Affections, or unruly Passions;
sometimes Watchfulness and Abstinence, when Sin takes Occasion from
Temptations, Concerns and Businesses in the World; sometimes Wisdom and
Circumspection, when the Avoydance of Temptations and Opportunities for sin, is
in an especial manner required of us. These Duties I say, are to be managed
with a peculiar design to oppose, defeat and destroy the Power of sin, into
which they have a powerful Influence as designed of God unto that End. For,

rightly improved, work two ways toward the End designed. 1. Morally, and by
way of Impetration, namely, of Help and Assistance: 2. Really, by an immediate
Opposition unto Sin and its Power, whence Assimulation unto Holiness does arise.

(First,) These Duties work Morally, and by way of Impetration. I shall
instance only in one of them, and that is Prayer. There are two parts of Prayer
with respect unto Sin and its Power. (1) Complaints: (2) Petitions.

1. Complaint. So is the Title of Psalm. 102. The Prayer of the Afflicted when
he is overwhelmed, and powers out his Complaint before the Lord. So David
expresses himself, Psalm. 55. 2. Attend unto me, and hear me, I mourn in my
Complaint, and make a Noise. His Prayer was a Doleful Lamentation. And Psalm.
142. 2. I powered out my Complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble.
This is the first Work of Prayer, with respect unto Sin, its Power and
Prevalency. The Soul therein pours out its Complaints unto God, and shows
before him the trouble it undergoes on the Account thereof. And this it does in
an humble Acknowledgement of its Guilt, crying out of its Deceit and Violence.
For all just and due Complaint respects that which is grievous, and which is
beyond the Power of the Complainer to relieve himself against. Of this sort
there is nothing to be compared with the Power of Sin, as to Believers.

principal Matter and Subject of their Complaints in Prayer. Yea, the very
Nature of the whole Case is such, as that the Apostle could not give an Account
of it without great Complaints, Romans 7. 24. This part of Prayer indeed is with
profligate Persons derided and scorned, but it is acceptable with God, and that
wherein Believers find Ease and Rest unto their Souls. For, let the World
scoff while it pleases, what is more acceptable unto God, than for his
Children, out of pure Love unto him and Holiness, out of fervent Desires to
comply with his Mind and Will, and thereby to attain Conformity unto Jesus
Christ, to come with their Complaints unto him, of the Distance they are kept
from these things by the captivating Power of sins, bewailing their frail
Condition, and humbly acknowledging all the Evils that they are liable unto
upon the Account thereof? Would any man have thought it possible, had not
Experience convinced him, that so much Luciferian Pride and Atheism should
possess the Minds o^ thy who would be esteemed Christians, as to scoff at and
deride these things? that any one should ever read the Bible, or once consider
what he is, and with whom he has to do, and to be ignorant of this Duty? But
we have nothing to do with such Persons, but to leave them to please themselves
whilst they may, with these fond and impious Imaginations. They will come
either in this World, (which we hope and pray for) in their Repentance to know
their Folly, or in another. I say, these Complaints of sin, powered out before
the Lord, these Cryings out of Deceit and Violence, are acceptable to God, and
prevalent with him to give out Aid and Assistance. He owns Believers as his
Children, and has the Bowels and Compassion of a Father toward them; Sin he
knows to be their greatest Enemy, and which fights directly against their
Souls. Will he then despise their Complaints, and their bemoaning of themselves
before him? will he not avenge them of that Enemy, and that speedily? See
Jerem. 31. 18, 19, 20. Men who think they have no other Enemies, none to
complain of, but such as oppose them, or obstruct them, or oppress them in
their Secular Interests, Advantages and Concerns, are strangers unto these
things. Believers look on sin as their greatest Adversary, and know that they
suffer more from it than from all the World: Suffer them therefore to make
their Complaints of it unto him who pities them, who will relieve them and
avenge them.

Petitions to this purpose; it consists of Petitions unto God, for supplies of
Grace to conflict and conquer Sin withal. I need not prove this; No man Prays
as he ought, no man joins in Prayer with another who prays as he ought, but
these Petitions are a part of his Prayer. Especially will they be so, and ought
they so to be, when the Mind is peculiarly engaged in the Design of destroying
sin. And these Petitions or Requests are, as far as they are gracious and
effectual, wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, who therein makes intercession for
us according to the Will of God. And hereby does he carry on this work of the
Mortification of sin, for his Work it is. He makes us to put up prevalent
Requests unto God, for such continual supplies of Grace, whereby it may be
constantly kept under, and at length destroyed. And this is the first way
whereby this Duty has an Influence into Mortification, namely, Morally and by
way of Impetration.

(Secondly,) This Duty has a real Efficiency unto the same End. It does its
self (when rightly performed, and duly attended unto) mightily prevail unto the
weakening and Destruction of sin. For in and by fervent Prayer, especially when
it is designed unto this End, the Habit, Frame, and Inclinations of the Soul
unto universal Holiness, with a Detestation of all sin, are increased,
cherished, and strengthened. The soul of a Believer is never raised unto a
higher Intension of spirit in the pursuit of, love unto, and delight in
Holiness, nor is more conformed unto it, or cast into the mould of it, than it
is in Prayer. And frequency in this Duty, is a principal means to fix and
consolidate the mind in the form and likeness of it; And hence do Believers
oft-times continue in, and come off from Prayer above all Impressions from sin,
as to Inclinations and Complyances. Would such a frame always continue, how
happy were we. But abiding in the Duty is the best way of reaching out after
it. I say therefore that this Duty is really Efficient of the Mortification of
sin, because therein all the Graces whereby it is opposed and weakened, are
excited, exercised, and improved unto that End; as also the Detestation and
Abhorency of sin is increased in us. And where this is not so, there are some
secret flaws in the Prayers of men, which it will be their wisdom to find out
and heal.

Fourthly, The Holy Spirit carries on this work by applying in an especial
manner the death of Christ unto us for that end. And this is another, thing
which, because the World understands not, it does despise. But yet in
whomsoever the Death of Christ is not the death of sin, he shall dye in his
sins. To evidence this Truth, we may observe (1) in general, That the Death of
Christ has an especial influence into the Mortification of sin, without which
it will not be Mortified. This is plainly enough testified unto in the
Scripture. By his Cross, that is, his Death on the Cross, We are crucified unto
the world, Gal. 6. 14. Our old man is crucified with him, that the Body of sin
might be destroyed, Romans 6. 6. That is, sin is Mortified in us by virtue of the
Death of Christ, (2) In the Death of Christ, with respect unto sin there may be
considedered, 1. His Oblation of himself, and 2. The Application thereof unto
us. By the first it is, that our sins are expiated as unto their Guilt; but
from the latter it is, that they are actually subdued as to their Power. For it
is by an Interest in, and a participation of the Benefits of his Death, which
we call the Application of it unto us. Hereon are we said to be buried with
him, and to rise with him, whereof our Baptism is a pledge; Romans 6. 3, 4. not
in an outward Representation, as some imagine of being dipped under the water,
and taken up again (which were to make one sign the sign of another,) but in a
powerful Participation of the virtue of the Death and Life of Christ, in a
death unto sin, and newness of life in Holy Obedience, which Baptism is a
pledge of, as it is a token of our initiation and implanting into him. So are
we said to be baptized into his death; or into the likeness of it, that is,
into its power, ver. 3. (3) The old man is said to be crucified with Christ, or
sin to be Mortified by the Death of Christ, as was in part before observed on
two Accounts.

(1) Of Conformity. Christ is the Head, the Beginning or Idea, of the New
Creation; The first born of every Creature. Whatever God designeth unto us
therein, he first exemplified in Jesus Christ; And we are predestined to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, Romans 8. 29. Hereof the Apostle gives us an
express instance in the Resurrection. Christ the first Fruits, afterward they
that are Christ's at his coming, 1 Cor. 15. 23. It is so in all things; all that
is wrought in us, it is in resemblance and conformity unto Christ.
Particularly, we are by Grace planted into the likeness of his Death, Romans 6.
5. being made conformable unto his Death, Phil. 3. 10. and so to be dead with
Christ, Col. 2. 20. Now this conformity is not in our Natural Death, nor in our
being put to death as he was; for it is that which we are made partakers of in
this Life, and that in a way of Grace and Mercy. But Christ died for sin, for
our sin, which was the meritorious procuring cause thereof. And he lived again
by the Power of God. A likeness and conformity hereunto God will work in all
Believers. There is by nature a Life of sin in them, as has been declared.
This Life must be destroyed, sin must dye in us, and we thereby become dead
unto sin. And as he rose again; So are we to be quickened in and unto newness
of life. In this death of sin consists that Mortification which we treat about;
and without which we cannot be conformed unto Christ in his Death, which we are
designed unto. And the same Spirit which wrought these things in Christ, will
in the pursuit of his Design, work that which answers unto them in all his
Members.

Efficacy; virtue goes forth from the Death of Christ, for the subduing and
Destruction of sin. It was not designed to be a dead, unactive, passive
Example, but it is accompanied with a Power conforming and changing us into its
own likeness. It is the Ordinance of God unto that End, which he therefore
gives efficacy unto. It is by a fellowship or participation in his sufferings,
that we are made conformable to his Death, Phil. 3. 10. this (...), is an
interest in the Benefit of his suffering; we also are made partakers thereof.
This makes us conformable to his Death, in the Death of sin in us. The Death of
Christ is designed to be the Death of sin; let them who are dead in sin deride
it whilst they please. If Christ had not dyed, sin had never dyed in any
sinner unto Eternity. Wherefore that there is a virtue and Efficacy in the
Death of Christ unto this purpose, cannot be denied without a Renuntiation of
all the Benefits thereof. On the one hand the Scripture tells us, that he is
our Life, our Spiritual Life, the Spring, Fountain, and Cause of it; we have
nothing therefore that belongs thereunto but what is derived from him. They
cast themselves out of the verge of Christianity, who suppose that the Lord
Christ is no otherwise our Life, or the Author of Life unto us, but as he has
revealed and taught the way of Life unto us; He is our Life as he is our Head.
And it would be a sorry Head that should only teach the feet to go, and not
communicate strength to the whole Body so to do. And that we have real
influences of Life from Christ, I have sufficiently proved before. Unto our
spiritual Life does ensue the Death of sin; for this on the other hand is
peculiarly assigned unto his Death in the Testimonies before produced. This
therefore is by virtue derived from Christ, That is, in an especial manner from
his Death, as the Scripture testifies.

All the Enquiry is, How the Death of Christ is applied unto us, or which is
the same, How we apply our selves to the Death of Christ for this purpose. And
I answer, We do it two ways.

(1) By Faith. The way to derive Virtue from Christ, is by touching of him. So
the diseased Woman in the Gospel touched but the Hemme of his Garment, and
Virtue went forth from him to stay her Bloody Issue, Math. 9. 22. It was not
her Touching him outwardly, but her Faith which she acted then and thereby,
that derived Virtue from him. For so our Savior tells her in his Answer,
Daughter be of good Comfort, thy Faith has made thee whole. But unto what End
was this touching of his Garment? It was only a Pledge and Token of the
particular Application of the healing Power of Christ unto her Soul, or her
Faith in him in particular for that End. For at the same time many thronged
upon him in a press, so as his Disciples marvelled he should ask who touched
his Clothes; Mark 5. 30, 31. yet was not any of them advantaged but the poor
sick Woman. A great Emblem it is of common Profession on the one hand, and
especial Faith on the other. Multitudes press and throng about Christ in a
Profession of Faith and Obedience, and in the real performance of many Duties;
but no Virtue goes forth from Christ to heal them. But when any one, though
poor, though seemingly at a distance, gets but the least touch of him by
especial Faith, this Soul is healed. This is our Way with respect unto the
Mortification of Sin. The Scripture assures us, that there is Virtue and
Efficacy in the Death of Christ unto that End. The Means whereby we derive this
Virtue from him, is by Touching of him, that is, by Acting Faith on him in his
Death, for the Death of Sin.

sin be mortified hereby? I say, how, by what Power and Virtue were they healed
in the Wilderness, who looked unto the Brazen Serpent? was it not because that
was an Ordinance of God, which by his Almighty Power he made effectual unto
that purpose? The Death of Christ being so as to the Crucifying of sin, when it
is looked on, or applied unto by Faith, shall not Divine Virtue and Power go
forth unto that End? The Scripture, and Experience of all Believers, give
Testimony unto the Truth and Reality thereof. Besides, Faith it self as acted
on the Death of Christ, has a peculiar Efficacy unto the subduing of sin; for,
beholding him thereby as in a Glass, we are changed into the same Image; 1 Cor.
3. 18. And that which we peculiarly behold, we are peculiarly transformed into
the Likeness of. And moreover, it is the only Means whereby we Actually derive
from Christ the Benefits of our Union with him; from thence we have all Grace,
or, there is no such thing in the World. And the Communication of it unto us,
is in and by the Actual Exercise of Faith principally. So it being acted with
respect unto his Death, we have Grace for the Killing of sin, and thereby
become dead with him, Crucified with him, Buried with him, as in the
Testimonies before produced. This is that which we call, the Application of the
Death of Christ unto us, or our Application of our selves to the Death of
Christ for the Mortification of sin. And they by whom this Means thereof is
despised or neglected, who are ignorant of it, or do Blaspheme it, must live
under the Power of sin, unto what Inventions soever they turn themselves for
Deliverance. According as we abide and abound herein, will be our success.
Those who are careless and remiss, in the Exercise of Faith, by Prayer and
Meditation, in the Way described, will find that Sin will keep its ground, and
maintain so much Power in them as shall issue in their perpetual Trouble. And
men who are much conversant with the Death of Christ, not in Notions and
Lifeless Speculations, not in Natural or Carnal Affections, like those which
are raised in weak Persons by Images and Crucifixes, but by holy Actings of
Faith, with respect unto what is declared in the Scripture as to its Power and
Efficacy, will be implanted into the Likeness of it, and experience the Death
of sin in them continually.

Love. Christ as Crucified is the great Object of our Love, or should so be.
For he is therein unto sinners altogether Lovely. Hence one of the Ancients
cried out, (...); My Love is crucified, and why do I stay behind. In the Death
of Christ, do his Love, his Grace, his Condescension, most gloriously shine
forth. We may therefore consider three things with respect unto this Love. (1)
The Object of it. (2) The Means of the Representation of that Object unto our
Minds and Affections. (3) The Effects of it as to the Case in hand. The Object
of it is Christ himself, in his unsearchable Grace, his unspeakable Love, his
infinite Condescension, his patient Suffering, and victorious Power, in his
Death, or dying for us. It is not his Death absolutely, but himself, as all
these Graces conspicuously shine forth in his Death, which is intended. And
there are various Ways whereby this may be represented unto our Minds.

themselves by their own Imaginations. They may frame and fancy dolorous things
unto themselves about it, which is the way of Persons under deep and devout
Superstitions. But no Love in sincerity will ever be ingenerated toward Jesus
Christ hereby. (2) It may be done by others, in pathetical and tragical
Declarations of the Outward part of Christ's sufferings. Herein some have a
great faculty to work upon the Natural Affections of their Auditors; And great
Passions accompanied with Tears and Vows may be so excited. But for the most
part, there is no more in this Work, than what the same persons do find in
themselves it may be, in the reading or hearing of a feigned Story. For there
is a sympathy in Natural Affections with the things that are their proper
Objects, though represented by false Imaginations. (3) It is done in the
Papacy, and among some others, by Images, in Crucifixes and dolorous Pictures,
whereunto they pay great Devotion, with an appearance of ardent Affections. But
none of these are such a due Representation of this Object, as to ingenerate
sincere Love toward Christ crucified in any Soul. Wherefore, (4) This is done
effectually only by the Gospel, and in the Dispensation of it according to the
Mind of God. For therein is Jesus Christ evidently crucified before our Eyes,
Gal. 3. 1. And this is does by proposing unto our Faith, the Grace, the Love,
the Patience, the Condescension, the Obedience, the End and Design of Christ
therein. So is Christ eyed by Faith as the proper Object of sincere Love. And
being so stated, the Effects of it, as of all true Love, are, 1. Adherence; 2.
Assimulation.

(1) Adherence; Love in the Scripture is frequently expressed by this Effect;
The Soul of one did cleave or was knit unto another; as that of Jonathan to
David, 1 Samuel 18. 1. So it produces a firm Adherence unto Christ crucified,
that makes a Soul to be in some sense always present with Christ on the Cross.
And hence (2) ensues Assimulation or Conformity. None treat of the Nature or
Effects of Love, but they assign this as one of them, that it begets a Likeness
between the Mind loving, and the Object beloved. And so I am sure it is in this
matter. A Mind filled with the Love of Christ as crucified, and represented in
the Manner and Way before described, will be changed into its Image and
Likeness, by the effectual Mortification of sin, through a Derivation of Power
and Grace from thence for that purpose.

Fifthly; The Holy Ghost carries on this Work by constant Discoveries unto,
and pressing on Believers, on the one hand, the true Nature and certain End of
Sin; and on the other, the Beauty, Excellency, Usefulness and Necessity of
Holiness, with the Concerns of God, Christ, the Gospel, and their own Souls
therein. A Rational Consideration of these things, is all the Ground and Reason
of Mortification in the Judgments of some men. But we have proved, that there
are other Causes of it also. And now I add, that if we have no Consideration
of these things, but what our own Reason is of it self able to suggest unto us,
it will never be prevalent unto any sincere or permanent Attempt in the
Mortification of any sin whatever. Let men make the best of their Reason they
can, in the searching and Consideration of the perverse Nature and dreadful
Consequents of Sin, of the perfect Peace and future Blessedness which attends
the Practice of Holiness, they will find an Obstinacy and Stubbornness in their
Hearts, not conquerable by any such Reasonings or Considerations: That
Conviction of Sin and Righteousness which is useful and prevalent unto that
End and Purpose, is wrought in us by the Holy Ghost, Joh. 16. 18. Although he
makes use of our Minds, Understandings, Reasons, Consciences, and the best of
our Consideration in this matter, yet if he give not a peculiar Efficacy and
Power unto all, the Work will not be effectual. When he is pleased to make use
of Reasons and Motives taken from the nature and end of Sin and Holiness, unto
the Mortification of sin, they shall hold good, and bind the Soul unto this
Duty, against all Objections and Temptations that would divert it whatever.

Sanctification of them that do Believe. Many things might have been more
enlarged, and particularly enquired into; what have been discoursed, I judge
sufficient to my present purpose. And I doubt not, but that what has been
argued from plain Scripture and Experience, is sufficient, as to direct us in
the Practice of true Evangelical Holiness, so with all sober Persons to cast
out of all Consideration that fulsome Product of Pride and Ignorance, that all
Gospel Holiness consists in the Practice of Moral Virtues.

BOOK V.
CHAP. I. Necessity of Holiness from the Consideration of the Nature of God.
(1) The Necessity of Evangelical Holiness owned by all Christians: Doctrines
falsely charged with an Inconsistency with it. (2) Though owned by all, yet
practiced by few, and disadvantageously pleaded for by many; the true Nature of
it briefly expressed. (3) First Argument for the Necessity of Holiness from the
Nature of God; frequently proposed unto our Consideration for that End. (4)
This Argument Cogent and unavoidable; pressed with its Limitation. (5) Not the
Nature of God absolutely, but as he is in Christ, the Foundation of this
Necessity, and a most Effectual Motive unto the same End; the Nature and
Efficacy of that Motive declared. (10) The Argument enforced, from the
Consideration of our Conformity unto God by Holiness; with that Communion and
Likeness with him which depend thereon; (13) With our future everlasting
Enjoyment of him. (14) True force of that Consideration vindicated; Merit
rejected, (15) And the Substitution of Morality in the Room of Gospel Holiness.
(16) False Accusations of the Doctrine of Grace, discarded; and (17) The
Neglect of the true Means of promoting Gospel Obedience, charged. (18, 19.) The
principal Argument farther enforced, from the Preeminence of our Natures and
Persons by this Conformity to God; (21) And our Accesses unto God thereby, in
order unto our eternal Enjoyment of him: (22) As it also alone renders us
useful in this World unto others. (23) Two sorts of Graces, by whose Exercise
we grow into Conformity with God; (24) Those that are Assimulating, as Faith,
and (26) Love; And (28) those which are Declarative of that Assimulation; as
Goodness or Benignity, and (31) Truth. (32) An Objection against the Necessity
of Holiness from the Freedom and Efficacy of Grace, answered.

Necessity of that Holiness which we have thus far described, unto all Persons
who make Profession of the Gospel, with the Reasons of that Necessity, and
principal Motives unto it. And for our Encouragement in this part of our Work,
this Necessity is such, as that it is by all sorts of Christians allowed,
pleaded for, and the thing it self pretended unto. For, whereas the Gospel is
eminently, (...), or (...), 1 Timothy 6. 3. Tit. 1. 1. The Truth or Doctrine which
is according unto Godliness, or that which is designed and every way suited
unto the attaining, furtherance and practice of it, no men can with Modesty
refuse the Trial of their Doctrines by their Tendency thereunto. But what is of
that Nature, or what is an Hinderance thereunto, that many are not yet agreed
about. The Socinians contend, that the Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ
does overthrow the Necessity of an Holy Life. The Papists say the same,
concerning the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto our
Justification. The same Charge is laid by others against the Doctrine of the
gratuitous Election of God, the almighty Efficacy of his Grace in the
Conversion of Sinners, and of his Faithfulness in the Preservation of true
Believers in their state of Grace unto the End: On the other hand, the
Scripture does so place the Foundations of all true and real Holiness in these
things, that without the Faith of them, and an Influence on our Minds from
them, it will not allow of any thing to be so called.

pretenses of others concerning the suitableness of their Doctrines unto the
Promotion of Holiness, is not my present Business. It is well that it has
always maintained a Conviction of its Necessity, and carried it through all
different Persuasions in Christianity. In this one thing alone almost, do all
Christian agree; and yet notwithstanding, the want of it, is, if not the only
yet the principal thing, whereby the most who are so called, are ruined. So
ordinary a thing is it, for men to agree for the Necessity of Holiness, and
live in the Neglect of it, when they have so done. Conviction comes in at an
easy rate, as it were whether men will or no, but Practice will stand them in
pains, cost and trouble. Wherefore, unto the due handling of this matter, some
few things must be premised. As,

(First,) It is disadvantageous unto the Interest of the Gospel, to have men
plead for Holiness with weak incogent Arguments, and such as are not taken out
of the Stores of its Truth, and so really affect not the Consciences of men.
And it is pernicious to all the Concerns of Holiness it self, to have that
defended and pleaded for, under its Name and Title, which indeed is not so, but
an Usurper of its Crown and Dignity; which we shall afterward enquire into.

(Secondly,) It is uncomely and unworthy, to hear men contending for Holiness,
as the whole of our Religion, and in the mean time on all Occasions, express in
themselves an Habit and Frame of Mind utterly inconsistent with what the
Scripture so calls, and so esteems. There is certainly no readier way on sundry
Accounts to unteach men all the Principles of Religion, all Respect unto God
and common Honesty. And if some men did this only, as being at variance with
themselves, without Reflections on others, it might the more easily be borne.
But to see or hear men proclaiming themselves in their whole Course, to be
Proud, Revengefull, Worldly, Sensual, Neglecters of Holy Duties, Scoffers at
Religion, and the Power of it, pleading for an Holy Life, against the Doctrine
and Practice of those who walked unblameably before the Lord in all his Ways,
yea upon whose Breasts and Foreheads was written Holiness unto the Lord, such
as were most of the first Reformed Divines, whom they reflect upon, is a thing
which all sober men do justly nauseate, and which God abhorres. But the further
Consideration here of I shall at present omit, and pursue what I have proposed.

(Thirdly,) In my Discourse concerning the Necessity of Holiness, with the
Grounds and Reasons of it, and Arguments for it, I shall confine my self unto
these two Things.

(1) That the Reasons, Arguments and Motives which I shall insist on, being
such as are taken out of the Gospel, or the Scripture, are not only consistent
and compliant with the great Doctrines of the Grace of God in our free
Election, Conversion, Justification, and Salvation by Jesus Christ, but such as
naturally flow from them, discover what is their true Nature and Tendency in
this matter.

(2) That I shall at present suppose all along, what that Holiness is which I
do intend. Now this is not that outward Show and pretense of it, which some
plead for; not an Attendance unto, or the Observation of some or all Moral
Virtues only; not a Readiness for some Acts of Piety and Charity, from a
superstitious proud Conceit of their being Meritorious of Grace or Glory. But I
intend that Holiness which I have before described, which may be reduced to
these three heads: (1) An internal Change or Renovation of our Souls, our
Minds, Wills and Affections by Grace. (2) An universal Compliance with the Will
of God in all Duties of Obedience, and Abstinence from Sin, out of a Principle
of Faith and Love. (3) A Designation of all the Actions of Life unto the Glory
of God by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel: This is Holiness; so to be,
and so to do, is to be Holy. And I shall divide my Arguments into Two sorts:
1. Such as prove the Necessity of Holiness as to the Essence of it, Holiness in
our Hearts and Natures; 2. Such as prove the Necessity of Holiness as to the
Degrees of it, Holiness in our Lives and Conversations.

The Nature of God as revealed unto us, with our Dependence on him, the
Obligation that is upon us to Live unto him, with the Nature of our Blessedness
in the Enjoyment of him, do require indispensibly that we should be Holy. The
Holiness of Gods Nature is every where in the Scripture made the Fundamental
Principle and Reason of the Necessity of Holiness in us. Himself makes it the
ground of his Command for it, Levit. 11. 44. For I am the Lord your God, ye
shall therefore sanctify your selves, and ye shall be Holy, for I am Holy. So
also Chap. 19. 2. Chap. 20. 7. And to show the everlasting Equity and Force of
this Reason, it is transferred over to the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. As he
which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation,
because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. God lets them know, that his
Nature is such, as that unless they are sanctified and Holy, there can be no
such Intercourse between him and them as ought to be between a God and his
People. So he declares the Sense of this Enforcement of that Precept to be,
Levit. 11. 45. I brought you out of the Land of Egypt to be your God, ye shall
therefore be Holy, for I am Holy. Without this, the Relation designed cannot be
maintained, that I should be your God and you should be my People. To this
Purpose belongs that Description given us of his Nature, Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6. For
thou art not a God that has pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell
with thee. The Foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all Workers of
Iniquity. Thou shall destroy them that speak Lying, the Lord will abhor the
Bloody and Deceitful man. Answerable unto that of the Prophet; Thou art of
purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and can not look on Iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. He
is such a God, that is, such is his Nature, so pure, so holy, that previous to
the Consideration of any free Acts of his Will, it is evident, that he can take
no pleasure in Fools, Liars, or Workers of Iniquity. Therefore Joshua tells the
People, that if they continued in their sins, they could not serve the Lord,
for he is an Holy God, Chap. 24. 19. All the Service of unholy Persons toward
this God, is utterly lost and cast away, because it is inconsistent with his
own Holiness to accept of it. And our Apostle argues in the same Manner, Heb.
12. 28, 29. Let us have Grace whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
Reverence and Godly Fear. For our God is a consuming Fire. He lays his
Argument for the Necessity of Grace and Holiness in the Worship of God, from
the Consideration of the Holiness of his Nature, which as a consuming fire will
devour that which is unsuited unto it, inconsistent with it. There would be no
end of pursuing this Reason of the Necessity of Holiness, in all places where
it is proposed expressly in the Scripture. I shall only add in General, that
God of Old strictly required, that no unholy, no unclean, no defiling thing
should be in the Camp of his People, because of his presence among them who is
himself holy, and without an exact Observance hereof he declares, that he will
depart and leave them.

Necessity of Holiness, and that it is indispensibly required of us, but only
this, that the God whom we serve and worship is absolutely Holy, that his Being
and Nature is such, as that he can have no delightful Intercourse with any that
are unholy, it were abundantly sufficient unto our purpose. He who resolves
not to be Holy, had best seek another God to worship and serve, with our God he
will never find Acceptance. And therefore the Heathen, who gave up themselves
unto all filthiness with delight and greediness, to stifle the Notions of a
Divine Being, that they might not control them in their Sins and Pleasures,
fancied such gods to themselves as were wicked and unclean, that they might
freely conform unto them, and serve them with satisfaction. And God himself
lets us know, that men of wicked and flagitious lives, have some secret
thoughts that he is not Holy, but like themselves, Psalm. 50. 21. For if they
had not, they could not avoid it, but they must either think of leaving him or
their sins.

First,) That unto us, in our present State and Condition, the Holiness of God
as absolutely considered, merely as an Infinite Eternal Property of the Divine
Nature, is not the immediate Ground of, and Motive unto Holiness, but it is the
Holiness of God as manifested and revealed unto us in Christ Jesus. Under the
first Consideration, we who are sinners can make on Conclusion from it, but
that of Joshua, He is an Holy God, a Jealous God, he will not forgive their
Iniquities, nor spare. This we may learn indeed from thence, that nothing which
is unholy can possibly subsist before him, or find Acceptance with him. But a
Motive and Encouragment unto any Holiness that is not absolutely Perfect, no
Creature can take from the Consideration thereof. And we do not, we ought not
to urge any such Argument for the Necessity of Holiness, as cannot be answered
and complied wit by the Grace of God as to the Substance, though we come short
in the Degrees of it. My meaning is, that no Argument can be rationally and
usefully pleaded for the Necessity of Holiness, which does not contain in its
self an Encouraging Motive unto it. To declare it necessary for us, and at the
same time impossible unto us, is not to promote its Interest. They understand
neither the Holiness of God nor man, who suppose that they are absolutely and
immediately suited unto one another, or that under that Notion of it, we can
take any encouraging Motive unto our Duty herein. Nay no Creature is capable of
such a Perfection in Holiness, as absolutely to Answer the Infinite Purity of
the Divine Nature, without a Covenant-Condescention, Job 4. 18. chap. 15. 15.
But it is the Holiness of God as he is in Christ, and as in Christ represented
unto us, that gives us both the Necessity and Motive unto ours.

Holy, as he dwelt among them, and was their God, that is in Covenant, both
which had respect unto Jesus Christ. In him all the glorious Perfections of God
are so represented unto us, as we may not thence only learn our Duty, but also
be encouraged unto it. For,

(1) All the Properties of God as so represented unto us, are more Conspicuous,
Resplendent, Alluring and Attractive, than as Absolutely considered. I know not
what Light into, and Knowledge of the Divine Perfections, Adam had in his state
of Innocence, when God had declared himself only in the Works of Nature;
Sufficient no doubt it was to guide him in his Love and Obedience, or that Life
which he was to live unto him. But I know that now, all our knowledge of God
and his Properties, unless it be that which we have in and by Jesus Christ, is
insufficient to lead or conduct us in that Life of Faith and Obedience, which
is necessary unto us. He therefore gives us the Light of the knowledge of his
Glory in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. That is, clear Manifestations
of his Glorious Excellencies. The light of the knowledge hereof is a clear,
useful, saving Perception and understanding of them. And this is not only
Directive unto Holiness, but also Effective of it. For thus beholding the Glory
of the Lord, we are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, Chap. 3.
18.

(2) In particular. The Fiery Holiness of God, is represented unto us in
Christ, so, as that although it lose nothing of declaring the indispensable
Necessity of Holiness in all that draw nigh to him, yet under such a
Contemperation with Goodness, Grace, Love, Mercy, Condescension, as may invite
and encourage us to endeavor after a Conformity thereunto.

(3) Together with a Representation of the Holiness of God in Christ, there is
a Revelation made of what Holiness in us he does require, and will accept. As
was observed before, the Consideration of it absolutely neither requires nor
admitts of any but that which is absolutely perfect, and where there is any one
failing, the whole of what we do is condemned, Jam. 2. 10. This therefore can
only perplex and torture the Soul of a sinner, by pressing on him at the same
time the Necessity and Impossibility of Holiness, Isa. 33. 14. But now as God
is in Christ, through his Interposition and Meditation, he accepts of such an
Holiness in us, as we are capable of, and which no man has any discouragement
from endeavoring to attain.

Christ declared and administered a spiritual Power of Grace, which shall work
this Holiness in us, or that Conformity unto the Holiness of God which he does
require. From this Fountain therefore we draw immediately as the Reasons of the
Necessity, so prevalent Motives unto Holiness in our Souls. Hence some things
may be inferenced. As (First,) That the Mediation of Christ, and in particular
his Satisfaction, is so far from being an Hinderance of, or a Discouragement
unto Holiness, as some blasphemously pretend, that the great fundamental Reason
of it in us, namely, the Holiness of God himself, can have no influence upon
us, without the supposition of it and Faith in it; unless Faith be built
hereon, no sinner upon a view of Gods Holiness as absolutely considered, can
have any other thoughts but those of Cain, My sin is great it cannot be
pardoned. God is an Holy God, I cannot serve him, and therefore will depart out
of his presence. But the Holiness of God as manifested in Jesus Christ,
including a supposition of Satisfaction made unto what is required by its
absolute Purity, and a condescension thereon to accept in him, that Holiness of
Truth and Sincerity which we are capable of, does equally maintain the
indispensible necessity of it, and encourage us unto it. And we may see what
contrary Conclusions will be made on these different Considerations of it:
Those who view it only in the first way, can come to no other issue in their
thoughts but that which they express in the Prophet, Isa. 33. 14. Who among us
shall dwell with the devouring fire, who among us shall inhabit with
everlasting burnings. God fiery Holiness serves toward them unto no other End
but to fill them with terror and despair. But other Inferences are natural from
the Consideration of the same Holiness, in the latter way. Our God, says the
Apostle, is a consuming fire; what then, what follows as our Duty thereon? Let
us have Grace whereby we may serve him acceptably with Reverence and Godly
fear, Heb. 12. 28, 29. There is no such forcible Reason for, no such powerful
Motive unto our Adherence unto him in Holy Obedience. Such different
Conclusions will men make from these different Considerations of the Holiness
of God, when once they come to be serious and in good earnest about them.

Holiness under the New Covenant, although it have the same general Nature and
one principal End with that which was required in the Covenant of Works, yet as
it has an especial Spring and Fountain which that had not, and relates unto
sundry Causes which the other had no concernment in, so it is not of the same
especial use therewith. The immediate End and Use of that Holiness in us, was
to answer the Holiness of God absolutely as expressed in the Law, whereon we
should have been Justified. This is now done for us by Christ alone, and the
Holiness which God requires of us, respects only those Ends which God has
proposed unto us, in Compliance with his own Holiness, as he will Glorify it
in Jesus Christ; which must be afterward declared.

( Secondly,) We may consider in what particular Instances the Force of this
Argument is conveyed unto us, or what are the especial Reasons why we ought to
be Holy because God is so. And they are three.

Conformity unto God, whereof in this World we are capable, which is our
Privilege, Preeminence, Glory and Honor. We were Originally Created in the
Image and Likeness of God. Herein consisted the Privilege, Preeminence, Order,
and Blessedness of our first state; and that for the Substance of it, it was no
other but our Holiness, is by all confessed. Wherefore, without this Conformity
unto God, without the Impress of his Image and Likeness upon us, we do not, we
cannot stand in that Relation unto God which was designed us in our Creation.
This we lost by the Entrance of sin. And if there be not a way for us to
acquire it again, if we do not so, we shall always come short of the Glory of
God, and of the End of our Creation. Now this is done in and by Holiness alone,
for therein consists the Renovation of the Image of God in us, as our Apostle
expressly declares, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. with Col. 3. 10. It is therefore to
no purpose for any man to expect an Interest in God, or any thing that will
prove Eternally to his Advantage, who does not endeavor after Conformity unto
him. For such a man despises all the Glory that God designed unto himself in
our Creation, and all that was Eminent and peculiarly bestowed upon our selves.

like unto God, according to his Measure, and the Capacity of a Creature,
always misseth both of his End, his Rule, and his Way. Our Savior would have
his Disciples to do all things so, as that they may be the Children of their
Heavenly Father, Matthew. 5. 45. that is, like him, representing him, as Children
do their Father. And the truth is, if this Necessity of Conformity unto God be
once out of our View and Consideration, we are easily turned aside by the
meanest Temptation we meet withal. In brief, without that Likeness and
Conformity unto God, which consists in Holiness, as we do under his Eye bear
the Image of his great Adversary the Devil, so we can have no especial Interest
in him, nor has he any in us.

(2) The Force of the Argument arises from the Respect it bears unto our
Actual Intercourse and Communion with God: This we are called unto, and this in
all our Duties of Obedience we must endeavor to attain. If there be not in
them a real Intercourse between God and our Souls, they are all but uncertain
beatings of the Air. When we are Accepted in them, when God is Glorified by
them, then have we in them this Intercourse and Communion with God. Now whereas
God is Holy, if we are not in our Measure holy according to his Mind, this
cannot be. For God neither accepts of any Duties from unholy Persons, nor is he
glorified by them; and therefore as unto these Ends does he expreslely reject
and condemn them. It is a good Duty to Preach the Word; But unto the Wicked God
says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate Instruction, and castest my
Words behind thee, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. Seeing thou art unholy. To pray is a good
Duty; But unto them that are not washed and made clean, and put not away the
evil of their Doings from before his Eyes, says God, When ye spread forth your
hands I will hide mine Eyes from you, and when ye make many Prayers, I will not
hear, Isa. 1. 15, 16. And the like may be said of all other Duties whatever.

Holy, if we are not so, all the Duties which we design or intend to perform
toward him, are everlastingly lost, as unto their proper Ends. For there is no
Intercourse nor Communion between Light and Darkness: God is Light, and in him
is no Darkness at all; and if we say, we have Fellowship with him, and walk in
Darkness, as all unholy Persons do, we lie, and do not the truth; but if we
walk in the Light as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another;
and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus, 1 John 1. 6, 7. v. 3. Now what man that shall consider this, unless he be
infatuated, would for the Love of any one sin, or out of Conformity to the
World, or any other thing, whereby the Essence and Truth of Holiness is
impeached, utterly lose and forfeit all the Benefit and Fruit of all those
Duties wherein perhaps he has labored, and which he has, it may be, been at
no small charge withal. But yet this is the Condition of all men, who come
short in any thing that is essentially necessary unto universal Holiness. All
they do, all they suffer, all the Pains they take in and about Religious
Duties, all their compliance with Convictions, and what they do therein within
doors and without, is all lost, as unto the great Ends of the Glory of God, and
their own Eternal Blessedness, as sure as God is Holy.

everlasting Enjoyment of him. This is out utmost End, which if we come short
of, ( Life it self is the greatest Loss) better ten thousand times we had never
been. For without it, a Continuance in Everlasting Miseries is inseparable from
our State and Condition. Now this is never attainable by any unholy Person.
Follow Holiness, says our Apostle, without which no man shall see God. For it
is the pure in Heart only that shall see God, Matthew. 5. 8. It is hereby that we
are made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12. Neither
can we attain it before we are thus made meet for it. No unclean thing, nothing
that defiles or is defiled, shall ever be brought into the glorious Presence
of this Holy God. There is no Imagination wherewith Mankind is besotted, more
foolish, none so pernicious as this, That Persons not purified, not sanctified,
not made holy in this Life, should afterward be taken into that state of
Blessedness which consists in the Enjoyment of God. There can be no Thought
more Reproachful to his Glory, nor more inconsistent with the Nature of the
things themselves. For neither can such Persons enjoy him, nor would God
himself be a Reward unto them. They can have nothing whereby they should adhere
unto him as their chiefest Good, nor can see any thing in him that should give
them Rest or Satisfaction; nor can there be any Medium whereby God should
Communicate himself unto them, supposing them to contue thus unholy, as all
must do who depart out of this Life in that Condition. Holiness indeed is
perfected in Heaven, but the Beginning of it is inviolably and unalterably
confined to this World; and where this fails, no hand shall be put unto that
Work unto Eternity. All unholy persons therefore who seed and refresh
themselves with Hopes of Heaven and Eternity, do it merely on false Notions of
God and Blessedness, whereby they deceive themselves. Heaven is a place where
as well they would not be, as they cannot be; in it self it is neither desired
by them, nor fit for them. He that has this Hope indeed, that he shall see
God, purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3. 2. 3. There is therefore a
manifold Necessity of Holiness impressed on us, from the Consideration of the
Nature of that God whom we serve and hope to enjoy, which is Holy.

Improvement of it. We have seen how all our Concernment and Interest in God
both here and hereafter, do depend on our being Holy. They invented a very
effectual Means for the Prejudicing, yea indeed a fatal Engine for the Ruin of
true Holiness in the World, who built it on no other bottom, nor pressed it on
any other motive, but that the Acts and Fruits of it were Meritorious in the
sight of God. For whether this be Believed and complied withal or not, true
Holiness is ruined, if no other more effectual Reason be substituted in its
room. Reject this Motive, and there is no need of it; which I am persuaded has
really taken place in many, who being taught that good Deeds are not
meritorious, have concluded them useless. Comply with it, and you destroy he
Nature of true Holiness, and turn all the pretended Duties of it into Fruits
and Effects of spiritual Pride and blind Superstition. But we see the Necessity
of it with respect unto God, has other Foundations suited unto, and consistent
with the Grace and Love and Mercy of the Gospel. And we shall fully show in our
Progress, that there is not one Motive unto it, that is of any real Force or
Efficacy, but perfectly complyes with the whole Doctrine of the free undeserved
Grace of God toward us by Jesus Christ; nor is there any of them which gives
the least Countenance unto any thing of worth in our selves, as from our
selves, or that should take us off from an absolute and universal Dependence on
Christ for Life and Salvation. But yet such they are, as render it as necessary
unto us to be Holy, that is, to be sanctified, as to be Justified. He that
thinks to please God, and to come to the Enjoyment of him without Holiness,
makes him an unholy God, putting the highest Indignity and Dishonor imaginable
upon him. God deliver poor Sinners from this Deceit. There is no Remedy, you
must leave your Sins, or your God. You may as easily reconcile Heaven and Hell,
the one remaining Heaven and the other Hell, as easily take away all Difference
between Light and Darkness, Good and Evil, as procure Acceptance for unholy
Persons with our God. Some live without God in the World; whether they have any
Notion of his Being or no, is not material: They live without any Regard unto
him, either as unto his present Rule over them, or his future Disposal of them.
It is no wonder if Holiness, both Name and Thing, be universally despised by
these Persons; their Design being to serve their Lusts to the utmost, and
immerse themselves in the Pleasures of the World, without once taking God into
their Thoughts, they can do no otherwise. But for Men who live under some
constant sense of God, and an eternal Accountableness unto him, and thereon do
many things he requires, and abstain from many Sins that their Inclinations and
Opportunities would suggest and prompt them unto, not to endeavor after that
universal Holiness which alone will be accepted with him, is a deplorable
Folly. Such men seem to Worship an Idol all their days. For he that does not
endeavor to be like unto God, does contrarily think wickedly that God is like
unto himself. It is true, our Interest in God is not built upon our Holiness,
but it is as true, that we have none without it. Were this Principle once well
fixed in the Minds of men, that without Holiness no man shall see God, and that
enforced from the Consideration of the Nature of God himself, it could not but
influence them unto a greater Diligence about it, than the most seem to be
engaged in.

Morality, or for Moral Virtue; I wish it be more out of Love to Virtue its
self, and a Conviction of its Usefulness, than out of a Design to cast Contempt
on the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Gospel, as it is declared by the
faithful Dispensers of it. However, we are bound to believe the Best of all
men. Where we see those who so plead for Moral Virtues, to be in their own
Persons, and in their Lives, modest, sober, humble, patient, self-denying,
charitable, useful toward all, we are obliged to believe, that their Pleas
for Moral Virtue proceed from a Love and Liking of it. But where men are proud,
furious, worldly, revengefull, profane, intemperate, covetous, ambitious, I
cannot so well understand their Declamations about Virtue. Only I would for the
present enquire, What it is that they intend by their Morality. Is it the
Renovation of the Image of God in us by Grace? is it our Conformity from thence
unto him in his Holiness? is it our being Holy in all Manner of Holiness,
because God is holy? is it the acting of our Souls in all Duties of Obedience,
from a Principle of Faith and Love, according to the Will of God, whereby we
have Communion with him here, and are lead toward the Enjoyment of him? If
these are the things which they intend, what is the matter with them? why are
they so afraid of the Words and Expressions of the Scripture? Why will they not
speak of the things of God in Words that the Holy Ghost teaches? Men never
dislike the Words of God, but when they dislike the Things of God; Is it
because these Expressions are not intelligible, People do not know what they
mean, but this of Moral Virtue they understand well enough? We appeal to the
Experience of all that truly fear God in the World unto the contrary. There is
none of them, but the Scripture Expressions of the Causes, Nature, Work and
Effects of Holiness, do convey a clear experimental Apprehension of them unto
their Minds: Whereas, by their Moral Virtue, neither themselves, nor any else,
do know what they intend, since they do or must reject the common received
Notion of it, for Honesty amongst men. If therefore they intend that Holiness
hereby which is required of us in the Scripture, and that particularly on the
Account of the Holiness of that God whom we serve, they fall into an high
Contempt of the Wisdom of God, in despising of those Notices and Expressions of
it, which being used by the Holy Ghost, are suited unto the spiritual Light and
Understanding of Believers; substituting their own arbitrary, doubtful,
uncertain Sentiments and Words, in their Room and place. But if it be something
else which they intend, as indeed (evidently it is, nor does any man understand
more in the Design, than Sobriety and Usefulness in the World, things
singularly good in their proper place) then it is no otherwise to be looked on,
but as a Design of Satan to undermine the true Holiness of the Gospel, and to
substitute a deceitful and deceiving Cloud or Shadow in the Room of it.

folly and falsehood of those clamorous Accusations, wherein the most important
Truths of the Gospel are charged as inconsistent with, and as repugnant unto
Holiness. The Doctrine, say the Socinians, of the Satisfaction of Christ,
ruins all Care and Endeavors after an Holy Life: For when men do believe that
Christ has satisfied the Justice of God for their Sins, they will be inclined
to be careless about them, yea to live in them. But as this Supposition does
transform Believers into Monsters of Ingratitude and Folly, so it is built on
no other Foundation than this, that if Christ take away the Guilt of Sin, there
is no Reason in the Nature of these things, nor mentioned in the Scripture why
we should need to be holy, and keep our selves from the Power, Filth and
Dominion of Sin, or any way Glorify God in this World; which is an Inference
weak, false and ridiculous. The Papists and others with them, lay the same
Charge on the Doctrine of Justification through the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ unto us. And it is wonderful to consider with what
virulent Railing this Charge is managed by the Papists, so with what scorn and
scoffing, with what Stories and Tales some amongst our selves endeavor to
expose this sacred Truth to Contempt, as though all those by whom it is
Believed, must consequently be Negligent of Holiness and good Works. Now
although I deny not, but that such men may find a great Strength of Connection
between these things in their own Minds, seeing there is a Principle in the
corrupt Heart of man to turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness, yet (as
shall in due time be proved) this sacred Truth is both Doctrinally and
Practically the great constraining Principle unto Holiness and Fruitfulness in
Obedience. For the present I shall return no other Answer unto those
Objections, but that the Objectors are wholly mistaken in our Thoughts and
Apprehensions concerning that God whom we serve. God in Christ whom we Worship,
has so revealed his own Holiness unto us, and what is necessary for us on the
Account thereof, as that we know it to be a foolish, wicked and blasphemous
thing, for any one to think to please him, to be accepted with him, to come to
the Enjoyment of him, without that Holiness which he requires, and from his
own Nature cannot but require. That the Grace or Mercy, or Love of this God,
who is our God, should encourage those who indeed know him, unto Sin, or
countenance them in a Neglect of Holy Obedience to him, is a monstrous
Imagination. There are as I shall show afterward, other invincible Reasons for
it, and Motives unto it. But the owning of this one Consideration alone, by
them who Believe the Grace of the Gospel, is sufficient to secure them from the
Reproach of this Objection.

Sloth and Negligence in this Matter. It is to be feared, that we have none of
us endeavored as we ought, to grow up into this Image and Likeness of God. And
although for the main of our Duty herein, our Hearts may not condemn us, yet
there are no doubt sundry things that belong unto it, wherein we have all
failed. Our Likeness unto God, that wherein we bear his Image, is our Holiness,
as has been declared. Wherever there is the Holiness of Truth before
described, in the Essence of it, there is a radical Conformity and likeness
unto God. In the first Communication of it unto us, through the Promises of the
Gospel, we are made Partakers (...), of the Divine Nature, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Such a
new spiritual Nature as represents that of God himself: Being begotten by him,
we are made partakers of his Nature. But though all Children do partake of the
Nature of their Parents, yet they may be, and some of them are very deformed,
and bear very little of their Likeness. So is it in this matter; we may have
the Image of God in our Hearts, and yet come short of that Likeness unto him in
its Degrees and Improvement which we ought to aim at. And this happens Two
ways; (1) When our Graces are weak, withering, and unthrifty; for in their
flourishing and fruit-bearing is our Likeness unto God evidenced, and in them
does the Glory of God in this World consist. (2) When by the Power of our
Corruptions or our Temptations, we contract a Deformity; something that has
the Likeness of the old crooked Serpent. Where either of these befall us, that
our Graces are low and thriftless; that our Corruptions are high and active,
frequently discovering themselves; there, though the Image of God may be in us,
there is not much of his Likeness upon us, and we come short of our Duty, in
this great and Fundamental Duty of our Faith and Profession. So far as it is
thus with us, may we not, ought we not greatly to blame our selves? Why are we
so slow, so Negligent in the pursuit of our principal Interest and Happiness?
Why do we suffer every thing, why do we suffer any thing to divert our Minds
from, or retard our Endeavors in this Design? Wherefore, that I may contribute
something to the awakening of our Diligence herein, I shall add some few
Motives unto it, and some Directions for it, that herein we may be found
perfecting Holiness in the Fear of the Lord, which is the only way whereby we
may be like unto him, in this World.

First, In our Likeness unto God, consists the Excellency and Preeminence of
our Nature, above that of all other Creatures in the world, and of our Persons
above those of other Men, who are not partakers of his Image.

For, (1) With Reference unto other Things, this is the highest Excellency that
a Created Nature is capable of. Other things had External Impressions of the
Greatness, Power, and Goodness of God upon them; Man alone in this lower world
was capable of the Image of God in him. The Perfection, the Glory, the
Preeminence of our Nature in the first Creation, was expressed only by this,
that we were made in the Image and likeness of God, Genesis 1. 26, 27. This gave
us a Preeminence above all other Creatures, and hence a Dominion over them
ensued. For although God made a distinct grant of it unto us, that we might the
better understand and be thankful for our Privilege; yet was it a necessary
Consequence of his Image in us. And this is that which James respects, where he
tells us, that (...), every Nature, the Nature of all things in their several
kinds, (...), is tamed, that is, subjected to the Nature of man. He renders
(...) Genesis 1. 28. by (...), which the LXX. render (...), subdue it. But being
not contented to be like God, that is in Holiness and Righteousness, we would
be as God in Wisdom and Sovereignty; and not attaining what we aimed at, we
lost what we had, Genesis 3. 5. Being in honor we continued not, but became like
the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. 12. we were first like God, and then like
Beasts, 2 Pet. 2. 12. By the loss of the Image of God, our Nature lost its
Preeminence, and we were reduced into order amongst perishing Beasts. For
notwithstanding some feeble Relics of this Image yet abiding with us, we have
really, with respect unto our proper End, in our lapsed Condition, more of the
Bestial Nature in us, than of the Divine. Wherefore the Restoration of this
Image in us by the Grace of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10, is the
Recovery of that Preeminence and Privilege of our Nature which we had
foolishly lost. Hereby there is an Impression again made upon our Natures of
the Authority of God, which gives us a Preeminence above other Creatures, and a
Rule over them; yea, that whole Dominion which Mankind scrambles for with Craft
and Violence, over the residue of the Creation, depends on this Renovation of
the Image of God in some of them. Not that I judge that men's Right and Title to
their Portion and Interests in this world, does depend on their own Personal
Grace or Holiness; But that if God had not designed to renew his Image in our
Nature by Jesus Christ, and as the Foundation thereof to take our Nature into
Union with himself in the person of his Son, and thereby to gather up all
things unto a New Head in him, and to make him the firstborn of the Creation,
the Head and Heir of all, he would not have continued any thing of Right or
Title therein. It was upon the Promise and the Establishment of the
New Covenant, that this Right was restored unto us. So it is expressed in the
Renovation of the Covenant with Noah and his Children, Genesis 9. 1, 2. God
blessed Noah and his Sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the Earth; and the fear of you, and the dread of you shall be upon
every beast of the Earth, and upon every fowl of the Air, and upon all that
moves on the Earth, and upon all the Fishes of the Sea, into your hand are
they delivered; which is an express Renovation of the Grant made unto us at
our first Creation, Genesis 1. 28. The Right whereunto we had lost, in our Loss of
the Image of God. And therefore in that service wherein the Creature is
continued unto Mankind, it is made Subject to vanity, and put into bondage, in
which state though it groan, and look out as it were for Deliverance, it must
continue until God has accomplished the whole Design of the glorious liberty
of his Children, Romans 8. 20, 21. Whatever they may Pride themselves in, their
Parts or Enjoyments, however they may sport themselves in the Use or Abuse of
other Creatures, if this Image of God be not renewed in them, they have really
no great Preeminence above the things which perish under theirhands, 2 Pet. 2.
12. God having Exalted our Natures by Union with himself in the Person of his
Son, requires of us to preserve its Dignity above others.

persons of some above others; The Righteous, says the wiseman, is more
Excellent than his Neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. It is seldom that this is so upon
the account of Civil Wisdom, Wealth, Greatness, or Power. There is nothing can
establish this general Rule, but their conformity and likeness to God. Hence
are such persons called the Saints in the Earth, and the Excellent, Psalm. 16.
3. Both the Terms (...) and (...) do first belong properly to God. He above is
absolutely (...) or Holy; and he is (...) Psalm. 8. 2. unto men they are
ascribed upon their Likeness unto him in Holiness. This makes them the Saints
and Excellent in the Earth, that gives them a Preeminence of Office and
Authority in some above others. And this Dignity of Office reflects a Dignity
of Person on them who are vested in it, and communicates a Preeminence unto
them; For their Office and Authority is from God, which gives both it and them
a real Privilege and Honor above others. But that which is Originally in and
from Persons themselves, is solely from the Renovation of the Image of God in
them, and is heightened and increased according to the Degrees they attain in
the Participation of it. The more Holy, the more Honorable. Hence wicked men in
the Scripture are said to be vile, (...) Psalm. 12. 8. Quisquiliae hominum,
trifling vilenesses; And the Righteous are said to be Precious and Valuable.
And hence it is, that there has oft-times an Awe been put on the spirits of
vile and outrageous sinners, from the Appearances of God in Holy Persons. And
indeed at all times, where men do Eminently bear a Conformity to God in
Holiness, wicked men exasperated by their secular Interests, Prejudices, and an
unconquerable Adherence to their Lusts, may oppose, revile, reproach and
persecute them, but secretly in their Hearts they have an Awe from the Likeness
of God in them, whence they will sometimes dread them, sometimes flatter them,
and sometimes wish that they were not, even as they deal with God himself. Why
do we weary our selves about other things? why do we spend our Labor in
vain, and our Strength for that which is not bread? such will all Endeavors
after any other Excellency at length appear.

Sin is the sole debasement of it, that alone whereby we render our selves base
and contemptible. Men's self-pleasing in the ways and fruits of it, or in
worldly Advantages, and their Mutual Applauses of one another, will suddenly
vanish into smoke. It is Holiness alone that is Honorable, and that because
there is in it the Image and Representation of God. I think we are satisfied,
that the Dignity of Professors above others, does not consist in Worldly or
Secular Advantages, for they are very few who have them; Not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. nor
does it consist in spiritual gifts; many who have excelled us, not only in the
Degree of them, but in the Kind also, who have had extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, shall be shut out of Heaven with the worst of the world, Matthew. 7. 22.
Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name, and in thy Name cast out devils, and in thy Name wrought (...), many
miraculous work? which is more than any of us can say; yet Christ will profess
unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity, you unholy
persons. Nor is it in Profession it self. Many make it is rigid austerities,
Renunciation of the world, and outward works of Charity, beyond the most of us,
and yet perish in their Superstitions. Nor is it in the Purity of Worship,
without such mixtures of Humane Inventions as others defile the Service of God
withal. For Multitudes may be made partakers thereof in the great house of God,
and yet be Vessels of wood and stone, who being not purged from sin, are not
vessels to honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21.
It consists therefore alone in that likeness unto God, which we have in and by
Holiness, with what does attend it, and is inseparable from it. Where this is
not, no other thing will exempt us from the common herd of perishing mankind.

Secondly, According unto our Growth and Improvement in this likeness unto God,
are our Accesses and Approaches toward Glory. We are drawing every day toward
our Natural End whether we will or no; and if we do not therewithal draw
nearer toward our Supernatural End in Glory, we are most miserable. Now men
do but deceive themselves, if they suppose that they are approaching toward
Glory in time, if they are not at the same time making nearer unto it in Grace;
It is some Representation of future Glory, that therein we shall be (...), Luke
20. 36. like, or equal unto Angels. But that respects one particular only of
that state. It is a far more excellent Description of it, that we shall be like
unto God, when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is, 1 John 3. 2. Our glory as subjectively considered, will be our Likeness
unto God according to the capacity of Creatures. And it is the highest folly
for any to think that they shall love that hereafter, which now they hate; that
that will be their Glory which they now abhor; such sottish Contradictions
are the Minds of men filled withal. There is nothing in this World which they
more despise, than to be like unto God, and they hate every one that is so; yet
pretend a Desire and Expectation of that Estate wherein they shall be so, which
is a being so for ever. But this will be our Glory; to behold the Face of God
in Righteousness, and to be satisfied with his Likeness, Psalm. 17. 15. How then
shall we make Approaches toward this Glory spiritually, which at least may
answer the Approaches we make toward our Ends naturally, seeing not to do so,
is folly and intolerable negligence? We have no other way, but Thriving and
Growing in that Likeness of God which we have here in Holiness. Hereby alone
are we transformed into the Image of God, from Glory to Glory; 2 Cor. 3. 18.
From one glorious Degree of Grace unto another, until one great Change shall
issue all Grace and Holiness in Eternal Glory: And in our Desires for Heaven,
if they are regular, we consider not so much our Freedom from Trouble as from
Sin; nor in our Aim in the first place so much at complete Happiness, as
perfect Holiness. And they who desire Heaven, as that which would only ease
them of their Troubles, and not as that which will perfectly free them of Sin;
will fall into a state wherein Sin and Trouble shall be Eternally inseparable.
As therefore we would continually tend toward our Rest and Blessedness, as we
would have assured and evident Pledges of it in our own Souls, as we would have
Fore-tastes of it, and an experimental Acquaintance with it, (as who would not
know as much as is possible of his Eternal Blessedness) this is the Design
which we ought to pursue. It is to be feared, that the most of us know not how
much of Glory may be in present Grace, nor how much of Heaven may be attained
in Holiness on the Earth. We have a Generation amongst us, that would fain be
Boasting of Perfection, whilst in their Minds they are evidently under the
Power of Darkness, corrupt in their Affections, and worldly in their Lives. But
our Duty it is, to be always perfecting Holiness in the fear of the Lord. This
pursued in a due Manner, is continually transforming the Soul into the Likeness
of God. Much of the Glory of Heaven may dwell in a simple Cottage. And poor
Persons, even under Rags, may be very like unto God.

Thirdly, It is from our Likeness and Conformity unto God alone, that we are or
may be useful in the World in a due Manner and Order. I shall have Occasion to
speak more unto this afterward, and shall therefore here only touch upon it,
with respect unto one Concernment or Circumstance. God is the great Preserver
and Benefactor of the whole Creation: He is good and does Good, the sole Cause
and Fountain of all Good, that in any kind, any Creature is made partaker of.
And there is no Property of God more celebrated in the Scripture than this of
his Goodness, and his giving out of the Fruits of it to all his Creatures. And
he is so only Good, that there is nothing so in any sense but by a
participation of it, and a Likeness unto him therein. They therefore who are
like unto God, and they only, are useful in this World. There is indeed, or at
least there has been, much Good, useful good done by others, on various
Convictions, and for various Ends: But there is one flaw or other in all they
do. Either Superstition, or Vainglory, or Selfishness, or Merit, or one thing
or other, gets into all the Good that is done by unholy Persons, and brings
Death into the Pot, so that although it may be of some use in particulars, unto
individual Persons, in some Seasons, it is of none unto the general Good of the
whole. He that bears the Likeness of God, and in all that he does, acts from
that Principle, he alone is truly useful, represents God in what he does, and
spoils it not by false Ends of his own. If therefore we would keep up the
Privilege and Preeminence of our Nature and Persons, if we would make due and
daily Accessions toward Glory and Blessedness, if we would be of any real use
in this World, our great Endeavor ought to be, to grow up more and more into
this Likeness of God, which consists in our Holiness.

How or what we may do, that we may thrive and grow up more and more into this
Likeness unto God. To remit other Considerations unto their proper place, at
present I answer, that there are some Graces of Holiness that are effectually
Assimulating, and others that are Declarative, and Expressive of this Likeness
of God in us.

( First.) Those of the first sort, which have a peculiar Efficacy to promote
the likeness of God in our Souls, are Faith and Love, in whose constant
Exercise we ought to abide and abound, if we intend to grow in Likeness and
Conformity to God.

Faith is a part of our Holiness, as it is a Grace of the sanctifying Spirit,
and it is a Principle of Holiness as it purifies the Heart, and is effectual by
Love. The more Faith is in its due and proper Exercise, the more holy we shall
be, and consequently the more like unto God. This were a large Theme, I shall
confine it unto one Instance. The glorious Properties of God, as we have showed
before, are manifested and revealed in Jesus Christ, in his Face do they shine
forth. The only way whereby we behold them, whereby we have an intuition into
them, is by Faith. In Christ are the glorious Excellencies of God represented
unto us, and by Faith do we behold them. And what is the Effect hereof? we are
changed into the same Image and Likeness, from Glory to Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
This is the great Mystery of Growing in Holiness, and Thriving in the Image of
God, which the World being ignorant of, have labored in vain by other Means to
satisfy their Notions and Convictions. But this is the great Way and Means of
it, appointed and blessed of God unto that Purpose; namely, constantly by
Faith, in a way of Believing the Revelation made in the Gospel, to view,
behold, and contemplate on the Excellencies of God, his Goodness, Holiness,
Righteousness, Love and Grace, as manifested in Jesus Christ; and that so as to
make use of, and apply unto our selves and our Condition the Effects and Fruits
of them, according to the Promise of the Gospel. This is the great Arcanum of
growing up into the likeness of God; without which, however men may multiply
Duties in a Compliance with their Convictions, they will have never the more
Conformity to God. And all Professors who come short in this matter, do or may
know, that it arises from their want of a constant Exercise of Faith on God in
Christ. If therefore we have a real Design, of being yet more like unto God,
which is our Privilege, Safety, Glory, Blessedness, this is the way we must
take for its Accomplishment. Abound in Actings of Faith, and we shall thrive in
Holiness. And they are but Acts of Presumption under the Name of Faith, which
do not infallibly produce this Effect.

Love has the same Tendency and Efficacy. I mean, the Love of God. He that
would be like unto God must be sure to love him, or all other Endeavors to
that Purpose will be in vain. And he that loves God sincerely, will be like
him. Under the Old Testament none in his general Course so like unto God as
David, called therefore the man after Gods own Heart; and none ever made
greater Expressions of Love unto him, which occur continually in the Psalms.
And let men take what pains they can in Acts and Duties of Obedience, if they
proceed not from a Principle of Divine Love, their Likeness unto God will not
be increased by them. All Love in general has an assimulating Efficacy, it
casts the Mind into the Mould of the thing beloved. So Love of this World makes
men Earthly minded; their Minds and Affections grow Earthy, carnal and sensual.
But of all Kinds Divine Love is most effectual to this purpose, as having the
best, the most noble, proper and attractive Object. It is our Adherence unto
God with Delight, for what he is in himself, as manifested in Jesus Christ. By
it we cleave unto God, and so keep near him, and thereby derive transforming
Virtue from him. Every Approach unto God by ardent Love and Delight is
Transfiguring. And it acts it self continually by (1) Contemplation; (2)
Admiration, and (3) Delight in Obedience.

1. Love acts it self by Contemplation. It is in the Nature of it to be
meditating and Contemplating on the Excellencies of God in Christ. Yea, this is
the Life of it, and where this is not, there is no Love. An heart filled with
the Love of God, will Night and Day be exercising it self in and with Thoughts
of Gods glorious Excellencies, rejoicing in them. This the Psalmist exhorts us
unto, Psalm. 30. 4. Sing unto the Lord, O ye Saints of his, and give thanks at
the remembrance of his Holiness. And Love will do the same with respect unto
all his other Properties. See to this purpose, Psalm. 63. throughout. And this
will further our Likeness unto him; our Minds by it will be changed into the
Image of what we Contemplate, and we shall endeavor, that our Lives be
conformed thereunto.

Admiration also. That is the voice of Love; How great is his Goodness! how
great is his Beauty! Zech. 9. 17. the Soul being as it were ravished with that
View which it has of the glorious Excellencies of God in Christ, has no way
to express its Affections but by Admiration. How great is his Goodness! how
great is his Beauty! And this Beauty of God is that sweetness and holy symmetry
of Glory, (if I may be allowed to speak so improperly) in all the Perfections
of God, being all in a sweet Correspondency exalted in Christ, which is the
proper Object of our Love. To see infinite Holiness, Purity and Righteousness,
with infinite Love, Goodness, Grace and Mercy, all equally Glorified in and
toward the same Things and Persons, one Glimpse whereof is not to be attained
in the World out of Christ; is that Beauty of God which attracts the Love of a
Believing Soul, and fills it with an holy Admiration of him. And this also is a
most effectual Furtherance of our Conformity unto him, which without these
steps we shall labor in vain after.

Delight in Obedience, and all the Duties of it. The common Instance of Jacob
is known, of whom it is said, that his seven Years Service seemed short, and so
easy to him, for the Love he bare to Rachel. He did that with Delight, which
he would not afterward undergo for the greatest Wages. But we have a greater
Instance: Our Lord Jesus Christ says concerning all the Obedience that was
required of him; Thy Law O God is in my heart, I delight to do thy Will. And
yet we know how terrible to Nature were the things he did and suffered in
Obedience to that Law. But his unspeakable Love to God and the Souls of men,
rendered it all his Delight. Hence follows Intension and Frequency in all the
Duties of it. And where these two are, Intension of mind and spirit, with a
Frequency of holy Duties, both proceeding from Delight, there Holiness will
thrive, and consequently we shall do so in our Conformity to God. In brief,
Love and Likeness unto God are inseparable, and proportionate unto one another.
And without this, no Duties of Obedience are any part of his Image.

Secondly.) There are Graces which are Declarative of this Assimulation, or
which evidence and manifest our Likeness unto God. I shall instance only in two
of them.

(1) And the first is such, as I shall give many Names unto it is its
Description, as the Scripture does also, but the thing intended is one and the
same. This is Goodness, Kindness, Benignity, Love, with Readiness to do good,
to forgive, to help and relieve, and this toward all Men, on all Occasions.
And this also is to be considered in Opposition unto an evil Habit of Mind
exerting it self in many Vices, which yet agree in the same general Nature;
such are Anger, Wrath, Envy, Malice, Revenge, Frowardness, Selfishness; all
which are directly opposite to the Grace of Holiness, at present instanced in
and pleaded for. And this I fear, is not so considered as it ought to be: For
if it were, it would not be so common a thing as it may be it is, for men to
plead highly for the Imitation of God, and almost in all they do, give us a
full Representation of the Devil. For as this universal Benignity and Love to
all, is the greatest Representation of the Nature of God on the Earth; so is
Fierceness, Envy, Wrath and Revenge, of that of the Devil. Would we then be
like unto our Heavenly Father, would we manifest that we are so unto his Glory,
would we represent him in and unto the World, it must be by this frame of
spirit, and Actings constantly suited thereunto. This our Blessed Savior
instructs us in and unto, Matthew. 5. 44, 45. A Man, I say, thus Good, his Nature
being cured and rectified by Grace, thence useful, and helpful, free from
Guile, Envy and Selfishness, Pride and Elation of Mind, is the best
Representation we can have of God on the Earth, since the Humane Nature of
Christ was removed from us.

like God, or to manifest his Glory in our Persons and Lives unto the World.
And no small part of our Holiness consists herein. Many Lusts, Corruptions, and
distempered Passions are to be subdued by Grace, if we design to be Eminent.
Strong Bents and Inclinations of Mind to comply with innumerable Provocations
and Exasperations that will befall us, must be corrected and discarded. Many
Duties be constantly attended unto, and sundry Graces kept up to their
Exercise. The whole drove of Temptations, all whose force consists in a
pretense of care for Self, must be scattered or resisted. And hence it is, that
in the Scripture a Good man, a Merciful man, an useful, liberal man, is
frequently spoken of by way of Eminency and Distinction, as one whom God has
an especial regard unto, and concerning whom there are peculiar Promises. When
men live to themselves, and are satisfied that they do no hurt, though they
do no good; are secure, selfish, wrathful, angry, peevish, or have their
kindness confined to their Relations, or otherwise are little useful but in
what they are pressed unto, and therein come off with Difficulty in their own
minds, who esteem all lost that is done for the Relief of others, and the
greatest part of Wisdom to be cautious, and disbelieve the necessities of men;
in a word, that make Self and its concernments the End of their lives; whatever
otherwise their profession be, or their Diligence in Religious duties, they do
very little either Represent or Glorify God in the world. If we therefore
Design to be Holy, let us constantly in our Families, toward our Relations, in
Churches, in our Conversations in the world, and dealings with all men, toward
our Enemies and Persecutors, the worst of them, so far as they are ours only,
toward all Mankind as we have Opportunity, labor after conformity unto God,
and to express our likeness unto him, in this Philanthropy, Goodness,
Benignity, Condescension, readiness to forgive, to help and relieve, without
which we neither are, nor can be the Children of our Father which is in Heaven.

frame of Heart, and actings suitable thereunto, required of us with respect
unto the Saints of God, unto Believers. Even God himself, whom we are bound to
imitate, and a Conformity unto whom we are pressing after, does exercise his
Benignity and Kindness in a peculiar manner toward them, 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is
the Savior of all men, but especially of them that believe. There is a
specialty in the Exercise of His saving Goodness toward Believers. And in
Answer hereunto, We are likewise commanded to do good unto all men, but
especially unto them who are of the Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. Although we
are obliged to the Exercise of the Goodness before described, unto all men
whatever, as we have Opportunity; so we are allowed, yea we are enjoined a
peculiar regard herein unto the Household of Faith. And if this were more in
Exercise, if we esteemed our selves, (notwithstanding the Provocations and
Exasperations which we meet withal, or suppose we do so, when perhaps none
are given us, or intended us) obliged to express this Benignity, Kindness,
Goodness, Forbearance, and Love toward all Believers in an especial manner; it
would prevent or remove many of those scandalous Offenses and Animosities that
are among us. If in Common we do love them that love us, and do good to them
that do good to us, and delight in them who are of our Company and go the same
way with us, it may advance us into the condition of Pharisees and Publicanes,
for they did so also. But if among Believers, we will take this course, love
them only, delight in them only, be open and free in all effects of genuine
kindness, toward them who go our way, or are of our Party, or are kind and
friendly to us, or that never gave us provocations really, nor in our own
surmizes; we are so far, and therein worse than either Pharisees or Publicanes.
We are to endeavor Conformity and Likeness unto God, not only as he is the God
of Nature, and is good unto all the works of his hands; but as he is our
Heavenly Father, and is Good, Kind, Benign, Merciful in an especial manner,
unto the whole Family of his Children, however differenced among themselves, or
indeed unkind or provoking unto him. I confess, when I see men apt to retain a
sense of old Provocations and Differences, ready to receive Impressions of new
ones, or ready for Apprehensions of such, where there are none; incredulous of
the sincerity of others who profess a readiness for Love and Peace, to take
things in the worst sense, to be Morose and Severe toward this or that sort of
Believers, unready to help them, scarce desiring their Prosperity, or it may be
their safety; I cannot but look upon it as a very great stain to their
Profession whatever else it be. And by this Rule would I have my own ways
examined.

Truth is another Grace, another part of Holiness, of the same Import and
Nature. Truth is used in the Scripture for Vprightness and Integrity; Thou
requirest Truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. and frequently the Doctrine of
Truth, as of God revealed, and by us believed. But that which I intend is only
what is enjoined us by the Apostle, namely, in all things to Speak the Truth in
Love, Ephesians. 4. 15. Our Apostasy from God was Eminently from him as the God of
Truth, by an Opposition to which Attribute we sought to dethrone him from his
Glory; We would not believe that his word was Truth. And sin entered into the
world by and with a long Train of Lies. And ever since, the whole world, and
every thing in it is filled with them, which represents him and his Nature who
is the Father of Lies and Liars. Hereby does it visibly and openly continue in
its Apostasy from the God of Truth. I could willingly stay to manifest how the
whole world is corrupted, depraved, and sullyed by Lies of all sorts, but I
must not divert thereunto. Wherefore Truth and sincerity in Words, for that at
present I confine my self unto, is an Effect of Renovation of the Image of God
in us, and a Representation of him to the world. No Duty is more frequently
pressed upon us; Put away false speaking, lie not to one another, speak the
Truth in Love; And the consideration hereof, is exceeding necessary unto all
those who by their course of Life are engaged in Trading, and that both because
of the Disreputation, which by the evil practices of some, of many, that I say
not of the most, is cast upon that Course of Life, and also because failures in
Truth, are apt a thousand ways to insinuate themselves into the Practices of
such Persons, yea when they are not aware thereof. It is naught, it is naught
says the buyer, but when he goes away he boasts; and it is good, it is good
says the seller, but when he has sold it, he boasts, or is well pleased
with the advantage, which he has made by his words. But these things have the
Image of Satan upon them, and are most opposite to the God of Truth. Another
Occasion must be taken, further to press this necessary Duty: only at present I
do but intimate, that where Truth is not universally observed, according to
the utmost watchfullness of Sincerity and Love, there all other Marks and
Tokens of the Image of God in any Persons, are not only Sullied but Defaced,
and the Representation of Satan is most prevalent. And these things I could
not but add, as naturally Consequential unto that first principal Argument
for the Necessity of Holiness, which we have proposed and insisted on.

first Argument, and added unto it some especial Improvements with respect unto
its Influence into our Practice, it remains only, that we free it from one
Objection which it seems exposed unto. Now this arises from the Consideration
of the Infinite Grace, Mercy, and Love of God, as they are proposed in the
Dispensation of the Word. For it may be said unto us, and like enough it will,
considering the frame of men's Minds in the Days wherein we live, Do not you
your selves, who thus press unto Holiness, and the Necessity of it from the
Consideration of the Nature of God, preach unto us every day the Greatness of
his Mercy toward all sorts of Sinners, his Readiness to receive them, his
Willingness to pardon them, and that freely in Christ, without the
Consideration of any Worth, Merit, or Righteousness of their own? And do you
not herein invite all sorts of Sinners, the worst and the greatest, to come
unto him by Christ, that they may be pardoned and accepted? Whence then can
arise any Argument for the Necessity of Holiness, from the Consideration of the
Nature of this God, whose Inestimable Treasures of Grace, and the freedom of
whose Love and Mercy toward Sinners, no Tongue, as you say, can express.

An. (1) This Objection is very natural unto carnal and unbelieving Minds, and
therefore we shall meet with it at every turn. There is nothing seems more
reasonable unto them, than that we may live in sin because Grace has abounded.
If men must yet be Holy, they can see no need nor use of Grace. And they cannot
see that God is Gracious to any Purpose, if notwithstanding men may perish
because they are not Holy. But this Objection is raised, rejected and condemned
by our Apostle, in whose Judgment we may acquiesce; Romans 6. 1. And in the same
place he subjoyns the Reasons, why notwithstanding the superabounding Grace of
God in Christ, there is an indispensible Necessity that all Believers should be
Holy.

(2) God himself has obviated this Objection. He proclaims his Name, Exodus 34.
6, 7. The Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, abundant in Goodness and
Truth, keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgressions and Sin.
Had he stood here, and neither in this nor in any other place of Scripture,
further declared his Nature and unchangeable Purposes concerning Sinners, some
Color might have been laid on this Objection. But he adds immediately, and
that will by no means clear the Guilty; that is, as it is explained in places
of Scripture innumerable, such as go on in their Sins, without regard unto
Obedience and Holiness, springing from the Atonement made for their guilty
Souls in the Blood of Christ.

(3) We do, we ought to declare, the rich and free Love, Grace, Mercy, and
Bounty of God unto Sinners in and by Jesus Christ; and Woe unto us, if we
should not be found in that Work all our Days; and thereby Encourage all sorts
of Sinners to come unto him for the free Pardon of their Sins, without Money or
Price, without Merit or Desert on their part; For this is the Gospel. But
notwithstanding all this Grace and Condescension, we declare, that he does not
dethrone himself, nor deny himself, nor change his Nature, nor become unholy,
that we may be saved. He is God still, Naturally and Essentially holy; Holy as
he is in Christ, reconciling the sinful World unto himself; and therefore
indispensibly requires, that those whom he pardons, receives, accepts into his
Love, and Communion with himself, should be Holy also. And these things are not
only consistent, but inseparable. Without the Consideration of this Grace in
God, we can have no Encouragement to be Holy; and without the Necessity of
Holiness in us, that Grace can neither be glorified nor useful.

CHAP. II. Eternal Election a Cause of, and Motive unto Holiness.
Other Arguments for the Necessity of Holiness, from Gods Eternal Election. The
Argument from thence explained, improved, vindicated.

own Duty) we ought to draw from that Revelation of the Nature of God in
Christ, which is made unto us, and our Relation unto him: If we are not thereby
prevailed on, always, in all Instances of Obedience, to endeavor to be Holy,
universally, in all manner of Holy Conversation, we neither can enjoy his
Favor here, nor be brought unto the Enjoyment of him in Glory hereafter.

Consideration which usually we take of God, next after his Nature and the
Properties of it, is of the Eternal free Acts of his Will, or his Decrees and
Purposes. And we shall now enquire, what Respect they have unto Holiness in us,
what Arguments and Motives may be taken from them, to evince the Necessity of
it unto us, and to press us thereunto; especially from the Decree of Election,
which in an especial Manner is by some traduced, as no Friend to this Design. I
say then, that,

It is the Eternal and Immutable Purpose of God, that all who are his in a
peculiar manner, all whom he designs to bring unto Blessedness in the
Everlasting Enjoyment of himself; shall antecedently thereunto be made Holy.
This Purpose of his, God has declared unto us, that we may take no wrong
Measures of our Estate and Condition, nor build Hopes or Expectations of future
Glory, on sandy Foundations that will fail us. Whatever we are else, in Parts,
Abilities, Profession, Moral Honesty, Usefulness unto others, Reputation in the
Church, if we are not personally, spiritually, Evangelically Holy, we have no
Interest in that Purpose or Decree of God, whereby any Persons are designed
unto Salvation and Glory. And this we shall briefly confirm.

Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us in Christ, before the Foundation of the World,
that we should be holy, and unblameable before him in Love. But is this that
which firstly and principally we are ordained unto, and that for its own sake,
namely, Holiness, and Unblameableness in the Obedience of Love? No; we are
firstly Ordained unto eternal life, Acts 13. 48. we are chosen from the
Beginning unto Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. That which God in the first place
intends as his End in the Decree of Election, is our Eternal Salvation, to the
praise of the Glory of his Grace; Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 11. How then is he said to
Choose us that we should be Holy? in what sense is our Holiness proposed as the
Design of God in Election? It is as the indispensible Means for the attaining
of the End of Salvation and Glory. I do, says God, choose these poor lost
Sinners, to be mine in an especial manner, to save them by my Son, and bring
them through his Mediation unto Eternal Glory; But in order hereunto, I do
purpose and decree, that they shall be holy and unblameable in the Obedience of
Love, without which as a Means none shall ever attain that End. Wherefore, the
Expectation and Hope of any man, for Life and Immortality and Glory, without
previous Holiness, can be built on no other Foundation but this, that God will
Rescind his Eternal Decrees, and change his Purposes, that is, cease to be God,
merely to comply with them in there Sins. And who knows not what will be the
End of such a cursed Hope and Expectation? The contrary is seconded by that of
the Apostle, Romans 8. 36. Whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called.
Wherever Predestination unto Glory goes before, concerning any Person, there
Effectual Vocation unto Faith and Holiness infallibly ensues: And where these
never were, the other never was. So 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. God has chosen you from
the Beginning unto Salvation, through the Sanctification of the Spirit. Chosen
we are unto Salvation, by the free Sovereign Grace of God: But how may this
Salvation be actually obtained? how may we be brought into the actual
possession of it? Through the Sanctification of the Spirit, and no otherwise.
Whom God does not sanctify and make Holy by his Spirit, he never chose unto
Salvation from the Beginning. The Councels of God therefore concerning us, do
not depend on our Holiness; but upon our Holiness our future Happiness depends
in the Councels of God.

Force of the Argument for the Necessity of Holiness, from Gods Decree of
Election; and it consists in these two things:

(1) That such is the Nature of the unalterable Decree of God in this Matter,
that no Person living, can ever attain the End of Glory and Happiness, without
the Means of Grace and Holiness. The same Eternal Purpose respects both. I
shall afterward show, how the infallible and indissolvible Connection of these
things is established by the Law of God. Our present Argument is from hence,
that it is fixed by Gods Eternal Decree. He has ordained none to Salvation,
but he has ordained them Antecedently to be Holy. Not the least Infant that
goes out of this World, shall come to Eternal Rest, unless it be sanctified,
and so made habitually and radically Holy. He chooses none to Salvation but
through the sanctification of the Spirit. As therefore whatever else we have or
may seem to have, it is contrary to the Nature of God, that we should come to
the Enjoyment of him, if we are not holy, so it is contrary to his Eternal and
unchangeable Decree also.

Evidence of our Interest in Gods Decree of Election, whereby we are designed
unto Life and Glory, without Holiness effectually wrought in us. Wherefore, as
our Life depends upon it, so do all our Comforts. To this Purpose speaks our
Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal,
The Lord knows who are his. It is the Decree of Election which he intends,
and he proposes it as that alone which will give security against Apostasy in
a time of great Temptations and Trials; As our Savior does likewise, Matthew.
24. 24. Every thing else will fail, but what is an especial Fruit and Effect of
this Decree. What therefore is incumbent on us with respect thereunto, that we
may know we have an Interest in this single Security against final Apostasy?
says the Apostle, And let every one that names the Name of Christ, depart
from Iniquity. There is no other way to come unto an Evidence thereof, but by a
Departure from all Iniquity, by universal Holiness. So the Apostle Peter
directs us, to give all diligence to make our Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Sure
it is in it self, from all Eternity. The Foundation of God stands sure. But
our Duty it is to make it sure, and certain unto ourselves. And this is a thing
of the highest Importance and Concernment unto us, whence we are required to
give all Diligence unto that End. How then may this be done or effected? This
he declares in the foregoing Verses, and it is only by finding in our selves,
and duly Exercising that Train of Gospel Graces and Duties which he there
enumerates, Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Election, that if we intend either Eternal Glory hereafter, or any Consolation
or Assurance here, that we must endeavor to be holy, and unblameable before
him in Love. For whomsoever God purposes to save, he purposes first to
sanctify; neither have we any ground to suppose, that we are built on that
Foundation of God which stands sure, unless we depart from all Iniquity. What
further Motives may be taken from the especial Nature of this Decree, shall be
considered when we have removed one Objection out of our way.

Some there are, who apprehend that these things are quite otherwise. For they
say, that a Supposition of Gods Decree of personal Election is a Discouragement
unto all Endeavors for Holiness, and an effectual Obstruction thereof in the
Lives of Men. And under this pretense chiefly, is the Doctrine concerning it
blasphemed and evil spoken of. For, say they, if God have freely from Eternity
chosen men unto Salvation, what need is there that they should be Holy? They
may live securely in the pursuit of their Lusts, and be sure not to fail of
Heaven at the last. For Gods Decree cannot be frustrated, nor his Will
resisted. And if men be not elected, whatever they endeavor in the Ways of
Holy Obedience, it will be utterly lost, for eternally saved they cannot, they
shall not be. This therefore is so far from being a Conviction of the Necessity
of Holiness, and a Motive unto it, as that indeed it renders it unnecessary and
useless; yea defeats the Power and Efficacy of all other Arguments for it, and
Motives unto it.

Now this Objection, if not for the sake of those who make use of it as a Cavil
against the Truth, yet of those who may feel the force of it in the way of a
Temptation, must be removed out of our way: To this End, I answer two Things:

1. In general; that this Persuasion is not of him that calls us. This way of
arguing is not taught in the Scripture, nor can thence be learned. The Doctrine
of Gods free Electing Love and Grace is fully declared therein. And withal, it
is proposed as the Fountain of all Holiness, and made a great Motive thereunto.
Is it not safer now for us to adhere to the plain Testimonies of Scripture,
confirmed by the Experience of the Generality of Believers, captivating our
Understandings to the Obedience of Faith, than hearken unto such perverse
Cavils as would possess our Minds with a Dislike of God and his Ways? Those
who hate Gospel Holiness, or would substitute something else in the room of it,
will never want Exceptions against all its Concernments. An Holiness they lay
claim unto, and plead an Interest in. For, as I said formerly, a Confession in
general of the Necessity hereof, is almost the only thing wherein all that are
called Christians do agree. But such an Holiness they would have, as does not
spring from Eternal Divine Election, as is not wrought in us Originally by the
Almighty Efficacy of Grace in our Conversion, as is not promoted by free
Justification, through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ. Now this
is such an Holiness as the Scripture knows nothing of, unless it be to reject
and condemn it. Wherefore, this Objection proceeding only from the Craft of
Satan, opposing the Ways and Methods of Gods Grace, when he deareth not
openly oppose the thing it self, it is safer for a Believer to rest quietly in
clear Scripture Revelation, than to attend unto such proud, perverse and
froward Cavillings.

particular; we are not only obliged to believe all Divine Revelations, but
also in the Way, Order and Method wherein by the Will of God they are proposed
unto us, and which is required by the Nature of the things themselves. For
Instance, The Belief of Eternal Life is required in the Gospel: But yet no man
is obliged to Believe, that he shall be eternally saved whilst he lives in his
Sins, but rather the contrary. On this Supposition, which is plain and evident,
I shall in the ensuing Propositions, utterly cast this Objection out of
Consideration.

Election considered absolutely in it self, without respect unto its Effects,
is no part of Gods revealed Will. That is, it is not Revealed, that this or
that man, is, or is not elected. This therefore can be made neither Argument
nor Objection, about any thing wherein Faith or Obedience are concerned; For we
know it not, we cannot know it, it is not our Duty to know it, the Knowledge of
it is not proposed as of any use unto us, yea it it is our sin to enquire into
it. It may seem to some, to be like the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil unto
Eve; good for Food, pleasant to the Eyes, and much to be desired to make one
wise, as all secret Forbidden things seem to carnal Minds. But men can gather
no Fruit from it but Death. See Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Whatever Exceptions therefore are
laid against this Decree as it is in it self, whatever Inferences are made, on
supposition of this or that man's being or not being elected, they are all
unjust and unreasonable, yea proved contending with God, who has appointed
another Way for the Discovery hereof, as we shall see afterward.

Gospel to men in pursuit of his Decree of Election, and in order unto its
effectual Accomplishment. I dispute not what other End it has or may have, in
its indefinite proposal unto all. But this is the first Regulating, principal
End of it. Wherefore, in the preaching of it, our Apostle affirms, that he
endured all things for the Elects sake, that they might obtain the Salvation
which is in Jesus Christ, with eternal Glory, 2 Timothy 2. 10. So God beforehand
commanded him to stay and preach the Gospel at Corinth, because he had much
People in that City, namely, in his Purpose of Grace, Acts 18. 10. See Chap. 2.
47. Chap. 13. 48.

Gospel comes, it proposes Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ, unto all that
shall believe, repent, and yield Obedience unto him. It plainly makes known
unto men their Duty, and plainly proposes unto them their Reward. In this
state of things, no man without the highest Pride and utmost Effect of
Unbelief, can oppose the secret Decree of God unto our known Duty. Says such a
one, I will neither repent, nor believe, nor obey, unless I may first know
whether I am Elected or no, for all at last will depend thereon. If this be the
Resolution of any man, he may go about his other Occasions, the Gospel has
nothing to say or offer unto him. If he will admit of it on no other terms, but
that he may set up his own Will and Wisdom and Methods, in Opposition unto and
Exclusion of those of God, he must, for ought I know, take his own Course,
whereof he may Repent when it is too late.

sole Way of God's Appointment, whereby we may come to an Apprehension of an
Interest in Election, is by the Fruits of it in our own Souls: Nor is it
Lawful for us to enquire into it or after it any other way. The Obligation
which the Gospel puts upon us to believe any thing, respects the Order of the
Things themselves to be Believed, and the Order of our Obedience, as was before
observed. For instance; when it is declared, that Christ dyed for Sinners, no
man is immediately obliged to believe, that Christ dyed for him in particular,
but only that he dyed to save Sinners, to procure a Way of Salvation for them,
among whom he finds himself to be. Hereon the Gospel requires of men Faith and
Obedience: This are they obliged to comply withal. Until this be done, no man
is under an Obligation to believe, that Christ dyed for him in particular. So
is it in this matter of Election: A man is obliged to believe the Doctrine of
it upon the first Promulgation of the Gospel, because it is therein plainly
declared. But as for his own personal Election, he cannot believe it, nor is
obliged to believe it any otherwise, but as God reveals it by its Effects. No
man ought, no man can justly Question his own Election, doubt of it, or
disbelieve it, until he be in such a Condition as wherein it is impossible
that the Effects of Election should ever be wrought in him; if such a Condition
there be in this World. For as a man whilst he is unholy can have no Evidence
that he is elected, so he can have none that he is not elected, whilst it is
possible that ever he may be Holy. Wherefore, whether men are Elected or no, is
not that which God calls any immediately to be conversant about. Faith,
Obedience, Holiness, are the inseparable Fruits, Effects, and Consequents of
Election; as has been proved before. See Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Tit. 1.
1. Acts 13. 48. In whomsoever these things are wrought, he is obliged according
to the Method of God and the Gospel, to believe his own Election: And any
Believer may have the same Assurance of it as he has of his Calling,
Sanctification or Justification; for these things are inseparable. And by the
Exercise of Grace are we obliged to secure our Interest in Election, 2 Pet. 1.
11. But as for those who are as yet Unbelievers and unholy, they can draw no
Conclusion that they are not elected, but from this Supposition, that they are
in a state and Condition wherein it is impossible that ever they should have
either Grace or Holiness; which cannot be supposed concerning any man but he
that knows himself to have sinned against the Holy Ghost.

Wherefore, all the supposed strength of the Objection mentioned, lies only
in the Pride of men's Minds and Wills, refusing to submit themselves unto the
Order and Method of God in the Dispensation of his Grace, and his Prescription
of their Duty, where we must leave it.

Eternal Election is every where in the Scripture proposed for the
Encouragement and Consolation of Believers, and to further them in their Course
of Obedience and Holiness. See Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Romans 8. 28,
29, 30, 31, 32, 33. As unto Men's present Concernment therein, it is infallibly
assured unto them by its Effects; and being so, it is filled with Motives unto
Holiness, as we shall now further declare in particular.

First, The Sovereign and ever to be Adored Grace and Love of God herein, is a
powerful Motive hereunto. For we have no way to express our Resentment of this
Grace, our Acknowledgement of it, our Thankfulness for it, but by an holy
fruitful Course of Obedience; nor does God on the Account hereof require any
thing else of us. Let us therefore enquire what Sense and Obligation this puts
upon us; That God from all Eternity, out of his mere Sovereign Grace, not moved
by any thing in our selves, should first choose us unto Life and Salvation by
Jesus Christ, decreeing immutably to save us out of the perishing multitude of
Mankind, from whom we neither then did in his Eye or Consideration, nor by any
thing in our selves ever would differ in the least? What Impression does this
make upon our Souls? What Conclusion as to our Practice and Obedience do we
hence educe? Why says one, If God has thus chosen me, I may then live in sin
as I please, all will be well and safe in the latter End, which is all I need
care for: But this is the Language of a Devil, and not of a Man. Suggestions
possibly of this nature, by the Craft of Satan, in Conjunction with the
Deceitfulness of Sin, may be injected into the Minds of Believers; as what may
not so be? But he that shall foment, embrace, and act practically according to
this Inference, is such a monster of Impiety and presumptuous Ingratitude, as
Hell it self cannot parallel, in many Instances. I shall use some Boldness in
this Matter. He that does not understand, who is not sensible, that an
Apprehension by Faith of Gods Electing Love in Christ, has a Natural,
immediate, powerful Influence upon the Souls of Believers, unto the Love of
God and Holy Obedience, is utterly unacquainted with the Nature of Faith, and
its whole Work and Actings toward God, in the Hearts of them that believe. Is
it possible, that any one who knows these things, can suppose, that those in
whom they are in Sincerity and Power, can be such stupid, impious and
ungrateful Monsters, so devoid of all Holy Ingenuity, and filial Affections
toward God, as merely out of despite unto him, to cast Poison into the Spring
of all their own Mercies? Many have I known complain, that they could not
arrive at a comfortable Persuasion of their own Election; never any, who when
they had received it in a due Way and Manner, that it proved a Snare unto them,
that it tended to ingenerate looseness of Life, Unholiness, or a Contempt of God
in them. Besides, in the Scripture it is still proposed and made use of unto
other Ends. And those who know any thing of the Nature of Faith, or of the Love
of God, any thing of Intercourse or Communion with him by Jesus Christ, any
thing of Thankefulness, Obedience or Holiness, will not be easily persuaded,
but that Gods Electing Love and Grace, is a mighty constraining Motive unto the
due Exercise of them all.

knows this to be so, and therefore he makes the Consideration of his
electing Love, as free and undeserved, his principal Argument to stir up the
People unto holy Obedience, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8, 11. And a Supposition hereof,
lies at the bottom of that blessed Exhortation of our Apostle, Col. 3. 12. Put
on therefore as the Elect of God, holy and beloved, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness,
Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving
one another. These things which are so great a part of our Holiness, become the
Elect of God; these are required of them on the Account of their Interest in
Electing Love and Grace. Men may frame an Holiness to themselves, and be
stirred up unto it by Motives of their own (as there is a Religion in the
World, that runs in a parallel Line by that of Evangelical Truth, but touches
it not, nor will do so to Eternity) but that which the Gospel requires, is
promoted on the grounds and by the Motives that are peculiar unto it, whereof
this of Gods free electing Love and Grace is among the principal. Farther to
confirm this Truth, I shall instance in some especial Graces, Duties, and parts
of Holiness, that this Consideration is suited to promote.

Humility in all things, is a necessary Consequent of a due Consideration of
this Decree of God. For what were we when he thus set his Heart upon us, to
choose us, and to do us good for ever? Poor lost undone Creatures, that lay
perishing under the Guilt of our Apostasy from him? What did he see in us, to
move him so to choose us, nothing but Sin and Misery? What did he foresee that
we would do of our selves more than others, if he wrought not in us by his
effectual Grace? nothing but a Continuance in Sin and Rebellion against him,
and that for ever. How should the Thoughts hereof, keep our Souls in all
Humility and continual self-abasement. For what have we in or from our selves,
on the Account whereof we should be lifted up? Wherefore, as the Elect of God,
let us put on Humility in all things. And let me add, that there is no Grace
whereby at this Day we may more glorify God and the Gospel, now the World is
sinking into Ruin under the weight of its own Pride.

The Spirits of men, the Looks of men, the Tongues of men, the Lives of men,
are lifted up by their Pride unto their Destruction. The Good Lord keep
Professors from a share in the Pride of these Days. Spiritual Pride in foolish
self-exalting Opinions, and the Pride of Life in the Fashions of the World, are
the Poison of this Age.

Submission to the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God, in the Disposal of all
our Concerns in this World: That this is an excellent Fruit of Faith, an
eminent part of Holiness, or Duty of Obedience, is acknowledged; and never was
it more signally called for than it is at this day. He that cannot live in an
Actual Resignation of himself and all his Concerns unto the Sovereign Pleasure
of God, can neither glorify him in any thing, nor have one hours solid Peace
in his own Mind. This public Calamities, this private Dangers and Losses, this
the uncertainty of all things here below, call for at present in an especial
Manner. God has taken all Pretenses of security from the Earth, by what some
men feel, and some men fear. None knows how soon it may be his Portion, to be
brought unto the utmost Extremity of Earthly Calamities. There is none so old,
none so young, none so wise, none so rich, as thence to expect Relief from such
things. Where then shall we in this Condition cast Anchor? whither shall we
betake our selves for Quietness and Repose? It is no way to be obtained, but in
a Resignation of our selves and all our Concernments into the Sovereign
Pleasure of God: And what greater Motive can we have thereunto than this? The
first Act of Divine Sovereign Pleasure concerning us, was the choosing of us
from all Eternity unto Holiness and Happiness. This was done when we were not,
when we had no Contrivances of our own. And shall we not now put all our
Temporary Concerns into the same Hand? Can the same Fountain send out sweet and
bitter water? Can the same Sovereign Pleasure of God, be the free only Cause of
all our Blessedness, and can it do that which is really Evil unto us? Our
Souls, our Persons, were secure and blessedly provided for, as to Grace and
Glory, in the Sovereign Will of God; and what a Prodigious Impiety is it, not
to trust all other things in the same Hand, to be disposed of freely and
absolutely? If we will not forgo our Interest in mere Absolute Free Sovereign
Grace for ten thousand Worlds, as no Believer will, how ready should we be to
resign up thereunto that little Portion which we have in this World among
perishing things?

Love, Kindness, Compassion, Forbearance toward all Believers, all the Saints
of God, however differenced among themselves, are made indispensibly necessary
unto us, and pressed on us from the same Consideration. And herein also does no
small part of our Holiness consist. To this purpose is the Exhortation of the
Apostle before mentioned, Col. 3. 12. For, if God have chosen them all from
Eternity, and made them the Objects of his Love and Grace, as he has done so
concerning all sincere Believers, do we not think it necessary, does not God
require of us, that we should love them also? How dare any of us entertain
unkind severe Thoughts, how dare we maintain Animosities and Enmities against
any of them whom God has Eternally chosen to Grace and Glory? Such things, it
may be, upon Provocations, and Surprizals, and clashings of Secular Interests,
have fallen out, and will fall out amongst us; But they are all opposite and
contrary unto that Influence which the Consideration of Gods Electing Love
ought to have upon us. The Apostles Rule is, That as unto our Communion in
Love, we ought to receive him whom God has received, and because God has
received him, against which no other thing can be laid in bar, Romans 14. 1, 3.
And the Rule is no less certain, yea is subject to less Exceptions, that we
ought to choose, embrace and love, all those whoever they be, whom God has
chosen and loved from Eternity. There is no greater Evidence of low, weak,
selfish Christians, than to prescribe any other Rules or Bounds unto their
spiritual Evangelical Affections, than the Decree of Gods Election, as
manifesting it self in its Effects. I endure all things, says our Apostle, not
for the Jews or Gentiles, not for the weak or strong in the Faith, not for
those of this of that Way, but for the Elects sake. This should regulate our
Love, and mightily stir it up unto all Actings of Kindness, Mercy,
Compassion, Forbearance, and Forgiveness.

Contempt of the World, and all that belongs unto it, will hence also be
ingenerated in us. Did God set his Heart upon some from Eternity? did he choose
them to be his own peculiar, to distinguish them as his from all the residue of
Mankind? Does he design to give them the highest, greatest, best Fruits and
Effects of his Love, and Glorify himself in their Praises for ever? What then
will he do for them? Will he make them all Kings or Emperors in the World? Or
at least, will he have them to be Rich, and Noble, and Honorable among men,
that it may be known and proclaimed, Thus shall it be done to the Man whom the
King of Heaven delights to honor; however, that they should be kept from
Streights, and Difficulties, and Trials, from Poverty, and Shame, and Reproach
in the World? Alas! none of these things were in the least in the Heart of God
concerning them. They deserve not to be named on the same day, as we use to
speak, with the least of those things which God has chosen his unto. Were
there any real substantial Good in them on their own Account, he would not have
cast them out of the Councels of his Love. But on the contrary, You see your
Calling, Brethren, which is the infallible fruit and consequent of Election,
how that not many Wise men after the Flesh, not many Noble, not many Mighty are
called, but God has chosen the Poor of the World, the Base and the
Contemptible, for the most part. Yea, he has designed the Generality of his
Elect to a poor, low, and afflicted Condition in this World. And shall we set
our Hearts on those things that God has so manifestly put an under-valuation
upon, in Comparison of the least Concernment of Grace and Holiness? Wherefore,
let them that are poor and despised in the World, learn to be satisfied with
their State and Condition: Had God seen it to have been good for you to have
been otherwise, he would not have passed it by, when he was acting Eternal Love
toward you. And let them that are Rich, not set their Hearts upon uncertain
Riches. Alas! they are things which God had no regard unto, when he prepared
Grace and Glory for his own. Let the Remembrance hereof suit your esteem and
valuation of them, and let it cool your spirits in your eager pursuit after
them. Do but think with your selves, that these are not the Things that God had
any Regard unto, when he chosen us unto Grace and Glory, and it will abate or
your Cares about them, cool your love toward them, and take off your Hearts
from them, which is your Holiness.

Electing Love is a Motive and Encouragement unto Holiness, because of the
enabling Supplies of Grace which we may and ought thence to expect by Jesus
Christ. The Difficulties we meet withal in a Course of Holiness, are great and
many. Here Satan, the World, and Sin, do put forth and try their utmost
strength; oft-times the Best are foiled, oft-times discouraged, sometimes weary
and ready to give over: It requires a good spiritual Courage, to take a
Prospect of the Lions, Serpents and Snares, that lie in the Way of a constant
persevering Course in Gospel Obedience. Hereon our knees are ready to grow
feeble, and our hands to hang down. It is no small Relief herein, no small
Encouragement to continue in our Progress, that the Fountain of Electing Grace,
will never fail us, but continually give out Supplies of spiritual Strength and
Refreshment. Hence may we take heart and courage, to rise again when we have
been foiled, to abide when the shock of Temptation is violent, and to persevere
in those Duties which are most wearisome to the Flesh. And they are
unacquainted with a Course of Holy Obedience, who know not how needful this
Consideration is unto a comfortable Continuance therein.

Tendency and Effect in the Assurance we have from thence, that notwithstanding
all the Oppositions we meet withal, we shall not utterly and finally miscarry.
Gods Election will at last obtain; Romans 11. 7. and His Foundation stands
sure, 2 Timothy 1. 19. His Purpose which is according unto Election, is
unchangeable; and therefore the final Perseverance and Salvation of those
concerned in it, are everlastingly secured. This is the Design of the Apostles
Discourse, Romans 8. from v. 28. unto the end. Because of the immutability of
Gods Eternal Purpose in our Predestination, and his effectual gracious
Operations, in the Pursuit, and for the Execution thereof, the Elect of God
shall infallibly be carried through all, even the most dreadful Oppositions
that are made against them, and be at length safely Landed in Glory. And there
is no greater Encouragement to grow and persist in Holiness, then what is
administered by this Assurance of a blessed End and Issue of it.

Experience of that spiritual slumber and sloth which Unbelief will cast us
under, of those Weaknesses, Discouragements and Despondencies, which
Uncertainties, Doubts, Fears and Perplexities of what will be the Issue of
things at last with them, do cast upon the Souls of men, how Duties are
discouraged, spiritual Endeavors and Diligence are impaired, Delight in God
weakened, and Love cooled by them, will be able to make a right Judgment of
the Truth of this Assertion. Some think that this Apprehension of the
immutability of Gods Purpose of Election, and the Infallibility of the
Salvation of Believers on that Account, tends only to Carelessness and Security
in sin; and that to be always in Fear, Dread, and Uncertainty of the End, is
the only Means to make us Watchful unto Duties of Holiness. It is very sad,
that any man should so far proclaim his inexperience and unacquaintedness with
the Nature of Gospel Grace, and Genius and Inclination of the New Creature, and
the proper workings of Faith, as to be able thus to argue, without a Check put
upon him by himself and from his own Experience. It is true, were there no
Difference between Faith and Presumption, no Difference between the Spirit of
Liberty under the Covenant of Grace, and that of Bondage under the Old
Covenant; no Spirit of Adoption given unto Believers, no Filial genuine Delight
in and Adherence unto God, ingenerated in them thereby, there might be
something in this Objection: But if the Nature of Faith, and of the New
Creature, the Operations of the one and Disposition of the other, are such as
they are declared to be in the Gospel, and as Believers have Experience of them
in their own Hearts; men do but bewray their Ignorance, whilst they contend,
that the Assurance of Gods unchangeable Love in Christ, flowing from the
Immutability of his Council in Election, does any way impeach, or does not
effectually promote the Industry of Believers in all Duties of Obedience.

Journey, knows himself to be in his right Way, and that passing on therein,
he shall certainly and infallibly come to his Journeys End, especially if he
will a little quicken his speed, as Occasion shall require; will you say, that
this is enough to make such a man Careless and Negligent, and that it would be
much more to his Advantage to be lost and bewildred in uncertain Paths and
Ways, not knowing whither he goes, nor whether he shall ever arrive at his
Journeys End? Common Experience declares the contrary, as also how momentary
and useless are those violent Fits and Gusts of Endeavors, which proceed from
Fear and Uncertainty, both in things Spiritual and Temporal, or Civil. Whilst
men are under the Power of Actual Impressions from such Fears, they will
convert to God, yea that they will Momento turbinis, and perfect Holiness in an
instant: But so soon as that Impression wears off, (as it will do on every
Occasion, and upon none at all) such Persons are as dead and cold toward God,
as the Lead or Iron, which ran but now in a fiery stream, is when the Heat is
departed from it. It is that Soul alone ordinarily, which has a comfortable
Assurance of Gods Eternal Immutable Electing Love, and thence of the blessed
End of its own Course of Obedience, who goes on constantly and evenly in a
Course of Holiness, quickening his Course, and doubling his speed as he has
Occasion from Trials or Opportunities. And this is the very Design of our
Apostle, to explain and confirm, Heb. 6. from the tenth Verse unto the end of
the Chapter, as is declared elsewhere.

It appears from what has been discoursed, that the Electing Love of God, is a
powerful constraining Motive unto Holiness, and that which proves invincibly,
the Necessity of it in all who intend the Eternal Enjoyment of God. But it will
be said, That if it be supposed or granted, that those who are Actually
Believers, and have a sense of their Interest herein, may make the use of it
that is pleaded; yet as for those who are unconverted, or are otherwise
uncertain of their spiritual State and Condition, nothing can be so
discouraging unto them as this Doctrine of Eternal Election. Can they make any
other Conclusion from it, but that, If they are not Elected, all Care and Pains
in and about Duties of Obedience are Vain; if they are, they are Needless. The
Removal of this Objection shall put a Close unto our Discourse on this Subject.
And I Answer:

revealed and proposed in the Scripture, principally to acquaint Believers with
their Privilege, Safety, and Fountain of their Comforts. Having therefore
proved its Usefulness unto them, I have discharged all that is absolutely
needful to my present Purpose. But I shall show moreover, that it has its
proper Benefit and Advantage toward others also.

For, (2) Suppose the Doctrine of Personal Election be Preached unto Men,
together with the other Sacred Truths of the Gospel: Two Conclusions, it is
possible, may by sundry Persons be made from it. ( First,) That whereas this is
a Matter of great and Eternal Moment unto our Souls, and there is no way to
secure our Interest in it, but by the Possession of its Fruits and Effects,
which are saving Faith and Holiness; we will, we must, it is our Duty, to use
our utmost Endeavors, by Attaining of them, and Growth in them, to make our
Election sure. And herein, if we be sincere and diligent, we shall not sail.
Others ( Secondly) may conclude, That if it be so indeed, that those who shall
be saved are chosen thereunto before the Foundation of the World, then it is to
no Purpose to go about to Believe or Obey, seeing all things must fall out at
last, according as they were Foreordained. Now I ask, which of these
Conclusions, is (I will not say, most suited unto the Mind and Will of God,
with that Subjection of Soul and Conscience which we owe to his Sovereign
Wisdom and Authority, but whether of them is) the most rational, and most
suitable to the Principles of sober Love of our selves, and Care of our
Immortal Condition? Nothing is more certain, than that the latter Resolution
will be infallibly Destructive (if pursued) of all the Everlasting Concernments
of our Souls; Death and Eternal Condemnation are the unavoidable Issues of it.
No man giving himself up to the Conduct of that Conclusion, shall ever come to
the Enjoyment of God. But in the other way, it is possible at least, that a man
may be found to be the Object of Gods Electing Love, and so be saved. But why
do I say, it is possible? there is nothing more infallibly certain, than that
he who pursues Sincerely and Diligently the Ways of Faith and Obedience, which
are, as we have often said, the Fruits of Election, shall obtain in the End
Everlasting Blessedness; and ordinarily, shall have in this World a Comfortable
Evidence of their own personal Election. This therefore on all Accounts, and
toward all sorts of Persons, in an invincible Argument of the Necessity of
Holiness, and a mighty Motive thereunto: For it is unavoidable, that if there
be such a thing as personal Election, and that the Fruits of it are
Sanctification, Faith and Obedience; it is utterly impossible, that without
Holiness any one should see God, the Reason of which Consequence is apparent
unto all.

CHAP. III. Holiness Necessary from the Commands of God.
Necessity of Holiness proved, from the Commands of God in the Law and the
Gospel.

Necessity of Holiness from the Nature and the Decrees of God: Our next
Argument shall be taken from his Word, or Commands, as the Nature and Order of
these things do require. And in this Case, it is needless to produce Instances
of Gods Commands, that we should be Holy, it is the concurrent Voice of the Law
of Gospel. Our Apostle sums up the whole Matter; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1, 2, 3. We
exhort you, that as you have received of us how you ought to walk, and please
God, so you would abound more and more; for you know that Commandment we gave
you, by the Lord Jesus; for this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification,
or Holiness; whereunto he adds one special Instance. This is that which the
Commandments of Christ require, yea this is the sum of the whole Commanding
Will of God. The substance of the Law is; Be ye Holy, for I the Lord your God
am Holy, Levit. 11. 44. the same with what it is referred unto by our Savior,
Matthew. 22. 37, 39. And whereas Holiness may be reduced unto two Heads: (1) The
Renovation of the Image of God in us; (2) Universal Actual Obedience; they are
the sum of the Perceptive Part of the Gospel, Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. Tit. 2.
11, 12. Hereof therefore there needs no further Confirmation by especial
Testimonies.

Force there is in this Argument, or whence we do conclude unto a Necessity of
Holiness from the Command of God. To this End, the Nature and proper Adjuncts
of these Commands are to be considered; that is, we are to get our Minds and
Consciences affected with them, so as to endeavor after Holiness on their
Account, or with respect unto them. For whatever we may do, which seems to
have the Matter of Holiness in it, if we do it not with respect unto Gods
Command, it has not the Nature of Holiness in it. For our Holiness is our
Conformity and Obedience to the Will of God; and it is a Respect unto a Command
which makes any thing to be Obedience, or gives it the formal Nature thereof.
Wherefore, as God rejects That from any place in his Fear, Worship, or Service,
which is resolved only into the Doctrines or Precepts of Men, Isa. 29. 13. so
for men to pretend unto I know not what Freedom, Light and Readiness unto all
Holiness, from a Principle within, without Respect unto the Commands of God
without, as given in his Word, is to make themselves this own God, and to
despise Obedience unto him who is over all, God blessed for ever: Then are we
the Servants of God, Then are we the Disciples of Christ, when we do what is
Commanded us, and because it is Commanded us. And what we are not influenced
unto by the Authority of God in his Commands, we are not principled for by the
Spirit of God administered in the Promises. Whatever Good any man does in any
Kind, if the Reason why he does it be not Gods Command, it belongs neither to
Holiness nor Obedience. Our Enquiry therefore is, after those things in the
Commands of God, which put such an indispensible Obligation upon us unto
Holiness, as that whatever we may be or we may have without it, will be of no
Use or Advantage unto us, as unto Eternal Blessedness, or the Enjoyment of him.

clear and safe, one thing must yet be premised unto these Considerations. And
this is, that Gods Commands for Holiness may be considered two ways: (1) As
they belong unto, and are Parts of the Covenant of Works; (2) As they belong
and are inseparably annexed unto the Covenant of Grace. In both respects they
are materially and formally the same; that is, the same Things are required in
them, and the same Person requires them, and so their Obligation is Joint and
Equal. Not only the Commands of the New Covenant do oblige us unto Holiness,
but those of the Old also, as to the Matter and Substance of them: But there is
a great Difference in the Manner and Ends of these Commands, as considered so
distinctly.

For, (1) The Commands of God as under the Old Covenant, do so require
universal Holiness of us, in all Acts, Duties and Degrees of them, that upon
the least Failure, in Substance, Circumstance, or Degree, they allow of nothing
else we do, but Determine us Trangressors of the whole Law. For with respect
unto them, whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is
Guilty of all, James 2. 10. Now I acknowledge, that although there arises from
hence an Obligation unto Holiness, to them who are under that Covenant, and
such a Necessity of it, as that without it they must certainly perish; yet no
Argument of the Nature with those which I insist upon, can hence be taken to
press us unto it. For no Arguments are forceable unto this Purpose, but such as
include Encouragements in them unto what they urge. But that, this
Consideration of the Command knows nothing of, seeing a Compliance with it is
in our Lapsed Condition absolutely impossible; and for the Things that are so,
we can have no Endeavors. And hence it is, that no man influenced only by the
Commands of the Law, or first Covenant absolutely considered, whatever in
particular he might be forced or compelled unto, did ever sincerely Aim or
Endeavor after universal Holiness.

Power of the Law, and compelled to habituate themselves unto a strict Course
of Duty, and being advantaged therein, by a sedate Natural Constitution, desire
of Applause, Self-Righteousness, or Superstition, may make a great Appearance
of Holiness. But if the Principle of what they do be only the Commands of the
Law, they never tread one true step in the Paths of it.

(2) The End why these Commands require all the Duties of Holiness of us, is
that they may be our Righteousness before God, or that we may be Justified
thereby. For Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the
Man which does those things shall live by them, Romans 10. 5. that is, it
requires of us all Duties of Obedience unto this End, that we may have
Justification and Eternal Life by them. But neither on this Account can any
such Argument be taken as those we enquire into. For the deeds of the Law no
man can be justified: If thou Lord should mark Iniquities, O Lord who shall
stand? Psalm. 130. 3. So prays David, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant,
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, Psalm. 143. 2. Romans 3. 20.
Gal. 2. 16. And if none can attain the End of the Command, as in this sense
they cannot, what Argument can we take from thence to prevail with them unto
Obedience? Whoever therefore presses men unto Holiness, merely on the Commands
of the Law, and for the Ends of it, does but put them upon tormenting
Disquietments, and deceive their Souls. However men are indispensibly obliged
hereby, and must Eternally perish for want of what the Law so requires, who do
not or will not by Faith comply with the only Remedy and Provision that God
has made in this Case. And for this Reason are we necessitated to deny a
Possibility of Salvation unto all to whom the Gospel is not preached, as well
as unto those by whom it is refused. For they are left unto this Law, whose
Precepts they cannot answer, and whose End they cannot attain.

Commands of God for Holiness under the New Covenant, or in the Gospel. For,

(1) Although God in them requires universal Holiness of us, yet he does not
do it in that strict and rigorous way as by the Law, so as that if we fail in
any thing either as to the Matter or Manner of its performance, in the
Substance of it, or as to the Degrees of its Perfection, that thereon both that
and all we do besides, should be rejected. But he does it with a
Contemperation of Grace and Mercy, so as that if there be an universal
sincerity, in a Respect unto all his Commands, he both pardons many sins, and
accepts of what we do, though it come short of Legal Perfection; both on the
Account of the Mediation of Christ. Yet this hinders not, but that the Law or
Command of the Gospel does still require universal Holiness of us, and a
Perfection therein, which we are to do our utmost Endeavor to comply withal,
though we have a Relief provided in sincerity on the one hand, and Mercy on the
other. For the Commands of the Gospel do still declare what God approves, and
what he does condemn, which is no less than all Holiness on the one hand, and
all Sin on the other, as exactly and extensively as under the Law. For this the
very Nature of God requires, and the Gospel is not the Ministry of Sin, so as
to give an Allowance or Indulgence unto the least, although in it Pardon be
provided for a multitude of sins by Jesus Christ. The Obligation on us unto
Holiness is Equal as unto what it was under the Law, though a Relief be
provided where unavoidably we come short of it. There is therefore nothing more
certain, than that there is no Relaxation given us as unto any Duty of
Holiness, by the Gospel, nor any Indulgence unto the least sin. But yet upon
the Supposition of the Acceptance of Sincerity, and a perfection of Parts,
instead of Degrees, with the Mercy provided for our Failings and Sins; there is
an Argument to be taken from the Command of it unto an indispensible Necessity
of Holiness, including in it the highest Encouragement to endeavor after it.
For, together with the Command, there is also Grace administered, enabling us
unto that Obedience which God will accept. Nothing therefore can avoid or
evacuate the Power of this Command and Argument from it, but a stubborn
Contempt of God, arising from the Love of Sin.

Commands of the Gospel do not require Holiness and the Duties of Righteousness
of us, to the same End as the Commands of the Law did, namely, that thereby we
might be Justified in the sight of God. For, whereas God now accepts from us an
Holiness short of that which the Law required, if he did it still for the same
End, it would reflect Dishonor upon his own Righteousness, and the Holiness of
the Gospel.

For (First,) if God can accept of a Righteousness unto Justification inferior
unto, or short of what he required by the Law, how great severity must it be
thought in him, to bind his Creatures unto such an exact Obedience and
Righteousness at first, as he could and might have dispensed withal? If he
does accept of sincere Obedience now unto our Justification, why did he not do
so before, but obliged Mankind unto absolute Perfection according to the Law,
for coming short wherein they all perished. Or shall we say, that God has
changed his Mind in this matter, and that he does not stand so much now on
rigid and Perfect Obedience for our Justification, as he did formerly? Where
then is the Glory of his Immutability, of his Essential Holiness, of the
absolute Rectitude of his Nature and Will?

Honor and Holiness of the Gospel on this Supposition? Must it not be looked
on as a Doctrine less Holy than that of the Law? For whereas the Law required
absolute perfect sinless Holiness unto our Justification, the Gospel admits of
that to the same End, on this Supposition, which is every way imperfect, and
consistent with a multitude of Sins and Failings? What can be spoken more to
the Derogation of it? Nay, would not this indeed make Christ the Minister of
Sin, which our Apostle rejects with so much Detestation? Gal. 2. 17. For to
say, that he has merited that our imperfect Obedience, attended with many and
great sins ( for there is no man that lives and sins not) should be
accepted unto our Justification, instead of perfect and sinless Obedience
required under the Law, is plainly to make him the Minister of Sin, or one that
has acquired some Liberty for sin, beyond whatever the Law allowed. And thus
upon the whole matter, both Christ and the Gospel, in whom and whereby, God
unquestionably designed to declare the Holiness and Righteousness of his own
Nature, much more Gloriously than ever he had done any other way, should be the
great means to darken and obscure them. For in and by them on this Supposition,
God must be be thought (and is declared) to accept of a Righteousness unto our
Justification, unspeakably inferior unto what he required before.

End of Gospel Commands requiring the Obedience of Holiness in us, is not, that
thereby or thereon we should be Justified. God has therein provided another
Righteousness for that End, which fully, perfectly, absolutely answers all that
the Law requires; and on some Considerations is far more Glorious than what the
Law either did or could require. And hereby has he exalted more than ever the
Honor of his own Holiness and Righteousness, whereof the External Instrument
is the Gospel, which is also therefore most Holy: Now this is no other but the
Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us; for he is the End of the Law for
Righteousness unto them that do believe, Romans 10. 4. But God has now appointed
other Ends unto our Holiness, and so unto his Command of it, under the Gospel,
all of them consistent with the Nature of that Obedience which he will accept
of us, and such as we may attain through the Power of Grace, and so all of them
offering new Encouragements as well as Enforcements unto our Endeavors after
it. But because these Ends will be the Subject of most of our ensuing
Arguments, I shall not here insist upon them. I shall only add two things in
General. (1) That God has no design for his own Glory, in us or by us, in this
World or unto Eternity, that there is no especial Communion that we can have
with him by Jesus Christ, nor any Capacity for us to enjoy him, but Holiness is
Necessary unto it, as a Means unto its End. (2) These present Ends of it under
the Gospel are such, as that God does no less indispensibly require it of us
now, than he did when our Justification was proposed as the End of it. They are
such in brief, as God upon the Account of them judges meet to command us to be
Holy in all Manner of Holiness, which what Obligation and Necessity it puts
upon us so to be, we are now to enquire.

First,) The first thing considerable in the Command of God to this purpose, is
the Authority wherewith it is accompanied. It is indispensibly necessary that
we should be Holy, on the Account of the Authority of Gods Command. Authority
wherever it is just, and exerted in a due and equal Manner, carries along with
it an Obligation unto Obedience. Take this away, and you fill the whole World
with Disorder. If the Authority of Parents, Masters and Magistrates, did not
oblige Children, Servants and Subjects, unto Obedience, the World could not
abide one moment out of Hellish Confusion. God himself makes use of this
Argument in general, to convince men of the Necessity of Obedience. A Son
honors his Eather, and a Servant his Master; if I then be a Father where is
mine Honor, and if I be a Master where is my Fear, says the Lord of Hosts
unto you Priests who despise my Name? Mal. 1. 6. If in all particular
Relations, where there is any thing of Superiority, which has the least parcel
of Authority accompanying of it, Obedience is expected, and exacted; is it not
due to me who have all Authority, of all Sovereign Relations in me toward you?
And there are two things that enforce the Obligation from the Command on this
Consideration, Jus imperandi, and Vis exequendi, both comprised in that of the
Apostle James, chapter 4. v. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy.

1. He who commands us to be Holy, is our Sovereign Lawgiver; He that has
absolute Power to prescribe unto us what Laws he pleases. When Commands come
from them who have Authority, and yet are themselves also under Authority,
there may be some secret Abatement of the Power of the Command. Men may think
either to appeal from them, or one way or other subduct themselves from under
their Power. But when the Power immediately commanding is Sovereign and
absolute, there is no room for Tergiversation. The Command of God proceeds from
the absolute Power of a Sovereign Legislator. And where it is not complied
withal, the whole Authority of God, and therein God himself is despised. So
God in many places calls sinning against his Commands, the despising of him,
Numb. 11. 20. 1 Samuel 2. 30. the despising of his Name, Mal. 1. 6. the despising
of his Commandment, and that in his Saints themselves, 2 Samuel 12. 10.

Command of God to be holy, not to Endeavor always and in all things so to
be, is to despise God, to reject his Sovereign Authority over us, and to live
in Defiance of him. This state I suppose there are few who would be willing to
be found in: To be constant Despisers of God, and Rebels against his Authority,
is a Charge that men are not ready to own, and do suppose that those who are so
indeed, are in a very ill Condition. But this and no better is the state of
every one who is not holy, who does not follow after Holiness. Yet so it is,
propose unto men the true Nature of Evangelical Holiness, press them to the
Duties wherein the Exercise of it does consist, convince them with Evidence as
clear as the Light at Noonday, that such and such Sins, such and such Courses
wherein they live and walk, are absolutely inconsistent with it, and
irreconcilable unto it, yet for the most part it is but little they will heed
you, and less they will do to answer your Exhortations. Tell the same Persons,
that they are Rebels against God, Despisers of him, that they have utterly
broken the Yoke, and cast off his Authority, and they will defy you, and
perhaps revile you. But yet these things are inseparable; God having given his
Command unto men to be Holy, declared his Sovereign Will and Pleasure therein,
if we are not so accordingly, we are not one Jott better than the Persons
described. Here then in the first place we found the Necessity of Holiness, on
the Command of God. The Authority wherewith it is accompanied, makes it
Necessary: Yea, from hence if we endeavor not to thrive in it, if we watch not
diligently against every thing that is contrary unto it, we are therein and so
far Despisers of God, and his Name, as in the places before cited.

Consciences of men, that the Obligation unto Holiness is indispensible. And it
would do well, if we always carried this formal Consideration of the
Commandment in our Minds; nothing would be more prevalent with us unto
Watchfulness in Holiness, as nothing does more effectually render what we do,
to be Obedience properly so called. Forgetfulness hereof, or not heeding it as
we ought, is the great Reason of our loose and careless Walking, of our Defect
in making a Progress in Grace and Holiness. No man is safe a Moment, whose Mind
by any means is dispossessed of a Sense of the Sovereign Authority of God in
his Commands; nor can any thing secure such a Soul from being pierced and
entered into by various Temptations. This therefore are we to carry about with
us wherever we go, and whatever we do, to keep our Souls and Consciences
under the power of it, in all Opportunities of Duties, and on all Occasions of
Sin. Had men always, in their Ways, Trades, Shops, Affairs, Families,
Studyes, Closets, this written on their Hearts, they would have Holiness to the
Lord on their Breasts and Foreheads also.

Commands is a Sovereign Lawgiver, so he is able to kill and keep alive. That
is, his Commanding Authority is accompanied with such a Power, as that whereby
he is able absolutely and Eternally to Reward the Obedient, and to return unto
the Disobedient a meet Recompense of Punishment. For, although I would not
exclude other Considerations, yet I think this of Eternal Rewards and
Punishments to be principally here intended.

But (1) supposing it to have Respect unto things Temporal also, it carries
along with it the greater Enforcement. God commands us to be holy: Things are
in that State and Condition in the World, as that if we endeavor to answer his
Will in a due Manner, designing to perfect Holiness in the f^ar of the Lord, we
shall meet with much Opposition, many Difficulties, and at length perhaps it
may cost us our Lives; multitudes have made Profession of it at no cheaper
Rate. But let us not mistake in this matter; He who commands us to be Holy is
the only Sovereign Lord of Life and Death, that has alone the Disposal of them
both, and consequently of all things that are subservient and conducing unto
the one or other. It is he alone who can kill in a way of Punishment, and he
alone can keep alive in a way of Merciful Preservation. This Power of our
Lawgiver, the holy Companions of Daniel committed themselves unto, and
preserved themselves by the Consideration of, when with the Terror of Death
they were commanded to forsake the Way of Holiness, Dan. 3. 17, 18. And with
respect unto it, our Lord Jesus Christ tells us, that he who would save his
Life, namely, by a sinful Neglect of the Command, shall lose it. This
therefore is also to be considered; the Power of him who commands us to be Holy
is such, as that he is able to carry us through all Difficulties and Dangers
which we may incur upon the Account of our being so. Now whereas the Fear of
Man is one principal Cause or Means of our failing in Holiness and Obedience,
either by sudden Surprizals, or violent Temptations, and the next hereunto, is
the Consideration of other things esteemed Good or Evil in this World; the
Faith and Sense hereof will bear us up above them, deliver us from them, and
carry us through them.

trust in the Lord; you may, you ought, without Fear or Dauntedness of spirit,
to engage into the Pursuit of universal Holiness: He who has commanded it, who
has required if of you, will bear you out in it; nothing that is truly evil
or finally disadvantageous shall befall you on that Account. For (let the World
rage whilst it pleases, and threaten to fill all things with Blood and
Confusion) to God the Lord belong the Issues from Death, he alone can kill and
make alive. There is therefore no small Enforcement unto Holiness, from the
Consideration of the Command, with respect unto the Power of the Commander,
relating unto things in this World.

But (2) I suppose it is a Power of Eternal Rewards and Punishments, that is
principally here intended. The Killing here, is that mentioned by our Savior,
and opposed to all Temporal Evil, and Death it self, Matthew. 10. 28. Fear not
them who can kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear
him who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. And this keeping alive,
is a Deliverance from the Wrath to come in Everlasting Life. And this is that
which gives an unavoidable Efficacy to the Command. Every Command of a
Superior does tacitly include a Reward and Punishment to be intended. For a
Declaration is made of what is pleasing and what is displeasing unto him that
gives the Command; and therein is there a virtual Promise and Threatening. But
unto all Solemn Laws Rewards and Punishments are expressly annexed.

influence the Minds of Men who are inclined unto their Transgression. (1) The
first is, that the Rewards and Punishments declared, are such as men think they
do justly prefer their own satisfaction in the Transgression of the Laws,
before them. It is so will all Good men, with respect unto Laws made contrary
to the Laws of God; and Wise men also may do so with respect unto useless
Laws, with trifling Penalties; and Evil men will do so with respect unto the
highest Temporal Punishments, when they are greedily set on the satisfaction of
their Lusts. Hence I say it is in the first place, that the Minds of men are so
little influenced with those Rewards and Punishments that are annexed unto
Humane Laws. And (2dly,) a secret Apprehension that the Commanders or Makers
of the Laws, neither will nor are able to execute those Penalties in the case
of their Transgression, evacuates all the Force of them. Much they ascribe to
their Negligence, that they will not take Care to see the Sanction of their
Laws executed; more to their Ignorance, that they shall not be able to find
out their Transgressions; and somewhat in sundry Cases to their Power, that
they cannot Punish nor Reward, though they would. And for these Reasons are the
Minds of men little influenced by Humane Laws beyond their own honest
Inclinations and Interest. But things are quite otherwise with respect unto the
Law and Commands of God that we should be Holy. The Rewards and Punishments,
called by the Apostle Killing and Keeping alive, being Eternal, in the highest
Capacities of Blessedness or Misery, cannot be Balanced by any Consideration
of this present World, without the highest Folly and Villainy unto our selves.
Nor can there be any Reserve on the Account of Mutability, Indifferency,
Ignorance, Impotency, or any other Pretense, that they shall not be Executed.
Wherefore, the Commands of God which we are in the Consideration of, are
accompanied with Promises and Threatenings, of Eternal Blessedness on the one
hand, or of Misery on the other. And these will certainly befall us, according
as we shall be found Holy or Unholy. All the Properties of the Nature of God
are immutably engaged in this matter; and hence ensues an indispensible
Necessity of our being Holy. God commands that we should be so, but what if we
are not so? Why as sure as God is Holy and Powerful we shall Eternally perish,
for with the Threatening of that Condition, is his Command accompanied in Case
of Disobedience. What if we do comply with the Command, and become holy? Upon
the same ground of Assurance, we shall be brought unto Everlasting Felicity.
And this is greatly to be considered in the Authority of the Commandment. Some
perhaps will say, that to yield holy Obedience unto God with respect unto
Rewards and Punishments, is servile, and becomes not the free spirit of the
Children of God. But these are vain Imaginations: The Bondage of our own
spirits may make every thing we do servile. But a due Respect unto Gods
Promises and Threatenings, is a principal part of our Liberty. And thus does the
Necessity of Holiness, which we are engaged in the Demonstration of, depend on
the Command of God, because of that Authority from whence it does proceed, and
wherewith it is accompanied. It is therefore certainly our Duty, if we would be
found walking in a Course of Obedience, and the Practice of Holiness, to keep a
sense hereof constantly fixed on our Minds. This is that which in the first
place God intends in that great Injunction of Obedience, Genesis 17. 1. I am God
Almighty, walk before me, and be thou perfect. The way to walk uprightly, to be
sincere or perfect in Obedience, is always to consider, that he who requires
it of us is God Almighty, accompanied with all the Authority and Power before
mentioned, and under whose Eye we are continually. And in particular we may
apply this unto Persons and Occasions.

Persons; let them in an especial manner have a continual Regard hereunto, who
on any Account are Great or High, or Noble in the World, and that because their
especial Temptation is to be lifted up unto a Forgetfulness or Regardlesness of
this Authority of God. The Prophet distributes incorrigible Sinners into two
sorts, and gives the different Grounds of their Impenitency respectively. The
first are the Poor; And it is their Folly, Stupidity and sensual Lusts, that
keep them off from attending to the Command. Jerem. 5. 3, 4. They have refused
to receive Correction, they have made their Faces barder than a Rock, they have
refused to return; therefore I said, Surely these are Poor, they are sottish,
for they know not the Way of the Lord, nor the Judgment of their God. There
are a sort of poor incorrigible Sinners, whose Impenitency arises much out of
their Ignorance, Blindness and Folly, which they please themselves in, although
they differ but little from the Beasts that perish. And such do we abound
withal, who will take no Pains for, who will admit of no Means of Instruction.
But there is another sort of Sinners to whom the Prophet makes his Application,
and discovers the Ground of their incorrigible Impenitency also; I will get me
to the Great men, and will speak unto them, for they have known the Way of the
Lord, and the Judgment of their God; v. 5. Great men, by Reason of their
Education and other Advantages, do attain unto a Knowledge of the Will of God,
or at least may be thought so to have done, and would be esteemed to excel
therein. They therefore are not likely to be Obstinate in sin, merely from
stupid Ignorance and Folly. No, says the Prophet, they take another Course.
They have altogether broken the Yoke, and burst the Bonds. They are like a
Company of rude Beasts of the Field, who having broken their Yokes and Cords,
do run up and down the Fields, treading down the Corn, breaking up the Fences,
pushing with the Horn, and trampling on all before them. This is the Course of
men in the Pursuit of their Lusts, when they have broken the Yoke of the Lord.
And this the Prophet declares to be the especial Evil of Great Men, the Rich,
the Mighty, the Honorable in the World. Now this Breaking of the Yoke, is the
Neglecting and Despising of the Authority of God in the Command. Seeing
therefore that this is the especial Temptation of that sort of Persons, and
Things innumerable there are of all sorts, that concur to render that
Temptation prevalent upon them, let all those who are of that Condition, and
have the least sincere Desire after Holiness, watch diligently, as they love
and value their Souls, to keep always and in all things, a due Sense of the
Authority of God in his Commands upon their Minds and Consciences. When you are
in the height of your Greatness, in the fullness of your Enjoyments, in the most
urgent of your Avocations by the Things or Societies of the World, and those
who belong unto it, when the variety of public Appearances and Attendencies
are about you, where you are uppermost in the Words of others, and it may be in
your own Thoughts, remember Him who is over all, and consider that you are
subject and obnoxious unto his Authority, equally with the poorest Creature on
the Earth. Remember, that it is your especial Temptation to do otherwise. And
if you do yet abhor those who by this Means are come to be Sons of Belial, or
such as have altogether broken the Yoke, and run up and down the World in the
pursuit of their Lusts, saying, Our Lips are our own, and who is Lord over us,
be you Watchful against the least Beginnings or Entrances of it in your selves.

general; let us all endeavor to carry a constant Regard unto the Authority of
God in his Commands, into all those Seasons, Places, Societies, Occasions,
wherein we are apt to be surprised in any Sin, or a Neglect of Duty. And I may
reduce this Instruction, or Point it unto three Heads or Occasions; namely,
Secrecy, Businesses, and Societies. (1) Carry this along with you into your
secret Retirements and Enjoyments. Neglect hereof is the next Cause of those
secret Actual provoking Sins which the World swarms with. When no Eye sees but
the Eye of God, men think themselves secure. Hereby have many been surprised
into Folly, which has proved the Beginning of a total Apostasy. An Awe from
the Authority of God in the Command upon the Heart, will equally secure us in
all Places, and on all Occasions. (2) Let us carry it into our Businesses, and
the Exercise of our Trades or Callings. Most men in these things, are very apt
to be intent on present Occasions, and having a certain End before them, do
habituate themselves unto the ways of its Attainment. And whilst they are so
engaged, many things occur which are apt to divert them from the Rule of
Holiness. Whenever therefore you enter into your Occasions, wherein you may
suppose that Temptations will arise, call to mind the Greatness, Power and
Authority over you, of him who has commanded you in all things to be holy.
Upon every Entrance of a Surprizal, make your Retreat unto such Thoughts which
will prove your Relief. (3) Carry it with you into your Companyes and
Societies. For many have frequent Occasions of engaging in such Societies, as
wherein the least Forgetfulness of the Sovereign Authority of God, will betray
them unto Profuseness in Vanity, and corrupt Communication, until they do
with Delight, and hear with Pleasure such things as wherewith the Holy Spirit
of God is grieved, their own Consciences are defiled, and the Honor of
Profession is cast to the ground.

Secondly,) The Command of God that we should be Holy, is not to be considered
only as an Effect of Power and Authority which we must submit unto, but as a
Fruit of infinite Wisdom and Goodness also, which it is our highest Advantage
and Interest to comply withal. And this introduces a peculiar Necessity of
Holiness, from the Consideration of what is Equal, Reasonable, Ingenuous; the
contrary whereunto is Foolish, Perverse, Ungrateful, every way unbecoming
Rational Creatures. Where nothing can be discerned in Commands, but mere
Authority, Will and Pleasure; they are looked on as merely respecting the Good
of them that command, and not at all theirs who are to obey, which disheartens
and weakens the Principle of Obedience. Now though God, because his Dominion
over us is Sovereign and absolute, might have justly left unto us no other
Reason or Motive of our Obedience, and it may be did so deal with the Church of
Old, as to some particular Temporary Ceremonial Institutions; yet he does not,
nor ever did so as to the Main of their Obedience. But as he proposes his Law
as an Effect of infinite Wisdom, Love and Goodness, so he declares and pleads,
that all his Commands are just and equal in themselves, good and useful unto
us, and that our Compliance with them is our present, as well as it will be our
future Happiness. And that this is so, that the Command of God requiring that
we should be Holy, as a Fruit of Wisdom and Goodness, is Equal and Advantageous
unto our selves, appears from all Consideration of it.

formally, as a Law prescribed unto us, and it is so because the Obedience in
Holiness which it requires, is proportioned unto the Strength and Power which
we have to Obey, which declares it Equal unto us, and an Effect of infinite
Wisdom and Goodness in God. The Command, as we showed before, may be considered
either as it belonged unto the Old Covenant, or as it is annexed unto, and so
is a part of the New. In the first way, as it belonged unto the Old Covenant,
the Strength of Grace which we had Originally from God under the Law of
Creation, was sufficient to enable us unto all that Holy Obedience which was
required therein; and our not doing so, was from wilful Rebellion, and not
from any Impotency or Weakness in us. We fell not from our first Estate for
want of Power to Obey, but by the neglect of the Exercise of that Power which
we had, God made us Upright, but we sought out many Inventions. And in the
latter way, as it belongs to the Covenant of Grace, there is by virtue of that
Covenant a Supply of spiritual strength given in by the Promise, unto all them
who are taken into it, enabling them to Answer the Commands for Holiness,
according to the Rule of the Acceptance of their Obedience, before laid down.
No man who is instated in the Covenant of Grace, comes short or fails of the
Performance of that Obedience which is required and accepted in that Covenant,
merely for want of Power and spiritual strength. For God therein according to
his Divine Power gives unto us all things that pertain unto Life and Godliness,
through the Knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and Virtue, 1 Pet. 1.
3.

Grace or Strength, is administered unto them by certain Ways and Means, which
if they attend not unto, they will come short of it. But this I say, in the
careful, diligent, sedulous use of those means appointed, none who belong to
the Covenant of Grace, shall ever fail of that Power and Ability which shall
render the Commands of the Gospel easy and not grievous unto them, and whereby
they may so fulfill them, as infallibly to be accepted. This the Scripture is
plain in, where Christ himself tells us, that his Yoke is easy, and his Burden
light, Matthew. 11. 30. and his holy Apostle, that his Commands are not grievous,
1 John 5. 3. For, if they should exceed all the Strength which we either have,
or he is pleased to give unto us, they would be like the Jewish Ceremonies, a
Yoke which we could not bear, and a Law not only grievous but unprofitable. But
on the contrary, our Apostle expressly affirms, and so may we, that he could
do all things, that is, in the Way and Manner, and unto the End for which they
are required in the Gospel, through Christ that strengthened him. Some would
confound these things, and cast all into Disorder. They would have men that are
under the Old Covenant, to have a Power and spiritual Strength to fulfill the
Commands of the New, which God has never spoken of nor declared, and which
indeed is contrary to the whole Design of his Grace. They would have men, who
having broken the Old Covenant, and forfeited all their Strength and Ability
which they had by it for Obedience, and are not initiated in the New Covenant,
yet to have a Power of their own to fulfill the Command of the one or the
other, which God neither gives nor is obliged to give, nor is it necessary to
prove that the Command is Equal and Holy. For, as was observed, God gives us
no Command of Holiness and Obedience, but in, with, and by virtue of some
Covenant. And there is no more required to prove them to be just and equal, but
that they are easy unto them who walk with God in that Covenant whereunto they
do belong, and that, that Performance of them shall be accepted which they have
Power for. If any will sinfully cast away there Covenant Interest and
Privilege, as we did all that of our Original Creation, we must thank our
selves if we have not Power to answer its Commands. Nor does it belong unto the
Equity of the Command of the New Covenant, that those who are not yet made
partakers of it by Grace, should have Power to fulfill them. Nay, if they had
so, and should do so accordingly, (were any such thing possible) it would not
avail them. For, being supposed not as yet to belong unto the New Covenant,
they must belong unto the Old. And the Performance of the Commands of the New
Covenant in the Way and Manner which are required therein, would not avail them
who are really under the Rule and Law of the Old, which admits of nothing short
of absolute perfection. But what the Law speaks, it speaks unto them that are
under the Law; and what the Gospel speaks, it speaks unto them who who are not
under the Law, but under Grace. And the formal Transition of men from one of
these States unto another, is by an Act of Gods Grace, wherein themselves are
merely passive, as has elsewhere been demonstrated. See Col. 1. 13.

Covenant with Mankind, the First Covenant, the Covenant of Works. Herein he
gave them Commands for Holy Obedience. These Commands were not only possible
unto them both for Matter and Manner, by virtue of that Strength and Power
which was concreated with them, but easy and pleasant, every way suited unto
their Good and Satisfaction in that state and Condition. This rendered their
Obedience equal, just, reasonable, and aggravated their Sin with the Guilt of
the most horrible Folly and Ingratitude. When by the Fall this Covenant was
broken, we lost therewith all Power and Ability to comply with its Commands in
holy Obedience. Hereupon, the Law continued holy, and the Commandment, holy,
just and good, as our Apostle speaks, Romans 7. 12. For what should make it
otherwise, seeing there was no Change in it by Sin, nor did God require more or
harder things of us than before? But to us it became impossible, for we had
lost the strength by which alone we were enabled to Observe it. And so the
Commandment which was Ordained to Life, we find to be unto Death, Romans 7. 10.
Toward all therefore that remain in that State, we say, the Commandment is
still just and holy, but it is neither easy nor possible. Hereon God brings in
the Covenant of Grace by Christ, and renews therein the Commands for holy
Obedience, as was before declared. And here it is, that men trouble themselves
and others about the Power, Ability, and Free Will that men have as yet under
the first Covenant, and the Impotency that ensued on the Transgression of it to
fulfill the Condition of the New Covenant, and yield the Obedience required in
it. For this is the place where men make their great Contests about the Power
of Free Will, and the Possibility of Gods Command. Let them but grant, that it
is the mere Work of Gods Sovereign and Almighty Grace effectually to enstate
men in the New Covenant, and we shall contend with them or against them, that
by virtue thereof, they have that spiritual Strength and Grace administered unto
them, as render all the Commands of it to be not only possible but easy also,
yea pleasant, and every way suited unto the Principle of an Holy Life wherewith
they are endued. And this we make an Argument for the Necessity of Holiness.
The Argument we have under Consideration, is that whereby we prove the
Necessity of Holiness with respect unto Gods Command requiring it, because it
is a Fruit of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness. It is so in an especial Manner as
it belongs unto the New Covenant. And therefore by our Disobedience or living
in Sin, unto the Contempt of Gods Authority, we add that of his Wisdom and
Goodness also. Now that it is so a Fruit of them, appears in the first place
from hence, that it is proportioned unto the Strength and Ability which we have
to Obey. Hence Obedience in Holiness becomes equal, easy, and pleasant unto
all Believers who sincerely attend unto it. And this fully evinceth the
Necessity of it, from the Folly and Ingratitude of the contrary. That these
things, and in them the Force of the present Argument may the better be
apprehended, I shall dispose them into the ensuing Observations.

Power and Ability in himself, or from himself. God has not in the New
Covenant brought down his Command to the Power of Man, but by his Grace he
raises the Power of Man unto his Command: The former were only a Compliance
with the Sin of our Nature, which God abhorres; the latter is the Exaltation of
his own Grace, which he aymeth at. It is not men's Strength in and of
themselves, the Power of Nature, but the Grace which is administered in the
Covenant, that we intend. For men to trust unto themselves herein, as though
they could do any thing of themselves; is a Renunciation of all the Aids of
Grace, without which we can do nothing. We can have no power from Christ,
unless we live in a Persuasion that we have none of our own. Our whole
spiritual Life is a Life of Faith; and that is, a Life of Dependence on Christ
for what we have not of our selves. This is that which ruins the Attempt of
many for Holiness, and renders what they do, (though it be like unto the Acts
and Duties of it) not at all to belong unto it. For, what we do in our own
strength, is no part of Holiness; as is evident from the preceding Description
of it. Neither does the Scripture abound in any thing more, than in Testifying
that the Power and Ability we have to fulfill the Commands of God as given in
the New Covenant, is not our own, nor from our selves, but merely from the
Grace of God administered in that Covenant; as John. 15. 5. Phil. 2. 13. 2 Cor.
3. 5. It will be said then, where lies the Difference? Because it is the mere
Work of Grace to instate us in the Covenant, you conclude that we have no power
of our own to that Purpose. And if when we are in Covenant, all our strength
and power is still from Grace, we are, as to any Ability of our own to fulfill
the Command of God, as remote from it as ever. I Answer: The first Work of
Grace is merely upon us. Hereby the Image of God is renewed, our Hearts are
changed, and a Principle of spiritual Life is bestowed on us. But this latter
Work of Grace is in us, and by us. And the Strength or Ability which we have
thereby, is as truly our own as Adams was his, which he had in the State of
Innocence. For he had his immediately from God, and so have we ours, though in
a different way.

Provision of spiritual Strength for any Man, enabling him to comply with the
Command of God for Holiness, as to Countenance him in the least carnal
Security, or the least Neglect of the diligent Use of all those Means which God
has appointed for the Communication thereof unto us, with the Preservation and
Increase of it. God who has determined Graciously to give us supplies thereof,
has also declared, that we are obliged unto our utmost diligence for the
Participation of them, and unto their due Exercise when received. This
innumerable Commands and Injunctions give Testimony unto; but especially is the
whole Method of Gods Grace and our Duty herein, declared by the Apostle Peter,
2 Epist. Chap. 1. v. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. which Discourse I have Opened
and Improved elsewhere. The sum is, that God creating in us a new spiritual
Nature, and therewithal giving unto us all things appertaining unto Life and
Godliness, or a Gracious Ability for the Duties of an Holy, Godly, spiritual
Life, we are obliged to use all Means in the continual Exercise of all Grace,
which will ascertain unto us our Eternal Election, with our Effectual Vocation,
whereon we shall obtain an assured Joyful Entrance into the Kingdom of Glory.

Grace and spiritual Strength is not equally Effectual at all Times. There are
Seasons wherein to Correct our Negligences in giving place to our Corruptions
and Temptations, or on other Grounds to discover unto us our own Frailty and
Impotency, with other Holy Ends of his own, that God is pleased to withhold the
powerful Influences of his Grace, and to leave us unto our selves. In such
Instances we shall assuredly come short of answering the Command for universal
Holiness, one way or other. See Psalm. 30. 6, 7. But I speak of ordinary Cases,
and to prevent that slothfulness and Tergiversation unto this Duty of complying
with all the Commands of God for Holiness, which we are so obnoxious unto.

Covenant of Grace spiritual Strength administered, so as that by Virtue thereof
we should yield sinless and absolutely Perfect Obedience unto God, or to render
any one Duty so absolutely Perfect. If any such there are, or ever were, who
maintain such an Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto us, as should
render our own personal Obedience unnecessary, they do overthrow the Truth and
Holiness of the Gospel. And to say, that we have such supplies of Internal
Strength, as to render the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto our
Justification, Unnecessay, is to overthrow the Grace of the Gospel, and the New
Covenant it self. But this alone we say; There is Grace administered by the
Promises of the Gospel, enabling us to Perform the Obedience of it, in that Way
and Manner as God will accept. And herein there are various Degrees, whereof we
ought constantly to aim at the most Complete, and so to be perfecting Holiness
in the Fear of the Lord. And where we signally come short of the best Rules and
Examples, it is principally from our Neglect of those Supplies of Grace which
are tendered in the Promises.

Gracious Power Necessary to render the Command for Holiness and Obedience
thereunto easy and pleasant.

1. That which is Habitually Resident in the Hearts and Souls of Believers,
whereby they are constantly inclined and disposed unto all Fruits of Holiness.
This the Scripture calls our Life, a New Principle of Life, without which we
are dead in Trespasses and Sins; Where this is not, whatever Arguments you
constrain and press men withal to be Holy, you do as it were but offer
violence unto them, endeavoring to force them against the sixed Bent and
Inclination of their Minds. By them all you do but set up a Damme against a
Stream of Waters, which will not be Permanent, nor turn the Course of the
stream contrary to its natural Inclination. Unto such the Cemmand for Holiness
must needs be grievous and difficult. But such a Disposition and Inclination,
or a Principle so inclining, and disposing of us unto Duties of Holiness, we
have not in nor of our selves by Nature; nor is it to be raised out of its
Ruins. For the carnal Mind (which is in us all) is Enmity against God, which
carries in it an Aversation unto every thing that is required of us in a way
of Obedience, as has been proved at large. And yet without this Habitual
Principle, we can never in a due Manner comply with any one Command of God that
we should be Holy. Want hereof is that which renders Obedience so grievous and
Burdensome unto many. They endure it for a Season, and at length either
violently or insensibly cast off its Yoke. Light and Conviction have compelled
them to take it on themselves, and to attend unto the performance of those
Duties which they dare not omit. But having no Principle enabling or enclining
them unto it, all they do, though they do much, and continue long therein, is
against the grain with them, they find it difficult, uneasy and wearisome.
Wherein they can be any Pretenses countenance themselves in a Neglect of any
part of it, or Bribe their Consciences into a Compliance with what is contrary
unto it, they fail not to deliver themselves from their Burden. And for the
most part, either insensibly by multiplied Instances of the Neglect of Duties
of Obedience, or by some great Temptations before they leave the World, they
utterly leave all the Ways of Holiness, and Respect unto the Commands, of God;
or if they continue any, it is unto External Acts of Morality which pass with
Approbation in the World, the inward and spiritual part of Obedience they
utterly Renounce. The Reason hereof, I say is, because having no Principle
within, enabling them unto a Compliance with the Commands of God, with Delight
and Satisfaction, they grow grievous and intolerable unto them. So unto many on
the same Ground, the Worship of God is very burdensome, unless it be borne for
them, by External Additions and Ornaments.

Actual Assistance of Effectual Grace required hereunto. We are not put into
that Condition by the Covenant, as that we should be able to do any thing of
our selves, without Actual Divine Assistance. This were to set us free from our
Dependence on God, and to make us Gods unto our selves. The Root still bears
us, and the Springs of our spiritual Life are in another. And where both these
are, there the Command is Equal not only in it self but unto us, and Obedience
unto it as easy as just.

Grace are Administered in the New Covenant, suited unto the holy Obedience it
requires.

1. For the first; it is that which God so frequently, so expressly promises,
where he says, that he will take away the Heart of Stone, and give us an Heart
of Flesh, that he will write his Laws in our Hearts, and put his Fear in our
inward parts; that we shall fear him, and never depart from him; that he will
circumcise our Hearts to know and love him: Which Promises, and the Nature of
the Grace contained in them, I have before at large explained. It is sufficient
unto our present Purpose, that in and by these Promises, we are made partakers
of the Divine Nature, and are therein endowed with a constant Habitual
Disposition and Inclination unto all Acts and Duties of Holiness; For our Power
follows our Love and Inclinations, as Impotency is a Consequent of their
Deceit.

principal Assertion. Upon the Supply of this Grace, which gives both Strength
for, and a constant Inclination unto Holy Obedience, the Command for it becomes
equal and just, meet and easy to be complied withal. For none can refuse a
Compliance with it in any Instance, but their so doing is contrary unto that
Disposition and Inclination of the New Nature which God has implanted in
themselves. So that in them to Sin, is not only contrary to the Law without
them, to the Light of their Minds, and Warning of their Consciences, but it is
so also unto that which is their own Inclination and Disposition, which has
sensibly in such Cases a Force and Violence put upon it, by the Power of
Corruptions and Temptations. Wherefore, although the Command for Holiness may
and does seem grievous and burdensome unto Unregenerate Persons, as we have
observed, because it is against the habitual bent and Inclination of their
whole Souls; yet neither is it, nor can it be so unto them who cannot neglect
it, or act any thing against it, but that therein also they must Crucify and
offer Violence unto the Inclinations of the New Creature in them, which are
their own. For in all things, the Spirit lusts against the Flesh, Gal. 5. 17.
and the Disposition of the New Creature is Habitually against Sin, and for
Holiness. And this gives a mighty constraining Power unto the Command, when it
is Evident in our own Minds and Consciences, that it requires nothing of us but
what we do or may find an Inclination or Disposition in our own Hearts unto.
And by this Consideration we may take in the Power of it upon our Souls, which
is too frequently disregarded. Let us but upon the proposal of it unto us,
consider what our Minds and Hearts say to it, what Answer they return, and we
shall quickly discern how equal and just the Command is. For I cannot persuade
my self, that any Believer can be so captivated at any time under the Power of
Temptations, Corruptions, or Prejudices, but that (if he will but take Council
with his own Soul, upon the Consideration of the Command for Obedience and
Holiness, and ask himself what he would have,) he will have a plain and sincere
Answer, That indeed I would do and have the Good proposed, this Holiness, this
Duty of Obedience. Not only will Conscience answer, that he must not do the
Evil whereunto Temptation leads, for if he does, Evil will ensue thereon; but
the new Nature, and his Mind and Spirit will say, This Good I would do, I
delight in it, it is Best for me, most suited unto me. And so it joins all the
Strength and Interest in has in the Soul, with the Command. See to this
Purpose the Arguing of our Apostle, Romans 7. 20, 21, 22. It is true, there is a
Natural Light in Conscience, complying with the Command in its Proposal, and
urging Obedience thereunto, which does not make it easy to us, but where it is
alone, increases its Burden and our Bondage; For it does only give in its
Suffrage unto the Sanction of the Command, and adds to the severity wherewith
it is attended. But that Compliance with the Command which is from a Principle
of Grace, is quite of another Nature, and greatly facilitates Obedience. And we
may distinguish between that Compliance with the Command which is from the
Natural Light of Conscience, which genders unto Bondage, and that which being
from a Renewed Principle of Grace, gives Liberty and Ease in Obedience. For,
the first respects principally the Consequent of Obedience or Disobedience, the
Good or Evil that will ensue upon them; Romans 2. 14, 15. Set aside this
Consideration, and it has no more to say: But the latter respects the Command
it self, which it embraces, delights in, and judges good and holy, with the
Duties themselves required, which are Natural, and suited thereunto.

Grace of the latter sort also, Actual Grace for every holy Act and Duty, is
administered unto us according to the Promise of the Gospel. So God told Paul,
that his Grace was sufficient for him. And he works in us both to will and to
do, of his own good Pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. so as that we may do all things
through him that enables us, the Nature of which Grace also has been before
discoursed of. Now although this Actual working Grace be not in the Power of
the Wilis of Men, to make use of or refuse as they see Good, but its
Administration depends merely on the Grace and Faithfulness of God, yet this I
must say, that where it is sought in a due Manner by Faith and Prayer, it is
never so restrained from any Believer, but that it shall be Effectual in him,
unto the whole of that Obedience which is required of him, and as it will be
accepted from him.

Condition of the Command of Holiness, how Just and Equal must it needs be
confessed to be, and therefore how highly Reasonable is it that we should
comply with it, and how great is their Sin and Folly by whom it is neglected!
It is true, we are absolutely obliged unto Obedience by the mere Authority of
God who commands; but he not only allows us to take in, but directs us to seek
after these other Considerations of it, which may give it Force and Efficacy
upon our Souls and Consciences. And among these, none is more Efficacious
toward Gracious Ingenuous Souls, than this of the Contemperation of the Duties
commanded, unto spiritual Aids of Strength promised unto us. For, what Cloak or
Pretense of Dislike or Neglect is here left unto any? Wherefore, not only the
Authority of God in giving a Command, but the Infinite Wisdom and Goodness of
God in giving such a Command, so Just, Equal and Gentle, fall upon us therein,
to Oblige us to Holy Obedience. To Neglect or Despise this Command, is to
Neglect or Despise God, in that Way which he has chosen to manifest all the
holy Properties of his Nature.

Command is Equal, and so to be esteemed from the Matter of it, or the Things
that it does require. Things they are that are neither great nor grievous, much
less perverse, useless, or evil, Micah 6. 6, 7, 8. There is nothing in the
Holiness which the Command requires, but what is Good to him in whom it is, and
Useful to all others concerned in him, or what he does. What they are, the
Apostle mentions in his Exhortation unto them, Phil. 4. 8. They are things
true, and honest, and just, and pure, and lovely, and of good report, and what
Evil is there in any of these things, that we should decline the Command that
requires them? The more we abound in them, the better it will be for our
Relations, our Families, our Neighbors, the whole Nation, and the World, but
best of all for our selves. Godliness is profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4.
8. These things are good and profitable unto men, Tit. 3. 8. Good to them that
do them, and good to those toward whom they are done. But both these things,
namely, the Usefulness of Holiness unto our selves and others, must be spoken
unto distinctly afterward, and are therefore transmitted unto their proper
place.

Endeavor after Holiness and the Improvement of it, with respect unto the
Command of God that we should be Holy, and because of it, and that especially
under the Consideration of it which we have insisted on. I know not what vain
Imaginations have seemed to possess the Minds of some, that they have no need
of Respect unto the Command, nor to the Promises and Threatenings of it, but to
Obey merely from the Power and Guidance of an inward Principle. Nay, some have
supposed, that a Respect unto the Command would vitiate our Obedience, rendering
it Legal and Servile. But I hope, That Darkness which hindered men from
discerning the Harmony and Compliance which is between the Principle of Grace
in us, and the Authority of the Command upon us, is much taken away from all
sincere Professors. It is a Respect unto the Command which gives the formal
Nature of Obedience unto what we do. And without a due Regard unto it, there
is nothing of Holiness in us. Some would make the Light of Nature to be their
Rule, some in what they do, look no further for their Measure than what
carries the Reputation of common Honesty among men. He that would be holy
indeed, must always mind the Command of God, with that Reverence and those
Affections which become him to whom God speaks immediately. And that it may be
Effectual toward us, we may consider:

multiplied his Commands unto this Purpose, to testify not only his own
infinite Care of us, and Love unto us, but also our Eternal Concernment in what
he requires. He does not give out unto us a single Command that we should be
Holy, (which yet were sufficient to Oblige us for ever) but he gives his
Commands unto that Purpose, Line upon line, line upon line, precept upon
precept, precept upon precept. He that shall but look over the Bible, and see
almost every Page of it filled with Commands, or Directions, or Instructions
for Holiness; cannot but conclude, that the Mind and Will of God is very much
in this matter, and that our Concernment therein is inexpressible. Nor does God
content himself to multiply Commands in General, that we should be Holy, so as
that if we have Regard unto him they may never be out of our Remembrance, but
there is not any particular Duty or Instance of Holiness, but he has given us
especial Commands for that also. No man can instance in the least Duty that
belongs directly unto it, but it falls under some especial Command of God. We
are not only then under the Command of God in general, and that often
reiterated unto us, in an awful Reverence whereof we ought to walk, but upon
all Occasions, whatever we have to do or avoid in following after Holiness, is
represented unto us in especial Commands to that purpose. And they are all of
them a Fruit of the Love and Care of God toward us. Is it not then our Duty
always to consider these Commands, to bind them unto our Hearts, and our
Hearts to them, that nothing may separate them? Oh that they might always
dwell in our Minds, to influence them unto an inward constant Watch against the
first Disorders of our Souls, that are unsuited to the inward Holiness God
requires, abide with us in our Closets, and all our Occasions for our Good.

various Enforcements God is pleased to give unto those multiplied Commands. He
does not remit us merely to their Authority, but he applies all other Ways
and Means whereby they may be made Effectual. Hence are they accompanied with
Exhortations, Entreaties, Reasonings, Expostulations, Promises, Threatenings,
all made use of to fasten the Command upon our Minds and Consciences. God
knows how slow and backward we are to receive due Impressions from his
Authority; and he knows by what Ways and Means the Principles of our internal
Faculties are apt to be wrought upon, and therefore applies these Engines to
fix the Power of the Commands upon us. Were these things to be treated of
severally, it is manifest how great a part of the Scripture were to be
transcribed. I shall therefore only take a little Notice of the Reinforcement
of the Command for Holiness, by those especial Promises which are given unto
it. I do not intend now the Promises of the Gospel in general, wherein in its
own Way and Place we are interested by Holiness, but of such peculiar Promises
as God enforces the Command by. It is not for nothing that it is said, that
Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to
come; 1 Timothy 4. 8. There is in all the Promises an especial Respect unto it,
and it gives them in whom it is an especial Interest in all the Promises.

Text which our Savior preached his first Sermon upon. For all the Blessings
which he pronounces consist in giving particular Instances of some parts of
Holiness, annexing an especial Promise unto each of them. Blessed, says he,
are the Pure in Heart; Heart Purity is the Spring and Life of all Holiness; and
why are such Persons Blessed; why says he, they shall see God; He appropriates
the Promise of the Eternal Enjoyment of God, unto this Qualification of Purity
of Heart. So also it has the Promises of this Life, and that in things
temporal and spiritual. In things temporal we may take out from amongst many
that especial Instance given us by the Psalmist; Blessed is he that considers
the Poor. Wisely to consider the poor in their Distress, so as to Relieve them
according to our Ability, is a great Act and Duty of Holiness. He that does
this, says the Psalmist, he is a Blessed man. Whence does that Blessedness
arise, and wherein does it consist? It does so in a Participation of those
especial Promises which God has annexed unto this Duty, even in this Life; the
Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him and
keep him alive, and he shall be Blessed on the Earth, and thou will not deliver
him into the hand of his Enemies; the Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of
languishing, and thou will make all his Bed in his sickness, Psalm. 41. 1, 2, 3.
Many especial Promises in the most important Concerns of this Life, are given
unto the Right discharge of this one Duty. For Godliness has the Promise of
this Life. And other Instances might be multiplied unto the same Purpose. It is
so also with respect unto things spiritual. So the Apostle Peter having
repeated a long Chain of Graces, whose Exercise he presents unto us, adds
for an Encouragement, If ye do these things ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
The Promise of Permanency in Obedience, with an absolute Preservation from all
such Fallings into Sin as are inconsistent with the Covenant of Grace, is
affixed unto our Diligence in Holiness. And who knows not how the Scripture
abounds in Instances of this Nature? That which we conclude from hence is, that
together with the Command of God requiring us to be Holy, we should consider,
the Promises wherewith it is accompanied, (among the things) as an
Encouragement unto the cheerful Performance of that Obedience, which the
Command it self makes Necessary.

Force of this Argument is evident, and exposed unto all. God has in this
Matter positively declared his Will, interposing his Sovereign Authority
commanding us to be Holy; and that on the Penalty of his utmost displeasure;
and he has therewithal given us redoubled Assurance, (as in a case wherein we
are very apt to deceive our selves) that be we else what we will, or can be,
without sincere Holiness he will neither own us, nor have any thing to do with
us. Be our Gifts, Parts, Abilities, Places, Dignities, Usefulness in the World,
Profession, outward Duties what they will, unless we are sincerely Holy, which
we may not be, and yet be eminent in all these things, we are not, we cannot,
we shall not be accepted with God.

Deceit in this Matter, which he foresaw would be apt to put it self on the
Minds of men. For whereas the Foundation of our Salvation in our selves, and
the Hinge whereon the whole weight of it does turn, is our Faith; men might be
apt to think, that if they have Faith, it will be well enough with them
although they are not Holy. Therefore, because this Plea and Pretense of Faith
is great, and apt to impose on the Minds of men, who would willingly retain
their Lusts with an Hope and Expectation of Heaven, we are plainly told in the
Scripture, that that Faith which is without Holiness, without Works, without
Fruits, which can be so, or is possible that it should be so; is vain; not that
Faith which will save our Souls, but Equivocally so called, that may perish for
ever with those in whom it is.

CHAP. IV. Necessity of Holiness from God's sending Jesus Christ.
The Necessity of Holiness proved from the Design of God in sending Jesus
Christ, with the Ends of his Mediation.

principal End of the Design of God in sending his Son into the World, was to
Recover us into a State of Holiness, which we had lost. For this purpose was
the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John
3. 8. The Manifestation of the Son of God was his Incarnation, 1 Timothy 1. 16. in
order to the Work which he had to accomplish in our Nature. And this was in
General the Destruction of the Works of the Devil. Among these the principal
was, the infecting of our Natures and Persons with a Principle of Sin and
Enmity against God, which was the Effect of his Temptation. And this is not
done but by the Introduction of a Principle of Holiness and Obedience. The
Image of God in us was defaced by Sin. The Renovation or Restoration hereof,
was one principal Design of Christ in his Coming. Unless this be done, there is
no New World, no New Creatures, no Restoration of all things, no one End of
the Mediation of Christ fully accomplished. And whereas his great and ultimate
Design was to bring us unto the Enjoyment of God, unto his Eternal Glory, this
cannot be, before by Grace and Holiness we are made meet for that Inheritance
of the Saints in Light. But we shall consider this Matter a little more
distinctly.

Mediation of Christ, is confined unto the Limits of his Threefold Office.
Whatever he does for the Church, he does it as a Priest, or as a King, or as a
Prophet. Now as these Offices agree in all the general Ends of his Mediation,
so they differ in their Acts, and immediate Objects. For their Acts it is
plain, Sacerdotal, Regal, and Prophetical Acts and Duties, are of different
Natures, as the Offices themselves are unto which they appertain. And for their
Objects; the proper immediate Object of the Priestly Office is God himself, as
is evident both from the Nature of the Office, and its proper Acts. For as to
the Nature of the Office. Every Priest is taken from among men, and ordained
for men in things pertaining unto God, that he may Offer both Gifts and
Sacrifices for sins, Heb. 5. 1. A Priest is one who is appointed to deal with
God, in the behalf of them for whom he executes his Office. And the Acts of the
Priestly Office of Christ are two; Oblation and Intercession, of both which God
is the immediate Objects. He offered himself unto God, and with him he makes
Intercession. But the immediate Object of Christ Kingly and Prophetical Offices
are Men, or the Church. As a Priest he Acts with God in our Name and on our
behalf; as a King and Prophet he Acts toward us in the Name and Authority of
God.

Offices of Christ has an Influence into Holiness, and makes it necessary unto
us.

First; For the Priestly Office of Christ, all the proper Acts of it do
immediately respect God himself, as has been declared. And therefore, he does
not by any Sacerdotal Act immediately and efficiently work Holiness in us. But
the Effects of these Priestly Acts, that is, his Oblation and Intercession, are
of two sorts: (1) Immediate, such as respect God himself; as Atonement,
Reconciliation, Satisfaction. In these consist the first and Fundamental End of
the Mediation of Christ. Without a Supposition of these, all other things are
rendered Useless. We can neither be sanctified nor saved by him, unless Sin be
first expiated, and God attoned. But they are not of our present Consideration.
(2) The Mediate Effects of Christ's Sacerdotal Acting respect us, and are also
of two sorts. 1. Moral, as our Justification and pardon of Sin. 2. Real, in our
Sanctification and Holiness. And hereunto as God does Design them, so he
Effects Holiness in all Believers, by virtue of the Oblation and Intercession
of Jesus Christ; Wherefore, although the immediate Actings of that Office
respect God alone as their proper Object, yet the Virtue and Efficacy of them
extend themselves unto our Sanctification and Holiness.

Tit. 2. 14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good Works. His giving
himself for us, is the common Expression of his Offering himself a Sacrifice to
God as a Priest, Ephesians. 5. 2. And this he did not only that he might redeem us
from Iniquity, from the Guilt of our Sins, and Punishment due unto them, which
are regarded in Redemption, but also that he might purify us to himself,
sanctify us, or make us Holy and Fruitful, or Zealous of good Works. His
Blood as through the Eternal Spirit he Offered himself unto God, purges our
Consciences from dead Works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14. There is a
purging of Sin, which consists in the Legal Expiation of it, in making
Atonement, Heb. 1. 3. But the purging of a Sinner, or of the Conscience, is by
Real Efficiency, in Sanctification, which is here declared to be one End of the
Oblation of Christ. So where he is said to wash us from our Sins in his own
Blood, namely, as shed and offered for us, Rev. 1. 5. it is not only the
Expiation of Guilt, but the Purification of Filth that is intended.

Way and Manner how Holiness is Communicated unto us by virtue of the Death and
Oblation of Christ, I have showed before at large, and shall not therefore here
again insist upon it. I shall only observe, that Holiness being one especial
End for which Christ gave himself for us, or Offered himself unto God for us,
without a Participation thereof, it is impossible that we should have the least
Evidence of an Interest in his Oblation as to any other End of it. And as for
those who are never made Holy, Christ never dyed or Offered himself for them. I
cannot understand what Advantage it is unto Religion, to affirm that the most
of them for whom Christ dyed as a Priest, or offered himself an Oblation to
God, shall have no Benefit thereby as to Grace or Glory; and incomparably the
most of them without any especial Fault of their own, as never hearing of him.
Neither can I find in the Scripture a double Design of Christ, in giving
himself for Mankind; toward some, that they may be redeemed from all Iniquity
and purified to be his peculiar Ones; toward others, that they may yet be left
under the Guilt and Power of their Sins. And it evacuates the force of the
Motive unto the Necessity of Holiness from the Consideration of the Oblation of
Christ, where men are taught that Christ offered himself a Sacrifice for them
who are never made Holy. Wherefore I say, no unholy person can have any certain
Evidence that he has an Interest in the Oblation of Christ, seeing he gave
himself to purify them for whom he was Offered.

Intercession of Christ, which is his second Sacerdotal Act, has also the same
End, and is Effectual to the same Purpose: It is true, he does Intercede with
God for the Pardon of Sin by virtue of his Oblation; whence he is said to be
our Advocate with God, to comfort us in case of Surprizals by sin, 1 John 1. 1,
2. But this is not all he designeth therein; He Intercedes also for Grace and
supplies of the Spirit, that we may be made and kept Holy. See John 17. 15, 17.

Secondly, As to the Prophetical Office of Christ, the Church or Men alone are
its immediate Object, and of all the Acts and Duties of it. He is therein Gods
Legate and Ambassador, his Apostle and Messenger unto us. Whatever he does as a
Prophet, he does it with us and toward us in the Name of God. And there are
two Parts or Works of Christ in this Office, relating only to the Doctrine he
taught: (1) The Revelation of God in his Name, and Love, in the Mystery of his
Grace and Goodness of Truth by his Promises, that we may believe in him. (2)
The Revelation of God in his Will and Commands, that we may obey him. For the
first, wherein indeed his Prophetical Office was principally exercised, see
John 1. 18. Chap. 1. 2. John 17. 6. The Revelation of the Preceptive Will of
God made by Jesus Christ, may be considered two ways. 1. As he was peculiarly
sent to the House of Israel, the Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of
the Promises of God unto the Fathers, Romans 15. 8. (2) With respect unto the
whole Church of all Ages.

(1) The first, which took up much of his personal Ministry in the Flesh,
consisted in the Declarations, Exposition, and Vindication that he gave unto
the Church of Divine Precepts for Obedience, which had been given before. God
had from the Beginning, and in especial Manner at the Promulgation of the Law
on Sinai, and the ensuing Expositions of it by the Prophets, given Excellent
Precepts for Holiness and Obedience; But the People unto whom they were given,
being carnal, they were not able to bear the spiritual Light and Sense of them,
which was therefore greatly Veyled under the Old Testament. Not only the
Promises, but the Precepts also of the Law, were then but obscurely
apprehended. Besides, the Church being grown corrupted, there were solemn
Expositions of Gods Commands received amongst them, whose sole Design was to
accommodate them unto the Lusts and Sins of men, or to exempt men if not
totally, yet in many Instances from an Obligation unto Obedience to them. Our
Blessed Savior applies himself in the Discharge of his Prophetical Office with
respect unto the End of the Command, which is our Holy Obedience, unto both
these, in the Declaration of its Excellency and Efficacy.

first) he declares the inward spiritual Nature of the Law, with its respect
unto the most secret Frames of our Hearts and Minds, with the least Disorder or
Irregularity of our Passions and Affections. And then ( secondly) he declares
the true Sense of its Commands, their Nature, Signification and Extent,
vindicating them from all the corrupt and false Glosses which then passed
current in the Church, whereby there was an Abatement made of their Efficacy,
and an Indulgence granted unto the Lusts of Men. Thus they had by their
Traditional Interpretation restrained the Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not
Kill, unto actual Murder; and the Seventh, Thou shall not commit Adultery, unto
actual Uncleanness; as some now would restrain the Second Commandment unto the
Making of Images and Worshipping them, excluding the primary Intent of the
Precept restraining all Means and Manners of Worship unto Divine Institution.
How in his Doctrine he took off these Corruptions, we may see Matthew. 5. 21, 22,
27, 28.

Law to its pristine Crown, as the Jews have a Tradition that it shall be done
in the Days of the Messiah. Herein did the Lord Christ place the Beginning of
his Prophetical Office and Ministry, Matthew. 5. 6, 7. He opened, unveyled,
explained and vindicated the Preceptive part of the Will of God before
Revealed, to the End that by a Compliance therewith we should be Holy. The full
Revelation of the Mind and Will of God in the Perfection and Spirituality of
the Command, was reserved for Christ in the Discharge of his Office. And he
gave it unto us, that we might have a perfect and complete Rule of Holiness.
This therefore was the immediate End of this Work or Duty of the Office of
Christ. And where we Answer it not, we reject that great Prophet which God has
sent, to which Excision is so severely threatened.

second part of this Office or the Discharge of it, with respect unto the
Church of all Ages, which takes in the Ministry of the Apostles as Divinely
inspired by him, consisted in the Revelation of those Duties of Holiness, which
although they had a general Foundation in the Law, and the Equity of them was
therein established; yet could they never have been known to be Duties in their
especial Nature, Incumbent on us and Necessary unto us, but by his Teachings
and Instructions. Hence are they called Old and New Commandments in distinct
senses; such are Faith in God through himself, Brotherly love, Denial of our
selves in taking up the Cross, doing Good for Evil, with some others of the
same Kind: And how a great part of Evangelical Holiness consists in these
things, is known. Besides, he also teaches us all those Ordinances of Worship
wherein our Obedience unto him belongs unto our Holiness also; whereby it is
enlarged and promoted. This I say is the Nature and End of the Prophetical
Office of Christ, wherein he Acts toward us from God, and in his Name, as to
the Declaration of the Will of God in his Commands. And it is our Holiness
which is his only End and Design therein. So it is summarily represented, Tit.
2. 10, 11, 12.

Doctrine of Obedience that Christ teaches. (1) That it reaches the Heart it
self, with all its inmost and secret Actings, and that in the first place. The
Practice of most goes no further but unto Outward Acts; the Teachings of many
go no further, or at best unto the Moderation of Affections. But he in the
first place requires the Renovation of our whole Souls, in all their Faculties,
Motions and Actings, into the Image of God, 1 John 3. 1. Ephesians. 4. 23, 24, 25.
(2) It is Extensive. There is nothing in any kind pleasing to God, conformable
to his Mind, or complyant with his Will, but he requires it; nothing crooked,
or perverse, or displeasing to God, but it is forbidden by him. It is therefore
a perfect Rule of Holiness and Obedience. (3) Clearness, Perspicuity and
Evidence of Divine Truth and Authority in all.

Doctrine of Christ for universal Obedience, in all the Duties of it, becomes
to be absolute, every way complete and perfect. And it is a notable Effect of
the Atheistical Pride of Men, that pretending to design Obedience (at least in
Moral Duties) unto God, they betake themselves unto other Rules and Directions,
as either more plain or full, or efficacious, than those of the Gospel, which
are the Teachings of Christ himself, as the great Prophet and Apostle sent of
God to instruct us in our Duty. Some go to the Light of Nature and the Use of
Right Reason, that is, their own, as their Guide; and some add the Additional
Documents of the Philosophers: They think a Saying of Epictetus, or Seneca; or
Arrianus, being wittily suited to their Fancies and Affections, to have more
Life and Power, in it than any Precepts of the Gospel. The Reason why these
things are more pleasing unto them than the Commands and Instructions of
Christ, is because proceeding from the Spring of Natural Light, they are suited
to the Workings of natural Fancy and Understanding; but those of Christ
proceeding from the Fountain of Eternal spiritual Light, are not comprehended
in their Beauty and Excellency, without a Principle of the same Light in us,
guiding our Understandings and influencing our Affections. Hence take any
Precept general or particular about Moral Duties, that is materially the same,
in the Writing of Philosophers, and in the Doctrine of the Gospel, not a few
prefer it as delivered in the first way, before the latter. Such a Contempt
have men risen unto of Jesus Christ the Wisdom of God, and the great Prophet of
the Church. When he entered upon his Office, the Voice came from the Excellent
Glory, This is my Beloved Son, hear him: This succeeded into the Room of all
those terrible Appearances and dreadful Preparations which God made use of in
the giving of the Law. For he gave the Law by the Ministry of Angels, who being
mere Creatures, he manifested the Dread of his own Presence among them, to give
Authority unto their Ministrations. But when he came to Reveal his Will under
the Gospel, it being to be done by him in whom dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead
Bodily, and who was entrusted himself with all Divine Power, he did no more but
indigitate or declare which was the Person, and give us a Command in General to
hear him. And this he did with respect unto what he had fixed before as a
Fundamental Ordinance of Heaven, namely, that when he should raise up and send
the great Prophet of the Church, whosoever would not hear him should be cut off
from the people. A Compliance therefore with this Command, in hearing the Voice
of Christ, is the Foundation of all Holiness and Gospel Obedience. And if men
will be moved neither with the Wisdom, nor Authority, nor Goodness of God, in
giving us this Command and Direction for our Good, nor with the Consideration
of the Endowments and Faithfulness of Jesus Christ the Son of God in the
Discharge of his Prophetical Office, nor from the Remembrance that it is He,
and not Epictetus, or Seneca, or Plato, to whom at the Last Day they must give
their Account, so as to take him alone for their Guide in all Obedience unto
God, and Duty among themselves; they will find, when it is too late, that they
have been mistaken in their Choice.

Obedience consists in Morality or the Duties of it, which is the Opinion of
(as one well calls them) our Modern Heathens; from whence or whom shall we
learn it, or to whom shall we go for Teaching and Instruction about it?
Certainly where the Instruction or Systeme of Precepts is most plain, full,
perfect, and free from Mistakes; where the manner of Teaching is most Powerful
and Efficacious, and where the Authority of the Teacher is greatest and most
unquestionable, there we ought to apply our selves to Learn and be guided. In
all these Respects we may say of Christ as Job said of God, Who teaches Like
him? Job 36. 22. Then probably shall we be Taught of God, when we are Taught by
him. The Commands and Precepts of Duties themselves which are given us by the
Light of Nature, however improved by the Wits and Reasons of contemplative men,
are many ways Defective.

utmost Imaginations of Men, never reached unto that wherein the Life and Soul
of Holiness does consist, Namely, the Renovation of our lapsed Natures into the
Image and Likeness of God. Without this, whatever Precepts are given about the
Moderation of Affections and Duties of Moral Holiness, they are lifeless, and
will prove useless. And hence it is, that by all those Documents which were
given by Philosophers of Old, the Nature of no one individual Person was ever
renewed, what Change soever was wrought on their Conversation. But that this is
plainly and directly required in the Doctrine of Obedience taught by Jesus
Christ as the great Prophet of the Church, I have sufficiently proved in this
whole Discourse.

(2) Very few of the Precepts of it are certain, so as that we may take them
for an undoubted and infallible Rule. There are some general Commands I
acknowledge, so clear in the Light of Nature, as that no question can be made,
but that what is required in them is our Duty to perform: Such are they, that
God is to be loved, that others are not to be injured, that every ones Right is
to be rendered unto him, whereunto all Reasonable Creatures do assent at their
first Proposal. And where any are found to live in an open Neglect or seem to
be Ignorant of them, their Degeneracy into Beastiality is open, and their
Sentiments not at all to be regarded. But go a little further, and you will
find all the great Moralists at endless uncertain Disputes about the Nature of
Virtue in general, about the Offices and Duties of it, about the Rule and
Measures of their Practice. In these Disputes did most of them consume their
Lives, without any great Endeavors to express their own Notions in their
Conversations.

Moralists seem to care for nothing but the Name; Virtue it self is grown to be
a strange and uncouth thing. But what is commanded us by Jesus Christ, there is
no room for the least haesitation whether it be an infallible Rule for us to
attend unto or no. Every Precept of his about the meanest Duty, is equally
certain and infallibly declarative of the Nature and Necessity of that Duty, as
those of the greatest, and that have most Evidence from the Light of Nature. If
once it appears that Christ requires any thing of us by his Word, that he has
taught us any thing as the Prophet of the Church, there is no Doubt remains
with us, whether it be our Duty or no.

(3) The whole Rule of Duties given by the most improved Light of Nature,
setting aside those that are purely Evangelical, which some despise, is obscure
and partial. There are sundry Moral Duties which I instanced in before, which
the Light of Nature as it remains in the lapsed depraved Condition of it, never
extended it self to the Discovery of. And this Obscurity is evident from the
Differences that are about its Precepts and Directions. But now as the
Revelation made by Christ, and his Commands therein, is Commensurate unto
Universal Obedience, and gives Bounds unto it, so that there is no Duty of it
but what he has commanded, and it is sufficient to discharge the most specious
Pleas and Pretenses of any thing to be a Duty toward God or Man, by showing
that it is not required by him; so his Commands and Directions are plain and
evidently perspicuous. I dare challenge the greatest and most Learned Moralists
in the World, to give an Instance of any one Duty of Morality, confirmed by the
Rules and Directions of the highest and most Contemplative Moralist, that I
will not show and evince, that it is more plainly and clearly required by the
Lord Christ in the Gospel, and pressed on us by far more effectual Motives than
any they are acquainted withal. It is therefore the highest Folly as well as
Wickedness, for Men to design, plead, or pretend the Learning Duties of
Obedience from others rather than from Christ the Prophet of the Church.

Manner of Teaching as to Power and Efficacy, is also considerable unto this
End. And concerning this also we may say Who teaches like him? There was that
Eminency in his personal Ministry whilst he was on the Earth, as filled all
men with Admiration. Hence it is said, that he taught with Authority, and not
as the Scribes, Matthew. 7. 29. and another while they wondered at the Gracious
words which he uttered, Luke 4. 22. And the very Officers that were sent to
apprehend him for Preaching, came away astonished, saying, Never man spoke like
this Man, John 7. 46. It is true, it was not the Design of God, that Multitudes
of that hardened Generation should be Converted by his personal Ministry, John
12. 38, 39, 40. as having another to fulfill in them, by them, and upon them;
yet it is evident from the Gospel, that there was (...), a Divine Power and
Glory, accompanying his Ministerial Instructions. Yet this is not that which I
intend, but his continued and present Teaching of the Church by his Word and
Spirit. He gives that Power and Efficacy unto it, as that by its Effects every
day it demonstrates it self to be from God, being accompanied with the Evidence
and Demonstration of a spiritual Power put forth in it. This the Experiences,
Consciences, and Lives of Multitudes bear witness unto continually. They do and
will to Eternity attest what Power his Word has had to enlighten their Minds,
to subdue their Lusts, to change and renew their Hearts, to relieve and comfort
them in their Temptations and Distresses, with the like Effects of Grace and
Power.

Manner of Teaching by the greatest Moralist; and what are the Effects of it?
Enticing Words, Smoothness and Elegancy of Speech, composed into Snares for the
Affections, and Delight unto the Fancy, are the Grace, Ornament, and Life of
the Way or Manner of their Teaching. And hereof, evanid Satisfaction, temporary
Resolutions for a kind of compliance with the things spoken, with (it may be)
some few perishing Endeavors after some Change of Life, are the best Effects
of all such Discourses And so easy and gentle is their Operation on the Minds
of men, that commonly they are delighted in by the most profligate and
obstinate Sinners, as is the Preaching of them who Act in the same spirit and
from the same principles.

(Thirdly,) Whereas the last thing Considerable in those whose Instructions we
should choose to give up our selves unto, is their Authority, that must be left
without further Plea to the Consciences of all men, whether they have the
highest Esteem of the Authority of Christ the Son of God, or of those others
whom they do admire; and let them freely take their Choice, so they will
ingenuously acknowledge what they do.

End of the Prophetical Office of Christ, in the Revelation he made of the Will
of God in the Scriptures, in his personal Ministry, in the Dispensation of his
Word and Spirit continued in the Church, is our Holiness and Obedience unto
God, I could not but Remark upon the Atheism, Pride and Folly of those Modern
Heathens, who really or in pretense, betake themselves to the Light of Nature
and Philosophical Maxims, for their Guidance and Direction, rather than to him
who is Designed of God to be the great Teacher of the Church. I deny not, but
that in the Ancient Moralists there are found many excellent Documents
concerning Virtue and Vice; but yet having been it may be more conversant in
their Writings than most of those who pretend so highly unto their Veneration,
I fear not to affirm, that as their Sayings may be of use for Illustration of
the Truth which is infallibly learned another way, so take them alone, they
will sooner delight the Minds and Fancies of men, than benefit or profit them
as to the true Ends of Morality or Virtue.

Thirdly; This also is one great End of the Kingly Power of Christ. For as such
does he subdue our Enemies, and preserve our Souls from Ruin. And those are
our Adversaries, which fight against our spiritual Condition and Safety; such
principally are our Lusts, our Sins, and our Temptations wherewith they are
accompanied. These does our Lord Christ subdue by his Kingly Power, quickening
and strengthening in us by his Aids and Supplies of Grace, all Principles of
Holy Obedience. In brief; the Work of Christ as a King may be reduced unto
these Heads. (1) To make his Subjects free. (2) To preserve them in safety,
delivering their Souls from Deceit and Violence. (3) In giving them Prosperity,
and increasing their Wealth. (4) In establishing assured Peace for them. (5) In
giving them Love among themselves. (6) In placing the Interest and Welfare of
his Kingdom in all their Affections. (7) In Eternally Rewarding their
Obedience. And all these he does principally by working Grace and Holiness in
them, as might be easily demonstrated. I suppose none question but, that the
principal Work of Christ toward us as our Head and King, is in making and
preserving of us Holy. I shall not therefore further insist thereon.

It remains that we improve these Considerations, unto the Confirmation of our
present Argument concerning the Necessity of Holiness.

First,) It is hence evident how vain and fond a thing it is, for any Persons
continuing in an unholy Condition to imagine, that they have any Interest in
Christ, or shall have any Benefit by him. This is the great Deceit whereby
Satan, that Enemy of the common Salvation, has Ruined the Generality of
Mankind who profess the Christian Religion. The Gospel openly declares a Way of
Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ. This is thus far admitted by all who are
called Christians, that they will allow of no other Way for the same End, unto
competition with it. For I speak not of them who being profligate and hardened
in Sins, are Regardless of all future Concernments; but I intend only such as
in general have a desire to escape the Damnation of Hell, and to attain
Immortality and Glory. And this they do at least profess to do by Jesus
Christ, as supposing that the Things to this purpose mentioned in the Gospel,
do belong unto them as well as unto others, because they also are Christians.
But they consider not that there are certain Ways and Means, whereby the
Virtue and Benefit of all that the Lord Christ has done for us, are conveyed
to the Souls of men, whereby they are made partakers of them. Without these we
have no Concernment in what Christ has done or declared in the Gospel. If we
expect to be saved by Christ, it must be by what he does and has done for us,
as a Priest, a Prophet and a King: But one of the principal Ends of what he
does in all these, is to make us Holy; and if these be not effected in us, we
can have no Eternal Benefit by any thing that Christ has done or continues to
do as the Mediator of the Church.

miserable Condition of the Generality of those who are called Christians, who
live in Sin and yet hope to be saved by the Gospel, is greatly to be bewailed.
They contract to themselves the Guilt of the two greatest Evils that any
Reasonable Creatures are liable unto in this World. For (1) they woefully
deceive and ruin their own Souls. Their whole Profession of the Gospel is but
a Crying peace, peace, when sudden destruction lies at the Door. They deny the
Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. They are
bought and vindicated into the Knowledge and Profession of the Truth, but in
their Works they deny him whom in Words they own, whose Damnation sleeps not.
For men to live in Covetousness, Sensuality, Pride, Ambition, Pleasures, Hatred
of the power of Godliness, and yet to hope for Salvation by the Gospel, is the
most infallible Way to hasten and secure their own Eternal Ruin. And (2ly,)
they cast the greatest Dishonor on Christ and the Gospel, that any Persons are
capable of casting on them. Those by whom the Lord Christ is rejected as a
Seducer, and the Gospel as a Fable, do not more (I may say not so much)
dishonor the one and the other, as those do, who professing to own them both,
yet continue to live and walk in an unholy Condition. For as to the open
Enemies of Christ, they are judged and condemned already, and none have
Occasion to think the worse of him or the Gospel for their Opposition unto
them: But for those others who profess to own them, they endeavor to represent
the Lord Christ as a Minister of Sin, as one who has procured Indulgence unto
men to live in their Lusts and Rebellion against God; and the Gospel as a
Doctrine of Licenciousness and Wickedness. What else can any one learn from
them concerning the one or the other? The whole Language of their Profession
is, that Christ is such a Savior, and the Gospel such a Law and Rule, as that
men loving Sin, and living in Sin, may be saved by them. This is that which
has Reflected all kind of Dishonor on Christian Religion, and put a stop unto
its Progress in the World. These are they of whom our Apostle makes his bitter
Complaint, Phil. 3. 18, 19. Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now
tell you even weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose
End is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is in their
Shame, who mind Earthly things. How many that are called Christians does this
Character suit in these days? Whatever they think of themselves, they are
Enemies of the Cross of Christ, and do trample under their feet the Blood of
the Covenant.

Secondly,) Let more serious Professors be most serious in this Matter. The
Apostle having given Assurance of the certain Salvation of all true Believers,
from the immutable Purpose of God, presently adds, Let every one that names
the Name of Christ depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. plainly intimating, that
without Holiness, without an universal departure from Iniquity, we cannot have
the least Evidence that we are interested in that assured Condition. You name
the Name of Christ, profess an Interest in him, and expect Salvation by him;
which Way will you apply your selves unto him? from which of his Offices do you
expect Advantage? Is it from his Sacerdotal? Has his Blood purged your
Consciences from dead works, that you should serve the living God? Are you
cleansed, and sanctified, and made Holy thereby? Are you redeemed out of the
World by it, and from your vain Conversation therein, after the Customs and
Traditions of men? Are you by it dedicated unto God, and made his peculiar
Ones? If you find not these Effects of the Bloodshedding of Christ in and upon
your Souls and Consciences, in vain will you expect those other of Atonement,
Peace and Reconciliation with God; of Mercy, Pardon, Justification and
Salvation, which you look for. The Priestly Office of Christ has its whole
Effect toward all on whom it has any Effects. Despisers of its Fruits in
Holiness, shall never have the least Interest in its Fruits in Righteousness?

Actings as the great Prophet of the Church, that you expect Help and Relief?
Have you effectually learned of him to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts,
to live Righteously, and Soberly, and Godly in this present World? Has he
taught you to be humble, to be meek, to be patient, to hate the Garment spotted
with the flesh? Has he instructed you unto sincerity in all your Ways,
Dealings, and whole Conversations among men? Above all has he taught you, have
you learned of him, to purify and cleanse your Hearts by Faith, to subdue your
inward spiritual and fleshly Lusts, to endeavor after an universal Conformity
unto his Image and Likeness? Do you find his Doctrine Effectual unto these
Ends, and are your Hearts and Minds cast into the Mould of it? If it be so,
your Interest in him by his Prophetical Office, is secured unto you. But if you
say, you hear his Voice in his Word, Read and Preached, that you have Learned
many Mysteries, and have attained much Light or Knowledge thereby, at least you
know the substance of the Doctrine he has taught, so as that you can discourse
of it, yea and that you do many Things or perform many Duties according unto
it; but cannot say, that the Effects before enqured after, are wrought in you
by his Word and Spirit, you lose the second Expectation of an Interest in
Christ as Mediator, or any Advantage thereby.

Kingly Office of Christ, and have you Expectations on him by virtue thereof?
You may do well to Examine, how he Rules in you and over you. Has he subdued
your Lusts, those Enemies of his Kingdom, which fight against your Souls? Has
he strengthened, aided, supported, assisted you by his Grace, unto all Holy
Obedience? And have you given up your selves to be Ruled by his Word and
Spirit, to obey him in all things, and to entrust all your Temporal and Eternal
Concernments unto his Care, Faithfulness and Power? If it be so, you have Cause
to Rejoice, as those who have an Assured Concern in the blessed Things of his
Kingdom. But if your proud rebellious Lusts do yet bear sway in you, if Sin
have dominion over you, if you continue to fulfill the Lusts of the Mind and of
the Flesh; if you walk after the Fashions of this World, and not as Obedient
Subjects of that Kingdom of his which is not of this World: Deceive not your
selves any longer, Christ will be of no Advantage unto you. In these things lie
the sum of our present Argument. If the Lord Christ act no otherwise for our
Good, but in and by his Blessed Offices of Priest, Prophet, and King; and if
the immediate Effect of the Grace of Christ acting in all these Offices toward
us, be our Holiness and Sanctification, those in whom that Effect is not
wrought and produced, have neither Ground nor Reason to Promise themselves an
Interest in Christ, or any Advantage by his Mediation. For men to name the Name
of Christ, to profess themselves Christians, or his Disciples, to avow an
Expectation of Mercy, Pardon, Life and Salvation by him, and in the mean time
to be in themselves Worldly, Proud, Ambitious, Envious, Revengefull, Haters of
Good Men, Covetous, living in diverse Lusts and Pleasures, is a Scandal and
Shame unto Christian Religion, and unavoidably Destructive to their own Souls.

CHAP. V. Necessity of Holiness from our Condition in this World.
Necessity of Holiness further Argued, from our own State and Condition in this
World, with what is required of us with respect unto our giving Glory to Jesus
Christ.

Necessity of Holiness may be taken from the Consideration of our selves, and
our present State and Condition. For it is hereby alone that the Vicious
Distemper of our Natures is or can be cured. That our Nature is fearfully and
universally depraved by the Entrance of Sin, I have before declared and
sufficiently confirmed. And I do not now consider it as to the Disability of
Living unto God, or Enmity unto him which is come upon us thereby, nor yet as
to the future Punishment which it renders us obnoxious unto: But it is the
present misery that is upon us by it, (unless it be cured) which I intend. For
the Mind of man being possessed with Darkness, Vanity, Folly, and Instability;
the Will under the Power of spiritual Death, Stubborn and Obstinate, and all
the Affections Carnal, Sensual and Selfish, the whole Soul being hurried off
from God, and so out of its Way, is perpetually filled with Confusion and
perplexing Disorder. It is not unlike that Description which Job gives of the
Grave, A Land of Darkness and of the shadow of Death, without any Order, and
where the Light is as Darkness; Chap. 10. 21, 22. When Solomon set himself to
search out the Causes of all the Vanity and Vexation that is in the World, of
all the Troubles that the Life of Man is filled withal; he affirms that this
was the sum of his Discovery, God made men upright, but they have found out
many Inventions, Eccles. 7. 29. that is, cast themselves into endless
Entanglements and Confusions. What is Sin in its Guilt, is Punishment in its
Power, yea the greatest that men are liable unto in this World. Hence God for
the Guilt of some Sins, poenally gives many up to the Power of others, Romans 1.
24, 26, 28. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. And this he does, not only to secure and aggravate
their Condemnation at the last Day, but to give them in this World a Recompense
of their Folly in themselves. For there is no greater Misery nor Slavery, than
to be under the Power of Sin.

Depravation of our Nature, the whole Soul filled with Darkness, Disorder and
Confusion, being brought under the Power of various Lusts and Passions,
captivating the Mind and Will unto their Interests, in the vilest Drudgeries of
Servitude and Bondage. No sooner does the Mind begin to Act any thing suitably
unto the small Remainders of Light in it, but it is immediately controlled by
impetuous Lusts and Affections, which darken its Directions, and silence its
Commands. Hence is the common Saying, not so common as what is signified by it;
-- Video Meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor --
Hence the whole Soul is filled with fierce Contraditions and Conflicts.
Vanity, Instability, Folly, sensual irrational Appetites, inordinate Desires,
self-disquieting and torturing Passions, act continually in our depraved
Natures. See the Account hereof, Romans 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
How full is the World of Disorder, Confusion, Oppression, Rapine, Uncleanness,
Violence, and the like dreadful Miseries? Alas! they are but a weak and
imperfect Representation of the Evils that are in the Minds of Men by Nature.
For as they all proceed from thence, as our Savior declares, Matthew. 15, 18,
19. so the Thousandth part of what is conceived therein, is never brought forth
and Acted. From whence come Wars and Fightings among you, come they not hence,
even of your Lusts that war in your Members? ye lust and have not, ye kill and
desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war, yet you have not, James
4. 1, 2. All Evils proceed from the impetuous Lusts of the Minds of men, which
when they are acted unto the utmost, are as unsatisfied as they were at their
first setting out. Hence the Prophet tells us, that Wicked men, under the Power
and Disorder of depraved Nature, are like a troubled Sea that cannot rest,
whose Waves cast up mire and dirt; and have no Peace; Isa. 57. 20, 21. The
Heart is in continual Motion; is Restless in it is Figments and Imaginations,
as the Waters of the Sea when it is stormy and troubled; and they are all evil,
only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. Herein does it cast up Mire and Dirt. And
those who seem to have the greatest Advantages above others in Power and
Opportunity to give satisfaction unto their Lusts, do but increase their own
Disquietness and Miseries, Psalm. 59. 14. For as these things are evil in
themselves, and unto others; so they are poenal unto those in whom they are,
especially in whom they abound and Reign. And if their Breasts were opened, it
would appear, by the Confusion and Horror they live in, that they are on the
very Confines of Hell.

Life of Man full of Vanity, Trouble, Disappointments, Vexations, and endless
self-dissatisfactions, which those who were wise among the Heathens, saw,
complained of, and attempted in vain Reliefs against. All these things proceed
from the Depravation of our Natures, and the Disorder that is come upon us by
Sin. And as (if they are not cured and healed) they will assuredly issue in
Everlasting Misery, so they are Woeful and Calamitous at present. True Peace,
Rest, and Tranquillity of Mind are strangers unto such Souls. Alas! what are
the perishing Profits, Pleasures, and Satisfactions by them, which this World
can afford? How unable is the Mind of man to find out Rest and Peace in them or
from them? They quickly satiate and suffocate in their Enjoyment, and become to
have no Relish in their Varieties, which only heightens present Vanity, and
treasures up Provision for future Vexation. We have therefore no greater
Interest in the World, than to enquire how this Disorder may be cured, and a
stop put to this Fountain of all Abominations. What we intend, will be cleared
in the ensuing Observations.

Naturally of a more sedate and quiet Temper and Disposition than others are.
They fall into such Outrages and Excesses of outward Sins as others do; nay,
their Minds are not capable of such turbulent Passions and Affections as the
most are possessed withal. These Comparatively are peaceable, and useful to
their Relations and others. But yet their Minds and Hearts are full of Darkness
and Disorder. For so is it with all by Nature, (as we have proved) who have not
an Almighty effectual Cure wrought upon them. And the less troublesome Waves
they have on the Surface, the more Mire and Dirt oft-times they have at the
Bottom.

Education, Convictions, Afflictions, Illuminations, Hope of a Righteousness of
their own, Love of Reputation, Engagements into the Society of Good men,
Resolutions for Secular Ends, with other Means of the like kind, do often put
great Restraints upon the Actings and Ebuillitions of the evil Imaginations and
turbulent Affections of the Minds of men; yea the frame of the Mind and the
Course of the Life may be much changed by them; how, wherein, and how far, is
not our present Business to declare.

Means, or any other of like Nature, the Disease is uncured, the Soul continues
still in its Disorder, and in all inward Confusions. For our Original Order,
Harmony and Rectitude, consisted in the Powers and Inclinations, or our Minds,
Wills and Affections, unto regular Actings toward God as our End and Reward.
Hence proceeded all that Order and Peace which was in all their Faculties, and
their Actings. Whilst we continued in due Order toward God, it was impossible
that we should be otherwise in our selves: But being by Sin fallen off from
God, having lost our Conformity and Likeness unto him, we fell into all the
Confusion and Disorder before described. Wherefore,

Cure and Remedy of this Evil Condition, is by Holiness. For it must be can be
no otherwise but by the Renovation of the Image of God in us; for from the Loss
hereof does all the Evil mentioned spring and arise. By this are our Souls in
some measure Restored unto their primitive Order and Rectitude. And without
this, Attempts for inward Peace, real Tranquillity of Mind, with due Order in
our Affections, will be in vain attempted. It is the Holy Soul, the sanctified
Mind alone, that is composed into an orderly Tendency toward the Enjoyment of
God That which we aim at is, what we are directed unto by our Apostle, Ephesians.
4. 22, 23, 24. Our Deliverance from the Power of corrupt and deceitful Lusts,
which are the Spring and Cause of all the Confusion mentioned, is by the
Renovation of the Image of God in us, and no otherwise. And hence, unto all
Persons not in Love with their Lusts and Ruin, arises a Cogent Argument and
Motive unto Holiness. But sundry things may be Objected hereunto; as,

sanctified Persons there are yet certain Remainders of our Original
Depravation and Disorder; that Sin still abides in Believers; yea that it
works powerfully and effectually in them, leading them Captive unto the Law of
Sin. Hence ensue great and mighty Wars and Conflicts in the Souls of
Regenerate Persons, that are truly sanctified. Herein they suffer so far, as
to groan, complain, and cry out for Deliverance. The Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary. Wherefore it
does not appear, that this Holiness does so heal and cure the sinful
Distempers of our Minds. On the other side, men supposed as yet under the Power
of Sin, who have not that Grace and Holiness in the Renovation of the Image of
God which is pleaded for, seem to have more peace and Quietness in their Minds.
They have not that inward Conflict which others complain of, nor those Groans
for Deliverance. Yea they find satisfaction in their Lusts and Pleasures,
relieving themselves by them against any thing that occasioneth their Trouble.

Ans. (1) For that Peace and Order which is pretended to be in the Minds of Men
under the Power of Sin, and not sanctified, it is like that which is in Hell
and the Kingdom of Darkness. Satan is not divided against himself, nor is
there such a Confusion and Disorder in his Kingdom as to destroy it; but it
has a Consistency from the common End of all that is in it, which is an
Opposition unto God and all that is good. Such a Peace and Order there may be
in an unsanctified Mind. There being no Active Principle in it for God and that
which is spiritually Good, all works one way, and all its troubled streams have
the same Course. But yet they continually cast up mire and dirt. There is only
that Peace in such Minds which the strong man armed, that is Satan, keeps his
Goods in, until a stronger than he comes to bind him. And if any one think
that Peace and Order to be sufficient for him, wherein his Mind in all its
Faculties acts uniformly against God, or for Self, Sin and the World, without
any Opposition or Contradiction, he may find as much in Hell when he comes
there.

Confusion and a Rebellion. Where a Confusion is in a State, all Rule or
Government is dissolved, and every thing is let loose unto the utmost Disorder
and Evil. But where the Rule is firm and stable, there may be Rebellions that
may give some parts and places Disturbances and Damage, but yet the whole State
is not disordered thereby. So is it in the Condition of a sanctified Soul on
the Account of the Remainders of Sin; there may be Rebellion in it, but there
is no Confusion. Grace keeps the Rule in the Mind and Heart firm and stable, so
that there is Peace and Assurance unto the whole state of the Person, though
Lusts and Corruptions will be rebelling and warring against it. The Divine
Order therefore of the Soul consisting in the Rule of Grace, subordinating all
to God in Christ, is never overthrown by the Rebellion of Sin at any time, be
it never so vigorous or prevalent. But in the state of unsanctified Persons
though there be no Rebellion, yet is there nothing but Confusion. Sin has the
Rule and Dominion in them; And however men may be pleased with it for a season,
yet is it nothing but perfect Disorder, because it is a continual Opposition to
God. It is a Tyranny that overthrowes all Law and Rule and Order with respect
unto our last and chiefest End.

Believer has that Satisfaction in this Conflict, as that its Peace is not
ordinarily disturbed, and is never quite overthrown by it. Such a Person knows
Sin to be his Enemy, knows its Design, with the Aids and Assistances which are
prepared for him against its Deceit and Violence; and considering the Nature
and End of this Contest, is satisfied with it. Yea the greatest hardships that
Sin can reduce a Believer unto, do but put him to the Exercise of those Graces
and Duties wherein he receives great spiritual Satisfaction. Such are
Repentance, Humiliation, godly Sorrow, self-Abasement and Abhorrency, with
fervent Outcryes for Deliverance. Now although these things seem to have that
which is grievous and dolorous prevailing in them, yet the Graces of the Spirit
of God being acted in them, they are so suited unto the Nature of the New
Creature, and so belong unto the spiritual Order of the Soul, that it finds
secret Satisfaction in them all. But the Trouble others meet withal in their
own Hearts and Minds on the Account of Sin, is from the severe Reflections of
their Consciences only, and they receive them no otherwise but as certain
Presages and Predictions of future and eternal Misery.

sanctified Person is secured of success in this Conflict, which keeps blessed
Peace and Order in his Soul during its Continuance. There is a twofold success
against the Rebellious Actings of the Remainders of Indwelling Sin. (1) In
particular Instances; (2) In the whole Cause. And in both these have we
sufficient Assurance of Success, if we be not wanting unto our selves.

1. For suppose the Contest be considered with respect unto any particular Lust
and Corruption, and that in Conjunction with some powerful Temptation, we have
sufficient and blessed Assurance that abiding in the diligent Use of the Ways
and Means assigned unto us, and the Improvement of the Assistance provided in
the Covenant of Grace, we shall not so fail of actual Success, as that Lust
should conceive, bring forth and finish Sin, 2 Cor. 2. 12. But if we be wanting
unto our selves, negligent in our known Duties and principal Concerns, it is no
wonder if we are sometimes cast into Disorder, and foiled by the Powers of Sin.
But,

2. As to the general Success in the whole Cause, namely, that Sin shall not
utterly deface the Image of God in us, nor absolutely or finally ruin our
Souls, which is its End and Tendency, we have the Covenant Faithfulness of God
(which will not fail us) for our security, Romans 6. 12. Wherefore,
notwithstanding this Opposition and all that is ascribed unto it, there is
Peace and Order preserved by the Power of Holiness in a sanctified Mind and
Soul.

Secondly, But it will be further Objected, That many Professors who pretend
highly unto Sanctification and Holiness, and whom you judge to be partakers of
them, are yet peevish, froward, morose, unquiet in their Minds, among their
Relations, and in the World; yea, much outward Vanity and Disorder (which you
make Tokens of the internal Confusion of the Minds of Men, and the Power of
Sin) do either proceed from them, or are carried on by them. And where then is
the Advantage pretended, that should render Holiness so indispensibly necessary
unto us?

Ans. If there are any such, the more shame for them, and they must bear their
own Judgment. These things are diametrically opposite to the Work of Holiness,
and the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. And therefore I say, (1) That many
(it may be) are esteemed Holy and Sanctified, who indeed are not so. Though I
will judge no man in particular, yet I had rather pass this Judgment on any
man, that he has no Grace, than that on the other hand, Grace does not change
our Natures, and renew the Image of God in us. (2) Many who are really holy,
may have the double Disadvantage; first to be under such Circumstances as will
frequently draw out their natural Infirmities, and then to have them greatned
and heightened in the Apprehension of them with whom they have to do, which was
Actually the Case of David all his Days, and of Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 6, 7. I
would be far from giving Countenance unto the sinful Distempers of any; but
yet I doubt not, but that the Infirmities of many are represented by Envy and
Hatred of Profession unto an undeserved Disadvantage. (3) Wherever there is
the seed of Grace and Holiness, there an Entrance is made on the Cure of all
these sinful Distempers, yea not only of the corrupt Lusts of the Flesh, that
are absolutely evil and Vicious in their whole Nature; but even of those
natural Infirmities and Distempers of peevishness, moroseness, inclination to
Anger and Passion, Vnsteadiness in Resolution. which Lusts is apt to possess,
and use unto evil and disorderly Ends. And I am pressing the Necessity of
Holiness, that is, of the Increase and Growth of it, that this Work may be
carried on to perfection, and that so through the Power of the Grace of the
Gospel, that great Promise may be accomplished which is recorded Isa. 11. 6, 7,
8, 9. And as when a wandering juggling Impostor, who pretended to judge of men's
Lives and Manners by their Physiognomy, beholding Socrates, pronounced him from
his Countenance a Person of a flagitious sensual Life, the People derided his
Folly, who knew his sober virtuous Conversation; but Socrates excused him,
affirming that such he had been, had he not bridled his Nature by Philosophy;
how much more truly may it be said of Multitudes, that they had been eminent
in nothing but untoward Distempers of Mind, had not their Souls been rectified
and cured by the Power of Grace and Holiness.

Arguments that offer their service to the Purpose in hand; I shall therefore
wave many, and those of great importance, attended with an unavoidable Cogency,
and shut up this Discourse with one which must not be omitted. In our Holiness
consists the principal part of that Revenue of Glory and Honor which the Lord
Christ requires and expects from his Disciples in this World. That he does
require this indispensibly of us, is I suppose out of Question amongst us;
although the most who are called Christians, live as if they had no other
Design but to cast all Obloquies, Reproach and Shame, on him and his Doctrine.
But if we are indeed his Disciples, he has bought us with a Price, and we are
not our own, but his, and that to glorify him in Soul and Body, becuase they
are his, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. He dyed for us, that we should not live unto our
selves, but unto him that so dyed for us, and by virtue of whose Death we live,
Romans 14. 7, 8, 9. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works,
Tit. 2. 14. But we need not to insist hereon. To deny that we ought to glorify
and honor Christ in the World, is to renounce him and the Gospel. The sole
Enquiry is, How we may do so, and what he requires of us to that purpose?

sum of all that the Lord Christ expects from us in this World, may be
reduced unto two Heads: (1) That we should live holily to him. (2) That we
should suffer patiently for him. And in these things alone is he glorified by
us. The first he expects at all times, and in all things; the latter on
particular Occasions, as we are called by him thereunto. Where these things
are, where this Revenue of Glory is paid in and returned unto him, he repents
not of his Purchase, nor of the unvaluable Price he has paid for us; yea
says, The Lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, I have a goodly Heritage;
which are the words of Christ concerning the Church, which is his Lot, and the
Portion of his Inheritance, Psalm. 16. 6. Now amongst many others we shall
consider but one way whereby we glorify the Lord Christ by our Holy Obedience,
and whence also it will appear how much we dishonor and reproach him when we
come short thereof.

Lord Christ coming into the World as the Mediator between God and Man, wrought
and accomplished a mighty Work amongst us. And what he did may be referred to
three Heads. (1) The Life which he lead; (2) The Doctrine which he taught; and
(3) The Death which he underwent. Concerning all these there ever was a great
Contest in the World, and it is yet continued. And on the part of the World, it
is managed under a double Appearance; For some openly have traduced his Life as
unholy, his Doctrine as foolish, and his Death as justly deserved; which was
the sense of the Pagan World, and the Apostate Judaical Church of Old, as it is
of many at this Day. Others allow them to pass with some Approbation,
pretending to own what is taught in the Gospel concerning them, but in fact and
practice deny any such Power and Efficacy in them as is pretended, and without
which they are of no Virtue, which is the way of Carnal Gospellers, and all
Idolatrous Superstitious Worshippers among Christians. And of late there is
risen up amongst us a Generation, who esteem all that is spoken concerning him
to be a mere Fable. In opposition hereunto, the Lord Christ calls all his true
Disciples, to bear Witness and Testimony unto the Holiness of his Life, the
Wisdom and Purity of his Doctrine, the Efficacy of his Death to Expiate Sin, to
make Atonement and Peace with God, with the Power of his whole Mediation to
Renew the Image of God in us, to restore us into his Favor, and to bring us
unto the Enjoyment of him. This he calls all his Disciples to avow unto and
express in the World, and by their so doing is he glorified (and no otherwise)
in a peculiar manner. A Testimony is to be given unto and against the World,
that his Life was most Holy, his Doctrine most heavenly and pure, his Death
most precious and Efficacious, and consequently that he was sent of God unto
his great Work, and was accepted of him therein; Now all this is no otherwise
done but by Obedience unto him in Holiness as it is visible and fruitful. For,

Life of Christ is our Example. This in the first place are we called unto, and
every Christian does virtually make that profession. No man takes that holy
Name upon him, but the first thing he signifies thereby, is that he makes the
Life of Christ his Pattern, which it is his Duty to express in his own. And he
who takes up Christianity on any other Terms, does woefully deceive his own
Soul. How is it then that we may yield a Revenue of Glory herein? How may we
bear Testimony unto the Holiness of his Life, against the Blasphemies of the
World, and the Unbelief of the most, who have no Regard thereunto? Can this be
any otherwise done but by Holiness of Heart and Life, by Conformity to God in
our Souls, and living unto God in fruitful Obedience? Can men devise a more
effectual Expedient to cast Reproach upon him, than to live in Sin, to follow
diverse lusts and pleasures, to prefer the World and present things before
Eternity, and in the mean time to Profess, That the Life of Christ is their
Example, as all unholy Professors and Christians do? Is not this to bear
witness with the World against him, that indeed his Life was unholy? Surely it
is high time for such Persons to leave the Name of Christians, or the Life of
Sin. It is therefore alone in Conformity to him in the Holiness we are pressing
after, that we can give him any Glory on the Account of his Life being our
Example.

Glory, unless we bear Testimony unto his Doctrine, that it is Holy, Heavenly,
filled with Divine Wisdom and Grace, as we make it our Rule. And there is no
other way whereby this may be done, but by holy Obedience, expressing the
Nature, End and Usefulness of it, Titus 2. 11, 12. And indeed, the Holy
Obedience of Believers, as has been declared at large before, is a thing quite
of another Kind than any thing in the World which by the Rules, Principles, and
Light of Nature, we are directed unto, or instructed in. It is Spiritual,
Heavenly, Mysterious, filled with Principles and Actings of the same Kind with
those whereby our Communion with God in Glory unto Eternity shall be
maintained. Now although the Life of Evangelical Holiness, be in its Principle,
Form, and chief Actings secret and hidden, hid with Christ in God from the Eyes
of the World, so that the Men thereof neither see nor know nor discern the
spiritual Life of a Believer, in its Being, Form and Power; yet there are
always such evident appearing fruits of it, as are sufficient for their
Conviction, that the Rule of it which is the Doctrine of Christ alone, is Holy,
Wise and Heavenly. And Multitudes in all Ages have been won over unto the
Obedience of the Gospel and Faith in Christ Jesus, by the Holy, Fruitful,
Useful Conversation of such as have expressed the Power and Purity of his
Doctrine in this Kind.

Power and Efficacy of the Death of Christ, as for other Ends, so to purify us
from all Iniquity, and to purge our Consciences from dead Works, that we may
serve the living God, is herein also required. The World indeed sometimes
rises unto that height of Pride and contemptuous Atheism, as to despise all
Appearance and Profession of Purity. But the Truth is, if we are not cleansed
from our Sins in the Blood of Christ, if we are not thereby purified from
Iniquity, we are an Abomination unto God, and shall be Objects of his Wrath for
ever. However the Lord Christ requires no more of his Disciples in this matter
unto his Glory, but that they Profess that his Blood cleanses them from their
sins, and evidence the Truth of it by such Ways and Means as the Gospel has
appointed unto that End. If their Testimony herein unto the Efficacy of his
Death be not received, be despised by the World, and so at present no apparent
Glory redound unto him thereby, he is satisfied with it, as knowing that the
Day is coming wherein he will call over these things again, when the Rejecting
of this Testimony shall be an Aggravation of Condemnation unto the unbelieving
World.

Evidence of this last Argument is plain, and exposed unto all; it is briefly
this: Without the Holiness prescribed in the Gospel, we give nothing of that
Glory unto Jesus Christ which he indispensibly requires. And if men will be so
sottishly foolish as to expect the greatest Benefits and Advantages by the
Mediation of Christ, namely, Pardon of Sin, Salvation, Life and Immortality,
whilst they neglect and refuse to give him any Revenue of Glory for all he
has done for them; we may bewail their Folly, but cannot prevent their Ruin.
He saves us freely by his Grace, but he requires that we should express a sense
of it in ascribing unto him the Glory that is his due. And let no man think
this is done in Wordy Expressions; it is no otherwise effected, but by the
Power of an Holy Conversation, showing forth the Praises of him who has called
us out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. Nay, there is more in it also; if
any one profess himself to be a Christian, that is, a Disciple of Jesus Christ,
to follow the Example of his Life, to Obey his Doctrine, to express the
Efficacy of his Death, and continue in an unholy Life; he is a false Traitor to
him, and gives in his Testimony on the side of the World, against Him and all
that he has done for us. And it is indeed the flagitious Lives of professed
Christians that have brought the Life, Doctrine and Person of our Lord Jesus
Christ into Contempt in the World. And I advise all that read or hear of these
things, diligently and carefully to study the Gospel, that they may receive
thence an Evidence of the Power, Truth, Glory and Beauty of Christ and his
Ways; for he that should consider the Conversation of men for his Guide, will
be hardly able to determine which he should choose, whether to be a Pagan, a
Mahumetan, or a Christian. And shall such Persons, by reason of whom the Name
of Christ is dishonored and blasphemed continually, expect Advantage by him or
Mercy from him? Will men yet think to live in Sensuality, Pride, Ambition,
Covetousness, Malice, Revenge, Hatred of all Good men, and Contempt of Purity,
and to enjoy Life, Immortality and Glory by Christ? Who can sufficiently bewayl
the dreadful Effects of such an horrid Infatuation! God teach us all duly to
consider, that all the Glory and Honor of Jesus Christ in the World, with
respect unto us, depends on our Holiness, and not on any other thing either
that we are, have, or may do. If therefore we have any Love unto him, any
spark of Gratitude for his unspeakable Love, Grace, Condescension, Sufferings,
with the Eternal Fruits of them, any Care about or Desire of his Glory and
Honor in the World, if we would not be found the most hateful Traitors at the
last Day unto his Crown, Honor and Dignity, if we have any Expectation of
Grace from him, or Advantage by him, here or hereafter, let us labor to be
Holy in all manner of Conversation, that we may thereby adorn his Doctrine,
express his Virtues and Praises, and grow up into Conformity and Likeness unto
him, who is the Firstborn and Image of the Invisible God.

(...).
FINIS.
AN Alphabetical TABLE of some Especial Matters contained in this Book.
A.
Page. Section. ABasement in the Remembrance of the Defilement of Sin, a
necessary Duty. 401, 14 No Ability in Sinners to purge themselves from their
Natural Pollution. 379 Mistakes about Ability to comply with Gods Commands.
544, 20 Abuse of the best Duties Possible. 398, 13 Abuse of spiritual Gifts. 1,
1 Abuse of Eternal Love devilish. 525, 14 Acquaintance with the Pollution of
Sin necessary. 394, 11 Every Gracious Act of the Will wrought by the Holy
Spirit. 470, 10 Difference between the Act of the Spirit in forming the Humane
Nature of Christ, and the Act of the Son in assuming it. 133, 12 To be acted by
the Spirit, what it is. 468, 11 How the Holy Prophets were Acted by the Spirit.
104, 10 All Actings of the Person of the Son of God toward the Humane Nature
voluntary. 129, 6 Actings of the Holy Spirit not ascribed unto him exclusively.
130, 9 Internal Actings of the blessed Trinity, where one Person is the Object
of the Love of another, natural and necessary to the Being of God. 45, 5
External Actings of one Divine Person toward another, of what sort. 46, 5 All
Actions internal and external to be tried by the Word. 412, 3 Internal Acts of
the Holy Trinity how undivided. 131, 9 All Acts of Natural Life from God. 465,
6 No Vital Acts under the Power of Death Spiritual. 246, 21 Act of the Holy
Ghost in forming the Body of Christ, a Creating Act. 132 Twofold Event of Men's
falls into Actual Sins. 291, 292: 7, 8 Actual Sins how they spring from
Original Sins. 289: 5 Actual supplies of Grace necessary to the Mortification
of Sin. 486, 23 Actual assistance of Grace necessary unto Obedience. 548, 27
Adam how he had the Spirit of God in the state of Innocence. 76, 14 Adam had
many things revealed unto him. 100, 6 Adherence and Assimulation Effects of of
Love. 496 Adjuncts of Divine Inspiration. 103, 9 Admiration an effect of love.
514, 26 Administration of Grace not equal at all times. 547, 24 Advantage and
Privilege in the Participation of the Gifts of the Spirit. 83, 7 Advantage of
the New Testament in our Access to God. 155, 2 Advantage of Duties vitiated in
their Performance. 249, 28 Great Advantage of spiritual Experience. 342
Affections wrought upon and excited by Convictions. 200, 18 Affections fixed by
Grace on spiritual things. 201, 18 Affections when renewed work sensibly. 353
Affections how depraved, how sanctified. 285, 57 Affections the Means of
Convictions. 294, 13 Afflictions how they purge away sin. 391, 9 Afflictions
how sanctified and made useful. ibid. Various Aggravations of the Defilement
of Sin. 379 Aggravations of sin in them who have received a Principle of Grace.
549, 29 All personal Properties assigned unto the Holy Spirit in the Scripture.
48, 8 Alienation from the Life of God what it is. 216, 22 Alienation of the
Minds of men from the Gospel, on what Ground. 233, 54 Allusion unto Local
Motion in sending of the Spirit, whence taken. 84, 8 Angels Gods Host. 70, 6
Ministry of Angels about the Body of Christ when dead. 147, 10 Anointing at the
Inauguration of Governors, what it signified. 117 The Spirit of Antichrist
what it is. 41, 17 An Anti-Spirit set up in Opposition to the Spirit of God.
19, 23 Apostasy of the Church in several Ages with respect unto the Persons of
the Holy Trinity. 24, 27 Apostasy of Christian Churches in the Rejection of
the Holy Spirit and his Work. 25, 27 Apostasy from beginnings of Conversion
how brought on. 300: 24 Appellations or Titles of the Holy Spirit in the
Scripture. 34, 9 Appearances of the Holy Spirit under visible Signs. 52, 15
Appearances of Persons in Divine Visions. 108, 14 All Apprehensions of Divine
Operations to be tried by the Rule of the Word. 187 Apprehension of Eternal
danger from the Law, before Conversion. 308: 31 Application of the Blood of
Christ for the Cleansing of Sin. 371, 1 Application to the Blood of Christ for
the Cleansing of Sin and the Nature of it. 387, 388, 389, s. 5. and 400, 405:
Applications of the Death of Christ unto the subduing of Sin wherein it
consists. 494, 495: 36 Arguments in Prayer for the further Communications of
the Spirit. 359, 4 Weak Arguments for Holiness prejudicial to it. 498, 2
Arguments to prove the Divine Personality of the Holy Ghost. 47, 48, etc. 8
Articulate Voices in Divine Revelations how formed. 106: 12 Internal Assistance
of the Spirit of God necessary to every Act of Obedience: 465: 5 Assumption the
only immediate Act of the Person of the Son toward the Humane Nature. 129, 4
Assurance accompanying Divine Revelations: 104: 10 Assurance of Success and
final preservation an Encouragement to Duties of Holiness: 529: 21 Assurance of
the End an Encouragement unto the use of the Means: 530: 23 Atonement or
Satisfaction not required of Sinners: 331: 13 False Ways of making Atonement
the Ground of all Superstition: ibid. Vain Attempts for the Mortification of
Sin: 478: 8 Auricular Confession an Invention to accommodate the Inclinations
of all Flesh: 380 Authority in giving the Spirit respects his Gifts and Grace:
81: 4 Authority of God gives Efficacy to the Word: 259: 13 Authority of God to
be always considered in his Commands: 537: 10 Sense of the Authority of God to
be carried into all our Occasions: 542: 17
B.
Baalam how a Prophet, and how a Sorcerer: 110: 17 Baptized into the Name of
the Holy Spirit, as into the Father and Son: 51: 14 Baptism of Christ the time
of his being anointed unto his Prophetical Office, 139, 140: 5 Baptism is not
Regeneration: 179: 15 All that are duly Baptized are not Regenerate: 180: 16
Baptism how it expresses our Sanctification: 371: 2 Baptism washes not away
Sin virtute Operis operati: 380 Beauty of the Soul in its Conformity unto God:
376: 5 Beginning and Ending of the Gift of Prophecy: 100: 6 Beginnings of
Holiness small like seed: 340: 4 Beginning of Good from our selves, a Pelagian
Fiction: 467: 9 Believers alone receive the Spirit, in what sense: 82: 5
Believers much unacquainted with the Nature of Holiness, and their own interest
therein: 327: 10 Believers the only Subject of Sanctification: 356: 6 Benefit
and use of the Word Preached: 341: 5 Benignity and Charity the great
Resemblances of God: 515: 28 Blasphemy of the Jews against the Name of Jesus:
3: 3 Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: 64: 29 Blindness of may about the Nature
of Sin: 479: 11 The Blood of Christ how it cleanses from sin: 384: 3 The Blood
of Christ that purges sin is the Blood of his sacrifice: 385: 4 Blood in
Sacrifice both Offered and Sprinkled: 385: 4 The Blood of Christ's Sacrifice
always in the same condition as to Efficacy: 386 Boasting and Despondency
prevented by the same Means: 345: 6 Bodily strength given by the Spirit of God:
118: 24 Bodily Absence of Christ how supplied by the Holy Spirit: 161: 6 Body
of Christ formed of the substance of the Blessed Virgin, Reasons thereof: 132
The Body how depraved by Sin: 366 The Body how sanctified: 368 Bounty expressed
in pouring forth the Spirit: 87: 13 The Spirit how called the Breath of Gods
Mouth: 39: 13 How God Breathed into man the Breath of Life: 75: 12 Burden of
the Lord whence that Name was given to Prophesies: 107: 14 Burden and danger of
Government: 117
C.
What it is to Call Jesus Lord: 34: 2 Calumny against the Doctrine of
Justification refuted: 365: 6 Twofold Capacity in the Mind with respect unto
spiritual things: 220: 29 Carnal Mind in all Mankind by Nature: 243: 14 Causes
of the Purification of Sin: 382: 1 Certainty of Outward Voices from Internal
Light: 106: 12 Secret Chambers where Christ is not, what is intended^y them:
152: 15 Characters of Divine Truth on all Divine Inspirations: 105: 10
Cherishing and Acting the Principle of Holiness, the great Means of
Mortification of Sin: 485: 22 Childhood the Vanity thereof: 289: 4 To say
Christ is the Lord what it includes, and how we are enabled thereunto: 5: 3
Christ in no sense the Son of the Holy Spirit: 133: 11 Christ raised from the
dead by the Holy Ghost: 148 Christ how he is our Life: 247: 23 Christ not
defiled with our defilements: 406: 16 Christ how he is made unto us
Sanctification: 445, etc. Christ the exemplary Cause of our Holiness: 447: 54
Christ an Head of Influence unto the Church: 451: 64 Christ only to be heard,
if we would learn Obedience: 559: 11 Circumcision of the Heart wherein it
consists: 275: 41. and 418: 11 Church of the Jews first fell by Idolatry: 25:
27 Head of the Church first respected in the New Creation: 128: 1 Churches how
at first founded and built by the Holy Ghost: 6: 6 Cleansing our selves from
Sin our Duty: 371: 1 Cleansing from Sin how to be prayed for: 372: 3 Cleansing
in Profession and Reality, in Signification and Efficacy: 380 No Cleansing of
Sin merely by our own Endeavors: 398: 13 Collation of the Spirit on Christ,
how a present and how a Continued Act: 141: 5 The commands of God how possible
unto us: 220: 30 Commands of the Covenant respect the power administered in the
Covenant: 432: 30 Commands of Duty when not grievous: 446: 53 Commands of
Obedience belonging unto the Old Covenant, and their Ends: 534: 3 Commands for
Obedience how proportioned unto our Abilities: 543: 19 Commands for Holiness
whence just and equal: 550: 31 Commands for Holiness multiplied, and why: 551:
34 Respect unto the Command the formal Reason of Obedience: 533: 2 How the Holy
Spirit comes on men: 89, 90: 16 Coming of Christ in the flesh the first and
principal Promise of the Old Testament: 8: 9 Communication of spiritual things
from Christ by the Spirit: 161: 6 Communication of the Virtue of the Blood of
Christ unto our Souls by the Holy Spirit: 390: 6 Communication from God to his
Creatures Twofold: 541: 64 All Communications in a way of Grace through
Christ: 452: 65 Communion with God by the Gospel, the nature, manner and way of
it: 163: 6 Communion between God and Believers by real Operation of the Holy
Ghost: 164: 6 Complaints of Sin in Prayer derided: 491: 30 Completing Acts
ascribed in all Divine Operations to the Holy Spirit: 69: 3 What comprehension
Prophets had of Divine Revelations: 103: 10 Conception of Christ in the Womb
Instantaneous: 133: 13 Conception of Christ how assigned to the Holy Spirit,
how to the Blessed Virgin: 134: 14 Conclusions to be made from the Doctrine of
Election: 531: 25 Concupiscence gets strength by Age: 290: 6 Condition of all
unregenerate Persons absolutely the same: 178: 12 Confluence of Trouble on the
Lord Christ in the Course of his Ministry: 142 Conformity unto God the Honor
of the Soul: 376: 5 Conformity unto God wherein it consists: 419: 13 Conformity
unto the Death of Christ, wherein it consists: 493: 33 Conformity to God our
only Glory: 503: 10 Conscience how affected with Convictions: 200: 17
Consistency of Commands and Promises proved: 336: 14 Glorious Consequences of
the Miraculous Conception of the Body of Christ: 135 Consequences falsely
charged on the Doctrine of the Gospel: 507: 16 Considerations of Grace, and the
true Spring of all spiritual Diligence: 346: 7 Considerations of the Nature and
End of Sin subservient unto Mortification: 496: 39 Spiritual consolations unto
whom they do belong: 359 Consolation of Believers from the Eternal Continuance
of Grace: 329: 11 Constancy in Holy Duties a necessary consequent of a
Principle of Holiness: 426: 20 Constitution no excuse for sin: 369
Contemplation an effect of Love: 514: 26 Contempt of the Gospel whence: 224: 37
Contempt of Regeneration in many: 205: 1 Contempt of the World from the
Consideration of Electing Love: 528: 19 Contest in the World about the Lord
Christ, how managed on each side: 149: 13 Continuation of the Work of the Holy
Ghost in the Church: 123: 4 Contrary Dispositions and Inclinations in
Believers, the Nature of them, and whence they are: 428: 24 Difficulty of
Conversion not only from a Custom of sinning: 253: 1 Conversion to God not
merely an Act of our own Wills: 262: 20 Way and Means of Conversion according
to the Old and New Pelagians: 267 Work of the Spirit in Conversion how declared
by some and derided by others: 341: 39 Conviction of Sin antecedaneous to
Conversion: 195: 8 Convictions of Sin how they are lost: 196: 9 Ways whereby
Convictions are lost, ex^^^^ in Austin: 296: 15, 16 The Nature of the
Conviction of Sin: 297: 18 Convictions variously used and abused: 364
Conviction of the Defilement of Sin necessary antecedently unto its
Purification: 387: 5 Evidence of Duties proceeding only from the Power of
Convictions: 426: 20 Corruption of the Mind expressed by Darkness: 209: 11
Corruption of Nature working early in Infancy: 288: 3 Common Notions of Good
and Evil remaining in Corrupted Nature, and their use: 293: 11 Corrupted Reason
depraves the whole Mystery of the Gospel: 325: 8 Creating of the Body of Christ
out of the substance of the Virgin compared with the Creation of the first man
out of the dust of the Earth: 132 Creation assigned distinctly to each Person
in the Trinity: 69: 1 Creation of Man, the Parts and Degrees of it: 74, 75: 10
New Creation how effected by the Holy Spirit: 98: 1 New Creation the work
whereby God designed to glorify himself principally in this World: 126: 8 New
Creation how assigned unto the Father, Son and Spirit distinctly: 126: 9 Old
and New Creation compared: 172: 1 Creatures above and below, why called Gods
Host: 71: 6 New Creature what it is, and wherein it consists: 183: 20 New
Creature supported and acted by the Holy Spirit: 466: 7 Cure of Idolatry by the
Captivity: 25: 27 Cyrus how Anointed of God. 77: 15. and 118: 22
D.
Danger of Mistakes about Regeneration. 190 State of Darkness and Blindness by
Nature. 206: 4 Spiritual Darkness the Nature of it. 207: 7 Darkness Objective
and Subjective. 208: 8 Spiritual Darkness working by Enmity, and its Effects.
230: 49 Dead Works what they are, and whence so called. 246: 22 Men said to be
Dead in Sin with respect to the Life we had in Adam. 242: 11 Work of the Spirit
toward the Humane Nature of Christ in the State of the Dead. 146: 10 Death
Natural what it is. 240: 5 Death Natural and Spiritual wherein they differ, and
wherein they agree. 243: 13 Death of Christ applied by the Spirit, for the
Mortification of Sin. 492: 33 Spiritual Death Twofold. 239: 2 Decays in Grace
to be found in many. 353 Deceits practical about Holiness. 420 Dedication unto
God, in what sense it is Sanctification. 324: 7 Deep Things of God what, and
how searched by the Spirit. 56: 19 Defilement of Sin wherein it does consist.
374: 4 Degrees of Prophecy fancied by the Jews, rejected. 105: 11 Degrees in
Holiness, and growth in Grace, whereon they do depend. 167: 10 Deliverances
means of Conviction. 294: 13 Delight an Effect of Love. 514: 27 Delight in
Sinners as sinning, the highest degree of Shamelesness. 397, 398 How the Spirit
of God departed from Saul. 37: 11 How the Holy Spirit departs from Men. 91:
19 Natural Depravation discovers the Nature of the Grace of Conversion. 279: 48
Depravation of the Mind how removed. 282: 52 Depravation of the Mind by Sin,
what it is, and wherein it does consist. 209: 13 Description of Sanctification.
338: 2 Spiritual Desertions and the Nature of them; by some Derided. 92: 19
Design of the Gospel what it is. 330: 13 Design to be like unto God, the Life
of Holiness. 503: 11 Desires of Heaven of what sort they ought to be. 512: 21
Despisers of God, who are so. 538: 11 Destruction of Sin in the Root and
Principle our great Duty. 405 Determination of the Will as a free Principle by
Grace proved. 284: 55 Diabolical Pride in Scoffing at the Humiliation of
Sinners. 405 Difference between receiving Doctrines Notionally, and Things
really. 219: 28 Difference about Free Will stated and debated. 434: 34
Difference between a Spiritual Life, and a Life of Moral Virtue. 408: 17. and
414: 6 Difference in Religion before the Entrance of Sin, and afterward. 461:
81 Differences between the life of Adam in Innocence, and the life of Grace in
Christ. 241: 9 Differences about Regeneration, none in it. 178: 12 Different
Operations and Effects of one and the same Spirit. 38: 12 Different degrees of
Graces. 340: 4 Difficulties of Faith. 401: 13 Difficulties in Duties from
sundry Causes. 438: 39 Difficulty and Necessity of the Work of Mortification.
480: 13 Dignity of Professors wherein it consists. 511: 20 Diligence required
in the Exercise of Grace. 354 Discerning of Spirits an extraordinary Gift at
the first. 18: 22 Discovery of Graces of Holiness springing from Election. 443:
46 Discovery of a false Foundation of Duties. 364 Dispensation of the Spirit
not consined unto the first times of the Church. 25: 28 Dispensation of the
Spirit in general declared. 79, 80: 1, 2, 3. Take away the Dispensation of the
Spirit, and the whole Church is ruined. 157 Disposition of the Soul unto Acts
and Duties of Holiness, from an inward Principle. 423: 16 No Disposition unto
spiritual Life in a State of spiritual Death. 250: 29 A Gracious Disposition
expressed by Fear, Love and Delight. 427: 17 Depraved Disposition in the Mind
by Nature. 215: 20 Dispositions unto Regeneration of what sort. 191: 1 Natural
Dispositions of some more sedate than of others. 568: 4 Disquisitions after God
by the Light of Nature, and their success. 230: 48 Distinct Operations ascribed
unto the distinct Persons in the Trinity. 45: 4 Manifestation of the
Distinction of Persons in the Divine Nature a great End in the Work of the New
Creation. 155: 2 Distresses upon Conviction of Sin. 302: 27 Distribution of
spiritual Gifts. 6: 5 Distributions of Grace used by the Ancients. 255: 6
Disturbance on Divine Revelations, whence it proceeds. 103: 9 Diversity of
Gifts an Occasion of Differences in the Churches. 7: 7 Knowledge of Divine
things in their Operations and Effects. 20: 24 Divine voluntary Actings
constantly ascribed unto the Holy Spirit in the Scripture. 49: 10 Divine
Persons succeeded not to each other in their Operations. 70: 3 Divine Nature in
Christ acted not as his Soul. 137: 2 No true Apprehension of Divine Goodness
but in Christ. 229: 36 Division of the Holy Spirit in what sense spoken of. 93:
20 Doctrine of the Spirit of God the second great Principle of the Spirit. 8: 9
Doctrine of the Spirit the Life of all saving Truth. 33: 8 Doctrine of the
Trinity despised by many. 45: 4 Doctrine of Regeneration variously described.
196: 10 Doctrine of some men about Regeneration. 261: 19 Doctrine of Obedience
taught by Christ, and what is considerable therein. 558: 10 Doctrines
concerning the Operations of the Spirit of God preached with Efficacy. 26: 31
Things or Doctrines of the Gospel reduced to two Heads. 223: 36 The Dove, under
which shape the Holy Ghost appeared, of what sort it was. 52, 53: 15, 16 Dreams
a Means of Divine Revelation. 107: 13 Christ how Driven by the Spirit. 142 Duty
not the Measure of Power. 379 Things wrought in a way of Grace, prescribed in a
way of Duty. 379 No Duty of Obedience but an Holy Heart is inclined unto it.
425: 19 Duty and End to be considered in every Act of Obedience. 441: 43 Duties
of Persons entrusted with spiritual Privileges. 7: 1 Duties required in order
to Conversion. 192: 3 Duties of Morality in the Gospel superstitious, not the
Foundation. 235: 58 Duties of Unbelievers how Sins. 248: 25 Good Duties how
vitiated, yet accepted. 248: 26 The same Duties how accepted and rejected with
respect unto diverse Persons. ibid. Duties not accepted on the Account of
Persons. 249: 26 Duties of Faith, Repentance and Obedience, on what Grounds to
be pressed on men. 249: 28 Good Duties of Unregenerate men how to be esteemed.
250, 251: 30 Duties of themselves will denominate no man Holy. 362 Duties of
Morality and Piety to be encouraged. 420 Special Duties of those who have
received a Principle of Holiness. 422 Duties Internal and External
distinguished. 463: 2 Duties of Believers and Unbelievers differ in their
Substance. 471: 16 Duties required in order unto the Mortication of Sin. 487:
23 Duties how to be performed, that Sin may be mortified: 489: 27 Duties of
Holiness more clearly revealed by Christ than any other way. 557: 9 How the
Spirit dwells in Believers notwithstanding the Remainders of Sin. 484: 20
E.
Earth in the first Creation what it contained. 72: 8 Education and Convictions
in some measure compose Natures Disorders. 568: 6 Effects of Conviction where
to be placed in the Soul. 199: 15 Effects of natural Vanity, and how they are
to be opposed. 214: 19 Effects of Conviction. 301: 26 Effects of the Priestly
Acts of Christ of two sorts. 555: 3 Especial Effects of Divine Love. 514: 25
Every work of the Spirit Effectual. 198: 14 Effectual Work of Grace, and our
own earnest Endeavors consistent. 345: 7 Efficacy given to all Ordinances by
the Holy Spirit. 23: 26 No Efficacy in second Causes independently on the
first. 77: 15 Efficacy of Faith whence it arises. 401: 13 Efficacy of the
Death of Christ for the destruction of Sin, wherein it consists. 493: 34 Real
internal Efficiency ascribed unto Grace. 269: 29 Eminent Effusions of the Holy
Spirit, accompanied with effectual Delusions of Satan at the same time. 18: 22
Plentiful Effusion of the Spirit the great Promise of the Old Testament. 122: 2
The Elect the subject of the Promise of the Spirit as to Regeneration. 357: 3
Election the Spring of all true Holiness. 442: 45 Eternal Election a Cause of
and Motive unto Holiness. 520, etc. No Evidence of Election without Holiness.
521: 5 Election absolutely considered no part of Gods Revealed Will. 523: 10 No
man Obliged to believe his Election before Conversion. 524: 13 Who are bound to
believe that they are Elected. 525: 13 Divine Emanation of the Holy Spirit from
the Father and Son. 35: 9 End of Prophecy in the Church. 99: 5 End of
Miraculous Operations. 115: 21 End of God in the Work of the Old and New
Creature. 155: 2 End of Afflictions and Trials. 343: 6 End of Duties Twofold.
441: 44 End of Legal Commands. 535: 5 Ends of Holiness, for which it is
required. 414: 4 Principal Ends for which the Holy Spirit is promised. 357: 3
Enforcements unto Obedience from the Authority of God in his Commands. 538: 10,
11 No Enjoyment of God without Purification from Sin. 378 Enmity of the Carnal
Mind against God and his Ways. 231: 49, 50 Natural Impotency and Enmity how
taken away. 278: 46 Enquiry into the Reasons and Difficulties in Holy Duties.
438: 8 Enthusiastical Raptures no Means of Conversion. 186: 25 No
Enthusiastical Impressions in Conversion. 270: 32 No Entrance with God without
Holiness. 504: 11 Equity of the Law how it respects the Ability of them that
are Obliged by it. 249: 27 Espousals of the Blessed Virgin with Joseph, the
Necessity thereof. 134: 14 Essence and Form of Holiness wherein it consists.
415: 7, 8 Eternal Love a powerful Motive unto Holiness. 525: 14 Evangelical
Holiness distinguished from all Pretenses thereunto. 439: 40 No Evangelical
Truth inconsistent with Holiness, or repugnant thereunto. 507: 16 Evidences of
Regeneration various: 177: 11 No Evidence of an Interest in the Oblation of
Christ unless we are Holy. 556: 4 Infallible Evidences of Divine Inspiration.
104: 10 Evil Spirits and their Operations. 37: 11 Evil Frame of Nature how
Cured. 383 Evil Spirit how it wrought in Saul. 112: 18 All Excellencies
ascribed unto the Holy Spirit in the Scripture. 98: 3 How Christ is our
Example. 447, 448, 449 Exhortations respect Duty not Ability. 244: 17
Experience of the work of the Spirit of God in the Souls of Men. 27: 31
Experiences of the Truth and Reality of things believed, supplied by the Holy
Spirit. 341: 5 Experience of the Defilement of Sin. 372: 3 External Duties of
two sorts. 464: 4 Extraordinary Works of the Holy Spirit, the several kinds of
them. 99: 4 Extraordinary Acts of Christ during the Course of his private Life.
140
F.
Face of the Earth by what means Annually renewed. 74: 9 Facility in Duties of
Obedience from a Principle of Holiness. 436: 37 Faith and Obedience with
respect unto the Gift of the Holy Ghost how to be regulated. 90: 16 Faith
Actually wrought by Grace. 272: 36 Faith and Love the Spring of Holiness, how
they are increased. 340: 5 Faith increased by the due Proposal of its proper
Objects. 341: 5 What Faith is required that a man may please God. 362 Faith
alone interests us in the purifying Virtue of the Blood of Christ. 388 Faith
works by Prayer unto the Cleansing of Sin. 390: 6 How it purges the Soul.
390: 8 Faith whether it be a Fixing of the Imagination. 400 The Power of Faith
in Conforming the Soul unto God. 513: 24 Faith of Election tends not to
Carelessness. 530: 22 Faith without Holiness vain. 553: 38 Faithfulness of God
in his Promises to be pleaded in Prayer. 360 How the Holy Spirit does Fall on
men. 90: 17 Reasons of Men's Falling from a Course of Duties. 548: 26 False
pretenses unto the Name and Work of the Holy Spirit: 13: 15 False Prophets how
they were Acted. ib. 16 False Prophets of two sorts, some merely Acted by the
Devil, some pretenders only: 14: 17 False pretenses to Divine Revelation,
Satan's Design therein. 15: 18 False Prophets why called Spirits. 16: 21 False
Notions of Jews and Mahumetans about the Spirit of God. 33: 8 The Father how he
is said to raise Christ from the Dead. 148 All Grace Originally from the
Father. 163 Dread and Fear attending Convictions of Sin. 304: 30 Fear
inseparable from Guilt. 375 Fear of Sin a Fruit of Faith. 404 Fear of Man how
to be removed. 539: 13 Fiery Tongues what they signified. 54: 17 Figurative
Expressions multiplied in the Scripture. 48: 9 Figurative Expressions setting
out the Vileness of Sin. 402 The Nature of the Guilt and Filth of Sin how made
known. 375 The Finger of God what it is. 72: 7 Filiation a personal Adjunct.
133: 11 Fire on the Altar what it signified. 53: 16 Fire and Water the Means of
all Typical Cleansing. 371: 1 Folly of men in seeking after Instruction in
Moral Duties from others rather than from Christ. 558: 11 The Things of God
Foolishness unto the Mind of the Natural man, how and in what sense. 221: 31 No
Force put upon the Faculties of our Souls by the Operations of the Spirit. 187
Forming of the Host of Heaven and Earth the Work of the Holy Spirit. 71: 7
Forming of the Body of Christ in the Womb the Work of the Holy Spirit. 131: 10
Foundation of all Church Order in the Confession of the Lordship of Christ. 4:
2 Foundation of the Ministry of the Church in the Promise of the Spirit. 156: 3
Foundation of Moral Differences among Mankind. 364 Freedom and Bounty in the
Gift of the Spirit. 82: 4 Free Will wherein it ends, consists. 433: 33 Freedom
of Corrupted Nature and of Grace. 434: 33 Frequency in Duties produces
Facility. 437 Fruits of Sin Internal and External. 476: 6 Fruits of Election
its only Manifestation. 524: 13 Evil Frame of Nature how Cured. 383 Fullness of
Christ what it is, and how Communicated. 457: 71 Fundamental Principles to be
attended unto in the trial of Spirits. 17: 12
G.
Gift of Prophecy honorable in the Church of Old, and why. 13: 16 Gift of
Prophecy falsely pretended unto and abused. 13: 16 The Gift of Prophecy
whether ever given to Wicked men. 110: 17 Gift of Prophecy not a sanctifying
Grace. 111: 18 Gifts of Civil Government from the Holy Ghost. 116: 22 Gifts for
the Discharge of the Office of Mediator Collated on the Humane Nature of Christ
by the Holy Ghost. 139: 4 Gifts how to be prayed for. 360 The Holy Spirit Given
of God, and how. 80: 3 Giving and Receiving related. ibid. Giving of the Spirit
includes Authority, Freedom and Bounty. 81: 4 The Spirit how Given by the
Father in the way of Authority. 81: 4 To Glorify God as God what it is. 44: 2
Glorified Body of Christ the Example of ours. 149: 12 Glorying in Sin its
Abomination. 397: 12 God Author of our Sanctification. 322: 3 God how he is the
God of Peace. 323: 3 All good in the Scripture ascribed to the Holy Spirit.
470: 15 A good man who he is. 515, 516: 29 No good in us but what is wrought by
the Holy Spirit. 11: 13 The good Spirit and the Holy Spirit the same. 38: 12
Good Spirit of God overruling the Devil. 112: 18 Gospel how abused and
despised. 223: 36 Apprehension of Gods Goodness in the Light of Nature, not
sufficient to reconcile men to him. 229: 47 No true Apprehension of the Divine
Goodness but in Christ. 229: 48 Nature of the Gospel with respect unto the
Objects of men's Lusts and Desires. 233: 54 Things peculiarly belonging to the
Gospel, or its own Things. 234: 56 Things known in the Light of Nature further
manifested in the Gospel. 234 What the Gospel superaddes unto Moral Duties.
235: 57 Gospel sent for the Accomplishment of the Decree of Election. 524: 11
Nature of Gospel Precepts. 535: 6 Grace taken two ways in the Scripture. 164:
7 Grace how really efficient in Conversion. 264: 23 Grace of the Gospel
overthrown by asserting it to be a Moral Suasion only. 265: 23 Nature of
Converting Grace explained. 268: 27 Grace victorious and irresistible. 270: 30
Grace internal not resisted. 271: 34 Grace produced by a Creating Act. 275: 40
Grace and Nature opposed. 322: 3 All Grace depends on continual Influences from
God. 344: 6 All Grace Originally in Christ. 362 Things wrought in a way of
Grace, prescribed in a way of Duty. 379 Grace excited by Afflictions. 392 Sin
and Grace cannot bear rule in the same Person at the same time. 429: 25 Grace
and Nature opposed. 322: 3 Grace how it frees the Soul from spiritual
Encumbrances. 436: 36 Grace how communicated from Christ unto Believers. 457:
70 Administration of Grace not equal at all times. 547: 24 Graces acted and
exercised in the Oblation of Christ. 144 Graces which are our Duties not
absolutely in our own power. 322: 2 Graces of Holiness improved into Glory.
328: 10 All Graces excited unto Exercise by the Holy Ghost. 341: 5 Graces whose
Exercise is Occasional only, how they are increased. 343: 6 Graces eminently
making us like unto God. 513: 23 Graces declaring our Conformity to God. 515:
28 Growth in Grace and Wisdom how ascribed unto Christ. 138: 2 Growth in
Holiness compared unto that of Trees and Plants. 346: 8 Growth of Holiness
secret and indiscernible. 347: 8 Growth in Holiness an Object of Faith. 351: 10
Growth in Holiness enjoined unto us, and required of us. 339: 4 Growth in
Holiness an Access toward Glory. 511: 21
H.
Habit of Holiness antecedently necessary to every Act of Holiness. 416: 8
Habit of Grace preserved by the constant Influences of the Holy Spirit. 417: 10
Habit of Holiness not acquired but preserved in a way of Duty. ibid. Habit of
Holiness permanent in its Inclination. 427: 23 Habits incline unto Acts of
their own kind for a certain End. 423: 15 Infused Habits of Grace proved. 280:
50 Intellectual Habits the Nature of them. 415: 8 Habitual Uncleanness equal in
all. 378 Habitual Pollution inconsistent with any Holiness. ibid. Habitual
Grace necessary unto all Acts of Obedience. 548: 26 Tongues and Hands of the
Prophets guided by the Holy Ghost. 105: 10 Harmony between Grace and the
Command. 551: 33 Head of the Church first respected in the New Creation. 128: 1
The Heart what it signifies, and how it is depraved. 212: 17 Stony Heart how
taken away. 277: 43 New Heart promised, what it is. 277: 44 and 418: 11 Heart
the meaning of it in the Scripture. 367 Historical Books of the Scripture
written by Divine Inspiration. 113: 19 The Holy Spirit how both Lord and God.
6: 4 Holy Spirit the only Author unto us of all spiritual Good. 11: 12 The
Holy Spirit known by his Operations. 21: 24 Holy Spirit so called from his
immaterial substance. 34: 9 The Holy Spirit so called first because he is
essentially holy. 35, 36: 9, 10 Holy Spirit called holy from his Work. 36: 10
Holy Spirit in what sense called the Spirit of God. 38: 13 Holy Spirit how
called the Spirit of the Son. 39: 14 The Holy Spirit an Eternal, Infinite,
Intelligent Person. 46, 47, 48, 49, etc. 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. The Holy Spirit has
a spiritual substance and subsistence of his own. 54: 18 Why the Holy Spirit
never Appeared in the Person of a Man. 55: 18 The Holy Spirit the Author of the
Ministry of the Church. 61: 26 The Holy Spirit the Object of men's Actings in
Religion. 62: 28 The Holy Spirit not a Quality or Virtue of the Divine Nature.
64: 30 The Holy Spirit expressly called God. 64: 31 The Holy Spirit given of
God, and how. 80: 3 The Holy Spirit compared unto Fire and Water, and why. 88:
13 The Holy Spirit One, dividing as he pleases to others. 94: 21 The Holy
Spirit the Promise and Legacy of Christ. 124: 6 The Holy Spirit the Spirit of
the Son as well as of the Father, and what follows thereon. 130: 8 Actings of
the Holy Spirit not ascribed unto him Exclusively. 130: 9 The Holy Spirit
supplies the bodily Absence of Christ. 158: 5 Holy Spirit works by Means
ordinarily. 187: 25 The Holy Spirit the immediate Sanctifier of all Believers.
337: 15 The Holy Spirit promised with respect unto his Effects. 357: 2 Holy
Spirit the principal efficient Cause of the Mortification of Sin. 481: 15, etc.
Holy Ghost how the Power of the most High. 132 No Holiness but by the Gospel
and the Grace of it. 325: 8 Holiness passes over into Eternity and Glory, and
how. 328: 11 Holiness glorious in this Life. 329: 12 Holiness all that God
requires of Believers. 330: 13 Holiness commanded in a way of Duty, promised
in a way of Grace. 336: 14 Holiness in its true Nature. 338: 2 Holiness how it
is increased in Believers. 340: 4 Holiness may thrive where its growth is not
discerned. 350: 10 Holiness pleases God wherever it is. 361: 5 No Holiness
beyond the bounds of Relation to Christ. 363: 6 Holiness of God wherein it
consists. 374: 4 Where the Principle of Holiness is, there will be the Fruits
of it. 421 All Holiness derived from Christ. 450, 451, etc. Evangelical
Holiness an effect of the Covenant of Grace. 459: 75 Holiness of God how an
Argument of the Necessity of Holiness in us. 500: 5 Holiness not absolutely of
the same use under the New Covenant and the Old. 503: 9 Holiness necessary unto
the future Enjoyment of God. 504: 13 Holiness the highest Excellency whereof
our Nature is capable. 509: 18 Holiness the Design of God in Election. 521: 3
Universal Holiness how required in the Precepts of the Gospel. 535: 6 Necessity
of Holiness. 537: 9 Moral Honesty not Holiness. 363: 6 The Host of Heaven, what
it is. 70: 6 Host of the Earth. 71: 6 Humane Nature of Christ derived no evil
from the Fall of Adam, Reasons thereof. 136: 1 Sanctification of the Humane
Nature of Christ in the Womb. 137: 1 Humane Nature of Christ guided and
supported by the Spirit in his Ministry. 141: 7 Humble walking with God,
Motives unto it. 404 Humility promoted by thoughts of Sovereign Grace. 526: 16
I.
Idolatry in Opposition to the Oneness of the Divine Nature and Monarchy, the
first Apostasy. 24: 27 Cure of Idolatry by the Captivity. 25: 27 Jesus
Anathema how uttered by the Instigation of the Devil. 3: 2 Jesus confessed to
be the Lord by unclean Spirits and how. 4: 2 Ignorance taken for simple
Nescience, how it may be ascribed to the Humane Nature of Christ. 138: 3
Ignorance of the true Nature of Holiness and its Effects. 421 Illumination
previous to Conversion, the Nature of it. 193: 6 Illumination how distinguished
from mere Natural Knowledge. 194: 7 Image of God wherein it consisted. 76: 14
Image of God defaced by Sin. 366 Image of God in us, wherein it consisted. 376:
5 Imitation of Christ highly Necessary. 449: 59 Imperfect Obedience not taken
into the Room of perfect Obedience by the New Covenant. 413: 4 Importance of
the Doctrine concerning the Holy Spirit. 10: 10 Importance of the Doctrine of
Sanctification. 324: 6 Imposition of Names by a Prophetical Spirit. 100: 6
Impotency of the Mind to receive spiritual things. 210: 13 Impotency of the
Mind by Nature. 218: 27 Impotency of the Mind of Man by Nature Twofold. 224:
39 Impotency from Spiritual Death, the Nature of it. 243: 14 Natural Impotency
and Enmity how taken away. 278: 46 Inclinations unto holy Actings predominant
in a Gracious Soul. 430: 27 Inclinations of Sin always to be watched against.
479: 11 Inconformity unto Gods Holiness, the Nature of it. 374 Reasons of
Inconformity unto God. 508: 17 Encumbrances from Sloth in spiritual Duties.
435: 36 Individed Operations of the Divine Nature. 69: 2 Indulgence of any Sin
hinders the progress of Holiness in general. 354 Indwelling Sin three ways to
be considered. 476: 6 Infusion of a Principle of Divine Life in Regeneration.
411: 2 Inhabitation of the Spirit the Foundation of the Mortification of Sin.
483: 18 Inherent Righteousness what it is, and wherein it consists. 182: 19
Actual Inherent Righteousness required unto Holiness. 463: 1 Ability of Adam in
the State of Innocence. 280: 50 Inspiration the Original of Prophecye. 101: 7
Inspiration what it is, and wherein it consists. 102: 8 Adjuncts of Divine
Inspiration. 103: 9 Institutions of the Law could not purge the Defilements of
sin. 379 Instruction of the Mind the first End of preaching the Word. 258: 11
Intellectual Faculties of the Mind strengthened by the Holy Spirit. 119: 26
Intellectual Faculties impaired by Sin. 206: 5 Intellectual and Moral Habits
short of Holiness. 336: 14 Intellectual Habits the Nature of them. 415: 8
Intension of Mind in attendance to the Outward Means of Conversion, how
Necessary, and in our own power. 192: 3 Intercession of Christ how a Cause of
our Holiness. 444: 5 Intercession of Christ its Influence unto Holiness. 556: 5
Interest of Faith and Obedience in Principles of Truth. 43: 1 Internal Actings
of the blessed Trinity, where one Person is the Object of the Love of another,
natural and necessary to the Being of God. 45: 5 Internal Acts of the Holy
Trinity, how undivided. 131: 9 Irregularity of our Natures the Cause of Shame.
383 Judgment of Spirits the Duty of all Believers. 18: 22 Justification not
for Obedience to Gospel Precepts. 536, 537: 7, 8, etc.
K.
Killing of Sin what it is, and whence it is so called. 478: 9 Kindness
required toward Believers in an especial Manner. 516: 30 Kingly Power of
Christ, and its Influence unto our Holiness. 562: 18 Knowledge of Divine things
in their Operations and Effects. 20: 24
L.
Law written in the Heart what it is. 278: 47 The Law to be considered as it
expresses first the Authority of God, and then his Holiness. 374 Law and Rule
of the Acceptance of New Obedience what it is. 413: 4 Power of the Law with
respect unto Duties. 534: 4 Reasons why men's Minds are little influenced by
Humane Laws. 540: 15 The Law expounded and vindicated by Christ. 556: 6 Legacy
left by our Lord Jesus Christ unto his sorrowful Disciples. 9: 10 Legal
Purifications Types of real Sanctification. 371: 2 Legal Institutions for
Purification, their Use and End. 399 Arguments from Legal Commands no Motives
to Holiness. 534: 3 Letter of the Scripture profits not the Jews whilst
they have not the Spirit. 24: 26 Spiritual Leprosy by Nature. 393: 10 Liberty
and Ability in the renewed Will. 433: 33 The Life of God from which we are
alienated by Nature, wherein it consists. 215: 21 Life natural what it is, and
wherein it consists. 239: 3, etc. Life spiritual what it is. 240: 6 Life unto
God of Adam in Innocence. ibid. Spiritual Life of Adam in Innocence. 241: 7
Christ how he is our Life. 247: 23 Spiritual Life wherein it consists. 419: 13
Life unto God consists principally in Duties internal. 464: 3 The Light within
examined. 19: 23 Things against the Light of Nature not really enjoined the
Prophets. 109: 15 Saving Light attainable by the Gospel only. 208: 9 Saving
Light how communicated to the Mind. 283: 54 Light and Ability in the renewed
Mind. 432: 31 Some things clear in the Light of Nature. 560: 13 Literal sense
of Doctrines of Truth may be understood. 219: 28 Three things required to
render man meet to live to God. 76: 14 No Local Motion in the sending of the
Spirit. 84: 8 Local Mutations in Vision or Divine Revelations, the Nature of
them. 109: 16 The Spirit of the Lord is Jehova. 65: 31 Love abused by
Superstition vain. 125: 6 Love the first Grace acted by Christ in the offering
of himself. 144 Spiritual Love how implanted on the Soul. 284: 56 Love to Man
the Spring of Christ's holy Obedience. 449: 58 Love derives Virtue from the
Death of Christ, and how. 495: 37 Love effectual to make us like unto God. 513:
25 Especial Effects of Divine Love. 514: 25, 26, 27. Eternal Love a powerful
Motive unto Holiness. 525: 14 Love toward all Saints promoted by thoughts of
Eternal Love. 517: 18 Electing Love a Motive unto Holiness. 529: 20 Lustrations
and Purgations whence in use among the Heathen. 376: 4 Lusts of the Mind from
Darkness. 231: 51 Particular Lusts not the entire Objects of Mortification.
481: 14
M.
Macedonian Heresy concerning the Holy Spirit. 46: 7 Man a middle Creature
between Angels above, and sensitive Animals below. 75: 10 Man the perfection of
the Inferior Creaation. 75: 12 The New Man what it is. 184: 21. and 367
Outward Manner and Ways of Divine Revelations. 106: 11 Manner of the secret
growth of Grace. 347: 8 The Manner and Way how the Blood of Christ does cleanse
us from Sin. 387: 5 Manner of the Operation of the Spirit in the Mortification
of Sin. 484: 21 Manner of teaching by the greatest Moralist compared with that
of Christ. 561: 16 Not the Matter only but the Words of Divine Revelations
given by Inspiration. 114: 20 Matter of Holiness wherein it consists. 411: 3
Means assigned in the Wisdom of God for the Recovery of fallen Man. 8: 9 Due
Means to be sued in coming to the knowledge of Christ. 151: 14 False Means
rejected. ibid. Means of Regeneration various. 177: 10 Use of Means toward
Persons unregenerate. 244: 16 Measures of the Gift of the Holy Spirit. 95: 21
The Spirit not given by Measure to Christ. 140 Mediation of Christ the only
procuring Cause of Holiness. 444: 49 Christ a Mediator in what sense. 451: 62
Mediation of Christ confined unto his Offices. 554: 2 Merit in^^nsistent with
Grace. 332: 13 Merit destractive unto Holiness. 505: 14 Metaphors not to be
feigned in the Scripture. 57: 21 Metaphor in the Expression of sending the
Spirit. 84: 8 Meteors when created. 72: 8 Method of the Work of the Spirit in
Regeneration. 189: 26 Method of the Gospel in declaring the Matters contained
in it. 235: 58 Method of Divine Revelations to be believed. 523: 9 The Mind
Depraved in things Natural and Moral. 209: 12 The Mind as the leading Faculty
of the Soul how Corrupted. 211: 15 The Mind affected with Darkness. 236: 60
Carnal Mind in all Mankind by Nature. 243: 14 Mind as the Conducting faculty
of the Soul how Depraved. 181: 51 Mind to be renewed. 367 Woeful Disorder of
the Mind in a Natural Condition. 567: 2 Impotency of the Mind to receive
spiritual Things. 210: 13 To be spiritually Minded what it is. 424: 18
Ministration of the Spirit renders the Gospel effectual. 11: 11 Ministration of
the Spirit, or how he is ministered. 85: 9 Ministers how called by the Holy
Ghost. 62: 26 Ministers Duty to inquire into and declare the Nature of
Regeneration. 188: 26 Ministry of the Gospel how the Ministry of the Spirit.
122: 3 Ministry of Angels about the Body of Christ when dead. 147: 10 Ministry
of the Word its use in Conversion. 257: 9 Foundation of the Ministry of the
Church in the Promise of the Spirit. 156: 3 Miracles Effects of the Power of
the Holy Ghost. 114: 21 No Mere Man the real Subject of a Power of working
Miracles. 115: 21 Miraculous Operations in Christ by the Power of the Holy
Ghost. 141: 6 Misery of Defiled Sinners. 394: 10 Misery of Man in this World
not renewed by Grace. 566: 1 Moral Condition of Man by Creation. 75: 11 Moral
Virtues and Endowments in Civil things wrought by the Holy Spirit. 118: 23
Moral Impotency of the Mind wherein it consists. 225: 41 Moral Virtue its worth
and Excellency. 325, 326: 8 Moral Virtue is not the Holiness of Truth. 326: 8
Moral Habits the Nature of them. 416: 8 Moral what is intended thereby. 460: 79
Name and Nature of Moral Virtue examined. 459: 78 Moral Operation and Efficacy
of Duties for the Mortifying of sin. 490: 29 Moral Virtue what intended
thereby. 506: 15 Morality improved by Grace no way hindered. 181: 17 Morality or
a Course of Moral Duties not Gospel Holiness. 440, 441, etc. To mortify sin
what it signifies. 474: 3 Mortification of Sin the Nature of it explained. 473:
1 Mortification an always present Duty. 475: 5 Mortification progressive. 479:
10 Moses the first who committed Divine Revelations to writing. 113: 19 No
local Motion in the sending of the Spirit. 84: 8 Motives unto Religious Worship
taken from what God is unto us. 44: 2 Motives unto the Purification of Sin.
391: 8 Example of Christ our great Motive unto Holiness. 449: 58 Principal
Motive unto the Mortification of Sin what it is. 489: 19 Moving on the Face of
the Waters. 72: 8 Mistake of sundry ancient Translations. 30: 3 Mystery of
Holiness. 326: 9 Mystery of the Cleansing of Sin by the Blood of Christ. 399
Mystical Body prepared for Christ by the Holy Ghost. 321: 1
N.
The Name Spirit with the several Significations of it in the Scripture
considered. 28: 2 The Name Spirit, how peculiar to the third Person in the
Trinity. 34: 9 The Name of God denoting his Being and Authority, proper to each
Person in the Trinity. 50: 12 The Nature of God the Foundation of all Religion.
43: 2 Nature of Prophecy of Old. 100: 5 Humane Nature of Christ derived no
Evil from the Fall of Adam, Reasons thereof. 136: 1 Sanctification of the
Humane Nature of Christ in the Womb. 137: 1 Divine Nature in Christ acted not
as his Soul. 137: 2 The Divine Nature what it is. 184: 21 Nature of the Common
Work of the Spirit explained, what. 198: 13 Our whole Nature the subject of
Sanctification. 323: 3 Nature of Holiness not to be comprehended by Natural
Reason. 326: 9 Nature of Merit wherein it consists. 332: 13 Nature lapsed and
depraved not able to repair it self. 335: 14 Nature of Decays in Holiness. 353
Nature created in the Image of God. 365 The Nature of the Guilt and Filth of
Sin how made known. 375 True Nature of spiritual Liberty. 434: 34 Nature of God
the only infinite Fountain of Holiness. 451: 63 Holy Nature of God the
Original Reason of the Necessity of Holiness in us. 499: 3 The Nature of that
Holiness which God requires of us, revealed in Christ. 502: 7 Some things
clear in the Light of Nature. 560: 13 The Natural Man who he is. 217: 24
Natural Impotency of the Mind wherein it consists. 225: 40 Necessity of Changes
in the Work of Grace. 353: 3 Necessity of Holiness acknowledged by all. 498: 1
Necessity of Holiness notwithstanding Gods readiness to pardon sin. 518: 33
Necessity of Holiness arising from Gods Command. 533: 2. and 553: 37 Neglect of
known Duty ruinous to the Life of Holiness. 250: 10 New Act of especial Grace
required unto every particular Duty. 430: 28 New Creation how effected by the
Holy Spirit. 95: 1 Work of the Holy Spirit in the New Creation greatly to be
considered. 121: 1 New Creation the Work whereby God designed to glorify
himself principally in this World. 126: 8 New Creation how assigned unto the
Father, Son and Spirit dictinctly. 126: 9 New Creature what it is, and wherein
it consists. 183: 20 New Man what it is. 367 New Nature wherein it consists.
411: 2 Nine sorts of spiritual Gifts. 6, 7: 7 Nocturnal Visions and Dreams the
same. 107: 13 Nothing to be done in Obedience without Aids from Christ. 466: 8
Nourishing of the Creation the Work of the Holy Spirit. 73: 9
O.
Obedience of Christ gave Efficacy to his Oblation. 144 Obedience without Merit
Foolishness to Carnal Reason. 334: 13 Obedience with respect unto Rewards and
Punishments not servile. 541: 15 Object of Christ's Priestly Acts God himself.
555: 3 Objects of the Life of Innocence, and the Life of Grace in Christ
different. 242: 10 Objects of Creating Acts not in potentia before their
Existence. 273: 37 Objections against the Progressive Nature of Holiness
answered. 349, 350, etc. 10 Objections against the Necessity of Holiness from
the Decree of Election, removed. 522, 523, etc. How the Lord Christ sanctified
himself to be an Oblation or Sacrifice. 143: 9 Oblation of Christ whence
voluntary and meritorious. 146: 9 Obligation unto Holiness no less under the
Gospel than under the Law. 535: 6 All Obstacles removed by effectual Grace.
270: 30 Obstinacy and Stubbornness of the Heart by Nature. 277: 45 Obstructions
of the Growth of Holiness. 350: 10 Occasions of spiritual decays in Grace. 354
How Christ Offered himself to God through the Eternal Spirit. 143: 8 Office of
Witness-bearing unto the Lord Christ, discharged by the Holy Spirit. 149: 13
One singular Spirit of God declared in the Scripture. 33: 8 The Holy Spirit
One, dividing as he pleases to others. 94: 21 Operations of the Spirit called
the Spirit by a Metonymy. 33: 8 Divine Operations of all sorts ascribed to the
Holy Spirit. 59: 24 All Divine Operations ascribed unto God absolutely. 68: 1
Operations of the Holy Spirit on the Humane Nature of Christ of two sorts. 128:
2 Operations of the Holy Spirit on the Humane Nature of Christ, notwithstanding
its personal Union with the Son. 129: 3 Operations of the Holy Spirit in
Conversion suited unto the Powers of our Souls. 270: 31 Twofold Operation of
Christ as Three in One. 162 Opening of the Heavens what it signifies. 52: 15
Opinions in the Primitive Church falsely fathered on spiritual Revelations. 15:
19 Opposition to the Spirit of God and his Works, with the Grounds of it. 21:
25 Pretenses of Opposition unto the Spirit of God examined. 21: 25 Oppositions
against the Church suppressed by the Spirit of God. 78: 16 No Opposition
between Gods Commands and his Grace. 167 Universal Opposition between Sin and
Grace. 477: 7 Order of Divine Dispensations depends on the Order of the
subsistence of the Divine Persons. 39: 14 Order of subsistence of the Holy
Spirit in the Blessed Trinity. 66: 33 Order of Operation depending on the Order
of Subsistence, not the Order of Promination. ibid. Outward Order in the Church
of no use without the Presence and Work of the Spirit. 158: 4 Order in
Subsistence gives Order in Operation. 162 Order of the Mind in its first
Creation. 212: 15 Order of the Gospel inverted by Prejudices. 235: 58 Order of
Precedence in the Acts of Sanctification. 410: 1 Skill in the Original Text
necessary to the Exposition of the Scripture. 30: 4 Original of all things in
their several kinds. 73: 9 Original of the Spirits Acting in all his Works
toward the Church. 89: 15 Where Original Sin is denied, Regeneration cannot be
effected. 186: 24 Original Order of our Souls wherein it consisted. 568: 6
Outward Manner and ways of Divine Revelations. 106: 11
P.
Pains of Death how loosed toward Christ. 147: 11 Vanity of Papal Inventions
for the Purification of Sin. 379, 380 Partial departure of the Spirit from any.
91: 19 Partial Works deceitful. 369 Two Parts of the Life of God. 423: 16
Particular good End not sufficient to render a Duty Good or Holy. 441: 44 Peace
with God preserved by Sanctification. 323: 3 How God sanctifies us as the God
of Peace. ibid. Pelagius his Artifices. 177: 9 Doctrine of Pelagius. 183: 20
Pelagianism renewed. 255: 5 Pelagianisme reduced unto its Head. 256: 7
Difference between Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians. 262: 19 Pelagian Grace
inconsistent with Prayer. 265: 24 Pelagius his Prayer. 266: 25 Pelagian Grace
rejected. 458: 73 Penmen of the Scripture whether all holy. 111: 18 Penmen of
the Scripture not left unto the use of their own Natural Abilities. 114: 20
Sinless Perfection not attainable in this Life. 547: 25 Persecution of Erring
Persons vain and fruitless. 19, 20: 23 Person of the Spirit and his Operations
distinguished. 33: 8 Third Person in the Trinity whence called the Spirit. 34:
9 Person of the Father the Fountain of the Trinity. 38: 13 Some things not
proper to a Person assigned to the Holy Ghost, in what sense. 48: 9 The Person
of the Holy Spirit not poured out but his Gifts and Graces. 87: 13 Every Divine
Person Author of the same Work. 68: 1 The Person of Christ how the Fountain of
all Grace. 455 The whole Person of a Believer the subject of Sanctification.
365 Divine Persons succeeded not to each other in their Operations. 70: 3
Manifestation of the distinction of Persons in the Divine Nature, a great End
in the Work of the New Creation. 155: 2 All Personal Properties assigned unto
the Holy Spirit in the Scripture. 48: 8 Personal Union or the Subsistence of
both the Natures of Christ in one Person, the necessary Consequent of
Assumption. 129: 5 Personality of the Holy Spirit, from John 14. 15, 16. 60,
61: 25 Persuasive Efficacy of the Word Preached. 258: 12 Persuasion conferres
no Strength. 262: 21 Persuasions enable not men to convert themselves. 266: 25
Persuasions of Perfection ruinous to Holiness. 355 Pharisaical Confidence. 397:
12 Wise Philosophers of Old the greatest Despisers of the Gospel. 221, 222
Physical Operations of Grace proved. 269: 29 Pleas for Balaam answered. 111,
112: 19 Pleas of Pelagians. 263: 21 Vain Pleas for the Power of Free Will, in
Opposition to the Aids of the Spirit. 471: 15 Pleas for Holiness by unholy
persons uncomely and dangerous. 498: 2 Pleas for Moral Virtue examined. 506: 15
Pollution or spiritual Defilement in Sin. 372: 3 Pollution of Sin that property
of it whereby it is opposed to the Holiness of God. 374: 4 Habitual Pollution
inconsistent with any Holiness. 378 Pouring forth of the Spirit. 86: 11 Pouring
forth of the Spirit always respects the times of the Gospel. 87: 12 Power
ascribed unto the Holy Spirit. 58: 22 Powers and Operations of Secondary Causes
to be owned. 77: 15 Power of the Mind with respect unto spiritual things
examined. 216: 23 Power in the Mind by Nature to discern spiritual things. 221:
30 Power of spiritual Darkness. 227: 43 Power of Darkness in the Devil. 228: 45
Powers and Duties of the Mind. 236: 60 Power unto Obedience in the State of
Innocence. 241: 8 Power in Natural men beyond what they do or will use. 245: 20
Power in the Faculties of Nature as Corrupted. 250: 29 Power of the Word to
prevail on the Souls of Men, whereon it depends. 258: 13 Spiritual Power in the
Habit of Holiness. 432: 31 Commands of the Covenant respect the Power
administered in the Covenant. 432: 30 Spiritual Power wherein it consists. 432:
31 No Power in Believers unto Duties of Holy Obedience, without assistance of
the Spirit. 465, etc. Power administered by Christ enabling us to be Holy. 502:
8 No Power given by one Covenant to fulfill the Commands of the other. 544: 20
All power unto Obedience from Grace. 546: 22 Twofold power necessary unto
Obedience. 547: 26 Practice of Moral Virtue not Gospel Holiness. 459: 77
Pravity of Sin with respect unto the Holiness of God Twofold. 377: 6 Praying
for the Spirit prescribed as our Duty. 123, 124: 5 Difference between the
Prayers of Wicked men, and of Believers. 164: 6 Prayers of the Church prove
Effectual Grace. 265: 24 Prayers for Grace and Holiness of what Nature. 348,
349: 9 Prayer for the Holy Spirit in what sense. 357: 2 Prayers of Believers
for the purification of Sin how influenced by the Spirit of God. 384: 3 Prayer
for Light to discern the Nature of Sin necessary. 395 Prayer how a Means of
purging Sin. 400: 13 Prayer weakeneth Sin and how. 492: 32 Preaching of the
Word by the Holy Spirit. 119: 27 Preaching of the Gospel provided for and
disposed by the Holy Ghost. 209: 10 Precepts of the Law not clearly understood
before the Coming of Christ. 557: 6 Preeminence of our Nature wherein it
consists. 509: 18 Prejudices against spiritual things from Darkness. 232: 53
Prejudices against the Mystery of the Gospel, what they are, and whence they
arise. 234: 55 Work preparatory unto Conversion. 192: 3 Works of the Spirit
preparatory for the New Creation. 98: 2 Preparatory Works for Conversion on
men, not preparatory Inclinations in them. 251: 30 Preparatory Work unto
Conversion wherein it consists. 256: 6 Presence of Christ by his Spirit what it
is, and wherein it consists. 159 Preservation of the Creation by Divine
Providence. 77: 15 Preservation of Grace a glorious Work. 348: 9 None can
preserve their own Grace. 345: 6 Pretenses of Opposition unto the Spirit of God
examined. 21: 25 Pretenses of Moral Virtue unto Holiness disproved. 462 False
pretenses unto Holiness. 327: 10 Prevalency of the Word whereon it depends.
260: 15 Pride the poison of the Age. 527: 16 Acts of Christ's Priestly Office.
555: 3 Principle of spiritual Life antecedent unto Moral Reformation of Life.
185: 22 Principle of Obedience how wrought in us of God. 276: 42 Principle of
spiritual Obedience how renewed in us. 280: 50 A Principle of Eternal Life in
Holiness. 329: 12 Priciple of Holiness in it self. 346: 8 Principle of
Sanctification or Habit of Grace wrought in Believers by the Holy Spirit, the
Nature of it. 411: 2 Principle of Holiness in what sense called an Habit. 416:
9 Principle of Holiness described. ibid. Principle of Holiness in Believers,
the same in kind in all Believers, distinct in degrees. 417: 10 Where the
Principle of Holiness is, there will be the Fruits of it. 421 Principle of
Holiness enclineth the Heart unto Acts and Duties of Holiness universally. 425:
19 Principle, Dispositions and Effects of Sin. 476: 6 All false Principles of
Obedience will admit of Reserves for Sin. 425: 19 Privilege of one man above
another on the Account of Holiness. 510: 19 Spirit proceeds from the Son. 39:
14 Procession of the Holy Spirit of what sort. 88, 89: 14, 15 Procession of the
Holy Spirit from the Father and Son. 89: 15 Twofold, Natural and Voluntary.
ibid. Dignity of Professors wherein it consists. 511: 20 Progress made by the
Lord Christ in the Exercise of his Humane Faculties. 137: 2 Mortification
Progressive. 479: 10 Promise of the Holy Ghost unto whom it is made. 10: 10
Promise of the Spirit of God unto the Church rendered useless by some. 23: 26
Promise of the Spirit under the Gospel unto all Believers. 123: 4 Promise of
Christ's presence with his Church how accomplished. 158: 5 Promise of God when
respected in a due manner. 337: 14 Promises and Exhortations how effectual.
245: 18 Promises how to be mixed with Faith. 400 Especial Promises annexed unto
especial Duties. 552: 35 Promises a great Encouragement unto Holiness. 553: 36
Proper Ends of the Knowledge of Christ Love and Conformity. 152: 16 All
properties of the Divine Nature ascribed unto the Holy Spirit. 66: 32 The
properties of God most gloriously represented in Christ. 501: 6 Prophets of
Baal who they were, and why so called. 14: 17 A Prophet what the Name
signifies. 101: 8 Prophets how they enquired into their own Prophecies. 100: 5
Tongues and Hands of the Prophets guided by the Holy Ghost. 105: 10 Prophets
established in the Church all Holy. 111: 18 Prophecy the first eminent Gift of
the Holy Ghost under the Old Testament. 99: 5 Beginning and Ending of the Gift
of Prophecy under the Old Testament. 100: 6 Prophecy in its Exercise Twofold.
101: 8 General Nature of the Gift of Prophecy. 102: 9 Prophetical Office of
Christ its Acts and Objects. 556: 6 Propositions of the Gospel to be believed,
of what Nature. 524: 12 Purgatory a great Engine for the Ruin of Souls. 381
Faith how it purges the Soul. 390: 8 Purging of Sin commensurate unto the
whole Work of Sanctification. 378 To purify our selves from all Sin our Duty.
398: 13 Purification the first of Sanctification. 370: 1 Means of Purification
if duly used, the Soul is kept from Defilement so as to be always accepted
with God. 407 Purification the End of Christ's Oblation. 555 Legal Purifications
Types of real Sanctification. 371: 2 Putting of Spirit on men, and what is
signified thereby. 85: 10
Q.
Quakers mistakes and failures about Mortification. 488: 26 Quakers strangers
unto true Mortification. 489: 26 Qualifications for the Receiving of Gospel
Gifts unto Edification. 359 Spiritual Quickening an Act of Almighty Power. 279:
49 The Queen of Heaven. 71: 6
R.
Rage against the Spirit of God. 24: 26 Enthusiastical Raptures no Means of
Conversion. 186: 25 Readiness unto Holy Obedience whence it proceeds. 435: 36
Readiness in the Minds of Believers unto all Duties of Obedience. 464: 5 Real
Work of Grace and Holiness in the Hearts of Believers. 452: 66 Reasons and
Causes why the Mysteries of the Gospel are esteemed Folly. 222: 34 Reasons why
the Growth of Holiness is hardly discerned. 351: 10 Corrupted Reason depraves
the whole Mystery of the Gospel. 325: 8 Weakness of Humane Reason to instruct
us unto Obedience. 559: 13 To Receive the Grace of God what it is. 80: 3 What
is required to the Receiving spiritual things in a spiritual Manner. 219: 29
Receiving of the Spirit how Antecedent unto Faith. 358: 3 Rectitude of Man's
Nature wherein it consisted. 76: 14 Reformation of Life is not Regeneration.
181: 17 Reformation of Life upon Convictions wherein it comes short of
Holiness. 201: 19 Regeneration wrought under the Old Testament, but not clearly
as to its Nature. 174: 6 Regeneration not a Metaphorical Expression of
Amendment of Life. 175 Regeneration in the Nature of it clearly revealed in the
Gospel. 176: 8 Regeneration as to the Kind of the Work the same in all that are
Regenerate. 177: 10 Regeneration infallibly produces Reformation of Life. 182:
19 Regeneration the only Means of Delivery from the state of Sin. 254: 3
Regeneration the Work of God, not our own. 285: 57 Regenerate Persons alone
have the Promise of the Spirit for their Sanctification. 358 Rejection of
Christ the the last fatal Fall of the Church of the Jews. 25: 27 Relation of
the Person of the Holy Spirit unto the Father and the Son. 89: 15 Relation the
Ground of Communication. 363: 5 Reliance on the Blood of Christ for Cleansing,
an Act of Faith. 389 No Relief by Christ for unholy Persons. 564: 21 Religious
Worship is the due Application of our Souls unto God according to his own
Manifestations of himself. 44: 3 Religious Obedience due to the Holy Spirit, as
unto the Father and Son. 51: 14 Religion in the Papacy wherein it consists.
333: 13 The only Remedy against the Pollution of Sin. 399 Effects of the
Remainder of Sin in Believers. 429: 26 Renovation of the Mind what it is, and
wherein it consists. 282: 53 Renovation of the Will wherein it consists. 284:
55 Renovation of our Natures the Foundation of spiritual Purification. 383
Renovation of our Nature how the Foundation of Right and Title to all other
things. 509: 18 Renovation of the Image of God the only Cure of the Vanity,
Disorder and Misery of our Souls. 568: 7 Reparation of our Nature wherein it
does consist. 366 Representation of New Objects unto the Rational Faculties of
Christ. 138: 3 False Representations of the Death of Christ to the Minds of
men. 495: 38 All Repugnancy to Conversion taken away by Grace. 275: 41
Residence of adverse Principles in the same Faculties of the Soul. 477: 8
Resignation of all unto the Divine Will necessary. 527: 17 How the Spirit may
be Resisted. 165: 8 Respect unto Gods Commands wherein it consists. 337: 14
Restoration of the Image of God an End of Christ's Incarnation. 554: 1 Resting
of the Spirit on any. 90: 18 Resurrection of Christ assigned distinctly unto
the Father, Son and Spirit. 147: 11 Nothing Revealed by Christ unto the Church,
but what is from Christ. 160 Divine Revelation the Rule and Measure of all
Religion. 44: 3 Revelation both materially and formally the Rule of Holiness.
412: 3 Revelation of God by Christ of what sort. 556: 6 Rewards and Punishments
Enforcements of Obedience. 539: 13 Inherent Righteousness what it is, and
wherein it consists. 182: 19 Righteousness of our own unto Justification not
required. 332: 13 Righteousness unto Justification not the End of Gospel
Commands. 537: 9 Word and Doctrine of Christ the Rule and Measure of Holiness.
445: 52 Every Rule of Duties besides the Gospel imperfect. 560: 14
S.
First Sacerdotal Act of Christ. 143: 9 Sacrifices were done really and
spiritually by the Sacrifice of Christ. 386 Several sorts of Sacrifices and
their use. ib. How the Lord Christ sanctified himself to be an Oblation or
Sacrifice. 143: 9 Sanctified Persons mistaken in the World. 188 Affections how
depraved, how sanctified. 285: 56 Sanctification of the Humane Nature of Christ
in the Womb. 137: 1 God the Author of our Sanctification. 322: 3 Sanctification
founded in Atonement. 323: 3 Sanctification described. 323, 324: 5
Sanctification Twofold. 324: 7 Sanctification and Holiness inseparable from
the Doctrine, Truth, and Grace of the Gospel. 325: 8 Sanctification of
Believers a Mysterious Work. 326: 9 Sanctification and Holiness promised. 335:
14 Sanctification and Regeneration how they differ. 339: 4 Sanctification a
Progressive Work. 339, 340: 4, 5, etc. Sanctification to be considered in its
Principle and Progress. 358 Entire Work of the Holy Ghost in Sanctification
explained. 435: 35 Sanctification no less necessary than Justification. 505: 14
Satisfaction of Christ the great Encouragement unto Holiness. 502: 8 Saul how
he Prophesied. 112: 18 Scripture to be attended unto against cavilling
Objections. 523: 8 Secret Chambers where Christ is not, what is intended by
them. 152: 15 Seers whence Prophets were so called. 102: 8 Selfish men unlike
to God. 516: 29 Seminal prolisick Virtue communicated by the Holy Spirit unto
the Creation. 73: 9 Sending of the Spirit, and how God is said to send him. 84:
8 Servile Fear the Nature of it. 404 Shame inseparable from the Filth of Sin.
375 Casting off Shame the highest Aggravation of Sin. 377: 5 Shows the things
of Christ to Believers, the things of Christ of two sorts. 165: 6 Signs and
Wonders no infallible Testimony of true Prophets. 18: 22 Miraculous Works
called Signs and why. 115: 21 No outward Sign can have in it self the Nature of
Regeneration. 180: 16 Various Significations of the Name Spirit. 30, 31, 32,
33: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. One singular Spirit of God declared in the Scripture. 33: 8
Great Significations depending on a single Letter. 114: 20 Sin against the Holy
Ghost why remediless. 12: 14 Where Original sin is denied, Regeneration cannot
be effected. 186: 24 Sin compared unto all things that are defiled and
polluted. 372: 3 Sin fills all Sinners not obdurate with shame. 377: 5 Glorying
in Sin its Abomination. 397: 12 Sin and Grace cannot bear Rule in the same
Person at the same time. 429: 25 Sin abides whilst we are in the flesh. 475: 5
Sin weakened by the Improvement and Exercise of Grace. 478: 8 Single Acts of
Obedience will denominate no man holy. 415: 8 Skill in the Original Text
necessary to the Exposition of the Scripture. 30: 4 Sloth in Holy Duties, the
Evil and Danger of it. 508: 17 Socinian Doctrine concerning the Holy Spirit.
47: 7 New Soul of the Proselyte. 180: 16 The Soul of Man the quickening
Principle in Life Natural not in Life Spiritual. 243: 13 The Soul and Body how
sanctified. 368 Sending of the Holy Spirit the principal Promise of the New
Testament. 8: 9 Spirits how to be tried. 17: 25 Holy Spirit known by his
Operations. 21: 24 Letter of the Scripture profits not the Jews whilst they
have not the Spirit. 24: 26 Dispensation of the Spirit not confined unto the
first times of the Church. 25: 28 The Name Spirit with the several
Significations of it in the Scripture confirmed. 28: 2 The good Spirit and the
holy Spirit the same. 38: 12 Holy Spirit in what sense called the Spirit of
God. 38: 13 Holy Spirit how called the Spirit of the Son. 39: 14 The Spirit not
called the Spirit of Christ because he was anointed with him. 40: 14 The Spirit
not called the Spirit of Christ because he inspired the Prophets to foretell
his Coming. 41: 16 The Spirit of Antichrist what it is. 41, 42: 17 The Holy
Spirit an Eternal Infinite Intelligent Person. 46, 47, 48, 49, etc. 7, 8, 9,
10, etc. The Holy Spirit has a spiritual Substance and subsistence of his own.
54: 18 Why the Holy Spirit never appeared in the Person of a Man. 55: 18 The
Holy Spirit the Author of the Ministry of the Church. 61: 26 The Holy Spirit
the Object of men's Actings in Religion. 62: 28 The Holy Spirit not a Quality or
Virtue of the Divine Nature. 64: 30 The Holy Spirit expressly called God. 64:
31 The Spirit of the Lord is Jehova. 65: 31 Spirit of God and the Breath of God
the same. 75: 12 The Holy Spirit given of God, and how. 80: 3 The Spirit how
given by the Father in the way of Authority. 81: 4 The Holy Spirit compared
unto Fire and Water, and why. 88: 13 The Holy Spirit One, dividing as he
pleases to others. 94: 21 Good Spirit of God overruling the Devil. 112: 18
Spirit of God the only Author of all things good and excellent under the Old
Testament. 119: 28 The Spirit and his Graces the great subject of all the
Prayers of Believers. 124: 5 The Holy Spirit the Promise and Legacy of Christ.
124: 6 The Holy Spirit the Spirit of the Son, as well as of the Father, what
follows thereon. 130: 8 The Spirit how and when given by Christ. 157: 3 The
Holy Spirit supplies the Bodily absence of Christ. 158: 5 How the Spirit
glorified Christ. 161 The Spirit that is born of the Spirit, what it is. 173: 3
Holy Spirit works by Means ordinarily. 187: 25 Things of the Spirit of God
what they are. 218: 26 Holy Spirit the immediate Author of Regeneration. 254: 4
The Holy Spirit the immediate Sanctifier of all Believers. 337: 15 The Holy
Spirit promised with respect unto his Effects. 357: 2 The Spirit that is formed
in Believers, what it is. 418: 12 Holy Spirit the principal efficient Cause of
the Mortification of Sin. 481: 15, etc. Use of Spiritual Gifts. 2: 1 Abuse of
Spiritual Gifts. ibid. Spiritual Gifts, their Author, Nature, Use and End. 5,
6, 7: 4, 5, 6, 7. Spiritual Mercies all from the Holy Spirit. 125: 7 No
spiritual Good in any one by Nature. 166: 10 Spiritual Troubles by some
despised. 197: 10 Spiritual and Natural how opposed. 217: 25 Spiritual things
Foolishness unto men of corrupt Affections. 233: 53 Spring of spiritual Life in
God. 246: 22 Spiritual Life what it is, and wherein it does consist. 246: 23
Spiritual things how spiritually to be discerned. 282: 53 Spiritual Life
wherein it consists. 419: 13 Spiritual things how they are to be taught. 460:
78 Spiritual Life and Natural compared in their Powers and Acts. 465: 7 Work of
the Spirit toward the Humane Nature of Christ in the State of the Dead. 146:
10 State of Regeneration the same in all. 179: 14 Strength by spiritual Aids
from the Holy Spirit. 383 Strength administered in each Covenant to fulfill its
terms. 545: 21 Stupidity in sinning. 397: 12 Variety of Style in the Holy
Scripture whence it proceeds. 114: 20 Moral Suasion not the only Means of
Conversion. 256, 257, etc. 7, 8 Submission to the Will of God how acted in the
Sufferings of Christ. 145 Submission to the Will of God promoted by thoughts of
Eternal Love. 527: 17 All Sufficiency unto Obedience from God, none in our
selves. 467: 9 Suitableness between the Mind and Duty from Grace only. 437 Sun
Moon and Stars the Host of Heaven. 71: 6 Supererogation the Vanity thereof.
333: 13 Supernatural principle of holiness wrought by the Holy Ghost. 414: 5
Suppositions of a State of Grace may be abused. 355 Surprizals with a Spirit of
Prophecy. 86: 11 Symbolical Actions how enjoined the Prophets. 109: 15
T.
Teaching by the Holy Ghost. 59: 25 Advantages in the Teachings of Christ above
all others. 559: 12 How the Spirit teaches us to pray. 349: 9 Temptations how
they hinder, and how they further the Growth of Holiness. 352 Tempting of the
Spirit wherein it consists. 63: 28 Testimony of the Spirit unto Christ with its
Efficacy. 150 Skill in the Original Text necessary to the Exposition of the
Scripture. 30: 4 Thankfulness for Cleansing from sin. 403 Three things
required to render man meet to live to God. 76: 14 Things represented in Vision
to the Prophets. 108: 14 Things against the Light of Nature, not really
enjoined the Prophets. 109: 15 Three things required unto the Writing of the
Scripture. 113: 20 Things supposed unto the Work of the Holy Spirit toward the
Church. 155: 2 The same things ascribed unto the Holy Spirit and unto Men, in
what sense. 168: 9 Things in the Power of our own Wills required in order unto
our Regeneration. 193: 4 Things of the Spirit of God what they are. 218: 26
Spiritual Things Foolishness unto men of corrupt Affections. 233: 53 Tongues
and Hands of the Prophets guided by the Holy Ghost. 105: 10 Mistake of sundry
ancient Translations. 30: 3 Doctrine of the Trinity the great Foundation of all
Religion. 45: 4 The holy Trinity revealed in the New Creation. 126: 8 Troubles
wherein we stand in need of Consolation, of two sorts. 360 Truth a Grace
expressing the Image of God. 517: 31 Trial of Prophets and Prophecy under the
Old Testament twofold. 18: 22 Twofold State of all Mankind. 205: 2 Twofold
Work of the Spirit in Sanctification, and Supplications answering each other.
348: 9
V.
Vanity of all Pleas and Pretenses against the Divine Personality of the Holy
Ghost. 49: 10 Vanity of the Mind what it is, and wherein it consists. 211: 15
Vanity the Nature and Causes of it in the World. 213: 18 Vanity of Papal
Inventions for the Purification of sin. 379, 380 Valuation of the Means of
Cleansing from sin. 403: 14 Various Significations of the Name Spirit. 30, 31,
32, 33: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Variety of Duties required unto the Mortification of
Sin. 490: 28 All Virtue of the especial Operation of the Spirit of God. 77: 15
Moral Virtues and Endowments in Civil things wrought by the Holy Spirit. 118:
23 Moral Virtue is not the Holiness of Truth. 326: 8 Virtues to be imitated in
Christ. 450: 59 Name and Nature of Moral Virtue examined. 459: 78 Moral Virtue
what intended thereby. 506: 15 View by Faith of the Blood of Christ as
sacrificed, and the Efficacy thereof. 389: 6 View of Sin under suffering
useful. 392 View of the State of Nature necessary. 393: 10 Vindication of the
true sense of the Law by Christ. 557: 7, 8 Vine and Branches their mutual
Relation and In-being. 456: 70 No Violence or Force offered unto the Will by
Grace. 271: 33 Prophetical Visions by the Representation of things to the
outward senses. 107: 14 Visions and Representations of things of two sorts.
108: 14 What is required to render Visions Divine Revelations. 109: 14 No Vital
Acts under the Power of Death spiritual. 246: 21 Vivification what it is. 279:
49 Divine Voluntary Actings constantly ascribed unto the Holy Spirit in the
Scripture. 49: 10 Articulate Voices in Divine Revelations how formed. 106: 12
Unalterable Decree of God that no unholy Person shall be saved. 521: 4 Guilt of
Unbelief notwithstanding Natural Impotency. 273: 37 Unclean the same with
Unholy. 370 Things unclean by the Law, why made so. 375 Uncleansed sinners can
never come to the Enjoyment of God. 394: 10 Uncleansed Sinners can have no
Communion with Christ. 406: 16 Unction of Christ unto his Prophetical Office.
139: 4 Understanding with all the proper Acts of it ascribed unto the Spirit.
55: 19 The Understanding, the use of it, and how it is depraved. 212: 16
Understanding corrupted as to the Object of its Acting. 281: 52 No unholy
Person can ever enjoy God. 505: 13 Vanity of Unholy Persons pretending an
Interest in the Mediation of Christ. 562: 19 Unholy Persons how of all others
they dishonor Jesus Christ. 563: 20 Personal Union or the subsistence of both
the Natures of Christ in one Person, the necessary Consequent of Assumption.
129: 5 Union with Christ notwithstanding the Defilement of Sin, how possible.
406: 16 Union with Christ by Virtue of the New Creature. 407 Union with Christ
wherein it consists. 419: 13 Union with Christ and the Nature thereof. 453: 66
Whether Union go before Sanctification, and in what sense. 453: 67
Universality the best Evidence of sincere Sanctification. 369 Unregenerate
Persons must all perish. 253: 2 Unregenerate Persons may pray for the Spirit.
361: 4 Use of spiritual Gifts. 1: 1 Use of Promises, Exhortations and
Threatenings. 166: 10 Use of Ordinances and Means necessary to the Progress of
Holiness. 354 Diligent Use of Means required unto every one that would be holy.
521: 4 Usefulness in the World depends on our Conformity to God. 512: 22
W.
Water poured on Grace to cause it to grow. 347: 8 Fire and Water the Means of
all Typical Cleansing. 371: 1 Watching against Sin on the Account of its
Defilement. 403: 15 The Way whereby the Blood of Christ cleanses from Sin,
known to few. 384: 3 The Way of Cleansing Sin made known by the Holy Spirit
alone. 388 Ways whereby Grace is increased. 343: 6 Ways and Means whereby we
may come to a Discovery of the Defilement of Sin. 395 The weakest Grace shall be
preserved. 344: 6 Weakness of Humane Reason to instruct us unto Obedience. 559:
13 A Rational Will the most eminent Property of a Person, ascribed to the Holy
Ghost. 57: 2^ The Will of the Spirit in all his Operations. 165: 8 Christ not
to be sought in the Wilderness, in what sense. 151: 15 Will and Affections how
under the Power of the Mind. 237: 61 The Will of God the only Rule of
Obedience. 249: 27 Wills and Assections of men how wrought upon by the Word.
259: 13 The Will in Conversion acts not but as it is acted. 271: 35 Acts of the
Will in Conversion how to be considered. 274: 39 The Will considered as a Vital
Faculty, and as a free Principle. 283: 55 Will of God the Rule and Measure of
our Obedience. 412: 3 Every gracious Act of the Will wrought by the Holy
Spirit. 470: 14 Wisdom and Power of the Holy Spirit in the Preservation of
Grace. 348: 9 Wisdom of God to be considered in all Commands of Obedience. 543:
18, 19, etc. Office of Witness-bearing unto the Lord Christi discharged by the
Holy Spirit. 149: 13 Witness of the Spirit. 168: 9 Words the Means of any thing
in us applied to God, intend signs only of it. 160 What the Word works
instrumentally, the Spirit works effectually. 197: 11 Word of God the only
Rule and Means of persuading the Soul to Conversion. 257: 8 Word and Doctrine
of Christ the Rule and Measure of Holiness. 445: 52 Every divine Work
distinctly assigned to each Person. 68: 1 Work of the Spirit toward the Humane
Nature of Christ in the state of the Dead. 146: 10 Every Work of the Spirit is
not sanctifying or saving. 166: 9 Work of Illumination and Conviction wherein
it comes short of Conversion. 199: 16 Work of the Spirit in Regeneration not
confined to Arguments and Motives. 261: 19 Work of the Holy Ghost in
Sanctification owned by all, the Nature of that Work questioned. 339: 3 Work of
Holiness secret and Mysterious. 351: 10 Work of Grace variously carried on in
the Soul. 353 Work of the Holy Spirit in us as to the Subject and Object of it.
385: 3 Entire Work of the Holy Ghost in Sanctification explained. 435: 35 What
Works ascribed distinctly to the Father, what to the Son, and what to the Holy
Spirit. 69: 2 Works supposed satisfactory for Sin, overthrow the Gospel. 331:
13 Workings of the Spirit of God on and in men of the World. 77: 15 Writing of
the Scripture an Effect of the Holy Ghost. 113: 19 Three things required unto
the Writing of the Scripture. 113: 20
Z.
Zeal to the Glory of God how Acted by Christ in his Oblation. 144
A TABLE of some Places of Scripture Explained or Applied in this Treatise.
GENESIS.
Chapters. Verses. Pages. Sections. 1 2 38 13 1 2 72 8 1 22 32 7 1 26, 27 75 11
2 7 74. and 465 10, and 6 3 8 29 2 4 4 53 16 6 5 211, 366 15 6 6 63 28 8 1 29 2
8 11 53 16 9 1, 2 510 18 17 1 334, 413 13, and 4 EXODUS.
4 8 115 21 7 1 102 8 31 2, 3. 118 25 LEVITICUS.
1 11 385 4 9 24 53 16 NUMBERS.
11 16, 17 95, 116 21 12 8 106 12 19 4, 5, 6. 389 20 387 4 ^4 1 112 18
DEUTERONOMY.
5 29 424 17 13 1, 2 18 22 18 20 14 17 30 6 417 11 32 12 65 31 JOSHUA.
10 11 115 12 12 22 112 18 JUDGES.
Chapters. Verses. Pages. Sections. 3 10 17 15 5 20 71 6 I. SAMUEL.
10 9 117 16 14 36 11 15 91 19 18 10 37 11 19 24 110 17 II. SAMUEL.
23 2 101 7 I. KINGS.
22 6 13 16 22 26 15 18 22 21, 22. 33 7 22 18 108 14 II. KINGS.
2 9 95 21 I. CHRONICLES.
12 18 90 16 28 12 105 10 28 19 113 19 EZRA.
9 6 396 JOB.
9 29, 30, 31 379 26 13 71 7 32 4 58 22 33 4 75 12 PSALMS.
1 4 29 2 5 4, 5, 6. 500 3 8 3 72 7 Psalms. Verses. Pages. Sections. 16 11 146
10 18 21, 22, 23 490 28 19 12, 13 408 33 6 35 9 38 5 377 5 40 6, 7, 8 144 45 13
329 12 5^ 11 35 9 5 402 7 389 5 53 3 395 63 8 425 18 68 18 157 3 104 29, 30. 73
9 139 13, 14. 327 10 143 10 37 12 PROVERBS.
1 23 86 11 4 18 347 9 6 10 436 36 8 26 74 10 30 12 397 12 ECCLESIASTES.
5 6 31 5 12 10 114 20 SOLOMON'S SONG.
5 2, 3 436 ISAIAH.
4 4 370 1 6 6, 7 54 17 11 1, 2, 3 131, 59. 90, 94. 23, 18, 20. 20 1, 2, 3. 109
15 32 15 86 11 40 27, 28 342 5 40 31 431 30 44 3 88 13 45 1 77, 118 15, 22 57
9, 10 376, 232. 5, 53 59 20, 21 11 11 61 1 139 4 63 10, 11, 14 35, 65 9, 31 64
6 377 6 JEREMIAH.
2 22 379 4 22 216 22 20 9 103 8 23 28 104 10 23 33, 36 108 14 31 33 418 11 52
23 32 6 EZEKIEL.
Chapters. Verses. Pages. Sections. 8 3 109 16 13 3 32 7 16 60, 61 62, 63 396
36 25, 26, 27. 185, 335, 370, 418, 23, 14, 1, 11. DANIEL.
10 9 107 13 12 3 83 7 12 9 104 10 HOSEA.
1 2 109 15 5 13 388 8 12 236 59 14 5, 6 346 8 AMOS.
4 13 30 3 MICAH.
2 7 59 23 3 8 101 7 6 6, 7 331 13 ZEPHANIAH.
3 17 91 18 ZECHARIAH.
4 7 78 16 12 8 342 5 13 1 387, 394. 4, 11. MATTHEW.
1 18 131 10 3 11 54 17 3 16, 17 52, 139 17 4 16 207 6 6 22, 23 237 61 9 38 142
6 12 24, 28, 31, 32. 63, 141 6, 29 24 26 151 15 27 46 130 6 28 19 45, 50, 51
MARK.
1 12 141 7 11 13 36 13 32 130 6 17 5 360 LUKE.
Chapters. Verses. Pages. Sections. 1 35 131 10 2 11 5 3 2 40 137 2 3 16 88 13
4 1 141 7 4 14 142 6 43 185 11 13 123 5 12 50 145 JOHN.
1 13 173 3 15 457 71 3 3, 4, 5, 6. 172 2 8 29 2 14 389 6 32, 33. 52 15 34 140
35 45 5 4 14 91, 426 19, 20 24 34 9 5 19, 20, 23 161 6 26 162 6 23 155 6 7 39
121 1 10 34, 35 116 11 51 111 18 14 17 82, 122 5, 2. 26 84 8 15 1, 4, 5. 476 7
5 345 6 16, 19 8^, 89 4, 16. 20 84 8 3 466 8 16 5, 6 9 10 7, 8* 9, 10, 11. 150
13, 14, 15. 162 ACTS.
1 2 157 4 4, 5, 6. 10 10 8 168 9 2 3 54 17 12, 16. 115 ^1 17 107 ^3 22 141 6
23 40 15 24 1^7 11 33 156 3 5 3, 4 64 31 5 9 62 28 7 51 162 8 8 19 6 6 13, 21,
23 180 16 10 44 90 17 10 10 108 14 12 9 108 14 13 24 61 26 16 16, 17 112 18 19
3 51 15 20 28, 32 62, 58 27, 22 ROMANS.
3 12, 13, 14 366 4 4 332 13 4 19, 20 400 6 19, 21 366, 396 6 3, 4 492 33 7 7,
8, 9 23 25 8 9 39 14, 4 8 16 168 9 27 348 9 26 385 3 6 424 18 4 468 11 13 475 3
11, 12, 13 477 7 13, 36 481, 521 15, 3 10 3, 4 332 13 5 535 5 12 2 212 15 14 1,
3 528 18 I. CORINTHIANS.
1 30 444 49, 50 2 10 55 19 2 14 217, 226 24, 25 3 19 368 26, 42 4 7, 15 3, 188
1, 26 6 17, 18 373, 4^9 4, 13 9 8 468 9 10 2 51 15 11 14 60 25 12 11 57 20 12
12 454, 455 13 1 48 9 15 45 217 24 10 470 14 II. CORINTHIANS.
3 8 11 11 3 17, 18 65 31 3 4, 5, 6 122, 467 3, 9 4 4 14 17 4 16 352 4 6 432,
449 31, 57 501 6 4 10 475 4 5 16 10 10 5 17 338, 183 2, 20 6 1, 16 80, 158 3, 5
7 1 377 6 13 5 189 27 GALATHIANS.
Chapters. Verses. Pages. Sections. 1 20 458 72 2 20 144 2 17 536 8 3 5 85 9 4
4 133 13 5 17 428 24 5 16 468 11 5 22, 23 468 12 5 5 469 13 5 17 477 6 15 180
16 6 10 516 30 EPHESIANS.
1 10 76 14 1 4 520, 442 45, 3 1 22, 23 454, 455 2 10 184, 466 21, 7 2 3 231 57
2 1 238 1 4 14 16 20 4 30 63 28 4 7, 10 140, 159 4 22, 23, 24 184 21 4 17, 18,
19 210, 240 14, 15, ^ 4 24 325, 367 8 4 15, 16 455 5 2, 25 146, 371 9 5 26, 27
387, 407 4 5 9, 30 419, 469 13, 12 PHILIPPIANS.
1 19 85, 486 9, 23 2 13 469 14 3 12, 13, 14 455 3 10 493 34 4 7 145 COLOSSIANS.
1 13, 21 227, 228 44, 46 1 15, 17, 18 452 65 2 11 371, 474 2 2 19 456 3 10 185
22 3 3 425, 458 18, 72 3 5 473 2 3 12 526 15 I. THESSALONIANS.
5 23 321, 367 2 II. THESSALONIANS.
2 2 18 22 2 13 442, 521 45, 3. I. TIMOTHY.
Chapters. Verses. Pages. Sections. 6 11 102 8 II. TIMOTHY.
2 19, 22 522 5, 8 TITUS.
2 11, 12 421 3 6 87, 173 13, 4 3 4, 5, 6 173 4 3 5 383 HEBREWS.
2 4 93, 168 20, 9 2 13 145 6 10 328 10 9 14 143 8 9 19, 20, 21, 22. 385 4 10
19, 20, 21, 22. 372 3 11 6 361 5 JAMES.
1 2, 3, 4, 343 6 2 10 554 3 3 4 57 20 I. PETER.
1 10, 11 40, 41 16 1 9, 10, 11 99 5 1 20, 21 101, 103 7, 10 110, 111 17, 18 1
15, 16 499 3 21 180 16 II. PETER.
1 4, 16 26, 184 30, 21 1 3 339, 345 4, 7 1 5, 6, 7 343, 442 6, 4^ 1 4, 10 418,
522 12, 5 2 1 15 19 2 4, 22 228, 378 45 3 5 73 9 I. JOHN.
1 7 384 3 4 1, 2, 3 16, 41 20, 21, 17 REVELATIONS.
1 4, 5, 66, 94 33. 20. 1 6. 403 14 2 2 16 20 22 17 169 9

FINIS.

