OF THE MORTIFICATION of SIN in BELIEVERS: The 1. NECESSITY, 2. NATURE, and 3.
MEANS of it.


With a Resolution of sundry CASES of CONSCIENCE thereunto belonging.

BY JOHN OWEN, D. D. a Servant of JESUS CHRIST in the Work of the Gospel.

The Third Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultrey near
Cornhill, and in Chancery Lane near Fleet Street, 1668.

Christian Reader,
I shall in a few words acquaint thee with the Reasons that obtained my consent
to the publishing of the ensuing Discourse. The consideration of the present
State and Condition of the Generality of Professors, the visible Evidences of
the Frame of their Hearts and Spirits, manifesting a great Disability of
dealing with the Temptations, wherewith from the Peace they have in the World,
and the Divisions that they have among themselves, they are encompassed, holds
the chief place amongst them. This I am assured is of so great importance, that
if hereby I only occasion others to press more effectually on the Consciences
of men, the work of considering their Ways, and to give more clear Direction
for the compassing of the End proposed, I shall well esteem of my Lot in this
undertaking. This was seconded by an Observation of some men's dangerous
Mistakes, who of late days have taken upon them to give Directions for the
Mortification of Sin, who being unacquainted with the Mystery of the Gospel,
and the Efficacy of the Death of Christ, have anew imposed the Yoke of a
self-wrought-out Mortification on the Necks of their Disciples, which neither
they nor their Forefathers were ever able to bear. A Mortification they cry up
and press, suitable to that of the Gospel neither in respect of Nature,
Subject, Causes, Means, nor Effects; which constantly produces the deplorable
Issues of Superstition, self-righteousness and Anxiety of Conscience, in them
who take up the burden which is so bound for them.

What is here proposed in weakness, I humbly hope will answer the Spirit and
Letter of the Gospel, with the Experiences of them who know what it is to walk
with God according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace. So that if not this,
yet certainly something of this kind, is very necessary at this season, for the
pro^^^^on and furtherance of this work (...) Mortification in the Hearts of
Believers, and their Direction in Paths safe, and wherein they may find Rest to
their Souls. Something I have to add, as to what in particular relates unto my
self. Having preached on this subject, unto some comfortable success, through
the Grace of him that administered seed to the Sower, I was pressed by sundry
persons, in whose hearts are the Ways of God, thus to publish what I had
delivered, with such Additions and Alterations as I should judge necessary.
Under the inducement of their Desires, I called to remembrance the Debt wherein
I have now for some Years stood engaged unto sundry N^ble and worthy Christian
Friends, as to a Treatise of Communion with God, some while since promised to
them; and thereon apprehended, that if I could not hereby compound for the
greater Debt, Since the first E^ition of this Treatise, that other also is
published.
yet I might possibly tender them this Discourse of Variance with themselves,
as Interest for their forbearance of that of Peace and Communion with God.
Besides, I considered that I had been providentially engaged in the public
Debate of sundry Controversies in Religion, which might seem to claim something
in another kind of more General Use, as a Fruit of Choice, not Necessity: On
these and the like accounts, is this short Discourse brought forth to public
view, and now presented unto thee. I hope I may own in sincerity, that my
hearts desire unto God, and the chief Design of my Life in the station wherein
the good Providence of God has placed me, are, that Mortification and
universal Holiness may be promoted in my own and in the Hearts and Ways of
others, to the Glory of God, that so the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ may be adorned in all things; for the compassing of which End, if this
little Discourse (of the publishing whereof this is the sum of the account I
shall give) may in any thing be useful to the least of the Saints, it will be
looked on as a Return of the weak Prayers wherewith it is attended by its
unworthy Author,

J. OWEN.


CHAP. I.
The Foundation of the whole ensuing Discourse laid in Romans 8.13. The words of
the Apostle opened. The certain connection between true Mortification and
Salvation. Mortification the work of Believers. The Spirit the principal
efficient Cause of it. What meant by the [Body] in the words of the Apostle.
What by the [Deeds of the Body.] Life in what sense promised to this Duty.

THat what I have of Direction to contribute to the carrying on of the work of
Mortification in Believers, may receive order and perspicuity, I shall lay the
foundation of it in those words of the Apostle, Romans 8.13. If ye by the Spirit
do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live; and reduce the whole to an
Improvement of the great Evangelical Truth and Mystery contained in them.

The Apostle having made a Recapitulation of his Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, and the blessed Estate and Condition of them who are made by Grace
partakers thereof, verse. 1, 2, 3. of this Chapter, proceeds to improve it, to
the Holiness and Consolation of Believers.

Among his Arguments and Motives unto Holiness, the Verse mentioned contains
one, from the contrary Events and Effects of Holiness and Sin. If ye live after
the flesh, ye shall dye. What it is to live after the flesh, and what it is to
dye, that being not my present aim and business, I shall no otherwise explain,
than as they will fall in with the sense of the latter words of the verse, as
before proposed.

In the words peculiarly designed for the Foundation of the ensuing Discourse,
there is

1. A Duty prescribed; Mortify the deeds of the body.

2. The Persons are denoted to whom it is prescribed; Ye; if Ye Mortify.

3. There is in them a Promise annexed to that Duty, Ye shall Live.

4. The Cause or Means of the Performance of this Duty, the Spirit; If ye
through the Spirit.

5. The Conditionality of the whole Proposition, wherein Duty, Means, and
Promise, are contained, If ye, etc.

The first thing occurring in the words, as they lie in the entire Proposition,
is the conditional Note; (...), but if. Conditionals in such Propositions may
denote two things.

1. The uncertainty of the Event, or thing promised in respect of them to whom
the duty is prescribed. And this takes place where the condition is absolutely
necessary unto the Issue, and depends not its self on any determinate Cause,
known to him to whom it is prescribed. So we say, If we live we will do such a
thing. This cannot be the Intendment of the conditional Expression in this
place. Of the Persons to whom these words are spoken, it is said verse. 1. of
the same Chapter, there is no condemnation to them.

2. The Certainty of the coherence and Connection that is between the things
spoken of. As we say to a sick man, If you will take such a potion, or use such
a remedy, you will be well. The thing we solely intend to express, is the
certainty of the Connection that is between the potion or remedy, and health.
And this is the use of it here. The certain Connection that is between the
mortifying of the deeds of the Body, and living, is intimated in this
conditional particle.

Now the connection and coherence of things being manifold, as of Cause and
Effect, of Way and Means, and the End; this between Mortification and Life, is
not of Cause and Effect properly and strictly, for Eternal Life is the gift of
God through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23. But of Means and End: God has appointed
this Means, for the attaining that End, which he has freely promised. Means
though necessary have a fair subordination to an End of free Promise. A Gift,
and a procuring Cause in him to whom it is given, are inconsistent. The
intendment then of this Proposition as conditional, is, That there is a certain
infallible connection and coherence between true Mortification and Eternal Life:
if you use this Means, you shall obtain that End: If you do mortify, you shall
live. And herein lies the main motive unto, and Enforcement of the Duty
prescribed.

2. The next thing we meet withal in the words, is the persons to whom this
Duty is prescribed; and that is expressed in the word Ye, in the Original
included in the Verb (...), if ye mortify: that is, ye Believers; ye to whom
there is no Condemnation, verse. 1. ye that are not in the Flesh, but in the
Spirit; verse. 5. who are quickened by the Spirit of Christ, verse. 10.11. to you
is this Duty prescribed. The pressing of this Duty immediately on any other, is
a notable Fruit of that Superstition and self-Righteousness that the world is
full of* the great work and design of devout men, ignorant of the Gospel, Romans
10.3, 4. Joh. 15.5. Now this description of the Persons, in conjunction with
the prescription of the duty, is the main Foundation of the ensuing Discourse,
as it lies in this Thesis or Proposition.

The choicest Believers, who are assuredly freed from the condemning power of
sin, ought yet to make it their business all their days, to mortify the
indwelling power of sin.

3. The principal efficient Cause of the performance of this Duty, is the
Spirit: (...), if by the Spirit. The Spirit here, is the Spirit mentioned verse.
11. the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of God, that dwells in us, verse. 9. that
quickens us, verse. 11. the Holy Ghost, verse. 14. the Spirit of Adoption, verse.
15. the Spirit that makes Intercession for us, verse. 26. All other ways of
Mortification are vain, all helps leave us helpless, it must be done by the
Spirit. Men, as the Apostle intimates, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. may attempt this work
on other Principles, by Means and Advantages administered on other accounts, as
they always have done, and do; but (says he) this is the work of the Spirit,
by him alone is it to be wrought, and by no other power is it to be brought
about. Mortification from a self-strength, carried on by way^s of
self-inven^^on, unto the End of a self-Righteousness, is the Soul and substance
of all ^alse Religion in the world: And this is a second Principle of my
ensuing Discourse.

4. The Duty it self, mortify the deeds of the Body; is nextly to be remarked.

Three things are here to be enquired into, 1. What is meant by the Body. 2.
What by the deeds of the Body. 3. What by Mortifying of them.


1. The Body in the close of the verse, is the same with the Flesh in the
beginning. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, but if ye Mortify the
deeds of the body; that is, of the flesh. It is that which the Apostle has all
along discoursed of, under the name of the flesh, which is evident from the
prosecution of the Antithesis between the spirit and the flesh, before and
after. The Body then here is taken for that Corruption and Pravity of our
Natures, whereof the Body in a great part is the Seat and Instrument: The very
Members of the Body, being made servants unto Unrighteousness thereby, Romans
6.19. It is Indwelling Sin, the corrupted Flesh, or Lust that is intended. Many
Reasons might be given of this metonymical expression, that I shall not now
insist on. The body here is the same with (...), and (...), the Old man, and
the body of Sin, Romans 6.6. or it may synechdochically express the whole person
considered as corrupted, and the seat of Lusts, and distempered Affections.

2. The deeds of the Body, the word is (...), which indeed denotes the outward
actions chiefly. The works of the Flesh, as they are called; (...), Gal. 5.19.
which are there said to be manifest: and are enumerated. Now though the outward
deeds are here only expressed, yet the inward and next Causes are chiefly
intended, the Axe is to be laid to the root of the tree: The Deeds of the Flesh
are to be mortified in their Causes, from whence they spring: the Apostle calls
them Deeds, as that which every Lust tends unto: Though it do but conceive, and
prove abortive, it ayms to bring forth a perfect Sin.

Having both in the seventh and the beginning of this Chapter treated of
Indwelling Lust and Sin, as the Fountain and Principle of all sinful Actions,
he here mentions its Destruction under the name of the Effects which it does
produce. (...), are as much as (...), Romans 8.6. the wisdom of the Flesh, by a
metonymie of the same nature with the former; or as the (...), and (...), the
passions and lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.24. whence the deeds and fruits of it
do arise: and in this sense is the Body used verse. 10. The body is dead because
of sin.

3. To Mortify; (...), if ye put to death: a Metaphorical Expression, taken
from the putting of any living thing to death. To kill a Man or any other
living thing, is to take away the principle of all his strength, vigor and
power, so that he cannot act, or exert, or put forth any proper Actings of his
own; so it is in this Case. Indwelling Sin is compared to a Person, a living
Person, called the old man, with his faculties, and properties, his wisdom,
craft, subtilty, strength; this (says the Apostle) must be killed, put to
death, Mortified: that is, have its power, life, vigor and strength to produce
its Effects taken away by the Spirit. It is indeed meritoriously and by way of
Example utterly mortified and slain by the Cross of Christ: and the Old man is
thence said to be crucified with Christ, Romans 6.6. and our selves to be dead
with him, verse. 8. and really, initially in Regeneration, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. when
a Principle contrary to it, and destructive of it, Gal. 5.17. is planted in our
hearts: but the whole work is by degrees to be carr^^d on toward Perfection
all our days. Of this more in the Process of our Discourse.

The Intendment of the Apostle in this prescription of the D^ty mentioned, is,
that The Mortification of Indwelling Sin, remaining in our mortal bodies, that
it may not have Life and Power to bring forth the Works or Deeds of the flesh,
is the constant Duty of Believers.

5. The promise unto this duty is Life: ye shall live. The Life promised, is
opposed to the Death threatened in the clause foregoing: If ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die; which the same Apostle elsewhere expresses; ye shall of
the flesh reap corruption: Gal. 6.8. or destruction from God. Now perhaps the
word may not only intend eternal Life, but also the spiritual Life in Christ
which here we have; not as to the Essence and being of it, which is already
enjoyed by Believers, but as to the joy, comfort, and vigor of it: As the
Apostle says in another case, Now I live if ye stand fast, 1 Thessalonians. 3.8. Now
my Life will do me good; I shall have joy and comfort with my life: ye shall
live, lead a good, vigorous, comfortable, spiritual Life whilst you are here,
and obtain Eternal Life hereafter.

Supposing what was said before of the connection between Mortification and
Eternal Life, as of Me^ns and End, I shall add only as a second Motive to the
Duty prescribed, that

The vigor and power and comfort of our spiritual Life, depends on the
Mortification of the deeds of the flesh.

Chap. II.
The principal Assertion concerning the Necessity of Mortification proposed to
Confirmation. Mortification the Duty of the best ^elievers, Col. 3.5. 1 Cor.
9.27. Indwelling Sin always abides: No Perfection in this Life. Phil. 3.12. 1
Cor. 13.12. 2 Pet. 3.18. Gal. 5.17. etc. The Activity of abiding sin in
Believers: Romans 7.23. Jam. 4.5. Heb. 12.1. Its Fruitfulness and Tendency. Every
Lust aims at the height in its kind. The Spirit and new Nature given to contend
against Indwelling Sin. Gal. 5.17. 2 Pet. 1.4, 5. Romans 7.23. The fearful Issue
of the Neglect of Mortification. Rev. 3.2. Heb. 3.13. The first general
Principle of the whole Discourse hence confirmed. Want of this Duty lamented.

HAving laid this Foundation, a brief Confirmation of the forementioned
principal Deductions will lead me to what I chiefly intend. The first is,

That The choicest believers, who are assuredly freed from the condemning power
of Sin, ought yet to make it their business all their days to mortify the
Indwelling power of Sin.

So the Apostle, Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members, which are upon the
earth. Whom speaks he to? such as were risen with Christ, verse. 1. such as were
dead with him, verse. 3. such as whose Life Christ was, and who should appear
with him in Glory, verse. 4. Do you mortify; do you make it your daily work, be
always at it whilst you live, cease not a day from this work; be killing Sin,
or it will be killing you; your being dead with Christ virtually, your being
quickened with him, will not excuse you from this work. And our Savior tells
us, how his Father deals with every branch in him that bears fruit, every
true and living Branch; He purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit, Joh.
15.2. He prunes it, and that not for a day or two, but whilst it is a branch
in this world. And the Apostle tells you what was his practice, 1 Cor. 9.27. I
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection. I do it (says he) daily, it
is the work of my Life, I omit it not; this is my Business. And if this were
the work and business of Paul, who was so incomparably exalted in Grace, Light,
Revelations, Enjoyments, Privileges, Consolations, above the ordinary measure
of Believers; where may we possibly bottom an Exemption from this Work and Duty
whilst we are in this world. Some brief account of the Reasons hereof may be
given.

1. Indwelling sin always abides, whilst we are in this world, therefore it
is always to be mortified. The vain, foolish, and ignorant disputes of men,
about perfect keeping of the Commands of God, of perfection in this Life, of
being wholly and perfect^y dead to sin, I meddle not now with. It is more than
probable, that the men of those Abominations, never knew what belonged to the
keeping of any one of Gods Commands; and are so much below perfection of
degrees, that they never attained to a perfection of parts in Obedience, or
universal Obedience in sincerity. And therefore many in our days who have
talked of perfection, have been wiser, and have affirmed it to consi^t in
knowing no difference between good and evil. Not that they are perfect in the
things we call good, but that all is alike to them; and the height of
Wickedness is their Perfection. Others who have found out a new way to it, by
denying original indwelling Sin, and a tempering the spirituality of the Law of
God, unto men's carnal Hearts; as they have sufficiently discovered themselves
to be ignorant of the Life of Christ, and the power of it in Believers, so they
have invented a new Righteousness, that the Gospel knows not of, being vainly
puffed up by their fleshly minds. For us, who dare not be wise above what is
written, nor boast by other men's lives of what God has not done for us, we
say, that Indwelling Sin lives in us in some measure and degree whilst we are
in this world. We dare not speak as though we had already attained, or were
already perfect, Phil. 3.12. our inward man is to be renewed day by day,
whilst here we live, 2 Cor. 4.16. and according to the Renovations of the new,
are the breaches and decays of the old. Whilst we are here, we know but in
part, 1 Cor. 13.12. having a remaining darkness to be gradually removed, by our
growth in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.18. And the Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, so that we cannot do the things that we would, Gal.
5.17. and are therefore defective in our Obedience as well as in our Light, 1 John 1.8. We have a body of death, Romans 7.24. from whence we are not delivered,
but by the death of our bodies, Phil. 3.21. now it being our Duty to mortify,
to be killing of Sin; whilst it is in us, we must be at work. He that is
appointed to kill an Enemy, if he leave striking, before the other ceases
living, does but half his work. Gal. 6.9. Heb. 12.1. 2 Cor. 7.1.

2. Sin does not only still abide in us, but is still acting, still laboring
to bring forth the deeds of the Flesh; When sin lets us alone, we may let Sin
alone: But as Sin is never less quiet, than when it seems to be most quiet; and
its waters are for the most part deep, when they are still; so ought our
contrivances against it to be; vigorous at all times, in all conditions, even
where there is least suspicion. Sin does not only abide in us, but the Law of
the members is still rebelling against the Law of the Mind, Romans 7.23. and the
Spirit that dwells in us lusts to Envy, Jam. 4.5. It is always in continual
work, the flesh lusts against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. Lust is still tempting
and conceiving sin, Jam. 1.14. In every Moral Action, it is always either
inclining to evil, or hindering from that which is good, or disframing the
Spirit from Communion with God. It inclines to Evil; the evil that I would not,
that I do, says the Apostle, Romans 7.19. whence is that? why because in me,
that is, in my flesh dwells no good thing ^ and it hinders from good; the
good that I would do, that I do not, verse. 19. upon the same account, either I
do it not; or not as I should; all my Holy things being defiled by this sin.
The flesh lusts against the Spirit, that ye cannot do the things that ye
would, Gal. 5.17. and it un^rames our Spirit; and thence is called the sin that
so easily besets us, Heb. 12.1. on which accoun^ are those grievous Complaints
that the Apostle makes of it Romans 7. So that sin is al^^yes acting, always
conceiving, always seducing and tempting. Who can say that he had ever any
thing to do with God, or for God, that indwelling Sin had not an hand in the
corrupting of what he did. And this trade will it drive more or less all our
days; If then sin will always Acting, if we be not always Mortifying, we are
lost Creatures. He that stands still, and suffers his Enemies to double blows
upon him without resistance, will undoubtedly be conquered in the issue: If Sin
be subtle, watchful, strong, and always at work in the business of killing
our S^uls, and we be slothful, negligent, foolish, in proceeding to the ruin
thereof, can we expect a comfortable Event? There is not a day but sin soils,
or is soiled; prevails, or is prevailed on; and it will be so whilst we live
in this world. I shall discharge him from this Duty, who can bring sin to a
Composition, to a cessation of Arms in this Warfare; if it will spare him any
one day, in any one duty, (provided he be a person that is acquainted with the
spirituality of Obedience, and the subtilty of sin) let him say to his Soul, as
to this Duty, Soul take thy rest. The Saints whose Souls breath after
deliverance from its perplexing Rebellion, know there is no safety against it,
but in a constant Warfare.

3. Sin will not only be striving, acting, rebelling, troubling, disquieting,
but it let alone, if not continually mortified, it will bring forth great,
cursed, scandalous, Soul-destroying sins. The Apostle tells us what the works
and fruits of it are, Gal. 5 19, 20, 21. The works of the flesh are manifest;
which are, Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, l^sciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, ^mulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like. You know what it
did in David, and sundry others. Sin aim^ always at the utmost: every time it
rises up to tempt or entice, might it have its own course, it would go out to
the utmost sin in that kind. Every unclean Thought or Glance would be Adultery,
if it could; every covetous Desire would be Oppression; every thought of
Unbelief would be Atheism, might it grow to its head. M^n may come to that,
that sin may not be heard speaking a scandalous word in their hearts; that is,
provoking to any great sin with scandal in its mouth; but every rise of Lust,
might it have its course, would come to the height of V^ll^ny. It is like the
Grave, that is never satisfied. And herein lies no small share of the
deceitfulness of Sin, by which it prevails to the hardening of men, and so to
the^r ruin: H^b. 3.13. It is mo^e^t as it were in its first motions and
Proposals; but having o^ce got sooting in the heart by them, it constantly
makes good its ground, and presses on to some farther degrees in the same
kind; This new acting and pressing forward, makes the Soul take little notice
of what an entrance to a falling off from God is already made; it thinks all is
indifferent well, if there be no farther progress; and so far as the Soul is
made insensible of any sin, that is, as to such a sense as the Gospel
requires, so far it is hardened: but Sin is still pressing forward; and that
because it has no bounds but utter Relinquishment of God, and opposition to
him; that it proceeds toward its height by degrees, making good the ground it
has got by Hardness, is not from its Nature, but its Deceitfulness. Now
nothing can prevent this, but Mortification. That withers the Root and strikes
at the Head of Sin every Hour, that whatever it ayms at, it is crossed in.
There is not the best Saint in the world, but if he should give over this Duty
would fall into as many cursed sins as ever any did of his kind.

4. This is one main reason why the Spirit and the new Nature is given unto us,
that we may have a Principle within, whereby to oppose Sin and Lust: The Flesh
lusts against the Spirit: Well, and what then? Why the Spirit also lusts
against the Flesh, Gal. 5.17. There is a propensity in the Spirit, or spiritual
new Nature, to be acting against the Flesh, as well as in the Flesh to be
acting against the Spirit: So 2 Pet. 1.4, 5. It is our participation of the
Divine Nature, that gives us an escape from the pollutions that are in the
world through lust: and Romans 7.23. there is a law of the mind, as well as a law
of the members. Now this is, (1) The most Unjust and unreasonable thing in the
world; when two Combatants are engaged, to bind one, and to keep him up from
doing his utmost, and to leave the other at liberty to wound him at his
pleasure. And, (2) The Foolishest thing in the world, to bind him who fights
for our Eternal Condition, and to let him alone who seeks and violently
attempts our everlasting ruin. The Contest is for our lives and souls. Not to
be daily employing the Spirit and New Nature, for the Mortifying of Sin, is to
neglect that excellent succor, which God has given us against our greatest
Enemy. If we neglect to make use of what we have received, God may justly hold
his hand from giving us more. His Graces as well as his Gifts are bestowed on
us to use, exercise, and trade with. Not to be daily mortifying sin, is to sin
against the Goodness, Kindness, Wisdom, Grace, and Love of God, who has
furnished us with a Principle of doing it.

5. Negligence in this Duty cast the Soul into a perfect contrary Condition to
that, which the Apostle affirms was his, 2 Cor. 4.16 Though our outward man
perish, our inward man is renewed day by day. In these the Inward man
perishes, and the Outward man is renewed day by day. Sin is as the house of
David, and Grace as the house of Saul. Exercise and success are the two main
cherishers of Grace in the heart; When it is suffered to lie still, it withers
and decays; the things of it are ready to dye, Rev. 3.2. and Sin gets ground
toward the hardening of the heart; Heb. 3.13. This is that which I intend; by
the Omission of this duty, Grace withers, Lust flourishes, and the Frame of
the Heart grows worse and worse: and the Lord knows what desperate and fearful
issues it has had with many. Where Sin through the Neglect of Mortification
gets a considerable Victory, it breaks the bones of the Soul, Psalm. 31.10.
Psalm. 51.8. and makes a man weak, sick, and ready to dye, Psalm. 38.3, 4, 5.
that he cannot look up, Psalm. 40.12. Isa. 33.24. and when poor Creatures will
take blow after blow, wound after wound, foil after foil, and never rouse up
themselves to a vigorous Opposition, can they expect any thing but to be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; and that their Souls should bleed to
death, 2 John 8? Indeed it is a sad thing to consider the fearful issues of
this Neglect, which lie under our eyes every day. See we not those whom we knew
humble, melting, brokenhearted Christians, tender and fearful to offend,
zealous for God, and all his ways, his Sabbaths, and Ordinances, grown,
through a neglect of watching unto this Duty, earthly, carnal, cold, wrathful,
complying with the men of the world, and things of the World, to the Scandal of
Religion, and the fearful Temptation of them that know them? The truth is,
what between placing mortification in a rigid stubborn Frame of Spirit, which
is for the most part earthly, legal, censorious, partial, consistent with
Wrath, Envy, Malice, Pride, on the one hand, and pretenses of Liberty, Grace,
and I know not what on the other, true Evangelical Mortification is almost lost
amongst us, of which afterward.

6. It is our Duty to be Perfecting Holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor.
7.1. To be growing in Grace every day, 1 Pet. 2.2. 2 Pet. 3.18. To be renewing
our inward man day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. Now this cannot be done without the
daily Mortifying of sin: Sin sets its strength against every Act of Holiness,
and against every degree we grow to. Let not that man think he makes any
Progress in Holiness, who walks not over the bellies of his Lusts; He, who does
not kill Sin in his way, takes no steps toward his Journeyes End. He who finds
not opposition from it, and who sets not himself in every particular to its
Mortification, is at peace with it, not dying to it.

This then is the first General Principle of our ensuing Discourse:
Notwith^tanding the meritorious Mortification (if I may so speak) of all and
every Sin in the Cross of Christ; notwithstanding the real Foundation of
universal Mortification laid in our first Conversion, by Conviction of Sin,
humiliation for sin, and the Implantation of a new Principle, opposite to it,
and destructive of it; yet Sin does so remain, so act, and work, in the best of
Believers, whilst they live in this world, that the constant daily
Mortification of it is all their days incumbent on them. Before I proceed to
the Consideration of the next Principle, I cannot but by the way complain of
many Professors of these days; who instead of bringing forth such great and
evident Fruits of Mortification, as are expected, scarce bear any Leaves of it.
There is indeed a broad Light fallen upon the men of this Generation; and
together therewith many spiritual Gifts communicated; which with some other
Considerations have wonderfully enlarged the bounds of Professors and
Profession; both they and it are exceedingly multiplied and increased. Hence
there is a noise of Religion and Religious Duties in every corner; preaching in
abundance; and that not in an empty, light, trivial and vain manner, as
formerly, but to a good proportion of a spiritual Gift; so that if you will
measure the number of Believers by Light, G^fts and profession, the Church may
have cause to say, Who has born me all these? But now if you will take the
measure of them by this great discriminating Grace of Christians, perhaps you
will find their number not so multiplied. Where almost is that Professor, who
owes his Conversion to these days of Light, and so talks and professes at such
a rate of Spirituality, as few in former days were in any measure acquainted
with, (I will not judge them, but perhaps boasting what the Lord has done in
them) that does not give evidence of a miserably unmortified heart? if vain
spending of Time, idleness, unprofitableness in men's places, envy, strife,
variance, emulations, wrath, pride, worldliness, selfishness, (1 Cor. 1.) be
Badges of Christians, we have them on us and amongst us in abundance. And if it
be so with them who have much Light, and which we hope is saving; what shall we
say of some who would be accounted religious, and yet despise Gospel Light, and
for the Duty we have in hand, know no more of it, but what consists in men's
Denying themselves sometimes times in outward Enjoyments, which is one of the
outmost Branches of it, which yet they will seldom practice! The good Lord send
out a spirit of Mortification to cure our Distempers, or we are in a sad
Condition.

There are two Evils which certainly attend every unmortified Professor. The
first in himself, the other in respect of others.

1. In himself, let him pretend what he will, he has slight thoughts of Sin;
at least of sins of daily infirmity. The Root of an unmortified Course, is the
digestion of Sin, without bitterness in the heart; When a man has confirmed
his Imagination to such an Apprehension of Grace and Mercy, as to be able
without bitterness to swallow and digest daily sins, that man is at the very
brink of turning the Grace of God into lasciviousness, and being hardened by
the deceitfulness of Sin. Neither is there a greater Evidence of a false and
rotten heart in the world, than to drive such a Trade. To use the blood of
Christ, which is given to cleanse us, 1 John 1.7. Tit. 2.14. The exaltation of
Christ, which is to give us Repentance, Act. 5.31. the Doctrine of Grace, which
teaches us to deny all ungodliness, Tit. 2.11, 12. to countenance Sin, is a
Rebellion, that in the issue will break the bones. At this door have gone out
from us, most of the professors that have Apostatized in the days wherein we
live, for a while they were most of them under Convictions; these kept them
unto Duties, and brought them to Profession. So they escaped the pollutions
that are in the world, through the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet.
2.20. But having got an acquaintance with the Doctrine of the Gospel, and being
weary of Duty, for which they had no Principle, they began to countenance
themselves in manifold Neglects, from the Doctrine of Grace. Now when once this
evil had laid hold of them, they speedily tumbled into perdition.

2. To others, it has an evil Influence on them, on a twofold account.

1. It hardens them, by begetting in them a Persuasion that they are in as good
Condition as the best Professors. Whatever they see in them, is so stained for
want of this Mortification, that it is of no value with them: They have Zeal
for Religion, but it is accompanied with want of forbearance, and universal
Righteousness. They deny Prodigality, but with worldliness: They separate from
the World, but live wholly to Themselves, taking no care to exercise loving
Kindness in the Earth: or they talk Spiritually, and live Vainly: mention
Communion with God, and are every way conformed to the World; ^^a^ting of
Forgiveness of Sin, and never Forgiving others: And with such Considerations do
poor Creatures harden their hearts in their Unregeneracy.

2. They deceive them in making them believe, that if they can come up to their
Condition, it shall be well with them; and so it grows an Easy thing, to have
the great Temptation of Repute in Religion to wrestle withal: when they may go
far beyond them, as to what appears in them, and yet come short of Eternal
Life; but of these things, and all the Evils of unmortified walking, afterward.

CHAP. III.
The second general Principle of the Means of Mortification proposed to
Confirmation. The Spirit the only Author of this work. Vanity of Popish
Mortification discovered. Many means of it used by them not appointed of God.
Those appointed by him abused. The mistakes of others in this business. The
Spirit is promised Believers for this work. Ezekiel. 11.19. Chap. 36.26. All that
we receive from Christ is by the Spirit. How the Spirit Mortifies sin, Gal.
5.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. The several ways of his Operations to this end proposed.
How his Work, and our Duty.

THE next Principle relates to the great Sovereign Cause of the Mortification
treated of, which, in the words laid for the Foundation of this Discourse, is
said to be the Spirit, that is, the Holy Ghost, as was evinced.

He only is sufficient for this work. All ways and means without him are as a
thing of naught; and He is the great Efficient of it, He works in us, as he
pleases.

1. In vain do men seek other remedies, they shall not be healed by them. What
several ways have been prescribed for this, to have sin mortified, is known.
The greatest part of Popish Religion, of that which looks most like Religion in
their Profession, consists in mistaken Ways and Means of Mortification. This
is the pretense of their rough garments, whereby they deceive. Their Vows,
Orders, Fastings, Penances, are all built on this ground, they are all for the
mortifying of Sin. Their Preachings, Sermons, and Books of Devotion, they look
all this way. Hence those who interpret the Locusts that came out of the
bottomless pit, Rev. 9.2. To be the Friars of the Romish Church, who are said
to torment men, so that they should seek death and not find it, verse. 6. think,
that they did it by their stinging Sermons, whereby they convinced them of Sin,
but being not able to discover the Remedy for the healing and Mortifying of it,
they kept them in perpetual Anguish and Terror, and such trouble in their
Consciences, that they desired to dye. This I say is the substance and Glory of
their Religion: but what with their laboring to mortify dead Creatures,
ignorant of the Nature and End of the work, what with the Poison they mixed with
it, in their persuasion of its Merit, yea Supererogation, (as they style their
unnecessary merit, with a proud barbarous title) their glory is their shame;
but of them and their Mortification, more afterward: chap. 8.

That the Ways and Means to be used for the Mortification of sin, invented by
them, are still insisted on and prescribed for the same end by some, who should
have more light and Knowledge of the Gospel, is known. Such Directions to this
purpose have of late been given by some, and are greedily caught at by others
professing themselves Protestants, as might have become Popish Devotionists
three or four hundred years ago. Such outside Endeavors, such bodily
Exercises, such self-performances, such merely Legal Duties, without the least
mention of Christ, or his Spirit, are varnished over with swelling words of
vanity, for the only Means and Expedients for the Mortification of sin, as
discover a deep rooted unacquaintedness with the power of God, and Mystery of
the Gospel. The consideration hereof, was one Motive to the publishing of this
plain Discourse.

Now the Reasons why the Papists can never with all their Endeavors truly
mortify any one sin, amongst others, are,

1. Because many of the Ways and Means they use and insist upon for this End,
were never appointed of God for that purpose. Now there is nothing in Religion
that has any Efficacy for compassing an End, but it has it from Gods
Appointment of it to that purpose. Such as these are, their rough Garments,
their Vows, Penances, Disciplines, their Course of Monastical Life, and the
like, concerning all which God will say, Who has required these things at your
hands? and In vain do you worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Traditions of
men. Of the same Nature are sundry self-vexations, insisted on by others.

2. Because those things that are appointed of God as Means, are not used by
them in their due Place and Order: such as are Praying, Fasting, Watching,
Meditation, and the like; these have their use in the business in hand. But
whereas they are all to be looked on as streams, they look on them as the
fountain. Whereas they effect and accomplish the End as Means only subordinate
to the Spirit and Faith, they look on them to do it by virtue of the work
wrought. If they fast so much, and pray so much, and keep their hours and
times, the work is done: As the Apostle says of some in another case, they are
always learning, never coming to the knowledge of the Truth; so they are
always mortifying, but never come to any sound Mortification. In a a word,
they have sundry Means to mortify the Natural man, as to the Natural life here
we lead, none to mortify Lust or Corruption.

This is the general mistake of men ignorant of the Gospel, about this thing;
and it lies at the bottom of very much of that Superstition and Will Worship
that has been brought into the world; what horrible self-macerations were
practiced by some of the ancient Authors of Monastical Devotion? what violence
did they offer to Nature? what extremity of sufferings did they put themselves
upon? search their ways and Principles to the bottom, and you will find, that
it had no other root but this mistake, namely, that attempting rigid
Mortification, they fell upon the natural man, instead of the corrupt old man;
upon the body wherein we live, instead of the Body of Death.

Neither will the natural Popery that is in others do it. Men are galled with
the Guilt of a Sin, that has prevailed over them: they instantly promise to
themselves and God, that they will do so no more; they watch over themselves,
and pray, for a season, until this heat waxes cold, and the sense of Sin is
worn off, and so Mortification goes also, and Sin returns to its former
Dominion: Duties are excellent food for an healthy Soul; they are no physic
for a sick Soul. He that turns his meat into his medicine, must expect no great
operation. Spiritually sick men cannot sweat out their distemper with working.
But this is the way of men that deceive their own Souls; as we shall see
afterward.

That none of these ways are sufficient, is evident from the Nature of the
work it self that is to be done; it is a work that requires so many concurrent
actings in it, as no self- Endeavor can reach unto; and is of that kind, that
an Almighty Energy is necessary for its accomplishment, as shall be afterward
manifested.

It is then the work of the Spirit. For,

1. He is Promised of God to be given unto us, to do this work; the taking away
of the stony heart, that is, the stubborn, proud, rebellious, unbelieving
Heart, is in general the work of Mortification that we treat of. Now this is
still promised to be done by the Spirit: Ezekiel. 11.19. Chap. 36.26. I will give
my Spirit, and take away the stony heart: and by the Spirit of God is this work
wrought, when all Means fail. Isa. 57.17, 18.

2. We have all our Mortification from the Gift of Christ, and all the Gifts of
Christ are communicated to us, and given us by the Spirit of Christ. Without
Christ we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. All communications of Supplies and Relief
in the beginnings, increasings, actings of any Grace whatever from him, are by
the Spirit, by whom he alone works in and upon Believers. From him we have our
Mortification: He is exalted and made a Prince and a Savior, to give
Repentance unto us: Act. 5.31. and of our Repentance our Mortification is no
small Portion. How does he do it? having received the Promise of the Holy
Ghost, he sends him abroad for that end: Act. 2.33. You know the manifold
Promises he made of sending the Spirit, as Tertullian speaks, vicariam navare
operam, to do the Works that he had to accomplish in us.

The Resolution of one or two Questions will now lead me nearer to what I
principally intend.

The first is,

Q. How does the Spirit mortify Sin?

I Answer, in general three ways.

A. 1. By causing our hearts to abound in Grace, and the Fruits that are
contrary to the Flesh, and the Fruits thereof, and Principles of them. So the
Apostle opposes the Fruits of the Flesh, and of the Spirit: The Fruits of the
Flesh (says he) are so and so, Gal. 5.19, 20. but says he, the Fruits of the
Spirit are quite contrary, quite of another sort, v. 22, 23. Yea, but what if
these are in us, and do abound, may not the other abound also? No, says he, v.
24. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts: But how? Why, v. 25. by living in the Spirit, and walking after the
Spirit: That is, by the abounding of these Graces of the Spirit in us, and
walking according to them. For, says the Apostle, these are contrary one to
another, v. 17. so that they cannot both be in the same subject, in any intense
or high degree. This Renewing of us by the Holy Ghost, as it is called, Tit.
3.5. is one great way of Mortification: He causes us to grow, thrive, flourish,
and abound in those Graces which are contrary, opposite, and destructive to all
the fruits of the Flesh, and to the quiet, or thriving of indwelling sin it
self.

2. By a real, physical Efficiency on the Root and Habit of Sin, for the
weakening, destroying and taking it away. Hence he is called a Spirit of
Judgment and Burning, Isa. 4.4. really consuming and destroying our Lusts. He
takes away the stony heart by an Almighty Efficiency; for as he begins the work
as to its kind, so he carries it on as to its degrees. He is the Fire which
burns up the very root of Lust.

3. He brings the cross of Christ into the Heart of a Sinner by Faith, and
gives us Communion with Christ in his Death, and Fellowship in his sufferings;
of the manner whereof more afterward.

Q. If this be the work of the Spirit alone, how is it, that we are exhorted to
it? Seeing the Spirit of God only can do it, let the work be left wholly to
him.

A. 1. It is no otherwise the work of the Spirit, but as all Graces and good
Works which are in us, are his: He works in us to will and to do of his own
good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. He works all our works in us, Isa. 26.12. the work
of Faith with power; 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. Col. 2.12. He causes us to pray, and is a
Spirit of Supplication, Romans 8.26. Zach. 12.10. and yet we are exh^rted, and
are to be exhorted to all these.

2. He does not so work our Mortification in us, as not to keep it still an Act
of our Obedience. The Holy Ghost works in us, and upon us, as we are fit to be
wrought in, and upon, that is, so as to preserve our own liberty, and free
Obedience. He works upon our Understandings, Wills, Consciences, and
Affections, agreeably to their own Natures; He works in us, and with us, not
against us, or without us; so that his Assistance is an Encouragement, as to
the facilitating of the Work, and no Occasion of neglect as to the work it
self. And indeed I might here bewail the endless foolish labor of poor Souls,
who being convinced of sin, and not able to stand against the Power of their
Convictions, do set themselves by innumerab^^ perplexing Ways and Duties to
keep down sin, but being strangers to the Spirit of God, all in vain. They
combat without Victory, have War without Peace, and are in slavery all their
days. They spend their strength for that which is not bread, and their labor
for that which prositeth not.

This is the saddest warfare that any poor Creature can be engaged in; A Soul
under the power of Conviction from the Law, is pressed to fight against Sin,
but has no strength for the Combat. They cannot but fight, and they can never
conquer, they are like men thrust on the Sword of Enemies, on purpose to be
slain. The Law drives them on, and Sin beats them back. Sometimes they think
indeed that they have foiled sin; when they have only raised a dust, that they
see it not; that is, they distemper their natural Affections of Fear, Sorrow,
and Anguish, which makes them believe that sin is conquered, when it is not
touched. By that time they are cold, they must to the battle again; and the
Lust which they thought to be slain, appears to have had no wound.

And if the Case be so sad with them who do labor and strive, and yet enter
not into the Kingdom; what is their Condition who despise all this? Who are
perpetually under the Power and Dominion of Sin, and love to have it so: and
are troubled at nothing but that they cannot make sufficient provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

CHAP. IV.
The last Principle; of the usefulness of Mortification. The Vigor and Comfort
of our spiritual Life depend on our Mortification. In what sense. Not
absolutely and necessarily. Psalm. 88. Heman' s Condition. Not as on the next
and immediate Cause. As a Means: by removing of the Contrary. The desperate
Effects of unmortified Lust: it weakens the Soul; Psalm. 38.3, 8. sundry ways:
and darkens it. All Graces improved by the Mortification of Sin. The best
Evidence of Sincerity.

THE last Principle I shall insist on, omitting, 1. The Necessity of
Mortification unto Life: And, 2. The Certainty of Life upon Mortification; is,

That the Life, Vigor, and Comfort of our spiritual Life depends much on our
Mortification of Sin.

Strength, and Comfort, and Power, and Peace in our walking with God, are the
things of our desires. Were any of us asked seriously, What it is that troubles
us, we must refer it to one of these heads; either we want streng^h, or
power, vigor and life, in our Obedience, in our walking with God; or we want
peace, comfort, and consolation therein. Whatever it is, that may befall a
Believer, that does not belong to one of these two heads, does not deserve to
be mentioned in the days of our Complaints. Now all these do much depend on a
constant Course of Mortification; concerning which observe,

1. I do not say they proceed from it; as though they were necessarily tied to
it. A man may be carried on in a constant course of Mortification all his
days, and yet perhaps never enjoy good day of Peace and Consolation. So it was
with Heman, Psalm. 88. His life was a life of perpetual Mortification, and
walking with God, yet terrors and wounds were his portion all his days: But
God singled out Heman (a choice Friend) to make him an Example to them that
afterward should be in distress. Can thou complain if it be no otherwise
with thee than it was with Heman, that eminent servant of God? And this shall
be his praise to the end of the World; God makes it his Prerogative to speak
Peace and Consolation: Isa. 57.18, 19. I will do that work, says God; I will
comfort him, v. 18. But how? by an immediate work of the new Creation, I Create
it, says, God. The use of means for the obtaining of peace is ours; the
bestowing of it is God's Prerogative.

2. In the ways instituted by God for to give us Life, Vigor, Courage and
Consolation, Mortification is not one of the immediate Causes of it. They are
the Privileges of our Adoption, made known to our Souls, that give us
immediately these things. The Spirit bearing witness with our spirits that we
are the Children of God: giving us a new Name, and a white Stone; Adoption and
Justification, that is, as to the sense and knowledge of them, are the
immediate Causes (in the hand of the Spirit) of these things. But this I say,

3. In our ordinary walking with God, and in an ordinary Course of his dealing
with us, the vigor and comfort of our spiritual Lives depends much on our
Mortification, not only as a Causa sine qua non, but as a thing that has an
effectual influence thereinto. For,

First, This alone keeps Sin from depriving us of the one and the other: Every
unmortified sin will certainly do two things:

1. It will weaken the Soul, and deprive it of its vigor.

2. It will darken the Soul, and deprive it of its Comfort and Peace.

(1.) It weakens the Soul, and deprives it of its Strength: when David had for
a while harbored an unmortified Lust in his heart, it broke all his Bon^s, and
left him no spiritual strength; hence he complained that he was sick, weak,
wounded, faint; there is (says he) no soundness in me, Psalm. 38.3. I am feeble
and sore broken, verse. 8. Yea I cannot so much as look up, Psalm. 40.12. An
unmortified Lust will drink up the Spirit, and all the vigor of the Soul, and
weaken it for all Duties. For,

1. It untunes and unframes the Heart it self, by entangling its Affections. It
diverts the heart from that spiritual Frame that is required for vigorous
Communion with God. It lays hold on the Affections, rendering its Object
beloved and desirable; so expelling the love of the Father, 1 John 2.1. Chap.
3.17. So that the Soul cannot say uprightly and truly to God, Thou art my
portion, having something else that it loves. Fear, Desire, Hope, which are the
choice Affections of the Soul, that should be full of God, will be one way or
other entangled with it.

2. It fills the Thoughts with Contrivances about it. Thoughts are the great
Purveyors of the Soul, to bring in provision to satisfy its Affections; and if
Sin remain unmortified in the Heart, they must ever and anon be making
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. They must glaze, adorn,
and dress the Objects of the Flesh, and bring them home to give satisfaction.
And this they are able to do, in the service of a defiled Imagination, beyond
all expression.

3. It breaks out and actually hinders Duty. The ambitious man must be
studying, and the worldling must be working or contriving, and the sensual vain
person providing himself for vanity, when they should be engaged in the Worship
of God.

Were this my present business, to set forth the Breaches, Ruin, Weakness,
Desolations, that one un^^c^tified Lust will bring upon a Soul, this Discourse
must be extended much beyond my Intendment.

(2) As Sin weakens, so it darkens the Soul. It is a cloud, a thick cloud, that
spreads it self over the Face of the Soul, and intercepts all the beams of Gods
Love and Favor. It takes away all sense of the Privilege of our Adoption: and
if the Soul begins to gather up Thoughts of Consolation,, Sin quickly scatters
them. Of which afterward.

Now in this regard does the vigor and power of our spiritual life depend on
our Mortification. It is the only Means of the Removal of that, which will
allow us neither the one nor the other. Men that are sick and wounded under the
power of Lust, make many Applications for Help; they cry to God, when the
Perplexity of their Thoughts overwhelms them; even to God do they cry, but are
not delivered; in vain do they use many Remedies, they shall not be healed. So
Hos. 5.13. Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his wound, and attempted sundry
remedies, nothing will do, until they come ( v. 15.) to acknowledge their
Offense. Men may see their Sickness and Wounds, but yet if they make not due
Applications their Cure will not be effected.

Secondly, Mortification prunes all the Graces of God, and makes room for them
in our hearts, to grow. The Life and Vigor of our spiritual Lives consists in
the vigor and flourishing of the Plants of Grace in our Hearts. Now as you may
see in a Garden, let there be a precious herb planted, and let the Ground be
untilled, and weeds grow about it, perhaps it will live still, but be a poor
withering, unusefull thing; you must look and search for it, and sometimes can
scarce find it; and when you do, you can scarce know it, whether it be the
Plant you look for or no; and suppose it be; you can make no use of it at all:
when let another of the same kind be set in ground, naturally as barren and bad
as the other; but let it be well weeded, and every thing that i^ noxious and
hurtful removed from it, it flourishes and thrives; you may see it at first
look into the Garden, and have it for your use when you please. So it is with
the Graces of the Spirit that are planted in our hearts: That is true; they are
still* they abide in a heart where there is some Negl^ct of Mortification, but
they are ready to dye; Revel. 3.2. they are withering and decaying. The heart
is like the Sluggards Field, so overgrown with weeds, that you can scarce see
the good Corn. Such a man may search for Faith, Love and Zeal, and scarce be
able to find any; and if he do discover that these Graces are there, yet alive,
and sincere; yet they are so weak, so clogged with Lusts, that they are of very
little use; they remain indeed, ^ut are ready to dye. But now let the Heart be
cleansed by Mortification, the Weeds of Lust constantly and daily rooted up,
(as they spring daily, Nature being their proper soil,) let Room be made for
Grace to thrive and flourish; how will every Grace act its part, and be ready
for every use and purpose!

Thirdly, As to our Peace; as there is nothing that has any Evidence of
Sincerity without it, so I know nothing that has such an Evidence of Sincerity
in it; which is no small Foundation of our Peace: Mortication is the Souls
vigorous Opp^sition to self; wherein Sincerity is most evident.

CHAP. V.
The principal Intendment of the whole Discourse proposed. The first main Case
of Canscience stated. What it is to Mortify any Sin, negatively considered.
Not the utter Destruction of it in this Life. Not the Dissimulation of it. Not
the Improvement of any Natural Principle. Not the Diversion of it. Not an
Occasional Conquest. Occasional Conquests of Sin, what, and when. Upon the
Eruption of Sin, in time of Danger or Trouble.

THese things being premised, I come to my principal Intention, of handling
some Questions, or practical Cases,, that present themselves in this business
of Mortification of Sin in Believers: The first, which is the Head of all the
rest; and whereunto they are reduced, may be considered as lying under the
ensuing Proposal.

Suppose a man to be a true Believer, and yet finds in himself a powerful
Indwelling Sin, leading him captive to the Law of it, consuming his Heart with
trouble, perplexing his Thoughts, weakening his Soul, as to Duties of Communion
with God, disqui^ting him as to Peace, and perhaps de^iling his Conscience, and
exposing him to Hardening through the deceitfulness of Sin; what shall he do?
what Course shall he take and insist on, for the Mortification of this Sin,
Lust, Distemper, or Corruption, to such a Degree, as that though it be not
utterly destroyed, yet in his Contest with it, he may be enabled to keep up
Power, Strength and Peace, in Communion with God?

In answer to this important Enquiry, I shall do these things.

1. Show what it is to mortify any Sin; and that both Negatively and
Positively, that we be not mistaken in the Foundation.

2. Give general Directions for such things, as without which it will be
utterly impossible for any one to get any Sin truly and spiritually Mortified.

3. Draw out the Particulars whereby this is to be done; in the whole carrying
on this Consideration, that it is not of the Doctrine of Mortification in
general, but only in reference to the particular Case before proposed, that I
am treating.

1. To Mortify a Sin, is not utterly to kill, root it out, and destroy it,
that it should have no more hold at all, nor residence in our hearts. It is
true, this is that which is aimed at, but this is not in this Life to be
accomplished. There is no man that truly sets himself to mortify any Si^, but
he ayms at, intends, desires its utter destruction; that it should leave
neither Root nor Fruit in the Heart or Life. He would so kill it, that it
should never move or stir any more; cry or call, seduce or tempt to
Eternity. Its not being, is the thing aimed at. Now though doubtless there may
by the Spirit and Grace of Christ, a wonderful success, and Eminency of
victory against any sin be attained; so that a man may have almost constant
triumph over it; yet an utter killing and destruction of it, that it should not
be, is not in this Life to be expected. This Paul assures us of, Phil. 3.12.
Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect. He was a choice
Saint, a pattern for Believers, who in Faith and Love, and all the Fruits of
the Spirit, had not his Fellow in the world; and on that account ascribes
perfection to himself, in comparison of others, verse. 15. Yet he had not
attained, he was not perfect, but was following after: still a vile body he
had, and we have, that must be changed by the great power of Christ at last: v.
21. This we would have, but God sees it best for us, that we should be complete
in nothing in our selves; that in all things we might be complete in Christ,
which is best for us, Col. 2.10.

2. I think I need not say, it is not the dissimulation of a Sin; when a man on
some outward respects forsakes the Practice of any sin, men perhaps may look on
him as a changed man; God knows that to his former iniquity he has added
cursed hypocrisy, and is got in a safer path to Hell than he was in before. He
has got another Heart than he had, that is more cunning, not a new Heart, that
is more holy.

3. The Mortification of Sin consists not in the Improvement of a quiet, sedate
Nature. Some men have an Advantage by their natural Constitution, so far, as
that they are not exposed to such violence of unruly passions, and tumultuous
Affections, as many others are. Let now these men cultivate and improve their
Natural Frame and Temper, by Discipline, Consideration and Prudence, and they
may seem to themselves and others, very mortified men, when perhaps their
Hearts are a standing Sink of all Abominations; some man is never so much
troubled all his Life perhaps with anger and passion, nor does trouble others,
as another is almost every day; and yet the latter have done more to the
Mortification of the sin, than the former. Let not such persons try their
Mortification by such things as their natural T^^^^^ gives no Life or Vigor
to: let them bring themselves to self-denial, unbelief, envy, or some such
spiritual sin, and they will have a better view of themselves.

4. A sin is not Mortified, when it is only diverted. Simon Magus for a season
left his Sorceries; but his Covetousness and Ambition that set him on work,
remained still, and would have been acting another way: therefore Peter tells
him, I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness; notwithstanding the
Profession thou have made, notwithstanding thy Relinquishment of thy Sorceries,
thy lust is as powerful as ever in thee: the same lust, only the streams of
it are diverted: it now exerts and puts forth it self another way, but it is
the old ga^l of Bitterness still. A man may be sensible of a lust, set himself
against the eruptions of it, take care that it shall not break forth, as it
has done; but in the mean time suffer the same corrupted habit to vent it self
some other way. As he who heals and skins a running Sore, thinks himself cured,
but in the mean time his Flesh festereth by the Corruption of the same humor,
and breaks out in another place. And this diversion, with the Alterations that
attend it, often befalls men, on Accounts wholly foreign unto Grace; change of
the Course of Life that a man was in; of Relations, Interests, Designs, may
effect it; yea the very Alterations in men's Constitutions, occasioned by a
natural Progress in the Course of their Lives, may produce such Changes as
these; men in Age do not usually persist in the pursuit of youthful lusts,
although they have never mortified any one of them. And the same is the Case of
bartering of Lusts; and leaving to serve one, that a man may serve another. He
that changes pride for worldliness, sensuality for Pharisaisme, vanity in
Himself to the contempt of Others; let him not think that he has Mortified the
sin that he s^ems to have left. He has changed his Master, but is a Servant
still.

5. Occasional Conquests of Sin do not amount to a Mortifying of it.

There are two Occasions or Seasons, wherein a man who is contending with any
sin, may seem to himself to have mortified it.

(1.) When it has had some sad Eruption to the disturbance of his Peace,
terror of his Conscience, dread of Scandal, and evident provocation of God.
This awakens and stirs up all that is in the man, and amazes him; fills him
with abhorrency of sin, and himself for it; sends him to God, makes him cry out
as for Life, to abhor his Lust as Hell, and to set himself against it. The
whole man, spiritual and natural being now awaked, Sin shrinks in its head,
appears not, but lies as dead before him. As when one that has drawn nigh to
an Army in the Night, and has killed a principal person; instantly the guards
awake, men are roused up, and strict Enquiry is made after the Enemy; who in
the mean time, until the noise and tumult be over, hides himself, or lies like
one that is dead, yet with firm Resolution to do the like mischief again, upon
the like Opportunity. Upon the sin among the Corinthians, see how they muster
up themselves for the surprizal and Destruction of it, 2 Epist. chap. 7. verse.
11. So it is in a person, when a breach has been made upon his Conscience,
Quiet, perhaps Credit, by his Lust, in some Eruption of Actual sin;
Carefulness, Indignation, Desire, Fear, Revenge, are all set on work about it,
and against it, and Lust is quiet for a season, being run down before them; but
when the hurry is over, and the Inquest past, the Thief appears again alive,
and is as busy as ever at his work.

(2.) In a time of some Judgment, Calamity, or pressing Affliction; the Heart
is then taken up with Thoughts and Contrivances of slying from the present
troubles, fears and dangers: This, as a convinced person concludes, is to be
done, only by relinquishment of Sin, which gains peace with God. It is the
Anger of God in every Affliction that galls a Convinced person. To be quit of
this, men resolve at such times against their sins. Sin shall never more have
any place in them; they will never again give up themselves to the service of
it. Accordingly Sin is quiet, stirs not, seems to be Mortified; not indeed
that it has received any one wound, but merely because the Soul has possessed
its Faculties whereby it should exert it self, with thoughts inconsistent with
the motions thereof; which when they are laid aside, Sin returns again to its
former Life and Vigor. So they Psalm. 78.32. unto 38. Are a full Instance and
Description of this Frame of spirit whereof I speak.

For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works:

Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble.

When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early
after God.

And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer.

Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him
with their tongues.

For their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his
Covenant.

I no way doubt, but that when they sought, and returned, and enquired early
after God, they did it with full purpose of heart, as to the relinquishment of
their sins: It is expressed in the word returned. To turn or return to the
Lord, is by a Relinquishment of sin. This they did early, with earnestness, and
diligence; but yet their sin was unmortified for all this, v. 36, 37. and this
is the state of many humiliations in the days of Affliction; and a great
Deceit in the Hearts of Believers themselves, lies oftentimes herein.

These and many other ways there are, whereby poor Souls deceive themselves,
and suppose they have mortified their Lusts, when they live and are Mighty, and
on every Occasion break forth to their disturbance and disquietness.

CHAP. VI.
The Mortification of Sin in particular described. The several Parts and
Degrees thereof. 1. The habitual weakening of its Root and Principle. The Power
of Lust to tempt. Differences of that Power to Persons and Times. 2. Constant
Fighting against Sin. The Parts thereof considered. 3. Success against it. The
sum of this Discourse.

WHat it is to mortify a Sin in General, which will make farther way for
particular Directions, is nextly to be considered.

The Mortification of a Lust consists in three things.

1. An habitual weakening of it. Every Lust is a depraved habit or Disposition,
continually inclining the Heart to evil: Thence is that description of him who
has no Lust truly mortified: Genesis 6.5. Every Imagination of the thoughts of
his Heart is only evil continually. He is always under the power of a strong
bent and Inclination to sin. And the reason why a natural man is not always,
perpetually, in the pursuit of some one lust night and day, is, because he has
many to serve, every one crying to be satisfied; Thence he is carried on with
great variety, but still in general he lies toward the satisfaction of self.

We will suppose then the lust or distemper whose Mortification is inquired
after, to be in its self a strong, deeply rooted, habitual Inclination and bent
of Will and Affections unto some Actual sin, as to the Matter of it, (though
not under that formal Consideration,) always stirring up Imaginations,
Thoughts and Contrivances about the Object of it. Hence men are said to have
their Hearts set upon Evil, Romans 13.14. the bent of their Spirits lies toward
it, to make provision for the flesh. And a sinful depraved habit (as in many
other things, so in this) differs from all natural or moral habits whatever;
for whereas they incline the Soul gently and suitably to it self, sinful
Habits impell with Violence and Impetuousness: (...).
whence Lusts are said to fight or wage war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. to
rebel, or rise up in War with that Conduct and Opposition which is usual
therein; Romans 7.23. to lead captive, or effectually captivating upon success in
battle: All works of great violence and impetuousness.

I might manifest fully from that description we have of it, Romans 7. How it
will darken the Mind, extinguish Convictions, dethrone Reason, interrupt the
Power and Influence of any Considerations that may be brought to hamper it, and
break through all into a flame. But this is not my present business. Now the
first thing in Mortification is the weakening of this Habit of Sin or Lust,
that it shall not with that violence, earnestness, frequency, rise up,
conceive, tumultuate, provoke, entice, disquiet, as naturally it is apt to do,
Jam. 1.14, 15.

I shall desire to give one Caution or Rule by the way; and it is this. Though
every Lust does in its own Nature, equally, universally incline and impell to
Sin, yet this mu^t be granted with these two Limitations:

1. One lust, or a lust in one man, may receive many accidental Improvements,
heightnings, and strengthnings, which may give it life, power and vigor,
exceedingly above what another Lust has, or the same lust, that is of the same
Kind and Nature in another man. When a Lust falls in with the natural
Constitution and Temper, with a suitable course of Life, with Occasions; or
when Satan has got a fit handle to it to manage it, as he has a thousand
ways so to do, that Lust grows violent and impetuous above others, or more
than the same lust in another man; Then the steams of it darken the Mind, so
that though a man knows the same things as formerly, yet they have no power,
nor influence on the Will, but corrupt Affections and Passions are set by it at
liberty.

But especially, Lust gets strength by Temptation; when a suitable Temptation
falls in wi^h a Lust, it gives it a new life, vigor, power, violence and rage
which it seemed not before to have, or to be capable of. Instances to this
purpose might be multiplied; but it is the design of some part of another
Treatise to evince th^s Observation.

2. Some lusts are far more sensible and discernable in their violent Actings
than others. Paul puts a difference between Uncleanness and all other sins. 1
Cor. 6.18. Flee fornication, every sin that a man does, is whithout the body,
but he that commits fornication sins against his own body. Hence the
Motions of that sin are more sensible, more discernable than of others; when
perhaps, the love of the World, or the like, is in a Person no less habitually
predominant than that, yet it makes not so great a combustion in the whole man.

And on this account some men may go in their own thoughts and in the eyes of
the World, for mortified men; who yet have in them no less predominancy of
Lust, than those who cry out with Astonishment upon the account of its
perplexing Tumultuatings. Yea than those who have by the Power of it, been
hurried into scandalous sins; only their lusts are in and about things which
raise not such a tumult in the Soul, about which they are exercised with a
calmer Frame of Spirit; the very Fabric of Nature being not so nearly
concerned in them, as in some other.

I say then, that the first thing in Mortification is the weakening of this
Habit, that it shall not impell and tumultuate as formerly, that it shall not
entice and draw aside, that it shall not disquiet and perplex; the killing of
its life, vigor, promptness and readiness to be stirring. This is called
crucifying the flesh with the lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24. that is, taking away
its Blood and Spirits that give it strength and power. The wasting of the body
of Death day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16.

As a Man nailed to the Cross; he first struggles and strives and cries out
with great strength and might; but as his Blood and Spirits waste, his
strivings are faint and seldom, his Cries low and hoarse, scarce to be heard.
When a man first sets on a Lust or distemper, to deal with it, it struggles
with great violence to break loose; it cries with Earnestness and Impatiency to
be satisfied and relieved; but when by Mortification the blood and spirits of
it are let out, it moves seldom and familiarly, cries sparingly, and is scarce
heard in the heart; It may have sometimes a dying pang, that makes an
Appearance of great vigor and strength, but it is quickly over, especially if
it be kept from considerable success. This the Apostle describes as in the
whole Chapter, so especially verse. 6. of chap. 6. Romans

Sin, says he, is crucified; it is fastened to the Cross; to what End? that the
body of Death may be destroyed; the Power of Sin weakened, and abolished by
little and little; that henceforth we should not serve sin, that is, that sin
might not incline, impell us with such Efficacy, as to make us servants to it,
as it has done heretofore. And this is spoken not only with respect to carnal
and sensual Affections, or Desires of worldly things; not only in respect of
the Lu^t of the Flesh, the Lust of the Ey^s, and the pride of Life, but also as
to the flesh, that is in the mind and will, in that Opposition unto God, which
is in us by Nature. Of what Nature soever the troubling Distemper be, by what
ways soever it make it self out, either by impelling to Evil, or hindering
from that which is good, the Rule is the same. And unless this be done
effectually, all after-contention will not compass the End aimed at. A man may
beat down the bitter Fruit from an evil Tree, until he is weary; whilst the
Root abides in strength and vigor, the beating down of the present Fruit will
not hinder it from bringing forth more; this is the Folly of some men; they set
themselves with all earnestness and diligence against the appearing eruption of
lust, but leaving the Principle and Root untouched, perhaps unsearched out,
they make but little or no progress in this work of Mortification.

2. In constant fighting and contending against sin. To be able always to be
laying load on Sin, is no small degree of Mortification. When Sin is strong and
vigorous, the Soul is scarce able to make any head against it. It sighs, and
groans, and mourns, and is troubled, as David speaks of himself, but seldom has
Sin in the pursuit; David complains that his Sin had taken fast hold upon him,
that he could look up, Psalm. 40.12. How little then was he able to fight
against it. Now sundry things are required unto, and comprised in this fighting
against Sin.

1. To know that a man has such an Enemy to deal withal; to take notice of
it, to consider it as an Enemy indeed, and one that is to be destroyed by all
means possible, is required hereunto. As I said before, the contest is vigorous
and hazardous; it is about the things of Eternity. When therefore man have
slight and transient thoughts of their lusts, it is no great sign that they
are mortified, or that they are in a way for their Mortification. This is,
every man's knowing the plague of his own heart, 1 King. 8.38. Without which no
other work can be done; it is to be feared that very many have little knowledge
of the main Enemy, that they carry about them in their bosoms. This makes them
ready to justify themselves, and to be impatient of reproof or admonition, not
knowing that they are in any danger, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.

2. To labor to be acquainted with the Ways, W^les, Methods, Advantages and
Occasions of its success is the beginning of this warfare. So do men deal with
Enemies. They enquire out their counsels and designs, ponder their Ends,
consider how and by what means they have formerly prevailed, that they may be
prevented; In this consists the greatest skill in conduct. Take this away, and
all waging of War (wherein is the greatest improvement of Humane Wisdom and
Industry) would be brutish. So do they deal with Lust, who mortify it indeed;
not only when it is actually vexing, enticing, and seducing, but in their
Retirements they consider, This is our Enemy, this is his way and Progress,
these are his Advantages, thus has he prevailed, and thus he will do, if not
prevented: So David, My sin is ever before me, Psalm. 51.2. And indeed one of
the choicest and most eminent parts of practically spiritual wisdom, consists
in finding out the subtilties, policies, and depths of any indwelling Sin; to
consider and know wherein its greatest strength lies; what Advantage it uses to
make of Occasions, Opportunities, Temptations; what are its Pleas, Pretenses,
Reasonings; what its Stratagems, Colors, Excuses; to set the wisdom of the
Spirit against the Craft of the old Man, to trace this Serpent in all its
turnings and windings; to be able to say at its most secret, and (to a common
Frame of Heart) imperceptible actings, This is your old way and course, I know
what you aim at; and so to be always in readiness, is a good part of our
warfare.

3. To load it daily with all the things which shall after be mentioned, that
are grievous, killing and destructive to it, is the height of this contest;
such an one never thinks his lust dead because it is Quiet, but labors still
to give it new wounds, new blows every day. So the Apostle, Col. 3.5.

Now whilst the Soul is in this Condition, whilst it is thus dealing, it is
certainly uppermost, Sin is under the Sword and dying.

3. In success; frequent success against any lust, is another part and Evidence
of Mortification; By success, I understand not a mere disappointment of Sin,
that it be not brought forth, nor accomplished; but a victory over it, and
pursuit of it to a complete Conquest: For instance, when the Heart finds Sin at
any time at work, seducing, forming Imaginations to make provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, it instantly apprehends Sin, and brings it
to the Law of God, and love of Christ; condemns it, follows it with execution
to the uttermost.

Now I say, when a man comes to this state and Condition, that lust is weakened
in the root and principle, that its motions and actions are fewer and weaker
than formerly, so they they are not able to hinder his duty, nor interrupt his
peace, when he can in a quiet sedate frame of Spirit, find out, and fight
against Sin, and have success against it, then Sin is mortified in some
considerable measure, and notwithstanding all its Opposition, a man may have
peace with God all his days.

Unto these Heads then do I refer the Mortification aimed at; that is, of any
one perplexing Distemper, whereby the General pravity and Corruption of our
Nature attempts to exert and put forth it self.

1. First, the weakening of its indwelling disposition, whereby it inclines,
intices, impells to evil, rebels, opposes, fights against God, by the
implanting habitual residence, and cherishing of a principle of Grace, that
stands in direct opposition to it, and is destructive of it, is the Foundation
of it. So by the implanting and growth of humility is pride weakened, passion
by patience, uncleanness by purity of Mind and Conscience, love of this world
by heavenly-mindedness, which are Graces of the Spirit, or the same habitual
Grace variously acting it self by the Holy Ghost, according to the variety or
diversity of the Objects about which it is exercised; as the other are several
Lusts, or the same natural Corruption variously acting its self according to
the various Advantages and Occasions that it meets withal.

2. The promptness, alacrity, vigor of the Spirit, or New Man in contending
with, cheerful fighting against the Lust spoken of, by all the Ways, and with
all the Means that are appointed thereunto, constantly using the succors
provided against its motions and actings, is a second thing hereunto required.

3. Success unto several degrees attends these two. Now this, if the distemper
has not an inconquerable Advantage from its natural situation, may possibly be
to such an universal Conquest, as the Soul may never more sensibly feel its
Opposition, and shall however assuredly arise to an allowance of Peace to the
Conscience, according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace.

CHAP. VII.
General Rules, without which no Lust will be mortified. No Mortification
unless a man be a Believer. Dangers of attempting Mortification of Sin by
Unregenerate Persons. The Duty of unconverted Persons, as to this business of
Mortification, considered. The vanity of the Papists Attempts, and Rules for
Mortification thence discovered.

THE ways and Means whereby a Soul may proceed to the Mortification of any
particular lust and Sin, which Satan takes Advantage by, to disquiet and weaken
him, comes next under Consideration.

Now there are some General Considerations to be premised, concerning some
Principles and Foundations of this work, without which no man in the world, be
he never so much raised by Convictions, and resolved for the Mortification of
any Sin, can attain thereunto.

General Rules and Principles, without which no Sin will be ever mortified, are
these,

1. Unless a Man be a Believer, that is, one that is truly ingrafted into
Christ, he can never mortify any one Sin; I do not say, unless he know himself
to be so, but unless indeed he be so. Mortification is the work of Believers,
Romans 8.13. If ye through the Spirit etc. Ye Believers, to whom there is no
condemnation, verse. 1. They alone are exhorted to it. Col. 3.5. Mortify
therefore your members that are upon the earth. Who should mortify? You who
are risen with Christ, verse. 1. whose Life is hid with Christ in God, verse. 3.
who shall appear with him in Glory, verse. 4. An unregenerate man may do
something like it, but the work it self, so as it may be acceptable with God,
he can never perform. You know what a Picture of it is drawn in some of the
Philosophers, Sencca, Tu^ly, Epictetus; what affectionate Discourses they have
of contempt of the World, and Self, of regulating and conquering all exorbitant
Affections and Passions. The Lives of most of them manifested, that their
Maxims differed as much from true Mortification, as the Sun painted on a
Sign-post, from the Sun in the Firmament. They had neither Light nor Heat.
Their own Lucian sufficiently manifests what they all were. There is no Death
of Sin, without the Death of Christ. You know what Attempts there are made
after it by the Papists, in their Vows, Penances, and Satisfactions; I dare say
of Them (I mean as many of them as act upon the Principles of their Church, as
they call it,) what Paul s^yes of Israel in point of Righteousness, Romans 9.31,
32. They have followed after Mortification, but they have not Attained to it;
Wherefore? Because they seek it not by Faith, but as it were by the works of
the Law. The same is the State and Condition of all amongst our selves, who in
Obedience to their Convictions, and awakened Consciences, do attempt a
Relinquishment of Sin; they follow after it, but they do not Attain it.

It is true, it is, it will be required of every person whatever, that hears
the Law or Gospel preached, that he mortify Sin; It is his Duty, but it is not
his immediate Duty; It is his Duty to do it, but to do it in Gods way. If you
require your Servant to pay so much Money for you in such a place, but first to
go and take it up in another; it is his Duty to pay the Money appointed, and
you will blame him if he do it not; yet it was not his immediate Duty; he was
first to take it up, according to your direction. So it is in this Case; Sin is
to be mortified, but something is to be done in the first place to enable us
thereunto.

I have proved, that it is the Spirit alone that can mortify Sin; He is
promised to do it, and all other means without him are empty and vain. How
shall he then mortify Sin, that has not the Spirit? A man may easier see
without Eyes, speak without a Tongue, than truly Mortify one Sin without the
Spirit. Now how is he attained? It is the Spirit of Christ; and (as the Apostle
says,) if we have not the Spirit of Christ, we are none of his, Romans 8.9. So,
if we are Christ's, have an Interest in him, we have the Spirit, and so alone
have power for Mortification. This the Apostle discourses at large, Romans 8. v.
8. So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. It is the Inference
and Conclusion he makes of his foregoing Discourse about our Natural state and
Condition, and the Enmity we have unto God and his Law therein. If we are in
the flesh, if we have not the Spirit, we cannot do any thing that should please
God. But what is our deliverance from this Condition, verse. 9. But ye are not
in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you:
Ye Believers, that have the Spirit of Christ, ye are not in the flesh. There is
no way of Deliverance from the State and Condition of being in the flesh, but
by the Spirit of Christ; And what if this Spirit of Christ be in you? why then
you are mortified, verse. 10. the Body is dead because of Sin, or unto it;
Mortification is carried on; the New Man is quickened to Righteousness. This
the Apostle proves verse. 11. from the Union we have with Christ by the Spirit,
which will produce suitable Operations in us, to what it wrought in him. All
attempts then for Mortification of any Lust, without an Interest in Christ, are
vain. Many men that are ga^led with and for Sin, (the arrows of Christ for
Conviction by the Preaching of the Word, or some Affliction having been made
sharp in their hearts) do vigorously set themselves against this or that
particular Lust, wherewith their Consciences have been most disquieted or
perplexed. But poor Creatures! they labor in the Fire, and their work
consumes. When the Spirit of Christ comes to this work, he will be as Refiners
Fire, and as Fullers Soap, and he will purge men as Gold and Silver, Mal. 3.3.
take away their dross and tin, their filth and blood, as Isa. 4.3. But men must
be Gold and Silver in the bottom, or else Refining will do them no good. The
Prophet gives us the sad issue of wicked men's utmost Attempts for
Mortification, by what Means soever that God affords them, Jer. 6.29, 30. The
Bellows are burnt, and the Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts
in vain, Reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the Lord has rejected
them; And what is the Reason hereof? v. 28. they were Brass and Iron when they
were put into the Furnace. Men may refine Brass and Iron long enough before
they will be good Silver.

I say then, Mortification is not the present business of unregenerate men. God
calls them not to it as yet. Conversion is their work. The Conversion of the
whole Soul, not the Mortification of this or that particular Lust. You would
laugh at a man, that you should see setting up a great Fabric, and never take
any care for a Foundation; especially if you should see him so foolish, as that
having a thousand Experiences, that what he built one day, fell down another,
he would yet continue in the same course. So it is with convinced Persons;
Though they plainly see* that what ground they get against Sin one^day, they
lose another, yet they will go on in the same Road still, without enquiring
where the destructive flaw in their progress lies. When the Jews upon the
Conviction of their Sin were cut to the heart, Act. 2.37. and cried out what
shall we do? What does Peter direct them to? Does he bid them go and mortify
their pride, wrath, malice, cruelty, and the like? no, he knew that was not
their present work, but he calls them to Conversion and Faith in Christ in
General, verse. 38. Let the Soul be first thoroughly converted, and then looking
on him whom they had pierced, Humiliation and Mortification will ensue. Thus
when John came to preach Repentance and Conversion, he said, The Axe is now
laid to the root of the tree, Mat. 3.10. The Pharisees had been laying heavy
Burdens, imposing tedious Duties, and rigid means of Mortification, in
Fastings, Washings, and the like, all in vain: Says John, The Doctrine of
Conversion is for you, the axe in my hand is laid to the root. And our Savior
tells us what is to be done in this case; says he, Do men gather Grapes from
Thorns? Matthew. 6.16. But suppose a Thorn be well pruned and cut, and have pains
taken with him? Yea but he will never bear Figgs; verse. 17, 18. It cannot be
but every Tree will bring forth Fruit according to its own kind. What is then
to be done, he tells us, Matt. 12.33. Make the Tree Good, and his Fruit will be
good: The Root must be dealt with, the Nature of the Tree changed, or no good
Fruit will be brought forth.

This is that I aim at, unless a man be Regenerate, unless he be a Believer,
all Attempts that he can make for Mortification, be they never so specious and
promising, all Means he can use, let him follow them with never so much
Diligence, Earnestness, Watchfulness and Contention of Mind and Spirit, are to
no purpose; In vain shall he use many remedies, he shall not be healed. Yea
there are sundry desperate Evils attending an Endeavor in convinced Persons
that are no more but so, to perform this Duty.

First, The mind and Soul is taken up about that which is not the man's proper
business, and so He is diverted from that which is so. God lays hold by his
Word and Judgments on some Sin in him, galls his Conscience, disquiets his
heart, deprives him of his Rest; now other Diversions will not serve his turn:
He must apply himself to the work before him. The business in hand being to
awake the whole Man unto a consideration of the State and Condition wherein he
is, that he might be brought home to God; instead hereof, he sets himself to
mortify the Sin that galls him; which is a pure issue of Self-love, to be
freed from his trouble; and not at all to the work he is called unto; and so is
diverted from it. Thus God tells us of Ephraim, when he spread his Net upon
them, and brought them down as the Fowls of Heaven, and chastised them, Hos.
7.12. caught them, entangled them, convinced them, that they could not escape;
says he of them, They return, but not to the most High: They set themselves to
a Relinquishment of Sin, but not in that manner by universal conversion as God
called for it. Thus are men diverted from coming unto God, by the most glorious
ways that they can fix upon to come to him by. And this is one of the most
common deceits whereby men ruin their own Souls; I wish that some whose Trade
it is to dawb with untempered Mortar in the things of God, did not teach this
Deceit, and cause the People to err by their Ignorance: What do men do? what
oft-times are they directed unto, when their Consciences are galled by Sin, and
Disquietment from the Lord has laid hold upon them? Is not a Relinquishment of
the Sin as to Practice, (that they are in some Fruits of it perplexed withal,
and making head against it,) the sum of what they apply themselves unto? and
is not the Gospel End of their Convictions lost thereby? Here men abide and
perish.

Secondly, This Duty being a thing good in it self, in its proper place, a Duty
evidencing Sincerity, bringing home Peace to the Conscience; a man finding
himself really engaged in it, his Mind and Heart set against this or that Sin,
with purpose and Resolution to have no more to do with it, he is ready to
conclude, that his state and Condition is good, and so to delude his own Soul.
For,

(1.) When his Conscience has been made sick with Sin, and he could find no
rest, when he should go to the great Physician of Souls, and get healing in his
Blood; the Man by this Engagement against Sin, pacifies and quiets his
Conscience, and sits down without going to Christ at all. Ah! how many poor
Souls are thus deluded to Eternity! When Ephraim saw his sickness, he sent to
King Jareb, Hos. 5.13. which kept him off from God. The whole bundle of the
Popish Religion is made up of Designs and contrivances to pacify Conscience
without Christ; all described by the Apostle, Romans 10.4.

(2.) By this means men satisfy themselves that their State and Condition is
good, seeing they do that which is a work good in it self, and they do not do
it to be seen. They know they would have the work done in sincerity, and so are
hardened in a kind of self Righteousness.

(3.) When a man has thus for a season been deluded, and has deceived his o^^
Soul, and finds in a long course of Life, that indeed his sin is not mortified,
or if he has changed one, he has gotten another; He begins a^ length to
think, that all contending is in vain, he shall never be able to prevail: He is
making a Dam against Water that increases on him Hereupon he gives over, as
one despairing of any success, and yields up himself to the power of sin, and
that habit of Formality th^^ he has gotten.

And this is the usual Issue with Persons attempting the Mortification of sin
without a^ Interest in Christ first obtained. It deludes thempunc; hardens
them, destroys them. And therefore w^ see that there are not usually more vile
an^ desperate sinners in the world, than such a^ having by Conviction been put
on this Cours^ have found it fruitless, and deserted it wit^out a discovery of
Christ. And this is t^^ substance of the Religion and Godliness (...) the
choicest Formalists in the world; and o^ all those who in the Roman Synagogue
a^^ drawn to Mortification as they drive India^ to Baptism, or Cattle to water.
I say then that Mortification is the work of Believers, and Believers only. To
kill sin is the work o^ living men; where men are dead, (as all Unbelievers,
the best of them are dead,) sin is alive, and will live.

2. It is the work of Faith; the peculiar work of Faith; Now if there be a work
to be done that will be effected by one only instrument, it is the greatest
madness for any to attempt the doing of it, that has not that Instrument. Now
it is Faith that purifies the Heart, Act. 15.9. or as Peter speaks, we purify
our Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22. And without it,
it will not be done.

What has been spoken, I suppose is sufficient to make good my first general
Rule: Be sure to get an Interest in Christ, if you intend to mortify any sin,
without it it will never be done.

Ob. You will say, What then would you have unregenerate men, that are
convinced of the Evil of sin do? Shall they cease striving against sin, live
dissolutely, give their Lusts their swinge, and be as bad as the worst of men?
This were a way to set the whole world into Confusion, to bring all things into
darkness, to set open the floodgates of lust, and lay the Reins upon the Necks
of men to rush into all sin with delight and greediness, like the horse into
the battle.

Ans. 1. God forbid! It is to be looked on as a great issue of the Wisdom,
Goodness, and Love of God, that by manifold ways and means he is pleased to
restrain the Sons of men from running forth into that compass of excess and
riot, which the depravedness of their Nature would carry them out unto with
violence. By what way soever this is done, it is an issue of the care,
kindness, and Goodness of God, without which the whole Earth would be an Hell
of Sin and Confusion.

2. There is a peculiar convincing Power in the Word, which God is oftentimes
pleased to put forth to the wounding, amazing, and in some sort humbling of
Sinners, though they are never converted. And the Word is to be preached,
though it has this End, yet not with this End. Let then the Word be preached,
and the sins of men rebuked, Lust will be restrained, and some Oppositions will
be made against Sin, though that be not the Effect aimed at.

3. Though this be the work of the Word and Spirit, and it be good in it self,
yet it is not profitable nor available as to the main End in them in whom it is
wrought; they are still in the gall of Bitterness, and under the power of
darkness.

4. Let men know it is their Duty, but in its proper place; I take not men from
Mortification, but put them upon Conversion. He that shall call a man from
mending a Hole in the Wall of his House, to quench a Fire that is consuming the
whole Building, is not his Enemy. Poor Soul! it is not thy Sore-finger but thy
Hectick-Feaver that thou art to apply thy self to the Consideration of. Thou
set thy self against a particular Sin, and do not consider that thou art
nothing but Sin.

Let me add this to them who are Preachers of the Word, or intend through the
good hand of God that Employment. It is their Duty to plead with men about
their Sins, to lay load on particular sins, but always remember, that it be
done with that which is the proper End of Law and Gospel. That is, that they
make use of the Sin they speak against, to the discovery of the State and
Condition wherein the Sinner is. Otherwise, happily they may work men to
Formality and Hypocrisy, but little of the true End of Preaching the Gospel
will be brought about. It will not avail, to beat a man off from his
Drunkenness, into a sober Formality; A skillful Master of the Assemblies lays
his Axe at the Root, drives still at the heart. To inveigh against particular
sins of ignorant unregenerate persons, (such as the Land is full of,) is a good
Work: But yet though it may be done with great efficacy, vigor and success, if
this be all the effect of it, that they are set upon the most sedulous
Endeavors of mortifying their sins preached down, all that is done, is but
like the beating of an Enemy in an open field, and driving him into an
impregnable Castle, not to be prevailed against. Get you at any time a sinner
at the advantage, on the account of any one sin whatever, have you any thing to
tak^ hold of him by, bring it to his State and Condition, drive it up to the
head, and there deal with him; to break men off from particular sins, and not
to break their Hearts, is to deprive our selves of Advantages of dealing with
them.

And herein is the Roman Mortification grievously peccant; they drive all sorts
of persons to it, without the least Consideration whether they have a principle
for it or no. Yea they are so far from calling on men to believe, that they may
be able to mortify their Lusts, that they call men to Mortification instead of
Believing. The truth is, they neither know what it is to believe, nor what
Mortification it self intends. Faith with them is but a general assent to the
Doctrine taught in their Church: And Mortification the betaking of a man by a
Vow to some certain Course of Life, wherein he d^^yes himself something of the
use of the things of this World, not without a considerable Compensation. Such
men know neither the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Their boasting of their
Mortification, is but their Glorying in their shame. Some Casuists among our
selves, who over-looking the Necessity of Regeneration, do avowedly give this
for a Direction to all sorts of persons, that complain of any Sin or Lust, that
they should vow against it, at least for a season, a Month or so, seem to have
a scantling of Light in the Mystery of the Gospel, much like that of Nicodemus,
when he came first to Christ. They bid men vow to abstain from their sin for a
season. This commonly makes their lust more impetuous. Perhaps with great
perplexity they keep their word: Perhaps not, which increases their Guilt and
Torment. Is their sin at all mortified hereby? Do they find a conquest over it?
Is their Condition changed, though they attain a Relinquishment of it? Are they
not still in the Gall of bitterness? Is not this to put men to make Brick, if
not without straw, (which is worse,) without strength? What Promise has any
unregenerate man to countenance him in this work? What assistance for the
performance of it? Can sin be killed without an interest in the Death of
Christ, or Mortified without the Spirit? If such Directions should prevail to
change men's Lives, as seldom they do, yet they never reach to the change of
their hearts or Conditions. They may make men self-justitiaries or Hypocrites,
not Christians. It grieves me oft-times to see poor Souls, that have a Zeal for
God, and a desire of eternal Welfare, kept, by such Directors and Directions,
under an hard, burdensome, outside Worship and Service of God, with many
specious Endeavors for Mortification, in an utter Ignorance of the
Righteousness of Christ, and unacquaintedness with his Spirit, all their days.
Persons and things of this kind, I know too many. If ever God shine into their
hearts, to give them the knowledge of his Glory in the face of his Son Jesus
Christ, they will see the folly of their present way.

CHAP. VIII.
The Second general Rule proposed. Without universal Sincerity for the
mortifying of every Lust, no Lust will be Mortified. Partial Mortification
always from a corrupt Principle. Perplexity of Temptation from a Lust,
oft-times a chastening for other Negligences.

THE Second Principle, which to this purpose I shall propose, is this, Without
Sincerity and Diligence in an Universality of Obedience, there is no
Mortification of any one perplexing Lust to be obtained. The other was to the
Person, this to the thing it self. I shall a little explain this Position.

A man finds any Lust to bring him into the Condition formerly described, it is
powerful, strong, tumultuating, leads captive, vexes, disquiets, takes away
peace; He is not able to bear it, wherefore he sets himself against it, prays
against it, groans under it, sighs to be delivered, but in the mean time,
perhaps in other Duties, in constant Communion with God, in Reading, Prayer and
Meditation, in other ways that are not of the same kind with the Lust
wherewith he is troubled, he is loose and negligent. Let not that man think
that ever he shall arrive to the Mortification of the Lust he is perplexed
withal. This is a Condition that not seldom befalls men in their Pilgrimage.
The Israelites under a sense of their Sin, drew nigh to God with much diligence
and earnestness, with Fasting and Prayer. Isa. 58. many Expressions are made of
their Earnestness in the work, v. 2. They seek me daily, and delight to know my
Ways, they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they delight in approaching
unto God. But God rejects all; their Fast i^ a Remedy that will not heal them,
and the Reason given of it, v. 5, 6, 7. is, because they were particular in
this Duty. They attended diligently to that, but in others were negligent and
careless. He that has a running sore (it is the Scripture Expression) upon
him, arising from an ill habit of Body contracted by Intemperance and ill Diet;
let him apply himself with what diligence and skill he can, to the cure of his
sore, if he leave the general habit of his body under Distempers, his labor
and travail will be in vain. So will his attempts be, that shall endeavor to
stop a bloody issue of Sin, and filth in his Soul, and is not equally careful
of his universal spiritual temperature, and Constitution. For,

1. This kind of Endeavor for Mortification, proceeds from a corrupt
Principle, Ground and Foundation, so that it will never proceed to a good
Issue. The true and acceptable Principles of Mortification shall be afterward
insisted on. Hatred of Sin as Sin, not only as galling or disquieting, sense of
the Love of Christ in the Cross lies at the bottom of all true spiritual
Mortification. Now it is certain, that that which I speak of proceeds from
self-love. Thou set thy self with all diligence and earnestness to mortify
such a Lust or Sin; what is the Reason of it? It disquiets thee, it has taken
away thy peace, it fills thy heart with sorrow and trouble, and fear, thou have
no rest because of it; Yea but Friend, thou have neglected Prayer or Reading,
thou have been vain and lo^se in thy Conversation in other things that have not
been of the same nature with that lust wherewith thou art perplexed; These are
no less sins and evils, than those under which thou groanest; Jesus Christ bled
for Them also; Why do thou not set thy self against them also? If thou
hatedst sin as Sin, every evil way, thou would be no less watchful against
every thing that grieves and disquiets the Spirit of God, than against that
which grieves and disquiets thine own Soul. It is evident that thou contendest
against sin, merely because of thy own trouble by it. Would thy Conscience be
quiet under it, thou would let it alone. Did it not disquiet thee, it should
not be disquieted by thee. Now, can thou think that God will set in with such
hypocritical Endeavors; that ever his Spirit will bear witness to the
treachery and Falsehood of thy Spirit? Do thou think he will ease thee of that
which perplexeth Thee, that thou may be at liberty to that which no less
grieves Him? No, (says God,) here is one* if he could be rid of this Lust I
should never hear of him more, let him wrestle with this, or he is lost. Let
not any man think to do his own work, that will not do God's. God's work
consists in universal Obedience; To be freed of the present perplexity is their
own only. Hence is that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.1. Cleanse your selves from
all pollution of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord.
If we will do any thing, we must do all things. So then, not only an intense
Opposition to this or that peculiar lust, but it is an universal humble Frame
and Temper of Heart, with watchfulness over every Evil, and for the performance
of every Duty, that is accepted.

2. How know thou but that God has suffered the Lust wherewith thou have
been perplexed to get strength in thee, and power over thee, to chasten thee
for thy other Negligences, and common Lukewarmness in walking before him; at
least to awaken thee to the consideration of thy ways, that thou may make a
through work and change in thy course of walking with him. The Rage and
predominancy of a particular Lust, is commonly the fruit and issue of a
careless, negligent course in general; and that upon a double account.

(1) As its natural Effect, if I may so say. Lust (as I showed) in general,
lies in the Heart of every one, even the best, whilst he lives; and think not
that the Scripture speaks in vain, that it is subtle, cunning, crafty; that it
seduces, entices, fights, ^ebells. Whilst a man keeps a diligent Watch over
his Heart, its Root and Fountain; whilst above all keepings, he keeps his
Heart, whence are the issues of Life and Death, Lust withers and dies in it.
But if through Negligence it makes an Eruption any particular way, gets a
passage to the Thoughts by the Affections, and from them, and by them, perhaps
breaks out into open sin in the Conversation, the strength of it bears that way
it has found out, and that way mainly it urges, until having got a passage,
it then vexes and disquiets, and is not easily to be restrained; Thus perhaps a
man may be put to wrestle all his days in sorrow, with that, which by a strict
universal Watch might easily have been prevented.

(2) As I said, God oftentimes suffers it to chasten our other Negligences;
for as with Wicked men, he gives them up to one Sin as the Judgment of
another, Romans 1.26.
a greater for the punishment of a less, or one that will hold them more firmly
and securely, for that which they might have possibly obtained a Deliverance
from: So even with his own, he may, he does leave them sometimes to some
vexatious distempers, either to prevent or cure some other Evil: So was the
Messenger of Satan let loose on Paul, 2 Cor. 12.7.
that he might not be lifted up through the abundance of spiritual Revelations.
Was it not a Correction to Peter's vain Confidence, that he was left to deny his
Master? Now if this be the state and Condition of Lust in its prevalency, that
God oftentimes suffers it so to prevail, at least to admonish us, and to
humble us, perhaps to chasten and correct us, for our general loose and
careless walking, is it possible that the effect should be removed, and the
cause continued; that the particular Lust should be mortified, and the general
Course be unreformed? He then that would really, thoroughly, and acceptably
mortify any disquieting Lust, let him take care to be equally diligent in All
parts of Obedience; and know that every Lust, every Omission of Duty, is
burdensome to God, Isa. 43.24.
though but one is so to Him. Whilst there abides a Treachery in the Heart to
indulge to any Negligence in not pressing Universally to all Perfection in
Obedience, the Soul is weak, as not giving Faith its whole work; and selfish,
as considering more the Trouble of Sin, than the Filth and Guilt of it; and
lives under a constant provocation of God, so that it may not expect any
comfortable Issue in any spiritual Duty that it does undertake, much less in
this under Consideration, which requires another Principle, and Frame of Spirit
for its Accomplishment.

CHAP. IX.
Particular Directions in relation to the foregoing Case proposed. First,
Consider the dangerous Symptoms of any Lust: 1. Inveterateness. 2. Peace
obtained under it; the several ways whereby that is done. 3. Frequency of
success in its seductions. 4. The Soul's fighting against it, with Arguments
only taken from the Event. 5. Its being attended with Judiciary Hardness. 6.
Its withstanding particular dealings from God. The State of Persons in whom
these things are found.

THE foregoing General Rules being supposed, Particular Directions to the Soul,
for its guidance under the sense of a disquieting lust or distemper, (being the
main thing I aim at) come next to be proposed. Now of these some are previous
and preparatory, and in some of them the work it self is contained. Of the
first sort are these ensuing:

First, Consider what dangerous symptoms thy Lust has attending or
accompanying it. Whether it has any deadly Mark on it or no: If it has,
extraordinary Remedies are to be used; an ordinary course of Mortification will
not do it.

You will say, what are these dangerous Marks and symptoms, the desperate
Attendances of an indwelling Lust that you intend? Some of them I shall name.

(1) Inveterateness; if it has lain long corrupting in thy Heart, if thou have
suffered it to abide in Power and prevalency, without attempting v^gorously the
killing of it, and the healing of the wounds thou have received by it, for some
long season, thy Distemper is dangerous. Have thou permitted Worldliness,
Ambition, Greediness of Study, to eat up other Duties; the Duties wherein thou
ought to hold constant Communion with God, for some long season? Or
Uncleanness to defile thy Heart, with vain, and foolish, and wicked
Imaginations, for many days? Thy Lust has a dangerous symptom. So was the
Case with David, Psalm. 38.5. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my
foolishness. When a Lust has layen long in the Heart, corrupting, festering,
cankering, it brings the Soul to a woeful Condition. In such a case an ordinary
course of humiliation will not do the work: Whatever it be, it will by this
Means insinuate it self more or less into all the Faculties of the Soul, and
habituate the Affections to its Company and society; it grows familiar to the
Mind and Conscience, that they do not startle at it as a strange thing, but are
bold with it as that which they are wonted unto; yea it will get such advantage
by this Means, as oftentimes to exert and put forth it self, without having
any notice taken of it at all; as it seems to have been with Joseph in his
swearing by the Life of Pharaoh. Unless some extraordinary Course be taken,
such a person has no ground in the world to expect that his latter End shall
be Peace.

For first, How will he be able to distinguish between the long abode of an
unmortified lust, and the dominion of Sin which cannot befall a Regenerate
person? Secondly, How can he promise himself, that it shall ever be otherwise
with him, or that his lust will cease tumultuating and seducing, when he sees
it fixed and abiding, and has done so for many days, and has gone through
variety of Conditions with him. It may be it has tried mercyes and
afflictions, and those possibly so remarkable, that the Soul could not avoid
the taking special notice of them; it may be it has weathered out many a
thorn; and passed under much variety of Gifts in the Administration of the
Word; and will it prove an easy thing to dislodge an Inmate pleading a title
by Prescription? Old neglected wounds are often mortal, always dangerous,
Indwelling Distempers grow resty, and stubborn, by continuance in ease and
quiet. Lust is such an Inmate, as, if it can plead Time and some Prescription,
will not easily be ejected. As it never dies of it self, so if it be not daily
killed, it will always gather strength.

(2) Secret Pleas of the Heart for the countenancing of it self, and keeping up
its peace, notwithstanding the abiding of a Lust, without a vigorous Gospel
Attempt for its Mortification, is another dangerous symptom of a deadly
Distemper in the Heart. Now there be several ways whereby this may be done, I
shall name some of them. As,

1. When upon Thoughts, perplexing Thoughts about Sin, instead of applying
himself to the Destruction of it, a man searches his Heart to see what
Evidences he can find of a good Condition, notwithstanding that sin and Lust,
so that it may go well with him.

For a man to gather up his Experiences of God, to call them to mind, to
collect them, consider, try, improve them, is an excellent thing; a Duty
practiced by all the Saints; commended in the Old Testament and the New. This
was David's work, when he communed with his own heart, and called to remembrance
the former loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm. 77.6, 7, 8, 9. This is the Duty
that Paul sets us to practice, 2 Cor. 13.5. And as it is in it self excellent,
so it has beauty added to it, by a proper Season. A time of Trial, or
Temptation, or Disquietness of the Heart about Sin, is a picture of Silver to
set off this Golden Apple, as Solomon speaks: But now, to do it for this End,
to satisfy Conscience, which cries and calls for another purpose, is a
desperate Device of an heart in love with Sin. When a man's Conscience shall
deal with him, when God shall rebuke him for the sinful distemper of his
Heart, if he, instead of applying himself to get that Sin pardoned in the Blood
of Christ, and mortified by his Spirit, shall relieve himself, by any such
other Evidences as he has, or thinks himself to have, and so disintangle
himself from under the yoke, that God was putting on his neck; his Condition is
very dangerous, his Wound hardly curable. Thus the Jews under the gallings of
their own Consciences, and the convincing preaching of our Savior, supported
themselves with this, that they were Abraham's Children, and on that account
accepted with God; and so countenanced themselves in all abominable wickedness
to their utter ruin.

This is in some degree, a Blessing of a man's self, and saying that upon one
account or other he shall have peace, although he adds drunkenness to thirst;
love of Sin, undervaluation of Peace, and of all tastes of Love from God, are
enwrapped in such a Frame: Such a one plainly shows, that if he can but keep up
hope of escaping the wrath to come, he can be well content to be Unfruitful in
the world, at any Distance from God that is not final separation. What is to be
expected from such an Heart?

2. By applying Grace and Mercy to an unmortified sin, or one not sincerely
endeavored to be mortified, is this Deceit carried on. This is a sign of an
Heart greatly entangled with the Love of Sin. When a man has secret thoughts
in his Heart, not unlike those of Naaman, 2 King. 5.18.
about his worshipping in the House of Rimmon; in all other things I will walk
with God; but in this thing, God be merciful unto me; his Condition is sad. It
is true indeed, a Resolution to this purpose, to indulge a man's self in any sin
on the account of Mercy, seems to be (and doubtless in any course, is)
altogether inconsistent with Christian Sincerity, and is a badge of an
Hypocrite, and is the turning of the Grace of God into wantonness, Jude 4. but
yet I doubt not but through the craft of Satan, and their own remaining
unbelief, the Children of God may themselves sometimes be ensnared with this
Deceit of sin; or else Paul would never have so cautioned them against it as he
does, Romans 6.1, 2. Yea indeed there is nothing more Natural, than for fleshly
reasonings to grow high and strong upon this account. The flesh would fain be
indulged unto upon the account of Grace: and every word that is spoken of
mercy, it stands ready to catch at, and to pervert it to its own corrupt ayms
and purposes. To apply Mercy then to a sin not vigorously mortified, is to
fulfill the End of the flesh upon the Gospel.

These and many other ways and wiles, a deceitful Heart will sometimes make
use of, to countenance it self in its Abominations. Now when a man with his sin
is in this Condition, that there is a secret liking of the sin prevalent in his
Heart, and though his Will be not wholly set upon it, yet he has an imperfect
velleity toward it, he would practice it were it not for such and such
Considerations, and hereupon relieves himself other ways than by the
Mortification and Pardon of it in the Blood of Christ, that man's wounds stink
and are corrupt, and he will, without speedy Deliverance, be at the door of
Death.

(3) Frequency of success in Sins seduction in obtaining the prevailing Consent
of the Will unto it, is another dangerous symptom. This is that I mean: When
the sin spoken of gets the Consent of the Will with some delight, though it be
not actually outwardly perpetrated, yet it has success. A man may not be able
upon outward Considerations to go along with Sin, to that which James calls
the finishing of it, Jam. 1.14, 15. as to the outward Acts of Sin, when yet the
will of sinning may be actually obtained: Then has it I say success. Now if
any lust be able thus far to prevail in the Soul of any man, as his Condition
may possibly be very bad and himself be unregenerate, so it cannot possibly be
very good, but dangerous. And it is all one upon the matter, whether this be
done by the choice of the Will, or by Inadvertency; For that Inadvertency it
self is in a manner chosen. When we are inadvertent and negligent, where we are
bound to watchfulness, and carefulness, that inadvertency does not take off
from the voluntariness of what we do thereupon; for although men do not choose
and resolve to be negligent and inadvertent, yet if they choose the things that
will make them so, they choose inadvertency it self, as a thing may be chosen
in its cause.

And let not men think that the evil of their hearts is in any measure
extenuated, because they seem for the most part to be surprised into that
consent which they seem to give unto it; for it is Negligence of their Duty in
watching over their Hearts, that betrays them into that surprizal.

(4) When a man fights against his sin only with Arguments from the Issue,
or the punishment due unto it; this is a sign that sin has taken great
possession of the Will, and that in the Heart there is a superfluity of
naughtiness. Such a man as opposes nothing to the seduction of Sin and Lust in
his Heart, but fear of shame among men, or Hell from God, is sufficiently
resolved to do the sin, if there were no punishment attending it; which what it
differs from living in the practice of Sin, I know not. Those who are Christ's,
and are acted in their Obedience upon Gospel Principles, have the Death of
Christ, the Love of God, the detestable Nature of Sin, the preciousness of
Communion with God, a deep grounded Abhorrency of sin as Sin, to oppose to any
seduction of Sin, to all the workings, strivings, fightings of Lust in their
Hearts. So did Joseph, How shall I do this great evil (says he) and sin
against the Lord, Genesis 39.9.
my good and gracious God? And Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14.
The love of Christ constrains us: 2 Cor. 7.1.
And having received these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all
pollutions of flesh and Spirit. But now if a man be so under the power of his
Lust, that he has nothing but Law to oppose it withal, if he cannot fight
against it with Gospel weapons, but deals with it altogether with Hell and
Judgment, which are the proper Arms of the Law, it is most evident, that sin
has possessed it self of his Will and Affections, to a very great prevalency
and conquest.

Such a Person has cast off (as to the particular spoken of) the Conduct of
Renewing Grace, and is kept from ruin only by restraining Grace; and so far
is he fallen from Grace, and returned under the Power of the Law; and can it be
thought that this is not a great provocation to Christ, that men should cast
off his easy gentle Yoke and Rule, and cast themselves under the Iron yoke of
the Law, merely out of indulgence unto their Lusts?

Try thy self by this also: When thou art by Sin driven to make a stand, so
that thou must either serve it, and rush at the command of it into folly, like
the horse into the battle, or make head against it to suppress it; what do
thou say to thy Soul? what do thou expostulate with thy self? is this all?
Hell will be the end of this course, Vengeance will meet with me, and find me
out; it is time for thee to look about thee, evil lies at the door. Paul's main
Argument to evince, that sin shall not have dominion over Believers, is, that
they are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. If thy contendings
against Sin be all on legal Accounts, from legal Principles and motives, what
assurance can thou attain unto, that sin shall not have dominion over thee,
which will be thy ruin?

Yea know that this Reserve will not long hold out: if thy Lust has driven
thee from stronger Gospel Forts, it will speedily prevail against this also; do
not suppose that such Considerations will deliver thee, when thou have
voluntarily given up to thine Enemy those Helps and Means of Preservation which
have a thousand times their Strength. Rest assuredly in this, that unless thou
recover thy self with speed from this Condition, the thing that thou fear
will come upon thee; what Gospel Principles do not, legal Motives cannot do.

(5) When it is probable that there is, or may be somewhat of judiciary
hardness, or at least chastening Punishment in thy Lust as disquieting; This is
another dangerous symptom. That God does sometimes leave even those of his
own, under the perplexing power at least of some Lust or Sin, to correct them
for former sins, Negligence and Folly, I no way doubt. Hence was that complaint
of the Church, Why have thou hardened us from the fear of thy Name, Isa. 63.17.
That this is his way of dealing with unregenerate men, no man questions. But
how shall a man know whether there be any thing of Gods chastening hand, in his
being left to the disquietment of his distemper?

Answ. Examine thy Heart and Ways: What was the state and Condition of thy
Soul before thou fellest into the Intanglements of that sin which now thou so
complainest of? Had thou been negligent in Duties? had thou lived
inordinately to thy self? is there the guilt of any great sin lying upon thee
unrepented of? A new Sin may be permitted, as well as a new Affliction sent to
bring an Old sin to remembrance?

Have thou received any eminent Mercy, Protection, Deliverance, which thou
did not improve in a due Manner, nor wast thankful for? or have been
exercised with any Affliction, without laboring for the appointed End of it?
or have thou been wanting to the Opportunities of glorifying God in thy
Generation, which in his good Providence he had graciously afforded unto thee?
or have thou conformed thy self unto the World and the men of it, through the
abounding of Temptations in the days wherein thou live?

If thou find this to have been thy State, awake, call upon God; thou art
fast asleep in a storm of Anger round about thee.

(6) When thy Lust has already withstood particular dealings from God against
it. This Condition is described, Isa. 57.17. For the Iniquity of his
Coveteousness I was wroth, and smote him, I hid me and was wroth, and he went
on frowardly in the way of his heart. God had dealt with them about their
prevailing Lust, and that several ways, by Affliction and Desertion. But they
held out against all: This is a sad Condition which nothing but mere sovereign
Grace (as God expresses it in the next verse,) can relieve a man in, and which
no man ought to promise himself, or bear himself upon. God oftentimes in his
providential Dispensations meets with a man, and speaks particularly to the
Evil of his Heart, as he did to Joseph's Brethren in their selling of him into
Egypt. This makes the man reflect on his sin, and judge himself in particular
for it. God makes it to be the voice of the Danger, Affliction, Trouble,
Sickness that he is in, or under. Sometimes in Reading of the Word, God makes a
man stay on something that cuts him to the Heart, and shakes him as to his
present Condition. More frequently in the Hearing of the Word preached (his
great Ordinance for Conviction, Conversion and Edification) does he meet with
men. God often hews men by the Sword of his Word in that Ordinance; strikes
directly on their bosom beloved Lust; startles the Sinner, makes him engage
into the Mortification and Relinquishment of the Evil of his Heart. Now if his
Lust have taken such hold on him, as to enforce him to break these bonds of the
Lord, and to cast these cords from him; If it overcomes these Convictions, and
gets again into its old posture; if it can cure the wounds it so receives, that
Soul is in a sad Condition.

Unspeakable are the Evils which attend such a Frame of Heart: Every particular
Warning to a man in such an Estate, is an inestimable Mercy; how then does he
despise God in them, who holds out against them; and what infinite Patience is
this in God, that he does not cast off such an one, and swear in his wrath,
that he shall never enter into his Rest.

These and many other Evidences are there of a Lust that is dangerous, if not
mortal. As our Savior said of the evil Spirit, This kind goes not out but by
Fasting and Prayer: So say I of Lusts of this kind; an ordinary Course of
Mortification will not do it, extraordinary ways must be fixed on.

This is the First particular Direction; Consider whether the Lust or Sin you
are contending with, has any of these dangerous symptoms attending of it.

Before I proceed, I must give one Caution by the way, lest any be deceived by
what has been spoken. Whereas I say, the things and evils above mentioned may
befall true Believers, let not any that finds the same things in himself,
thence or from thence conclude that he is a true Believer. These are the Evils
that Believers may fall into, and be ensnared withal, not the things that
Constitute a Believer. A man may as well conclude that he is a Believer,
because he is an Adulterer; because David that was so, fell into Adultery; as
conclude it from the signs foregoing, which are the evils of Sin and Satan in
the Hearts of Believers. The seventh of the Romans contains the Description of
a Regenerate man. He that shall consider what is spoken of his dark side, of
his unregenerate part, of the indwelling Power and Violence of Sin remaining in
him, and because he finds the like in himself, conclude that he is a regenerate
man, will be deceived in his Reckoning. It is all one as if you should argue, A
wise man may be sick and wounded, yea do some things foolishly, Therefore every
one who is sick and wounded and does things foolishly, is a wise man. Or as if
a silly deformed Creature hearing one speaking of a beautiful Person, should,
say that he had a mark or a Scarre that much disfigured him, should conclude
that because he has himself scarres, and moles, and warts, that he also is
beautiful. If you will have Evidences of your being Believers, it must be from
those things that constitute men Believers. He that has these things in
himself, may safely conclude, If I am a Believer, I am a most miserable one.
But that any man is so, He must look for other Evidences, if he will have Peace.

CHAP. X.
The Second particular Direction. Get a clear Sense of (1) The Guilt of the Sin
perplexing. Considerations for Help therein proposed. (2) The Danger manifold:
1. Hardening. 2. Temporal Correction. 3. Loss of Peace and Strength. 4. Eternal
Destruction. Rules for this Management of the Consideration. (3) The Evil of
it: 1. In Grieving the Spirit. 2. Wounding the New Creature.

THE Second Direction is this, Get a clear and abiding Sense upon thy Mind and
Conscience of the (1) Guilt, (2) Danger, (3) Evil of that Sin wherewith thou
art perplexed.

(1) Of the Guilt of it. It is one of the D^ceits of a prevailing Lust, to
extenuate its own Guilt. Is it not a little one? When I go and bow my self in
the House of Rimmon, God be merciful to me in This thing. Though this be bad,
yet it is not so bad as such and such an Evil, others of the People of God have
had such a Frame; yea what dreadful Actual sins have some of them fallen into!
Innumerable ways there are whereby Sin diverts the Mind from a right and due
Apprehension of its Guilt. Its noysom Exhalations darken the Mind, that it
cannot make a right Judgment of things; Perplexing Reasonings, extenuating
Promises, tumultuating Desires, treacherous Purposes of ^^linquishment, hopes
of Mercy; all have a share in disturbing the Mind, in its Consideration of the
Guilt of a prevailing Lust. The Prophet tells us, that Lust will do thus
wholly, when it comes to the height: Hos. 4.11. Whoredom and Wine and new Wine
take away the heart: The Heart, (i.e.) the understanding, as it is often used
in the Scripture. And as they accomplish this work to the height in
unregenerate Persons, so in part in rege^^rate also. Solomon tells you of him
who was enticed by the lewd Woman, that he was among the simple ones, he was a
young man void of understanding, Prove. 7.7. And wherein did his folly appear?
Why says he, in the 23d verse. He knew not that it was for his Life; He
considered not the Guilt of the Evil that he was involved in. And the Lord
rendering a Reason why his dealings with Ephraim took no better Effect, gives
this Account: Ephraim is like a silly Dove without heart, Hos. 7.11. had no
understanding of his own miserable Condition. Had it been possible that David
should have lain so long in the Guilt of that abominable Sin, but that he had
innumerable corrupt Reasonings, hindering him from taking a clear View of its
Ugliness and Guilt in thc Glass of the Law? This made the Prophet that was sent
for his awaking, in his dealings with him, to shut up all subterfuges and
Pretenses, by his Parable; that so he might fall fully under a sense of the
Guilt of it. This is the proper issue of Lust in the heart, it darkens the Mind
that it shall not judge aright of its Guilt; And many other Ways it has for
its own Extenuation, that I shall not now insist on. Let this then be the first
care of him that would mortify Sin, to fix a right Judgment of its Guilt in
his Mind. To which end take these Considerations to thy assistance:

1. Though the Power of Sin be weakened by inherent Grace in them that have it,
that Sin shall not have dominion over them, as it has over others, yet the
Guilt of Sin that does yet abide and remain, is aggravated and heightened by it,
Romans 6.1, 2. What shall we say then? shall we continue in Sin that Grace may
abound? God forbid, how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
How shall we that are dead; the Emphasis is on the word We. How shall we do it,
who (as he afterward describes it,) have received Grace from Christ to the
contrary? We (doubtless) are more evil than any, if we do it. I shall not
insist on the special Aggravations of the Sins of such Persons; how they sin
against more Love, Mercy, Grace, Assistance, Relief, Means and Deliverances,
than others. But let this Consideration abide in thy Mind. There is
inconceivably more Evil and Guilt in the Evil of thy Heart, that does remain,
than there would be in so much Sin, if thou had no Grace at all. Observe,

2. That as God sees abundance of beauty and Excellency in the desires of the
Hearts of his Servants, more than in any the most glorious works of other men,
yea more than in most of their own outward Performances, which have a greater
mixture of Sin than the desires and Pantings of Grace in the Heart have: So God
sees a great deal of Evil in the working of Lust in their Hearts, yea and more
than in the open notorious Acts of wicked men, or in many outward Sins
whereinto the Saints may fall; seeing against them there is more Opposition
made, and more Humiliation generally follows them. Thus Christ, dealing with
his decaying Children, goes to the root with them; lays aside their
profession, Rev. 3.15. I know thee, thou art quite another thing than thou
professest, and this makes thee abominable.

So then; let these things and the like Considerations lead thee to a clear
sense of the Guilt of thy indwelling Lust, that there may be no room in thy
Heart for extenuating or excusing thoughts, whereby Sin insensibly will get
strength and prevail.

(2) Consider the danger of it, which is manifold:

1. Of being hardened by its Deceitfulness: This the Apostle sorely charges on
the Hebrews, chapter 3. v. 12, 13. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you
an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God: But exhort one
another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin. Take heed (says he) use all means, consider your
Temptations, watch diligently, there is a Treachery, a deceit in Sin, that
tends to the hardening of your Hearts from the Fear of God. The hardening here
mentioned is to the utmost; utter Obduration; Sin tends to it, and every
Distemper and Lust will make at least some progress toward it. Thou that wast
tender, and did use to melt under the Word, under Afflictions, wilt grow (as
some have profanely spoken,) Sermon-proof, and Sickness-proof; Thou that did
tremble at the presence of God, thoughts of Death, and Appearance before him,
when thou had more Assurance of his Love than now thou have, shall have a
Stoutness upon thy Spirit, not to be moved by these things. Thy Soul and thy
sin shall be spoken of, and spoken to, and thou shall not be at all concerned;
But shall be able to pass over Duties, Praying, Hearing, Reading, and thy Heart
not in the least affected. Sin will grow a light thing to thee; thou will pass
by it as a thing of naught; This it will grow to, and what will be the End of
such a Condition? Can a sadder thing befall thee? Is it not enough to make any
heart to tremble, to think of being brought into that Estate, wherein he should
have slight thoughts of Sin; slight thoughts of Grace, of Mercy, of the Blood
of Christ, of the Law, Heaven and Hell, come all in at the same season? Take
heed, this is that thy Lust is working toward; the hardening of the Heart,
searing of Conscience, blinding of the Mind, stupifying of the Affections, and
deceiving of the whole Soul.

2. The danger of some great temporal Correction, which the Scripture calls
Vengeance, Judgment, and Punishment, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33, Though God
should not utterly cast thee off for this Abomination that lies in thy Heart,
yet he will visit with the Rod; though he pardon and forgive, he will take
vengeance of thy Inventions. O remember David and all his troubles; look on him
flying into the Wilderness, and consider the hand of God upon him. Is it
nothing to thee, that God should kill thy Child in anger, ruin thy Estate in
anger, break thy Bones in anger, suffer thee to be a Scandal and Reproach in
anger, kill thee, destroy thee, make thee lie down in darkness in anger? Is it
nothing that he should punish, ruin, and undo others for thy sake? Let me not
be mistaken, I do not mean, that God does send all these things always on his
in Anger; God forbid. But this I say, That when he does so deal with thee, and
thy Conscience bears witness with him, what thy Provocations have been, thou will find his dealings full of bitterness to thy Soul. If thou fear not
these things, I fear thou art under hardness.

3. Loss of Peace and Strength all a man's days. To have peace with God, to
have strength to walk before God, is the sum of the great Promises of the
Covenant of Grace. In these things is the Life of our Souls. Without them in
some comfortable measure, to Live, is to Dye. What good will our Lives do us,
if we see not the face of God sometimes in peace? If we have not some strength
to walk with him? Now both these will an unmortified Lust certainly deprive the
Souls of men of. This case is so evident in David, as that nothing can be more
clear. How often does he complain that his bones were broken, his Soul
disquieted, his wounds grievous on this account? Take other Instances, Isa.
57.18. For the Iniquity of his Covetousness I was wroth, and hid my self. What
peace I pray is there to a Soul while God hides himself? Or strength whilst he
smites? Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place, until they acknowledge
their Offense, and seek my face. I will leave them, hide my Face, and what will
become of their peace and strength? If ever then thou have enjoyed peace with
God, if ever his Terrors have made thee afraid, if ever thou have had strength
to walk with him, or ever have mourned in thy Prayer, and been troubled because
of thy weakness, think of this danger that hangs over thy head. It is perhaps
but a little while and thou shall see the Face of God in Peace no more: Perhaps
by to morrow thou shall not be able to pray, read, hear, or perform any Duties
with the least cheerfulness, Life or Vigor; and possibly thou may never see
a quiet hour whilst thou live; That thou may carry about thee broken bones
full of pain and terror all the days of thy Life; yea perhaps God will shoot
his Arrows at thee, and fill thee with Anguish and disquietness, with Fears
and Perplexities, make thee a Terror and an Astonishment to thy self and
others, show thee Hell and Wrath every moment; frighten and scare thee with sad
Apprehensions of his Hatred, so that thy sore shall run in the Night season,
and thy Soul shall refuse Comfort; so that thou shall wish Death rather than
Life, yea thy Soul may choose strangling. Consider this a little, though God
should not utterly destroy thee, yet he might cast thee into this condition,
wherein thou shall have quick and living Apprehensions of thy Destruction. Wont
thy Heart to thoughts hereof: Let it know what is like to be the Issue of its
State, leave not this Consideration until thou have made thy Soul to tremble
within thee.

4. There is the Danger of eternal Destruction. For the due Management of this
Consideration, observe,

I. That there is such a connection between a Continuance in Sin and eternal
Destruction, that though God does resolve to deliver some from a Continuance in
Sin, that they may not be destroyed, yet he will deliver none from Destruction
that continue in sin. So that whilst any one lies under an Abiding power of
sin, the Threats of Destruction and everlasting Separation from God are to be
held out to him: So Heb. 3.12. to which add Heb. 10.38. This is the Rule of
Gods proceeding: If any man depart from him, draw back through Unbelief, Gods
Soul has no pleasure in him; that is, his Indignation shall pursue him to
Destruction; so evidently, Gal. 6.8.

II. That he who is so entangled (as above described) under the Power of any
Corruption, can have at that present no clear prevailing Evidence of his
Interest in the Covenant, by the Efficacy whereof he may be delivered from Fear
of Destruction. So that Destruction from the Lord may justly be a Terror to
him; And he may, he ought to look upon it, as that which will be the End of his
Course and ways. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1. True! but who shall have the comfort of this Assertion? Who may
assume it to himself? They that walk after the Spirit, and not after the Flesh.
But you will say, Is not this to persuade men to unbelief? I answer, No; there
is a twofold Judgment that a man may make of himself; 1. Of his Person, and 2.
Of his Ways. It is the judgment of his Ways, not his Person that I speak of;
Let a man get the best Evidence for his Person that he can, yet to judge that
an evil Way will end in Destruction, is his Duty; not to do it, is Atheism. I
do not say, that in such a Condition a man ought to throw away the Evidences of
his personal Interest in Christ; but I say, he cannot keep them. There is a
twofold condemnation of a man's self:

First, In respect of Desert, when the Soul concludes, that it Deserves to be
cast out of the presence of God; and this is so far from a business of
Unbelief, that it is an Effect of Faith.

Secondly, With respect to the Issue and Event; when the Soul concludes it
shall be Damned. I do not say this is the Duty of any one, nor do I call them
to it. But this I say, that the End of the way wherein a man is, ought by him
to be concluded to be death, that he may be provoked to fly from it; And this
is another Consideration, that ought to dwell upon such a Soul, if it desire to
be freed from the intanglement of its Lusts.

(3) Consider the Evils of it. I mean its present Evils. Danger respects what
is to come; Evil what is present: Some of the many Evils that attend an
unmortified Lust, may be mentioned.

1. It grieves the Holy and Blessed Spirit, which is given to Believers to
dwell in them and abide with them. So the Apostle, ( Ephesians. 4.25, 26, 27, 28,
29.) dehorting them from many Lusts and Sins, gives this as the great Motive of
it, verse. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit, whereby you are sealed to the day of
Redemption. Grieve not that Spirit of God (says he) whereby you receive so
many and so great Benefits; of which he instances in one signal and
comprehensive one, Sealing to the day of Redemption. He is grieved by it, as a
tender and loving Friend is grieved at the unkindness of his Friend, of whom he
has well deserved; so is it with this tender and loving Spirit, who has
chosen our Hearts for an Habitation to dwell in, and there to do for us all
that our Souls desire. He is grieved by our harboring his Enemies, and those
whom he is to destroy in our Hearts with him. He does not afflict willingly,
nor grieve Us, Lam. 3.33. and shall we daily grieve Him? Thus is he said
sometimes to be vexed, sometimes grieved at his heart, to express the greatest
sense of our provocation. Now if there be any thing of gracious Ingenuity left
in the Soul, if it be not utterly hardened by the Deceitfulness of Sin, this
Consideration will certainly affect it. Consider Who and What thou art, who the
Spirit is that is grieved, what he has done for thee, what he comes to thy
Soul about, what he has already done in thee; and be ashamed. Among those who
walk with God, there is no groater Motive and Incentive unto universal
Holiness, and the preserving of their Hearts and Spirits in all Purity and
Cleanness, than this, That the blessed Spirit who has undertaken to dwell in
them as Temples of God, and to preserve them meet for him who so dwells in
them, is continually considering what they give Entertainment in their Hearts
unto; and rejoices when his Temple is kept undefiled; that was an high
Aggravation of the Sin of Zimri, that he brought his Adulteress into the
Congregation in the sight of Moses, and the rest, who were weeping for the Sins
of the people, Numb. 25.6. and is it not an high Aggravation of the
countenancing a Lust, or suffering it to abide in the Heart, when it is (as it
must be, if we are Believers) entertained under the peculiar Eye and View of
the Holy Ghost; taking care to preserve his Tabernacle pure and holy?

2. The Lord Jesus is wounded afresh by it; His new Creature in the heart is
wounded. His Love is foiled, his adversary gratified. As a total relinquishment
of him by the Deceitfulness of Sin, is the crucifying him afresh, and the
putting of him to open shame, so every harboring of Sin that he came to
destroy, wounds and grieves him.

3. It will take away a man's usefulness in his Generation. His Works, his
Endeavors, his Labors seldom receive Blessing from God. If he be a Preacher,
God commonly blows upon his Ministry, that he shall labor in the Fire, and not
be honored with any success, or doing any work for God; and the like may be
spoken of other Conditions. The world is at this day full of poor withering
Professors; how few are there that walk in any Beauty, or Glory; how barren,
how useless are they for the most part ^. Amongst the many Reasons that may be
assigned of this sad Estate, it may justly be feared, that this is none of the
least effectual; many men harbor Spirit-devouring Lusts in their bosoms, that
lie as Worms at the Root of their Obedience, and corrode and weaken it day by
day. All Graces, all the Ways and Means whereby any Graces may be exercised
and improved, are prejudiced by this Means; and as to any success, God blasts
such men's undertakings.

This then is my second Direction, and it regards the Opposition that is to be
made to Lust, in respect of its habitual residence in the Soul; keep alive upon
thy Heart these or the like Considerations, of its Guilt, Danger and Evil; be
much in the meditation of these things; cause thy Heart to dwell and abide upon
them. Engage thy Thoughts into these Considerations; let them not go off, nor
wander from them, until they begin to have a powerful Influence upon thy
Soul; until they make it to tremble.

CHAP. XI.
The Third Direction proposed. Load the Conscience with the Guilt of the
perplexing Distemper. The Ways and Means whereby that may be done. The Fourth
Direction. Vehement desire for Deliverance. The Fifth. Some Distempers rooted
deeply in men's Natural Tempers. Considerations of such Distempers: Ways of
dealing with them. The Sixth Direction. Occasions and Advantages of Sin to be
prevented. The Seventh Direction. The first actings of Sin vigorously to be
opposed.

THIS is my Third Direction:

Load thy Conscience with the Guilt of it. Not only consider, that it has a
Guilt, but load thy Conscience with the Guilt of its actual Eruptions and
Disturbances.

For the right improvement of this Rule, I shall give some particular
Directions.

First, Take Gods Me^hod in it, and begin with Generals, a^^ so descend to
particulars.

(1) Charge thy Conscience with that Guilt which appears in it, from the
Rectitude and Holiness of the Law. Bring the holy Law of God into thy
Conscience; lay thy corruption to it; pray that thou may be affected with
it. Consider the holiness, spirituality, fiery severity, inwardness,
absoluteness of the Law; And see how thou can stand before it. Be much (I
say) in affecting thy Conscience with the Terror of the Lord in the Law, and
how righteous it is that every one of thy Transgressions should receive a
recompense of Reward. Perhaps thy Conscience will invent shifts and Evasions to
keep off the Power of this Consideration; as, that the condemning power of the
Law does not belong to thee, thou art set free from it, and the like; and so
though thou be not conformable to it, yet thou need not to be so much
troubled at it. But,

1. Tell thy Conscience, that it cannot manage any evidence to the purpose,
that thou art free from the condemning Power of Sin, whilst thy unmortified
Lust lies in thy Heart; so that perhaps the Law may make good its Plea against
thee for a full Dominion, and then thou art a lost Creature. Wherefore it is
best to ponder to the utmost, what it has to say.

Assuredly he (...) pleads in the most secret Reserve of his Heart, that he is
freed from the condemning po^e^ of the Law, thereby secretly to countenance
himself in giving the ^^^st allowance unto any Sin or Lust, is not able on
Gospel grounds to manage any Evidence unto any tolerable spiritual Security,
that indeed he is in a due manner freed from what he so pretends himself to be
delivered.

2. Whatever be the issue, yet the Law has Commission from God to seize upon
Transgressors wherever it find them, and so bring them before his Throne, where
they are to plead for themselves; This is thy present case: The Law has found
thee out, and before God it will bring thee: If thou can plead a Pardon, well
and good; If not, the Law will do its work.

3. However, this is the proper Work of the Law, to discover Sin in the Guilt
of it, to awake and humble the Soul for it, to be a Glass to represent Sin in
its colors; and if thou denyest to deal with it on this Account, it is not
through Faith, but through the hardness of thy Heart and the Deceitfulness of
Sin.

This is a Door that too many Professors have gone out at, unto open Apostasy;
such a Deliverance from the Law they have pretended, as that they would consult
its Guidance and Direction no more; they would measure their Sin by it no more;
by little and little this Principle has insensibly from the Notion of it
proceeded to influence their practical Understandings; and having taken
possession there, has turned the Will and Affections loose to all manner of
Abominations.

By such ways (I say then) as these, persuade thy Conscience to hearken
diligently to what the Law speaks in the Name of the Lord unto thee, about thy
Lust and Corruption. Oh! if thy Ears be open, it will speak with a Voice that
shall make thee tremble, that shall cast thee to the ground, and fill thee with
Astonishment. If ever thou will mortify thy Corruptions, thou must tie up thy
Conscience to the Law, shut it from all shifts and Exceptions until it owns
its Guilt, with a clear and through Apprehension: So that thence, (as David
speaks) thy Iniquity may ever be before thee.

(2) Bring thy Lust to the Gospel, not for Relief, but for farther conviction
of its Guilt; look on him whom thou have pierced, and be in bitterness. Say to
thy Soul; What have I done? what Love, what Mercy, what Blood, what Grace have
I despised and trampled on? Is this the Return I make to the Father for his
Love, to the Son for his Blood, to the Holy Ghost for his Grace? Do I thus
requite the Lord? Have I defiled the Heart that Christ dyed to wash; that the
Blessed Spirit has chosen to dwell in? And can I keep my self out of the Dust?
What can I say to the dear Lord Jesus? How shall I hold up my head with any
boldness before him? Do I account Communion with him of so little value, that
for this vile Lusts sake I have scarce left him any room in my Heart? How shall
I escape, if I neglect so great Salvation? In the mean time, what shall I say
to the Lord? Love, Mercy, Grace, Goodness, Peace, Joy, Consolation, I have
despised them all, and esteemed them as a thing of naught, that I might harbor
a Lust in my Heart.

Have I obtained a view of Gods Fatherly Countenance, that I might behold his
face, and provoke him to his face? Was my Soul washed, that room might be made
for new Defilements? Shall I endeavor to disappoint the End of the Death of
Christ? Shall I daily grieve that Spirit whereby I am sealed to the day of
Redemption? Entert^in thy Conscience daily with this Treaty. (...) it can stand
before this Aggravation o^ (...) ^^i^t. If this make it not sink in some (...)*
and melt, I fear thy Case is dangerous.

Secondly, (...) particulars. As under the General (...) Gospel, all the
Benefits of it are to be considered, as Redemption, Justification and the l^ke;
so in particular, consider the Management of the love of them toward thine own
Soul, for the Aggravation of the Guilt of thy Corruption. As,

1. Consider the infinite Patience and forbearance of God toward thee in
particular: Consider what Advantages he might have taken against thee, to have
made thee a shame and a reproach in this World, and an object of wrath for
ever: How thou have dealt treacherously and falsely with him from time to time,
flattered him with thy Lips, but broken all Promises and Engagements; and that
by the means of that Sin thou art now in pursuit of; and yet he has spared
thee from time to time, although thou seem boldly to have put it to the
trial how long he could hold out: And will thou yet sin against him? will thou
yet weary him, and make him to serve with thy Corruptions?

Have thou not often been ready to conclude thy self, that it was utterly
impossible that he should bear any longer with thee; that he would cast thee
off, and be gracious no more; that all his Forbearance was exhausted, and Hell
and Wrath was even ready prepared for thee; and yet above all thy Expectation
he has returned with Visitations of Love; and will thou yet abide in the
Provocation of the eyes of his Glory?

2. How often have thou been at the door of being Hardened by the Deceitfulness
of Sin; and by the infinite rich Grace of God have been recovered to communion
with him again?

Have thou not found Grace decaying; Delight in Duties, Ordinances, Prayer and
Meditation, vanishing; inclinations to loose careless walking, thriving; and
they who before were entangled, almost beyond recovery? Have thou not found thy
self engaged in such Ways, Societies, Companies, and that with delight, as God
abhorres? and will thou venture any more to the brink of Hardness?

3. All Gods gracious dealings with thee in Providential Dispensations,
Deliverances, Afflictions, Mercies, Enjoyments, all ought here to take place.
By these I say, and the like Means, load thy Conscience, and leave it not
until it be thoroughly affected with the Guilt of thy indwelling Corruption:
Until it is sensible of its Wound, and lie in the dust before the Lord. Unless
this be done to the purpose, all other Endeavors are to no purpose. Whilst
the Conscience has any Means to alleviate the Guilt of Sin, the Soul will
never vigorously attempt its Mortification.

Fourthly, Being thus affected with thy Sin, in the next place, get a constant
longing, breathing after deliverance from the Power of it. Suffer not thy Heart
one moment to be contented with thy present Frame and Condition. Longing
desires after any thing, in things Natural and Civil, are of no value nor
consideration, any farther, but as they incite and stir up the person in whom
they are, to a diligent use of Means for the bringing about the thing aimed at.
In spiritual things it is otherwise. Longing, breathing and panting after
Deliverance, is a Grace in its self, that has a mighty power to conform the
Soul into the likeness of the thing longed after. Hence the Apostle describing
the Repentance and godly Sorrow of the Corinthians, reckons this as one eminent
Grace that was then set on work; vehement Desire, 2 Cor. 7.11. And in this case
of indwelling Sin, and the power of it, what Frame does he express himself to
be in? Romans 7.24. His heart breaks out with longings into a most passionate
Expression of desire of deliverance. Now if this be the frame of Saints, upon
the general consideration of indwelling Sin, how is it to be heightened and
increased, when thereunto is added the perplexing Rage and Power of any
particular Lust and Corruption? Assure thy self, unless thou longest for
Deliverance thou shall not have it.

This will make the Heart watchful for all Opportunities of Advantage against
its Enemy; and ready to close with any Assistances that are afforded for its
Destruction; strong Desires are the very Life of that praying always which is
enjoined us in all Conditions, and in none is more necessary than in this; they
set Faith and Hope on work, and are the Souls moving after the Lord.

Get thy Heart then into a panting and breathing Frame, long, sigh, cry out;
you know the Example of David, I shall not need to insist on it.

The Fifth Directions is,

5 ly, Consider whether the Distemper with which thou art perplexed, be not
rooted in thy Nature, and cherished, fomented and heightened from thy
Constitution. A proneness to some Sins may doubtless lie in the Natural Temper
and Disposition of men. In this Case consider;

1. This is not in the least an Extenuation of the Guilt of thy Sin.

Some with an open Profaneness will ascribe gross Enormities to their Temper
and Disposition. And whether others may not relieve themselves from the
pressing Guilt of their Distempers by the same Consideration, I know not. It is
from the F^ll, from the Original depravation of our Natures, that the fomes and
Nourishment of any Sin abides in our Natural Temper. David reckons his being
shapen in Iniquity, and conception in Sin, Psalm. 51.5. as an Aggravation of his
following Sin, not a lessening or extenuation of it. That thou art peculiarly
inclined unto any sinful Distemper, is but a peculiar breaking out of Original
Lust in thy Nature, which should peculiarly abase and humble thee.

2. That thou have to fix upon on this account, in reference to thy walking
with God, is, that so great an Advantage is given to Sin, as also to Satan, by
this thy Temper and Disposition, that without extraordinary Watchfulness, Care
and Diligence, they will assuredly prevail against thy Soul. Thousands have
been on this account hurryed headlong to Hell, who otherwise (at least) might
have gone at a more gentle, less provoking, less mischievous rate.

3. For the Mortification of any Distemper, so rooted in the Nature of a Man,
unto all other Ways and Means already named or farther to be insisted on,
there is one expedient peculiarly suited. This is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
9.27. I keep under my Body, and bring it into subjection. The bringing of the
very Body into subjection, is an Ordinance of God, tending to the Mortification
of Sin. This gives check unto the Natural Root of the Distemper, and withers it
by taking away its fatness of soil. Perhaps because the Papists (men ignorant
of the Righteousness of Christ, the Work of his Spirit, and whole business in
hand) have laid the whole weight and stress of Mortification in voluntary
Services and Penances; leading to the subjection of the Body, knowing indeed
the true Nature neither of Sin nor Mortification, it may on the other side be a
Temptation to some, to neglect some means of humiliation, which by God himself
are owned and appointed. The bringing of the body into subjection in the case
insisted on, by cutting short the Natural Appetite, by fasting, watching, and
the like, is doubtless acceptable to God, so it be done with the ensuing
limitations.

(1) That the outward weakening and impairing of the Body, be not looked upon
as a thing good in it self, or that any Mortification does consist therein,
(which were again to bring us under carnal Ordinances) but only as a Means for
the End proposed; the weakening of any Distemper in its Natural root and seat.
A man may have leanness of Body and Soul together.

(2) That the means whereby this is done, namely, by fasting and watching, and
the like, be not looked on as things that in Themselves, and by virtue of their
Own Power, can produce true Mortification of any Sin; for if they would, Sin
might be mortified without any help of the Spirit, in any unregenerate person
in the world. They are to be looked on only as ways whereby the Spirit may,
and sometimes does put forth strength for the accomplishing of his own work,
especially in the Case mentioned. Want of a right understanding and due
Improvement of these and the like Considerations, has raised a Mortification
among the Papists that may be better applied to Horses and other Beasts of the
Field, than to Believers.

This is the sum of what has been spoken; when the distemper complained of,
seems to be rooted in Natural temper and constitution, in applying our Souls to
a participation of the Blood and Spirit of Christ, an Endeavor is to be used,
to give check in the way of God, to the natural Root of that Distemper.

Sixthly, Consider what Occasions, what Advantages thy Distemper has taken to
exert and put forth it self, and watch against them all. This is one part of
that Duty which our blessed Savior recommends to his Disciples under the name
of watching, Mark 13.37. I say unto you all, Watch; which in Luke 21.34. is,
Take heed that your hearts be not overcharged: Watch against all Eruptions of
thy Corruptions. I mean that Duty which David professed himself to be exercised
unto: I have (says he) kept my self from mine Iniquity. he watched all the
ways and workings of his Iniquity to prevent them, to rise up against them.
This is that which we are called unto under the name of Considering our Ways:
Consider what Ways, what Companyes, what Opportunities, what Studies, what
Businesses, what Conditions, have at any time given, or do usually give
advantages to thy Distempers, and set thy self heedfully against them all. Men
will do this with respect unto their bodily infirmities and distempers; The
Seasons, the Diet, the Air, that have proved offensive shall be avoided. Are
the the things of the Soul of less importance? Know that he that dares to d^lly
with Occasions of Sin, will dare to Sin. He that will venture upon Temptations
unto Wickedness, will venture upon Wickedness. Hazael thought he should not be
so wicked as the Prophet told him he would be: To convince him, the Prophet
tells him no more, but Thou shall be King of Syria. If he will venture on
Temptations unto Cruelty, he will be cruel. Tell a man he shall commit such and
such Sins, he will startle at it: If you can convince him, that he will venture
on such Occasions and Temptations of them, he will have little ground left for
his Confidence. Particular Directions belonging to this Head are many, not now
to b^ insisted on. But because this Head is of no less importance than the
whole Doctrine here handled, I have a^ large in another Treatise, about
entering into Temptations, treated of it.

Seventhly, Rise mightily against the first Actings of thy Distemper, its first
Conceptions; suffer it not to get the least Ground. Do not say, thus far it
shall go, and no farther. If it have allowance for one step, it will take
another. It is impossible to fix Bounds to Sin. It is like water in a Channel;
if it once break out, it will have its course. Its not acting, is easier to be
compassed than its Bounding. Therefore does James give that Gradation and
Process of Lust, Chap. 1.14, 15. that we may stop at the Entrance. Do thou
find thy corruption to begin to entangle thy Thoughts; rise up with all thy
strength against it, with no less Indignation than if it had fully accomplished
what it aims at. Consider what an unclean Thought would have; it would have
thee roll thy self in Folly and Filth. Ask Envy what it would have; Murder and
Destruction is at the end of it. Set thy self against it with no less vigor,
than if it had utterly debased thee to wickedness. Without this Course thou will not prevail. As Sin gets ground in the Affections to delight in it, it
gets also upon the Understanding to slight it.

CHAP. XII.
The Eighth Direction. Thoughtfulness of the Excellency of the Majesty of God.
Our Vnacquaintedness with him, proposed and considered.

EIghthly, Use and exercise thy self to such Meditations as may serve to fill
thee at all times with self-abasement and Thoughts of thine own vileness: As,

1. Be much in Thoughtfulness of the Excellency of the Majesty of God, and
thine infinite inconceivable distance from him; many thoughts of it cannot but
fill thee with a sense of thine own Vileness, which strikes deep at the root of
any indwelling Sin. When Job comes to a clear discovery of the Greatness and
Excellency of God, he is filled with self-abhorrency, and is pressed to
Humiliation, Job 42.5, 6. And in what state does the Prophet Habakkuk affirm
himself to be cast, upon the apprehension of the Majesty of God? Chap. 3.16.
With God (says Job) is terrible Majesty, Job 37.22. Hence were the thoughts of
them of Old, that when they had seen God they should dye. The Scripture abounds
in this self-abasing Consideration, comparing the men of the Earth to
Grasshoppers, to Vanity, the dust of the balance in respect of God, Isa. 40.13,
14, 15. Be much in thoughts of this nature, to abase the pride of thy Heart,
and to keep thy Soul humble within thee. There is nothing will render thee in a
greater indisposition to be imposed on by the deceits of sin, than such a frame
of Heart. Think greatly of the Greatness of God.

2. Think much of thine unacquaintedness with him; Though thou know enough
to keep thee low and humble, yet how little a portion is it that thou know
of him! The Contemplation hereof cast that wise man into that Apprehension of
himself, which he expresses, Prove. 30.2, 3, 4. Surely I am more brutish than
any man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned Wisdom, nor
have the knowledge of the Holy. Who has ascended up into Heaven, or descended?
Who has gathered the Wind in his fists? Who has bound the Waters in a
Garment? Who has established the Ends of the Earth? What is his Name, and what
is his Sons Name if thou can tell? Labor with this also to take down the
pride of thy Heart. What do^t thou know of God? How little a portion is it? How
immense is he in his Nature? C^nst thou look without terror into the Abyss of
Eternity? Thou can not bear the rays of his glorious Being.

Because I look on this Consideration of great use in our walking with God, so
far as it may have (as it may have) a Consistency with that filial Boldness
which is given us in Jesus Christ to draw nigh to the Throne of Grace, I shall
farther insist upon it, to give an abiding Impression of it to the Souls of
them who desire to walk humbly with God.

Consider then I say, to keep thy heart in continual awe of the Majesty of God,
That Persons of the most high and eminent Seize, of the nearest and most
familiar Communion with God, do yet in this life know but a very little of him,
and his Glory. God reveals his Name to Moses, the most glorious Attributes that
he has manifested in the Covenant of Grace, Exodus 34.5, 6. yet all are but the
back-parts of God. All that he knows by it, is but little, low, compared to
the perfection of his Glory.

Hence it is with peculiar reference to Moses, that it is said, No man has
seen God at any time, Joh. 1.18. Of him in comparison with Christ does he
speak, verse. 17. and of him it is here said, No man (no not Moses, the most
eminent among them) has seen God at any time. We speak much of God, can talk
of Him, his Ways, his Works, his Counsels all the day long; The truth is, we
know very little of him; our Thoughts, our Meditations, our Expressions of him
are low, many of them unworthy of his Glory, none of them reaching his
Perfections.

You will say, that Moses was under the Law, when God wrapped up himself in
darkness, and his Mind in Types and Clouds and dark Institutions. Under the
glorious shining of the Gospel, which has brought Life and Immortality to
light, God being revealed from his own bosom, we now know him much more
clearly, and as he is: We see his face now, and not his back-parts only as
Moses did.

Ans. 1. I acknowledge a vast, and almost unconceivable difference between the
Acquaintance we now have with God, Heb. 1.11.
after his speaking to us by his own Son, and that which the generality of the
Saints had under the Law: For although their eyes were as good, sharp and clear
as ours, their Faith and spiritual understanding not behind ours, the Object as
glorious unto them as unto us, yet our day is more clear than theirs was; the
Clouds are blown away and scattered, Cant, 4.6.
the shadows of the Night are gone and fled away, the Sun is risen, and the
Means of sight is made more eminent and clear than formerly. Yet,

2. That peculiar sight which Moses had of God, Exodus 34. was a Gospel-sight, a
sight of God as Gracious, etc. and yet it is called but his back-parts, that is,
but low and mean, in comparison of his Excellencies and Perfections.

3. The Apostle exalting to the utmost this Glory of Gospel Light above that of
the Law, manifesting that now the veil causing Darkness is taken away; (...).
so that with open or uncovered face we behold the Glory of the Lord; Tells us
how: As in a glass, 2 Cor. 3.18. In a glass. How is that? Clearly, perfectly?
Alas no: He tells you how that is, 1 Cor. 13.12. We see through a glass darkly,
says he: It is not a Telescope, that helps us to see things afar off,
concerning which the Apostle speaks; and yet what poor helps are they! How
short do we come of the Truth of things, notwithstanding their Assistance! It
is a Looking-glass whereunto he alludes, (where are only obscure species and
images of things, and not the things themselves) and a sight therein, that he
compares our Knowledge to: He tells you also that all that we do see (...), by
or through this Glass, is in (...), in a Riddle, in darkness and Obscurity; And
speaking of himself (who surely was much more clear sighted than any now
living) he tells us that he saw but (...), in part; he saw but the back-parts
of heavenly things, v. 12. and compares all the knowledge he had attained of
God, to that he had of things when he was a child, verse. 11. it is a (...)
short of the (...): yea such as (...), it shall be destroyed or done away. We
know what weak, feeble, uncertain Notions and Apprehensions Children have of
things of any abstru^^ Consideration; how when they grow up with any
Improvements of Parts and Abilities, those Conceptions vanish, and they are
ashamed of them. It is the commendation of a Child, to love, honor, believe
and obey his Father; but for his Science and Notions, his Father knows their
childishness and Folly. Notwithstanding all our Confidence of high Seize,
all our Notions of God are but childish in respect of (...) infinite
Perfections. We lisp and babble* (...) say we know not what, for the most part;
in our most accurate (as we think) Conceptions and Notions of God. We may love,
honor, believe and obey our Father, and therewith he accepts our Childish
thoughts, for they are but Childish. We see but his back-parts, we know but
little of him. Hence is that Promise, wherewith we are so often supported and
comforted in our Distress; we shall see him as he is; we shall see him face to
face; know as we are known; comprehend that for which we are comprehended, 1
Cor. 15.12. 1 John 3.2. and positively, Now we see him not: All concluding that
here we see but his back-parts, not as he is, but in a dark obscure
representation, not in the perfection of his Glory.

The Queen of Sheba had heard much of Solomon, and framed many great thoughts
of his Magnificence in ^er Mind thereupon; but when she came and saw his Glory,
she was forced to confess, that the one half of the truth had not been told
her. We may suppose that we have here attained great knowledge, clear and high
thoughts of God; but alas! when he shall bring us into his presence, we shall
cry out, we never knew him as he is: The thousandth part of his Glory and
Perfection and Blessedness, never entered into our hearts.

^^Te Apostle tells us; 1 John 3.2. That we know not what we our selves shall
be; what we shall find our selves in the Issue; much less will it enter into
our Hearts to conceive, what God is, and what we shall find him to be. Consider
either him who is to be known, or the Way whereby we know him, and this will
farther appear.

First, We know so little of God, because it is God who is thus to be known;
that is, he who has described himself to us very much by this, That we cannot
know him: What else does he intend where he calls himself invisible,
incomprehensible, and the like? That is, He whom we do not, cannot know as he
is; and our farther progress consists more in knowing what he is not, than what
he is. Thus is he described to be immortal, infinite; that is, he is not as we
are, mortal, finite, and limited. Hence is that glorious description of him, 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has Immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can
approach unto, whom no man has seen nor can see. His light is such as no
Creature can approach unto: He is not seen, not because he cannot be seen, but
because we cannot bear the sight of him. The Light of God ( in whom is no
Darkness) forbids all access to him by any Creature whatever: We who cannot
behold the Sun in its glory, are too too weak to bear the beams of Infinite
Brightness.

On this Consideration (as was said) the wise man professes himself a very
Beast, and not to have the understanding of a Man, Prove. 30.2. that is, he knew
nothing in comparison of God, so that he seemed to have lost all his
Understanding, when once he came to the Consideration of him, his work and his
ways. In this Consideration let our Souls descend to some particulars.

1. For the Being of God; we are so far from a knowledge of it, so as to be
able to instruct one another therein, by words and expressions of it, as that
to frame any conceptions in our Mind, with such species and impressions of
things as we receive the knowledge of all other things by, is to make an Idol
to our selves, and so to worship a God of our own making, and not the God that
made us. We may as well and as lawfully hew him out of wood, or stone, as form
him a being in our Minds suited to our Apprehensions.

The utmost of the best of our thoughts of the being of God is, that we can
have no thoughts of it. Our knowledge of a being is but low, when it mounts no
higher but only to know that we know it not.

2. There be some things of God, which he himself has taught us to speak of,
and to regulate our Expressions of them; but when we have so done, we see not
the things themselves, we know them not: To believe and admire is all that we
attain to. We profess (as we are taught,) that God is infinite, omnipotent,
eternal; and we know what Disputes and Notions there are about Omnipresence,
Immensity, Infiniteness and Eternity. We have (I say) words and notions about
these things, but as to the things themselves, what do we know? What do we
comprehend of them? Can the Mind of Man do any more but swallow it self up in
an infinite Abyss, which is as nothing; give it self up to what it cannot
conceive, much less express? Is not our understanding brutish in the
Contemplation of such things? and is as if it were not; yea the perfection of
our understanding, is, not to understand, and to rest there: They are but the
back parts of Eternity and Infiniteness that we have a glimpse of. What shall I
say of the Trinity, or the Subsistence of distinct Persons in the same
individual Essence; a Mystery by many denied, because by none understood; a
Mystery whose every letter is mysterious.

Who can declare the Generation of the Son, the procession of the Spirit, or
the difference of the one from the other? but I shall not farther instance in
particulars. That infinite and inconceivable distance that is between Him and
us, keeps us in the dark as to any sight of his face, or clear Apprehension of
his Perfections.

We know him rather by what he does, than by what he is: by his doing us good,
than by his essential Goodness; and how little a portion of him (as Job speaks)
is hereby discovered?

Secondly, We know little of God, because it is Faith alone whereby here we
know him; I shall not now discourse about the remaining Impressions on the
Hearts of all men by Nature that there is a God, nor what they may Rationally
be taught concerning that God, from the works of his Creation and Providence,
which they see and behold; it is confessedly (and that upon the woeful
experience of all Ages) so weak, low, dark, confused, that none ever on that
account glorified God as they ought, but notwithstanding all their knowledge of
God, were indeed without God in the world.

The chief and (upon the matter) almost only acquaintance we have with God, and
his Dispensations of himself, is by Faith. He that comes to God must believe
that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that seek him, Heb. 11.6. Our
Knowledge of him, and his Rewarding, (the bottom of our Obedience or comeing to
him) is believing. We walk by Faith, and not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. (...); by
Faith, and so by Faith, as not to have any express Idea, Image, or species of
that which we believe: Faith is all the Argument we have of things not seen,
Heb. 11.1. I might here insist upon the Nature of it, and from all its
Concomitants and Concernments manifest, that we know but the back-parts of what
we know by Faith only. As to its Rise, it is built purely upon the Testimony
of him whom we have not seen; as the Apostle speaks, How can ye love him whom
you have not seen? That is, whom you know not but by Faith that he is: Faith
receives all upon his Testimony, whom it receives to be, only upon his own
Testimony. As to its Nature it is an Assent upon Testimony, not an Evidence
upon Demonstration; and the Object of it is (as was said before) above us.
Hence our Faith (as was formerly observed) is called a seeing darkly as in a
Glass: All that we know this way (and all that we know of God we know this way)
is but low, and dark, and obscure.

But you will say, all this is true, but yet it is only so to them that know
not God (perhaps) as he is revealed in Jesus Christ; with them who do so, it is
otherwise. It is true, No man has seen God at any time, but the only begotten
Son, he has revealed him, Joh. 1.17, 18. and, the Son of God is now come, and
has given us an understanding that we may know him that is true, 1 John 5.20.

The Illumination of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the Image of God
shines upon Believers, 2 Cor. 4.4. yea and God who commanded light to shine
out of darkness, shines into their hearts, to give them the knowledge of his
Glory in the face of his Son, v. 6. So that though we were darkness, yet we are
now light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. And the Apostle says, We all with open face
behold the Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. and we are now so far from being in
such darkness, or at such a distance from God, that our communion and
fellowship is with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3. The Light of the Gospel
whereby now God is revealed, is glorious; not a Star, but the Sun in his beauty
is risen upon us; and the veil is taken from our faces; so that though
unbelievers, yea and perhaps some weak Believers may be in some darkness, yet
those of any growth, or considerable Seize have a clear sight and view of
the face of God in Jesus Christ.

A. 1. The truth is, we all of us know enough of him to love him more than we
do, to delight in him, and serve him, believe him, obey him, put our trust in
him above all that we have hitherto attained.

Our Darkness and Weakness is no Plea for our Negligence and Disobedience. Who
is it that has walked up to the Knowledge that he has had of the Perfections,
Excellencies, and Will of God? Gods End in giving us any Knowledge of himself
here, is that we may glorify him as God; that is, love him, serve him, believe
and obey him, give him all the honor and Glory that is due from poor sinful
Creatures, to a sin-pardoning God, and Creator; we must all acknowledge, that
we were never thoroughly transformed into the Image of that Knowledge which we
have had. And had we used our Talents well, we might have been trusted with
more.

2. Comparatively, that knowledge which we have of God by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ in the Gospel, is exceeding eminent and glorious. It is so in
comparison of any knowledge of God that might otherwise be attained, or was
delivered in the Law under the Old Testament, which had but the shadow of good
things, not the express Image of them. This the Apostle pursues at large, 2
Cor. 3. Christ has now in these last days revealed the Father from his own
bosom, declared his Name, made known his Mind, Will and Council in a far more
clear, eminent, distinct manner than he did formerly, whilst he kept his
People under the poedagogy of the Law: And this is that which for the most part
is intended in the places before mentioned; the clear, perspicuous delivery and
declaration of God, and his Will in the Gospel is expressly exalted in
comparison of any other way of Revelation of himself.

3. The difference between Believers and Unbelievers as to Knowledge, is not so
much in the Matter of their Knowledge, as in the Manner of knowing. Unbelievers
some of them may know more, and be able to say more of God, his Perfections and
his will, than many Believers, but they know nothing as they ought: nothing in
a right manner, nothing spiritually and savingly; nothing with an holy,
heavenly light. The excellency of a Believer is not, that he has a large
Apprehension of things, but that what he does apprehend (which perhaps may be
very little) He sees it in the light of the Spirit of God, in a saving
soul-transforming light: And this is that which gives us communion with God,
and not prying Thoughts, or curious raised Notions.

4. Jesus Christ by his Word and Spirit, reveals to the Hearts of all his, God
as a Father, as a God in Covenant, as a Rewarder, every way sufficiently to
teach us to obey him here, and to lead us to his Bosom, to lie down there in
the Fruition of him to Eternity: But yet now,

5. Notwithstanding all this, it is but a little portion we know of him, we see
but his back-parts. For,

(1) The intendment of all Gospel Revelation is not to unveil Gods Essential
Glory, that we should see him as he is, but merely to declare so much of him as
he knows sufficient to be a bottom of our Faith, Love, Obedience, and coming
to him. That is, of the Faith which here he expects from us: Such services as
beseem poor Creatures in the midst of Temptations; but when he calls us to
eternal Admiration and Contemplation, without Interruption, he will make a new
manner of Discovery of himself, and the whole shape of things, as it now lies
before us, will depart as a shadow.

(2) We are dull and slow of heart to receive the things that are in the Word
revealed. God by our Infirmity and weakness, keeping us in continual dependence
on him, for Teachings and Revelations of himself out of his Word, never in this
world bringing any Soul to the utmost of what is from the Word to be made out
and discovered; so that although the way of Revelation in the Gospel be clear
and evident, yet we know little of the things themselves that are revealed.

Let us then revive the use and intendment of this Consideration; will not a
due Apprehension of this unconceivable Greatness of God, and that infinite
distance wherein we stand from him, fill the Soul with an holy and awful Fear
of him; so as to keep it in a Frame unsuited to the thriving or flourishing of
any Lust whatever? Let the Soul be continually wonted to Reverential thoughts
of Gods greatness and omnipresence, and it will be much upon its watch, as to
any undue deportments; consider him with whom you have to do; even our God is
a consuming fire; and in your greatest Abashments at his presence and eye,
know, that your very Nature is too narrow to bear apprehensions suitable to his
essential Glory.

CHAP. XIII.
The Ninth Direction. When the heart is disquieted by Sin, speak no peace to
it, until God speak it. Peace without detestation of Sin, unsound; So is Peace
measured out unto our selves. How we may know when we measure our peace unto
our selves. Directions as to that Enquiry. The vanity of speaking peace
slightly. Also of doing it on one singular account, not universally.

IN case God disquiet the Heart about the Guilt of its Distempers either in
respect of its Root and indwelling, or in respect of any Eruptions of it, take
heed thou speak not peace to thy self before God speaks it; but hearken what
he says to thy Soul: This is our next Direction, without the Observation
whereof, the Heart will be exceedingly exposed to the deceitfulness of Sin.

This is a business of great importance. It is a sad thing for a man to deceive
his own Soul herein. All the warnings God gives us in tenderness to our Souls,
to try and examine our selves, do tend to the preventing of this great Evil of
speaking peace groundlesly to our selves, which is upon the issue to bless our
selves in an opposition to God. It is not my business to insi^t upon the danger
of it, but to help Believers to prevent it, and to let them know when they do
so.

To manage this Direction aright, observe,

(1) That as it is the great Prerogative and Sovereignty of God to give grace
to whom he pleases, ( he has mercy on whom he will, Romans 9.16. and among all
the Sons of men, He calls whom he will, and sanctifies whom he will,) so among
those so called and justified, and whom he will save, He yet reserves this
Privilege to himself, to speak Peace to whom he pleases, and in what Degree
he pleases, even amongst them on whom he has bestowed Grace. He is the God of
all Consolation, in an especial manner in his dealing with Believers: That is,
of the good things that he keeps locked up in his Family, and gives out of it
to all his Children at his pleasure. This the Lord insists on, Isa. 57.16, 17,
18. It is the case under Consideration that is there insisted on. When God
says he will heal their Breaches and Disconsolations, he assumes this
Privilege to himself in an especial manner. I create it, verse. 19. Even in
respect of these poor wounded Creatures, I create it, and according to my
sovereignty make it out as I please.

Hence as it is with the collation of Grace in reference to them that are in
the state of Nature; God does it in great Curiosity, and his proceedings
therein, in taking and leaving, as to outward Appearances, quite besides, and
contrary oft-times to all probable Expectations; so is it in his Communication
of Peace and Joy in reference unto them that are in the state of Grace; he
gives them out often times quite besides our expectation, as to any appearing
Grounds of his Dispensations.

(2) As God creates it for whom he pleases, so it is the Prerogative of
Christ, to speak it home to the Conscience: Speaking to the Church of Laodicea,
who had healed her wounds falsely, and spoke peace to her self when she ought
not, He takes to himself that Title, I am the Amen; the faithful witness,
Revel. 3.14. He bears testimony concerning our Condition as it is indeed; we
may possibly mistake, and trouble our selves in vain, or flatter our selves
upon false Grounds, but he is the Amen, the faithful witness, and what he
speaks of our State and Condition, that it is indeed, Isa. 11.3. He is said not
to judge according to the sight of the eye, not according to any outward
appearance, or any thing that may be subject to a mistake, as we are apt to do;
but He shall judge and determine every cause as it is indeed.

Take these two previous Observations, and I shall give some Rules whereby men
may know whether God speaks peace to them, or whether they speak peace to
themselves only.

(1) Men certainly speak peace to themselves, when their so doing is not
attended with the greatest detestation imaginable of that sin in reference
whereunto they do speak Peace to themselves, and abhorrency of themselves for
it. When men are wounded by sin, disquieted and perplexed, and knowing that
there is no remedy for them, but only in the mercyes of God through the blood
of Christ, do therefore look to him, and to the Promises of the Covenant in
him, and thereupon quiet their hearts that it shall be well with them, and that
God will be exalted that he may be gracious to them, and yet their Souls are
not wrought to the greatest detestation of the sin or sins upon the Account
whereof they are disquieted; this is to heal themselves, and not to be healed
of God. This is but a great and strong wind, that the Lord is nigh unto, but
the Lord is not in the wind. When men do truly look upon Christ whom they have
pierced, (without which there is no Healing or Peace,) they will mourn, Zech.
12.10. they will mourn for him even upon this account, and detest the sin that
pierced him. When we go to Christ for healing, Faith eyes him peculiarly as one
pierced. Faith takes several views of Christ according to the Occasions of
Address to him, and communion with him that it has. Sometimes it views his
Holiness, sometimes his power, sometimes his love, his favor with his Father.
And when it goes for healing and peace, it looks especially on the blood of the
Covenant, on his Sufferings; for by his stripes are we healed, and the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, Isa. 53.5. when we look for Healing,
his stripes are to be eyed; not in the outward story of them, which is the
course of Popish Devotionists, but in the Love, Kindness, Mystery and design of
the Cross. And when we look for peace, his Chastisements must be in our eye:
Now this I say, if it be done according to the mind of God, and in the strength
of that Spirit which is poured out on Believers, it will beget a detestation of
that sin or sins, for which healing and peace is sought. So Ezekiel. 16.60, 61.
nevertheless I will remember my Covenant with thee in the days of thy youth,
and I will establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant, and what then? then
thou shall remember thy ways and be ashamed. When God comes home to speak
peace in a sure Covenant of it, it fills the Soul with shame for all the ways
whereby it has been alienated from him. And one of the things that the Apostle
mentions as attending that godly sorrow which is accompanied with Repentance
unto Salvation never to be repented of, is revenge, yea what revenge, 2 Cor.
7.11. They reflected on their miscarriages with Indignation and Revenge for
their Folly in them. When Job comes up to a through healing, he cries, Now I
abhor my self, Job 42.6. and until he did so, he had no abiding peace. He
might perhaps have made up himself with that Doctrine of free Grace which was
so excellently preached by Elihu; Chap. 33. from v. 14. unto the 29th, but he
had then but skinned his wounds, he must come to self-abhorrency, if he come to
healing. So was it with those in Psalm. 78.33, 35. in their great trouble and
perplexity for and upon the Account of Sin; I doubt not but upon the Address
they made to God in Christ, (for that so they did, is evident from the titles
they gave him, they call him their Rock and their Redeemer, two words every
where pointing out the Lord Christ) they spoke peace to themselves; but was it
sound and abiding? No, it passed away as the early dew: God speaks not one word
of peace to their Souls. But why had they not peace? Why, because in their
Address to God they flattered him: But how does that appear? verse. 37. Their
heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast. They had not a
detestation nor relinquishment of that sin, in reference whereunto they spoke
peace to themselves: Let a man make what application he will for healing and
peace, let him do it to the true Physician, let him do it the right way, let
him quiet his Heart in the Promises of the Covenant; yet when Peace is spoken,
if it be not attended with the detestation and Abhorrency of that Sin which was
the wound, and caused the Disquietment, this is no Peace of Gods creating, but
of our own purchasing. It is but a skinning over the wound, whilst the core
lies at the bottom, which will putrify and corrupt, and corrode, until it
break out again with noysomness, vexation and danger. Let not poor Souls that
walk in such a path as this, (they are more sensible of the trouble of Sin,
than of the pollution or uncleanness that attends it; they address themselves
for mercy, yea to the Lord in Christ they address themselves for mercy, but yet
will keep the sweet Morsel of their Sin under their Tongue,) let them (I say)
never think to have true and solid peace. For instance, Thou find thy Heart
running out after the World, and it disturbs thee in thy communion with God;
the Spirit speaks expressly to thee, He that loves the World, the love of the
Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. This puts thee on dealing with God in Christ
for the healing of thy Soul, the quieting of thy Conscience; but yet withal a
through detestation of the evil it self abides not upon thee; yea perhaps that
is liked well enough, but only in respect of the Consequences of it; perhaps
thou may be saved, yet as through fire; and God will have some work with thee
before he has done, but thou will have little Peace in this Life; thou will be
sick and fainting all thy days, Isa. 57.17. This is a Deceit that lies at the
root of the Peace of many Professors, and wa^ts it; they deal with all their
strength about Mercy and Pardon; and seem to have great Communion with God in
their so doing: they lie before him, bewail their Sins and Follies, that any
one would think (yea they think themselves) that surely they and their Sins are
now parted, and so receive in Mercy that satisfies their Hearts for a little
season; but when a through search comes to be made, there has been some secret
reserve for the Folly or Follyes treated about; at least there has not been
that through Abhorrency of it which is necessary; and their whole peace is
quickly discovered to be weak and rotten; scarce abiding any longer than the
words of begging it are in their mouths.

(2) When men measure out peace to themselves upon the conclusions that their
convictions and Rational Principles will carry them out unto; This is a false
peace, and will not abide. I shall a little explain what I mean hereby. A man
has got a wound by sin, he has a Conviction of some Sin upon his Conscience,
he has not walked uprightly as becomes the Gospel; all is not well and right
between God and his Soul: He considers now what is to be done; Light he has,
and knows what Path he must take, and how his Soul has been formerly healed.
Considering that the Promises of God are the outward Means of Application for
the healing of his sores, and quieting of his Heart, he goes to them, searches
them out, finds out some one or more of them, whose literal Expressions are
directly suited to his condition: Says he to himself, God speaks in this
Promise, here I will take my self a plaster as long and broad as my wound, and
so brings the word of the promise to his Condition, and sets him down in peace.
This is another appearance upon the mount, the Lord is near, Joh. 16.8.
but the Lord is not in it. It has not been the work of the Spirit, (who alone
can convince us of Sin and Righteousness and Judgment,) but the mere Actings
of the intelligent rational Soul. As there are three sorts of Lives (we say,)
the vegetative, the sensitive and the rational or intelligent. Some things have
only the vegetative; some the sensitive also, and that includes the former;
some have the rational, which takes in and supposes both the other. Now he that
has the rational, he does not only act suitably to that principle, but also
to both the others, he grows and is sensible. It is so with men in the things
of God; some are mere natural and rational men; some have a superadded
Conviction with Illumination; and some are truly regenerate. Now he that has
the latter, has also both the former; and therefore he acts sometimes upon the
Principles of the rational, sometimes upon the Principles of the enlightened
man. His true spiritual life is not the principle of all his motions; He acts
not always in the strength thereof, neither are all his fruits from that Root.
In this case that I speak of, he acts merely upon the Principle of Conviction
and Illumination, whereby his first naturals are heightened; but the Spirit
breaths not at all upon all these waters. Take an Instance; suppose the wound
and disquiet of the Soul to be upon the account of Relapses, which whatever the
evil or Folly be, though for the matter of it, never so small, yet there are no
wounds deeper than those that are given the Soul on that account, nor
disquietments greater. In the perturbation of his Mind, he finds out that
Promise, Isa. 55.7. The Lord will have mercy, and our God will abundantly
pardon; He will multiply or add to pardon; He will do it again and again; or
that in Hos. 14.4. I will heal their back sliding, I will love them freely;
This the man considers, and thereupon concludes Peace to himself; whether the
Spirit of God make the Application or no, whether that gives life and power to
the letter or no, that he regards not. He does not hearken whether God the Lord
speak peace. He does not wait upon God, who perhaps yet hides his face, and
sees the poor Creature stealing Peace and running away with it, knowing that
the time will come when he will deal with him again, and call him to a new
reckoning; Hos. 11.3. when he shall see that it is in vain to go one step
where God does not take him by the hand.

I see here indeed sundry other questions upon this arising and interposing
themselves: I cannot apply my self to them all: one I shall a little speak to.

It may be said then, seeing that this seems to be the path that the Holy
Spirit leads us in, for the healing of our wounds, and quieting of our hearts,
how shall we know when we go alone our selves, and when the Spirit also does
accompany us?

Ans. 1. If any of you are out of the way upon this account, God will speedily
let you know it; for b^side^ that you have his Promise, that the meek he will
guide ^n ^udg^ment, and teach them his way, Psalm. 25.9. he will not let you
always err. He will (I say) not suffer your nakedness to be covered with
Fig Leaves, but take them away, and all the peace you have in them, and will
not suffer you to settle on such lees; you shall quickly know your wound is not
healed. That is, you shall speedily know whether or no it be thus with you by
the event; the peace you thus get and obtain, will not abide. Whilst the Mind
is overpowered by its own Convictions, there is no hold for disquietments to
fix upon. Stay a little and all th^se reasonings will grow cold, and vanish
before the face of the first Temptation that arises. But,

2. This course is commonly taken without waiting; which is the Grace, and that
peculiar acting of Faith which God calls for to be exercised in such a
Condition. I know God does sometimes come in upon the Soul instantly, in a
moment as it were, wounding and healing it; as I am persuaded it was in the
Case of David when he cut off the lap of Saul's Garment: But ordinarily in such
a case God calls for waiting and laboring, Psalm. 123.2. Psalm. 130.6.
attending as the eye of a Servant upon his Master: Says the Prophet Isaiah,
chapter 8.17. I will wait upon the Lord, who hides his face from Jacob. God will
have his Children lie a while at his door, when they have run from his House,
and not instantly rush in upon him; unless he take them by the hand, and pluck
them in, when they are so ashamed that they dare not come to him. Now
self-healers, or men that speak peace to themselves, do commonly make haste,
they will not tarry; They do not hearken what God speaks, Isa. 28.16. but on
they will go to be healed.

3. Such a Course, though it may quiet the Conscience and the Mind, the
rational concluding part of the Soul, yet it does not sweeten the Heart with
Rest and gracious Contention. The Answer it receives is much like that Elisha
gave Naaman, Go in peace; 2 King. 5.19. it quieted his Mind, but I much
question whether it sweetened his Heart, or gave him any Joy in Believing, other
than the natural Joy that was then stirred in him upon his healing. Do not my
words do good, says the Lord, Mich. 2.7. When God speaks, there is not only
truth in his words, that may answer the Conviction of our Understanding, but
also they do good, they bring that which is sweet and good and desirable to
the Will and Affections: By them the Soul returns unto its Rest, Psalm. 116.16.

4. Which is worst of all, it amends not the life, it heals not the evil, it
cures not the distemper: When God speaks Peace, it guides and keeps the Soul
that it turn not again to Folly, Psa^. 85.8. When we speak it our selves, the
Heart is not taken off the Evil. Nay it is the readyest course in the world to
bring a Soul into a trade of Backsliding. If upon thy plaistering thy self,
thou find thy self rather animated to the battle again, than utterly weaned
from it, it is too palpable that thou have been at work with thy own Soul, but
Jesus Christ and his Spirit were not there. Yea and oftentimes Nature having
done its work, will ere a few days are over come for its Reward; and having
been active in the work of Healing, will be ready to reason for a new wounding.
In Gods speaking peace there comes along so much sweetness and such a Discovery
of his Love, Luke 22.32.
as is a strong Obligation on the Soul no more to deal perversely.

(3) We speak Peace to our selves, when we do it slightly. This the Prophet
complains of in some Teachers, Jer. 6.14. They have healed the wound of the
Daughter of my people slightly. And it is so with some persons, they make the
healing of their wounds a slight work, a look, a glance of Faith to the
Promises does it, and so the matter is ended. The Apostle tells us, that the
Word did not profit some, because it was not mixed with Faith, Heb. 4.2. (...),
it was not well tempered and mingled with Faith. It is not a mere look to the
word of Mercy in the Promise, but it must be mingled with Faith until it is
incorporated into the very Nature of it; and then indeed it does good unto the
Soul: If thou ha^^ had a wound upon thy Conscience, which was attended with
weakness and disquietness, which now thou art freed of, How came^t thou so? I
looked to the Promises of pardon and healing, and so found Peace: Yea but
perhaps thou have made too much haste, thou have done it overly, thou have not
fed upon the Promise, so as to mix it with Faith, to have got all the virtue of
it diffused into thy Soul; only thou have done it slightly; thou will find thy
wound ere it be long breaking out again, and thou shall know that thou art not
cured.

(4) Whoever speaks peace to himself upon any one account, and at the same time
has another Evil of no less importance lying upon his Spirit, about which he
has had no dealing with God, that man cry^s Peace when there is none. A little
to explain my Meaning: A man has neglected a Duty again and again, perhaps
when in all Righteousness it was due from him; his Conscience is perplexed, his
Soul wounded, he has no quiet in his Bones by reason of his Sin; he applies
himself for Healing, and finds Peace. Yet in the mean time perhaps worldliness,
or Pride, or some other folly where with the Spirit of God is exceedingly
grieved, may lie in the bosom of that man, and they neither disturb him, nor he
them. Let not that man think that any of his Peace is from God.

Then shall it be well with men when they have an equal respect to all Gods
Commandments. God will justify us from our sins, but he will not justify the
least sin in us; He is a God of purer eyes than to behold Iniquity.

(5) When men of themselves speak peace to their Consciences, it is seldom that
God speaks humiliation to their Souls: Gods Peace is humbling Peace, melting
Peace, as it was in the case of David; Psalm. 51.1. Never such deep humiliation
as when Nathan brought him the tidings of his Pardon.

Q. But you will say, When may we take the comfort of a Promise as our own, in
relation to some peculiar wound for the quieting the Heart.

A. 1. In general, when God speaks it, be it when it will, sooner or later. I
told you before, He may do it in the very instant of the sin it self, and that
with such irresistible power, that the Soul must needs receive his mind in it.
Sometimes he will make us wait longer; but when he speaks, be it sooner or
later, be it when we are sinning or repenting, be the Condition of our Souls
what they please, if God speak he must be received. There is not any thing that
in our Communion with him the Lord is more troubled with us for, (if I may so
say) than our unbelieving Fears that keep us off from receiving that strong
consolation which he is so willing to give to us.

But you will say, We are where we were; when God syeaks it, we must receive
it; that is true, but how shall we know when he speaks?

Ans. 1. I would we could all practically come up to this, to receive peace
when we are convinced that God speaks it, and that it is our Duty to receive
it; But,

2. There is (if I may so say) a secret instinct in Faith, whereby it knows
the voice of Christ, when He speaks indeed; as the babe leaped in the womb when
the blessed Virgin came to Elizabeth; Faith leaps in the heart when Christ
indeed draws nigh to it; My sheep (says Christ) know my voice, Joh. 10.14,
they know my voice, they are used to the sound of it, and they know when his
lips are opened to them, and are full of Grace: The spouse was in a sad
condition, Cant. 5.2. asleep in security; but yet as soon as Christ speaks she
cries, it is the voice of my beloved that speaks; She knew his voice, and was
so acquainted with communion with him that instantly she discovers him: and so
will you also: if you exercise your selves to acquaintance and communion with
him, you will easily discern between his voice and the voice of a stranger. And
take this (...) with you; when he does speak he speaks as never man spoke; He
speaks with power, and one way or other will make your hearts burn within you,
as He did to the Disciples, Luke 22. He does it by putting in his hand at the
hole of the door, Cant. 5.4. his spirit into your hearts to seize on you.

He that has his senses exercised to discern good or evil, being increased in
judgment and experience, by a constant observation of the ways of Christ's
intercourse, the manner of the operations of the spirit, and the effects it
usually produces, is the best judge for himself in this case.

2. If the word of the Lord does good to your souls, He speaks it. If it
humble, if it cleanse and be useful for those ends, for which promises are
given: viz. 1 To endear. 2. cleanse,

3. To Melt and bind to Obedience, 4. To self-emptiness, etc. But this is not
my business: Nor shall I farther divert in the pursuit of this Direction;
without the observation of it, Sin will have great Advantages toward the
hardening of the Heart.

CHAP. XIV.
The general use of the foregoing Directions. The great Direction for the
accomplishment of the Work aimed at. Act Faith on Christ; The several Ways
whereby this may be done. Consideration of the Fullness in Christ for Relief,
proposed. Great Expectations from Christ: Grounds of these Expectations. His
Mercifulness, his Faithfulness. Event of such Expectations: On the part of
Christ: On the part of Believers. Faith peculiarly to be acted on the Death of
Christ* Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. The Work of the Spirit in this whole business.

NOW the Considerations which I have hitherto insisted on, are rather of things
preparatory to the work aimed at, than such as will effect it. It is the hearts
due preparation for the work it self, without which it will not be
accomplished, that hitherto I have aimed at.

Directions for the work it self are very few; I mean that are peculiar to it.
And they are these that follow.

First, Set Faith at work on Christ for the killing of thy sin. His blood is
the great sovereign remedy for sin-sick souls. Live in this and thou will dye
a Conqueror. Yea thou will through the good providence of God, live to see thy
lust dead at thy feet. But thou will say, how shall Faith act its self on
Christ for this end and purpose. I say sundry ways.

1. By faith fill thy soul with a due consideration of that provision which is
laid up in Jesus Christ for this end and purpose, that all thy lusts, this
very lust wherewith thou art entangled, may be mortified by Faith; ponder on
this, that though thou art no way able in or by thy self to get the conquest
over thy distemper, though thou art even weary of contending, and art utterly
ready to faint, Luke 16.17. yet that there is enough in Jesus Christ, to yield
thee relief Phil. 4.13. It staid the prodigal when he was ready to faint, that
yet there was bread enough in his father's house; Though he was at a distance
from it, yet it releived him, and staid him, that there it was. In thy greatest
distress and anguish, consider that fullness of Grace, those Riches, those
Treasures of strength, might and help, that, are laid up in him, for our
support, Isa. 40.28, 29, 30, 31.
Joh. 1.16. Col. 1.19. Let them come into, and abide in thy mind. Consider that
he is exalted and made a Prince and a Savior to give repentance unto Israel,
Act. 5.31. and if to give Repentance, to give Mortification, without which the
other is not, nor can be, Christ tells us that we obtain purging Grace by
abiding in him, Joh. 15.3. To act faith upon the fullness that is in Christ for
our supply, is an eminent way of abiding in Christ, for both our insition and
aboade is by Faith, Romans 11.19, 20. Let then thy soul by faith be exercised
with such thoughts and apprehensions as these. I am a poor weak Creature;
unstable as water, I cannot excel. This corruption is to hard for me, and is at
the very door of ruining my soul: and what to do I know not: My soul is become
as parched ground and an habitation of Dragons; I have made promises and broken
them; vows and engagemens have been as a thing of naught; many persuasions
have I had, that I had got the victory and should be delivered, but I am
deceived; so that I plainly see, that without some eminent succor and
assistance, I am lost, and shall be prevailed on, to an utter relinquishment of
God; but yet though this be my sta^e and Condition, Yet let the hands that hang
down be lifted up, Joh. 1.16. Mat. 28.18.
and the feeble knees be strengthened; behold the Lord Christ that has all
fullness of Grace in his heart, all fullness of power in his hand; He is able
to slay all these his enemies. There is sufficient provision in him for my
relief and assistance: He can take my drooping dying soul, and make me more
than a Conqueror. Romans 8.38.
Why say thou O my soul my way is hid from the Lord and my Judgment is
passed over from my God? Have thou not known, have thou not heard that the
everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends the of the earth faints
not, neither is weary; there is no searching of his understanding; he gives
power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases strength. Even
the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fail; but
they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up
with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint, Isa. 40.49, etc. He can make the dry parched ground of my soul to become
a poole, and my thirsty barren heart as springs of water: yea he can make this
habitation of Dragons, this heart so full of abominable lusts, and fiery
temptations, to be a place for Grass and fruit to himself. Isa. 35. So God
stayed Paul under his Temptation, with the Consideration of the sufficiency of
his Grace: My Grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. Though he were not
immediately so far made partaker of it as to be freed from his Temptation,
yet the sufficiency of it in God, for that end and purpose, was enough to stay
his Spirit. I say then, by faith be much in the Consideration of that supply
and the fullness of it, that is in Jesus Christ; and how he can at any time
give thee strength and deliverance. Now if hereby thou do not find success to
a conquest, yet thou will be staid in the Chariot, that thou shall not fly out
of the field until the battle be ended; Thou will be kept from an utter
despondency, and a lying down under thy unbelief; or a turning aside to false
means and remedies that in the issue will not relieve thee. The efficacy of
this Consideration will be found only in the practice.

2. Raise up thy heart by faith to an expectation of Relief from Christ; Relief
in this case from Christ is like the Prophets vision, Hab. 2.3. It is for an
appointed time; but at the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry,
yet wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry; though it may
seem somewhat long to thee, whilst thou art under thy trouble and perplexity,
yet it shall surely come in the appointed time of the Lord Jesus, which is the
best season. If then thou can raise up thy heart to a settled Expectation of
relief from Jesus Christ; if thine eyes are toward him, as the eyes of a
servant to the hand of his master, Psalm. 123.2. when he expects to receive
somewhat from him, thy soul shall be satisfied, Isa. 7.8. he will assuredly
deliver thee; He will slay the lust, and thy latter end shall be peace; only
look for it, at His hand expect when and how He will do it. If you will not
believe, surely ye shall not be established.

Q. But thou will say, what ground have I to build such an Expectation upon; so
that I may expect not to be deceived?

A. As thou have necessity to put thee on this course, Joh. 6.68, thou must be
relieved and saved this way or none; to whom will thou go? so there are in the
Lord Jesus innumerable things to encourage and engage thee to this Expectation.

For the necessity of it, I have in part discovered it before, when I
manifested that this is the work of Faith, and of Believers only. Without me
(says Christ) you can do nothing, Joh. 15.15. speaking with especial relation
to the purging of the heart from sin, verse. 2. Mortification of any sin, must
be by a supply of Grace. Of our selves we cannot do it. Now it has pleased
the Father that in Christ all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. that of his
fullness we might receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. He is the head, from
whence the new man must have influences of life and strength, or it will decay
every day. If we are strengthened with might in the inner man, Col. 1.11, it is
by Christ's dwelling in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.16, 17. That this work is
not to be done without the Spirit, I have also showed before. Whence then do we
expect the Spirit? from whom do we look for him? Who has promised him to us,
having procured him for us? Ought not all our expectations to this purpose to
be on Christ alone? Let this then be fixed upon thy heart, that if thou have
not relief from him, thou shall never have any: All ways, endeavors,
contendings, that are not animated by this expectation of releif from Christ
and him only, are to no purpose, will do thee no Good: yea if they are any
thing but supportments of thy heart in this expectation, or means appointed by
himself, for the receiving help from him, they are in vain.

Now farther to engage thee to this Expectation.

1. Consider his mercifulness, tenderness, and kindness, as he is our great
high Priest, at the right hand of God. Assuredly he pitties thee in thy
distress; says He, as one Whom his Mother comfort so will I comfort you,
Isaiah 66.15. He has the tenderness of a Mother to a sucking Child, Heb.
2.17, 18. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the People, for in
that himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted: How is the ability of Christ upon the account of his suffering
proposed to us? in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able. Did
the sufferings and Temptations of Christ add to his ability and power? not
doubtless considered absolutely and in its self: But the Ability here
mentioned, is such as has readiness, pronenesse, willingness, to put its self
forth accompanying of it; it is an Ability of will against all disswasions; He
is able having suffered and being tempted, to break through all diswasions to
the contrary, to relieve poor tempted souls: (...), He is able to help. It is a
metonymy of the Effect. For he can now be moved to help having been so tempted.
So c. 4.15, 16. For we have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet
without sin. Let us therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain Me^cy, and find Grace to help in time of need. The Exhortation of verse.
16. is the same that I am upon, namely, that we would entertain Expectations of
Relief from Christ, which the Apostle there calls (...), Grace for seasonable
help; if ever (says the Soul) help were seasonable, it would be so to me in my
present Condition. This is that which I long for, Grace for seasonable help. I
am ready to dye, to perish, to be lost for ever; Iniquity will prevail against
me, if help come not in; says the Apostle, Expect this Help, this Relief, this
Grace from Christ; yea, but on what account? that he lays down v. 15. and we
may observe, that the word v. 16. which we have translated to obtain, is,
(...), that we may receive it, suitable and seasonable help will come in. I
shall freely say this one thing of establishing the Soul by Faith in
expectation of Relief from Jesus Christ, Mat. 11.28.
on the account of his Mercifulness as our High Priest will be more available
to the ruin of thy Lust and Distemper, and have a better and speedier issue
than all the rigidest Means of self-maceration, that ever any of the sons of
men engaged themselves into. Yea let me add, that never any Soul did or shall
perish by the power of any lust, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Revel. 3.18.
sin or corruption, who could raise his soul by Faith to an expectation of
relief from Jesus Christ.

2. Consider his Faithfulness who has promised, which may raise thee up, and
confirm thee in this waiting in an Expectation of Relief. He has promised to
relieve in such Cases, and he will fulfill his word to the utmost. God tells us
that his Covenant with us is like the Ordinances of Heaven, the Sun, Moon and
Stars, which have their certain Courses, Jerem. 31.36. Thence David said, that
he watched for Relief from God, as one watches for the Morning, a thing that
will certainly come in its appointed season; so will be thy Relief from Christ.
It will come in its season, as the dew and rain upon the parched Ground; for
Faithful is he who has promised. Particular Promises to this purpose are
innumerable; with some of them (that seem peculiarly to suit to his Condition)
let the Soul be always furnished.

Now there are two eminent Advantages which always attend this Expectation of
succor from Jesus Christ.

1. It engages him to a full and speedy Assistance; nothing does more engage
the Heart of a man to be useful and helpful to another, than his Expectation
of help from him, if justly raised and countenanced by him who is to give the
Relief. Our Lord Jesus has raised our Hearts by his kindness, Care and
Promises, to this Expectation; Certainly our rising up unto it, must needs be a
great Engagement upon him to assist us accordingly. This the Psalmist gives us
as an approved Maxim, Thou Lord never forsakest them that put their trust in
thee. When the Heart is once won to rest in God, to repose himself on him, He
will assuredly satisfy it. He will never be as water that fails, nor has he
said at any time to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye my face in vain. If Christ be
chosen for the Foundation of our Supply, he will not fail us.

2. It engages the Heart to attend diligently to all ways and Means whereby
Christ is wont to communicate himself to the Soul, and so takes in the real
Assistance of all Graces and Ordinances whatever. He that expects any thing
from a man, applies himself to the ways and Means whereby it may be obtained.
The Beggar that expects an Alms, lies at his door or in his way, from whom he
does expect it. The way whereby, and the Means wherein Christ communicates
himself is, and are, his Ordinances ordinarily. He that expects any thing from
him, must attend upon him therein. It is the expectation of Faith that sets the
Heart on work. It Is not an idle groundless Hope that I speak of. If now there
be any Vigor, Efficacy and Power in Prayer or Sacraments to this End of
mortifying Sin, a man will assuredly be interested in it all, by this
Expectation of Relief from Christ. On this account I reduce all particular
actings, by Prayer, Meditation and the like, to this Head; and so shall not
farther insist on them. When they are grounded on this bottom, and spring from
this Root, they are of singular use to this purpose; and not else.

Now on this Direction for the Mortification of a prevailing Distemper you may
have a thousand probatum est's; Who has walked with God under this Temptat^^n,
and has not found the use and success of it? I dare leave the Soul under it,
without adding any more. Only some particulars relating thereunto may be
mentioned.

(1) Act Faith peculiarly upon the Death, Blood and Cross of Christ; that is,
on Christ as crucified and slain. Mortification of Sin is peculiarly from the
Death of Christ. It is one peculiar, yea eminent End of the Death of Christ,
which shall assuredly be accomplished by it. He died to destroy the works of
the Devil; whatever came upon our Natures by his first Temptation, whatever
receiv^^ strength in our Persons by his daily suggestions, Christ died to
destroy it all. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
Tit. 2.14. This was his Aim and Intendment (wherein he will not fail) in his
giving himself for us. That we might be freed from the Power of our Sins, and
purified from all our defiling Lusts, was his Design. He gave himself for the
Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, that he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy and without blemish, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. And this by
virtue of his death, in various and several degrees shall be accomplished.
Hence our washing, purging and cleansing is every where ascribed to his Blood,
1 John 1.7. Heb. 1.3. Revelat. 1.5. That being sprinkled on us, Purge^ our
Consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. This is that we
aim at, this we are in pursuit of; that our Consciences may be purged from dead
works; that they may be rooted out, destroyed, and have place in us no more.
This shall certainly be brought about by the Death of Christ: There will virtue
go out from thence to this purpose. Indeed, all Supplies of the Spirit,
Communion with Christ, chap. 7, 8.
all Communications of Grace and Power, are from hence, as I have elsewhere
showed. Thus the Apostle states it; Romans 6. verse. 2. is the Case proposed that
we have in hand; How shall we that are dead unto sin live any longer therein?
Dead to Sin by Profession; dead to Sin by Obligation to be so; dead, to Sin by
a Participation of Virtue and Power for the Killing of it; dead to Sin by Union
and Interest in Christ, in and by whom it is killed: How shall we live therein?
This he presses by sundry Considerations, all taken from the Death of Christ,
in the ensuing Verses. This must not be, verse. 3. Know you not that so many of
us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his Death? We have in
Baptism an Evidence of our Implantation into Christ; we are baptized into him;
But what of him are we baptized into an Interest in? His Death, says he: If
indeed we are baptized into Christ, and beyond Outward Profession, we are
^^ptized into his Death. The Explication (...) this, of our being baptized into
the Death of Christ, the Apostle gives us, verse. 4, 5. Therefore we are buried
with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the
dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in Newness of
life; Knowing this, that our Old man is crucified with him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. This is (says
he) our being baptized into the Death of Christ, namely, our Conformity
thereunto. To be dead unto Sin, to have our corruptions mortified, as he was
put to death for Sin; so that as he was raised up to Glory, we may be raised up
to Grace and Newness of Life.

He tells us whence it is that we have this Baptism into the Death of Christ,
verse. 6. and this is from the Death of Christ it self: Our old Man is crucified
with him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed: (...), is crucified with
him; not in respect of Time, but of Causality; we are crucified with him,
meritoriously in that he procured the Spirit for us, to mortify Sin;
efficiently, in that from his Death virtue comes forth for our crucifying; in
the way of a Representation and Exemplar, we shall assuredly be crucified unto
Sin, as he was for our Sin. This is that the Apostle intends. Christ by his
Death destroying the works of the Devil, procuring the Spirit for us, has so
killed Sin as to its Reign in Believers, that it shall not obtain its End and
Dominion.

(2) Then act Faith on the Death of Christ, and that under these two Notions:
Phil. 3.10. Col. 3.3. 1 Pet. 1.18.


1. In expectation of Power. 2. In endeavors for Conformity.
For the First, the Direction given in general may suffice.

As to the latter, that of the Apostle may give us some Light into our
Direction, Gal. 3.1. Let Faith look on Christ in the Gospel as he is set forth
dying and crucified for us: 1 Cor. 15.31. 1 Pet. 1.16. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. Col. 1.3.
Look on him under the weight of our Sins, praying, bleeding, dying: bring him
in that Condition into thy heart by Faith: apply his blood so shed to thy
Corruptions: do this daily. I might draw out this Consideration to a great
length, in sundry particulars, but I must come to a close.

I have only then to add, the Heads of the work of the Spirit in this
business of Mortification, which is so peculiarly ascribed to him.

In one word: This whole work which I have described as our Duty, is effected,
carried on, and accomplished by the Power of the Spirit, in all the parts and
degrees of it: As,

1. He alone clearly and fully convinces the Heart of the evil and guilt and
danger of the Corruption, Lust, or Sin to be Mortified. Without this Conviction
(or whilst it is faint, that the Heart can wrestle with it, or digest it,
there will be no through-work made. An unbelieving Heart (as in part we have
all such) will shift with any Consideration, until it be over-powred by clear
and evident Convictions: Now this is the proper work of the Spirit: He
convinces of Sin, Joh. 16.8. He alone can do it; If men's rational
Considerations, with the preaching of the letter, were able to convince them of
Sin, we should (it may be) see more Convictions than we do. There comes by the
preaching of the Word an Apprehension upon the understandings of men, that they
are Sinners, that such and such things are Sins; that themselves are guilty of
them; But this light is not powerful, nor does it lay hold on the practical
Principles of the Soul, so as to conform the Mind and Will unto them, to
produce Effects suitable to such an Apprehension. And therefore it is, that
wise and knowing men, destitute of the Spirit, do not think those things to be
Sins at all wherein the chief Movings and Actings of Lust do consist. It is the
Spirit alone that can do, that does this work to the purpose. And this is the
first thing that the Spirit does in order to the Mortification of any Lust
whatever; It convinces the Soul of all the evil of it, cuts off all its pleas,
discovers all its deceits, stops all its Evasions, answers its Pretenses, makes
the Soul own its Abomination, and lie down under the sense of it. Unless this
be done, all that follows is in vain.

2. The Spirit alone reveals unto us the Fullness of Christ for our Relief,
which is the Consideration that stays the Heart from false Ways, and from
despairing Despondency, 1 Cor. 2.8.

3. The Spirit alone establishes the Heart in expectation of Relief from
Christ; which is the great sovereign Means of Mortification, as has been
discovered, 2 Cor. 1.21.

4. The Spirit alone brings the Cross of Christ into our Hearts, with its
Sin-killing Power; for by the Spirit are we baptized into the Death of Christ.

5. The Spirit is the Author and Finisher of our Sanctification; gives new
Supplies and Influences of Grace for Holiness and Sanctification, when the
contrary Principle is weakened and abated, Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18.

6. In all the Souls Addresses to God in this Condition, it has Supportment
from the Spirit. Whence is the power, life and vigor of Prayer? Whence its
Efficacy to prevail with God? Is it not from the Spirit? He is the Spirit of
supplication promised to them who look on him whom they have pierced, Zech.
12.10. enabling them to pray with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered, Romans
8.16. This is confessed to be the great Medium or way of Faiths prevailing with
God. Thus Paul dealt with his Temptation, whatever it were; I besought God that
it might depart from me, 2 Cor. 12.8. What is the work of the Spirit in Prayer,
whence, and how it gives us in assistance, and makes us to prevail, what we are
to do that we may enjoy his Help for that purpose, is not my present
Intendment to demonstrate.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed and Sold by Not. Ponder at the Peacock in
the Poultry, Near Cornhil, and in Chancery Lane near Fleet Street.
EXercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews; also Concerning the Messiah:
wherein the Promises concerning him to be a spiritual R^deemer of Mankind, are
explained, and Vindicated, etc. With an Exposition of, and Discourses on the
two first Chapters of the said Epistle to the Hebrews. By John Owen, D. D. in
Folio,

Exercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning the Priesthood of
Christ; wherein the Original, Causes, Nature, Prefigurations, and Discharge of
that Holy Office, are Explained and Vindicated. The Nature of the Covenant of
the Redeemer, with the Call of the Lord Christ unto his Office, are declared:
and the Opinions of the Socinians about it are fully Examined, and their
opp^^^^ions unto it, refuted: With a Continuation of the Exp^^^ion on the
third, fourth, and fifth Chapters of the said Epistle to the Hebrews, being the
Second Volu^^. By John Owen, D. D. in Folio.

(...): Or, A Discourse concerning the Ho^y ^^irit. Wherein an account is given
of his Name, ^^^^re* ^^^^^nality* Dispensation, Operations, and Effects: His
whole Work in the Old and new Creation is explained; ^he Doctrine concerning it
vindicated from Oppos^^^ions and Reproaches. The Nature also, and Necessity of
Gospel-Holiness; the difference between Grace and Morality, or a spiritual Life
unto God in Evangelical Obedi^nce, and a course of Moral Virtues, are stated
and declared, By John Owen, D. D. in Folio.

A practical Exposition on the 130 Psalm: where in the Nature of the
forgivene^^ ^f Sin is declared; the Truth and Reality of it a^^erted, and the
case of a Soul distressed with the guilt of Sin, and relieved by a Discovery of
Forgiveness with God, is at large discoursed. By John Owen, D. D. in Quarto.

A Practical Discourse of Gods Sovereignty, with other Material points deriving
thence.

Londons Lamentations; or, a sober, serious Discourse concerning the late Fiery
Dispensation. By Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Word at St. Margarets
New-Fish street, London in Quarto.

Liberty of Conscience upon its true and proper grounds asserted and vindicated
etc. To which is added the Second Part, viz. Liberty of Conscience the
Magistrates Interest. By a Protestant, a Lover of Truth and the Peace and
Prosperity of the Nation; in Quarto, The Second Edition.

A Discourse of the Nature, Power, Deceit, and Prevalency of the Remainders of
Indwelling-Sin in Believers. Together with the ways of its working, and means
of prevention. By John Owen, D. D. in Octavo.

Truth and Innocence Vindicated. In a Survey of a Discourse concerning
Ecclesiastical Polity, and the Authority of the Civil Magistrate over the
Consciences of Subjects in matters of Religion, By Joh. Owen, D.D. in octa.

Exercitations concerning the Name, Original, Nature, use, and continuance of a
Sacred day of Rest; wherein the Original of the Sabath from the foundation of
the World, the Morality of the fourth Commandment, with the change of the
Sabbath Day, are enquired into: Together with an Assertion of the Divine
Institution of the Lords Day. By John Owen. D.D. in Octavo, The Second
Impression.

Evangelical Love, Church-Peace and Unity. By Jo. Owen, D. D.

The unreasonableness of Atheism made manifest; in a Discourse to a Person of
Honor. By Sir Charles Wolsely Baronet, Third Impression.

The Reasonableness of Scripture-Belief. A Discourse, giving some Account of
those Rational Grounds upon which the Bible is received as the Word of God.
Written by Sir Charles Wolsely, Baronet.

The Rehearsal Transprosed, or Animadversions upon a late Book, entitled, A
Preface, showing what grounds there are of fears and jealousies of Popery. The
first Part By Andrew Marvel, Esquire.

The Rehearsal Transprosed; the second Part. Occasioned by two Letters: the
first Printed by a nameless Authors entitled* A Reproof etc. the second, a
Letter left at a Friends House, dated Nov. 3. 1673. subscribed J.G. and
concluding with these words, If thou dare to Print or Publish any Lie or
Libel against Dr. Parker. by the Eternal God I will cut thy Throat. Answered by
Andrew Marvel.

Theopolis, or the City of God, New Jerusalem; in opposition to the City of the
Nations, Great Babylon. By Henry D'anvers, in Octavo.

A Guide for the Practical Gauger; with a Compendium of Decimal Arithmetic.
showing briefly the whole Art of Gauging of Brewers Tuns, Coppers, Backs, etc.
Also the Mash or Oyld-Cask; and Sybrant Hantz his Table of Area's of Segments
of a Circle; the Mensuration of all manner of Superficies. By William Hunt.
Student in the Mathematics, in Octavo.

(...) Hoc est Domus Mosaicae Clavis: five Legis Sepimentum. Authore Josepho
Cooper Anglo, in Octavo.

A Vindication of some Passages in a discourse concerning Communion with God,
from the Exceptions of William Sherlock, Rector of St. George Buttelph Lane.
by John Owen, D. D. in Octavo.

A Brief Instruction in the Worship of God and Discipline of the Churches of
the New Testament, by way of question and Answer, with an Explication and
Confirmation of those Answers. By John Owen, D. D.

Anti-Sozzo, five Sherlocismus Enervatus: In Vindication of some Great Truths
Opposed, and Opposition to some Great Errors Maintained By Mr. William
Sherlock. A Brief Declaration and Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
By John Owen, D. D. in 12.

Eben-Ezer: Or, a Small Monument of great Mercy, appearing in the Miraculous
Deliverance of William Okeley, William Adams, John Anthony, John Jephs,
John-Carpenter, From the Miserable Slavery of Algiers, with the wonderful Means
of their escape in a Boat of Canvas; the great Distress, and utmost Extremities
which they endured at Sea for six days, and Nights; their safe Arrival at
Mayork: With several Matters of Remarque during their long Captivity, and the
following Providence of God which brought them safe to England. By William
Okeley, in Octavo.

The Nature of Apostacy from the Profession of the Gospel, and the punishment
of Apostates declared. from Heb. 6. ver. 4, 5, 6. with an Inquiry into the
Causes and Reasons of the Decay of the power of Religion, in the World. With
Remedies and means of prevention, in Octavo. By John Owen, D. D.

Mortification of Sin in Believers: 1. The Necessity, 2. Nature* and 3. Means
of it. 'With a resolution of sundry Cases of Conscience thereunto belonging. By
John Owen, D. D. in Octavo.

The Practical D(...)y of the Papists Discovered to be Destructive of
C^ristianity and Men's Souls.

Dutch and English Grammar

Dutch and English Dictionary.


