TWO DISCOURSES Concerning the Holy Spirit, AND HIS WORK.

The One, of The Spirit as a Comforter. The Other, as He is the Author of
Spiritual Gifts.

In the former Discourse these Particulars are distinctly handled.

Chap. I. The Holy Ghost the Comforter and Advocate of the Church.

Chap. II. General Adjuncts or Properties of the Office of a Comforter.

Chap. III. Unto whom the Holy Spirit is a Comforter.

Chap. IV. Of the Inhabitation of the Spirit.

Chap. V. Actings of the Spirit as a Comforter. How he is an Unction.

Chap. VI. The Spirit a Seal, and how.

Chap. VII The Spirit an Earnest, and how.

By the Late Reverend JOHN OWEN, D. D.

London Printed for William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street, where you
may be supplied with most of Dr. Owen's Works. 1693.

THE PREFACE.
THAT there are sundry Great and Eminent Promises referring to New Testament
Times concerning the pouring out of the Spirit, none who is acquainted with the
Scriptures, and believes them, can doubt. By the performance of them a Church
has been begotten and maintained in the World through all Ages since the
Ascension of Christ, sometimes with greater Light and Spiritual Luster, and
sometimes with less. It has been one of the Glories of the Protestant
Reformation, that it has been accompanied with a very Conspicuous and
Remarkable Effusion of the Spirit: And indeed thereby there has from Heaven a
Seal been set, and a Witness born unto that great Work of God. In this
unvaluable Blessing we in this Nation have had a Rich and Plentiful share;
insomuch as it seems Satan and his Ministers have been tormented and
exasperated thereby: And thence it is come to pass, that there have some risen
up among us, who have manifested themselves to be not only Despisers in Heart,
but virulent Reproachers of the Operations of the Spirit. God who knows how to
bring Good out of Evil, did for Holy and Blessed Ends of his own suffer those
horrid Blasphemies to be petulantly ventod.

On this occasion it was, that this Great, and Learned, and Holy Person, the
Author of these Discourses, took up Thoughts of writing concerning the Blessed
Spirit, and his whole Economy, as I understood from Himself sundry years ago,
discoursing with Him concerning some Books then newly published, full of
Contumely and Contempt of the Holy Spirit and his Operations. For as it was
with Paul at Athens, when he saw the City wholly given to Idolaty; so was
Doctor Owen's Spirit stirred in him, when he read the Scoffs and Blasphemies
cast upon the Holy Spirit, and his Grace, and Gifts, and Aids, in some late
Writers.

Had not Pelagius vented his Corrupt Opinions concerning the Grace of God, it
is like the Church had never had the Learned and Excellent Writings of
Augustine in Defense thereof. It appears from Bradwardin that the Revival of
Pelagianism in his Days, stirred up his Zealous and Pious Spirit to Wrise that
Profound and Elaborate Book of his, De Causa Dei. Arminius, and the Jesuits
endeavoring to Plant the same Weed aagain, produced the Scholastic Writings
of Twiss and Ames, (not to mention Foreign Divines) for which we in this
Generation have abundant Cause of Enlarged Thankfulness unto the Father of
Lights. The occasion which the Holy Ghost laid hold on to carry forth Paul to
Write his Epistle to the Galatians, (wherein the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith is so fully cleared) was the bringing in among them of another Gospel by
Corrupt Teachers, after which many in those Churches were soon drawn away. The
obstinate adherence of many among the Jews to the Mosaical Rites and
Observances, and the Inclination of others to Apostatize from the New Testament
Worship and Ordinances, was in like manner the occasion of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. The Light which shines, and is held out in those Epistles, the Church
of Christ could ill have wanted.

The like way and working of the Wisdom of God, is to be seen and adored, in
stirring up this Learned and Excellent Person to communicate and leave unto the
World that Light touching the Spirit and his Operations, which he had received
by that Spirit from the Sacred Oracles of Truth, the Scriptures.

To what advantage and increase of Light it is performed, is not for so
incompetent a Pen to say as writes this. Nevertheless, I doubt not but the
discerning Reader will observe such Excellencies shining out in this, and other
of this Great Author's Writings, as do greatly commend them to the Church of
God, and will do so in after Ages, however this Corrupt and Degenerate
Generation entertain them. They are not the crude, and hasty, and untimely
Abortions of a Self-full, Distempered Spirit, much less the Boilings over of
inward Corruption and Rottenness put into a Fermentation; but the mature,
sedate, and seasonable Issues of a Rich Magazine of Learning, well digested
with great exactness of Judgment. There is in them a great Light cast and
reflected on, as well as derived from the Holy Scriptures, those inexhaustible
Mines of Light in Sacred Things. They are not filled with vain, impertinent
jangling, nor with a noise of multiplied futilous Distinctions, nor with novel
and uncouth Terms foreign to the Things of God, as the manner of some Writers
is ad nauseam usque. But there is in them an happy and rare conjunction of firm
Solidity, Enlightening Clearness, and Heart-searching Spiritualness, evidencing
themselves all along, and thereby approving and commending his Writings to the
Judgment, Conscience, Spiritual Taste and Experience of all those who have any
Acquaintance with, and relish of the Gospel.

On these, and such like accounts, the Writings of this Great and Learned Man,
as also his Ordinary Sermons, if any of them shall be published, (as possibly
some of them may) will be while the World stands an upbraiding and condemning
of this Generation, whose vitiated and ill-affected Eyes could not bear so
great a Light set up and shining on a Candlestick, and which did therefore
endeavor to put it under a Bushel.

These Two Discourses, with those formerly published, make up all that Dr. Owen
perfected or designed on this Subject of the Spirit, as the Reader may perceive
in the Account which Himself has given in his Prefaces to some of the former
Pieces, published by himself in his Lifetime. Not but that there are some other
Lucubrations of his on Subjects nearly allied unto these, which possibly may be
published hereafter; viz. One Entitled, The Evidences of the Faith of God's
Elect; and perhaps some others. What further he might have had in his Thoughts
to do, is known to Him whom he served so industriously and so faithfully in his
Spirit in the Gospel while he was here on Earth, and with whom he now enjoys
the Reward of all his Labors, and all his Sufferings. For certain it is
concerning Dr. Owen, that as God gave him very Transcendent Abilities, so he
did therewithal give him a Boundless Enlargedness of Heart, and unsatiable
Desire to do Service to Christ and his Church: Insomuch as he was thereby
carried on, through great Bodily Weakness, Languishing and Pains, besides
manifold other Trials and Discouragements, to bring forth out of his Treasury
(like a Scribe well instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven) many useful and
excellent Fruits of his Studies, much beyond the Expectation and Hopes of those
who saw how often and how long he was near unto the Grave.

But while he was thus indefatigably and restlesly laying out for the Service
of Christ, in this and succeeding Generations those Rich Talents with which he
was furnished, his Lord said unto him, Well done thou good and faithful
Servant, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. No Man ever yet, but Jesus
Christ, was able to finish all that was in his Heart to do for God. On the
removal of such accomplished and useful Persons, I have sometimes relieved my
self with this Thought, that Christ lives in Heaven still, and the Blessed
Spirit from whom the Head and Heart of this Chosen Vessel were so Richly
Replemshed, lives still.

Nath. Mather.
October 27. 1692.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 19. for concera read content. p. 7. l. 23. dele comma after
external, and put it after subsistence. p. 11. l. 7. f. above r. about. l. 18.
f. comprize r. confine. p. 12. l. 19. r. this is his. p. 14. l. 2. r. that he
should. p. 15. l. 11. r. acted them. l. 3. a fine, f. expect r. expects. p. 23.
l. ult. f. and r. end. p. 32. l. 19. f. Discovery r. Recovery. p. 35. l. 13. f.
wherein r. when. p. 37. l. 21. f. Things r. Thoughts. l. ult. f. Being r.
Living. p. 38. l. 25. f. Direction r. directs us. p. 39. l. 13. a fine, f.
declaring r. declares. p. 40. l. 7, 8, 10, 13. dele the Interragatory Points.
p. 42. l. 15. f. this r. his. p. 43. l. 24. f. instances r. instaences. p. 55.
l. 4. a fine, f. Heb. 11. 13. r. Luke 11. 13. p. 83. l. 14. f. he had, r. they
had. p. 86. l. 7. f. in r. is. p. 89. l. 6. dele comma after Spirit. p. 90. l.
18. f. And there was r. and that there was. l. ult. f. this Holy Spirits r. his
Holy Spirit. p. 91. l. 17. r. Arrhabone. r. posuit. l. 18. r. Arrhabo. l. 21.
f. quam r. quum. f. tuerit r. fuerit. l. 22. f. redditur r. reddatur. p. 92. l.
10. f. Arrabon r. Arrhabon. l. 12. r. Obinius, penult. f. (...). p. 98. l. 5.
f. natures r. names l. 14. f. longer r. long. p. 99. l. 15. after called dele
[(...) and] and after (...) add [and (...)] p. 105. l. 5. f. significations r.
signification. p. 120. l. 14. f. they r. there.

CHAP. I. The Holy Ghost the Comforter of the Church by way of Office. How He
is the Churches Advocate, Joh. 14. 16. 1 John 2. 1, 2. Joh. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11.
opened.
THAT which remains to complete our Discourses concerning the Dispensation of
the Holy Spirit, is the Office and Work that he has undertaken for the
Consolation of the Church. And,

THREE things are to be considered with respect unto this Head of the Grace of
the Gospel. (1.) That the Holy Spirit is the Comforter of the Church by way of
Especial Office. (2.) What is in that Office, or wherein the Discharge of it
does consist. (3.) What are the Effects of it toward Believers.

IT must be granted, that there is some Impropriety in that Expression, by the
way of Office. An Office is not simply, nor it may be properly spoken of a
Divine Person, who is absolutely so and nothing else. But the like Impropriety
is to be found in most of the Expressions which we use concerning God, for who
can speak of him aright, or as he ought. Only we have a safe Rule whereby to
express our Conceptions; even what He speaks of Himself. And he has taught us
to learn the Work of the Holy Ghost toward us in this Matter, by ascribing
unto Him those things which belong unto an Office among Men.

FOUR things are required unto the Constitution of an Office. (1) An especial
Trust. (2) An especial Mission or Commission. (3) An especial Name. (4) An
especial Work. All these are required unto an Office properly so called; and
where they are complied withal by a voluntary susception in the Person
designed thereunto, an Office is completely constituted. And we must enquire
how these things in a Divine Manner do concur in the Work of the Holy Spirit as
he is the Comforter of the Church.

FIRST, He is entrusted with this Work, and of his own Will has taken it on
Himself. For when our Savior was leaving of the World, and had a full Prospect
of all the Evils, Troubles, Dejections and Disconsolations which would befall
his Disciples, and knew full well that if they were left unto themselves, they
would faint and perish under them, He gives them Assurance that the Work of
their Consolation and Supportment was left entrusted and committed unto the
Holy Spirit, and that He would both take Care about it, and perfect it
accordingly.

THE Lord Christ when he left this World, was very far from laying aside his
Love unto and Care of his Disciples. He has given us the highest Assurance
that he continues for ever the same Care, the same Love and Grace toward us,
he had and exercised when he laid down his Life for us. See Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16.
Cap. 7. 27. But inas much as there was a double Work yet to be performed in our
behalf, one toward God, and the other in our selves, He has taken a twofold
way for the Performance of it. That toward God he was to discharge immediately
Himself in his Humane Nature: For other Mediator between God and Man, there
neither is, nor can be any. This He does by his Intercession. Hence there was a
necessity that as to his Humane Nature, the Heavens should receive him unto the
Time of the Restitution of all things; as Acts 3. 21. There was so, both with
respect unto Himself and us.

THREE things with respect unto Himself, made the Exaltation of his Humane
Nature in Heaven, to be necessary. For,

1. IT was to be a Pledge and Token of God's Acceptance of him, and
Approbation of what he had done in the World, Joh. 16. 7, 8. For what could
more declare or evidence the Concern and Delight of God in what he had done and
suffered, than after he had been so ignominiously treated in the World, to
receive him visibly, gloriously and triumphantly into Heaven. He was manifested
in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, and in the issue
received up into Glory; 1 Timothy 3. 16. Herein God set the great Seal of Heaven
unto his Work of Mediation, and the Preaching of the Gospel which ensued
thereon. And a Testimony hereunto, was that which filled his Enemies with Rage
and Madness, Act. 7. 55, 56, 57. His Resurrection confirmed his Doctrine with
undeniable Efficacy; but his Assumption into Heaven testified unto his Person,
with an astonishing Glory.

2. IT was necessary with respect unto the Humane Nature it self, that after
all its Labors and Sufferings it might be crowned with Honor and Glory. He
was to suffer and enter into his Glory, Luke 24 26. Some dispute whether Christ
in his Humane Nature merited any thing for himself or no; but not to immix our
selves in the Niceties of that Enquiry, it is unquestionable that the highest
Glory was due to him upon his accomplishment of the Work committed unto him in
this World, which he therefore lays claim to accordingly, Joh. 17. 4, 5. It was
so,

3. WITH respect unto the Glorious Administration of his Kingdom: For as his
Kingdom is not of this World, so it is not only over this World, or the whole
Creation here below; The Angels of Glory, those Principalities and Powers
above, are subject unto him, and belong unto his Dominion, Ephesians. 1. 21. Phil. 2.
9, 10. Among them attended with their ready Service and Obedience unto all his
Commands, does he exercise the Powers of his glorious Kingdom. And they would
but degrade Him from his Glory without the least Advantage unto themselves, who
would have him forsake his high and glorious Throne in Heaven, to come and
reign among them on the Earth, unless they suppose themselves more meet
Attendants on his Regal Dignity than the Angels themselves, who are mighty in
Strength and Glory.

SECONDLY, The Presence of the Humane Nature of Christ in Heaven, was necessary
with respect unto Us. The Remainder of his Work with God on our behalf, was to
be carried on by Intercession, Heb. 7. 26, 27. And whereas this Intercession
consists in the Vertual Representation of his Oblation, or of himself as a
Lamb slain in Sacrifice, it could not be done without his continual Appearing
in the Presence of God, Heb. 9. 24.

The other Part of the Work of Christ respects the Church or Believers, as its
immediate Object. So in particular does his comforting and supporting of them.
This is that Work which in a peculiar manner is committed and entrusted unto
the Holy Spirit, after the Departure of the Humane Nature of Christ into Heaven.

But two things are to be observed concerning it. (1.) That whereas this whole
Work consists in the Communication of Spiritual Light, Grace and Joy to the
Souls of Believers, it was no less the immediate Work of the Holy Ghost whilst
the Lord Christ was upon the Earth, than it is now he is absent in Heaven; Only
during the time of his Conversation here below in the days of his Flesh, his
holy Disciples looked on him as the only Spring and Foundation of all their
Consolation, their only Support, Guide and Protector, as they had just Cause to
do. They had yet no insight into the Mystery of the Dispensation of the Spirit,
nor was he yet so given or poured out, as to evidence himself and his Operation
unto their Souls. Wherefore they looked on themselves as utterly undone when
their Lord and Master began to acquaint them with his leaving of them. No
sooner did he tell them of it, but Sorrow filled their Hearts, Joh. 16. 6.
Wherefore he immediately lets them know, that this great Work of relieving them
from all their Sorrows and Fears, of dispelling their Disconsolations, and
supporting them under their Trouble, was committed to the Holy Ghost, and would
by him be performed in so eminent a manner, as that his Departure from them
would be unto their Advantage, Ver. 7. Wherefore the Holy Spirit did not then
first begin really and effectually to be the Comforter of Believers upon the
Departure of Christ from his Disciples, but he is then first promised so to be
upon a double Account. (1.) Of the Fall Declaration and Manifestation of it. So
things are often said in the Scripture then to be, when they do appear and are
made manifest. An eminent lustance hereof we have in this Case, John 7. 38, 39.
The Disciples had hitherto looked for all immediately from Christ in the Flesh,
the Dispensation of the Spirit being hid from them. But now this also was to be
manifested unto them. Hence the Apostle affirms, that though we have known
Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth we know him no more, 2 Cor. 1. 16. That
is, so as to look for Grace and Consolation immediately from him in the Flesh,
as it is evident the Apostles did, before they were instructed in this unknown
Office of the Holy Ghost. (2.) Of the full Exhibition and eminent Communication
of Him unto this End. This in every kind was reserved for the Exaltation of
Christ, when he received the Promise of the Spirit from the Father, and poured
it out upon his Disciples.

2. THE Lord Christ does not hereby cease to be the Comforter of his Church.
For what he does by his Spirit, he does by himself. He is with us unto the end
of the World by his Spirit being with us, and he dwells in us by the Spirit
dwelling in us; and whatever else is done by the Spirit, is done by him. And it
is so upon a Threefold Account. For, (1) The Lord Christ, as Mediator, is God
and Man in One Person, and the Divine Nature is to be considered in all his
Mediatory Operations. For he who works them is God, and he works them all
as God-Man, whence they are Theandrical. And this is proposed unto us in the
greatest Acts of his Humiliation, which the Divine Nature in it self is not
formally capable of. So God redeemed his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20.
28. Inasmuch as he who was in the form of God, and thought it no Robbery to be
equal with God, humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, the Death of
the Cross, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Now in this respect the Lord Christ and the Holy
Spirit are one in Nature, Essence, Will and Power. As he said of the Father, I
and my Father are one, John 10. 30. So it is with the Spirit, he and the Spirit
are One. Hence all the Works of the Holy Spirit are his also; as his Works were
the Works of the Father, and the Works of the Father were his: All the
Operations of the Holy Trinity, as to things external, unto their Divine
Subsistence being individed. So is the Work of the Holy Spirit in the
Consolation of the Church his Work also.

(2) BECAUSE the Holy Spirit in this Condescension unto Office, acts for Christ
and in his Name. So the Son acted for and in the Name of the Father, where he
every where ascribed what he did unto the Father in a peculiar manner. The
Word, says he, which you hear, is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me,
John 14. 24. It is his originally and eminently, because as spoken by the Lord
Christ, he was said by him to speak it. So are those Acts of the Spirit,
whereby he comfort Believers, the Acts of Christ, because the Spirit
speaks and acts for him, and in his Name.

(3) ALL those things, those Acts of Light, Grace and Mercy, whereby the Souls
of the Disciples of Christ are comforted by the Holy Ghost, are the things of
Christ, that is, especial Fruits of his Mediation. So speaks our Savior
himself of Him and his Work; He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of
mine, and show it unto you, John 16. 14. All that Consolation, Peace and Joy
which he communicates unto Believers; yea, all that he does in his whole Work
toward the Elect, is but the effectual Communication of the Fruits of the
Mediation of Christ unto them. And this is the first thing that constitutes the
Office of the Comforter; this Work is committed and entrusted unto him in an
especial manner, which in the infinite Condescension of his own Will, he takes
upon him.

SECONDLY, It farther evinceth the Nature of an Office, in that he is said to
be sent unto the Work* And Mission always includes Commission. He who is sent
is entrusted and empowred as unto what he is sent about. See Psalm. 104. 30.
John 14. 26. Chap. 15. 26. Chap. 16. 7. The Nature of this sending of the
Spirit, and how it is spoken of him in general, has been considered before in
our Declaration of his general Adjuncts, or what is affirmed of him in the
Scripture, and may not here again be insisted on. It is now mentioned only as
an Evidence to prove, that in this Work of his toward us, he has taken that
on him which has the Nature of an Office. For that is his Office to perform
which he is sent unto, and he will not fail in the Discharge of it. And it is
in it self a great Principle of Consolation unto all true Believers, an
effectual Means of their Supportment and Refreshment, to consider, that not
only is the Holy Ghost their Comforter, but also that he is sent of the Father
and the Son, so to be. Nor can there be a more uncontrollable Evidence of the
Care of Jesus Christ over his Church, and toward his Disciples in all their
Sorrows and Sufferings, than this is, that he sends the Holy Ghost to be their
Comforter.

THIRDLY, He has an especial Name given him, expressing and declaring his
Office. When the Son of God was to be incarnate, and born in the World, he had
an especial Name given unto him; He was called Jesus. Now although there was a
signification in this Name of the Work he was to do; for he was called Jesus,
because he was to save his People from their Sins, Matthew. 1. 21. yet was it
also that proper Name whereby he was to be distinguished from other Persons. So
the Holy Spirit has no other Name but that of the Holy Spirit, which how it is
characteristical of the Third Person in the Holy Trinity, has been before
declared. But as both the Names of Jesus and of Christ, though neither of them
is the Name of an Office, as one has dreamed of late; yet have respect unto
the Work which he had to do, and the Office which he was to undergo, without
which he could not have rightly been so called: So has the Holy Ghost a Name
given unto him, which is not distinctive with respect unto his Personality, but
denominative with respect unto his Work. And this is (...).

THIS Name is used only by the Apostle John, and that in his Gospel, only from
the mouth of Christ, Chap. 14. Ver. 16, 26. Chap. 15. Ver. 26. Chap. 16. Ver.
7. And once he uses it himself, applying it unto Christ, 1 John 2. 1. where we
render it an Advocate.

The Syriack Interpreter retains the Name (...), Paraclita; not as some imagine
from the use of that Word before among the Jews, which cannot be proved. Nor is
it likely that our Savior made use of a Greek Word barbarously corrupted,
(...), was the Word he employed to this purpose. But looking on it a proper
Name of the Spirit with respect unto his Office, he would not translate it.

As this Word is applied unto Christ, which it is in that One Place of 1 John
2. 1. It respects his Intercession, and gives us Light into the Nature of it.
That it is his Intercession which the Apostle intends is evident from its
Relation unto his being our Propitiation. For the Oblation of Christ on the
Earth, is the Foundation of his Intercession in Heaven. And he does therein
undertake our Patronage, as our Advocate, to plead our Cause, and in an
especial manner to keep off Evil from us. For although the Intercession of
Christ in general respects the procurement of all Grace and Mercy for us, every
thing whereby we may be saved unto the utmost, Heb. 7. 25, 26. yet his
Intercession for us as an Advoeate respects Sin only, and the evil Consequents
of it. For so is he in this place said to be our Advocate, and in this place
alone is he said to be, only with respect unto Sin: If any Man sin, we have an
Advocate. Wherefore his being so, does in particular respect that part of his
Intercession, wherein he undertakes our Defense and Protection when accused of
Sin. For Satan is (...), the Accuser, Rev. 12. 10. And when he accuses
Believers for sin, Christ is their (...), their Patron and Advocate. For
according unto the Duty of a Patron or Advocate in Criminal Causes, partly he
shows wherein the Accusation is false, and aggravated about the Truth, or
proceeds upon Mistakes; partly that the Crimes charged have not that Malice in
them as is pretended; and principally in pleading his Propitiation for them,
that so far as they are really guilty, they may be graciously discharged.

FOR this Name is applied unto the Holy Spirit. Some translate it a Comforter;
some an Advocate; and some retain the Greek Word Paraclete. It may be best
interpreted from the Nature of the Work assigned unto Him under that Name. Some
would comprize the whole Work intended under this Name unto his Teaching, which
he is principally promised for: For the Matter and Manner of his Teaching, what
he teaches, and the way how he does it, is, they say, the Ground of all
Consolation unto the Church. And there may be something in this Interpretation
of the Word, taking Teaching in a large Sense, for all Internal, Divine,
Spiritual Operations. So are we said to be taught of God when Faith is wrought
in us, and we are enabled to come unto Christ thereby. And all our Consolations
are from such Internal, Divine Operations. But take Teaching properly, and we
shall see that it is but one distinct Act of the Work of the Holy Ghost as here
promised among many.

BUT 2dly. The Work of a Comforter is principally ascribed unto him. For, (1)
That he is principally under this Name intended as a Comforter, is evident from
the whole Context and the occasion of the Promise. It was with respect unto the
Troubles and Sorrows of his Disciples, with their Relief therein, that he is
promised under this Name by our Savior. I will not, says he, leave you
Orphans, Chap. 14. 18. Though I go away from you, yet I will not leave you in a
desolate and disconsolate Condition. How shall that be prevented in his
Absence, who was the Life and Spring of all their Comforts? Says he, I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you (...), Ver. 16. that is, Another to be
your Comforter. So he renews again his Promise of sending him under this Name,
because Sorrow had filled their Hearts upon the Apprehension of his Departure,
Chap. 16. 7, 8. Wherefore he is principally considered as a Comforter: And, as
we shall see further afterward, this his principal Work, most suited unto his
Nature, as he is the Spirit of Peace, Love and Joy. For he who is the Eternal,
Essential Love of the Divine Being, as existing in the distinct Persons of the
Trinity, is most meet to communicate a Sense of Divine Love with Delight and
Joy unto the Souls of Believers. Hereby he sets up the Kingdom of God in them,
which is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. And
in nothing does he so evidence his Presence in the Hearts and Spirits of any,
as by the Disposal of them unto Spiritual Love and Joy. For shedding abroad the
Love of God in our Hearts, as Romans 5. 5. He produces a Principle and Frame of
Divine Love in our Souls, and fills us with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.
The Attribution therefore of this Name unto him, the Comforter, evidenceth that
he performs this Work in the way of an Office.

NEITHER, (2) Is the signification of an Advocate to be omitted, seeing what he
does as such tends also to the Consolation of the Church. And we must first
observe, that the Holy Spirit is not our Advocate with God. This belongs alone
unto Jesus Christ, and is a part of his Office. He is said indeed to make
Intercession with Groans that cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26. But this he does
not immediately, nor in his own Person. He no otherwise makes Intercession for
us, but by enabling us to make Intercession according unto the Mind of God. For
to make Intercession formally, is utterly inconsistent with the Divine Nature,
and his Person, who has no other Natare but that which is Divine. He is
therefore incapable of being our Advocate with God: The Lord Christ is so
alone, and that on the Account of his precedent Propitiation made for us. But
he is an Advocate for the Church, in, with, and against the World. Such an
Advocate is one that undertaketh the Protection and Defense of another, as to
any Cause wherein he is engaged. The Cause wherein the Disciples of Christ are
engaged in and against the World, is the Truth of the Gospel, the Power and
Kingdom of their Lord and Master. This they testify unto; this is opposed by
the World, and this under various Forms, Appearances and Pretenses, is that
which they suffer Reproaches and Persecutions for in every Generation. In this
Cause the Holy Spirit is their Advocate, justifying Jesus Christ and the Gospel
against the World.

AND this he does three ways. (1) By suggesting unto, and furnishing the
Witnesses of Christ with Pleas and Arguments to the Conviction of Gainsayers.
So it is promised that should do, Mat. 10. 18, 19, 20. And ye shall be brought
before Governors and Kings for my sake, for a Testimony against them and the
Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
speak, for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak. For it
is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you. They
were to be given up, that is, delivered up as Malefactors unto Kings and Rulers
for their Faith in Christ, and the Testimony they gave unto Him. In this
Condition the best of Men are apt to be solicitous about their Answers, and the
Plea they are to make in the Defense of themselves and their Cause. Our Savior
therefore gives them Encouragement not only from the Truth and Goodness of
their Cause, but also from the Ability they should have in pleading for it unto
the Conviction or Confusion of their Adversaries. And this he tells them should
come to pass not by any Power or Faculty in themselves, but by the Aid and
Supply they should receive from this Advocate, who in them would speak by them.
This was that Mouth and Wisdom which he promised unto them, which all their
Adversaries should not be able to gainsay or resist, Luke 21. 15. A present
Supply of Courage, Boldness and Liberty of Speech above and beyond their
Natural Temper and Abilities, immediately upon their receiving of the Holy
Ghost. And their very Enemies saw the Effects of it unto their Astonishment.
Upon the Plea they made before the Council at Jerusalem, it is said, That when
they saw the Boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were ignorant
and unlearned Men, they marvailed, Acts 4. 13. They saw their outward
Condition, that they were poor and of the meanest of the People, yet carried it
with Courage and Boldness before this great Sanhedrim, with whose Authority and
unusual Appearance in Grandeur, all Persons of that sort were wont to be
abashed and tremble at them. They found them ignorant and unlearned in that
Skill and Learning which the World admired, yet plead their Cause unto their
Confusion. They could not therefore but discern and acknowledge that there was
a Divine Power present with them, which acted above themselves, their State,
their natural or acquired Abilities. This was the Work of this Advocate in them
who had undertaken the Defense of their Cause. So when Paul pleaded the same
Cause before Agrippa and Felix, one of them confessed his Conviction, and the
other trembled in his Judgment Seat.

NEITHER has he been wanting unto the Defense of the same Cause in the same
manner in succeeding Generations. All the Story of the Church is filled with
Instances of Persons, mean in their outward Condition, timorous by Nature, and
unaccustomed unto Dangers, unlearned and low in their Natural Abilities, who in
the Face of Rulers and Potentates, in the sight of Prisons, Tortures, Fires
provided for their Destruction, have pleaded the Cause of the Gospel with
Courage and Success, unto the Astonishment and Confusion of their Adversaries.
Neither shall any Disciple of Christ in the same case want the like Assistance
in some due Measure and Proportion, who expect it from him in a way of
believing, and depends upon it. Examples we have hereof every Day in Persons
acted above their own natural Temper and Ablities unto their own Admiration.
For being conscious unto themselves of their own Fears, Despondencies and
Disabilities, it is a Surprizal unto them to find how all their Fears have
disappeared, and their Minds have been enlarged when they have been called unto
Trial for their Testimony unto the Gospel. We are in such cases to make use of
any Reason, Skill, Wisdom or Ability of Speech which we have, or other honest
and advantageous Circumstances which present themselves unto us, as the Apostle
Paul did on all occasions. But our dependence is to be solely on the Presence
and Supplies of our blessed Advocate, who will not suffer us to be utterly
defective in what is necessary unto the Defense and Justification of our Cause.

(2) HE is the Advocate for Christ, the Church, and the Gospel, in and by his
Communication of Spiritual Gifts, both extraordinary and ordinary, unto them
that do believe. For these are things at least in their Effects visible unto
the World. Where Men are not utterly blinded by Prejudice, Love of Sin, and of
the World, they cannot but discern somewhat of a Divine Power in these
Supernatural Gifts. Wherefore they openly testify unto the Divine Approbation
of the Gospel, and the Faith that is in Christ Jesus. So the Apostle confirms
the Truths that he had preached, by this Argument, that therewith and thereby,
or in the confirmation of it, the Spirit as unto the Communication of Gifts was
received, Gal. 3. 2. And herein is he the Churches Advocate, justifying their
Cause openly and visibly by this Dispensation of his Power toward them and in
their behalf. But because we have treated separately and at large of the Nature
and Use of these Spiritual Gifts, I shall not here farther insist on the
Consideration of them.

(3) BY Internal Efficacy in the Dispensation of the Word. Herein also is he
the Advocate of the Church against the World, as is declared, John 16. 8, 9,
10, 11. For when he is come he will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment. Of Sin, because they believe not on me. Of
Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more. Of Judgment,
because the Prince of this World is judged. That which is ascribed unto him
with respect unto the World, is expressed by the Word (...): He shall reprove
or convince: (...) in the Scripture is used variously. Sometimes it is to
manifest, or bring forth unto Light. Ephesians. 5. 13. (...). For all things that are
reproved or discovered, are made manifest by the Light. And it has the same
Sense, John 3. 20. Sometimes it is to rebuke and reprove, 1 Timothy 5. 20. (...).
Those that sin rebuke before all. So also Rev. 3. 19. Tit. 1. 13. Sometimes it
is so to convince as in that, to stop the Mouth of an Adversary, that he shall
have nothing to answer or reply, John 8. 9. (...), Being convicted by their own
Consciences, so as not having a Word to reply, they deserted their Cause. So
Tit. 1. 9. (...), To convince Gainsayers, is explained, Ver. 11. by (...), To
stop their Mouth, namely, by the convincing Evidence of Truth. (...) is an
uncontrollable Evidence, or an evident Argument, Heb. 11. 1. Wherefore (...)
here, is by undeniable Argument and Evidence so to convince the World, or the
Adversaries of Christ and the Gospel, as that they shall have nothing to reply.
This is the Work and Duty of an Advocate, who will absolutely vindicate his
Client when his Cause will bear it.

AND the Effect hereof is Twofold. For all Persons upon such an over-powring
Conviction take one of these two ways. (1) They yield unto the Truth and
embrace it, as finding no Ground to stand upon in its refusal. Or, (2) They fly
out into desperate Rage and Madness, as being obstinate in their Hatred against
the Truth, and destitute of all Reason to oppose it. An Instance of the former
way we have in those Jews, unto whom Peter preached on the Day of Pentecost.
Reproving and convincing of them beyond all Contradiction, they were pricked in
their Hearts, and cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? And
therewithal came over unto the Faith, Acts 2. 37, 41. Of the latter, we have
many Instances in the Dealings of our Savior with that People: For when he had
at any time convinced them, and stopped their Mouths as to the Cause in hand,
they called him Beelzebub, cried out that he had a Devil, took up Stones to
throw at him, and conspired his Death, with all Demonstration of desperate Rage
and Madness, John 8. 48, 58. Chap. 10. 30, 31, 39. So it was in the case of
Stephen, and the Testimony he gave unto Christ, Acts 7. 56, 57, 58. And with
Paul, Acts 22. 22, 23. An Instance of Bestial Rage not to be paralleled in any
other Case; but in this it has often fallen out in the World. And the same
Effects this Work of the Holy Ghost, as the Advocate of the Church ever had,
and still has upon the World. Many being convinced by Him in the Dispensation
of the Word, are really humbled and converted unto the Faith. So God adds daily
to the Church such as shall be saved. But the generality of the World are
enraged by the same Work against Christ, the Gospel, and those by whom it is
dispensed. Whilst the Word is preached in a formal manner, the World is well
enough contented that it should have a quiet Passage among them. But where ever
the Holy Ghost puts forth a convincing Efficacy in the Dispensation of it, the
World is enraged by it; which is no less an Evidence of the Power of their
Conviction, than the other is of a better Success.

THE Subject Matter concerning which the Holy Ghost manageth his Plea by the
Word against the World as the Advocate of the Church, is referred unto the
Three Heads of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment, Ver. 8. the especial Nature of
them being declared Ver. 9, 10, 11.

1. WHAT Sin it is in particular that the Holy Spirit shall so plead with the
World about, and convince them of, is declared Ver. 9. Of Sin, because they
believe not in me. There are many Sins whereof Men may be convinced by the
Light of Nature, Romans 2. 14, 15. More that they are reproved for by the Letter
of the Law. And it is the Work of the Spirit also in general, to make these
Convictions effectual. But these belong not unto the Cause which he has to
plead for the Church against the World; nor is that such as any can be brought
unto Conviction about by the Light of Nature, or Sentence of the Law; but it is
the Work of the Spirit alone by the Gospel. And this in the first place is
Unbelief, particularly not believing in Jesus Christ, as the Son of God, the
promised Messiah and Savior of the World. This he testified concerning
himself, this his Works evinced him to be, and this both Moses and the Prophets
bare witness unto: Hereon he tells the Jews, that if they believed not that he
was He, that is, the Son of God, the Messiah and Savior of the World, they
should die in their Sins, John 8. 5, 21, 24. But in this Unbelief, in this
Rejection of Christ, the Jews and the rest of the World justified themselves,
and not only so, but despised and persecuted them who believed in him. This was
the Fundamental Difference between Believers and the World, the Head of that
Cause wherein they were rejected by it as foolish, and condemned as impious.
And herein was the Holy Ghost their Advocate: For he did by such undeniable
Evidences, Arguments and Testimonies, convince the World of the Truth and Glory
of Christ, and of the Sin of Unbelief, that they were every where either
converted or enraged thereby. So some of them upon this Conviction, gladly
received the Word, and were baptized, Acts 2. 41. Others upon the preaching of
the same Truth by the Apostles, were cut to the heart, and took counsel to slay
them, Chap. 5. 33. In this Work he still continues. And it is an Act of the
same kind whereby he yet in particular convinces any of the Sin of Unbelief,
which cannot be done but by the effectual, internal Operation of his Power.

2. HE thus convinces the World of Righteousness, Ver. 10. Of Righteousness,
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more. Both the Personal
Righteousness of Christ, and the Righteousness of his Office, are intended. For
concerning both these the Church has a Contest with the World, and they belong
unto that Cause wherein the Holy Spirit is their Advocate. Christ was looked on
by the World as an Evil Doer; accused to be a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a
Seditious Person, a Seducer, a Blasphemer, a Malefactor in every kind; whence
his Disciples were both despised and destroyed for believing in such an one.
And it is not to be declared how they were scorned and reproached, and what
they suffered on this Account. In the mean time they pleaded and gave Testimony
unto his Righteousness, that he did no Sin, nor was Guile found in his Mouth,
that lie fulfilled all Righteousness, and was the Holy One of God. And herein
was the Holy Ghost their Advocate, convincing the World principally by this
Argument, that after all he did and suffered in this World, as the highest
Evidence imaginable of God's Approbation of him and what he did, that he was
gone to the Father, or assumed up into Glory. The poor blind Man, whose Eyes
were opened by him, pleaded this as a forcible Argument against the Jews that
he was no Sinner, in that God heard him so as that he had opened his Eyes;
whose Evidence and Conviction they could not bear, but it turned them into Rage
and Madness, John 9. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. How much more glorious and effectual
must this Evidence needs be of his Righteousness and Holiness, and God's
Approbation of him, that after all he did in this World, he went unto his
Father, and was taken up into Glory. For such is the meaning of these Words, Ye
shall see me no more: That is, th^^ shall be an end put unto my State of
Humiliation, and of my Converse with you in this World, because I am to enter
into my Glory. That the Lord Christ then went unto his Father, that he was so
gloriously exalted, undeniable Testimony was given by the Holy Ghost unto the
Conviction of the World. So this Argument is pleaded by Peter, Acts 2. 33. This
is enough to stop the Mouths of all the World in this Cause, that he sent the
Holy Ghost from the Father to communicate Spiritual Gifts of all sorts unto his
Disciples. And there could be no higher Evidence of his Acceptance, Power and
Glory with him. And the same Testimony he still continues in the Communication
of Ordinary Gifts in the Ministry of the Gospel. Respect also may be had (which
Sense I would not exclude) unto the Righteousness of his Office. There ever was
a great Contest about the Righteousness of the World. This the Gentiles looked
after by the Light of Nature, and the Jews by the Works of the Law. In this
State the Lord Christ is proposed as the Lord our Righteousness, as he who was
to bring in, and had brought in Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9. 24. Being
the End of the Law for Righteousness unto all that believe, Romans 10. 4. This
the Gentiles rejected as Folly, Christ crucified was foolishness unto them; and
to the Jews it was a Stumbling Block, as that which everted the whole Law: And
generally they all concluded, that he could not save himself, and therefore it
was not probable that others should be saved by him. But herein also is the
Holy Spirit the Advocate of the Church. For in the Dispensation of the Word, he
so convinces Men of an Impossibility for them to attain a Righteousness of
their own, as that they must either submit to the Righteousness of God in
Christ, or die in their Sins.

3. HE convinces the World of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is
Judged. Christ himself was judged and condemned by the World. In that Judgment
Satan the Prince of this World had the principal Hand; for it was effected in
the Hour, and under the Power of Darkness. And no doubt but he hoped that he
had carried his Cause, when he had prevailed to have the Lord Christ publicly
judged and condemned. And this Judgment the World sought by all means to
justify and make good. But the whose of it is called over again by the Holy
Ghost pleading in the Cause, and for the Faith of the Church. And he does it so
effectually, as that the Judgment is turned on Satan himself. Judgment with
unavoidable Conviction passed on all that Superstition, Idolatry and Wickedness
which he had filled the World withal. And whereas he had born himself under
various Masks, Shades and Pretenses to be the God of this World, the Supreme
Ruler over all, and accordingly was worshipped all the World over, he is now by
the Gospel laid open and manifested to be an accursed Apostate, a Murderer,
and the great Enemy of Mankind.

WHEREFORE, taking the Name Paracletus in this Sense for an Advocate, it is
proper unto the Holy Ghost in some part of his Work in and toward the Church.
And whenever we are called to bear Witness unto Christ and the Gospel, we
abandon our Strength and betray our Cause, if we do not use all Means appointed
of God unto that and, to engage him in our Assistance.

BUT it is as a Comforter that he is chiefly promised unto us, and as such is
he expressed unto the Church by this Name.

FOURTHLY, That he has a peculiar Work committed unto him suitable unto this
Mission, Commission and Name, is that which will appear in the Declaration of
the Particulars wherein it does consist. For the present, we only assert in
general, that his Work it is to support, cherish, relieve and comfort the
Church in all Trials and Distresses. And this is all that we intend when we say
that it is his Office so to do.

CHAP. II. General Adjuncts or Properties of the Office of a Comforter as
exercised by the Holy Spirit.
TO evidence yet further the Nature of this Office and Work, we may consider
and enquire into the general Adjuncts of it as exercised by the Holy Spirit.
And they are Four.

FIRST, Infinite Condescension. This is among those Mysteries of the Divine
Dispensation which we may admire, but cannot comprehend. And it is the Property
of Faith alone to act and live upon incomprehensible Objects. What Reason
cannot comprehend, it will neglect as that which it has no concernment in, nor
can have Benefit by. Faith is most satisfied and cherished with what is
infinite and inconceivable, as resting absolutely in Divine Revelation. Such is
this Condescension of the Holy Ghost. He is by Nature over all, God blessed for
ever. And it is a Condescension in the Divine Excellency to concern it self in
a particular manner, in any Creature whatever. God humbles himself to behold
the things that are done in Heaven and in Earth, Psalm. 113. 5, 6. How much more
does he do so in submitting himself unto the Discharge of an Office in the
behalf of poor Worms here below.

THIS I confess is most astonishing, and attended with the most
incomprehensible Rays of Divine Wisdom and Goodness in the Condescension of the
Son. For he carried the Term of it unto the lowest and most abject Condition
that a rational, intelligent Nature is capable of. So is it represented by the
Apostle, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. For he not only took our Nature into Personal Union
with himself, but became in it, in his outward Condition as a Servant, yea, as
a Worm and no Man, a Reproach of Men, and despised of the People, and became
subject to Death, the Ignominious, shameful Death of the Cross. Hence this
Dispensation of God was filled up with Infinite Wisdom, Goodness and Grace. How
this Exinanition of the Son of God was compensated with the Glory that did
ensue, we shall rejoice in the Contemplation of unto all Eternity. And then
shall the Character of all Divine Excellencies be more gloriously conspicuous
on this Condescension of the Son of God, than ever they were on the Works of
the whole Creation, when this Goodly Fabric of Heaven and Earth was brought by
Divine Power and Wisdom through Darkness and Confusion out of nothing.

THE Condescension of the Holy Spirit unto his Work and Office is not indeed of
the same kind, as to the Terminus ad quem, or the Object of it. He assumes not
our Nature, he exposes not himself unto the Injuries of an outward State and
Condition. But yet it is such as is more to be the Object of our Faith in
Adoration, than of our Reason in Disquisition. Consider the thing in it self;
how one Person in the Holy Trinity, subsisting in the Unity of the same Divine
Nature, should undertake to execute the Love and Grace of the other Persons,
and in their Names: What do we understand of it? This Holy Economy in the
distinct and subordinate Actings of the Divine Persons in these external Works,
is known only unto, is understood only by themselves. Our Wisdom it is to
acquiesce in express, Divine Revelation: Nor have they scarcely more
dangerously erred by whom these things are denied, than those have done, who by
a proud and conceited Subtilty of Mind, pretend unto a Conception of them,
which they express in Words and Terms as they say, precise and accurate, indeed
foolish and curious, whether of other Men's coining or their own finding out.
Faith keeps the Soul at an Holy Distance from these infinite Depths of the
Divine Wisdom, where it profits more by Reverence and Holy Fear, than any can
do by their utmost Attempt to draw nigh unto that inaccessable Light wherein
these Glories of the Divine Nature do dwell.

BUT we may more steddily consider this Condescension with respect unto its
Object; the Holy Spirit thereby becomes a Comforter unto us poor, miserable
Worms of the Earth. And what Heart can conceive the Glory of this Grace? What
Tongue can express it? Especially will its Eminency appear, if we consider the
Ways and Means whereby he does so comfort us, and the Opposition from us which
he meets withal therein, whereof we must treat afterward.

SECONDLY, Unspeakable Love accompanies the Susception and Discharge of this
Office; and that working by Tenderness and Compassion. The Holy Spirit is said
to be the Divine, Eternal, mutual Love of the Father and the Son. And although
I know that much Wariness is to be used in the Declaration of those Mysteries,
nor are Expressions concerning them to be ventured on not warranted by the
Letter of the Scripture, yet I judge that this Notion does excellently express,
if not the distinct manner of Subsistence, yet the mutual, internal Operation
of the Persons of the Blessed Trinity. For we have no Term for, nor Notion of
that inessable Complacence and eternal Rest which is therein, beyond this of
Love. Hence it is said that God is Love, 1 John 4. 8, 16. It does not seem to
be an essential Property of the Nature of God only, that the Apostle does
intend. For it is proposed unto us as a Motive unto mutual Love among our
selves: And this consists not simply in the Habit or Affection of Love, but in
the Actings of it in all its Fruits and Duties. For so is God Love, as that the
Internal Actings of the Holy Persons which are in and by the Spirit, are all
the ineffable Actings of Love, wherein the Nature of the Holy Spirit is
expressed unto us. The Apostle prays for the Presence of the Spirit with the
Corinthians under the Name of the God of Love and Peace, 2 Epist. 13. 11. And
the Communication of the whole Love of God unto us is committed unto the
Spirit, for the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost
which is given unto us, Romans 5. And hence the same Apostle distinctly
mentions the Love of the Spirit, conjoyning it with all the Effects of the
Mediation of Christ, Romans 15. 30. I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus
Christ his sake, and for the Love of the Spirit: I do so on the Account of the
respect you have unto Christ, and all that he has done for you, which is a
Motive irresistible unto Believers. I do it also for the Love of the Spirit;
all that Love which he acts, and communicates unto you. Wherefore in all the
Actings of the Holy Ghost toward us, and especially in this of his Susception
of an Office in the behalf of the Church, which is the Foundation of them all,
his Love is principally to be considered, and that he chooses this way of
acting and working toward us to express his peculiar, personal Character, as
he is the Eternal Love of the Father and the Son. And among all his Actings
toward us, which are all Acts of Love, this is most conspicuous in those
wherein he is a Comforter.

WHEREFORE, because this is of great use unto us, as that which ought to have,
and which will have, if duly apprehended, a great Influence on our Faith and
Obedience, and is moreover the Spring of all the Consolations we receive by and
from him, we shall give a little Evidence unto it, namely, that the Love of the
Spirit is principally to be considered in this Office, and the Discharge of it.
For whatever Good we receive from any one, whatever Benefit or present Relief
we have thereby, we can receive no Comfort or Consolation in it, unless we are
persuaded that it proceeds from Love; and what does so, be it never so small,
has Refreshment and Satisfaction in it unto every ingenious Nature. It is Love
alone that is the Salt of every Kindness or Benefit, and which takes out of it
every thing that may be noxious or hurtful. Without an apprehension hereof, and
satisfaction herein, multiplied beneficial Effects produce no internal
Satisfaction in them that do receive them, nor put any real Engagement on their
Minds, Prove. 23. 6, 7, 8. It is therefore of Concernment unto us to secure this
Ground of all our Consolation; in the full Assurance of Faith, that there was
infinite Love in the Susception of this Office by the Holy Ghost. And it is
evident that so it was,

1. FROM the Nature of the Work it self. For the Consolation or comforting of
any who stand in need thereof, is an immediate Effect of Love, with its
inseparable Properties of Pity and Compassion. Especially it must be so where
no Advantage redounds unto the Comforter, but the whole of what is done
respects entirely the Good and Relief of them that are comforted. For what
other Affection of Mind can be the Principle hereof from whence it may proceed?
Persons may be relieved under Oppression by Justice, under Want by Bounty; but
to comfort and refresh the Minds of any, is a peculiar Act of sincere Love and
Compassion: So therefore must this Work of the Holy Ghost be esteemed to be. I
do not intend only that his Love is eminent and discernable in it, but that it
proceeds solely from Love. And without a Faith hereof we cannot have the
Benefit of this Divine Dispensation, nor will any Comforts that we receive be
firm or stable. But when this is once graciously fixed in our Minds, that there
is not one Drop of Comfort or Spiritual Refreshment administered by the Holy
Ghost, but that it proceeds from his Infinite Love; then are they disposed into
that Frame which is needful to comply with him in his Operations. And in
particular, all the Acts wherein the Discharge of this Office does consist, are
all of them Acts of the highest Love, of that which is Infinite, as we shall
see in the Consideration of them.

2. THE manner of the Performance of this Work is so expressed, as to evince
and expressly demonstrate that it is a Work of Love. So is it declared where he
is promissed unto the Church for this Work, Isa. 66. 13. As one whom his Mother
comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. He
whom his Mother comfort is supposed to be in some kind of Distress: Nor
indeed is there any, of any kind that may befall a Child whose Mother is kind
and tender, but she will be ready to administer unto him all the Consolation
that she is able. And how or in what manner will such a Mother discharge this
Duty, it is better conceived than it can be expressed. We are not in things
natural able to take in a Conception of greater Love, Care and Tenderness than
is in a tender Mother, who comforts her Children in Distress. And hereby does
the Prophet graphically represent unto our Minds the manner whereby the Holy
Ghost discharges this Office toward us. Neither can a Child contract greater
Guilt, or manifest a more depraved Habit of Mind, than to be regardless of the
Affections of a Mother endeavoring its Consolation. Such Children may indeed
sometimes through the Bitterness of their Spirits by their Pains and Distempers
be surprised into Frowardness, and a present Regardlesness of the Mothers
Kindness and Compassion, which they know full well how to bear withal. But if
they continue to have no Sense of it, if it make no Impression upon them, they
are of a prostigate Constitution. And so it may be sometimes with Believers;
they may by Surprizals into Spiritual Frowardness, by Weakness, by
unaccountable Despondencies, be regardless of Divine Influences of Consolation.
But all these things the great Comforter will bear with and overcome. See Isa.
57. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. For thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also
that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the humble,
and to revive the Heart of the contrite ones. For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth: For the Spirit should fail before me, and the
Souls which I have made. For the Iniquity of his Covetousness was I wroth, and
smote him: I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
Heart. I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also, and
restore Comforts unto him, and to his Mourners. I create the Fruit of the Lips;
Peace, Peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord,
and I will heal him. Where Persons are under Sorrows and Disconsolations upon
the Account of Pains and Sickness, or the like, in a Design of Comfort toward
them, it will yet be needful sometimes to make use of Means and Remedies that
may be painful and vexatious. And these may be apt to irritate and provoke
poor, wayward Patients. Yet is not a Mother discouraged hereby, but proceeds on
in her way until the Cure be effected and Consolation administered. So does God
by his Spirit deal with his Church. His Design is to revive the Spirit of the
humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite ones, Ver. 15. And he gives
this Reason of it, namely, That if he should not act in infinite Love and
Condescension toward them, but deal with them after their Deservings, they
would utterly be consumed, the Spirit would fail before him, and the Souls
which he had made, Ver. 16. However, in the pursuit of this Work he must use
some sharp Remedies that were needful for the curing of their Distempers, and
their Spiritual Discovery. Because of their Iniquity, the Iniquity of their
Covetousness, which was the principal Disease they labored under, he was
wroth, and smote them, and hid his Face from them, because his so doing was
necessary to their Cure, Ver. 17. And how do they behave themselves under this
Dealing of God with them? They grow prevish and froward under his Hand, choosing
rather to continue in their Disease, than to be thus healed by him, they went
on frowardly in the way of their Hearts, Ver. 17. How therefore does this Holy
Comforter now deal with them? Does he give them up unto their Frowardness? Does
he leave and forsake them under their Distemper? No, a tender Mother will not
so deal with her Children. He manageth his Work with that infinite Love,
Tenderness and Compassion, as that he will overcome all their frowardness, and
cease not until he has effectually administered Consolation unto them; Ver.
18. I have seen, says he, all these his ways, all his frowardness and
miscarriages, and yet says he, I will heal him; I will not for all this be
diverted from my Work and the pursuit of my design; before I have done, I will
lead him into a right frame, and restore Comforts unto him. And that there may
be no failure herein, I will do it by a creating act of Power, Ver. 19. I
create the fruit of the lips, Peace, Peace. This is the Method of the Holy
Ghost in administering Consolation unto the Church, openly evidencing that Love
and Compassion from whence it does proceed. And without this Method should no
One Soul be ever spiritually refreshed under its Dejections. For we are apt to
behave our selves frowardly more or less under the Work of the Holy Ghost
toward us. Infinite Love and Compassion alone working by Patience and
Long-suffering can carry it on unto Perfection. But if we are not only froward
under particular Occasions, Temptations and Surprizals clouding our present
View of the Holy Spirit in his Work, but are also habitually careless and
negligent about it, and do never labor to come unto satisfaction in it, but
always indulge unto the peevishness and frowardness of Unbelief, it argues a
most depraved unthankful frame of Heart, wherein the Soul of God cannot be well
pleased.

3. It is an Evidence that his Work proceeds from, and is wholly managed in
Love, in that we are cautioned not to grieve him, Ephesians. 4. 30. And a double
Evidence of the Greatness of his Love herein is tendered unto us in that
Caution. (1.) In that those alone are subject to be grieved by us, who act in
Love toward us. If we comply not with the Will and Rule of others, they may be
provoked, vexed, instigated unto Wrath against us. But those alone who love us,
are grieved at our miscarriages. A severe Schoolmaster may be more provoked
with the fault of his Scholar, than the Father is; but the Father is grieved
with it, when the other is not. Whereas therefore the Holy Spirit is not
subject or liable unto the Affection of Grief as it is a Passion in us, we are
cautioned not to grieve him, namely to teach us with what Love and Compassion,
with what tenderness and holy Delight he performs his Work in us and toward
us. (2.) It is so in that he has undertaken the Work of Comforting them who
are so apt and prone to grieve him, as for the most part we are. The great Work
of the Lord Christ was to dye for us. But that which puts an Eminence on his
Love, is that he dyed for us whilst we were yet his Enemies, Sinners and
Ungodly, Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. And as the Work of the Holy Ghost is to comfort us,
so a Luster is put upon it by this, that he comforts those who are very prone
to grieve himself. For although it may be we will not through a peculiar
Affection, hurt, molest or grieve them again by whom we are grieved, yet who is
it that will set himself to comfort those that grieve him, and that when so
they do. But even herein the Holy Ghost commends his Love unto us, that even
whilst we grieve him, by his Consolations he recovers us from those ways
wherewith he is grieved.

This therefore is to be fixed as an important Principle in this part of the
Mystery of God, That the principal Foundation of the Susception of this Office
of a Comforter by the Holy Spirit, is his own peculiar and ineffable Love. For
both the Efficacy of our Consolation and the Life of our Obedience do depend
hereon. For when we know that every acting of the Spirit of God toward us,
every gracious Impression from him on our Understandings, Wills or Affections,
are all of them in pursuit of that infinite, peculiar Love whence it was that
he took upon him the Office of a Comforter, they cannot but all of them
influence our Hearts with spiritual Refreshments. And wherein Faith is
defective in this matter, that it does not exercise it self in the
Consideration of this Love of the Holy Ghost, we shall never arrive unto solid,
abiding, strong Consolation. And as for those by whom all these things are
despised and derided, it is no straight unto me whether I should renounce the
Gospel or reject them from an Interest in Christianity, for the Approbation of
both is inconsistent. Moreover it is evident how great a Motive hence arises
unto cheerful, watchful, universal Obedience. For all the Actings of Sin or
Unbelief in us, are in the first Place Re-actions unto those of the Holy Ghost
in us and upon us. By them is he resisted in his Persuasions, quenched in his
Motions, and himself grieved. If there be any holy Ingenuity in us, it will
excite a vigilant Diligence not to be overtaken with such wickednesses against
unspeakable Love. He will walk both safely and fruitfully whose Soul is kept
under a Sense of the Love of the Holy Spirit herein..

Thirdly, Infinite Power, is also needful unto and accordingly evident in the
Discharge of this Office. This we have fixed, that the Holy Ghost is and ever
was the Comforter of the Church. Whatever therefore is spoken thereof, belongs
peculiarly unto him. And it is expressed as proceeding from and accompanied
with Infinite Power, as also the Consideration of Persons and Things declare it
necessary that so it should be. Thus we have the Churches Complaint in a deep
Disconsolation: My way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over
from my God, Isa. 48. 27. It is not so much her Affliction and Miseries, as an
Apprehension that God regarded her not therein, which causes her Dejection.
And when this is added unto any pressing Trouble, whether Internal or External,
it does fully constitute a State of spiritual Disconsolation. For when Faith
can take a Prospect of the Love, Care and concernment of God in us and our
Condition, however grievous things may be at present unto us, yet can we not be
comfortless. And what is it that in the Consolation which God intends his
Church, he would have them to consider in himself as an assured Ground of
Relief and Refreshment? This he declares himself in the following Verses: Ver.
28, 29, 30, 31. Have thou not known, have thou not heard that the Everlasting
God, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth faints not nor is weary, etc. The
Church seems not at all to doubt of his Power, but of his Love, Care and
Faithfulness toward her. But it is his infinite Power that he chooses first
to satisfy her in, as that which all his actings toward her were founded in
and resolved into, without a due consideration whereof all that otherwise could
be expected would not yield her Relief. And this being fixed on their Minds, he
next proposes unto them his Infinite Understanding and Wisdom; there is no
searching of his Understanding. Conceive aright of his Infinite Power, and then
leave things unto his Sovereign, unsearchable Wisdom for the Management of them
as to Ways, Degrees, Times and Seasons. An Apprehension of want of Love and
Care in God toward them, was that which immediately caused their
Disconsolation; but the Ground of it was in their Unbelief of his Infinite
Power and Wisdom. Wherefore in the Work of the Holy Ghost for the comforting of
the Church, his Infinite Power is peculiarly to be considered. So the Apostle
proposes it unto the weakest Believers for their Supportment, and that which
should assure them of the Victory in their Conflict, That greater is he that is
in them, than he that is in the World, 1 John 4. 4. That Holy Spirit which is
bestowed on them, and dwells in them, is greater, more able and powerful,
than Satan that attempts their Ruin in and by the World, seeing he is of
Power Omnipotent. Things of our Disconsolation arise from the Impressions that
Satan makes upon our Minds and Consciences by Sin, Temptation, and
Persecution. For we find not in our selves such an Ability of Resistance as
from whence we may have an Assurance of a Conquest. This, says the Apostle,
you are to expect from the Power of the Holy Spirit, which is infinitely above
whatever Satan has, to make Opposition unto you, or to bring any
Disconsolation on you. This will cast out all that Fear which has Torment
accompanying of it. And however this may be disregarded by them who are filled
with an Apprehension of their own Self-sufficiency as unto all the Ends of
their Being and Obedience unto God; as likewise, that they have a neverfailing
Spring of Rational Considerations about them, able to administer all necessary
Relief and Comfort at all Times: Yet those who are really sensible of their own
Condition, and that of other Believers, if they understand what it is to be
comforted with the Consolation of God, and how remote they are from those
Delusions which Men embrace under the Name of their Rational Considerations,
will grant that the Faith of Infinite Power is requisite unto any Solid,
Spiritual Comfort. For,

1. WHO can declare the Dejections, Sorrows, Fears, Despondencies and
Discouragements that Believers are obnoxious unto, in the great Variety of
their Natures, Causes, Effects and Occasions? What Relief can be suited unto
them, but what is an Emanation from Infinite Power? Yea, such is the Spiritual
Frame and Constitution of their Souls, as that they will oft-times reject all
means of Comfort that are not communicated by an Almighty Efficacy. Hence God
creates the Fruit of the Lips, Peace, Peace, Isa. 57. 20. produces Peace in
the Souls of Men by a creating Act of his Power; and Direction in the place
before mentioned to look for it only from the infinite Excellency of his
Nature: None therefore was meet for this Work of being the Churches Comforter,
but the Spirit of God alone. He only by his Almighty Power can remove all their
Fears, and support them under all their Dejections in all that Variety
wherewith they are attempted and exercised. Nothing but Omnipotence it self is
suited to obviate those innumerable Disconsolations that we are obnoxious unto.
And those whose Souls are pressed in earnest with them, and are driven from all
the Reliefs which not only carnal Security and Stout-beartedness in Adversity
do offer, but also from all those lawful Diversions which the World can
administer, will understand that true Consolation is an Act of the exceeding
Greatness of the Power of God, and without which it will not be wrought.

2. THE Means and Causes of their Disconsolation, direct unto the same Spring
of their Comfort. Whatever the Power of Hell, of Sin and the World, separately
or in Conjunction can effect, it is all levelled against the Peace and Comfort
of Believers. Of how great Force and Efficacy they are in their Attempts to
disturb and ruin them, by what various ways and means they work unto that End,
would require great Enlargement of Discourse to declare. And yet when we have
used our utmost Diligence in an Enquiry after them, we shall come short of a
full Investigation of them; yea, it may be of what many Individual Persons find
in their own Experience. Wherefore with respect unto One Cause and Principle of
Disconsolation, God declaring that it is he who comfort his People, Isa. 51.
12, 13, 14, 15. I, even I, am he that comfort you: Who art thou that thou
should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the Son of Man which shall
be made as Grass? And forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth
the Heavens, and laid the Foundations of the Earth? And have feared continually
every day, because of the Fury of the Oppressor, as if he were ready to
destroy? And where is the Fury of the Oppressor? The Captive Exile hasteneth
that he may be loosed, and that he should not die in the Pit, nor that his
Bread should fail. But I am the Lord thy God, that divided the Sea, whose Waves
roared: the Lord of Hosts is his Name. He sees it necessary to declare his
Infinite Power, and to express in sundry Instances the Effects thereof.

WHEREFORE if we take a View of what is the State and Condition of the Church
in it self, and in the World: How weak is the Faith of most Believers? How
great their Fears? How many their Discouragements? As also, with how great
Temptations, Calamities, Oppositions, Persecutions they are exercised? How
vigorously and sharply these things are set on upon their Spirits, according
unto all Advantages inward and outward that their Spiritual Adversaries can lay
hold upon? It will be manifest how necessary it was that their Consolation
should be entrusted with him with whom Infinite Power does always dwell. And if
our own inward or outward Peace seems to abate of the necessity of this
Consideration, it may not be amiss by the Exercise of Faith herein to lay in
Provision for the future, seeing we know not what may befall us in the World.
And should we live to see the Church in Storms, as who knows but we may, our
principal Supportment will be, that our Comforter is of Almighty Power,
wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in Operation.

4. THIS Dispensation of the Spirit is unchangeable. Unto whomsoever he is
given as a Comforter, he abides with them for ever. This our Savior expressly
declares in the first Promise he made of sending him as a Comforter in a
peculiar manner. John 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. The Moment of this
Promise lies in his unchangeable Continuance with the Church. There was indeed
a present occasion rendering necessary this Declaration of the unchangeableness
of his Abode. For in all this Discourse, our Savior was preparing the Hearts
of his Disciples for his Departure from them, which was now at hand. And
whereas he lays the whole of the Relief which in that Case He would afford unto
them, upon his sending of the Holy Ghost, he takes care not only to prevent an
Objection which might arise in their Minds about this Dispensation of the
Spirit, but also in so doing to secure the Faith and Consolation of the Church
in all Ages. For as he himself who had been their immediate, visible Comforter
during the whole Time of his Ministry among them, was now departing from them,
and that so, as that the Heavens were to receive him until the time of the
Restitution of all things, they might be apt to fear that this Comforter who
was now promised unto them might continue also only for a Season, whereby they
should be reduced unto a new Loss and Sorrow. To assure their Minds herein, our
Lord Jesus Christ lets them know that this other Comforter should not only
always continue with them unto the ends of their Lives, Work and Ministry, but
abide with the Church absolutely unto the Consummation of all things. He is now
given in an Eternal and Unchangeable Covenant, Isa. 59. 21. and he can no more
depart from the Church, than the everlasting, sure Covenant of God can be
abolished.

BUT it may be objected by such as really enquire into the Promises of Christ,
and after their Accomplishment, for the Establishment of their Faith; whence it
is that if the Comforter abide always with the Church, that so great a number
of Believers do in all Ages spend, it may be, the greatest part of their Lives
in Troubles and Disconsolation, having no experience of the Presence of the
Holy Ghost with them as a Comforter. But this Objection is not of Force to
weaken our Faith as unto the Accomplishment of this Promise. For,

1. There is in the Promise it self, a Supposition of Troubles and
Disconsolations thereon to befall the Church in all Ages. For with respect unto
them it is that the Comforter is promised to be sent. And they do but dream who
fancy such a State of the Church in this World, as wherein it should be
accompanied with such an Assurance of all inward and outward Satisfaction, as
scarce to stand in need of this Office or Work of the Holy Ghost. Yea, the
Promise of this abiding with us for ever as a Comforter, is an infallible
Prediction that Believers in all Ages shall meet with Troubles, Sorrows and
Disconsolation.

2. THE Accomplishment of Christ's Promises does not depend as to its Truth
upon our Experience, at least not on what Men sensibly feel in themselves under
their Distresses, much less on what they express with some mixture of Unbelief.
So we observed before from that place of the Prophet concerning the Church,
Isa. 41. 27. that her way was hidden from the Lord, and her Judgment passed
over from her God. As she complained also, The Lord has forsaken me, and my
Lord has forgotten me, Chap. 49. 14. But yet in both places God convinces her
of her Mistake, and that indeed her Complaint was but a Fruit of Unbelief. And
so it is usual in great Distresses, when Persons are so swallowed up with
Sorrow, or overwhelmed with Anguish, that they are not sensible of the Work of
the Holy Ghost in their Consolation.

3. HE is a Comforter unto all Believers at all Times, and on all Occasions
wherein they really stand in need of Spiritual Consolation. But yet if we
intend to have Experience of his Work herein, to have the Advantage of it, or
Benefit by it, there are sundry things required of our selves in a way of Duty.
If we are negligent herein, it is no wonder if we are at a loss for those
Comforts which he is willing to administer. Unless we understand aright the
Nature of Spiritual Consolations, and value them both as sufficient and
satisfactory, we are not like to enjoy them, at least not to be made sensible
of them. Many under their Troubles suppose there is no Comfort but in their
removal: and know not of any Relief in their Sorrow, but in the taking away of
their Cause. At best they value any outward Relief before Internal Supports and
Refreshments. Such Persons can never receive the Consolation of the Holy Spirit
unto any refreshing Experience. To look for all our Comforts from him, to value
those things wherein his Consolations do consist, above all earthly Enjoyments,
to wait upon him in the use of all Means for the receiving of his Instances of
Love and Grace, to be fervent in Prayer for his Presence with us, and the
manifestation of his Grace, are required in all those toward whom he
discharges this Office. And whilst we are found in these ways of Holy
Obedience and Dependence, we shall find him a Comforter, and that for ever.

THESE things are observable in the Office of the Holy Ghost in general as he
is the Comforter of the Church, and the manner of his Discharge thereof. What
is further considerable unto the Guidance of our Faith, and the Participation
of Consolation with respect hereunto, will be evident in the Declaration of the
Particulars that belong thereunto.

CHAP. III. Unto whom the Holy Spirit is promised and given as a Comforter; or
the Object of his Acting in this Office.
WE have considered the Promise of Christ to send the Holy Spirit to be the
Comforter of the Church, and unto that end to abide with them for ever. The
Nature also of that Office and Work in general which hereon he undertakes and
discharges, with the Properties of them, have been declared. Our next Enquiry
is unto whom this Promise is made, and toward whom it is infallibly fulfilled.
How and unto what Ends, in what Order as unto his Effects and Operations, the
Holy Spirit is promised unto any Persons and received by them, has been
already declared in our former Discourses, Lib. 4. Chap. 3. We shall therefore
here only declare in particular who he is promised unto and received by, as a
Comforter. And this is to all, and only unto Believers; those who are actually
so. All his Operations required unto the making of them so to be, are
antecedent hereunto. For the Promise of him unto this End, wherever it is
recorded, is made directly unto them, and unto them it is confined. Immediately
it was given unto the Apostles; but it was not given unto them as Apostles, but
as Believers and Disciples of Christ, with a particular respect unto the
Difficulties, and Causes of Disconsolation which they were under, or should
meet withal upon the Account of their being so. See the Promises unto this
purpose expressly, John 14. 16, 17, 26. Chap. 15. 26. Chap. 16. 7, 8. And it is
declared withal that the World, which in that Place is opposed unto them that
do believe, cannot receive him, Chap. 14. 17. Other effectual Operations he
has upon the World, for their Conviction, and the Conversion of many of them.
But as a Spirit of Consolation He is neither promised unto them, nor can they
receive him, until other gracious Acts of his have passed on their Souls.
Besides, we shall see that all his Actings and Effects as a Comforter are
confined unto them that believe, and do all suppose Saving Faith as antecedent
unto them.

And this is the great Fundamental Privilege of true Believers, whereby,
through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, they are exalted above all other
Persons in this World. And this will the more evidently appear, when we shall
consider those especial Operations, Acts and Effects whereby Consolation is
administered unto them. That the Life of Man is the subject of innumerable
Troubles is made evident and uncontrollable by Catholic Experience. That Man
is born to Trouble as the Sparks fly upward, has been the constant
Acknowledgment of all that have been wise in all Ages. And those who have
designed to drown the Sense of them in Security and Sensuality of Life, have
been ever looked on as greatly exorbitant from the Principles of Nature and
Dictates of Reason, voluntarily degenerating into the Condition of Creatures
brutish and irrational. Others who will not forego the Privilege of their
Being, have always made it a principal Enquiry, How or whence they might take
and receive Relief and Comfort for their Supportment against their unavoidable
Troubles, Sorrows and Disconsolation. Yea it is natural and necessary unto all
men so to do. All men cannot but seek after Rest and Peace, not only out of
Choice, but instinct of Nature, Trouble and Sorrow being diametrically contrary
unto it in its Being, and tending unto its Dissolution. Wherefore they all
naturally seek for Consolation. Hence the best and most useful Part of the Old
Philosophy consisted in the Prescription of the Ways and Means of comforting
and supporting the Minds of Men against things noxious and grievous to Nature,
with the Sorrows which ensue thereon. And the Topics they had found out unto
this Purpose, were not to be despised, where men are destitute of spiritual
Light and supernatural Revelation. Neither did the Wisdom or Reason of Man ever
arise unto any thing more useful in this World, than to discover any rational
Considerations that might allay the Sorrows, or relieve the minds of them that
are disconsolate. For things that are really grievous unto the Generality of
Mankind, do outweigh all the real Satisfaction which this Life and World can
afford. And to place either Satisfaction or Relief in the pursuit of sensual
Lusts, is brutish. But yet what did all the Spring and Well-Heads of Rational
and Philosophical Consolation rise unto? what Refreshment did their Streams
afford? The utmost they attained unto, was but to confirm and make obstinate
the Minds of men, in a Fancy, an Opinion, or Persuasion contrary unto what they
felt and had Experience of. For what they contended for, was but this, that the
Consideration of the common Lot of Mankind, the unavoidableness of grieving
accidents, the shortness of humane Life, the true Exercise of Reason upon more
noble Objects, with others of the like nature, should satisfy men that the
things which they endured were not evil or grievous. But what does all this
amount unto in comparison of this Privilege of Believers, of this Provision
made for them in all their Disconsolations, by him in whom they do believe.
This is a Relief that never entered into the Heart of man to think of or
conceive. Nor can it be understood by any but those by whom it is enjoyed. For
the World, as our Savior testifies, neither knows this Spirit nor can
receive him. And therefore what is spoken of him and this Work of his is looked
on as a Fancy or the Shadow of a Dream. And although the Sun of Righteousness
be risen in this matter, and shine on all that dwell in the Land of Goshen, yet
those that abide still in Egypt make use only of their Lanthorns. But those who
are really Partakers of this Privilege, do know in some measure, what they do
enjoy, although they are not able to comprehend it in its Excellency, nor value
it in a due manner: For how can the Heart of Man, or our poor, weak
Understandings fully conceive this glorious Mystery of sending the Holy Ghost
to be our Comforter; Only they receive it by Faith, and have Experience of it
in its Effects. There is in my Judgment an unspeakable Privilege of those who
are Believers antecedent unto their believing as they are Elect; namely that
Christ dyed in their stead alone. But this is like the Wells which Isaac's
Servant dug, that the Philistines strove about, as those which belonged unto
them, which though fresh useful Springs in themselves, caused them to be
called Esek and Sitna. Mighty strivings there are to break down the Enclosure
of this Privilege, and lay it common unto all the World, that is indeed Waste
and useless. For it is contended, that the Lord Christ dyed equally for all and
every one of Mankind, for Believers and Unbelievers, for those that are saved
and those that are damned. And to this purpose many pretenses are pleaded to
show how the most of them for whom Christ dyed, have no real Benefit by his
Death, nor is any thing required in them to evidence that they have an Interest
therein. But this Privilege we now treat of, is like the Well Rehoboth, Isaac
kept it unto himself, and the Philistines strove not about it. None contend
that the Spirit is a Comforter unto any but Believers: Therefore is it by the
World despised and reproached, because they have no Interest in it, nor have
the least Pretense to strive about it. Did Believers therefore duly consider
how they are advanced hereby through the Love and Care of Jesus Christ into an
inexpressible Dignity above the residue of Mankind, they would more rejoice in
it than in all that this World can supply them withal. But we must proceed.

It appears from what has been discoursed, that this is not the first saving
Work of the Holy Spirit on the Souls of Men. Regeneration and habitual
Sanctification do always precede it. He comfort none but those whom he has
before sanctified. Nor are any other but such capable of his Consolations.
There is nothing in them that can discern his acting, or value what he does of
this kind. And this is the true Reason why the whole Work of the Holy Spirit as
a Comforter, wherein consists the Accomplishment of the most glorious Promise
that ever Christ made to his Church, and the greatest Evidence of his continued
Care thereof, is so neglected, yea despised amongst the generality of professed
Christians. A great Evidence of the apostatized State of Christianity. They can
have no concern in any Work of his but in its proper Order. If men be not first
sanctified by him, they can never be comforted by him. And they will themselves
prefer in their Troubles any natural or rational Reliefs, before the best and
highest of his Consolations. For however they may be proposed unto them,
however they may be instructed in the Nature, Ways and Means of them, yet they
belong not unto them, and why should they value that which is not theirs? The
World cannot receive him. He works on the World for Conviction, Joh. 16. 8.
and on the Elect for Conversion, Joh. 3. 8. But none can receive him as a
Comforter, but Believers. Therefore is this whole Work of the Holy Spirit
little taken notice of by the most, and despised by many. Yet is it never the
less glorious in it self, being fully declared in the Scripture, nor the less
useful to the Church, being testified unto by the Experience of them that
truly believe.

THAT which remains for the full Declaration of this Office and Work of the
Holy Ghost, is the Consideration of those Acts of his which belong properly
thereunto, and of those Privileges whereof Believers are made Partakers
thereby. And whereas many blessed Mysteries of Evangelical Truth are contained
herein, they would require much Time and Diligence in their Explanation. But as
to the most of them, according unto the Measure of Light and Experience which I
have attained, I have prevented my self the handling of them in this place. For
I have spoken already unto most of them in two other Discourses, the one
concerning the Perseverance of True Believers, and the other of our Communion
with God, and of the Holy Spirit in particular. As therefore I shall be sparing
in the Repetition of what is already in them proposed unto public View, so it
is not much that I shall add thereunto. Yet what is necessary unto our present
Design, must not be wholly omitted, especially seeing I find that further Light
and Evidence may be added unto our former Endeavors in this kind.

CHAP. IV. Inhabitation of the Spirit, the first thing promised.
THE first thing which the Comforter is promised for unto Believers, is, that
he should dwell in them, which is their great Fundamental Privilege, and
whereon all other do depend. This therefore must in the first place be enquired
into.

THE Inhabitation of the Spirit in Believers is among those things which we
ought, as to the Nature or Being of it, firmly to believe; but as to the Manner
of it cannot fully conceive. Nor can this be the least Impeachment of it is
Truth unto any who assent unto the Gospel, wherein we have sundry things
proposed as Objects of our Faith, which our Reason cannot comprehend. We shall
therefore assert no more in this matter, but what the Scripture directly and
expressly goes before us in. And where we have the express Letter of the
Scripture for our Warrant, we are eternally safe, whilst we affix no Sense
thereunto that is absolutely repugnant unto Reason, or contrary unto more plain
Testimonies in other places. Wherefore to make plain what we intend herein, the
ensuing Observations must be premised.

FIRST, This Personal Inhabitation of the Holy Spirit in Believers, is distinct
and different from his Essential Omnipresence, whereby he is in all things.
Omnipresence is Essential; Inhabitation is Personal. Omnipresence is a
necessary Property of his Nature, and so not of him as a distinct Person in the
Trinity, but as God essentially, one and the same in Being and Substance with
the Father and the Son. To be every where, to fill all things, to be present
with them, or indistant from them, always equally existing in the Power of an
Infinite Being, is an inseparable Property of the Divine Nature as such. But
this Inhabitation is Personal, or what belongs unto him distinctly as the Holy
Ghost. Besides it is voluntary, and that which might not have been, whence it
is the Subject of a Free Promise of God, and wholly depends on a Free Act of
the Will of the Holy Spirit himself.

SECONDLY, It is not a Presence by Virtue of a Metonymical Denomination, or an
Expression of the Cause for the Effect, that is intended. The meaning of this
Promise, The Spirit shall dwell in you, is not, He shall work graciously in
you; for this he can without any especial Presence. Being essentially every
where, he can work where and how he pleases, without any especial Presence.
But it is the Spirit himself that is promised, and his Presence in an especial
manner, and an especial manner of that Presence; he shall be in you, and dwell
in you, as we shall see. The only Enquiry in this matter is, whether the Holy
Spirit himself be promised unto Believers, or only his Grace, which we shall
immediately enquire into.

THIRDLY, The dwelling of the Person of the Holy Spirit in the Persons of
Believers, of what Nature soever it be, does not effect a Personal Union
between them. That which we call a Personal Union, is the Union of Diverse
Natures in the same Person, and there can be but one Person by Virtue of this
Union. Such is the Hypostatical Union in the Person of the Son of God. It was
our Nature he assumed, and not the Person of any. And it was impossible he
should so assume any more but in one Individual Instance: For if he could have
assumed another Individual Being of our Nature, then it must differ personally
from that which he did assume. For there is nothing that differs one Man from
another, but a distinct Personal Subsistence of each. And it implies the
highest Contradiction, that the Son of God could be Hypostatically united unto
more than one: For if they are more than one, they must be more Persons than
one: And many Persons cannot be Hypostatically united, for that is to be one
Person and no more. There may be a manifold Union, Mystical and Moral, or
diverse, of many Persons, but a Personal Union there cannot be of any thing but
of distinct Natures. And as the Son of God could not assume many Persons, so
supposing that Humane Nature which he did unite to himself to have been a
Person, that is, to have had a distinct Subsistence of it is own Antecedent unto
it is Union, and there could have been no Personal Union between it and the Son
of God. For the Son of God was a distinct Person; and if the Humane Nature had
been so too, there would have been two Persons still, and so no Personal Union.
Nor can it be said, that although the Humane Nature of Christ was a Person in
it self, yet it ceased so to be upon its Union with the Divine; and so two
Persons were conjoined and compounded into one. For if ever Humane Nature have
in any Instance a personal Subsistence of it is own, it cannot be separated from
it without the Destruction and Annihilation of the Individual. For to suppose
otherwise, is to make it to continue what it was, and not what it was; for it
is what it is, distinct from all other Individuals by Virtue of it is
Personality. Wherefore, upon this Inhabitation of the Spirit, wherein soever it
does consist, there is no Personal Union ensuing between him and Believers, nor
is it possible that any such thing should be. For he and they are distinct
Persons, and must eternally abide so whilst their Natures are distinct. It is
only the Assumption of our Nature into Union with the Son of God, antecedent
unto any individual Personal Subsistence of it is own, that can constitute such
an Union.

FOURTHLY, The Union and Relation that ensues on this Inhabitation of the
Spirit, is not immediate between him and Believers, but between them and Jesus
Christ. For he is sent to dwell in them by Christ, in his Name, as his Spirit,
to supply his Room in Love and Grace toward them, making use of his things in
all his Effects and Operations unto his Glory. Hence, I say, is the Union of
Believers with Christ by the Spirit, and not with the Spirit himself. For this
Holy Spirit dwelling in the Humane Nature of Christ, manifesting and acting
himself in all Fullness therein, as has been declared, being sent by him to
dwell in like manner, and act in a limited Measure in all Believers, there is a
mystical Union thence arising between them, whereof the Spirit is the Bond and
Vital Principle.

ON these Considerations, I say, it is the Person of the Holy Ghost that is
promised unto Believers, and not only the Effects of his Grace and Power, and
his Person it is that always dwells in them. And as this on the one hand is
an Argument of his Infinite Condescension in complying with this Part of his
Office and Work, to be sent by the Father and Son to dwell in Believers, so it
is an evident Demonstration of his Eternal Deity, that the one and self-same
Person should at the same time inhabit so many Thousands of distinct Persons as
are, or were at any time, of Believers in the World; which is Fondness to
imagine concerning any one that is not absolutely infinite. And therefore that
which some oppose as unmeet for him, and beneath his Glory, namely, this his
Inhabitation in the Saints of God, is a most illustrious and incontroulable
Demonstration of his Eternal Glory. For none but he who is absolutely immense
in his Nature and Omnipresence, can be so present with, and indistant from all
Believers in the World; and none but he whose Person by Virtue of his Nature is
infinite, can personally, equally inhabit in them all. An Infinite Nature and
Person is required hereunto. And in the Consideration of the
Incomprehensibility thereof are we to acquiesce as to the Manner of his
Inhabitation, which we cannot conceive.

1. THERE are very many Promises in the Old Testament, that God would thus give
the Holy Spirit in and by Virtue of the New Covenant; as Ezekiel. 36. 27. Isa. 59.
21. Prove. 1. 23. And in every place God calls this promised Spirit, and as
promised, His Spirit, my Spirit; which precisely denotes the Person of the
Spirit himself. It is generally apprehended, I confess, that in these Promises
the Holy Spirit is intended only as unto his gracious Effects and Operations,
but not as to any Personal Inhabitation. And I should not much contend upon
these Promises only, although in some of them his Person as promised be
expressly distinguished from all his gracious Effects: But the Exposition which
is given of them in their Accomplishment under the New Testament, will not
allow us so to judge of them. For,

2. WE are directed to pray for the Holy Spirit, and assured that God will give
him unto them that ask him of him in a due manner, Heb. 11. 13. If these Words
must be expounded metonymically and not properly, it must be because either,
(1) They agree not in the Letter with other Testimonies of Scripture. Or, (2)
Contain some Sense absurd and unreasonable. Or, (3) That which is contrary unto
the Experience of them that believe. The first cannot be said, for other
Testimonies innumerable concur with it. Nor the Second, as we shall show. And
for the Third, it is that whose contrary we prove. What is it that Believers
intend in that Request? I suppose, I may say, that there is no one Petition
wherein they are more intense and earnest, nor which they more frequently
insist upon. As David prayed, that God would not take his Holy Spirit from him,
Psalm. 51. So do they, that God would bestow him on them. For this they do, and
ought to do, even after they have received him. His Continuance with them, his
evidencing and manifestation of himself in and to them, are the design of their
continued Supplications for him. Is it merely external Operations of the Spirit
in Grace that they desire herein? Do they not always pray for his ineffable
Presence and Inhabitation? Will any Thoughts of Grace or Mercy relieve or
satisfy them, if once they apprehend that the Holy Spirit is not in them, or
does not dwell with them? Although they are not able to form any Conceptions in
their Minds of the manner of his Presence and Residence in them, yet is it that
which they pray for, and without the Apprehension whereof by Faith, they can
have neither Peace nor Consolation. The Promise hereof being confined unto
Believers, those that are truly and really so, as we showed before, it is their
Experience whereby its Accomplishment is to be judged; and not the Presumption
of such, by whom both the Spirit himself, and his whole Work is despised.

3. AND this Inhabitation is that which principally our Lord Jesus Christ
directs his Disciples to expect in the Promise of him. He dwells with you,
and shall be in you, John 14. 17. He does so who is the Comforter, the Spirit
of Truth: Or as it is emphatically expressed, Chap. 16. 13. He the Spirit of
Truth. He is promised unto, and he inhabits them that do believe. So it is
expressly affirmed toward all that are Partakers of this Promise. Romans 8. 9. Ye
are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be the Spirit of God dwells in
you. Ver. 11. The Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwells in
you. The Holy Spirit dwells in us, 1 Timothy 3. 14. He that is in us, is greater
than he that is in the World, 1 John 4. 4. And many other express Testimonies
there are unto the same purpose. And whereas the Subject of these Promises and
Propositions is the Holy Ghost himself, the Person of the Holy Ghost, and that
so expressed as not to leave any Pretense for any thing else, and not his
Person to be intended: And whereas nothing is ascribed unto him that is
unreasonable, inconvenient unto him in the Discharge of his Office, or
inconsistent with any of his Divine Perfections, but rather what is every way
suitable unto his Work, and evidently demonstrative of his Divine Nature and
Subsistence: It is both irrational and unsuitable unto the Economy of Divine
Grace to wrest these Expressions unto a lower, meaner, figurative
Signification: And I am persuaded that it is contrary to the Faith of the
Catholic Church of True Believers so to do. For however some of them may not
have exercised their Minds about the manner of the Abode of the Holy Spirit
with the Church, and some of them when they hear of his Personal Indwelling,
wherein they have not been duly instructed, do fear it may be, that indeed that
cannot be, which they cannot comprehend, and that some Evil Consequence may
ensue upon the Admittance of it, although they cannot say what they are: Yet it
is with them all even an Article of Faith, that the Holy Ghost dwells in the
Church, that is, them that truly believe; and herein have they an Apprehension
of such a Personal Presence of his as they cannot conceive. This therefore
being so expressly, so frequently affirmed in the Scripture, and the Comfort of
the Church which depends thereon being singular and eminent, it is unto me an
important Article of Evangelical Truth.

3. ALTHOUGH all the principal Actings of the Holy Spirit in us, and toward us
as a Comforter, do depend on this Head, or flow from this Spring of his
Inhabitation, yet in the Confirmation of it is Truth, I shall here name one or
two, by which it self is evidenced, and it is Benefits unto the Church declared.

(1) THIS is the Spring of his gracious Operations in us. So our Savior
himself declares it. The Water that I shall give unto him, shall be in him a
Well of Water springing up into everlasting Life, John 4. 14. The Water here
promised is the Holy Spirit, called the Gift of God, Ver. 10. This is evident
from that parallel place, John 7. 38, 39. where this Living Water is plainly
declared to be the Holy Ghost. And this Water which is given unto any, is to be
in him, and there to abide, which is but a Metaphorical Expression of the
Inhabitation of the Spirit. For it is to be in him as a Well, as a Living
Fountain, which cannot be spoke of any gracious Habit whatever. No Quality in
our Minds can be a Spring of Living Water. Besides, all gracious Habits are
Effects of the Operation of the Holy Spirit, and therefore they are not the
Well it self, but belong unto the springing of it up in Living Waters. So is
the Spirit in his Indwelling distinguished from all his Evangelical Operations
of Grace, as the Well is distinct from the Streams that flow from it. And as it
is natural and easy for a Spring of Living Waters to bubble up, and put forth
refreshing Streams; so it belongs unto the Consolation of Believers, to know
how easy it is unto the Holy Spirit, how ready he is on the account of his
gracious Inhabitation, to carry on and perfect the Work of Grace, Holiness and
Sanctification in them. And what Instruction they may take for their own
Deportment toward him, may be afterward spoken unto. So in many other places
is his Presence with us (which we have proved to be by the way of gracious
Inhabitation) proposed as the Cause and Spring of all his gracious Operations,
and so distinct from them. So the Holy Ghost that is given us, Sheds abroad the
Love of God in our Hearts, Romans 5. 5. The Spirit of God that dwells in us,
shall quicken our mortal Bodies, Romans 8. 12. He bears Witness with our
Spirits that we are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 16. Which places have been
elsewhere explained and vindicated.

(2) THIS is the hidden Spring and Cause of that inexpressible Distance and
Difference that is between Believers and the rest of the World. Our Apostle
tells us, that the Life of Believers is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. A
blessed Life they have whilst they are here, dead to the World, and as dead in
the World. A Life that will issue in eternal Glory: But no such thing appears,
no Luster of it is cast abroad into the Eyes of Men: True, says the Apostle,
for it is hid with Christ in God. It is so both in its Causes, Nature,
Operations and Means of Preservation. But by this hidden Life it is that they
are differenced from the perishing World. And it will not be denied, as I
suppose, that this Difference is real and great: For those who believe, do
enjoy the especial Love and Favor of God; whereas those who do not, are under
the Curse, and the Wrath of God abides on them. They are alive unto God, but
these are dead in Trespasses and Sins. And if Men will not believe that there
is so inexpressible a difference between them in this World, they will be
forced to confess it at the last Day, when the Decretory Sentences of Come ye
Blessed, and Go ye Cursed, shall be openly denounced. But for the most part
there is no Visible Cause in the Eyes of the World of this inexpressible and
eternal Difference between these two sorts of Persons. For besides that for the
most part the World does judge amiss of all that Believers are and do, and do
rather, through an inbred Enmity, working by wicked and foolish Surmizes,
suppose them to be the worst, rather than absolutely the best of Men: There is
not for the most part such a visible, manifest difference in outward Actions
and Duties, on which alone a Judgment may be passed in Man's Day, as to be a
just Foundation of believing so unspeakable Difference between their Persons as
is spoken of. There is a difference in their Works, which indeed ought to be
far greater than it is; and so a greater Testimony given to the Righteousness
of God, 1 John 3. 12. There is yet a greater difference in internal, habitual
Grace, whereby the Minds of Believers are transformed initially into the Image
of God, Tit. 1. 15. But these things will not bear the Weight of this
inconceivable Distance. Principally therefore it depends hereon, namely, the
Inhabitation of the Spirit in them that believe. The great difference between
the two Houses that Solomon built, was, that God dwelt in the one, and he
himself in the other. Though any two Houses as unto their outward Fabric make
the same Appearance, yet if the King dwell in the one, and a Robber in the
other, the one may be a Palace, and the other a Den. It is this Inhabitation
of the Spirit whereon all the Privileges of Believers do immediately depend,
and all the Advantages which they have above the Men of the World. And the
difference which is made hereby, or ensues hereon, is so inconceivably great,
as a sufficient Reason may thence be given of all the excellent things which
are spoken of them who are Partakers of it.

CHAP. V. Particular Actings of the Holy Spirit as a Comforter. How he is an
Unction.
THE especial Actings of the Holy Spirit toward Believers as their Comforter,
with the Privileges and Advantages which by them they are made Partakers of,
have been severally spoken unto by many; and I have also in other Discourses
had occasion to treat concerning some of them. I shall therefore be the more
brief in the present Discourses of them, and waving things commonly known and
received, shall endeavor to state right Conceptions of them, and to add
further Light unto what has been already received.

THE first of this sort which we shall mention, because, as I think, the first
in Order of Nature, is the Unction, or Anointing which Believers have by him.
So are they said to be anointed, 2 Cor. 1. 21. and 1 John 2. 20. Ye have (...),
an Unction, an Unguent from the Holy One, Ver. 27. The Anointing which you have
received abides in you. And the same Anointing teaches you of all things.
What this (...) is which we do receive, and wherein this Anointing does
consist, we must in the first place enquire. For a distinct Comprehension and
Knowledge of that which is so great a Privilege, and of so much use unto us,
is our Duty and Advantage. It is so the more, because by the most these things
are neglected. That is an empty Sound unto them, which has in its self the
Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ. Some things there are which
pretend unto this Unction, or which some would have it to consist in, that we
must remove out of our way to render the Truth more evident.

SOME think that by this Unction, the Doctrine of the Gospel, or the Truth it
self is intended. This Episcopius pleads for in his Exposition of the place.
That Doctrine of the Gospel which they had received, was that which would
preserve them from the Seducers, which in that place of the Apostle, 1 John 2.
20. Believers are warned to beware of. But neither the Context nor the Text
will admit of this Interpretation. For, (1) The thing it self in Question, was,
the Doctrine of the Gospel. This the Seducers pretended to be on their side,
which the Apostle denies. Now although the Doctrine it self was that whereby
this Difference was to be determined; yet is not the Doctrine it self, but the
Advantage they had for the right Understanding of it, that which is proposed
for their Relief and Comfort. (2) This Unction is said to abide in them who
have received it, whereas we are said to abide in the Doctrine or the Truth,
and not that in us properly. (3) This Unction is said to teach us all things;
but the Doctrine of the Truth is that which we are taught, and there must be a
difference between that which teaches, and that which is taught thereby. (4)
Whereas in all other places of the Scripture, either the Holy Ghost himself, or
some especial Operation of his, is hereby intended, there is no Reason nor
Pretense of any to be taken from the Words or Context, why another
Signification should be here imposed on that Expression. (5) For the Reason
which he adds, that there is no mention in any other place of Scripture of any
peculiar, internal Act or Work toward any Persons, in their teaching or
reception of the Truth, it is so extremely remote from the Truth, and is so
directly opposite unto express Testimonies almost innumerable, that I wonder
how any Man could be so forgetful as to affirm it. Let the Reader satisfy
himself in what has been discoursed on the Head of Spiritual Illumination.

SECONDLY, The Testimony given by the Holy Ghost unto the Truth of the Gospel
imparted unto them, is the Exposition of this Unction in the Paraphrase of
another. This Testimony was by his miraculous Operations, at his first Effusion
on the Apostles. But neither can this be the Mind of the Holy Ghost herein: For
this Unction which Believers had, is the same with their being anointed of God,
2 Cor. 1. 21. And that was a Privilege whereof they were all personally made
Partakers. So also is that which is here mentioned, namely, that which was in
them, which abode with them, and taught them. Neither is this a tolerable
Exposition of these Words, You have an Unction from the Holy One, abiding in
you, teaching of you; that is, you have heard of the miraculous Operations of
the Holy Ghost in the Confirmation of the Gospel, giving Testimony unto the
Truth.

THIRDLY, It is to no purpose to examine the Pretenses of some of the
Romanists, that respect is had herein to the Chrysme or Unguent that they use
in Baptism, Confirmation, and in their sictitious Sacraments of Order and
Extreme Unction. For besides that all their Unctions are Inventions of their
own, no Institution of Christ, nor of any Efficacy unto the Ends for which this
Unction is granted unto Believers, the more sober of their Expositors take no
notice of them on this occasion. Those who would know what respect they have
thereunto, may find it in the Commentaries of A-Lapide on this place.

THESE Apprehensions being removed, as no way suiting the Mind of the Holy
Ghost, nor expressing the Privilege intended, nor the Advantage which we have
thereby, we shall follow the Conduct of the Scripture in the Investigation of
the true Nature of it. And to this end we may observe,

1. THAT all Persons and Things that were Dedicated or Consecrated unto God
under the Old Testament, were anointed with Material Oil: So were the Kings of
the People of God, so were Priests and Prophets: In like manner the Sanctuary,
the Altar, and all the Holy Utensils of Divine Worship were Anointed. And it is
confessed that among all the rest of Mosaical Institutions, those also
concerning Unction were Typical and Figurative of what was to come.

2. THAT all these Types had their first, proper and full Signification and
Accomplishment in the Person of Jesus Christ. And because every Person and
thing that was made holy to God, was so anointed, he who was to be the most
Holy, the only Spring and Cause of Holiness in and unto others, had his Name
and Denomination from thence. Both Messiah in the Old Testament, and Christ in
the New, are as much as the Anointed One. For he was not only in his Person
typified in the anointed Kings, Priests and Prophets, but also in his Mediation
by the Tabernacle, Sanctuary, Altar and Temple. Hence his Unction is expressed
in those Words, (...), Dan. 9. 24. To anoint the Holy of Holies, who was
prefigured by all the holy anointed Ones before. This became his Name as he was
the Hope of the Church under the Old Testament, The Messiah; and the immediate
Object of the Faith of the Saints under the New, The Christ. Here therefore in
the first place, we must enquire into the Nature of this Unction; that of
Believers being an Emanation from thence, and to be interpreted by Analogy
thereunto. For (as it is usually expressed by way of Allusion) it is as they
Oil, which being poured on the Head of Aaron, went down to the Skirts of his
Garments.

3. THAT the Lord Christ was anointed and how, is declared, Isa. 61. 1. The
Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me. His
Unction consisted principally in the Communication of the Spirit unto him. For
he proves that the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, because he was anointed.
And this gives us a general Rule, that the anointing with material Oil under
the Old Testament, did presigure and represent the Effusion of the Spirit under
the New, which now answers all the Ends of those Typical Institutions. Hence
the Gospel in opposition unto them all in the Letter, outwardly, visibly, and
materially is called the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8. So is the
Unction of Christ expressed, Isa. 11. 2. The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might,
the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of the Lord.

4. WHEREAS the Unction of Christ did consist in the full Communication of the
Spirit unto him not by Measure in all his Graces and Gifts, needful unto his
Humane Nature or his Work, though it be essentially one entire Work, yet was it
carried on by several Degrees and Distinctions of Time. For, (1) He was
anointed by the Spirit in his Incarnation in the Womb, Luke 1. 35. the Nature
of which Work we have at large before explained. (2) He was so at his Baptism,
and Entrance into his Public Ministry, when he was anointed to Preach the
Gospel, as Isa. 61. 1. And the Holy Ghost descended on him in the shape of a
Dove, Matthew. 3. 17. The first part of his Unction more peculiarly respected a
Fullness of the Grace, the latter of the Gifts of the Spirit. (3) He was
peculiarly anointed unto his Death and Sacrifice, in that Divine Act of his,
whereby he sanctified himself thereunto, John 17. 19. which has also been
before declared. (4.) He was at his Ascension when he received of the Father
the Promise of the Spirit, pouring him forth on his Disciples; Acts 2. 23. And
in this latter instance he was anointed with the Oil of Gladness, which
includes his glorious Exaltation also. For this was absolutely peculiar unto
him, whence he is said to be so anointed above his Fellows. For although in
some other parts of this anointing, he has them who partake of them by and
from him in their Measure, yet in this of receiving the Spirit with a Power of
Communicating him unto others, herein he is singular, nor was ever any other
Person sharer with him therein in the least degree. See the Exposition on Heb.
1. 8, 9. Now although there be an inconceivable difference and distance between
the Unction of Christ and that of Believers, yet is his the only Rule of the
Interpretation of theirs, as to the kind thereof. And,

5. BELIEVERS have their Unction immediately from Christ. So is it in the Text;
You have an Unction from the Holy One. So is He called, Acts 3. 14. Rev. 3. 7.
These things says He that is Holy. He Himself was anointed as the most Holy,
Dan. 9. 24. And it is his Spirit which Believers do receive, Ephesians. 3. 16. Phil.
1. 19. It is said, That he who anointeth us is God, 2 Cor. 1. 21. And I do take
God there Personally for the Father, as the same Name is in the verse
foregoing. For all the Promises of God in him, that is, in Christ, are yea, and
in Him Amen. Wherefore the Father is the Original, Supreme Cause of our
Anointing, but the Lord Christ, the Holy One is the immediate Efficient Cause
thereof. This Himself expresses when he affirms that he will send the Spirit
from the Father. The Supreme Donation is from the Father; the immediate
Collation from the Son.

6. IT is therefore manifest, that the anointing of Believers consists in the
Communication of the Holy Spirit unto them from and by Jesus Christ. It is not
the Spirit that does anoint us, but he is the Unction wherewith we are anointed
by the Holy One. This the Analogy unto the Unction of Christ makes undeniable;
for as he was anointed, so are they in the same kind of Unction, though in a
degree inferior unto him. For they have nothing but a Measure and Portion from
his Fullness as he pleases, Ephesians. 4. 7. Our Unction therefore is the
Communication of the Holy Spirit, and nothing else. He is that Unction which is
given unto us, and abides with us. But this Communication of the Spirit is
general and respects all his Operations. It does not yet appear wherein the
especial Nature of it does consist, and whence this Communication of him is
thus expressed, by an Unction. And this can be no otherwise learned but from
the Effects ascribed unto him as he is an Unction, and the Relation with the
Resemblance that is therein, unto the Unction of Christ. It is therefore some
particular Grace and Privilege which is intended in this Unction, 2 Cor. 1.
21. It is mentioned only neutrally, without the Ascription of any Effects unto
it, so that therein we cannot learn its especial Nature. But there are two
Effects elsewhere ascribed unto it, The first is Teaching with a saving,
permanent knowledge of the Truth thereby produced in our Minds. This is fully
expressed, 1 John 2. 20, 27. You have an Unction from the Holy One, aend you
know all things; that is, all those things of the Fundamental, Essential Truths
of the Gospel, all you need to know that you may obey God truly, and be saved
infallibly. This you have by this Unction. For this anointing which you have
received abides in you, and teaches you all things. And we may observe, that
it is spoken of in an especial manner with respect unto our Permanency and
Establishment in the Truth, against prevalent Seducers and Seductions; so it is
joined with establishing in that other Place, 2 Cor. 1. 21.

WHEREFORE, in the first Place this anointing with the Holy Ghost, is the
Communication of him unto us with respect unto that gracious Work of his in the
Spiritual, saving Illumination of our Minds, teaching us to know the Truth, and
to adhere firmly unto it in Love and Obedience. This is that which is
peculiarly ascribed unto it; and we have no way to know the Nature of it, but
by its Effects.

THE Anointing then of Believers with the Spirit consists in the Collation of
him upon them, to this End; that he may graciously instruct them in the Truths
of the Gospel, by the saving Illumination of their Minds, causing their Souls
firmly to cleave unto them with Joy and Delight, and transforming them in the
whole inward Man into the Image and Likeness of it. Hence it is called the
anointing of our Eyes with Eye Salve that we may see, Rev. 3. 18. So does it
answer that Unction of the Lord Christ with the Spirit, which made him quick of
Understanding in the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. 3. Let these things therefore
be fixed in the first place; namely that the (...), the Unction which Believers
receive from the Holy One, is the Spirit himself; and that his first peculiar,
especial Effect as an Unction, is his teaching of us the Truths and Mysteries
of the Gospel by saving Illumination in the manner before described.

HEREUNTO also is referred what is said of Believers being made Kings and
Priests. Rev. 1. 5. For there is an Allusion therein unto the Anointing of
those sorts of Persons under the Old Testament. Whatever was Typical therein
was fully accomplished in the Unction of Christ unto his Office, wherein he was
the Sovereign King, Priest and Prophet of the Church. Wherefore by a
Participation in his Unction, they are said to be made Kings and Priests; or a
Royal Priesthood, as it is, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and this participation of his Unction
consists in the Communication of the same Spirit unto them wherewith he was
anointed. Whereas therefore these Titles denote the Dignity of Believers in
their especial Relation unto God, by this Unction they are peculiarly dedicated
and consecrated unto him.

IT is manifest therefore, first, that this Unction we receive from the Holy
One, is the Holy Spirit, which he has promised unto all that believe in him;
and then that we have these two things by Virtue thereof, (1.) Spiritual
Instruction by Saving Illumination in the Mind of God, and the Mysteries of the
Gospel; (2.) An especial Dedication unto God, in the way of a Spiritual
Privilege.

WHAT remains, is to enquire, (1.) What Benefit or Advantage we have by this
Unction: (2.) How this belongs unto our Consolation, seeing the Holy Spirit is
thus bestowed on us, as he is promised to be the Comforter of the Church.

AS unto the first Head, it is hereon that our stability in Believing does
depend. For it is pleaded unto this purpose in a peculiar manner by the
Apostle, 1 John 2. 20, 27. It was the Unction from the Holy One, which then
kept Believers from being carried from the Faith by the Craft of Seducers.
Hereby he makes Men according unto their measure of quick Understanding in the
fear of the Lord. Nor will any thing else give Assurance in this Case.
Temptations may come as a Storm or Tempest, which will quickly drive Men from
their greatest fleshly Confidences. Hence oftentimes those who are forwardest
to say, Though all Men should forsake the Truth, yet would not they so do; are
the forwardest upon Trials so to do. Neither will Men's Skill, Cunning or
Disputing Abilities secure them from being at one time or other inveigled with
fair Pretenses, or entangled with the cunning sleights of them who lie in wait
to deceive. Nor will the best defenses of Flesh and Blood, stand firmly and
unshaken against powerful Allurements on the one hand, and fierce Persecutions
on the other, the present Artillery of the Patrons and Promoters of Apostasy.
None of these things does the Apostle prescribe or recommend unto Believers, as
an effectual means of their Preservation, when a Trial of their stability in
the Truth shall befall them. But this Unction he assures them will not fail,
neither shall they fail because of it.

AND to this End we may consider, (1.) The Nature of the Teaching which we have
by this Anointing; The Anointing teaches you. It is not merely an External,
Doctrinal Instruction, but an Internal, Effectual Operation of the Holy Ghost
Herein does God give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
knowledge of him, that the Eyes of our Understanding being enlightened, we may
know what is the hope of his Calling; Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. He makes use indeed of
the Outward Means of Instruction by the Word, and teaches nothing but what is
revealed therein. But he gives us an Understanding that we may know him that is
true, and opens our Eyes that we may clearly and spiritually see the wondrous
things that are in his Law. And there are no Teachings like unto his. None so
abiding, none so effectual. When Spiritual things through this anointing are
discovered in a Spiritual manner, then do they take up an immovable Possession
in the Minds of Men. As God will destroy every oppressing yoke because of the
anointing of Christ, Isa. 10. 27. so will he break every Snare of Seduction by
the anointing of Christians. So it is promised that under the Gospel, Wisdom
and Knowledge shall be the stability of the Times, Isa. 33. 6. Nothing will
give stability in all Seasons, but the Wisdom and Knowledge which are the
Effects of this Teaching, when God gives us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation
in the knowledge of him.

(2.) WHAT it is that it teaches; and that is all things; The same anointing
teaches you all things. So was the Promise that he should teach us all things,
and bring all things to our Remembrance that Christ has said unto us, John 14.
26. and guide us into all Truth; Chap. 16. 13. It is not all things absolutely
that is intended, for they are restrained unto those of one certain kind, even
the things which Christ had spoken, that is, such as belonged unto the Kingdom
of God. Neither are they all of them absolutely intended, especially as to the
Degrees of the Knowledge of them. For in this Life we know but in part, and see
all things darkly as in a Glass. But it is all things and all Truth with
respect unto the End of this Promise and Teaching. In the Promise the whole
Life of Faith with Joy and Consolation thereon, is the End designed. All things
necessary thereunto, this Unction teaches us. And in the other place of the
Apostle, it respects the great Fundamental Truths of the Gospel which the
Seducers opposed, from whose Seduction this Unction does secure Believers.
Wherefore it teaches all that are made partakers of it, all that Truth, all
those things, all that Christ has spoken that are necessary unto these Ends
that they may live unto God in the Consolation of Faith, and be delivered from
all Attempts to draw them into Error.

THE Degrees of this Knowledge which are exceeding various, both with respect
unto the clearness and evidence of Conception, and the extent of the things
known, depend on the various Measures whereby the Spirit acts according unto
his own Will, and the different use of the external Means of Knowledge which we
do enjoy. But what is necessary unto the Ends mentioned, none shall come short
of who enjoy this anointing. And where its Teachings are complied withal in a
way of Duty, where we obstruct them not by Prejudices and Sloth, where we give
up our selves unto their directive Efficacy in a diligent, impartial Attendance
unto the Word whereby alone we are to be taught, we shall not fail of that
knowledge in the whole Counsel of God, and all the Parts of it, which he will
accept and bless. And this gives stability unto Believers, when Trials and
Temptations about the Truth do befall them; and the want hereof in the uncured
Darkness of their Minds, and Ignorance of the Doctrine of the Gospel, is that
which betrays Multitudes into a defection from it in Seasons of Temptation and
Persecution.

(3.) It so teaches as to give withal an Approbation of and Love unto the
things that are taught. These are the next Principle and Cause of Practice, or
the doing of the things that we know, which is the only Cement of all the Means
of our security rendering them firm and stable. The Mind may discern Spiritual
Truths, but if the Will and Affections be not wrought over to love them and
delight in them, we shall never conform our selves unto them in the diligent
exercise and practice of what they do require. And what we may do on the
solitary Efficacy of Light and Conviction without the adherence of Love and
Delight, will neither be acceptable unto God, nor shall we be permanent and
stable therein. All other means in the World without the Love and Practice of
the Truth, will be insufficient unto our Preservation in the Saving Profession
of it. And this is the Characteristical Note of the Teachings by this Unction.
It gives and communicates with it, the Love of that Truth wherein we are
instructed, and delight in Obedience unto what it does require. Where these are
not, however raised our Minds may be, or our Understandings enlarged in the
apprehension of Objective Truths, whatever sublime Notions or subtle
Conceptions about them we may have, though we could master and manage all the
Speculations and Niceties of the Schools in their most pretended accuracy of
Expression, yet as to the Power and Benefit of Religion, we should be but as
sounding Brass and tinckling Symbals. But when this Holy Spirit does in and by
his Teaching breathe into our Hearts an Holy, Divine Love unto, and Complacency
in the things we are taught, when he enables us to taste how gracious the Lord
is in them, rendering them sweeter unto us than the Honey or the Honeycomb,
when he makes them our Delight and Joy, exciting and quickening the practical
Principles of our Minds unto a compliance with them in holy Obedience, then
have we that Unction from the Holy One which will both sanctify and secure our
Souls unto the End.

And hereby may we know, whether we have our selves received of this anointing.
Some would fain put it off unto what was peculiar unto the Times of the
Apostles, and would suppose another kind of Believers in those days, than any
are now in the World, or need to be; though what our Savior prayed for them,
even for the Apostles themselves as to the Spirit of Grace and Consolation, he
prayed also for all them who should believe on him through their Word unto the
End of the World. But take away the Promise of the Spirit, and the Privileges
thereon depending, from Christians, and in truth they cease so to be. Some
neglect it, as if it were an empty Expression, and either wholly insignificant,
or at best intended somewhat wherein they need not much concern themselves; and
whatever it be, they doubt not but to secure the pretended Ends of it in their
Preservation from Seduction by their own Skill and Resolutions. On such
Pretenses are all the Mysteries of the Gospel by many despised, and a Religion
is formed wherein the Spirit of Christ has no Concernment. But these things
are otherwise stated in the Minds of the true Disciples of Christ. They know
and own of how great Importance it is to have a share in this Unction; how much
their Conformity unto Christ, their Participation of him, and the Evidence of
their Union with him; how much their Stability in Profession, their Joy in
believing, their Love and Delight in Obedience, with their Dignity in the sight
of God and all his Holy Angels, do depend thereon. Neither do we look upon it
as a thing obscure or unintelligible, that which no Man can know whether he
has or no. For if it were so, a thing so thin, aerial and imperceptible, as
that no Spiritual Sense or Experience could be had of it, the Apostle would not
have referred all sorts and degrees of Believers, Fathers, Young Men, and
little Children unto it for their Relief and Encouragement in the times of
Danger. Wherefore it evidenceth it self in the way and manner of its Acting,
Operation and Teaching before declared. And as by those Instances they satisfy
themselves as unto what Experience they have of it; so it is their Duty to pray
continually for it is Increase, and further Manifestation of it is Power in them:
Yea, it is their Duty to labor that their Prayers for it may be both fervent
and effectual. For the more express and eminent the Teachings of this Anointing
in them are, the more fresh and plentiful is their Unction, the more will their
Holiness and Consolation abound.

AND whereas this is that by which, as it immediately proceeds from the Holy
Spirit, they have their peculiar Dedication unto God, being made Kings and
Priests unto him, they are highly concerned to secure their Interest therein.
For it may be they are so far from being exalted, promoted and dignified in the
World by their Profession, as that they are made thereby the Scorn of Men, and
the Outcasts of the People. Those indeed whose Kingdom and Priesthood, their
Dignity and Honor in Christianity, their Approximation unto God and Christ in
a peculiar manner, consist in Secular Titles, Honor, Power and Grandeur, as it
is in the Papacy, may content themselves with their Chrysme, or greasy Unction
of their outward, Ceremonious Consecration, without much Enquiry after, or
Concern in this Spiritual Anointing. But those who get little or nothing in
this World, that is, of the World, by their Profession, but Labor, Pain,
Travail of Soul and Body, with Scorns, Reproaches and Persecutions, had need
look after that which gives them a Dignity and Honor in the sight of God, and
which brings in Satisfaction and Peace unto their own Souls: And this is done
by that Anointing alone whereby they are made Kings and Priests unto God,
having Honor before him, and a free, sacred Access unto him.

I shall only add, that whereas we ascribe this Anointing in a pecnliar manner
unto the Holy Ghost as the Comforter of the Church, we may easily discern
wherein the Consolation which we receive by it, does consist. For who can
express that Satisfaction, Refreshment and Joy which the Mind is possessed
with, in those Spiritual, effectual Teachings which give it a clear
Apprehension of Saving Truth in its own Nature and Beauty, and enlarge the
Heart with Love unto it, and Delight in it. It is true, that the greatest part
of Believers are oft-times either at such a Loss as unto a clear Apprehension
of their own Spiritual State, or so unskilled in making a right Judgment of the
Causes and Means of Divine Consolations, or so confused in their own
Experiences, or so negligent in their Enquiries into these things; or are so
disordered by Temptations, as that they receive not a refreshing Sense of those
Comforts and Joys which are really inseparable from this anointing. But still
it is in it self that Spring from whence their secret Refreshments and
Supportments do arise. And there is none of them but upon Guidance and
Instruction are able to conceive, how their chiefest Joys and Comforts, even
those whereby they are supported in and against all their Troubles, are
resolved into that Spiritual Understanding which they have into the Mysteries
of the Will, Love and Grace of God in Christ, with that ineffable Complacency
and Satisfaction which they find in them, whereby their Wills are engaged into
an unconquerable Constancy in their Choice. And there is no small Consolation
in a due Apprehension of that Spiritual Dignity which ensues hereon. For when
they meet with the greatest Troubles, and the most contemptuous Scorns in this
World, a due Apprehension of their Acceptance with God, as being made Kings and
Priests unto him, yield them a Refreshment which the World knows nothing of,
and which themselves are not able to express.

CHAP. VI. The Spirit a Seal, and How.
SECONDLY, Another Effect of the Holy Spirit as the Comforter of the Church, is
that by him Believers are sealed, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. He who anointed us is God,
who has also sealed us. And how this is done, the same Apostle declares, Ephesians.
1. 13. In whom also after ye believed ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of
Promise. And Chap. 4. 30. And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God whereby ye are
sealed to the Day of Redemption. In the first place, it is expressly said, that
we are sealed with the Spirit, whereby the Spirit himself is expressed as this
Seal, and not any of his especial Operations; as he is also directly said
himself to be the Pledge of our Inheritance. In the latter, the Words are,
(...), in whom, in and by the receiving of whom, ye are sealed. Wherefore no
especial Act of the Spirit, but only an especial Effect of his Communication
unto us, seems to be intended hereby.

THE common Exposition of this Sealing is taken from the Nature and Use of
Sealing among Men. The Sum whereof is this, Sealing may be considered as a
Natural or Moral Action, that is, either with respect unto the Act of it as an
Act, or with respect unto its Use and End. In the first way it is the
Communication of the Character or Image that is on the Seal unto the thing that
is Sealed, or that the Impression of the Seal is set unto. In answer hereunto,
the Sealing of the Spirit should consist in the Communication of his own
Spiritual Nature and Likeness unto the Souls of Believers: So this Sealing
should materially be the same with our Sanctification. The End and Use of
Sealing among Men is twofold. (1) To give Security unto the Performance of
Deeds, Grants, Promises, Testaments and Wills, or the like engaging
Signification of our Minds. And in answer hereunto, we may be said to be Sealed
when the Promises of God are confirmed and established unto our Souls, and we
are secured of them by the Holy Ghost. But the Truth is, this were to Seal the
Promises of God, and not Believers. But it is Persons and not Promises that are
said to be Sealed. (2) It is for the safe-keeping or Preservation of that which
a Seal is set upon. So things precious and highly valuable, are sealed up, that
they may be kept safe and inviolable. So on the other hand, when Job expressed
his Apprehension that God would keep an everlasting Remembrance of his Sin,
that it should not be lost or out of the way, he says, his Transgression was
sealed up in a Bag, Chap. 14. 17. And so it is that Power which the Holy Ghost
puts forth in the Preservation of Believers, which is intended. And in this
respect they are said to be Sealed unto the Day of Redemption.

THESE things have been spoken unto and enlarged on by many, so that there is
no need again to insist upon them. And what is commonly delivered unto this
purpose, is good and useful in the Substance of it, and I have on several
occasions long since my self made use of them. But upon renewed Thoughts and
Consideration I cannot fully acquiesce in them. For, (1) I am not satisfied
that there is such an Allusion herein unto the use of Sealing among Men, as is
pretended. And if there be, it will fall out as we see it has done, that there
being so many Considerations of Seals and Sealing, it will be hard to determine
on any one Particular which is principally intended. And if you take in more,
as the manner of the most is to take in all they can think of, it will be
unavoidable that Acts and Effects of various kinds will be assigned unto the
Holy Ghost under the Term of Sealing, and so we shall never come to know what
is that one determinate Act and Privilege which is intended therein. (2) All
things which are usually assigned as those wherein this Sealing does consist,
are Acts or Effects of the Holy Ghost upon us whereby he Seals us; whereas it
is not said that the Holy Spirit Seals us, but that we are Sealed with him: He
is God's Seal unto us.

ALL our Spiritual Privileges, as they are immediately communicated unto us by
Christ, so they consist wholly in a Participation of that Head, Spring and
Fullness of them which is in him. And as they proceed from our Union with him,
so their principal End is Conformity unto him. And in him in whom all things
are conspicuous, we may learn the Nature of those things, which in lesser
measure, and much Darkness in our selves, we are made Partakers of. So do we
learn our Unction in his. So must we enquire into the Nature of our being
Sealed by the Spirit in his Sealing also. For as it is said, that he who has
sealed us is God, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. so of him it is said emphatically, For him
has God the Father Sealed, Joh. 6. 27. And if we can learn aright how God the
Father sealed Christ, we shall learn how we are sealed in a Participation of
the same Privilege.

I confess there are variety of Apprehensions concerning the Act of God whereby
Christ was sealed, or what it is that is intended thereby. Maldonate on the
Place reckons up Ten several Expositions of the Words among the Fathers, and
yet embraces no one of them. It is not suited unto my Design to examine or
refute the Expositions of others, whereof a large and plain Field does here
open it self unto us. I shall only give an Account of what I conceive to be the
Mind of the Holy Ghost in that Expression. And we may observe,

FIRST, That this is not spoken of Christ with respect unto his Divine Nature.
He is indeed said to be the Character of the Person of the Father in his Divine
Person as the Son, because there are in him, communicated unto him from the
Father, all the Essential Properties of the Divine Nature; as the thing Sealed
receives the Character or Image of the Seal. But this Communication is by
Eternal Generation and not by Sealing. But it is an external, transient Act of
God the Father on the Humane Nature, with respect unto the Discharge of his
Office. For it is given as the Reason why he should be complied withal and
believed in in that Work. Labor for that Bread which the Son of Man shall give
unto you; for him has God the Father Sealed. It is the Ground whereon he
persuades them to Faith and Obedience unto himself.

SECONDLY, It is not spoken of him with an especial respect unto his Kingly
Office, as some conceive. For this Sealing of Christ they would have to be his
Designation of God unto his Kingdom, in opposition unto what is affirmed, Ver.
15. That the People designed to come and make him a King by Force. For that is
only an occasional Expression of the Sense of the People, the principal Subject
treated on, is of a Nobler Nature. But whereas the People did flock after him
on the account of a Temporal Benefit received by him, in that they were fed,
filled and satisfied with the Loaves which he had miraculously increased, Ver.
26. He takes occasion from thence to propose unto them the Spiritual Mercies
that he had to tender unto them. And this he does in answer unto the Bread that
he had eat, under the Name of Meat, and Bread enduring to everlasting Life,
which he would give unto them. Under this Name and Notion of Meat he did
comprize all the Spiritual Nourishment in his Doctrine, Person, Mediation and
Grace that he had prepared for them. But on what Grounds should they look for
these things from him? how might it appear that he was Authorized and enabled
thereunto? In answer unto that Enquiry, he gives this Account of himself, For
him has God the Father Sealed; namely, unto this End.

THIRDLY, Wherefore the Sealing of God unto this End and Purpose, must have two
Properties, and two Ends also annexed unto it. (1) There is in it a
Communication of Authority and Ability. For the Enquiry is, how he could give
them that Meat which endured unto everlasting Life: As afterward they ask
expressly, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? Ver. 52. To this it is
answered, That God the Father had Sealed him; that is, He it was who was
enabled of God the Father to give and dispense the Spiritual Food of the Souls
of Men. This therefore is evidently included in this Sealing. (2) It must have
Evidence in it also; that is, somewhat whereby it may be evinced that he was
thus authorized and enabled by God the Father. For whatever Authority or
Ability any one may have unto any End, none is obliged to make Application unto
him for it, or depend upon him therein, unless it be evidenced that he has
that Authority and Ability. This the Jews immediately enquired after. What Sign
(say they) do thou then, that we may see and believe thee? What do thou
work? Ver. 30. How shall it be demonstrated unto us that thou art authorized
and enabled to give us the Spiritual Food of our Souls? This also belonged unto
his Sealing; for therein there was such an express Representation of Divine
Power communicated unto him, as evidently manifested that he was appointed of
God unto this Work. These two Properties therefore must be found in this
Sealing of the Lord Christ with respect unto the End here mentioned; namely,
that he might be the Promuscondus, or principal Dispenser of the Spiritual Food
of the Souls of Men.

FOURTHLY, It being God's Seal, it must also have two Ends designed in it. (1)
God's owning of him to be his. Him has God the Father Sealed unto this End,
that all may know and take notice of his Owning and Approbation of him. He
would have him not looked on as one among the rest of them that dispensed
Spiritual things, but as him whom he had singled out and peculiarly marked for
himself. And therefore this he publicly and gloriously testified at the
Entrance; and again, a little before the fininishing of his Ministry: For upon
his Baptism there came a Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. which was nothing but a public
Declaration that this was He whom God had Sealed, and so owned in a peculiar
manner. And this Testimony was afterward renewed again at his Transfiguration
in the Mount, Matthew. 17. 5. Behold a Voice out of the Cloud, which said, This
is my Beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, hear ye him: This is he whom I
have Sealed. And this Testimony is pleaded by the Apostle Peter, us that
whereinto their Faith in him as the Sealed One of God, was resolved, 2 Pet. 1.
17, 18. (2) To manifest that God would take Care of him, and preserve him in
his Work unto the End, Isa. 42.

FIFTHLY, Wherefore, this Sealing of the Son is the Communication of the Holy
Spirit in all Fullness unto him, authorizing him unto, and acting his Divine
Power in all the Acts and Duties of his Office, so as to evidence the Presence
of God with him, and Approbation of him, as the only Person that was to
distribute the Spiritual Food of their Souls unto Men. For the Holy Spirit by
his powerful Operations in him and by him, did evince and manifest, that he was
called and appointed of God to this Work, owned by him, and accepted with him,
which was God's Sealing of him. Hence the Sin of them who despised this Seal of
God, was unpardonable. For God neither will nor can give greater Testimony unto
his Approbation of any Person, than by the Great Seal of his Spirit. And this
was given unto Christ in all the Fullness of it. He was declared to be the Son
of God according to the Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1. 4. and justified in the
Spirit, or by his Power evidencing that God was with him, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Thus
did God Seal the Head of the Church with the Holy Spirit; and thence
undoubtedly may we best learn how the Members are sealed with the same Spirit,
seeing we have all our Measures out of his Fullness, and our Conformity unto him
in the design of all gracious Communications unto us.

SIXTHLY; Wherefore, Gods Sealing of Believers with the Holy Spirit, is his
gracious Communication of the Holy Ghost unto them, so to act his Divine Power
in them, as to enable them unto all the Duties of their Holy Calling,
evidencing them to be accepted with him both unto themselves and others, and
asserting their Preservation unto Eternal Salvation. The Effects of this
Sealing are gracious Operations of the Holy Spirit in and upon Believers; but
the Sealing it self is the Communication of the Spirit unto them. They are
Sealed with the Spirit. And farther to evidence the Nature of it with the Truth
of our Declaration of this Privilege, we may observe,

1. THAT when any Persons are so effectually called as to become true
Believers, they are brought into many new Relations, as to God himself, as his
Children, unto Jesus Christ, as his Members, unto all Saints and Angels, in the
Families of God above and below; and are called to many new Works, Duties and
Uses which before they knew nothing of. They are brought into a new World,
erected by the New Creation, and which way soever they look or turn themselves,
they say, Old things are past away, behold all things are become new. So it is
with every one that is made a New Creature in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 5. 17. In
this state and condition wherein a Man has new Principles put within him, new
Relations contracted about him, new Duties presented unto him, and a new
Deportment in all things required of him, How shall he be able to behave
himself aright, and answer the condition and holy station wherein he is placed?
This no Man can do of himself, for who is sufficient for these things?
Wherefore,

2. IN this state God owns them and communicates unto them his Holy Spirit, to
fit them for their Relations, to enable them unto their Duties, to act their
new Principles, and every way to discharge the Work they are called unto, even
as their Head the Lord Christ was unto his. God does not now give unto them the
Spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a sound Mind, 2 Timothy 1. 7. And
hereby does God Seal them. For,

(1.) HEREBY he gives his Testimony unto them that they are his, owned by him,
accepted with him, his Sons or Children; which is his Seal. For if they were
not so, he would never have given his Holy Spirit unto them. And herein
consists the greatest Testimony that God does give, and the only Seal that he
does set unto any in this World. That this is Gods Testimony and Seal, the
Apostle Peter proves, Acts 15. 8, 9. For on the debate of that Question,
Whether God approved and accepted of the humble Believers, although they
observed not the Rites of Moses, he confirms that he did, with this Argument;
God, says he, which knows their Hearts bare them Witness; How did he do it?
How did he set his Seal to them as his? Says he, By giving them the Holy
Ghost, even as he did unto us. Hereby God gives Testimony unto them. And lest
any should suppose that it was only the Gifts and Miraculous Operations of the
Holy Ghost which he had respect unto, so as that this Sealing of God should
consist therein alone, he adds, that his Gracious Operations also were no less
an effect of this Witness which God gave unto them; And put no difference
between us and them, purifying their Hearts by Faith. This therefore is that
whereby God gives his Testimony unto Believers, namely when he Seals them with
his Spirit, or by the Communication of the Holy Spirit unto them. And this he
does in two Respects. For,

(2.) THIS is that whereby he gives Believers Assurance of their Relation unto
him, of their Interest in him, of his Love and Favor to them. It has been
generally conceived that this Sealing with the Spirit, is that which gives
Assurance unto Believers; and so indeed it does, although the way whereby it
does it, has not been rightly apprehended. And therefore none have been able
to declare the especial Nature of that Act of the Spirit whereby he Seals us,
whence such Assurance should ensue. But it is indeed not any Act of the Spirit
in us that is the Ground of our Assurance, but the Communication of the Spirit
unto us. This the Apostle plainly testifies, 1 John 3. 24. Hereby we know that
he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. That God abides in us
and we in him, is the subject matter of our Assurance; This we know, says the
Apostle; which expresses the highest Assurance we are capable of in this
World. And how do we know it? Even by the Spirit which he has given unto us.
But it may be, the sense of these words may be, that the Spirit which God gives
us does by some especial Work of his, effect this Assurance in us; and so it is
not his being given unto us, but some especial Work of his in us, that is the
Ground of our Assurance, and consequently our Sealing. I do not deny such an
especial Work of the Spirit, as shall be afterward declared; but I judge that
it is the Communication of the Spirit, himself unto us that is here intended.
For so the Apostle declares his sense to be, Chap. 4. 13. Hereby know we that
we dwell in God, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. This is
the great Evidence, the great Ground of Assurance which we have, that God has
taken us into a near and dear Relation unto himself, because he has given us
of his Spirit; that great and Heavenly Gift which he will impart unto no
others. And indeed on this one Hinge depends the whole Case of that Assurance
which Believers are capable of. If the Spirit of God dwell in us, we are his;
But if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, Romans 8, 9.
Hereon alone depends the Determination of our especial Relation unto God. By
this therefore does God Seal Believers; and therein gives them Assurance of his
Love. And this is to be the sole Rule of your self-Examination whether you are
Sealed of God or no.

(3.) HEREBY God evidenceth them unto the World, which is another End of
sealing. He marks them so hereby for his own, as that the World cannot but in
general take notice of them. For where God sets this Seal in the Communication
of his Spirit, it will so operate and produce such Effects as shall fall under
the Observation of the World. As it did in the Lord Christ, so also will it do
in Believers according unto their measure. And there are two ways whereby Gods
sealing does evidence them unto the World. The one is by the Effectual
Operation of the Spirit communicated unto them both in Gifts and Graces. Though
the World is blinded with Prejudices, and under the Power of a prevalent Enmity
against spiritual things, yet it cannot but discover what a Change is made in
the most of those whom God thus seals, and how by the Gifts and Graces of the
Spirit which they hate, they are differenced from other Men. And this is that
which keeps up the difference and enmity that is in the World between the
Seeds. For Gods sealing of Believers with his Spirit evidenceth his especial
Acceptance of them, which fills the Hearts of them who are acted with the
Spirit of Cain, with Hatred and Revenge. Hence many think that the respect
which God had unto the Sacrifice of Abel was testified by some visible sign,
which Cain also might take notice of. And there was an (...), the kindling of
his Sacrifice by Fire from Heaven, which was the Type and Resemblance of the
Holy Ghost, as has been showed. All other Causes of difference are capable of
a Composition, but this about the Seal of God, can never be composed. And that
which follows from hence is, that those who are thus sealed with the Spirit
of God, cannot but separate themselves from the most of the World, whereby it
is more evidenced unto whom they do belong.

(4.) HEREBY God Seals Believers unto the day of Redemption, or Everlasting
Salvation. For the Spirit thus given unto them, is, as we have showed already,
to abide with them for ever, as a Well of Water in them springing up into
Everlasting Life, John 7.

THIS therefore is that Seal which God grants unto Believers, even this Holy
Spirit for the Ends mentioned, which according unto their Measure, and for this
Work and End, answers that great Seal of Heaven which God gave unto the Son, by
the Communication of the Spirit unto him in all its Divine Fullness, authorizing
and enabling him unto his whole Work, and evidencing him to be called of God
thereunto.

CHAP. VII. The Spirit an Earnest; And how.
AGAIN the Holy Spirit as thus Communicated unto us, is said to be an Earnest.
(...) the Word in the Original is no where used in the New Testament but in
this matter alone, 2 Cor. 2. 22. Chap. 5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 14. The Latin Translator
renders this Word by Pignus, a Pledge. But he is corrected therein by Hierom on
Ephesians. 1. Pignus, says he, Latinus Interpres pro arrabone possuit. Non id ipsum
autem Arrabo quod pignus sonat. Arrabo enim futurae emptioni quaesi quoddam
testimonium, and obligamentum datur. Pignus vero, hoc est (...) pro mutua
pecunia apponitur, ut quam illa reddita tuerit, reddenti debitum pignus a
Creditore redditur. And this Reason is generally admitted by Expositors. For a
Pledge is that which is committed to and left in the Hand of another to secure
him, that Money which is borrowed thereon, shall be repaid, and then the Pledge
is to be received back again. Hence it is necessary that a Pledge be more in
value than the Money received, because it is taken in security for repayment.
But an Earnest is a Part only of what is to be given or paid, or some lesser
thing that is given to secure somewhat that is more or greater in the same or
another kind. And this Difference must be admitted if we are obliged to the
precise signification and common use of Pledges and Earnests among Men, which
we must enquire into. The Word is supposed to be dervied from the Hebrew (...);
and the Latins make use of it also, Arrabon, and Arrha. It is sometimes used in
other Authors; as Plutarch in Galba. (...); he prepossessed Oninius with great
Sums of Money as an Earnest of what he would do afterward. Hesychius explains
it by (...), a Gift beforehand. As to what I apprehend to be the Mind of the
Holy Ghost in this Expression, I shall declare it in the ensuing Observations.

FIRST; It is not any Act or Work of the Holy Spirit on us or in us, that is
called his being an Earnest. It is He Himself who is this Earnest. This is
expressed in every place where there is mention made of it. 2 Cor. 1. 22. (...);
The Earnest of the Spirit; that Earnest which is the Spirit, or the Spirit as
an Earnest; as Austin reads the words, Arrhabona Spiritum. Chap. 5. 5. Who has
also given unto us the Earnest of the Spirit. The giving of this Earnest is
constantly assigned to be the Act of God the Father, who according to the
Promise of Christ would send the Comforter unto the Church. And in the other
place, Ephesians. 1. 14. it is expressly said that the Holy Spirit is the Earnest of
our Inheritance. Every where the Article is of the Masculine Gender, (...); and
(...), the Spirit is of the Neuter. Some would have it to refer unto Christ, v.
12. But as it is not unusual in Scripture that the Subjunctive Article and
Relative should agree in Gender with the following Substantive, as (...) here
does with (...); so the Scripture speaking of the Holy Ghost, though (...) be
of the Neuter Gender, yet having respect unto the thing, that is, the Person of
the Spirit, it subjoins the pronoun of the Masculine Gender unto it, as John
14. 26. Wherefore the Spirit himself is the Earnest, as given unto us from the
Father by the Son. And this Act of God is expressed by giving or putting him
into our Hearts, 2 Cor. 1. 22. How he does this, has been before declared,
both in general, and with respect in particular unto his Inhabitation. The
meaning therefore of the words is, that God gives unto us his Holy Spirit to
dwell in us, and to abide with us as an Earnest of our future Inheritance.

SECONDLY; It is indifferent whether we use the Name of an Earnest, or a Pledge
in this Matter. And although I choose to retain that of an Earnest from the most
usual Acceptance of the Word, yet I do it not upon the Reason alleged for it,
which is taken from the especial Nature and Use of an Earnest in the Dealings
of Men. For it is the End only of an Earnest whereon the Holy Ghost is so
called, which is the same with that of a Pledge, and we are not to force the
Similitude or Allusion any farther. For precisely among Men an Earnest is the
Confirmation of a Bargain and Contract made on equal Terms between Buvers and
Sellers, or Exchangers. But there is no such Contract between God and us. It is
true there is a supposition of an Antecedent-Covenant, but not as a Bargain or
Contract between God and us. The Covenant of God as it respects the
Dispensation of the Spirit, is a mere free gratuitous Promise; and the
stipulation of Obedience on our part is consequential thereunto. Again he that
gives an Earnest in a Contract or Bargain, does not principally aim at his own
Obligation to pay such or such a sum of Money, or somewhat equivalent
thereunto, though he do that also; but his principal Design is to secure unto
himself that which he has bargained for, that it may be delivered up unto him
at the time appointed. But there is nothing of this Nature in the Earnest of
the Spirit, wherein God intends our Assurance only and not his own. And sundry
other things there are wherein the Comparison will not hold nor is to be urged,
because they are not intended.

THE general End of an Earnest or a Pledge, is all that is alluded unto: And
this is to give security of somewhat that is future or to come. And this may be
done in a way of free Bounty, as well as upon the strictest Contract. As if a
Man have a poor Friend or Relation, he may of his own accord give unto him a
sum of Money, and bid him take it as a Pledge or Earnest of what he will yet
do for him. So does God in a way of Sovereign Grace and Bounty give his Holy
Spirit unto Believers; and withal lets them know, that it is with a design to
give them yet much more in his appointed season. And here is he said to be an
Earnest. Other things that are observed from the Nature and Use of an Earnest
in Civil Contracts and Bargains between Men, belong not hereunto; though many
things are occasionally spoken and discoursed from them of Good Use unto
Edification.

THIRDLY, In two of the Places wherein mention is made of this matter, the
Spirit is said to be an Earnest, but wherein, or unto what End, is not
expressed, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Chap. 5. 5. The third place affirms him to be an
Earnest of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14. What that is, and how he is so, may be
briefly declared. And,

1. WE have already manifested that all our Participation of the Holy Spirit in
any kind, is upon the Account of Jesus Christ, and we do receive him
immediately as the Spirit of Christ. For to as many as receive Christ, the
Father gives Power to become the Sons of God, John 1. 12. And because we are
Sons, he sends forth the Spirit of his Son into our Hearts, Gal. 4. 6. And as
we receive the Spirit from him, and as his Spirit, so he is given unto us to
make us conformable unto him, and to give us a Participation of his Gifts,
Graces and Privileges.

2. CHRIST himself in his own Person is the Heir of all things. So he was
appointed of God, Heb. 1. 2. and therefore the whole Inheritance is absolutely
his. What this Inheritance is, what is the Glory and Power that is contained
therein, I have at large declared in the Exposition of that Place.

3. MAN by his Sin had universally forfeited his whole Right unto all the Ends
of his Creation, both on the Earth below, and in Heaven above. Death and Hell
were become all that the whole Race of Mankind had either Right or Title unto.
But yet all the glorious things that God had provided were not to be cast away,
an Heir was to be provided for them. Abraham when he was old and rich had no
Child, complained that his Steward, a Servant was to be his Heir, Genesis 15. 3,
4. but God lets him know that he would provide another Heir for him of his own
Seed. When Man had lost his right unto the whole Inheritance of Heaven and
Earth, God did not so take the Forfeiture, as to seize it all into the Hands of
Justice and destroy it: But he invested the whole Inheritance in his Son,
making him the Heir of all. This he was meet for, as being God's Eternal Son by
Nature, and hereof the Donation was free, gratuitous and absolute. And this
Grant was confirmed unto him by his Unction with the Fullness of the Spirit. But,

4. THIS Inheritance as to our Interest therein lay under a Forfeiture; and as
unto us it must be redeemed and purchased, or we can never be made Partakers of
it. Wherefore the Lord Christ, who had a Right in his own Person unto the whole
Inheritance by the Free Grant and Donation of the Father, yet was to redeem it
from under the Forfeiture, and purchase the Possession of it for us: Thence is
it called the Purchased Possession. How this Purchase was made, what made it
necessary, by what means it was effected, are declared in the Doctrine of our
Redemption by Christ, the Price which he paid, and the Purchase that he made
thereby. And hereon the whole Inheritance is vested in the Lord Christ, not
only as unto his own Person, and his Right unto the whole, but he became the
great Trustee for the whole Church, and had their Interest in this Inheritance
committed unto him also. No Man therefore can have a right unto this
Inheritance, or to any part of it, not unto the least share of God's Creation
here below, as a part of the rescued or purchased Inheritance, but by Virtue of
an Interest in Christ, and Union with him. Wherefore,

FOURTHLY, The way whereby we come to have an Interest in Christ, and thereby a
right unto the Inheritance, is by the Participation of the Spirit of Christ, as
the Apostle fully declares, Romans 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. For it is by the Spirit of
Adoption, the Spirit of the Son, that we are made Children. Now says the
Apostle, If we are Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with
Christ. Children are Heirs unto their Father. And those who are Children of God
are Heirs of that Inheritance which God has provided for his Children. Heirs
of God. And all the good things of Grace and Glory which Believers are made
Partakers of in this World, or that which is to come, are called their
Inheritance, because they are the Effects of free, gratuitous Adoption. They
are not things that themselves have purchased, bargained for, earned or
merited, but an Inheritance depending on and following solely upon their free,
gratuitous Adoption. But how can they become Heirs of God, seeing God has
absolutely appointed the Son alone to be Heir of all things, Heb. 1. 2. He was
the Heir unto whom the whole Inheritance belonged. Why, says the Apostle, by
the Participation of the Spirit of Christ, we are made joint Heirs with Christ.
The whole Inheritance as unto his own Personal Right was entirely his by the
free Donation of the Father, all Power in Heaven and Earth being given unto
him. But if he will take others into a joint Right with him, he must purchase
it for them, which he did accordingly.

FIFTHLY, Hence it is manifest, how the Holy Spirit becomes the Earnest of our
Inheritance. For by him, that is, by the Communication of him unto us, we are
made joynt-Heirs with Christ, which gives us our Right and Title, whereby our
Natures are as it were inserted into the assured Conveyance of the great and
full Inheritance of Grace and Glory. In the giving of his Spirit unto us, God
making of us Coheirs with Christ, we have the greatest and most assured Earnest
and Pledge of our future Inheritance. And he is to be thus an Earnest until,
or unto the Redemption of the Purchased Possession. For after that a Man has a
good and firm Title unto an Inheritance settled in him, it may be a longer time
before he can be admitted into an actual Possession of it, and many
Difficulties he may have in the mean time to conflict withal. And it is so in
this Case. The Earnest of the Spirit given unto us, whereby we become Coheirs
with Christ, whose Spirit we are made Partakers of, secures the Title of the
Inheritance in and unto our whole Persons. But before we can come unto the full
Possession of it, not only have we many Spiritual Trials and Temptations to
conflict withal in our Souls, but our Bodies also are liable unto Death and
Corruption. Wherefore whatever First Fruits we may enjoy, yet can we not enter
into the actual Possession of the whole Inheritance, until not only our Souls
are delivered from all Sins and Temptations, but our Bodies also are rescued
out of the Dust of the Grave. This is the full Redemption of the Purchased
Possession, whence it is signally called the Redemption of the Body, Romans 8. 23.

THUS as the Lord Christ himself was made Heir of all things by that
Communication of the Spirit unto him, whereby he was anointed unto his Office;
so the participation of the same Spirit from him and by him, makes us Coheirs
with him, and so he is an Earnest given us of God of the future Inheritance. It
belongs not unto my present purpose to declare the Nature of that Inheritance,
whereof the Holy Spirit is the Earnest. In brief, it is the highest
Participation with Christ in that Glory and Honor that our Natures are capable
of.

AND in like manner we are said to receive (...), Romans 8. 23. That is, the
Spirit himself as the First Fruits of our Spiritual and Eternal Redemption. God
had appointed that the First Fruits, which are called (...) and (...) should be
a (...), an Offering unto himself. Hereunto (...) answers, and is taken
generally for that which is first in any kind, Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 15. 20. Jam.
1. 18. Rev. 14. 4. And the First Fruits of the Spirit must be either what he
first works in us, or all his Fruits in us with respect unto the full Harvest
that is to come; or the Spirit himself, as the Beginning and Pledge of Future
Glory. And the latter of these is intended in this place. For the Apostle
discourses about the Liberty of the whole Creation from that slate of Bondage
whereunto all things were subjected by Sin. With respect hereunto he says,
that Believers themselves having not as yet obtained a full Deliverance, as he
had expressed it, Chap. 7. 24. do groan after it is perfect Accomplishment. But
yet, says he, we have the Beginning of it, the First Fruits of it, in the
Communication of the Spirit unto us: For where the Spirit of God is, there is
Liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. For although we are not capable of the full and perfect
Estate of the Liberty provided for the Children of God, whilst we are in this
World, conflicting with the Remainders of Sin, pressed and exercised with
Temptations, our Bodies also being subject unto Death and Corruption, yet where
the Spirit of God is, where we have that First Fruit of the Fullness of our
Redemption, there is Liberty in the real Beginning of it, and assured
Consolation, because it shall be consummated in the appointed Season.

THESE are some of the Spiritual Benefits and Privileges which Believers enjoy
by a Participation of the Holy Ghost, as the promised Comforter of the Church:
These things he is unto them, and as unto all other things belonging unto their
Consolation, he works them in them, which we must in the next place enquire
into. Only something we may take notice of from what we have already insisted
on. As, (1) That all Evangelical Privileges whereof Believers are made
Partakers in this World, do center in the Person of the Holy Spirit. He is the
great Promise that Christ has made unto his Disciples, the great Legacy which
he has bequeathed unto them. The Grant made unto him by the Father when he had
done all his Will, and fulfilled all Righteousness, and exalted the Glory of
his Holiness, Wisdom and Grace, was this of the Holy Spirit to be communicated
by him unto the Church. This he received of the Father as the Complement of his
Reward, wherein he saw of the Travail of his Soul and was satisfied. This
Spirit he now gives unto Believers, and no Tongue can express the Benefits
which they receive thereby. Therein are they anointed and sealed, therein do
they receive the Earnest and First Fruits of Immortality and Glory. In a Word,
therein are they taken into a Participation with Christ himself in all his
Honor and Glory. Hereby is their Condition rendered honorable, safe,
comfortable, and the whole Inheritance is unchangeably secured unto them. In
this one Privilege therefore of receiving the Spirit, are all others
enwrapped. For, (2) No one way, or thing, or Similitude can express or
represent the greatness of this Privilege. It is Anointing, it is Seallng, it
is an Earnest and First Fruit, every thing whereby the Love of God, and the
blessed Security of our Condition may be expressed or intimated unto us. For
what greater Pledge can we have of the Love and Favor of God? What greater
Dignity can we be made Partakers of? What greater Assurance of a future,
blessed Condition, than that God has given us of his Holy Spirit? And, (3)
Hence also is it manifest how abundantly willing he is, that the Heirs of
Promise should receive strong Consolation in all their Distresses, when they
fly for Refuge unto the Hope that is set before them.

The End of the First Part.
A DISCOURSE OF Spiritual Gifts, BEING The SECOND PART OF THE Work of the Holy
Spirit.

IN WHICH These Particulars are distinctly handled in the following Chapters.

Chap. I. Spiritual Gifts, their Names and Significations.

Chap. II. Differences between Spiritual Gifts and Saving Graces.

Chap. III. Of Gifts and Offices: Extraordinary, and First of Offices.

Chap. IV. Of Extraordinary Spiritual Gifts.

Chap. V. Of the Original, Duration, Use and End of Extraordinary Spiritual
Gifts.

Chap. VI. Of Ordinary Gifts of the Spirit: the Grant, Institution, Use,
Benefit and End of the Ministry.

Chap. VII. Of Spiritual Gifts enabling the Ministry to the Exercise and
Discharge of their Trust and Office.

Chap. VIII. Of the Gifts of the Spirit with respect unto Doctrine, Rule and
Worship: How attained and improved.

By the late Reverend JOHN OWEN, D. D.

London, Printed for William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate Street. 1693.

OF Spiritual Gifts. PART II.
CHAP. I. Spiritual Gifts, their Names and Significations.
1. THE Second part of the Dispensation of the Spirit in order unto the
perfecting of the New Creation, or the Edification of the Church, consists in
his communication of Spiritual Gifts unto the Members of it, according as their
places and stations therein do require. By his Work of Saving Grace (which in
other Discourses we have given a large account of) he makes all the Elect
Living Stones, and by his communication of Spiritual Gifts he fashions and
builds those Stones into a Temple for the Living God to dwell in. He
spiritually unites them into one Mystical Body under the Lord Christ as an Head
of Influence by Faith and Love; and he unites them into an Organical Body under
the Lord Christ as an Head of Rule, by Gifts and Spiritual Abilities. Their
Nature is made one and the same by Grace; their Use is various by Gifts. Every
one is a part of the Body of Christ, of the Essence of it by the same
quickening, animating Spirit of Grace; but one is an Eye, another an Hand,
another a Foot in the Body, by virtue of peculiar Gifts. For unto every one of
us is given Grace according to the measure of the Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7.

( 2.) THESE Gifts are not saving sanctifying Graces; those were not so in
themselves which made the most glorious and astonishing appearance in the
World, and which were most eminently useful in the Foundation of the Church,
and propagation of the Gospel. Such as were those that were Extraordinary and
Miraculous. There is something of the Divine Nature in the least Grace, that is
not in the most glorious Gift which is only so. It will therefore be part of
our work, to show wherein the Essential Difference between these Gifts and
sanctifying Graces does consist; as also what is their Nature and Use must be
enquired into. For although they are not Grace, yet they are that without which
the Church cannot subsist in the World, nor can Believers be useful unto one
another, and the rest of Mankind, unto the Glory of Christ, as they ought to
be. They are the powers of the World to come; those effectual Operations of the
power of Christ, whereby his Kingdom was Erected and is preserved.

( 3.) AND hereby is the Church state under the New Testament differenced from
that under the Old. There is indeed a great Difference between their Ordinances
and ours; theirs being suited unto the dark apprehensions which they had of
Spiritual things; ours accommodated unto the clearer Light of the Gospel, more
plainly and expressly representing Heavenly things unto us, Heb. 10. 1. But our
Ordinances with their Spirit would be carnal also. The principal Difference
lies in the Administration of the Spirit, for the due performance of Gospel
Worship by virtue of these Gifts bestowed on Men for that very End. Hence the
whole of Evangelical Worship is called the Ministration of the Spirit, and
thence said to be glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 8. And where they are neglected, I see
not the Advantage of the outward Worship and Ordinances of the Gospel, above
those of the Law. For although their Institutions are accommodated unto that
Administration of Grace and Truth which came by Jesus Christ; yet they must
lose their whole Glory, Force and Efficacy, if they be not dispensed, and the
Duties of them performed, by virtue of these spiritual Gifts. And therefore no
sort of Men by whom they are neglected, do or can content themselves with the
pure and immixed Gospel Institutions in these things, but do rest principally
in the outward part of Divine Service in things of their own finding out. For
as Gospel Gifts are useless without attending unto Gospel Institutions; so
Gospel Institutions are found to be fruitless and unsatisfactory, without the
attaining and exercising of Gospel Gifts.

( 4.) BE it so therefore that these Gifts we intend are not in themselves
saving Graces; yet are they not to be despised. For they are, as we shall show,
The powers of the World to come, by means whereof the Kingdom of Christ is
preserved, carried on and propagated in the World. And although they are not
Grace, yet are they the great means whereby all Grace is ingenerated and
exercised. And although the spiritual Life of the Church does not consist in
them, yet the Order and Edification of the Church depends wholly on them. And
therefore are they so frequently mentioned in the Scripture as the great
privilege of the New Testament; Directions being multiplied in the Writings of
the Apostles about their nature and proper use. And we are commanded earnestly
to desire and labor after them, especially those which are most useful and
subservient unto Edification, 1 Cor. 12. 31. And as the neglect of Internal
saving Grace, wherein the power of Godliness does consist, has been the Bane
of Christian Profession as to Obedience, issuing in that Form of it which is
consistent with all manner of Lusts; so the neglect of these Gifts has been
the Ruin of the same Profession as to Worship and Order, which has thereon
issued in fond Superstition.

( 5.) THE great and signal promise of the Communication of these Gifts, is
recorded, Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity
Captive, thou have received Gifts for Men. For these words are applied by the
Apostle unto that Communication of spiritual Gifts from Christ, whereby the
Church was founded and edified, Ephesians. 4. 8. And whereas it is foretold in the
Psalm, that Christ should receive Gifts, that is to give them unto Men, as that
Expression is Expounded by the Apostle; so he did this by receiving of the
Spirit; the proper cause and immodiate Author of them all, as Peter declares,
Acts 2. 23. Therefore being by the Right Hand of God exalted, and having
received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this
which ye now see and hear; speaking of the miraculous Gifts conferred on the
Aposties at the Day of Pentecost. For these Gifts are from Christ, not as God
absolutely, but as Mediator, in which Capacity he received all from the Father
in a way of free Donation. Thus therefore he received the Spirit as the Author
of all spiritual Gifts. And whereas all the powers of the World to come
consisted in them, and the whole work of the Building and Propagation of the
Church depended on them, the Apostles after all the Instructions they had
received from Christ whilst he conversed with them in the Days of his Flesh,
and also after his Resurrection, were commanded not to go about the great work
which they had received Commission for, until they had received power by the
coming of the Holy Ghost upon them in the Communication of those Gifts, Acts 1.
4, 8. And as they neither might nor could do any thing in their peculiar work,
as to the laying of the Foundation of the Christian Church, until they had
actually received those extraordinary Gifts which gave them power so to do; so
if those who undertake in any Place, Degree or Office, to carry on the
Edification of the Church, do not receive those more ordinary Gifts which are
continued unto that end, they have neither Right to undertake that work, nor
Power to perform it in a due manner.

( 6.) The things which we are to enquire into concerning these Gifts, are,
(1.) Their Name; (2.) Their Nature in general, and therein how they agree with
and differ from Saving Graces; (3.) Their Distinction; (4.) The particular
Nature of them; and (5.) Their Use in the Church of God.

( 7.) 1. THE general Name of those Spiritual Endowments which we intend is
(...); so the Apostle renders (...), Ephesians. 4. 8. from Psalm. 68. 18. Dona, Gifts.
That is, they are free and undeserved Effects of Divine Bounty. In the Minds of
Men on whom they are bestowed, they are Spiritual Powers and Endowments with
respect unto a certain end. But as to their Original and principal cause, they
are free undeserved Gifts. Thence the Holy Spirit as the Author of them, and
with respect unto them, is called (...), the Gift of God, John 4. 10. And the
Effect it self is also termed (...), the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 10. 45.
The Gift of God, Acts 8. 20. The Gift of the Grace of God, Ephesians. 3. 7. The
Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. The Heavenly Gift, Heb. 6. 4. All expressing the
Freedom of their Communication on the part of the Father, Son and Spirit. And
in like manner on the same account are they called (...), that is gracious
largesses; Gifts proceeding from mere Bounty. And therefore saving Graces are
also expressed by the same Name in general, because they also are freely and
undeservedly communicated unto us, Romans 11. 28. But these Gifts are frequently
and almost constantly so expressed, Romans 12. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 7. Chap. 7. 7. Chap.
12. 4, 9, 28, 30. 1 Pet. 4. 14. 2 Timothy 1. 6. And it is absolute freedom in the
Bestower of them that is principally intended in this Name. Hence he has left
his Name as a Curse unto all Posterity, who thought this free gift of God might
be purchased with Money, Acts 8. 20. A Pageantry of which Crime the Apostate
Ages of the Church erected in applying the Name of that Sin to the purchase of
Benefices and Dignities, whilst the Gift of God was equally despised on all
hands. And indeed this was that whereby in all Ages Countenance was given unto
Apostasy and Defection from the Power and Truth of the Gospel. The Names of
Spiritual things were still retained, but applied to outward Forms and
Ceremonies, which thereby were substituted insensibly into their room, to the
ruin of the Gospel in the Minds of Men. But as these Gifts were not any of
them to be bought, no more are they absolutely to be attained by the Natural
Abilities and Industry of any, whereby an Image of them is attempted to be set
up by some, but deformed and useless. They will do those things in the Church
by their own Abilities, which can never be acceptably discharged but by Virtue
of those Free Gifts which they despise; whereof we must speak more afterward.
Now the full Signification of these Words in our Sense is peculiar unto the New
Testament. For although in other Authors they are used for a Gift or Free
Grant, yet they never denote the Endowments or Abilities of the Minds of Men
who do receive them, which is their principal Sense in the Scripture.

( 8.) WITH respect unto their especial Nature, they are called (...):
Sometimes absolutely, 1 Cor. 12. 1. (...), but concerning Spirituals; that is,
Spiritual Gifts. And so again, Chap. 14. 1. (...), Desire Spirituals; that is,
Gifts; for so it is explained, Chap. 12. 31. (...), Covet Earnestly the best
Gifts. Whenever therefore they are called (...), there (...), denoting their
general Nature is to be supplied: And where they are called (...) only, (...)
is to be understood, as expressing their especial Difference from all others.
They are neither Natural, nor Moral, but Spiritual Endowments. For both their
Author, Nature and Object are respected herein. Their Author is the Holy
Spirit; their Nature is Spiritual; and the Object about which they are
exercised, are Spiritual Things.

( 9.) AGAIN, with respect unto the Manner of their Communication they are
called (...), Heb. 2. 4. Distributions, or Partitions of the Holy Ghost: Not
whereof the Holy Ghost is the Subject, as though he were parted or divided, as
the Socinians dream on this place; but whereof he is the Author, the
Distributions which he makes. And they are thus called Divisions, Partitions,
or Distributions, because they are of diverse sorts and kinds, according as the
Edification of the Church did require. And they were not at any time all of
them given out unto any one Person, at least so, as that others should not be
made Partakers of the same sort. From the same inexhaustible Treasure of
Bounty, Grace and Power, these Gifts are variously distributed unto Men. And
this Variety, as the Apostle proves, gives both Ornament and Advantage to the
Church. If the whole Body were an Eye, where were the Hearing, etc. 1 Cor. 12.
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. It is this (...), this various
Distribution of Gifts, that makes the Church an Organical Body; and in this
Composure, with the peculiar Uses of the Members of the Body, consists the
Harmony, Beauty and Safety of the whole. Were there no more but One Gift, or
Gifts of one sort, the whole Body would be but one Member: As where there is
none, there is no animated Body but a dead Carcass.

( 10.) AND this various Distribution, as it is an Act of the Holy Spirit,
produces (...), There are Diversities of Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 4. The Gifts thus
distributed in the Church are Diverse as to their sorts and kinds, one of one
kind, another of another: An Account hereof is given by the Apostle
particularly, Ver. 8, 9, 10. in a distinct Enumeration of the sorts or kinds of
them. The Edification of the Church is the general End of them all; but diverse,
distinct, different Gifts are required thereunto.

( 11.) THESE Gifts heing bestowed, they are variously expressed with regard
unto the Nature and Manner of those Operations which we are enabled unto by
Virtue of them. So are they termed (...), Minisirations, 1 Cor. 12. 5. That is,
Powers and Abilitles whereby some are enabled to administer Spiritual Things
unto the Benefit, Advantage and Edification of others: And (...), Ver. 6.
Effectual Workings or Operations, efficaciously producing the Effects which
they are applied unto. And lastly, they are comprised by the Apostle in that
Expression, (...), The Manifestation of the Spirit, Ver. 7. In and by them does
the Holy Spirit evidence and manifest his Power. For the Effects produced by
them, and themselves in their own Nature, especially some of them, do evince,
that the Holy Spirit is in them, that they are given and wrought by him, and
are the ways whereby he acts his own Power and Grace.

These things are spoken in the Scripture as to the Names of these Spiritual
Gifts: And it is evident, that if we part with our Interest and Concern in
them, we must part with no small Portion of the New Testament. For the mention
of them, Directions about them, their Use, and Abuse, do so frequently occur,
that if we are not concerned in them, we are not so in the Gospel.

CHAP. II. Differences between Spiritual Gifts and Saving Grace.
( 1.) THEIR Nature in General, which in the next place we enquire into, will
be much discovered in the Consideration of those things wherein these Gifts do
agree with Saving Graces, and wherein they differ from them.

( 2.) THERE are three things wherein Spiritual Gifts and Saving Graces do
agree.

1. THEY are both sorts of them the Purchase of Christ for his Church, the
especial Fruit of his Mediation. We speak not of such Gifts or Endowments of
Men's Minds as consist merely in the Improvement of their Natural Faculties.
Such are Wisdom, Learning, Skill in Arts and Sciences, which those may abound
and excel in who are utter Strangers to the Church of Christ; and frequently
they do so, to their own Exaltation and Contempt of others. Nor do I intend
Abilities for Actions Moral, Civil or Political; as Fortitude, Skill in
Government or Rule, and the like. For although these are Gifts of the Power of
the Spirit of God, yet they do belong unto those Operations which he exercises
in upholding or Ruling of the World, or the Old Creation as such, whereof I
have treated before. But I intend those alone which are conversant about the
Gospel, the things and Duties of it, the Administration of its Ordinances, the
Propagation of its Doctrine and Profession of it is ways. And herein also I put
a difference between them, and all those Gifts of the Spirit about Sacred
things, which any of the People of God enjoyed under the Old Testament. For we
speak only of those which are Powers of the World to come. Those others were
salted to the Economy of the Old Covenant, and confined with the Light which
God was pleased then to communicate unto his Church. Unto the Gospel State they
were not suited, nor would be useful in it, Hence the Prophets, who had the
most eminent Gifts, did yet all of them come short of John the Baptist; because
they had not by Virtue of their Gifts that Acquaintance with the Person of
Christ, and Insight into his Work of Mediation, that he had; and yet also he
came short of him that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, because his Gifts
were not purely Evangelical. Wherefore these Gifts whereof we treat, are such
as belong unto the Kingdom of God erected in an especial manner by Jesus Christ
after his Ascension into Heaven: For he was exalted that he might fill all
things, (...), that is, the whole Church with these Effects of his Power and
Grace. The Power therefore of communicating these Gifts, was granted unto the
Lord Christ as Mediator by the Father, for the Foundation and Edification of
his Church, as it is expressed, Acts 2. 33. And by them was his Kingdom both
set up and propagated, and is preserved in the World. These were the Weapons of
Warfare which he furnished his Disciples withal, when he gave them Commission
to go forth and subdue the World unto the Obedience of the Gospel, Acts 1. 4,
8. And mighty were they through God unto that purpose, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6.
In the Use and Exercise of them did the Gospel run, and was glorisied, to the
Ruin of the Kingdom of Satan and Darkness in the World. And that he was ever
able to erect it again under another Form than that of Gentilism, as he has
done in the Antichristian Apostasy of the Church Visible, it was from a
Neglect and Contempt of these Gifts, with their due Use and Improvement. When
Men began to neglect the attaining of these Spiritual Gifts, and the Exercise
of them, in praying, in preaching, in Interpretation of the Scripture, in all
the Administrations and whole Worship of the Church, betaking themselves wholly
to their own Abilities and Inventions, accommodated unto their Ease and Secular
Interests, it was an easy thing for Satan to erect again his Kingdom, though
not in the old manner, because of the Light of the Scripture which had made
Impression on the Minds of Men, which he could not obliterate. Wherefore he
never attempted openly any more to set up Heathrnism or Paganism, with the Gods
of the Old World and their Worship; but he insensibly raised another Kingdom,
which pretended some likeness unto and compliance with the Letter of the Word,
though it came at last to be in all things expressly contrary thereunto. This
was his Kingdom of Apostasy and Darkness under the Papal Antichristianism, and
woeful Degeneracy of other Christians in the World. For when Men who pretend
themselves entrusted with the Preservation of the Kingdom of Christ, did
wilfully cast away those Weapons of their Warfare whereby the World was subdued
unto him, and ought to have been kept in Subjection by them, what else could
ensue?

( 3.) BY these Gifts I say, does the Lord Christ demonstrate his Power, and
exercise his Rule. External Force and Carnal Weapons were far from his
Thoughts, as unbecoming his absolute Sovereignty over the Souls of Men, his
infinite Power and Holiness. Neither did any ever betake themselves unto them
in the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom, but either when they had utterly lost and
abandoned these Spiritual Weapons, or did not believe that they are sufficient
to maintain the Interest of the Gospel, though Originally they were so to
introduce and fix it in the World: That is, that although the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost were sufficient and effectual to bring in the Truth and Doctrine of the
Gospel against all Opposition, yet are they not so to maintain it; which they
may do well once more to consider. Herein therefore they agree with Saving
Graces: For that they are peculiarly from Jesus Christ the Mediator, is
confessed by all; unless it be by such as by whom all real, internal Grace is
denied. But the Sanctifying Operations of the Holy Spirit, with their respect
unto the Lord Christ as Mediator, have been sufficiently before confirmed.

( 4.) 2. There is an Agreement between Saving Graces and Spiritual Gifts, with
respect unto their immediate efficient Cause. They are both sorts of them
wrought by the Power of the Holy Ghost. As to what concerns the former or
saving Grace, I have already treated of that Argument at large; nor will any
deny that the Holy Ghost is the Author of these Graces, but those that deny
that there are any such. That these Gifts are so wrought by him, is expressly
declared wherever there is mention of them in general or particular.
Wherefore, when they acknowledge that there were such Gifts, all confess him to
be their Author; by whom he is denied so to be, it is only because they deny
the continuance of any such Gifts in the Church of God. But this is that which
we shall disprove.

( 5.) 3. Herein also they agree, that both sorts of them are designed unto the
Good, Benefit, Ornament and Glory of the Church. The Church is the proper Seat
and Subject of them, to it are they granted, and in it do they reside. For
Christ is given to be Head over all things unto the Church, which is his Body,
the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. But this Church
falls under a double Consideration. First, as it is Believing; Secondly, as it
is Professing. In the first respect absolutely it is invisible, and as such is
the peculiar subject of Saving Grace. This is that Church which Christ loved
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it, and present it
unto himself a Glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that it should be Holy and without Blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. This is the
work of Saving Grace, and by a participation thereof do Men become Members of
this Church and not otherwise. And hereby is the professing Church quickened
and enabled unto Profession in an acceptable manner. ^or the Elect receive
Grace unto this end in this World, that they may glorify Christ and the Gospel
in the Exercise of it, Col. 1. 6. John 15. 8. But Gifts are bestowed on the
professing Church, to render it visible in such a way as whereby God is
glorified. Grace gives an invisible Life to the Church; Gifts give it a visible
Profession. For hence does the Church become Organical and disposed into that
Order which is Beautiful and Comely. Where any Church is Organized merely by
outward Rules, perhaps of their own devising, and makes Profession only in an
attendance unto outward Order, not following the leading of the Spirit in the
Communication of his Gifts, both as to Order and Discharge of the Duties of
Profession, it is but the Image of a Church wanting an animating Principle and
Form. That Profession which renders a Church visible according to the Mind of
Christ, is the orderly Exercise of the spiritual Gifts bestowed on it, in a
Conversation evidencing the invisible Principle of Saving Grace. Now these
Gifts are conferred on the Church in order unto the Edification of it self in
Love, Ephesians. 4 16. as also the propagation of its Profession in the World, as
shall be declared afterward. Wherefore both of these sorts have in general the
same end, or are given by Christ unto the same purpose, namely the Good and
Benefit of the Church, as they are respectively suited to promote them.

( 6.) It may also be added, that they agree herein, that they have both the
same respect unto the Bounty of Christ. Hence every Grace is a Gift, that which
is given and freely bestowed on them that have it. Mat. 13. 11. Phil. 1. 29.
And although on the other side every Gift be not a Grace, yet proceeding from
gracious Favor and Bounty, they are so called, Romans 12. 6. Ephesians. 4. 7. How in
their due Exercise they are mutually helpful and assistant unto each other,
shall be declared afterward.

( 7.) SECONDLY, We may consider wherein wherein the Difference lies or does
consist, which is between (...) spiritual Gifts and sanctifying Graces. And
this may be seen in sundry Instances. As,

1. SAVING Graces are (...), the Fruit or Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.
Ephesians. 5. 9. Phil. 1. 11. Now Fruits proceed from an abiding Root and flock of
whose Nature they do partake. There must be a good Tree to bring forth good
Fruit, Mat. 12. 33. No external Watering or Applications unto the Earth, will
cause it to bring forth useful Fruits, unless they are Roots from which they
spring and are educed. The Holy Spirit is as the Root unto these Fruits; the
Root which bears them, and which they do not bear, as Romans 11. 18. Therefore in
order of Nature is he given unto Men before the production of any of these
Fruits. Thereby are they ingrafted into the Olive, are made such Branches in
Christ the true Vine, as derive Vital Juice, Nourishment and Fructifying Virtue
from him even by the Spirit. So is he a Well of Water springing up unto
Everlasting Life, John 4. 14. He is a Spring in Believers, and all saving
Graces are but Waters arising from that Living overflowing Spring. From him a
Root or Spring, as an internal Virtue, Power or Principle, do all these Fruits
come. To this end does he dwell in them and abide with them according to the
promise of our Lord Jesus Christ, John 14. 17. Romans 8. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 16.
whereby the Lord Christ effects his purpose in ordaining his Disciples to
bring forth Fruit that should remain, John 15. 16. In the place of his Holy
Residence he works these Effects freely according to his own will. And there
is nothing that has the true Nature of saving Grace, but what is so a Fruit of
the Spirit. We have not first these Graces, and then by virtue of them receive
the Spirit (for whence should we have them of our selves?) but the Spirit
bestowed on us, works them in us; and gives them a Spiritual Divine Nature in
conformity unto his own.

( 8.) With Gifts singly considered, it is Otherwise. They are indeed Works and
Effects, but not properly Fruits of the Spirit, nor are any where so called.
They are effects of his operation upon Men, not Fruits of his working in them.
And therefore many receive these Gifts, who never receive the Spirit as to the
principal ends for which he is promised. They receive him not to sanctify and
make them Temples unto God; though Metonymically with respect unto his outward
Effects they may be said to be made partakers of him. This renders them of a
different Nature and kind from Saving Graces. For whereas there is an Agreement
and Coincidence between them in the respects before mentioned, and whereas the
Seat and Subject of them, that is of Gifts absolutely, and principally of
Graces also is the Mind, the difference of their Nature proceeds from the
different manner of their Communication from the Holy Spirit.

( 9.) Secondly; Saving Grace proceeds from, or is the effect and fruit of
Electing Love. This I have proved before in our Enquiry into the Nature of
Holiness. See it directly asserted Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. 2 These. 2. 13. Acts 2 41.
Chap. 13. 48. Whom God graciously chooses and designeth unto Eternal Life, them
he prepares for it by the Communication of the Means which are necessary unto
that end, Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. Hereof Sanctification, or the Communication of
saving Grace is comprehensive; for we are chosen unto Salvation through the
Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2. 13. For this is that whereby we are
made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12. The End of
God in Election is the Sonship and Salvation of the Elect, unto the praise of
the Glory of his Grace, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. And this cannot be unless his Image be
renewed in them in Holiness or Saving Graces. These therefore he works in them,
in pursuit of his Eternal purpose therein. But Gifts on the other hand which
are no more but so, and where they are solitary or alone, are only the Effects
of a temporary Election. Thus God chooses some Men into some Office in the
Church, or unto some Work in the World. As this includes a preferring them
before or above others, or the using them when others are not used, we call it
Election; and in it self it is their fitting for, and separation unto their
Office or Work. And this temporary Election is the Cause and Rule of the
Dispensation of Gifts. So he chose Saul to be King over his People, and gave
him thereon another Spirit, or Gifts fitting him for Rule and Government. So
our Lord Jesus Christ chose and called at the first Twelve to be his Apostles,
and gave unto them all alike Miraculous Gifts. His temporary choice of them was
the ground of his Communication of Gifts unto them. By virtue hereof no saving
Graces were Communicated unto them, for one of them never arrived unto a
participation of them. Have not I, says our Savior unto them, chosen you
Twelve, and one of you is a Devil? John 6. 70. He had chosen them unto their
Office, and Endowed them with extraordinary Gifts for the Discharge thereof,
but one of them being not chosen unto Salvation before the Foundation of the
World, being not ordained unto Eternal Life, but on the other side being the
Son of Perdition, or one certainly appointed unto destruction, or before of old
ordained unto that Condemnation, he continued void of all sanctifying Graces,
so as unto any acceptance with God he was in no better condition than the
Devil himself, whose Work he was to do. Yet was he by virtue of this choice
unto the Office of Apostleship for a season Endowed with the same Spiritual
Gifts that the other was. And this Distinction our Savior himself does plainly
lay down. For whereas he says, John 6. 70. I have chosen you Twelve, that is
with a temporary choice unto Office; John 13. 18. he says, I speak not of you
all, I know whom I have chosen, so excepting Judas from that number, as is
afterward expressly declared. For the Election which here he intends, is that
which is accompanied with an infallible ordination unto abiding fruit-bearing,
Chap. 15. 16. that is, Eternal Election wherein Judas had no Interest.

( 10.) And thus it is in general and in other instances. When God chooses any
one to Eternal Life, he will in pursuit of that purpose of his, communicate
saving Grace unto them. And although all Believers have Gifts also sufficient
to enable them unto the discharge of their Duty in their station or condition
in the Church, yet they do not depend on the Decree of Election. And where God
calls any, or chooses any unto an Office, Charge or Work in the Church, he
always furnishes them with Gifts suited unto the end of them. He does not so
indeed unto all that will take any Office unto themselves; but he does so unto
all whom he calls thereunto. Yea his Call is no otherwise known, but by the
Gifts which he communicates for the discharge of the Work or Office whereunto
any are called. In common use I confess all things run contrary hereunto. Most
Men greatly insist on the necessity of an outward Call unto the Office of the
Ministry, and so far no doubt they do well; for God is the God of Order; that
is of his own. But whereas they limit this outward Call of theirs unto certain
Persons, (...) Modes and Ceremonies of their own, without which they will not
allow that any Man is tightly called unto the Ministry, they do but contend to
oppress the Consciences of others by their Power and with their Inventions. But
their most pernicious mistake is yet remaining: So that Persons have or do
receive an outward Call in their Mode and Way, which what it has of a Call in
it I know not, they are not solicitous whether they are called of God or no.
For they continually admit of them unto their outward Call, on whom God has
bestowed no Spiritual Gifts to fit them for their Office; whence it is as
evident as if written with the Beams of the Sun, that he never called them
thereunto. They are as watchful as they are able, that God himself shall impose
none on them besides their Way and Order, or their Call. For let a Man be
furnished with Ministerial Gifts never so Excellent, yet if he will not come up
to their Call, they will do what lies in them for ever to shut him out of the
Ministry: But they will impose upon God without his Call every day. For if they
ordain any one in their way unto an Office, though he have no more of Spiritual
Gifts than Balaam's Ass, yet if you will believe them, Christ must accept of
him for a Minister of his whether he will or no. But let Men dispose of things
as they please, and as it seems good unto them, Christ has no other Order in
this matter, but as every one has received the Gift, so let them minister as
good Stewards of the Grace of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10. and Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. It is
true, that no Man ought to take upon him the Office of the Ministry, but he
that is, and until he be solemnly Called and set apart thereunto by the Church:
But it is no less true, that no Church has either Rule or Right so to call or
set apart any one to the Ministry, whom Christ has not previously called by
the Communication of Spiritual Gifts necessary to the Discharge of his Office;
and these things must be largely insisted on afterward.

( 11.) THIRDLY, Saving Grace is an Effect of the Covenant, and bestowed in the
Accomplishment, and by Virtue of the Promises thereof. This has been declared
elsewhere at large, where we treated of Regeneration and Sanctification. All
that are taken into this Covenant are sanctified and made holy. There is no
Grace designed unto any in the Eternal Purpose of God, none purchased or
procured by the Mediation of Christ, but it is comprised in, and exhibited by
the Promises of the Covenant. Wherefore they only who are taken into that
Covenant are made Partakers of Saving Grace, and they are all so. Things are
not absolutely so with respect unto Spiritual Gifts, although they also in some
Sense belong unto the Covenant. For the Promises of the Covenant are of two
sorts. (1) Such as belong unto the Internal Form and Essence of it- (2) Such as
belong unto it is outward Administration; that is, the Ways and Means whereby
it is Internal Grace is made Effectual. Saving Grace proceeds from the former;
Gifts relate unto the latter. For all the Promises of the plentiful Effusion of
the Spirit under the New Testament, which are frequently applied unto him as he
works and effects Evangelical Gifts Extraordinary and Ordinary in Men, do
belong unto the New Covenant; not as unto it is internal Essence and Form, but
as unto it is outward Administration. And if you overthrow this Distinction,
that the Covenant is considered either with respect unto it is Internal Grace,
or it is External Administration, every thing in Religion will be cast into
Confusion. Take away Internal Grace as some do, and the whole is rendered a mere
outside Appearance: Take away the outward Administration, and all Spiritual
Gifts and order thereon depending must cease. But as it is possible that some
may belong unto the Covenant with respect unto internal Grace, who are no way
taken into the External Administration of it, as Elect Infants who die before
they are Baptized; so it is frequent that some may belong to the Covenant, with
respect to it is outward Administration by virtue of Spiritual Gifts, who are
not made Partakers of it is inward effectual Grace.

( 12.) FOURTHLY, Saving Grace has an immediate respect unto the Friestly
Office of Jesus Christ, with the Discharge thereof in his Oblation and
Intercession. There is, I acknowledge, no Gracious Communication unto Men that
respects any one Office of Christ exclusively unto the other. For his whole
Mediation has an Influence into all that we receive from God in a way of Favor
or Grace. And it is his Person as vested with all his Offices, that is the
immediate Fountain of all Grace unto us. But yet something may, yea, sundry
things do peculiarly respect some one of his Offices, and are the immediate
Effects of the Virtue and Efficacy thereof. So is our Reconciliation and Peace
with God the peculiar Effect of his Oblation, which as a Priest he offered unto
God. And so in like manner is our Sanctification also, wherein we are washed
and cleansed from our Sins in his Blood, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Tit. 2. 14. And
although Grace be wrought in us by the Administration of the Kingly Power of
Christ, yet it is in the pursuit of what he had done for us as a Priest, and
the making of it effectual unto us. For by his Kingly Power he makes effectual
the Fruits of his Oblation and Intercession: But Gifts proceed solely from the
Regal Office and Power of Christ. They have a remote respect unto, and
Foundation in the Death of Christ, in that they are all given and distributed
unto, and for the good of that Church which he purchased with his own Blood;
but immediately they are Effects only of his Kingly Power. Hence Authority to
give and dispose them is commonly placed as a Consequent of his Exaliation at
the Right Hand of God, or with respect thereunto, Mat. 28. 18. Acts 2. 33. This
the Apostle declares at large, Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Christ being exalted
at the Right Hand of God, all Power in Heaven and Earth being given unto him,
and he being given to be Head over all things unto the Church, and having for
that end received the Promise of the Spirit from the Father, he gives out these
Gifts as it seems good unto him. And the Continuation of their Communication,
is not the least Evidence of the Continuance of the Exercise of his Kingdom:
For besides the Faithful Testimony of the Word to that purpose, there is a
threefold Evidence thereof, giving us Experience of it. (1) His Communication
of Saving Grace in the Regeneration, Conversion and Sanctification of the
Elect. For these things he works immediately by his Kingly Power. And whilst
there are any in the World savingly called and sanctified, he leaves not
himself without Witness as to his Kingly Power over all Flesh, whereon he gives
Eternal Life unto unto as many as the Father has given him, John 17. 2. But
this Evidence is wholly invisible unto the World, neither is it capable of
receiving it when tendered, because it cannot receive the Spirit, nor sees him,
nor knows him, John 14. 17. Nor are the things thereof exposed to the
Judgment of Sense or Reason, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. (2) Another Evidence hereof is
given in the Judgments that he executes in the World, and the outward
Protection which he affords unto his Church. On both these there are evident
Impressions of the continued actual Exercise of his Divine Power and Authority:
For in the Judgments that he executes on Persons and Nations, that either
reject the Gospel or persecute it, especially in some signal and uncontrollable
Instance, as also in the Guidance, Deliverance and Protection of his Church, he
manifests that though he was dead yet he is alive, and has the Keys of Hell
and Death. But yet because he is on the one Hand pleased to exercise great
Patience toward many of his open stubborn Adversaries, yea, the greatest of
them, suffering them to walk and prosper in their own ways, and to leave his
Church unto various Trials and Distresses, his Power is much hid from the World
at present in these Dispensations. (3) The third Evidence of the Continuance of
the Administration of his Mediatory Kingdom, consists in his Dispensation of
these Spiritual Gifts, which are properly the Powers of the New World. For such
is the Nature of them and their Use, such the Sovereignty that appears in their
Distribution, such their Distinction and Difference from all natural
Endowments, that even the World cannot but take notice of them, though it
violently hate and persecute them; and the Church is abundantly satisfied with
the Sense of the Power of Christ in them. Moreover, the principal End of these
Gifts is, to enable the Officers of the Church unto the due Administration of
all the Laws and Ordinances of Christ unto it is Edification. But all these Laws
and Ordinances, these Offices and Officers, he gives unto the Church as the
Lord over his own House, as the Sole Sovereign Lawgiver and Ruler thereof.

( 13.) FIFTHLY, They differ as unto the Event even in this World they may come
unto, and oft-times actually do so accordingly. For all Gifts, the best of
them, and that in the hignest Degree wherein they may be attained in this Life,
may be utterly lost or taken away. The Law of their Communication is, that who
improveth not that Talent or Measure of them which he has received, it shall
be taken from him. For whereas they are given for no other end, but to Trade
withal according to the several Capacities and Opportunities that Men have in
the Church, or their Families, or their own private Exercise, if that be
utterly neglected, to what end should they be left unto rust and uselesness in
the Minds of any? Accordingly we find it to come to pass. Some neglect them,
some reject them, and from both sorts they are Judicially taken away. Such we
have amongst us. Some there are who had received Considerable Spiritual
Abilities for Evangelical Administrations: But after a while they have fallen
into an outward state of things, wherein, as they suppose, they shall have no
Advantage by them; yea, that their Exercise would turn to their Disadvantage,
and thereon do wholly neglect them: By this means they have insensibly decayed,
until they become as devoid of Spiritual Abilities, as if they never had
Experience of any Assistance in that kind. They can no more either pray, or
speak, or evidence the Power of the Spirit of God in any thing unto the
Edification of the Church. Their Arm is dried up, and their right Eye is
utterly darkened, Zech. 11. 17. And this sometimes they come to be sensible of,
yea, ashamed of, and yet cannot retrieve themselves. But for the most part they
fall into such a state, as wherein the Profession and Use of them becomes as
they suppose inconsistent with their present Interest, and so they openly
renounce all concernment in them: Neither for the most part do they stay here,
but after they have rejected them in themselves, and espoused lazy profitable
outward Helps in their room, they blaspheme the Author of them in others, and
declare them all to be Delusions, Fancies and Imaginations. And if any one has
the Confidence to own the Assistance of the Holy Spirit in the Discharge of the
Duties of the Gospel unto the Edification of the Church, he becomes unto them a
Scorn and Reproach. These are Branches cut off from the Vine, whom Men gather;
or those whose miserable Condition is described by the Apostle, Heb. 6. 4, 5,
6. But one way or other these Gifts may be utterly lost or taken away from
them, who have once received them, and that whether they be Ordinary or
Extraordinary. There is no kind of them, no degree of them, that can give us
any Security, that they shall be always continued with us, or at all beyond our
diligent Attendance unto their Use and Exercise. With Saving Grace it is not
so. It is indeed subject unto various Decays in us; and it is thriving or
flourishing in our Souls, depends upon and answers unto our diligent Endeavor
in the use of all means of Holiness, ordinarily, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
For besides that, no Man can have the least Evidence of any thing of this Grace
in him, if he be totally negligent in it is Exercise and Imyrovement; so no Man
ought to expect that it will thrive or abound in him, unless he constantly and
diligently attend unto it, and give up himself in all things to it is Conduct.
But yet as to the continuance of it in the Souls of the Elect, as to the Life
and Being of it is Principle, and principal Effect in habitual Conformity unto
God and his Will, it is secured in the Covenant of Grace.

( 14) SIXTHLY, On whomsoever Saving Grace is bestowed, it is so firstly and
principally for himself and his own Good. It is a Fruit of the especial Love
and Kindness of God unto his own Soul, Jer. 31. 3. This both the Nature and all
the Ends of it do declare. For it is given unto us to renew the Image of God in
us, to make us like unto him, to restore our Nature, enable us unto Obedience,
and to make us meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. But yet we must
take heed that we think not that Grace is bestowed on any merely for
themselves. For indeed it is that wherein God designeth a Good unto all, Vir
bonus commune Bonum. A good Man is a good to all, Mic. 5. 7. And therefore God
in the Communication of Saving Grace unto any, has a three-sold respect unto
others, which it is the Duty of them that receive it diligently to consider and
attend unto. (1) He intends to give an Example by it of what is his Will, and
what he opproveth of: And therefore he requires of them in whom it is, such
Fruits in Holy Obedience, as may express the Example of an Holy Life in the
World, according to the Will of God and unto his Glory. Hereby does he further
the Salvation of the Elect, 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 7. 16. Convince the
Unbelieving World at present, 1 Pet. 2. 12. 15. Chap. 3. 16. And condemn it
hereafter, Heb. 11. 7. And himself is glorified, Matthew. 5. 16. Let therefore no
Man think, that because Grace is firstly and principally given him for himself
and his own Spiritual Advantage, that therefore he must not account for it also
with respect unto those other Designs of God. Yea, he who in the Exercise of
what he esteems Grace, has respect only unto himself, gives an Evidence that
he never had any that was genuine and of the right kind. (2) Fruitfulness unto
the benefiting of others is hence also expected. Holy Obedience the Effect of
Saving Grace, is frequently expressed in the Scripture by Fruits and
Fruitfulness, See Col. 1. 10. And these Fruits, or the things which others are
to feed upon and to be sustained by, are to be born by the Plants of the Lord,
the Trees of Righteousness. The Fruits of Love, Charity, Bounty, Mercy, Wisdom,
are those whereby Grace is rendered useful in the World, and is taken notice of
as that which is lovely and desirable, Ephesians. 2. 10. (3) God requires, that by
the Exercise of Grace the Doctrine of the Gospel be adorned and propagated.
This Doctrine is from God; Our Profession is our avowing of it so to be: What
it is the World knows not, but takes it is Measures of it from what it observes
in them by whom it is professed. And it is the unprofitable flagitious Lives of
Christians that have almost thrust the Gospel out of the World with Contempt.
But the Care that it be adorned, that it be glorified, is committed of God unto
every one on whom he bestows the least of Saving Grace. And this is to be done
only by the Guidance of an Holy Conversation in Conformity thereunto. And many
other such blessed Ends there are, wherein God has respect unto the Good and
Advantage of other Men in the Collation of Saving Grace upon any. And if
gracious Persons are not more useful than others in all things that may have a
real Benefit in them unto Mankind, it is their Sin and Shame. But yet after
all, Grace is principally and in the first place given unto Men for themselves,
their own Good and Spiritual Advantage, out of Love to their Souls, and in
order unto their Eternal Blessedness; all other Effects are but Secondary Ends
of it. But as unto these Spiritual Gifts it is quite otherwise. They are not in
the first place bestowed on any for their own sakes, or their own Good, but for
the Good and Benefit of others. So the Apostle expressly declares, 1 Cor. 12. 7.
The Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. These
Gifts whereby the Spirir evidenceth and manisesteth his Power, are bestowed on
Men for this very End, that they may profit and benefit others in their
Edification. And yet also where they are duly improved, they tend much to the
Spiritual Advantage of them on whom they are bestowed, as we shall see
afterward. Wherefore as Grace is primarily given unto us for our selves, and
secondarily for the Good of others; so Gifts are bestowed in the first place
for the Edification of others, and secondly for our own Spiritual Advantage
also.

( 15.) SEVENTHLY; The principal difference between them is in their nature and
Kind, discovering it self in their different Subjects, Operations and Effects.
For those already insisted on are principally from External Causes and
Considerations. And, (1) As to the different Subjects of them, Spiritual Gifts
are placed and seated in the Mind or Understanding only, whether they are
ordinary or extraordinary they have no other Hold nor Residence in the Soul.
And they are in the Mind as it is Notional and Theoretical, rather than as it
is practical. They are Intellectual Abilities and no more. I speak of them
which have any Residence in us; For some Gifts, as Miracles and Tongues,
consisted only in a transient Operation of an extraordinary Power. Of all
others Illumination is the Foundation, and Spiritual Light their Matter. So the
Apostle declares in his Order of Expression, Heb. 6. 4. The Will, and the
Affections, and the Conscience, are unconcerned in them. Wherefore they change
not the Heart with Power, although they may reform the Life by the Efficacy of
Light. And although God does not ordinarily bestow them on flagitious Persons,
nor continue them with such as after the reception of them become flagitious;
yet they may be in those who were unrenewed, and have nothing in them to
preserve Men absolutely from the worst of Sins. But Saving Grace possesses the
whole Soul; Men are thereby sanctified throughout in the whole Spirit, Soul and
Body, 1 These. 5. 17. as has been at large declared. Not the Mind only is
savingly enlightened, but there is a Principle of Spiritual Life infused into
the whole Soul, enabling it in all its Powers and Faculties to act
Obedientially unto God, whose Nature has been fully explained elsewhere.
Hence, (2.) They differ in their Operations. For Grace changes and
transformeth the whole Soul into its own Nature, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8. Romans 6. 17.
Chap. 12. 2. 2 Cor. 3. 18. It is a New, a Divine Nature unto the Soul, and is
in it an Habit disposing, inclining and enabling of it unto Obedience. It acts
it self in Faith, Love and Holiness in all things. But Gifts of themselves have
not this Power nor these Operations. They may and do in those who are possessed
of them in and under their Exercise make great impression on their own
Affections, but they change not the Heart, they renew not the Mind, they
transform not the Soul into the Image of God. Hence where Grace is predominant,
every Notion of Light and Truth which is Communicated unto the Mind, is
immediately turned into practice, by having the whole Soul cast into the Mould
of it; where only Gifts bear sway, the use of it in Duties unto Edification is
best whereunto it is designed. (3.) As to Effects or Consequents, the great
difference is, that on the part of Christ; Christ does thereby dwell and reside
in our Hearts; when concerning many of those who have been made partakers of
these other Spiritual Endowments, he will say, Depart from me I never knew you,
which he will not say of any one whose Soul he has inhabited.

( 16.) These are some of the principal Agreements and Differences between
Saving Graces and Spiritual Gifts; both sorts of them being wrought in
Believers by that one and self-same Spirit which divides to every one as he
will. And sor a close of this discourse I shall only add, that where these
Graces and Gifts in any Eminency or good Degree are bestowed on the same
Persons, they are exceedingly helpful unto each other. A Soul sanctified by
Saving Grace, is the only proper Soil for Gifts to flourish in, Grace
Influenceth Gifts unto a due Exercise, prevents their abuse, stirs them up unto
proper occasions, keeps them from being a matter of Pride or Contention, and
subordinates them in all things unto the Glory of God. When the actings of
Grace and Gifts are inseparable, as when in Prayer the Spirit is a Spirit of
Grace and Supplication, the Grace and Gift of it working together, when
utterance in other Duties is always accompanied with Faith and Love, then is
God glorified, and our own Salvation promoted. Then have Edifying Gifts a
Beauty and Luster upon them, and generally are most successful; when they are
clothed and adorned with Humility, Meekness, a Reverence of God, and
Compassion for the Souls of Men. Yea when there is no evidence, no
manifestation of their being accompanied with these and the like Graces, they
are but as a Parable or wise Saying in the Mouth of a Fool. Gifts on the other
side excite and stir up Grace unto its proper Exercise, and Operations. How
often is Faith, Love and Delight in God excited and drawn forth unto especial
Exercise in Believers by the use of their own Gifts. And thus much may suffice
as to the Nature of these Gifts in general: we next consider them under their
most general Distributions.

CHAP. III. Of Gifts and Offices Extraordinary: And first of Offices.
( 1.) THE Spiritual Gifts whereof we treat, respect either Powers and Duties
in the Church, or Duties only. Gifts that respect Powers and Duties are of two
sorts, or there have been, or are at any time, two sorts of such Powers and
Duties: The first whereof was Extraordinary, the latter Ordinary, and
consequently the Gifts subservient unto them must be of two sorts also, which
must further be cleared.

( 2.) Wherever Power is given by Christ unto his Churches, and Duiies are
required in the execution of that Power, unto the Ends of his Spiritual
Kingdom, to be performed by virtue thereof, there is an Office in the Church.
For an Ecclesiastical Office is an especial Power given by Christ unto any
Person or Persons for the performance of especial Duties belonging unto the
Edification of the Church in an especial manner. And these Offices have been of
two sorts. (1.) Extraordinary. (2.) Ordinary. Some seem to deny that there was
ever any such thing as Extraordinary Power or Extraordinary Offices in the
Church. For they do provide Successors unto all who are pleaded to have been of
that kind; and those such as look how far short they come of them in other
things, do exceed them in Power and Rule. I shall not contend about words, and
shall therefore only enquire what it was that constituted them to be Officers
of Christ in his Church whom thence we call Extraordinary; and then if others
can duly lay claim unto them, they may be allowed to pass for their Successors.

( 3.) THERE are four things which constitute an extraordinary Officer in the
Church of God, and consequently are required in, and do constitute an
extraordinary Office. (1.) An extraordinary Call unto an Office, such as none
other have or can have by virtue of any Law, Order or Constitution whatever.
(2.) An Extraordinary Power communicated unto Persons so called, enabling them
to act what they are so called unto, wherein the Essence of any Office does
consist. (3.) Extraordinary Gifts for the Exercise and Discharge of that Power.
(4.) Extraordinary Employment as to its extent and measure, requiring
extraordinary Labor, Travail, Zeal and Self-denial. All these do and must
concur in that Office, and unto those Offices which we call Extraordinary.

( 4.) THUS was it with the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists at the first,
which were all Extraordinary Teaching Officers in the Church, and all that ever
were so, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. Besides these, there were at the first
planting of the Church, Persons endued with Extraordinary Gifts, as of
Miracles, Healing and Tongues, which did not of themselves constitute them
Officers, but do belong to the second Head of Gifts which concern Duties only.
Howbeit these Gifts were always most eminently bestowed on them who were called
unto the Extraordinary Offices mentioned, 1 Cor. 14. 18. I thank my God I speak
with Tongues more than you all. They had the same Gift some of them, but the
Apostle had it in a more Eminent Degree. See Mat. 10. 8. And we may treat
briefly in our passage of these several sorts of Extraordinary Officers.

( 5.) First, For the Apostles, they had a double Call, Mission and Commission,
or a Twofold Apostleship. Their first Call was unto a subserviency unto the
Personal Ministry of Jesus Christ. For he was a Minister of the Circumcision
for the Truth of God, to confirm the Promises made unto the Fathers, Romans 15.
8. In the discharge of this his Personal Ministry it was necessary that he
should have peculiar Servants and Officers under him to prepare his Way and
Work, and to attend him therein. So he Ordained Twelve that they should be with
him, and that he might send them forth to Preach, Mark 3. 14. This was the
substance of their first Call and Work, namely to attend the presence of
Christ, and to go forth to Preach as he gave them order. Hence because he was
in his own Person as to his Prophetical Office the Minister only of the
Circumcision, being therein according to all the Promises sent only to the lost
Sheep of the House of Israel, he confined those who were to be thus assistant
unto him in that his especial Work and Ministry, and whilst they were so, unto
the same Persons and People, expressly prohibiting them to extend their Line or
Measure any further. Go not, says he, into the way of the Gentiles, and into
any City of the Samaritans enter you not; but go rather unto the lost Sheep of
the House of Israel, Mat. 10. 5. This rather was absolutely exclusive of the
others during his Personal Ministry, and afterward included only the
preeminence of the Israelites, that they were to have the Gospel offered unto
them in the first place. It was necessary the Word of God should be first
spoken unto them, Acts 13. 46.

( 6.) And this, it may be, occasioned that Difference which was afterward
among them, whether their Ministry extended unto the Gentiles or no; as we may
see Acts, Chap. 10 and 11. But whereas our Savior in that Commission, by
virtue whereof they were to act after his Resurrection, had extended their
Office and Power expressly to all Nations, Mat. 28. 19. or to every Creature in
all the World, Mat. 16. 15. A Man would wonder whence that uncertainty should
arise. I am persuaded that God suffered it so to be, that the Calling of the
Gentiles might be more signalized, or made more eminent thereby. For whereas
this was the great Mystery which in other Ages was not made known but hid in
God, namely that the Gentiles should be Fellow Heirs, and of the same Body, and
partakers of his Promise in Christ, that is, of the Promise made unto Abraham
by the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. it being now to be laid open and
displayed, he would by their Hesitation about it have it searched into,
examined, tried and proved, that the Faith of the Church might never be shaken
about it in after Ages. And in like manner when God at any time suffers
Differences and Doubts about the Truth or his Worship, to arise in the Church,
he does it for Holy Ends, although for the present we may not be able to
discover them. But this Ministry of the Apostles with its Powers and Duties,
this Apostleship which extended only unto the Church of the Jews, ceased at the
Death of Christ, or at the end of his own Personal Ministry in this World. Nor
can any, I suppose, pretend unto a Succession to them therein. Who or what
peculiar Instruments he will use and employ for the final Recovery of that
miserable lost People, whether he will do it by an Ordinary or an Extraordinary
Ministry, by Gifts Miraculous, or by the naked Efficacy of the Gospel, is known
only in his own Holy Wisdom and Counsel; The Conjectures of Men about these
things are vain and fruitless. For although the Promises under the Old
Testament for the calling of the Gentiles were far more clear and numerous,
than those which remain concerning the recalling of the Jews, yet because the
Manner, Way, and all other Circumstances were obscured, the whole is called a
Mystery hid in God from all the former Ages of the Church; much more therefore
may the way and manner of the recalling of the Jews be esteemed an hidden
Mystery; as indeed it is notwithstanding the Dreams and Conjectures of too many.

( 7.) BUT these same Apostles, the same individual Persons, Judas only
excepted, had another Call unto that Office of Apostleship which had respect
unto the whole Work and Interest of Christ in the World. They were now to be
made Princes in all Lands, Rulers, Leaders in Spiritual things, of all the
Inhabitants of the Earth, Psalm. 4. 5. 16. And to make this Call the more
conspicuous and evident, as also because it includes in it the Institution and
Nature of the Office it self whereunto they were called, our Blessed Savior
proceeds in it by sundry degrees. For, (1.) He gave unto them a Promise of
Power for their Office, or Office-Power, Mat. 16. 19. So he promised unto them
in the Person of Peter the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, or a power of
Spiritual binding and loosing of Sinners, of remitting or retaining Sin by the
Doctrine of the Gospel, Mat. 18. 18. John 20. 23. (2.) He actually collated a
Right unto that Power upon them, expressed by an outward Pledge, John 20 21,
22, 23. Jesus says unto them, Peace be unto you, as my Father has sent me,
even so send I you. And when he had said this he breathed on them, and says
unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose soever Sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them, and whose soever Sins ye retain they are retained. And this
Communication of the Holy Ghost was such as gave them a peculiar Right and
Title unto their Office, but not a Right and Power unto its Exercise. (3.) He
Sealed as it were their Commission which they had for the Discharge of their
Office, containing the whole warranty they had to enter upon the World, and to
subdue it unto the Obedience of the Gospel, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Go Teach,
Baptize, Command. But yet, (4.) All these things did not absolutely give them a
present Power for the Exercise of that Office whereunto they were called, or at
least a limitation was put for a Season upon it. For under all this Provision
and Furniture they are commanded to stay at Jerusalem, and not address
themselves unto the discharge of their Office, until that were fulfilled which
gave it its compleatness and perfection, Acts 1. 4, 6. Wherefore it is said,
That after his Ascension into Heaven, he gave some to be Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 8,
11. He gave not any completely to be Apostles until then. He had before
appointed the Office, designed the Persons, gave them their Commission with the
visible pledge of the Power they should afterward receive. But there yet
remained the Communication of extraordinary Gifts unto them to enable them unto
the discharge of their Office. And this was that which after the Ascension of
Christ they received on the day of Pentecost, as it is related, Acts 2. And
this was so essentially necessary unto their Office, that the Lord Christ is
said therein to give some to be Apostles. For without these Gifts they were not
so, nor could discharge that Office unto his Honor and Glory. And these things
all concurred to the Constitution of this Office, with the Call of any Persons
to the discharge of it. The Office it self was instituted by Christ, the
Designation and Call of the Persons unto this Office was an immediate Act of
Christ. So also was their Commission and Power, and the Extraordinary Gifts
which he endowed them withal. And whereas the Lord Christ is said to give this
Office and these Officers after his Ascension, namely in the Communication of
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost unto those Officers for the Discharge of that
Office, it is evident that all Office-Power depends on the Communication of
Gifts whether Extraordinary or Ordinary. But where any of these is wanting,
there is no Apostle, nor any Successor of one Apostle. Therefore when Paul was
afterward added unto the Twelve in the same Power and Office, he was careful
to declare how he received both Call, Commission and Power immediately from
Jesus Christ. Paul an Apostle, not of Men, neither by Men, but by Jesus Christ,
and God the Father who raised him from the Dead, Gal. 1. 1. Whereas those who
pretend to be their Successors, if they will speak the Truth must say, that
they are what they are, neither of Jesus Christ, nor God the Father, but or Men
and by Men. However they neither dare nor will pretend so to be of God and
Christ, as not to be called by the Ministry of Man, which evacuates the
pretense of Succession in this Office.

( 8.) Furthermore, unto the Office described there belongs the measure and
extent of its Power Objectively, and the Power it self Intensively or
Subjectively. For the first, the Object of Apostolical Power was Twofold, (1.)
The World to be Converted. (2.) The Churches gathered of those that were
Converted, whether Jews or Gentiles. For the first; their Commission extended
to all the World; and every Apostle had Right, Power and Authority to Preach
the Gospel to every Creature under Heaven, as he had opportunity so to do, Mat.
28. 18, 19, 20. Mark 16. 15. Romans 10. 15, 16, 17, 18. Now whereas it was
impossible that any one Person should pass through the whole World in the
pursuit of this Right and Power; and whereas for that cause our Lord had
ordained Twelve to that purpose, that the Work might the more effectually be
carried on by their Endeavors, it is highly probable that they did by
Agreement distribute the Nations into certain Lots and Portions which they
singly took upon them to instruct. So there was an Agreement between Paul on
the one Hand with Barnabas, and Peter, James and John on the other, that they
should go to the Gentiles, and the other take more especial Care of the Jews,
Gal. 2. 7, 8, 9. And the same Apostle afterward designed to avoid the Line or
Allotment of others to Preach the Gospel where the People were not allotted
unto the especial Charge of any other, 2 Cor. 10. 16. But yet this was not so
appointed as if their Power was limited thereby, or that any of them came short
in his Apostolical Power in any other place in the World, as well as that
wherein for convenience he particularly exercised his Ministry. For the Power
of every one still equally extended unto all Nations, although they could not
always Exercise it in all places alike. Nor did that express Agreement that was
between Peter and Paul about the Gentiles and the Circumcision, either
discharge them of their Duty, that the one should have more regard unto the
Circumcision, or the other unto the Gentiles; nor did it limit their Power, or
bound their Apostolical Authority; but only directed the Exercise of it as unto
the principal Intention and Design. Wherefore as to the Right and Authority of
Preaching the Gospel and Converting Persons unto the Faith, the whole World
sell equally under the Ca^e, and was in the Commission of every Apostle,
although they applied themselves unto the discharge of this Work in particular,
according to their own Wisdom and Choice under the guidance and disposal of the
Providence of God. And as I will not deny but that it is the Duty of every
Christian, and much more of every Minister of the Gospel, to promote the
Knowledge of Christ unto all Mankind, as they have opportunities and advantages
so to do; yet I must say, if there be any who pretend to be Successors of the
Apostles as to the extent of their Office-Power unto all Nations;
notwithstanding whatever they may pretend of such an Agreement to take up with
a Portion accommodated unto their Ease and Interest, whilst so many Nations of
the Earth lie unattempted as to the Preaching of the Gospel, they will one Day
be found Transgressors of their own Profession, and will be dealt withal
accordingly.

( 9.) OUT of the World by the Preaching of the Gospel Persons were called,
converted, and thereon gathered into Holy Societies or Churches for the
Celebration of Gospel worship, and their own mutual Edification. All these
Churches whenever they were called and planted in the whole World, were equally
under the Authority of every Apostle. Where any Church was called and planted
by any particular Apostle, there was a peculiar Relation between him and them,
and so a peculiar mutual Care and Love: Nor could it otherwise be. So the
Apostle Paul pleads an especial Interest in the Corinthians and others, unto
whom he had been a Spiritual Father in their Conversion, and the Instrument of
forming Christ in them. Such Churches therefore as were of their own peculiar
calling and planting, it is probable they did every one take Care of in a
peculiar manner. But yet no Limitation of the Apostolical Power ensued hereon.
Every Apostle had still the Care of all the Churches on him, and Apostolical
Authority in every Church in the World equally, which he might exercise as
occasion did require. Thus Paul affirms that the Care of all the Churches was
upon him daily, 2 Cor. 11. 28. And it was the Crime of Diotrephes, for which he
is branded, that he opposed the Apostolical Power of John in that Church, where
probably he was the Teacher, 3 John 9, 10. But what Power now over all
Churches, or Authority in all Churches, some may fancy or claim to themselves,
I know not; but it were to be wished that Men would reckon that Care and Labor
are as extensive in this Case as Power and Authority.

( 10.) AGAIN, the Power of this extraordinary Office may be considered
intensively or formally what it was. And this in one Word was, All the Power
that the Lord Christ has given or thought meet to make use of for the
Edification of the Church. I shall give a brief Description of it in some few
general Instances. (1) It was a Power of administering all the Ordinances of
Christ in the way and manner of his Appointment. Every Apostle in all places
had Power to Preach the Word, to Administer the Sacraments, to Ordain Elders,
and to do whatever else belonged unto the Worship of the Gospel. But yet they
had not Power to do any of these things any otherwise but as the Lord Christ
had appointed them to be done. They could not Baptize any but Believers and
their Seed, Acts 8. 36, 37, 38. Acts 16. 15. They could not Administer the
Lord's Supper unto any but the Church, and in the Church, 1 Cor. 10. 20, 22,
23, 24. Chap. 10. 17. They could not Ordain Elders, but by the Suffrage and
Election of the People, Acts 14. 23. Those indeed who pretend to be their
Successors, plead for such a Right in themselves unto some, if not all
Gospel-Administrations, as that they may take Liberty to dispose of them at
their pleasure by their sole Authority, without any regard unto the Rule of all
Holy Duties in particular. (2) It was a Power of executing all the Laws of
Christ, with the Penalties annexed unto their Disobedience. We have, says the
Apostle, in a readiness wherewith to revenge all Disobedience, 2 Cor. 10. 6.
And this principally consisted in the Power of Excommunication, or the
Judiciary Excision of any Person or Persons from the Society of the Faithful,
and Visible Body of Christ in the World. Now although this Power were
absolutely in each Apostle toward all Offenders in every Church; whence Paul
affirms that he had himself delivered Hymeneus and Alexander unto Satan, 1 Timothy
1. 20. Yet did they not exercise this Power without the Concurrence and Consent
of the Church from whence an Offender was to be cut off; because that was the
Mind of Christ, and that which the Nature of the Ordinance did require, 1 Cor.
5. 3, 4, 5. (3) Their whole Power was Spiritual and not Carnal. It respected
the Souls, Minds and Consciences of Men alone as it is Object, and not their
Bodies; or Goods, or Liberties in this World. Those extraordinary Instances of
Ananias and Saphira in their sudden Death, of Elymas in his Blindness, were
only miraculous Operations of God in testifying against their Sin, and
proceeded not from any Apostolical Power in the Discharge of their Office. But
as unto that kind of Power which now has devoured all other Appearances of
Church Authority, and in the Sense of the most is only significant, namely, to
Fine, Punish, Imprison, Banish, Kill and Destroy Men and Women, Christians,
Believers, Persons of an unblameable useful Conversation, with the worst of
Carnal Weapons and Savage Cruelty of Mind, as they were never entrusted with
it, nor any thing of the like kind, so they have sufficiently manifested how
their Holy Souls did abhor the Thoughts of such Antichristian Power and
Practices; though in others the Mystery of Iniquity began to work in their Days.

( 11.) THE Ministry of the LXX also, which the Lord Christ sent forth
afterward, to go two and two before his Face into every City and Place whither
he himself would come, was in like manner Temporary; that is, it was
subservient and commensurate unto his own Personal Ministry in the Flesh, Luke
10. 1, 2, 3. These are commonly called Evangelists, from the General Nature of
their Work, but were not those Extraordinary Officers, which were afterward in
the Christian Church under that Title and Appellation. But there was some
Analogy and Proportion between the one and the other. For as these first
Seventy seem to have had an Inferior Work, and subordinate unto that of the
Twelve in their Ministry unto the Church of the Jews, during the time of the
Lord Christ his Converse among them; so those Evangelists that afterward were
appointed, were subordinate unto them in their Evangelical Apostleship. And
these also as they were immediately called unto their Employment by the Lord
Jesus, so their Work being Extraordinary, they were endued with Extraordinary
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as Ver. 9. 17, 19.

( 12.) IN the Gospel Church State there were Evangelists also as they are
mentioned, Ephesians. 4. 11. Acts 21. 2. 2 Timothy 4. 5. Gospellers, Preachers of the
Gospel, distinct from the Ordinary Teachers of the Churches. Things I confess
are but obscurely delivered concerning this sort of Men in Scripture; their
Office being not designed unto a Continuance. Probably the Institution of it
was traduced from the Temporary Ministry of the Seventy before mentioned. That
they were the same Persons continued in their first Office, as the Apostles
were, is uncertain and improbable; though it be not that some of them might be
called thereunto; as Philip, and Timothy, and Titus, were Evangelists that were
not of that first Number. Their especial Call is not mentioned, nor their
Number any where intimated. That their Call was Extraordinary is hence
apparent, in that no Rules are any where given or prescribed about their Choice
or Ordination, no Qualification of their Persons expressed, nor any Direction
given the Church as to it is future Proceeding about them, no more than about
new or other Apostles. They seem to have been called by the Apostles, by the
Direction of a Sp irit of Prophecy or immediate Revelation from Christ. So it
is said of Timothy, who is expressly called an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5. That he
received that Gift by Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4. 14. that is, the Gift of the Office:
As when Christ ascended, he gave Gifts unto Men, some to be Evangelists, Ephesians.
4. 8, 11. For this way did the Holy Ghost design Men unto extraordinary Offices
and Employments, Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. And when they were so designed by Prophecy,
or immediate Revelation from Christ by the Holy Ghost, then the Church in
Compliance therewith both prayed for them, and laid their Hands on them: So
when the Holy Ghost had revealed his choosing of Paul and Barnabas unto an
especial Work, the Prophets and Teachers of the Church of Antioch where they
then were, fasted and prayed, and laid their Hands on them, so sending them
away, Acts 13. 14. And when Timothy was called to be an Evangelist by especial
Revelation or Prophecy, the Apostle laid his Hands on him, whereby he received
the Holy Ghost in his extraordinary Gifts: The Gift of God which was in him by
the putting on of his Hands, 2 Timothy 1. 6. And as it was usual with him to join
others with himself in those Epistles which he wrote by immediate Divine
Inspiration, so in this Act of laying his Hands on an Evangelist as a Sign of
the Communication of extraordinary Gifts, he joined the Ordinary Presbytery of
the Church with him, that were present in the place where he was so called. It
is evident therefore, that both their Call and their Gifts were extraordinary,
and therefore so also was their Office. For although Men who have only an
Ordinary Call to Office may have Extraordinary Gifts, and many had so in
Primitive Times: And although some might have Extraordinary Gifts, who were
never called unto Office at all, as some of those who spoke with Tongues, and
wrought Miracles; yet where there is a Concurrence of an Extraordinary Call and
Extraordinary Gifts, there the Office is Extraordinary.

( 13.) THE Power that these Officers in the Church were entrusted with, was
Extraordinary: For this is a certain Consequent of an Extraordinary Call, and
Extraordinary Gifts. And this Power respected all Churches in the World
equally; yea, and all Persons, as the Apostles also did. But whereas their
Ministry was subordinate unto that of the Apostles, they were by them guided as
to the particular places wherein they were to exercise their Power, and
discharge their Office for a Season. This is evident from Paul's Disposal of
Titus as to his Work and Time, Tit. 1. 5. Chap. 3. 12. But yet their Power did
at no time depend on their Relation unto any particular place or Churcb, nor
were they ever Ordained to any one Place or See more than another. But the
Extent of their Employment was every way as large as that of the Apostles, both
as to the World and as to the Churches; only in their present particular
Disposal of themselves, they were, as it is probable, for the most part under
the Guidance of the Apostles; although sometimes they had particular
Revelations and Directions from the Holy Ghost, or by the Ministry of Angels,
for their especial Employment, as Philip had, Acts 8. 26.

( 14.) AND as for their Work, it may be reduced unto Three Heads. (1) To
Preach the Gospel in all Places unto all Persons, as they had occasion. So
Philip went down to Samaria and preached Christ, Acts 8. 5. And when the
Apostle Paul charge Timothy to do the Work of an Evangelist, 2 Timothy 4. 5. he
prescribes unto him Preaching the Word in Season and out of Season, ver. 2. And
whereas this was incumbent in like manner on the Ordinary Teachers of every
Church; the Teaching of those Evangelists differed from theirs in two things.
(1) In the Extent of their Work, which as we showed before, was equal unto that
of the Apostles; whereas Ordinary Bishops, Pastors or Teachers, were to feed,
teach and take care of the especial Flocks only which they were set over, Acts
20. 17, 18. 1 Pet. 5. 2. (2) They were obliged to labor in their Work in a
more than ordinary manner; as it should seem from 2 Timothy 4. 5. (2ly.) The
Second Part of their Work was to confirm the Doctrine of the Gospel by
Miraculous Operations as occasion did require. So Philip the Evangelist wrought
many Miracles of sundry sorts at Samaria, in the Confirmation of the Doctrine
which he taught, Acts 8. 6, 7, 13. And in like manner there is no question, but
that the rest of the Evangelists had the Power or Gift of Miraculous
Operations, to be exercised as occasion did require, and as they were guided by
the Holy Ghost. (3) They were employed in the settling and completing of those
Churches, whose Foundations were laid by the Apostles. For whereas they had the
great Work upon them, of Preaching the Gospel unto all Nations, they could not
continue long or reside in any one Place or Church. And yet when Persons were
newly converted to the Faith, and disposed only into an Imperfect Order,
without any especial peculiar Officers, Guides or Rulers of their own; it was
not safe leaving of them unto themselves, lest they should be too much at a
Loss as to Gospel Order and Worship. Wherefore, in such places where any
Churches were planted, but not completed, nor would the Design of the Apostles
suffer them to continue any longer there; they left these Evangelists among
them for a Season, who had Power by virtue of their Office to dispose of things
in the Churches, until they came unto Compleatness and Perfection. When this
End was attained, and the Churches were settled under Ordinary Elders of their
own, the Evangelists removed into other places, according as they were directed
or disposed. These things are evident from the Instructions given by Paul unto
Timothy and Titus, which have all of them respect unto this Order.

( 15.) Some there are who plead for the Continuance of this Office: Some in
express Terms and under the same Name: Others for Successors unto them, at
least in that part of their Work which consists in Power over many Churches.
Some say that Bishops succeed to the Apostles, and Presbyters unto those
Evangelists: But this is scarce defensible in any tolerable manner by them
whose Interest it is to defend it. For Timothy, whom they would have to be a
Bishop, is expressly called an Evangelist. That which is pleaded with most
probability for their Continuance, is the Necessity of the Work wherein they
were employed in the Rule and Settlement of the Churches: But the Truth is, if
their whole Work as before described be consulted, as none can perform some
parts of it, so it may be very few would over-earnestly press after a
Participation of their Office. For to preach the Word continually, and that
with a peculiar Labor and Travail, and to move up and down according as the
Necessity of the Edification of the Churches does require, doing nothing in
them but according to the Rule and Appointment of Christ, are things that not
many will earnestly covet to be engaged in. But there is an Apprehension that
there was something more than Ordinary Power belonging unto this Office, that
those who enjoyed it were not obliged always to labor in any particular
Church, but had the Rule of many Churches committed unto them. Now whereas this
Power is apt to draw other desirable things unto it, or carry them along with
it; this is that which some pretend a Succession unto: Though they are neither
Called like them, nor Gifted like them, nor Labor like them, nor have the same
Object of their Employment, much less the same Power of Extraordinary
Operations with them; yet as to the Rule over sundry Churches, they must needs
be their Successors. I shall therefore briefly do these two things. (1) Show
that there are no such Officers as these Evangelists continued by the Will of
Christ in the ordinary State and Course of the Chrrch. (2) That there is no
need of their Continuance from any Work applied unto them.

( 16.) AND, 1. The things that are Essential unto the Office of an Evangelist,
are unattainable at present unto the Church. For where no Command, no Rule, no
Authority, no Directions are given, for the calling of any Officer, there that
Office must cease, as does that of the Apostles, who could not be called but by
Jesus Christ. What is required unto the Call of an Evangelist, was before
declared. And unless it can be manifested either by Institution or Example, how
any one may be otherwise called unto that Office, no such Office can be
continued. For a Call by Prophecy or Immediate Revelation none now will
pretend unto. And other Call the Evangelists of Old had none.

( 17.) NOR is there in the Scripture the least mention of the Call or
Appointment of any one to be an Ecclesiastical Officer in an Ordinary stated
Church, but with Relation unto that Church whereof he was, or was to be, an
Officer. But an Evangelist as such, was not especially related unto any one
Church more than another; though as the Apostles themselves, they might for a
time attend unto the Work in one Place or Church, rather or more, than another.
Wherefore without a Call from the Holy Ghost, either immediate by Prophecy and
Revelation, or by the Direction of Persons infallibly inspired, as the Apostles
were, none can be called to be Evangelists, nor yet to succeed them under any
other Name in that Office. Wherefore the Primitive Church after the Apostles
time, never once took upon them to constitute or Ordain an Evangelist, as
knowing it a thing beyond their Rule, and out of their Power. Men may invade an
Office when they please, but unless they be called unto it, they must account
for their Usurpation. And as for those who have erected an Office in the
Church, or an Episcopacy, principally if not solely out of what is ascribed
unto these Evangelists, namely, to Timothy and Titus, they may be further
attended unto in their Claim, when they lay the least Pretense unto the whole
of what is ascribed unto them. But this doing the Work of an Evangelist, is
that which few Men care for, or delight in; only their Power und Authority in a
new kind of Mannagery, many would willingly possess themselves of.

( 18.) 2. THE Evangelists we read of, had extraordinary Gifts of the Holy
Spirit, without which they could not warrantably undertake their Office. This
we have manifested before. Now these extraordinary Gifts, differing not only in
Degrees but in Kind from all those of the Ordinary Ministry of the Church, are
not at present by any pretended unto: And if any should make such a Pretense,
it would be an easy matter to convince them of their Folly. But without these
Gifts, men must content themselves with such Offices in the Church as are
stated with respect unto every particular Congregation. Acts 14. 23. Chap. 20.
28. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. Phil. 1. 1.

( 19.) SOME indeed seem not satisfied, whether to derive their Claim from
Timothy and Titus as Evangelists, or from the Bishops that were Ordained by
them, or described unto them. But whereas those Bishops were no other but
Elders of particular Churches, as is evident beyond a modest Denial, from Acts
20. 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 8. Tit. 1. 4, 5. So certainly they cannot
be of both sorts, the one being apparently superior unto the other. If they
are such Bishops as Titus and Timothy Ordained, it is well enough known both
what is their Office, their Work and their Duty: If such as they pretend
Timothy and Titus to be, they must manifest it in the like Call, Gifts and
Employment, as they had.

( 20.) FOR, (3) There are not any now, who do pretend unto their Principal
Employment by Virtue of Office, nor can so do. For it is certain, that the
Principal Work of the Evangelists was to go up and down from one Place and
Nation unto another, to preach the Gospel unto Jews and Gentiles as yet
unconverted, and their Commission unto this purpose was as large and extensive
as that of the Apostles. But who shall now empower any one hereunto? What
Church, what Persons have received Authority to Ordain any one to be such an
Evangelist? Or what Rules or Directions are given as to their Qualifications,
Power or Duty; or how they should be so ordained? It is true, those who are
ordained Ministers of the Gospel, and others also that are the Disciples of
Christ, may and ought to preach the Gospel to unconverted Persons and Nations
as they have opportunity, and are particularly guided by the Providence of God:
But that any Church or Person have Power or Authority to ordain a Person unto
this Office and Work, cannot be proved.

( 21.) LASTLY, The Continuance of the Employment as unto the Settling of new
planted Churches, is no way necessary. For every Church being planted and
settled, is entrusted with Power for it is own Preservation and continuance in
due Order according to the Mind of Christ, and is enabled to do all those
things in it self, which at first were done under the Guidance of the
Evangelists; nor can any one Instance be given wherein they are defective. And
where any Church was called and gathered in the Name of Christ, which had some
things yet wanting unto it is Perfection and Complete Order, which the
Evangelists were to finish and settle; they did it not but in and by the Power
of the Church it self; only presiding and directing in the things to be done.
And if any Churches through their own Default have lost that Order and Power
which they were once established in, as they shall never want Power in
themselves to recover their pristine Estate and Condition, who will attend unto
their Duty according unto Rule to that purpose: So this would rather prove a
Necessity of raising up new Evangelists, of a new extraordinary Ministry on the
Defection of Churches, than the continuance of them in the Church rightly
stated and settled.

( 22.) Besides these Evangelists, there were Prophets also who had a
Temporary, Extraordinary Ministry in the Church. Their grant from Christ or
Institution in the Church is mentioned, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. and the
Exercise of their Ministry is declared Acts 13. 1. But the Names of Prophets,
and Prophecy, are used variously in the New Testament. For sometimes an
Extraordinary Office and Extraordinary Gifts are signified by them; and
sometimes Extraordinary Gifts only; sometimes an Ordinary Office with Ordinary
Gifts; and sometimes Ordinary Gifts only. And unto one of these Heads may the
use of the word be every where reduced: In the places mentioned, Extraordinary
Officers endued with Extraordinary Gifts are intended. For they are said to be
set in the Church; and are placed in the second Rank of Officers next to the
Apostles; first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, 1 Cor. 12. 28. between them and
Evangelists, Ephesians. 4. 11. And two things are ascribed unto them. (1.) That
they received immediate Revelations and Directions from the Holy Ghost, in
things that belonged unto the present Duty of the Church. Unto them it was that
the Holy Ghost revealed his Mind, and gave Commands concerning the separation
of Barnabas and Saul unto their Work, Acts 13. 2. (2.) They foretold things to
come by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, wherein the Duty or Edification of
the Church was concerned. So Agabus the Prophet foretold the Famine in the days
of Claudius Caesar, whereon Provision was made for the poor Saints at
Jerusalem, that they might not suffer by it, Acts 11. 28, 29. And the same
Person afterward, prophesied of the Bonds and Sufferings of Paul at
Jerusalem, Acts 21. 10, 11. And the samething, it being of the highest
Concernment unto the Church, was, (as it should seem) revealed unto the
Prophets that were in most Churches; for so himself gives an account hereof.
And now behold I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things
that shall befall me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City
that Bonds and Afflictions abide me, Acts 20. 21, 22. That is, in all the
Cities he passed through, where there were Churches planted and Prophets in
them. These things the Churches then stood in need of, for their Confirmation,
Direction and Comfort; and were therefore I suppose, most of them supplied with
such Officers for a Season; that is, whilst they were needful. And unto this
Office, though expressly affirmed to be set in the Church and placed between the
Apostles and the Evangelists, none that I know of do pretend a Succession. All
grant that they were extraordinary, because their Gift and Work was so; but so
were those of Evangelists also. But there is no mention of the Power and Rule
of these Prophets, or else undoubtedly we should have had on one pretense or
other Successors provided for them.

( 23.) 2dly, Sometimes an Extraordinary Gift without Office is intended in
this Expression. So it is said that Philip the Evangelist had four Daughters,
Virgins, which did Prophecy, Acts 21. 9. It is not said that they were
Prophetesses, as there were some under the Old Testament; only that they did
Prophecy; that is, they had Revelations from the Holy Ghost occasionally for
the use of the Church. For to Prophecy is nothing but to declare hidden and
secret things by virtue of immediate Revelation, be they of what Nature they
will; and so is the word commonly used, Mat. 26. 68. Luke 22. 64. So an
Extraordinary Gift without Office is expressed, Acts 19. 6. And when Paul had
laid his Hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came, and they spoke with Tongues and
Prophesied. Their Prophesying, which was their Declaration of Spiritual things
by immediate Revelation, was of the same Nature with their speaking with
Tongues; both Extraordinary Gifts and Operations of the Holy Ghost. And of this
sort were those Miracles, Healings and Tongues which God for a time set in the
Church, which did not constitute distinct Officers in the Church, but they were
only sundry Persons in each Church which were endued with these Extraordinary
Gifts for its Edification. And therefore are they placed after Teachers,
comprizing both, which were the principal sort of the ordinary continuing
Officers of the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28. And of this sort do I reckon those
Prophets to be who are treated of, 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. For that they
were neither stated Officers in the Churches, nor yet the Brethren of the
Church promiscuously; but such as had received an especial Extraordinary Gift,
is evident from the Context, see verse 30. 37.

( 24.) AGAIN, an Ordinary Office with Ordinary Gifts is intended by this
Expression, Romans 12. 6. Having then Gifts differing according to the Grace that
is given to us, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the proportion
of Faith. Prophecy here can intend nothing but Teaching, or Preaching, in the
Exposition and Application of the Word; for an External Rule is given unto it,
in that it must be done according to the proportion of Faith, or the sound
Doctrine of Faith revealed in the Scripture. And this ever was and will ever
continue to be the Work and Duty of the ordinary Teachers of the Church,
whereunto they are enabled by the Gifts of Christ which they receive by the
Holy Ghost, Ephesians. 4. 7. as we shall see more afterward. And hence also those
who are not called unto Office, who have yet received a Gift enabling them to
declare the Mind of God in the Scripture unto the Edification of others, may be
said to Prophecy.

( 25.) AND these things I thought meet to interpose, with a brief Description
of those Officers which the Lord Jesus Christ granted unto his Church for a
Season, at its first Planting and Establishment, with what belonged unto their
Office, and the necessity of their Work. For the Collation of them on the
Church, and their whole Furniture with Spiritual Gifts, was the immediate Work
of the Holy Ghost, which we are in the Declaration of; and withal it was my
Design to manifest how vain is the pretense of some unto a kind of Succession
unto these Officers, who have neither an Extrordinary Call, nor Extraordinary
Gifts, nor Extraordinary Employment, but only are pleased to assume an
Extraordinary Power unto themselves, over the Churches and Disciples of Christ;
and that such as neither Evangelists, nor Prophets, nor Apostles, did ever
claim or make use of. But this matter of Power is Fuel in it self unto the
Proud, Ambitious Minds of Diotrephists, and as now circumstanced with other
Advantages, is useful to the corrupt Lusts of Men; and therefore it is no
wonder if it be pretended unto, and greedily reached after, by such as really
have neither Call to the Ministry, nor Gifts for it, nor do employ themselves
in it. And therefore as in these Extraordinary Officers and their Gifts, did
consist the Original Glory and Honor of the Churches in an especial manner,
and by them was their Edification carried on and perfected; so by an empty
pretense unto their Power, without their Order and Spirit, the Churches have
been stained and deformed, and brought to destruction. But we must return unto
the Consideration of Extraordinary Spiritual Gifts, which is the especial Work
before us.

CHAP. IV. Extraordinary Spiritual Gifts. 1 Cor. 12. v. 8, 9, 10, 11.
( 1.) EXTRAORDINARY Spiritual Gifts were of two sorts. First, Such as
absolutely exceed the whole Power and Faculties of our Minds and Souls. These
therefore did not consist in an abiding Principle or Faculty always resident in
them that received them, so as that they could Exercise them by virtue of any
inherent Power and Ability. They were so granted unto some Persons in the
Execution of their Office, as that so often as was needful, they could produce
their Effects by virtue of an immediate Extraordinary Influence of Divine
Power, transiently affecting their Minds. Such was the Gift of Miracles,
Healing, and the like. There were no Extraordinary Officers, but they had these
Gifts. But yet they could work or operate by virtue of them, only as the Holy
Ghost gave them especial Direction for the putting forth of his Power in them.
So it is said that Paul and Barnabas Preaching at Iconium, the Lord gave
Testimony unto the word of his Grace, and granted Signs and Wonders to be done
by their Hands, Acts 14. 3. The working of Signs and Miracles, is the immediate
operation of the Spirit of God; nor can any Power or Faculty efficiently
productive of such Effects, abide in the Souls or Minds of Men: These
miraculous Operations were the witness of the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven,
which he gave to the Truth of the Gospel. See Heb. 2. 4. with our Exposition
thereon. Wherefore there was no more in these Gifts which absolutely exceed the
whole faculties of our Natures, but the designing of certain Persons by the
Holy Ghost, in and with whose Ministry he would himself effect miraculous
operations.

Secondly, They were such as consisted in Extraordinary Endowments and
Improvements of the Faculties of the Souls or Minds of Men; such as Wisdom,
Knowledge, Utterance, and the like. Now where these were bestowed on any in an
Extraordinary manner, as they were on the Apostles and Evangelists, they
differed only in Degree from them that are ordinary, and still continued; but
are of the same kind with them; whereof we shall treat afterward. Now whereas
all these Gifts of both sorts, are expressly and distinctly enumerated, and set
down by our Apostle in one place, I shall consider them as they are there
proposed by him.

( 2.) 1 COR. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. But the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every Man to profit withal. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of
Wisdom; to another the word of Knowledge by the same Spirit; to another Faith
by the same Spirit; to another the Gifts of Healing by the same Spirit; to
another the working of Miracles; to another Prophecy; to another discerning of
Spirits; to another diverse kinds of Tongues; to another the Interpretation of
Tongues: But all these works that one and self-same Spirit; dividing to every
one severally as he will. The general Concernments of this passage in the
Apostle were declared, and the context opened, at the beginning of our
Discourse on this subject. I shall only now consider the especial Spiritual
Gifts that are here enumerated by the Apostle, which are Nine in number, laid
down promiscuously without respect unto any order or dependence of one upon
another; although it is probable that those first placed, were the principal,
or of principal use in the Church.

( 3.) The first is (...), the Word of Wisdom. (...) here is of the same
signification with (...) in the Hebrew; which often signifies a Thing or
Matter. Wherefore the Word of Wisdom, is nothing but Wisdom it self. And our
Enquiry is, What was that Wisdom which was a peculiar and an especial Gift (in
those days) of the Holy Ghost. Our Lord Jesus Christ promised unto his
Disciples that he would give them a Mouth and Wisdom which all their
Adversaries should not be able to gainsay nor resist, Luke 21. 15. This will be
our Rule in the Declaration of the Nature of this Gift. That which he has
respect unto, is the Defense of the Gospel, and its Truth, against powerful
persecuting Adversaries. For although they had the Truth on their side, yet
being Men ignorant and unlearned, they might justly fear that when they were
brought before Kings and Rulers, and Priests, they should be baffled in their
Profession, and not be able to defend the Truth. Wherefore this Promise of a
Mouth and Wisdom respects Spiritual Ability and Utterance in the Defense of the
Truth of the Gospel, when they were called into question about it. Spiritual
Ability of Mind is the Wisdom, and Utterance or freedom of Speech is the Mouth
here promised. An Eminent instance of the accomplishment hereof we have in
Peter and John, Acts 4. For upon their making a Defense of the Resurrection of
Christ and the Truth of the Gospel therein, such as their Adversaries were not
able to gainsay nor resist, it is said, that when the Rulers and Elders saw
their (...), that is their utterance in Defense of their Cause with Boldness,
and so the Wisdom wherewith it was accompanied, considering that they were
unlearned and Ignorant, they were astonished, and only considered, that they
had been with Jesus, v. 13. And he it was who in the accomplishment of his
Promise had given them that Spiritual Wisdom and Utterance, which they were not
able to resist. So it is said expressly of Stephen, that his Adversaries were
not able to resist the Wisdom and Spirit whereby he spoke, Actt 6. 10.
Wherefore this Gift of Wisdom in the first place was a Spiritual Skill and
Ability to defend the Truths of the GosPel, when questioned, opposed or
blasphemed. And this Gift was eminent in those Primitive Times, when a Company
of unlearned Men were able upon all occasions to maintain and defend the Truth
which they Believed and Professed before and against Doctors, Scribes, Lawyers,
Rulers of Synagogus, yea Princes and Kings, continually so confounding their
Adversaries, as that being obstinate in their unbelief they were forced to
cover their Shame by betaking themselves unto Rage and Bestial Fury, Acts 6.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Chap. 7. 54. Chap. 22. 22, 23. As has been the manner of
all their Successors ever since.

( 4.) NOW although this be an especial kind of Wisdom, an Eminent Gift of the
Holy Ghost, wherein the Glory of Christ and Honor of the Gospel in greatly
concerned; namely an Ability to manage and defend the Truth in times of Trial
and Danger, to the Confusion of its Adversaries; yet I suppose the Wisdom here
intended, is not absolutely consined thereunto, though it be principally
intended. Peter speaking of Paul's Epistles, affirms that they were written
according to the Wisdom given into him, 2 Pet. 3. 15. That is, that especial
Gift of Spiritual Wisdom, for the management of Gospel Truths unto the
Edification of the Church of Christ, which he had received. And he that would
understand what this Wisdom is, must be thoroughly conversant in the Writings of
that Apostle. For indeed the Wisdom that he uses in the management of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, in the due consideration of all Persons, Occasions,
Circumstances, Temptations of Men and Churches, of their State, Condition,
Strength or Weakness, Growth or Decays, Obedience or Failings, their Capacities
and Progresses, with the Holy Accommodation of himself in what he teaches or
delivers, in Meekness, in Vehemence, in Tenderness, in Sharpness, in severe
Arguings and pathetical Expostulations, with all other ways and means suited
unto his Holy Ends, in the propagation of the Gospel, and Edification of the
Church, are inexpressibly Glorious and Excellent. All this did he do according
to the singular Gift of Wisdom that was bestowed on him. Wherefore I take the
Word of Wisdom here mentioned, to be a peculiar Spiritual Skill and Ability,
wisely to manage the Gospel in it is Administration unto the Advantage and
Furtherance of the Truth, especially in the Defense of it when called unto the
Trial with it is Adversaries. This was an Eminent Gift of the Holy Ghost; which
considering the Persons employed by him in the Ministry for the most part,
being known to be unlearned and ignorant, filled the World with Amazement, and
was an effectual Means for the subduing of Multitudes unto the Obedience of
Faith. And so eminent was the Apostle Paul in this Gift, and so successful in
the Management of it, that his Adversaries had nothing to say, but that he was
subtle, and took Men by Craft and Guile, 2 Cor. 12. 16. The Sweetness,
Condescension, Self-denial, Holy Compliance, with all which he made use of,
mixed with Truth, Gravity and Authority, they would have had to be all Craft
and Guile. And this Gift when it is in any measure continued unto any Minister
of the Gospel, is of singular Use unto the Church of God. Yea, I doubt not but
the Apostle fixed it here in the first place, as that which was eminent above
all the rest. And as where it is too much wanting, we see what wosul Mistakes
and Miscarriages, Men, otherwise good and holy, will run themselves into, unto
the great Disadvantage of the Gospel; so the real Enjoyment and Exercise of it
in any competent measure, is the Life and Grace of the Ministry. As God filled
Bezaliel and Aholiab with Wisdom for the building of the Tabernacle of old, so
unless he give this Spiritual Wisdom unto the Ministers of the Gospel, no
Tabernacle of his will be erected where it is fallen down, nor kept up where it
stands. I intend not Secular Wisdom, or Civil Wisdom, much less Carnal Wisdom;
but a Spiritual Ability to discharge all our Duties aright in the Ministry
committed unto us. And as was said, where this is wanting, we shall quickly see
woeful and shameful Work made in Churches themselves.

( 5.) I cannot pass by the Consideration of this Gift, without offering
something that may guide us either in the obtaining, or the due Exercise of it.
And hereunto the things ensuing may be subservient. As, (1) A Sense of our own
Insufficiency as of our selves, as unto any End for which this Wisdom is
requisite. As it is declared that we have no Sufficiency in our selves for any
thing that is good, all our Sufficiency being of God: So in particular, it is
denied that we have any for the Work of the Ministry, in that Interrogation
containing a Negative Proposition, And who is sufficient for these things? 2
Cor. 2. 16. A Sense hereof is the first Step toward this Wisdom, as our
Apostle expressly declares. Let no Man deceive himself, if any among you seems
to be wise in this world, let him become a Fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.
18. Until we discover and are sensible of our own Folly, we are fit neither to
receive nor to use this Spiritual Wisdom. And the want hereof proves the Ruin
of many that pretend unto the Ministry: And it were to be wished that it were
only their own. They come to the Work of it full of Pride, Self-conceit, and
foolish Elation of Mind, in an Apprehension of their own Abilities, which yet
for the most part are mean and contemptible. This keeps them sufficiently
estranged from a Sense of that Spiritual Wisdom we treat of. Hence there is
nothing of a Gospel Ministry nor it is Work found among them, but an empty Name.
And as for those who have reduced all Ecclesiastical Administrations to Canons,
Laws, Acts, Courts and Legal Processes in them, they seem to do it with a
Design to cast off all Use of Spiritual Gifts; yea, to exclude both them, and
their Author, Name and Thing, out of the Church of God. Is this the Wisdom
given by the Holy Ghost for the due Management of Gospel Administrations;
namely, that Men should get a little Skill in some of the worst of Humane Laws,
and uncomely Artifices of intreiguing Secular Courts, which they pride
themselves in, and terrify poor Creatures with Mulcts and Penalties, that are
any way obnoxious unto them? What use these things may be of in the World I
know not, unto the Church of God they do not belong.

( 6.) 2. Being sensible of our own Insufficiency, Earnest Prayers for a Supply
of this Wisdom are required in us. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of
God, who gives to all Men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him, James 1. 5. There is both a Precept and a Promise to enforce this Duty.
That we all want Wisdom in our selves, is unquestionable; I mean, as to our
Concerns in the Gospel, either to bear Testimony unto it in Difficulties, or to
manage the Truths of it unto Edification: The way for our Supply, lies plain
and open before us; neither is there any other that we can take one step in
toward it. Let us ask it of God, who gives liberally, and we shall receive
it. This was that which rendered Solomon so great and glorious; when he had his
Choice given him of all desirable things, he made his Request for Wisdom to
the Discharge of the Office and Duties of it that God had called him unto. Though
it were an whole Kingdom that he was to Rule, yet was his Work carnal and of
this World, compared with the Spiritual Administrations of the Gospel. And
hereunto a worldly Ministry is no less averse, than unto a Sense of their own
Insufficiency. The Fruits do sufficiently manifest how much this Duty is
contemned by them: But the Neglect of it, I say, the Neglect of Praying for
Wisdom to be enabled unto the Discharge of the Work of the Ministry, and the
due Management of the Truths of the Gospel according as occasion do require, in
them who pretend thereunto, is a Fruit of Unbelief, yea, of Atheism and
Contempt of God.

( 7.) 3. DUE Meditation on our great Pattern, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Apostles; being Followers of them as they were of him, is also required
hereunto. As in all other things, so in especial, in his Ministry for the
Revelation of the Truth, and giving Testimony thereunto, the Lord Jesus was the
great Pattern and Example; God in him representing unto us that Perfection in
Wisdom which we ought to aim at. I shall not here in particular look into this
Heavenly Treasury, but only say, that he who would be really and truly wise in
Spiritual things, who would either rightly receive, or duly improve this Gift
of the Holy Ghost, he ought continually to bear in his Heart, his Mind and
Affections, this great Exemplar and Idea of it, even the Lord Jesus Christ in
his Ministry; namely, what he did, what he spoke, how on all occasions his
Condescension, Meekness and Authority did manifest themselves; until he be
changed into the same Image and likeness by the Spirit of the Lord. The same is
to be done in their place and Sphere toward the Apostles as the principal
Followers of Christ, and who do most lively represent his Graces and Wisdom
unto us. Their Writings, and what is written of them, are to be searched and
studied unto this very end, that considering how they behaved themselves in all
Instances, on all occasions in their Testimony, and all Administrations of the
Truth, we may endeavor after a Conformity unto them in the Participation of
the same Spirit with them. It would be no small stay and Guidance unto us, if
on all occasions we would diligently search and consider what the Apostles did
in such Circumstances, or what they would have done in answer to what is
recorded of their Spirit and Actings. For although this Wisdom be a Gift of the
Holy Spirit, yet as we now consider it, as it is continued in the Church, it
may be in part obtained and greatly improved, in the due Use of the Means which
are subservient thereunto; provided that in all we depend solely on God for the
giving of it, who has also prescribed these Means unto us for the same End.

( 8.) 4. LET them who design a Participation of this Gift, take heed it be not
stifled with such vicious Habits of Mind as are expressly contrary unto it, and
destructive of it: Such are Self-fulness, or Confidence, Hastiness of Spirit,
Promptness to speak, and Slowness to hear, which are the great Means which make
many abound in their own Sense and Folly; to be wise in their own Conceits, and
contemptible in the Judgment of all that are truly so. Ability of Speech in
time and season, is an especial Gift of God, and that eminently with respect
unto the Spiritual things of the Gospel. But a Profluency of Speech venting it
self on all occasions, and on no occasions, making Men open their Mouths wide,
when indeed they should shut them, and open their Ears; and to pour out all
that they know, and what they do not know, making them angry if they are not
heard, and impatient if they are contradicted, is an unconquerable
Fortification against all true Spiritual Wisdom.

( 9) 5. LET those who would be Sharers herein, follow after those Gifts and
Graces which do accompany it, promote it, and are inseparable from it. Such are
Humility, Meekness, Patience, Constancy, with Boldness and Confidence in
Profession, without which we shall be Fools in every Trial. Wisdom indeed is
none of all these, but it is that which cannot be without them, nor will it
thrive in any Mind that is not cultivated by them. And he who thinks it is not
worth his Pains and Travail, nor that it will quit Cost to seek after this
Spiritual Wisdom, by a constant Watchfulness against the opposite Vices
mentioned, and Attendance unto those concomitant Duties and Graces, must be
content to go without it. This is the first Instance given by our Apostle of
the Spiritual Gifts of the Primitive Times; to one is given by the Spirit the
Word of Wisdom.

( 10.) TO another the Word of Knowledge by the same Spirit. (...). I showed
before, that (...) may denote the thing it self; the Word of Knowledge, that is
Knowledge. But if any shall suppose, that because this Knowledge was to be
expressed unto the Church for it is Edification, it is therefore called a Word
of Knowledge, as a Word of Exhortation, or a Word of Consolation; that is,
Exhortation and Consolation administered by Words, I shall not contend to the
contrary. It is Knowledge that is the Gift peculiarly intended in this Second
Place. And we must enquire, both how it is an especial Gift, and of what sort
it is. And it should seem that it cannot have the Nature of an especial Gift,
seeing it is that which was common to all. For so says the Apostle, speaking
unto the whole Church of the Corinthians; We know that we all have Knowledge, 1
Cor. 8. 1. And not only so, but also adds, that this Knowledge is a thing which
either in it is own Nature tends unto an ill Issue, or is very apt to be abused
thereunto: For, says he, Knowledge puffs up, for which cause he frequently
reflects upon it in other places. But yet we shall find that it is a peculiar
Gift, and in it self singularly useful: However it may be abused as the best
things may be, yea, are most liable thereunto. The Knowledge mentioned in that
place by the Apostle, which he ascribes in common unto all the Church, was only
that which concerned things Sacrificed unto Idols; and if we should extend it
farther, unto an Understanding of the Mystery of the Gospel which was in the
Community of Believers, yet is there place remaining for an Eminency, therein
by virtue of an especial Spiritual Gift. And as to what he adds about Knowledge
puffing up, he expounds in the next Words; if any Man thinks that he knows
any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, Ver. 2. It is not Men's
Knowledge, but the vain and proud Conceit of ignorant Men, supposing themselves
knowing and wise, that so puffs up and hinders Edification.

( 11.) WHEREFORE, (1) By this Word of Knowledge, not that Degree of it which
is required in all Christians, in all the Members of the Church, is intended.
Such a Measure of Knowledge there is necessary both unto Faith and Confession.
Men can believe nothing of that whereof they know nothing, nor can they confess
with their Mouths what they apprehend not in their Minds. But it is somewhat
singular, eminent, and not common to all. Neither, (2) Does that Eminency or
Singularity consist in this, that it is Saving and Sanctifying Knowledge which
is intended. That there is such a peculiar Knowledge whereby God shines into
the Hearts of Believers, with a Spiritual Saving Insight into Spiritual things,
transforming the Mind into the Likeness of them, I have at large elsewhere
declared. For it is reckoned among Gifts; whereas that other is a Saving Grace,
whose difference has been declared before. It is expressed by the Apostle, 1
Cor. 13. 2. by understanding all mysteries and all knowledge; that is, having
an Understanding in, and the knowledge of all Mysteries. This Knowledge he
calls a Gift, which shall vanish away, Ver. 8. and so not belonging
absolutely unto that Grace, which being a part of the Image of God in us, shall
go over into Eternity. And Knowledge in Ver. 2. is taken for the thing known;
if I understand all Knowledge, which is the same with all Mysteries. Wherefore
the Knowledge here intended, is such a peculiar and especial Insight into the
Mysteries of the Gospel, as whereby those in whom it was, were enabled to teach
and instruct others. Thus the Apostle Paul, who had received all these Gifts in
the highest Degree and Measure, affirms, that by his Writing, those to whom he
wrote might perceive his Skill and Understanding in the Mystery of Christ.

( 12.) AND this was in an especial manner necessary unto those first
Dispensers of the Gospel; for how else should the Church have been instructed
in the Knowledge of it. This they prayed for them, namely, that they might be
filled with the Knowledge of the Will of God, in all Wisdom and Understanding,
Col. 1. 9. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20. Chap. 3. 18, 19. Col. 2. 2. The means whereby
they might come hereunto, was by their Instruction, who therefore were to be
skilled in a peculiar manner in the Knowledge of those Mysteries, which they
were to impart unto others, and to do it accordingly: And so it was with them
Acts 20. 27. Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. Col. 4. 2. Now although this Gift as to that
excellent Degree wherein it was in the Apostles, and those who received the
Knowledge of Christ and the Gospel by immediate Revelation, be withheld, yet
it is still communicated in such a Measure unto the Ministers of the Church, as
is necessary unto it is Edification. And for any one to undertake an Office in
the Church, who has not received this Gift in some good measure of the
Knowledge of the Mystery of God, and the Gospel, is to impose himself on that
Service in the House of God, which he is neither called unto nor sitted for.
And whereas we have lived to see all Endeavors after an especial Acquaintance
with the Mysteries of the Gospel, despised or derided by some, it is an
Evidence of that fatal and fearful Apostasy, whereinto the Generality of
Christians are fallen.

( 13.) FAITH is added in the 3d place; To another Faith by the same Spirit.
That the Saving Grace of Faith, which is common unto all True Believers, is not
here intended, is manifest from the Context. There is a Faith in Scripture
which is commonly called the Faith of Miracles, mentioned by our Apostle in
this Epistle, as a principal, extraordinary, Spiritual Gift, Chap. 13. 2.
Though I had all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains; that is, the highest
Degree of a Faith of Miracles, or such as would effect miraculous Operations of
the highest Nature. This I should readily admit to be here intended, but that
there is mention made of working Miracles in the next Verse, as a Gift distinct
from this Faith. Yet whereas this working of Miracles is every where ascribed
to Faith, and could not be any where but where the peculiar Faith from which
those Operations did proceed was first imparted, it is not unlikely but that by
Faith the Principle of all miraculous Operations may be intended, and by the
other Expressions the Operations themselves. But if the Distinction of these
Gifts be to be preserved, as I rather judge that it ought to be, considering
the placing of Faith immediately upon Wisdom and Knowledge, I should judge that
a peculiar Confidence, Boldness and Assurance of Mind in the Profession of the
Gospel, and the Administration of it is Ordinances, is here intended. Faith
therefore is that (...), that Freedom, Confidence and Boldness in the Faith, or
Profession of the Faith, which is in Christ Jesus, mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3. 13. That is, our (...), or Confidence in Profession, whose Beginning we
are to hold fast and firm unto the end, Heb. 3. 14. And we do see how excellent
a Gift this is on all occasions. When Troubles and Trials do befall the Church
upon the account of it is Profession, many, even true Believers, are very ready
to faint and despond, and some to draw back at least for a Season; as others do
utterly, to the Perdition of their Souls. In this State the eminent Usefulness
of this Gift of Boldness in the Faith, of an assured Confidence in Profession,
of an especial Faith to go through Troubles and Trials, is known unto all.
Oft-times the Eminence of it in one single Person, has been the means to
preserve an whole Church from Coldness, Backsliding, or sinful Compliances
with the World. And where God stirs up any one unto some great or singular
Work in his Church, he constantly endows them with this Gift of Faith. So was
it with Luther, whose undaunted Courage and Resolution in Profession, or
Boldness in the Faith, was one of the principal means of succeeding his great
Undertaking. And there is no more certain Sign of Churches being forsaken of
Christ in a time of Trial, than if this Gift be withheld from them, and
Pusillanimity, Fearfulness, with Carnal Wisdom do spring up in the room of it.
The Work and Effects of this Faith are expressed 1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye, stand
fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be strong. So also Ephesians. 6. 10. 2 Pet.
2. 1. And the especial way whereby it may be attained or improved, is by a
diligent careful discharge at all times of all the Duties of the Places we hold
in the Church, 1 Pet. 3. 13.

( 14.) THE Gifts of Healing, are nextly mentioned. (...). To another the Gifts
of Healings by the same Spiris. So they are again expressed Ver. 28. in the
Plural Number, because of their Free Communication unto many Persons. These
Healings respected those that were sick, in their sudden and miraculous
Recovery from long or deadly Distempers, by the Imposition of Hands in the Name
of the Lord Jesus. And as many of the mighty Works of Christ himself, for the
Reasons that shall be mentioned, consisted in these Healings, so it was one of
the first things which he gave in Commission to his Apostles, and furnished
them with Power for, whilst they attended on him in his personal Ministry,
Matthew. 10. 1. So also did he do to the Seventy, making it the principal Sign of
the Approach of the Kingdom of God, Luke 10. 9. And the same Power and Virtue
he promises to Believers, namely, that they should lay Hands on the Sick and
recover them after his Ascension. Of the Accomplishment of this Promise, and
the Exercise of this Power, the Story of the Acts of the Apostles gives us
many Instances, Acts 5. 15. Chap. 3. 7. Chap. 9. 33, 34. And two things are
observed singular in the Exercise of this Gift. As First, That many were cured
by the Shadow of Peter as he passed by, Acts 5. 15. And again, many were so by
Handkerchiefs and Aprons carried from the Body of Paul, Chap. 19. 12. And the
Reason of these extraordinary Operations in extraordinary Cases, seems to have
been the Encouragement of that great Faith which was then stirred up in them
that beheld those miraculous Operations, which was of singular Advantage unto
the Propagation of the Gospel; as the Magical Superstition of the Roman Church
sundry ways endeavoring to imitate these inimitable Actings of Sovereign
Divine Power, has been a Dishonor to Christian Religion.

( 15.) BUT whereas these Healings were miraculous Operations, it may be
enquired why the Gift of them is constantly distinguished from Miracles, and is
placed as a distinct Effect of the Holy Ghost by it self; for that so it is, is
evident both in the Commission of Christ granting this Power unto his
Disciples, and in the Annumeration of these Gifts in this and other Places. I
answer, This seems to be done on a Threefold Account. (1) Because Miracles
absolutely, were a Sign unto them that Believed not, as the Apostle speaks of
Tongues, they were a Sign not unto them that believe, but unto them that
believed not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. That is, which served for their Conviction. But
this Work of Healing was a Sign unto Believers themselves, and that on a double
Account. For First, The pouring out of this Gift of the Holy Ghost, was a
peculiar Sign and Token of the coming of the Kingdom of God. So says our
Savior to his Disciples, Heal the Sick, and say unto them, The Kingdom of God
is come nigh unto you, Luke 10. 9. This Gift of Healing being a Token and
Pledge thereof. This Sign did our Savior give of it himself, when John sent
his Disciples unto him to enquire for their own Satisfaction, not his, whether
he were the Messiah or no, Matthew. 11. 4, 5. Go, says he, and show John these
things which ye do hear and see; the Blind receive their Sight, the Lame walk,
the Lepers are cleansed, and the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised up, and the
Poor have the Gospel preached unto them: Which was the Evidence of his own
being the Messiah, and bringing in the Kingdom of God. The Jews have an ancient
Tradition, that in the Days of the Messiah all things should be healed but the
Serpent. And there is a Truth in what they say; although for their parts they
understand it not. For all are healed by Christ but the Serpent and his Seed;
the wicked Unbelieving World. And hereof, namely, of the healing and recovery
of all things by Christ, was this Gift or Sign unto the Church. Wherefore he
began his Ministry after his first Miracle, with healing all manner of
Sickness, and all manner of Diseases among the People, Matthew. 4. 23, 24, 25.
(2) It was a Sign that Christ had born and taken away Sin, which was the Cause,
Root and Spring of Diseases and Sicknesses, without which no one could have
been miraculously cured. Hence that place of Isaiah, Chap. 53. 4. Surely he
has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows: Which is afterward interpreted,
By being wounded for our Transgressions, and being bruised for our Iniquities,
Ver. 5. As also by Peter, by his bearing our Sins in his own Body on the Tree:
1 Pet. 2. 24. is applied by Matthew unto the curing of Diseases and Sicknesses,
Mat. 8. 16, 17. Now this was for no other Reason, but because this Healing of
Diseases was a Sign and Effect of his bearing our Sins, the Causes of them,
without a Supposition whereof healing would have been a false Witness unto Men.
It was therefore on these Accounts a Sign unto Believers also.

( 16.) 2ly. Because it had a peculiar Goodness, Relief and Benignity toward
Mankind in it, which other miraculous Operations had not; at least, not unto
the same Degree. Indeed this was one great Difference between the miraculous
Operations that were wrought under the Old Testament, and those under the New;
that the former generally consisted in dreadful and tremendous Works, bringing
Astonishment, and oft-times Ruin to Mankind; but those other were generally
Useful and Beneficial unto all. But this of Healing had a peculiar Evidence of
Love, Kindness, Compassion, Benignity, and was suited greatly to affect the
Minds of Men with Regard and Gratitude. For long afflictive Distempers or
Violent Pains, such as were the Diseases cured by this Gift, do prepare the
Minds of Men, and those concerned in them, greatly to value their Deliverance.
This therefore in an especial manner declared and evidenced the Goodness, Love
and Compassion of him that was the Author of this Gospel, and gave this Sign of
Healing Spiritual Diseases by healing of Bodily Distempers. And doubtless, many
who were made Partakers of the Benefit hereof, were greatly affected with it;
and that not only by Walking, and Leaping, and Praising God, as the Cripple did
who was cured by Peter and John, Acts 3. 8. but also unto Faith and Boldness in
Profession, as it was with the Blind Man healed by our Savior himself, John 8.
31, 32, 33, 38, etc. But yet no outward Effects of themselves, can work upon
the Hearts of Men, so as that all who are made Partakers of them should be
brought unto Faith, Thankfulness and Obedience. Hence did not only our Savior
himself observe that of Ten at once cleansed by him from their Leprosy, but
One returned to give Glory to God, Luke 17. 7. But he whom he cured of a
Disease that he had suffered under Eight and Thirty Years, notwithstanding a
following Admonition given him by our blessed Savior, turned Informer against
him, and endeavored to betray him unto the Jews, John 5. 5, 8, 13, 14, 15. It
is effectual Grace alone, which can change the Heart, without which it will
continue obstinate and unbelieving, under not only the Sight and Consideration
of the most miraculous outward Operations, but also the Participation in our
selves of the Benefit and Fruits of them. Men may have their Bodies cured by
Miracles, when their Souls are not cured by Grace.

( 17.) 3ly. It is thus placed distinctly by it self, and not cast under the
common Head of Miracles, because ordinarily there were some outward means and
tokens of it that were to be made use of, in the Exercise of this Gift. Such
were (1) Imposition of Hands. Our Savior himself in Healing of the Sick did
generally lay his Hands on them, Matthew. 6. 5. Luke 4. 40. And he gave the same
Order unto his Disciples, that they should lay their Hands on those that were
sick, and heal them, which was practiced by them accordingly. (2) Anointing
with Oil: They anointed with Oil many that were sick, and healed them, Mark 6.
13. And the Elders of the Church with whom this Gift was continued, were to
come to him that was sick, and praying over him, anoint him with Oil in the
Name of the Lord, and he should be saved, Jam. 5. 14, 15. Some do contend for
the Continuance of this Ceremony, or the anointing of them that are sick by the
Elders of the Church, but without Ground or Warrant: For although it be their
Duty to pray in ae paerticulur manner for those that are sick, of their Flocks,
and it be the Duty of them who are sick to call for them unto that purpose; yet
the Application of the outward Ceremony being instituted, not as a means of an
uncertain Cure, as all are which work naturally unto that end, but as a Pledge
and Token of a certain Healing and Recovery, where there is not an Infallible
Faith thereof, when the Healing may not ensue; it is to turn an Ordinance into
a Lie. For if a Recovery follow Ten times on this anointing, if it once fall
out otherwise, the Institution is rendered a Lie, a False Testimony; and the
other Recoveries manifested to have had no dependence on the Observation of it.
For these Reasons, I judge, that this Gift of Healing, though belonging unto
miraculous Operations in general, is every where reckoned as a distinct Gift by
it self. And from that place of James, I am apt to think that this Gift was
communicated in an especial manner unto the Elders of Churches, even that were
ordinary and sixed; it being of so great Use, and such singular Comfort unto
them that were poor and persecuted, which was the Condition of many Churches,
and their Members in those Days.

( 18.) MIRACLES ensue in the fifth place, (...), Effectual Working of mighty
Powers, or powerful Works. For the Signification of this Word here rendered
Miracles, the Reader may consult our Exposition on Heb. 2. 4. I shall not
thence transcribe what is already declared, nor is any thing necessary to be
added thereunto. Concerning this Gift of Miracles we have also spoken before in
general; so that we shall not much further here insist upon it; neither is it
necessary that we should here treat of the Nature, End and Use of Miracles in
general, which in part also has been done before. Wherefore, I shall only
observe some few things as to the Gift it self, and the Use of it in the
Church, which alone are our present Concernment. And, (1) As we before
observed, this Gift did not consist in any Inherent Power or Faculty of the
Mind; so as that those who had received it should have an Ability of their own
to work or effect such Miracles, when, and as they saw good. As this is
disclaimed by the Apostles, Acts 3. 12. so a Supposition of it would overthrow
the very Nature of Miracles; for a Miracle is an immediate Effect of Divine
Power exceeding all created Abilities; and what is not so, though it may be
strange or wonderful, is no Miracle. Only Jesus Christ had in his own Person a
Power of working Miracles when, and where, and how he pleased, because God was
with him, or the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him Bodily. (2) Unto the
working of every Miracle in particular, there was a pcculiar Act of Faith
required in them that wrought it. This is that Faith which is called the Faith
of Miracles, Have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
Now this Faith was not a strong fixing of the Imagination that such a thing
should be done, as some have blasphemously dreamed, nor was it a Faith resting
merely on the Promises of the Word, making particular Application of them unto
Times, Seasons and Occasions, wherein it no way differs from the Ordinary Grace
of Faith: But this was the true Nature of it, that as it was in general
resolved into the Fromises of the Word, and Power of Christ declared therein,
that such and such things should be wrought in general; so it had always a
peculiar immediate Revelation for it is Warranty and Security in the working of
any Miracle. And without such an immediate Revilation or Divine Impulse and
Impression, all Attempts of miracuious Operations are vain, and means only for
Satan to infinuate his Delusions by.

( 19) No Man therefore could work any Miracle, nor attempt in Faith so to do,
without an immediate Revelation that Divine Power should be therein exerted,
and put forth in it is Operation: Yet do I not suppose that it was necessary
that this Inspiration and Revelation should in order of time precede the acting
of this Faith, though it did the operation of the Miracle it self. Yea, the
Inspiration it self consisted in the Elevation of Faith to apprehend Divine
Power in such a Case for such an end; which the Holy Ghost granted not to any,
but when he designed so to work. Thus Paul at once acted Faith, apprehended
Divine Power, and at the same time struck Elymas the Sorcerer Blind by a
Miraculous Operation, Acts 13. 9, 10, 11, 12. Being filled with the Holy Ghost,
vor. 9. That is, having received an Impression and Warranty from him, he put
forth that act of Faith, at whose presence the Holy Spirit would effect that
miraculous Operation which he believed. Wherefore this was the Nature of this
Gift; some Persons were by the Holy Ghost Endowed with that especial Faith
which was prepared to receive Impressions and Intimations of his putting forth
his Power in this or that Miraculous operation. Those who had this Faith, could
not work Miracles when, and where, and how they pleased; only they could
infallibly signify what the Holy Ghost would do, and so were the outward
Instruments of the Execution of his Power.

( 20.) 3. ALTHOUGH the Apostles had all Gift of the Spirit in an Eminent
Degree and Manner above all others, as Paul says, I thank my God I speak with
Tongues more than you all; yet it appears that there were some other Persons
distinct from them, who had this Gift of working Miracles in a peculiar manner.
For it is not only here reckoned as a peculiar distinct Gift of the Holy Ghost,
but also the Persons who had received it, are reckoned as distinct from the
Apostles and other Officers of the Church, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. Not that I think
this Gift did constitute them Officers in the Church, enabling them to Exercise
Power in Gospel Administrations therein; only they were Brethren of the Church,
made Eminent by a participation of this Gift, for the end whereunto it was
ordained. By these Persons Ministry, did the Holy Spirit on such occasions as
seemed meet to his Infinite Wisdom, effect miraculous Operations, besides what
was done in the same kind by the Apostles and Evangelists, all the World over.

( 21.) 4. THE use of this Gift in the Church at that time and season, was
manifold. For the Principles which Believers proceeded on, and the Doctrines
they professed, were new and strange to the World, and such as had mighty
prejudices raised against them in the Minds of Men. The Persons by whom they
were maintained and asserted were generally as to their outward condition poor
and contemptible in the World. The Churches themselves, as to their Members,
few in number; encompassed with multitudes of Scoffers, and persecuting
Idolaters; themselves also, newly converted, and many of them but weak in the
Faith. In this state of things, this Gift of Miracles was exceeding useful and
necessary unto the propagation of the Gospel, the vindication of the Truth, and
the Establishment of them that did believe. For, (1.) By Miracles occasionally
wrought, the people round about who yet believed not, were called in as it
were, unto a due consideration of what was done, and what was designed thereby.
Thus when the noise was first spread abroad of the Apostles speaking with
Tongaes, the multitude came together and were confounded, Acts 2. 6. So the
multitude gathered together at Lystra upon the Curing of the Cripple by Paul
and Barnabas, thinking them to have been Gods, Acts 14. 11. When therefore any
were so amazed with seeing the Miracles that were wrought, hearing that they
were so in the confirmation of the Doctrine of the Gospel, they could not but
enquire with Diligence into it, and cast out those Prejudices which before they
had entertained against it. (2.) They gave Authority unto the Ministers of the
Church. For whereas on outward accounts they were despised by the Great, Wise
and Learned Men of the World, it was made evident by these Divine Operations,
that their Ministry was of God, and what they taught approved by him. And where
these two things were effected, namely that a sufficient, yea an eminently
cogent Ground and Reason was given, why Men should impartially enquire into the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and an evidence given that the Teachers of it were
approved of God, unless Men were signally Captivated under the power of Satan,
2 Cor. 4. 4. or given up of God judicially unto Blindness and Hardness of
Heart, it could not be, but that the prejudices which they had of themselves,
or might receive from others against the Gospel, must of necessity be prevailed
against and conquered. And as many of the Jews were so hardened and blinded at
that time, Romans 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 These. 2. 14, 15, 16. so it is mavelous to
consider with what Artifices Satan bestirred himself among the Gentiles by
false and lying Signs and Wonders, with many other ways to take off from the
Testimony given unto the Gospel by these Miraculous Operations.

AND this was that which Miracles were designed unto toward unbelievers;
namely to take away prejudices from the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Persons
by whom it was taught, so disposing the Minds of Men unto an attendance unto
it; and the Reception of it. For they were never means instituted of God for
the ingenerating of Faith in any, but only to provoke and prevail with Men, to
attend unprejudicately unto that whereby it was to be wrought. For Faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. And therefore whatever
Miracles were wrought, if the Word preached was not received, if that did not
accompany them in its powerful Operation, they were but despised. Thus whereas
some upon hearing of the Apostles speak with Tongues, mocked and said, These
Men are full of new Wine, Acts 2. 13. yet upon preaching of the Word which
ensued, they were Converted unto God. And the Apostle Paul tells us, that if
there were nothing but miraculous speaking with Tongues in the Church, and
Unbeliever coming in would say they were all mad, 1 Cor. 14. 23. who by the
Word of Prophecy would be convinced, judged and converted unto God, ver. 24,
25. (3.) They were of singular use to confirm and establish in the Faith those
who were weak and newly Converted. For whereas they were assaulted on every
hand by Sathaen, the World, and it may be their nearest Relations, and that
with Contempt, Scorn and Cruel Mocking; it was a singular Confirmation and
Establishment to behold the miraculous Operations which were wrought in the
approbation of the Doctrine which they did profess. Hereby was a sense of it
more and more let into, and impressed on their Minds, until by an habitual
Experience of its Goodness, Power, and Efficacy, they were established in the
Truth.

( 22.) PROPHESY is added in the sixth place. (...). To another Prophecy; that
is, is given by the same Spirit. Of this Gift of Prophecy we have sufficiently
treated before. Only I take it here in its largest Sense; both as it signifies
a faculty of Prediction, or foretelling things future upon Divine Revelation,
or an Ability to declare the Mind of God from the Word by the especial and
immediate Revelation of the Holy Ghost. The first of these, was more rare, the
latter more ordinary and common. And it may be there were few Churches, wherein
besides their Elders and Teachers by virtue of their Office, there were not
some of these Prophets; so of those who had this Gift of Prophecy, enabling in
an eminent manner to declare the Mind of God from the Scriptures, unto the
Edification of the Church. It is expressed that there were some of them in the
Church at Antioch, Acts 13. 1, 2. and many of them in the Church at Corinth, 1
Cor. 14. For this Gift was of singular use in the Church; and therefore as to
the end of the Edification thereof, is preferred by our Apostle above all other
Gifts of the Spirit whatever, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Chap. 14. 1, 39. For it had a
double use, (1.) The Conviction and Conversion of such as came in occasionally
into their Church Assemblies. Those unto whom the propagation of the Gospel was
principally committed went up, and down the World, laying hold on all occasions
to preach it unto Jews and Gentiles, as yet unconverted. And where Churches
were gathered and settled, the principal work of their Teachers was to Edify
them that did believe. But whereas some would come in among them into their
Church Assemblies, perhaps out of Curiosity, perhaps out of worse designs, the
Apostle declares that of all the Ordinances of the Church, this of Prophecy was
suited unto the Conviction and Conversion of all Unbelievers, and is oft-times
Blessed thereunto, whereby this and that Man is Born in Sion. (2dly.) This
Exposition and Application of the Word by many, and that by virtue of an
extraordinary assistance of the Spirit of God, was of singular use in the
Church it self. For if all Scripture given by Inspiration from God, so
expounded and applied, be profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction in Righteousness, the more the Church enjoys thereof, the
more will its Faith, Love, Obedience and Consolation be increased. Lastly, the
manner of the Exercise of this Gift in the Church unto Edification, is
prescribed and limited by our Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. And
first, he would not have the Church burdened with the most profitable Gift or
its exercise, and therefore determines that at one time, not above two or three
be suffered to speak; that is, one after another, that the Church be neither
wearied nor burdened, ver. 29. Secondly, Because it was possible that some of
them who had this Gift might mix somewhat of their own Spirits in their Word
and Ministry, and therein mistake and err from the Truth; he requires that the
other who had the like Gift, and so were understanding in the Mind of God,
should judge of what was spoken by them, so as the Church might not be led into
any Error by them; let the other judge. Thirdly, That order he observed in
their Exercise; and especially that way be given unto any immediate Revelation,
and no Confusion be brought into the Church by many speaking at the same time.
And this Direction manifests that the Gift was extraordinary, and is now
ceased; though there be a continuance of ordinary Gifts of the same kind, and
to the same end in the Church, as we shall see afterward, ver. 30. Fourthly,
By the observation of this order, the Apostle shows, that all the Prophets
might exercise their Gift unto the Instruction and Consolation of the Church in
a proper Season; such as their frequent Assemblies would afford them, ver. 31.
And whereas it may be objected, that these things coming in an extraordinary
immediate manner from the Holy Ghost, it was not in the power of them who
recieved them, to confine them unto the order prescribed, which would seem to
limit the Holy Spirit in his operations, whereas they were all to speak as the
Spirit gave them Ability and Utterance, let what would ensue, the Apostle
assures them by a general Principle that no such thing would follow on a due
use and exercise of this Gift. For God, says he, is not the Author of
Confusion, but of Peace, as in all Churches of the Saints, ver. 33. As if he
should have said; If such a course should be taken, that any one should speak
and prophecy as he pretended himself to be moved by the Spirit, and to have
none to judge of what he said, all Confusion; Tumult and Disorder would ensue
thereon. But God is the Author of no such thing, gives no such Gifts, appoints
no such exercise of them, as would tend thereunto. But how shall this be
prevented, seeing these things are extraordinary, and not in our own power;
yea, says he, the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, ver. 32.
By the Spirit of the Prophets that their Spiritual Gift and Ability for its
exercise is intended, none do question. And whereas the Apostle had taught two
things concerning the Exercise of this Gift: (1) That it ought to be Orderly to
avoid Confusion. (2) That what proceeds from it ought to be judged by others;
he manifests that both these may be observed, because the Spirit of the
Prophets is subject to the Prophets; that is, both their Spiritual Gift is so
in their own Power, as that they might dispose themselves unto its Exercise
with Choice and Judgment, so as to preserve Order and Peace, not being acted as
with an Enthusiastical Afflation, and carried out of eheir own Power; this Gift
in it is Exercise was subject unto their own Judgment, Choice and Understanding;
so what they expressed by virtue of their Spiritual Gift was subject to be
judged of by the other Prophets that were in the Church. Thus was the Peace and
Order of the Church to be preserved, and the Edefication of it to be promoted.

( 25.) Discerning of Spirits is the next Gift of the Spirit here enumerated,
(...), To another the Discernings of Spirits; the Ability and Faculty of
Judging of Spirits. The Dijudication of Spirits. This Gift I have upon another
occasion formerly given an Account of, and therefore shall here but briefly
touch upon it. All Gospel-Administrations were in those Days avowedly executed
by Virtue of Spiritual Gifts. No Man then durst set his Hand unto this Work,
but such as either really had, or highly pretended unto a Participation of the
Holy Ghost. For the Administration of the Gospel is the Dispensation of the
Spirit. This therefore was pleaded by all in the preaching of the Word, whether
in private Assemblies, or publicly to the World. But it came also then to
pass, as it did in all Ages of the Church, that where God gave unto any the
extraordinary Gifts of his Spirit for the Reformation or Edification of the
Church, there Satan suborned some to make a Pretense thereunto unto it is
Trouble and Destruction: So was it under the Old Testament, and so was it
foretold that it should be under the New. So the Apostle Peter having declared
the Nature and Excellency, Use and Certainty of that Prophecy which was of
old, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21. adds thereunto, But there were false Prophets also
among the People, Chap. 2. 1. That is, when God granted that signal Privilege
unto the Church, of the Immediate Revelation of his Will unto them by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, which constituted Men true Prophets of the Lord:
Satan stirred up others to pretend unto the same Spirit of Prophecy for his
own malicious Ends, whereby there were false Prophets also among the People.
But it may be it will be otherwise now under the Gospel Church State. No, says
he; There shall be false Teachers among you; that is, Persons pretending to the
same Spiritual Gift that the Apostles and Evangelists had, yet bringing in
thereby damnable Heresies. Now all their damnable Opininions they Fathered upon
immediate Revelations of the Spirit. This gave occasion to the Holy Apostle
John to give that Caution, with his Reason of it, which is expressed 1 John 4.
1, 2, 3. which Words we have opened before. And this false Pretense unto
extraordinary Spiritual Gifts, the Church was tried and pestred withal, so
long as there was any occasion to give it Countenance; namely, whilst such
Gifts were really continued unto any therein. What way then had God Ordained
for the Preservation and Safety of the Church, that it should not be imposed
upon by any of these Delusions? I answer, There was a Standing Rule in the
Church, whereby whatsoever was, or could be offered Doctrinally unto it, might
certainly and infallibly be tried, judged and determined on. And this was the
Rule of the written Word; according to that everlasting Ordinance, To the Law
and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. This in all Ages was sufficient for the
Preservation of the Church from all Errors and Heresies, or damnable Doctrines,
which it never fell into, nor shall do so, but in the sinful Neglect and
Contempt hereof. Moreover, the Apostle further directs the Application of this
Rule unto present occasions, by advising us to fix on some Fundamental
Principles which are likely to be opposed, and if they are not owned and
avowed, to avoid such Teachers, whatever Spiritual Gift they pretend unto, 1
John 4. 2, 3. 2 John 9, 10, 11. But yet because many in those Days were weak in
the Faith, and might be surprised with such Pretenses, God had graciously
provided and bestowed the Gift here mentioned on some, it may be, in every
Church, namely, of Discerning of Spirits. They could by Virtue of the
Extraordinary Gift and Aid therein of the Holy Ghost, make a true Judgment of
the Spirits that Men pretended to act, and to be acted by, whether they were of
God or no. And this was of singular Use and Benefit unto the Church in those
Days. For as Spiritual Gifts abounded, so did a Pretense unto them, which was
always accompanied with pernicious Designs. Herein therefore did God grand
Relief for them who were either less skilful, or less wary, or less able on any
account to make a right Judgment between those who were really endowed with
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, and those who falsely pretended thereunto.
For these Persons received this Gift, and were placed in the Church for this
very End, that they might guide and help them in making a right Judgment in
this matter. And whereas the Communication of these Gifts is ceased, and
consequently all Pretenses unto them, unless by some Persons Phrenetical and
Enthusiastical, whose Madness is manifest to all, there is no need of the
Continuance of this Gift of Discerning of Spirits, that standing Infallible
Rule of the Word, and ordinary Assistance of the Spirit, being every way
sufficient for our Preservation in the Truth; unless we give up our selves to
the Conduct of corrupt Lusts, Pride, Self-conceit, Carnal Interest, Passions
and Temptations, which Ruin the Souls of Men.

( 22.) THE two Spiritual Gifts here remaining, are Speaking with Tongues, and
their Interpretation. The first Communication of this Gift of Tongues unto the
Apostles, is particularly described, Acts 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. And although they
were at that time endued with all other Gifts of the Holy Ghost, called Power
from Above, Acts 1. 8. yet was this Gift of Tongues signalized by the Visible
Pledge of it, the joint Participation of the same Gift by all, and the
Notoriety of the matter thereon, as in that place of the Acts is at large
described. And God seems to have laid the Foundation of Preaching the Gospel in
this Gift, for two Reasons. (1) To signify that the Grace and Mercy of the
Covenant was now no longer to be confined unto one Nation, Language or People,
but to be extended unto all Nations, Tongues and Languages of People under
Heaven. (2) To testify by what means he would subdue the Souls and Consciences
of Men unto the Obedience of Christ and the Gospel, and by what means he would
maintain his Kingdom in the World. Now this was not by Force and Might, by
external Power or Armies, but by the Preaching of the Word, whereof the Tongue
is the only Instrument. And the outward Sign of this Gift in Tongues of Fire
evidenced the Light and Efficacy wherewith the Holy Ghost designed to accompany
the Dispensation of the Gospel. Wherefore, although this Gift began with the
Apostles, yet was it afterward very much diffused unto the Generality of them
that did believe. See Acts 10. 46. Chap. 19. 6. 1 Cor. 14. And some few things
we may observe concerning this Gift: As, (1) The especial matter that was
expressed by this Gift, seems to have been the Praises of God for his wonderful
Works of Grace by Christ. Although, I doubt not, but that the Apostles were
enabled by virtue of this Gift to declare the Gospel unto any People unto whom
they came in their own Language, yet ordinarily they did not Preach nor
Instruct the People by Virtue of this Gift, but only spoke forth the Praises of
God to the Admiration and Astonishment of them who were yet Strangers to the
Faith. So when they first received the Gift, they were heard speaking the
wonderful Works of God, Acts 2. 11. And the Gentiles who first believed spoke
with Tongues, and magnified God, Acts 10. 46. (2) These Tongues were so given
for a Sign unto them that believed not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. that sometimes those
that spoke with Tongues, understood not the Sense and Meaning of the Words
delivered by themselves, nor were they understood by the Church it self wherein
they were uttered, 1 Cor. 14. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. etc. But this I suppose was only
sometimes; and that, it may be mostly, when this Gift was unnecessarily used.
For I doubt not, but the Apostles understood full well the things delivered by
themselves in diverse Tongues. And all who had this Gift, though they might not
apprehend the meaning of what themselves spoke and uttered, yet were so
absolutely in the Exercise of it under the Conduct of the Holy Spirit, that
they neither did nor could speak any thing by virtue thereof, but what was
according unto the Mind of God, and tended unto his Praise, 1 Cor. 14. 2. 14,
17. (3) Although this Gift were excellent in it self, and singularly effectual
in the Propagation of the Gospel unto Unbelievers, yet in the Assemblies of the
Church it was of little or no Use, but only with respect unto the things
themselves that were uttered. For as to the principal End of it, to be a Sign
unto Unbelievers, it was finished and accomplished toward them, so as they had
no farther need nor use of it. But now whereas many Unbelievers came
occasionally into the Assemblies of the Church, especially at some freer
Seasons, for whose Conviction the Holy Ghost would for a Season continue this
Gift among Believers; that the Church might not be disadvantaged thereby, he
added the other Gift here mentioned, namely, The Interpretation of Tongues. He
endowed either those Persons themselves who spoke with Tongues, or some others
in the same Assembly, with an Ability to interpret and declare to the Church
the things that were spoken and uttered in that miraculous manner; which is the
last Gift here mentioned. But the Nature, Use and Abuse of these Gifts is so
largely and distinctly spoken unto by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. that as I need
not insist on them, so I cannot fully do it without an entire Exposition of
that whole Chapter, which the Nature of my Design will not permit.

CHAP. V. The Original, Duration, Use and End of Extraordinary Spiritual Gifts.
( 1.) THIS Summary Account does the Apostle give of these Extraordinary Gifts
of the Holy Ghost which then flourished in the Church, and were the Life of
it is extraordinary Ministry. It may be mention may occur of some such Gifts
under other Names, but they are such as may be reduced unto some one of those
here expressed. Wherefore this may be admitted as a perfect Catalogue of them,
and comprehensive of that Power from Above, which the Lord Christ promised unto
his Apostles and Disciples upon his Ascension into Heaven, Acts 1. 8. For he
ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4. 10.
that is, the Church with Officers and Gifts, unto the Perfection of the Saints,
by the Work of the Ministry, and the Edification of his Body, Ver. 11. For
being by the Right Hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the
Promise of the Holy Ghost, he shed forth, or abundantly poured out these things
whereof we speak, Acts 2. 33. And as they were the great Evidence of his
Acceptance with God, and Exaltation, seeing in them the Spirit convinced the
World of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment; so they were the great means whereby
he carried on his Work amongst Men, as shall afterward be declared.

( 2.) THERE was no certain limited Time for the Cessation of these Gifts.
Those peculiar unto the Apostles, were commensurate unto their Lives. None
after their Decease had either Apostolical Office, Power or Gifts. The like may
be said of Evangelists. Nor have we any undoubted Testimony, that any of those
Gifts which were truly miraculous, and every way above the Faculties of Men,
were communicated unto any after the Expiration of the Generation of them who
conversed with Christ in the Flesh, or those who received the Holy Ghost by
their Ministry. It is not unlikely, but that God might on some occasions for a
longer Season, put forth his Power in some miraculous Operations, and so he yet
may do, and perhaps does sometimes. But the Superstition and Folly of some
ensuing Ages inventing and divulging innumerable Miracles false and foolish,
proved a most disadvantagious Prejudice unto the Gospel, and a means to open a
way unto Satan to impose endless Delusions upon Christians. For as true and
real Miracles with becoming Circumstances, were the great means that won and
reconciled a Regard and Honor unto Christian Religion in the World; so the
Pretense of such as either were absolutely false, or such as whose Occasions,
Ends, Matter or Manner were unbecoming the Greatness and Holiness of him who is
the true Author of all miraculous Operations, is the greatest Dishonor unto
Religion that any one can invent. But although all these Gifts and Operations
ceased in some respect, some of them absolutely, and some of them as to the
immediate manner of Communication and Degree of Excellency; yet so far as the
Edification of the Church was concerned in them, something that is Analogous
unto them, was and is continued. He who gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, gave also some Pastors and Teachers. And as he furnished
the former with extraordinary Gifts; so as far as any thing of the like kind is
needful for the continual Edification of the Church, he bestows it on the
latter also, as shall be declared.

( 3.) AND these Gifts of the Spirit added unto his Grace in real Holiness,
were the Glory, Honor and Beauty of the Church of Old. Men have but deceived
themselves and others, when they have seigned a Glory and Beauty of the Church
in other things. And whatever any think or say, where these Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which are the Ornaments of the Church, her clothing of wrought Gold,
and her Raiment of Needle Work, being neglected and lost, and they think to
adorn her with the meritricious Paint of pompous Ceremonies, with outward
Grandeur, Wealth and Power, she is utterly fallen from her Chastity, Purity and
Integrity. But it is evident that this is the state of many Churches in the
World which are therefore worldly and carnal, not Spiritual or Evangelical.
Power, and Force, and Wealth, the Gifts in this Case of Another Spirit, under
various Pretenses and Names, are their Life and Glory, indeed their Death and
Shame. I deny not but that it is lawful for Ministers of the Gospel to enjoy
Earthly Possessions, which they do attain by any commendable way among other
Men. Neither are they required, unless in extraordinary Cases, to part with the
Right and Use of their Temporal Goods, because they are so, Ministers of
Christ; though those who are so indeed, will not deny but that they ought to
use them in a peculiar manner unto the Glory of Christ, and Honor of the
Gospel, beyond other Men. Neither shall I ever question, that, wherein the
Scripture is so express, namely, That those who labor in the Word and
Doctrine, should have a convenient, yea, an Honorable Subsistence provided for
them according to the best Ability of the Church, for their Work's sake. It is
in like manner also granted, that the Lord Christ has committed all that Power
which with repect unto the Edification of the Church, he will exercise in this
World unto the Church it self; as it cannot without a Virtual Renunciation of
the Gospel and Faith in Christ Jesus as the Head and King of the Church, be
supposed that this Power is any other but Spiritual, over the Souls and
Consciences of Men. And therefore cannot this Power be exercised, or be any
ways made effectual, but by virtue of the Spiritual Gifts we treat of. But for
Men to turn this Spiritual Power to be exercised only by virtue of Spiritual
Gifts, into an external coercive Power over the Persons, Bodies, Liberties and
Lives of Men, to be exercised by Law-Courts, in Ways, Forms, Manners utterly
Foreign to the Gospel, and all Evangelical Administrations, without the least
Pretense unto, or Appearance of the Exercise of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost
therein; yea, and by Persons by whom they are hated and derided, acting with
Pride, Scorn and Contempt of the Disciples of Christ, and over them, being
utterly ignorant of the true Nature and Use of all Gospel Administrations, this
is to disorder the Church, and in stead of an House of Spiritual Worship, in
some Instances to turn it into a Den of Thieves. Where hereunto there are
moreover annexed earthly Revenues, containing all Food and Fuel of corrupt
Lusts, with all things satisfactory unto the Minds of Worldly, Sensual Men, as
a meet Reward of these Carnal Administrations, as it is at this Day in the
Church of Rome, there all Use of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost is excluded, and
the Church is brought into extreme Desolacion. And although these things are
are as contrary to the Gospel as Darkness to Light, yet the World for many
Reasons, not now to be insisted on, being willing to be deceived in this
matter, it is generally apprehended that there is nothing so pernicious unto
the Church, so justly to be watched against and rooted out, as a Dislike of
their Horrible Apostasies in the Corrupt Depravation of all Evangelical
Administrations. This was not the State, this was not the Condition of the
Primitive Churches; their Life consisted in the Grace of the Spirit, and their
Glory in his Gifts. None of their Leaders once dreamed of that new kind of
Beauty, Glory and Power, consisting in numberless Superstitious Ceremonies
instead of Religious Worship; Worldly Grandeur instead of Humility and
Self-denial; and open Tyranny over the Consciences and Persons of Men, in the
room of Spiritual Authority, effectual in the Power of Christ, and by virtue of
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

( 4.) THERE are many sore Divisions at this Day in the World, among and
between the Professors of Christian Religion, both about the Doctrine and
Worship of the Gospel, as also the Discipline thereof. That these Divisions are
evil in themselves, and the Cause of great Evils, Hindrances of the Gospel,
and all the Effects thereof in the World, is acknowledged by all; and it is a
thing doubtless to be greatly lamented, that the generality of them who are
called Christians, are departed from the great Rule of keeping the Unity of the
Spirit in the Bond of Peace. He who does not pray always, who is not ready with
his utmost Endeavor to remedy this Evil, to remove this great Obstruction of
the Benefit of the Gospel, is scarce worthy the Name of a Christian. The common
way insisted on unto this End, is, that those who have most Force and Power,
should set up Standards and Measures of Agreement, compelling others by all
ways of Severity and Violence to a Compliance therewith; judging them the
highest Offenders who shall refuse so to do; because the determining and
settling of this matter is committed unto them. This is the way of Antichrist,
and those who follow him therein. Others with more Moderation and Wisdom, but
with as little Success, do or have endeavored the Reconciliation of the
Parties at variance, some, more or all of them, by certain middle ways of
mutual Condescension which they have found out. Some things they blame, and
some things they commend in all; some things they would have them do, and some
things omit; all for the sake of Peace and Love. And this Design carries with
it so fair and pleadable a Pretense, that those who are once engaged in it, are
apt to think that they alone are the true Lovers of Christianity in general,
the only sober and indifferent Persons, fit to Umpire all the Differences in
the World, in a few Propositions which they have framed. And so wedded are some
wise and Holy Men unto these Apprehensions of reconciling Christians by their
conceived Methods, that no Experience of endless Disappointments, and of
increasing new Differences and Digladiations, of forming new Parties, of
reviving old Animosiries, all which roll in upon them continually, will
discourage them in their Design. What then, will some say, would you have these
Divisions and Differences that are among us continued and perpetuated, when you
acknowledge them so evil and pernicious? I say, God forbid: Yea, we pray for,
and always will endeavor their removal and taking away. But yet this I say on
the other hand, whether Men will hear, or they will forbear, there is but one
way of effecting this so blessed and desirable a Work, which until it be
engaged in, let Men talk what they please of Reconciliation, the worst of Men
will be reviling and persecuting those who are better than themselves unto the
End of the World. And this way is, That all Churches should endeavor to reduce
themselves unto the Primitive Pattern. Let us all but consider what was the
Life and Spirit of those Churches, wherein their Honor, Glory and Order did
consist, making it our joint Design to walk in the Principle of that Grace of
the Spirit wherein they walked, in the Exercise and Use of those Gifts of the
Spirit which were the Spring of, and gave Virtue unto all their
Administrations, renouncing whatever is Foreign unto, and inconsistent with
these things, and that Grace and Unity will quickly enter into Professors,
which Christ has purchased for them. But these things are here only
occasionally mentioned; and are not farther to be pursued.

( 5.) THESE Spiritual Gifts the Apostle calls, The Powers of the World to
come, Heb. 6. 4, 5. that is, those effectual powerful Principles and
Operations, which peculiarly belong unto the Kingdom of Christ and
Administration of the Gospel, whereby they were to be set up, planted, advanced
and propagated in the World. The Lord Christ came and wrought out the mighty
Work of our Salvation in his own Person, and thereon laid the Foundation of his
Church on himself, by the Confession of him as the Son of God. Concerning
himself and his Work, he preached, and caused to be preached, a Doctrine that
was opposed by all the World, because of it is Truth, Mystery and Holiness; yet
was it the Design of God to break through all those Oppositions, to cause this
Doctrine to be received and submitted unto, and Jesus Christ to be believed in,
unto the Ruin and Destruction of the Kingdom of Satan in the World. Now this
was a Work that could not be wrought without the putting forth and exercise of
mighty Power, concerning which nothing remains to be enquired into, but of what
sort it ought to be. Now the Conquest that the Lord Christ aimed at was
Spiritual, over the Souls and Consciences of Men; the Enemies he had to
conflict withal were Spiritual, even Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual
Wickednesses in High Places; the God of this World, the Prince of it, which
ruled in the Children of Disobedience: The Kingdom which he had to erect, was
Spiritual, and not of this World; all the Laws and Rules of it, with their
Administrations and Ends, were Spiritual and Heavenly. The Gospel that was to
be propagated was a Doctrine not concerning this World, nor the things of it,
nor of any thing Natural or Political, but as they were merely subordinate unto
other Ends, but Heavenly and mysterious, directing Men only in a Tendency
according to the Mind of God unto the eternal Enjoyment of him. Hereon it will
easily appear what kind of Power is necessary unto this Work, and for the
attaining of these Ends. He that at the speaking of one Word could have engaged
more than Twelve Legions of Angels in his Work, and unto his Assistance, could
have easily by outward Force and Arms have subdued the whole World into an
external Observance of him and his Commands, and thereon have ruled Men at his
pleasure. As this he could have done, and may do when he pleases, so if he had
done it, it had tended nothing unto the Ends which he designed. He might indeed
have had a glorious Empire in the World, comprehensive of all Dominions that
ever were or can be on the Earth; but yet it would have been of the same kind
and Nature with that which Nero had, the greatest Monster of Villainy in Nature.
Neither had it been any great matter for the Son of God to have outdone the
Romans or the Turks, or such like Conspiracies of wicked Oppressors. And all
those who yet think meet to use external Force over the Persons, Lives and
Bodies of Men, in order unto the reducing of them unto the Obedience of Christ
and the Gospel, do put the greatest Dishonor upon him imaginable, and change
the whole Nature of his Design and Kingdom. He will neither own nor accept of
any Subject, but whose Obedience is a Free Act of his own Will, and who is so
made willing by himself in the Day of his Power. His Design, and his only
Design in this World unto the Glory of God, is to erect a Kingdom, Throne and
Rule in the Souls and Consciences of Men, to have an Obedience from them in
Faith, Love and Spiritual Delight, proceeding from their own Choice,
Understandings, Wills and Affections; an Obedience that should be internal,
Spiritual, Mystical, Heavenly, with respect solely unto things unseen and
eternal, wherein himself and his Laws should be infinitely preferred before all
earthly things and Considerations. Now this is a matter that all Earthly Powers
and Empires could never desire, design or put an hand unto, and that which
renders the Kingdom of Christ as of another Nature, so more excellent and
better than all Earthly Kingdoms, as Liberty is better than Bondage, the Mind
more excellent than the outward Carcass, Spiritual and Eternal things than
things Carnal and Temporary, as the Wisdom and Holiness of God are more
excellent than the Folly and Lusts of Men.

( 6.) SEEING therefore this was the Design of Christ, this was the Nature and
Work of the Gospel which was to be propagated, wherein Carnal Power and outward
Force could be of no use, yea, whose Exercise was inconsistent with,
dishonorable unto, and destructive of the whole Design; and wherein the Work
to be accomplished on the Minds and Souls of Men is incomparably greater than
the conquering of Worlds with Force and Arms, it is enquired what Power the
Lord Christ did employ herein, what Means and Instruments he used for the
Accomplishment of his Design, and the erecting of that Kingdom or Church State,
which being promised of Old, was called the World to come, or, the New World,
the New Heaven and Earth wherein dwells Righteousness: And I say, it was
these Gifts of the Holy Ghost whereof we have treated, which were those Powers
of this World to come. By them it was, or in their Exercise, that the Lord
Christ erected his Empire over the Souls and Consciences of Men, destroying
both the Work and Kingdom of the Devil. It is true, it is the Word of the
Gospel it self, that is the Rod of his Strength which is sent out of Sion to
erect and dispense his Rule: But that hidden Power which made the Word
effectual in the dispensation of it, consisted in these Gifts of the Holy
Ghost. Men may despise them, or think light of them whilst they please, they
are those Powers which the Lord Christ in his Wisdom, thought meet alone to
engage in the propagation of the Gospel, and setting up of his Kingdom in the
World.

( 7.) THE Recovery and Return of the People from the Captivity of Babylon, was
a Type of the Spiritual Redemption of the Church by Jesus Christ: And how God
effected that as a Type hereof, he declares, Zech. 4. 6. Not by Army, nor by
Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts; so much more was this work to
be effected. So after his Resurrection the Lord Christ tells his Apostles that
they were to be his Witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria,
and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth, that is, all the World over, Acts 1.
8. But how shall they be able so to bear Testimony unto them, as that their
witness shall be received and become effectual? Says he, Ye shall receive
power for this end; I have given you Authority to Preach the Word before, and
now I will give you such an Ability for it, as none shall be able to withstand
or resist; and this is after the Holy Ghost is come upon you, that is in the
Communication of these Gifts whereby you may be enabled unto your work. In them
consisted that Mouth and Wisdom which he promised he would give them, which all
their Adversaries were not able to gainsay or resist. Luke 21. 15. Wherefore,
that which I shall close this Discourse withal, shall be a brief endeavor to
declare how these Gifts were the Spiritual Powers of the Gospel unto all the
ends we have before mentioned as designed by Jesus Christ; whence it will
appear how little there was of the Wisdom, Skill, Power or Authority of Men in
the whole work of propagating the Gospel, and planting the Church of Christ, as
we shall afterward manifest, how by the Dispensation of the other more
ordinary Gifts of the Spirit both the Gospel and the Church are continued and
preserved in the World.

FIRST the Persons whom the Lord Christ chose, called and designed unto this
Work, were by these Gifts enabled thereunto. As no Mortal Men had of themselves
any sufficiency for such a work, so the Persons particularly called unto it by
Jesus Christ, lay under all the Disadvantages that any Persons could possibly
be liable unto in such an undertaking. For, (1) They were all of them unlearned
and ignorant, which the Jews took notice of, Acts 4. 13. and which the Gentiles
despised them for. (2) They were Poor, and of no Reputation in the World, which
made them contemned by all sorts of Persons. And (3) They seem in many
instances to have been pasillanimous and fearful, which they all manifested
when they so shamefully fled and left their Master in his Distresses, the chief
of them also Swearing that he knew him not. Now it is easily understood what
great disadvantages these were unto the undertaking of so great a work as they
were called unto; yea how impossible it was for them under these qualifications
to do any thing in the pursuit of it. Wherefore by the Communication of these
Gifts unto them, all these Impediments arising from themselves were removed,
and they were furnished with Endowments of quite another nature, whereby they
were eminently sitted with that Spiritual Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding
which surpassed all the Wisdom that was of the World or in it, by what ways or
means soever it were attained. They both had and declared a Wisdom which none
of the Princes of this World were acquainted withal, 1 Cor. 2. Those who
during the abode of Christ in the Flesh with them, could not understand a plain
Parable, and were ever and anon at no small loss about the sense and meaning of
their matter, having very low and carnal apprehensions about his Person, Work
and Office, were now filled with a Knowledge of all Heavenly Mysteries, and
with Wisdom to declare, manage and maintain them against all opposers. Kings,
Princes, Rulers of Synagogues were now all one to them, they had a Mouth and
Wisdom given them which none of their Adversaries could resist. Where ever
they came in all Nations, to all sorts of People, of all Languages, they were
now enabled in their own Tongue and Speech to declare and preach the Gospel
unto them, being always filled with a Treasure of Wisdom and Spiritual
Mysteries, whence they could draw forth as every occasion did require. (2)
Whereas they were poor, the difficulties wherewith such a condition is attended
were also by this means utterly taken away. For although they had neither
Silver nor Gold by their Work or Employment, but their outward Wants and
Distresses were rather increased thereby; yet their Minds and Souls were by
this Communication of the Spirit, so raised above the World, and filled with
such a Contempt of all the desirable things in it, and of all the Pride of Men
upon their account, as that their want of Possessions and outward Enjoyments
made them only the more ready and expedite for their work, whence also such of
them as had Possessions sold them, gave their price to the Poor, that they
might be no hindrance unto them in their Design. And hence also it was that
those who even after the Resurrection of Christ were enquiring after a Temporal
Kingdom, wherein no doubt a good part of its Glory, Power and Advantages would
fall to their share, as most do who yet continue to Dream of such a Kingdom in
this World, immediately upon the Communication of these Gifts rejoiced that
they were counted worthy of shame for the Name of Christ, when they were
Imprisoned, Whipped, and despitefully used, Acts 4. (3) They had Boldness,
Courage and Constancy given unto them in the room of that pusillanimity and
fear which before they had discovered. This the Jews took notice of and were
astonished at, Acts 4. 13. And they had reason so to be, if we consider the
Power and Authority of that work wherein they were then assaulted, with the
Speech of Peter unto them, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. which he spoke as filled with
the Holy Ghost. See also Acts 5. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. And in the whole course of
their Ministry throughout the World the like undaunted Courage, Resolution and
Constancy did always and in all things accompany them. Wherefore these Gifts in
the first place may be esteemed the Powers of the World to come, in as much as
by them those unto whom the work of Preaching the Gospel, propagating the
Mystery of it, the Conversion of Nations, the planting of Churches, and in all
the Erection of the Kingdom of Christ was committed, were enabled by them unto
the utmost Capacity of Humane Nature to discharge, effect and accomplish the
work committed unto them. By virtue and in the strength of these Spiritual
Abilities, did they set upon the whole Kingdom of Satan and Darkness in the
World, contending with the Gates of Hell, and all the Powers of the Earth,
attempting the Wisdom of the Greeks and the Religion of the Jews, with success
against both. They went not forth with Force and Arms, or Carnal Power, they
threatened no Man, menaced no Man with the Carnal Weapons of Force or Penalties,
they had no Baits or Allurements of Wealth, Power or Honor to enveagle the
Minds of Corrupt and Sensual Men, but as was said in the Warranty and Power of
these Spiritual Gifts they both attempted and accomplished this work. And thing
continue still in the same condition according unto their proportion. Such as
is the Furniture of Men with Spiritual Abilities and Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
such is their fitness for the work of the Ministry, and no other. And if any
shall undertake this work without this Provision of Abilities for it, they will
neither ever be owned by Christ, nor be of the least use in the Employment they
take upon them. A Ministry devoid of Spiritual Gifts is a sufficient evidence
of a Church under a degenerating Apostasy. But these things will be farther
spoken unto afterward.

( 8.) SECONDLY; By these Gifts were all their Administrations, especially
their Preaching the Gospel rendered effectual unto their proper end. The
Preaching of the Word which is the Sword of the Spirit, was the great
Instrument whereby they wrought out and accomplished their designed work in the
Conviction and Conversion of the Souls of Men. It may therefore be enquired
what it was that gave efficacy and success unto the Word as preached or
dispensed by them. Now this as it should seem must be either that the subject
matter of it was so suited unto the Reasons and Understandings of Men, as that
they could not but admit of it upon its proposal; or that the manner whereby
they declared it was with such persuasive Artifices as were meet to prevail
with the Minds of Men unto an Assent, or to impose upon them against the best
of their defenses. But the Apostle declares that it was utterly otherwise in
both these regards. For the matter of the Doctrine of the Gospel unto the Minds
of Carnal Men, such as all Men are until renewed by the Gospel it self, is
Folly, and that which is every way meet to be despised, 1 Cor. 1. And for the
manner of its Declaration, they did not therein neither would they use the
enticing words of Humane Wisdom, any Arts of Oratory, or Dresses of Rhetoric
or Eloquence, lest the Effects which were wrought by the Word should have
seemed in any measure to have proceeded from them, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. Wherefore,
not to mention that internal efficacious power of Grace which God secretly puts
forth for the Conversion of his Elect, the consideration whereof belongs not
unto our present design, and I say that it was by virtue of those Gifts that
the Administration of the Gospel was so efficacious and successful. For, (1)
From them proceeded that Authority over the Minds of Men wherewith the Word was
accompanied. When the Lord Christ was Anointed by the Spirit to Preach the
Gospel, it is said, He taught as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes,
Mat. 7. 29. Whatever was his outward Appearance in the Flesh, the Word as
Administered by him was attended with such an Authority over the Minds and
Consciences of Men, as they could not but be sensible of. And so was it with
the Primitive Dispensers of the Gospel; by virtue of these Spiritual Gifts they
preached the Word in the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
There was accompanying of their Preaching an Evidence or Demonstration of a
Power and Authority that was from God and his Spirit. Men could not but
conclude that there was something in it which was over them or above them, and
which they must yield or submit unto as that which was not for them to contend
withal. It is true, the Power of the Gospel was hid unto them that were to
perish, whose Minds the God of this World had effectually blinded, lest the
Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ should shine into them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
Whence it came to pass that the Word was rejected by many; yet wherever God
was pleased to make it effectual, it was by a Sense of a Divine Authority
accompanying its Administration by virtue of those Spiritual Gifts. And
therefore our Apostle shows, that when Men prophesied or declared the Mind of
God from the Word by the Gift of Prophecy, Unbelievers did fall down, and
Worshipping God reported that God was in them of a Truth, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.
They were sensible of a Divine Authority which they could not stand before or
withstand. (2) From hence also proceeded that Life and Power for Conviction
which the Word was accompanied with in their Dispensation of it. It became
shortly to be the Arrows of Christ, which were sharp in the Hearts of Men. As
Men found an Authority in the Dispensation of the Word, so they felt and
experienced an efficacy in the Truths Dispensed. By it were their Minds
enlightened, their Consciences awakened, their Minds convinced, their Lives
judged, the secrets of their Hearts made manifest, as 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. until
they cried out in Multitudes, Men and Brethren what shall we do? Hereby did the
Lord Christ in his Kingdom and Majesty ride prosperously Conquering and to
Conquer, with the Word of Truth, Meekness and Righteousness, subduing the Souls
of Men unto his Obedience, making them free, ready, willing in the Day of his
Power. These were the Forces and Weapons that he used in the establishing of
his Kingdom, which were mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down of Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the
Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. So does the Apostle describe the success
of these Administrations as an absolute conquest, wherein all Opposition is
broken, all strong Holds and Fortifications are demolished, and the whole
reduced unto due Obedience. For by this means were all things effected; all the
strong holds of Sin in the Minds of Men in their natural Darkness, Blindness
and Obstinacy; all the high Fortifications of prejudices, and vain, proud,
lofty imaginations raised in them by Satan, were all cast down by and before
Gospel Administrations, managed by Virtue and Authority of these Spiritual
Gifts which the Lord Christ ordained to be the Powers of his Kingdom.

( 9.) THIRDLY; Those of them which consisted in miraculous operations were
suited to fill the World with an Apprehension of a Divine Power accompanying
the Word, and them by whom it was administered. And sundry things unto the
furtherance of the Gospel depended hereon. As, (1) The World which was stupid,
asleep in Sin and Security, satisfied with their Lusts and Idolatries,
regardless of any thing but present Enjoyments, was awakened hereby to an
Attendance unto, and Enquiry into this new Doctrine that was proposed unto
them. They could not but take notice that there was something more than
ordinary in that Sermon which they were summoned unto by a Miracle. And this
was the first and principal use of these miraculous Operations. They awakened
the dull, stupid World unto a consideration of the Doctrine of the Gospel,
which otherwise they would have securely neglected and despised. (2) They
weakened and took off those mighty prejudices which their Minds were possessed
with by Tradition and Secular Enjoyments; what these prejudices were I shall
not here declare, I have done it elsewhere. It is enough to observe that they
were as great, as many, as effectual, as Humane Nature in any Case is capable
of. But yet although they were sufficiently of proof against all other means of
Conviction, yet they could not but sink and weaken before the manifest evidence
of present Divine Power; such as these miraculous Operations were accompanied
withal. For although all the things which they cleaved unto, and intended to
do so inseparably, were, as they thought, to be preferred above any thing that
could be offered unto them, yet when the Divine Power appeared against them,
they were not able to give them Defense. Hence upon these Operations one of
these two Effects ensued. (1) Those that were shut up under their Obstinacy and
Unbelief, were filled with Tormenting Convictions, and knew not what to do to
relieve themselves. The Evidence of Miracles they could not withstand, and yet
would not admit of what they tendered and confirmed; whence they were filled
with Disquietments and Perplexities. So the Rulers of the Jews manifested
themselves to have been upon the Curing of the Impotent Person at the Gate of
the Temple. What shall we do (say they) to these Men, for that indeed a notable
Miracle has been done by them, Acts 4. 16. (2) The Minds of others were
exceedingly prepared for the Reception of the Truth; the Advantages unto that
purpose being too many to be here insisted on. (3) They were a great means of
taking off the Scandal of the Cross. That this was that which the World was
principally offended at in the Gospel, is sufficiently known. Christ Crucified
was to the Jews a Stumblingblock, and unto the Greeks Foolishness. Nothing
could possibly be or have been a matter of so high offense unto the Jews, as to
offer them a Crucified Messiah, whom they expected as a Glorious King to subdue
all their Enemies; nor ever will they receive him, in the Mind wherein they
are, upon any other Terms. And it seemed a part of the extremest Folly unto
the Grecians, to propose such Great and Immortal Things in the Name of one that
was himself Crucified as a Malefactor. And a shame it was thought on all hands
for any Wise Man to profess or own such a Religion as came from the Cross. But
yet after all this blustering of Weakness and Folly, when they saw this
Doctrine of the Cross owned by God, and witnessed unto by manifest Effects of
Divine Power, they could not but begin to think, that Men need not be much
ashamed of that which God so openly avowed. And all these things made way to
let in the Word into the Minds and Consciences of Men, where by its own
Efficacy it gave them satisfying Experience of its Truth and Power.

( 10.) FROM these few Instances whereunto many of an alike Nature might be
added, it is manifest how these Spiritual Gifts were the Powers of the World to
come, the Means, Weapons, Arms that the Lord Christ made use of for the
subduing of the World, destruction of the Kingdom of Satan and Darkness, with
the planting and establishment of his own Church on the Earth. And as they were
alone suited unto his Design, so his Accomplishment of it by them is a glorious
Evidence of his Divine Power and Wisdom, as might easily be demonstrated.

Of Ordinary Gifts of the Spirit. CHAP. VI.
The Grant, Institution, Use, Benefit, End and Continuance of the Ministry.
1. THE consideration of those Ordinary Gifts of the Spirit which are annexed
unto the Ordinary Powers and Duties of the Church, does in the next place lie
before us. And they are called Ordinary, not as if they were absolutely common
unto all, or were not much to be esteemed, or as if that were any way a
diminishing Term: But we call them so upon a double account, (1) In distinction
from those Gifts which being absolutely Extraordinary did exceed the whole
Power and Faculties of the Souls of Men, as Healings, Tongues and Miracles. For
otherwise they are of the same Nature with most of those Gifts which were
bestowed on the Apostles and Evangelists, differing only in degree. Every true
Gospel Ministry has now Gifts of the same kind with the Apostles in a degree
and measure sufficient to their Work, excepting those mentioned. (2) Because of
their continuance in the ordinary state of the Church, which also they shall do
unto the Consummation of all things. Now my design is to treat peculiarly of
the Gifts of the Holy Spirit. But because there is a Gift of Christ which is
the Foundation and Subject of them, something must be spoken briefly unto that
in the first place. And this Gift of Christ is that of the Ministry of the
Church, the Nature of which Office I shall not consider at large, but only
speak unto it as it is a Gift of Christ. And this I shall do by some little
illustration given unto that passage of the Apostle, where this Gift and the
Communication of it is declared, Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the measure of the Gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high he led Captivity
Captive, and gave Gifts unto Men, (Now that he ascended, what is it but that be
also descended first into the lower parts of the Earth? He that descended is
the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all
things,) and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work
of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ; till we all come in
the Unity of the Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect
Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. That we
henceforth be no more tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine by the sleight of Men and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive; but speaking the Truth in Love may grow up into him in all things
which is the Head, even Christ. From whom the whole Body fitly joined together
and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according unto the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the Body, unto the
Edifying of it self in Love.

( 2.) THERE is no other place of Scripture wherein at one view the Grant,
Institution, Use, Benefit, End and Continuance of the Ministry is so clearly
and fully represented. And the End of this whole Discourse is to declare that
the Gift and Grant of the Ministry and Ministers, of the Office, and the
Persons to discharge it, is an Eminent, most useful Fruit and Effect of the
Mediatory Power of Christ, with his Love and Care toward his Church. And those
of whom the Apostle speaks (unto every one of us) are the Officers or Ministers
whom he does afterward enumerate, although the words may in some sense be
extended unto all Believers. But principally the Ministry and Ministers of the
Church are intended. And it is said, unto them is Grace given. It is evident
that by Grace here, not Sanctifying, Saving Grace is intended, but a
participation of a gracious Favor with respect to an especial End: So the word
is frequently used in this case by our Apostle, Romans 15. 15. Gal. 2. 9. Ephesians.
3. 8. This Gracious Favor we are made partakers of; this Trust is freely, in a
way of Grace committed unto us. And that according to the measure of the Gift
of Christ, unto every one according as the Lord Christ does measure the Gift of
it freely out unto them. Thus in general was the Ministry granted unto the
Church, the particular account whereof is given in the ensuing Verses. And,

( 3.) FIRST, it is declared to be a Gift of Christ. (...), And he himself
gave, ver. 11. It is the great Fundamental of all Church Order, Power and
Worship, that the Gift and Grant of Christ is the Original of the Ministry. If
it had not been so given of Christ, it had not been lawful for any of the Sons
of Men to institute such an Office, or appoint such Officers. If any had
attempted so to do, as there would have been a Nullity in what they did, so
their Attempt would have been expressly against the Headship of Christ, or his
Supreme Authority over the Church. Wherefore, that he would thus give Ministers
of the Church was promised of old, Jer. 3. 15. as well as signally foretold in
the Psalm from whence these Words are taken. And as his doing of it is an Act
of his Mediatory Power, as it is declared in this place, and Matthew. 28. 18. so
it was a Fruit of his Care, Love and Bounty, 1 Cor. 2. 21, 22. And it will
hence follow not only that Offices in the Church, which are not of Christ's
giving by Institution, and Officers that are not of Gift, Grant, by Provision
and Furnishment, have indeed no place therein, but also that they are set up in
Opposition unto his Authority and in Contempt of his Care and Bounty. For the
doing so arises out of an Apprehension, that both Men have a Power in the
Church which is not derived from Christ, and that to impose Servants upon him
in his House without his Consent, as also that they have more Care of the
Church than he had, who made not such Provision for them. And if an Examination
might be admitted by this Rule, as it will one Day come on whether Men will or
no, some great Names now in the Church would scarce be able to preserve their
Station; Popes, Cardinals, Metropolitans, Diocesan Prelates, Archdeacons,
Commissaries, Officials, and I know not what other monstrous Products of an
incestuous Conjunction between Secular Pride and Ecclesiastical Degeneracy,
would think themselves severely treated to be tried by this Rule: But so it
must be at last, and that unavoidably. Yea, and that no Man shall be so hardy,
as once to dare attempt the setting up of Officers in the Church without the
Authority of Christ; the Eminency of this Gift and Grant of his is declared in
sundry particular Instances, wherein neither the Wisdom, nor Skill, nor Power
of any, or all of the Sons of Men, can have the least Interest, or in any thing
alike unto them.

( 4.) AND this appears, (1) From the Grandeur of it is Introduction, or the
great and solemn Preparation that was made for the giving out of this Gift. It
was given by Christ when he ascended up on high, and led Captivity captive,
Ver. 8. The Words are taken from Psalm. 68. 17, 18. The Chariots of God are
twenty thousand, even Thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them as in Sinai
in the Holy Place. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity captive,
thou have received Gifts for Men, yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord
God might dwell among them. In the first place, the glorious Appearance of God
on Mount Sinai in giving of the Law, his descending and ascending unto that
purpose, is intended. But they are applied here unto Christ, because all the
glorious Works of God in and toward the Church of Old, were either
Representatory, or gradually introductory of Christ and the Gospel. Thus the
glorious Ascending of God from Mount Sinai after the giving of the Law, was a
Representation of his ascending far above all Heavens to fill all things, as
Ver. 10. And as God then led Captivity captive in the Destruction of Pharaoh
and the Egyptians, who had long held his People in Captivity, and under Cruel
Bondage: So dealt the Lord Christ now in the Destruction and Captivity of
Satan and all his Powers, Col. 2. 15. Only whereas it is said in the Psalm,
that he received Gifts for men, here it is said, that he gave Gifts to men,
wherein no small Mystery is couched. For although Christ is God, and is so
gloriously represented in the Psalm, yet an Intimation is given that he should
act what is here mentioned in a condition wherein he was capable to receive
from another, as he did in this matter, Acts 2. 2, 3. And so the Phrase in the
Original does more than infinuate (...), Thou have received Gifts in Adam, in
the Man or Humane Nature. And (...) signifies as well to give as to receive,
especially when any thing is received to be given. Christ received this Gift in
the Humane Nature to give it unto others. Now to what end is this glorious
Theater, as it were, prepared, and all this Preparation made, all Men being
called to the Preparation of it? It was to set out the Greatness of the Gift he
would bestow, and the Glory of the Work which he would effect. And this was to
furnish the Church with Ministers, and Ministers with Gifts for the Discharge
of their Office and Duty. And it will one Day appear, that there is more Glory,
more Excellency in giving one poor Minister unto a Congregation, by furnishing
him with Spiritual Gifts for the Discharge of his Duty, than in the Pompous
Installment of a Thousand Popes, Cardinals or Metropolitans. The worst of Men
in the Observance of a few outward Rites and Ceremonies can do the latter;
Christ only can do the former, and that as he is ascended up on high to that
purpose.

( 5.) 2ly. IT appears to be such an eminent Gift from it is Original
Acquisition. There was a Power acquired by Christ for this great Donation,
which the Apostle declares, ver. 9. Now that he ascended, what is it but that
he also descended first into the Lower parts of the Earth. Having mentioned the
Ascension of Christ as the immediate Cause or Fountain of the Communication of
this Gift, Ver. 8. he found it necessary to trace it unto it is first Original.
He does not therefore make mention of the descending into the lower parts of
the Earth occasionally upon that of his ascending, as if he catched at an
Advantage of a Word: Nor does he speak of the Humiliation of Christ absolutely
in it is self, which he had no occasion for; but he introduces it, to show what
respect this Gift of the Ministry and Ministers, of the Office, Gifts and
Persons, had thereunto. And Christ's descending into the lower parts of the
Earth may be taken two ways, according as that Expression, the Lower parts of
the Earth, may be diversely understood. For the (...), The Lower Parts of the
Earth, are either the whole Earth, that is, those lower Parts of the World, or
some part of it. For the Word Lower includes a Comparison either with the whole
Creation, or with some part of it self. In the first Sense Christ's state of
Humiliation is intended, wherein he came down from Heaven into these lower
parts of Gods Creation, conversing on the Earth. In the latter, his Grave and
Burial are intended; for the Grave is the lowest part of the Earth into which
Mankind does descend. And both of these, or his Humiliation as it ended in his
Death and Burial, may be respected in the Words. And that which the Apostle
designs to manifest, is, that the deep Humiliation, and the Death of Christ, is
the Fountain and Original of the Ministry of the Church, by way of Acquisition
and Procurement. It is a Fruit whose Root is in the Grave of Christ. For in
those things, in the Humiliation and Death of Christ lay the Foundation of his
Mediatory Authority, whereof the Ministry is an Effect, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. And it was appointed by him to be the Ministry of that Peace between God
and Man, which was made therein and thereby, Ephesians. 2. 14, 16, 17. For when he
had made this Peace by the Blood of the Cross, he preached it in the giving
these Gifts unto Men for it is solemn Declaration. See 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21.
Wherefore, because the Authority from whence this Gift proceeded, was granted
unto Christ upon his descending into the lower parts of the Earth, and the end
of the Gift is to declare and preach the Peace which he made between God and
Man by his so doing, this Gift relates thereunto also. Hereon does the Honor
and Excellency of the Ministry depend, with respect hereunto is it to be
esteemed and valued, namely, it is Relation unto the Spiritual Humiliation of
Christ, and not from the carnal or secular Exaltation of those that take it
upon them.

( 6.) 3ly. IT appears to be an eminent and signal Gift from the immediate
Cause of it is actual Communication, or the present Qualification of the Lord
Christ for the bestowing of it; and this was his glorious Exaltation upon his
Ascension. A Right unto it was acquired by him in his Death, but his actual
Investiture with all glorious Power, was to precede it is Communication, ver. 8,
10. He was first to ascend up on high, to triumph over all his and our
Adversaries, put now under him into absolute and eternal Captivity, before he
gave out this Gift. And he is said here to ascend far above all Heavens, that
is, these visible and aspectable Heavens, which he passed through when he went
into the glorious Presence of God, or unto the Right Hand of the Majesty on
high. See Heb. 4. 14. with our Exposition thereon. It is also added, why he was
thus gloriously exalted; and this was, that he might fill up all things, not
(...) but (...); not in the Essence of his Nature, but in the Exercise of his
Power. He had laid the Foundation of his Church on himself in his Death and
Resurrection; but now the whole Fabric of it was to be filled with it is
Utinsils, and beautified with it is Ornaments. This he ascended to accomplish,
and did it principally in the Collation of this Gift of the Ministry upon it.
This was the first Exercise of that glorious Power, which the Lord Christ was
vested withal upon his Exaltation; the first Effect of his Wisdom and Love, in
filling all things unto the Glory of God, and the Salvation of his Elect. And
these things are mentioned, that in the Contemplation of their Greatness and
Order we may learn and judge how excellent this Donation of Christ is. And it
will also appear from hence, how contemptible a thing the most pompous Ministry
in the World is, which does not proceed from this Original.

( 7.) 4. THE same is manifest from the Nature of the Gift it self: For this
Gift consists in Gifts. He gave Gifts. There is an active giving expressed;
He gave: And the thing given, that is, Gifts. Wherefore the Ministry is a Gift
of Christ, not only because freely and bountifully given by him to the Church;
but also because Spiritual Gifts do essentially belong unto it, are indeed it is
Life, and inseparable from it is Being. A Ministry without Gifts, is no Ministry
of Christ's giving; nor is of any other Use in the Church, but to deceive the
Souls of Men. To set up such a Ministry, is both to despise Christ, and utterly
to frustrate the ends of the Ministry; those for which Christ gave it, and
which are here expressed. For, (1) Ministerial Gifts and Graces are the great
Evidence that the Lord Christ takes care of his Church and provides for it, as
called into the Order and into the Duties of a Church. To set up a Ministry
which may be continued by outward Forms and Orders of Men only, without any
Communication of Gifts from Christ, is to despise his Authority and Care.
Neither is it his Mind that any Church should continue in Order any longer, or
otherwise, than as he bestows these Gifts for the Ministry. (2) That these
Gifts are the only Means and Instruments whereby the Work of the Ministry may
be performed, and the End of the Ministry attained, shall be farther declared
immediately. The Ends of the Ministry here mentioned, called it is Work, are the
perfecting of the Saints, and the Edifying of the Body of Christ, until we all
come unto a perfect Man. Hereof nothing at all can be done without these
Spiritual Gifts. And therefore a Ministry devoid of them, is a Mock-ministry,
and no Ordinance of Christ.

( 8.) 5. THE Eminency of this Gift appears in the Variety and Diversity of the
Offices and Officers which Christ gave in giving of the Ministry. He knew there
would, and had appointed there should be a twofold Estate of the Church, ver.
10. (1) Of it is first Election and Foundation. (2) Of it is Building and
Edification; and different both Offices and Gifts were necessary unto these
different States. For, (1) Two things were extraordinary in the first Erection
of his Church. (1) An extraordinary Aggression was to be made upon the Kingdom
of Satan in the World, as upheld by all the Potentates of the Earth, the
concurrent Suffrage of Mankind, with the Interest of Sin and Prejudices in
them. (2) The casting of Men into a new Order, under a new Rule and Law, for
the Worship of God, that is, the planting and erecting of Churches all the
World over. With respect unto these Ends extraordinary Officers with
extraordinary Authority, Power and Abilities were requisite. Unto this end
therefore he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, of the
Nature of whose Offices and their Gifts we have spoken before. I shall here
only add, that it was necessary that these Officers should have their immediate
Call and Authority from Christ, antecedent unto all Order and Power in the
Church. For the very Being of the Church depended on their Power of Office: But
this without such an immediate Power from Christ no Man can pretend unto. And
what was done originally by their Persons, is now done by their Word and
Doctrine: For the Church is built on the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20. (2ly)
There was a state of the Church in it is Edification, which was to be carried on
according to the Rules and Laws given by Christ in the ordinary Administration
of all the Ordinances and Institutions of the Gospel. To this end Christ gives
ordinary Officers, Pastors and Teachers, who by his Direction were ordained in
every Church, Acts 14. 23, 24. And these are all the Teaching Officers that he
has given unto his Church. Or if any shall think that in the Enumeration of
them in this place, as also 1 Cor. 12. our Apostle forgot Popes and Diocesan
Bishops, with some others, who certainly cannot but laugh to themselves, that
they should be admitted in the World as Church Officers, he must speak for
himself.

( 9.) BUT whereas the other sort of Officers was given by Christ, by his
immediate Call and Communication of Power unto them, it does not appear how he
gives these ordinary Officers or Ministers unto it. I answer, He did it
originally, and continues to do it by the ways and means ensuing. (1) He does
it by the Law and Rule of the Gospel, wherein he has appointed this Office of
the Ministry in his Church, and so always to be continued. Were there not such
a standing Ordinance and Institution of his, it were not in the Power of all
the Churches in the World to appoint any such among them, whatever appearance
there may be of a Necessity thereof. And if any should have attempted any such
thing, no Blessing from God would have accompanied their Endeavor, so that
they would but set up an Idol of their own. Hereon we lay the continuance of
the Ministry in the Church. If there be not an Ordinance and Institution of
Christ unto this purpose; or if such being granted, yet the Force of it be now
expired, we must and will readily confess, that the whole Office is a mere
Usurpation. But if he have given Pastors and Teachers unto his Church to
continue until all his Saints in all Ages come unto a perfect Man, unto the
measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. and has
promised to be with them as such, unto the consummation of all things, Matthew.
28. 18, 19, 20. If the Apostles by his Authority Ordained Elders in evry Church
and City, Acts 14. 23. Tit. 1. 5. and who therein were made Overseers of the
Flocks by the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28. having the charge of feeding and
overseeing the Flock that is among them always, until the chief Shepherd shall
appear, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If Believers, or the Disciples of Christ are
obliged by him always to yield Obedience unto them, Heb. 13. 7, 17. with other
such plain Declarations of the Will of the Lord Christ in the Constitution and
Continuance of this Office, this Foundation stands firm and unshaken as the
Ordinances of Heaven that shall not be changed. And whereas there is not in the
Scripture the least Intimation of any such Time, State or Condition of the
Church, as wherein the Disciples of Christ may or ought to live from under the
orderly Conduct and Guidance of the Ministers, it is vain to imagine that any
Defect in other Men, any Apostasy of the greatest part of any, or all Visible
Churches, should cast them into an Incapacity of erecting a regular Ministry
among them, and over them. For whereas the Warranty and Authority of the
Ministry depends on this Institution of Christ, which is accompanied with a
Command for it is Observance, Matthew. 28. 18. all his Disciples being obliged to
yield Obedience thereunto, their doing so in the Order and Manner also by him
approved, is sufficient to constitute a lawful Ministry among them. To suppose,
that because the Church of Rome, and those adhering unto it, have by their
Apostasy utterly lost an Evangelical Ministry among them, that therefore
others unto whom the Word of God is come, and has been effectual unto their
Conversion, have not sufficient Warranty from the Word to yield Obedience unto
all the Commands of Christ, (which when we have talked of Power and Authority
whilst we please, is all that is lest unto us in this World) or that in so
doing he will not accept them, and approve of what they have done, is an
Assertion fit for Men to maintain, who have a Trade to drive in Religion unto
their own especial Advantage.

( 10.) 2ly. THE Lord Christ gives and continneth this Office by giving
Spiritual Gifts and Abilities unto Men to enable them to discharge the Duties,
and perform the Work of it. This is that which I principally design to confirm
in it is proper place, which will immediately ensue. All I shall say at present
is, that Spiritual Gifts of themselves make no Man actually a Minister, yet no
Man can be made a Minister according to the Mind of Christ, who is not partaker
of them. Wherefore, supposing the continuance of the Law and Institution
mentioned, if the Lord Christ does at any time, or in any place, cease to give
out Spiritual Gifts unto Men, enabling them in some good measure unto the
Discharge of the Ministry, then and in that place the Ministry it self must
cease and come to an end. To erect a Ministry by Virtue of outward Order, Rites
and Ceremonies, without Gifts for the Edification of the Church, is but to hew
a Block with Axes, and smooth it with Planes, and set it up for an Image to be
adored. To make a Man a Minister who can do nothing of the proper peculiar Work
of the Ministry, nothing toward the only end of it in the Church, is to set up
a dead Carcass, fastening it to a Post, and expecting it should do you Work and
Service.

( 11.) 3ly. HE does it by giving Power unto his Church in all Ages to call and
separate unto the Work of the Ministry such as he has sitted and gifted for
it. The things before mentioned are essentially constituent of the Ministry,
this belongs unto the outward Order of their Entrance into the Ministry who are
by him called thereunto. And concerning this, we may observe the things
following. (1) That this Power in the Church is not Despotical or Lordly, but
consists in a Faculty, Right and Ability to act in this matter obedientially
unto the Commands of Christ. Hence all the Acting of the Church in this matter,
is nothing but an instituted means of conveying Authority and Office from
Christ unto Persons called thereunto. The Church does not give them any
Authority of it is own, or resident in it is self, but only in a way of Obedience
unto Christ do transmit Power from him unto them who are called. Hence do they
become the Ministers of Christ, and not of the Bishops, or Churches, or Men,
holding their Office and Authority from Christ himself, by the Law and Rule of
the Gospel; so that whosoever despises them, despises him also in them. Some
would have Ministers of the Gospel to receive all their Authority from the
People that choose them, and some from the Bishops who Ordain them, and whence
they have theirs I know not. But this is to make them Ministers of Men, and
Servants of Men, and to constitute other Masters between them and Christ. And
whereas all Church Power is originally and absolutely vested in Christ, and in
him solely; so that none can be Partaker of the least Interest in it, or share
of it, without a Communication of it from him unto them, neither Popes, nor
Prelates, nor People, are able to produce any such Grant or Concession of Power
unto them from him, as that they should have an Authority residing in them, and
in their Power, to despose unto others as they see cause, so as they should
hold it from them, as a part or efflux of the Power vested in them. It is
Obedience unto the Law of Christ, and following the Guidance of his previous
Communication of Gifts as a Means to communicate his Power unto them who are
called to the Ministry, that is the whole of what is committed unto any in this
kind. (2) The Church has no Power to call any unto Office of the Ministry,
where the Lord Christ has not gone before it in the Designation of him by an
Endowment with Spiritual Gifts. For if the whole Authority of the Ministry be
from Christ, and he never gives it but where he bestows these Gifts with it for
it is Discharge, as in Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, etc. then to call any to the Ministry whom
he has not so previously gifted, is to set him aside, and to act in our own
Names and Authority. And by reason of these things the Holy Ghost is said to
make Men Overseers of the Flocks who are thus called thereunto, because both
the Communication of Power in the Constitution of the Law, and of Spiritual
Gifts by internal effectual Operation, are from him alone, Acts 20. 28. (3) The
outward way and Order whereby a Church may call any Person unto the Office of
the Ministry among them and over them, is by their joint solemn Submission unto
him in the Lord, as unto all the Powers and Duties of this Office, testified by
their Choice and Election of him. It is concerning this outward Order that all
the World is filled with Disputes about the Call of Men unto the Ministry,
which yet in Truth is of the least concernment therein. For whatever Manner or
Order be observed herein, if the things before mentioned be not premised
thereunto, it is of no Validity or Authority. On the other hand, grant that the
Authority of the Ministry depends on the Law, Ordinance and Institution of
Christ, that he calls Men unto this Office by the collation of Spiritual Gifts
unto them, and that the Actings of the Church herein is but an instituted moral
means of communicating Office-Power from Christ himself unto any; and let but
such other things be observed as the Light and Law of Nature requires in cases
of an alike kind, and the outward Mode of the Churches acting herein need not
much be contended about. It may be proved to be a Beam of Truth from the Light
of Nature, that no Man should be imposed on a Church for their Minister against
their Wills, or without their express Consent; considering that his whole Work
is to be conversant about their Understandings, Judgments, Wills and
Affections; and that this should be done by their Choice and Election, as the
Scripture does manifestly declare, Numb. 8. 9, 10. Acts 1. 23, 26. Acts 6. 35.
Acts 14. 23. so that it was for some Ages observed Sacredly in the Primitive
Churches, cannot modestly be denied. But how far any People or Church may
commit over this Power of declaring their Consent and Acquiescency unto others
to act for them, and as it were in their stead, so as that the Call to Office
should yet be valid, provided the former Rules be observed, I will not much
dispute with any, though I approve only of what makes the nearest Approaches
to the Primitive Pattern that the Circumstances of things are capable of. (4.)
The Lord Christ continues his bestowing of this Gift, by the Solemn Ordinance
of setting apart those who are called in the manner declared, by Fasting and
Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, Acts 14. 23. Chap. 13. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 14. By
these means, I say, does the Lord Christ continue to declare, that he accounts
Men faithful, and puts them into the Ministry, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 1.
12.

( 12.) THERE are yet remaining sundry things in the Passage of the Apostle,
which we now insist on, that declare the Eminency of this Gift of Christ, which
may yet be farther briefly considered. As, (6) The End why it is bestowed; and
this is expressed, (1) Positiveiy, as to the Good and Advantage of the Church
thereby, ver. 12. (2) Negatively, as to it is Prohibition and Hinderance of
Evil, ver. 14. In the end of it as positively expressed, three things may be
considered. (1) That it is (...), that is, for the gathering of the Saints into
complete Church Order. The Subject Matter of this part of their Duty is the
Saints, that is, by Calling and Profession; such as are all the Disciples of
Christ. And that which is effected toward them is (...), their Coagmentation,
joynting or compacting into Order. So the Word signifies Gal. 6. 1. And this
Effect is here declared, ver. 16. It is true, the Saints mentioned may come
together into some initial Church Order, by their Consent and Agreement to walk
together in all the ways of Christ, and in Obedience unto all his Institutions,
and so become a Church essentially before they have any ordinary Pastor or
Teacher, either by the conduct of extraordinary Officers, as at first, or
through Obedience unto their Word; whence Elders were ordained among those who
were in Church State, that is, thus far before, Acts 14. 23. but they cannot
come to that Perfection and Compleatness which is designed unto them. That
which renders a Church completely Organical, the proper Seat and Subject of all
Gospel Worship and Ordinances, is this Gift of Christ in the Ministry.

BUT it may be asked, Whether a Church before it come unto this (...), or
Compleatness, before it has any Minister in Office, or have by any means lost
the Ministry among them, may not delegate and appoint some one or more from
among themselves for to Administer all the Ordinances of the Gospel among them,
and unto them, and by that means make up their own Perfection?

( 13.) SECONDLY, The Church being so completed, these Officers are given unto
it for the Work of the Ministry: This Expression is comprehensive, and the
Particulars included in it are not in this place to be enquired into. It may
suffice unto our present purpose to consider that it is a Work, not a
Preferment; and a Work they shall find it, who design to give up a comfortable
Account of what is committed unto them. It is usually observed, that all the
Words whereby the Work of the Ministry is expressed in the Scripture, do denote
a peculiar industrious kind of Labor: Though some have son out ways of
Honor and Ease to be signified by them. And, Both these are directed unto one
general Issue. It is all (...), Unto the Edification of the Body of Christ. Not
to insist on the Metaphors that are in this Expression, the Excellency of the
Ministry is declared in that, the Object of it is Duty and Work is no other but
the Body of Christ himself; and it is End, the Edification of this Body, or it is
Increase in Faith and Obedience, in all the Graces and Gifts of the Spirit,
until it comes unto Conformity unto him, and the Enjoyment of him. And a
Ministry which has not this Object and End, is not of the giving or Grant of
Christ.

( 14.) THE End of the Ministry is expressed negatively, or with respect unto
the Evils which it is ordained for our Deliverance from, ver. 14. (1) The Evil
which we are hereby delivered from, is the danger of being perniciously and
destructively deceived by false Doctrines, Errors and Heresies, which then
began, and have ever since in all Ages continued to infest the Churches of God.
These the Apostle describes, (1) From the Design of their Authors, which is, to
deceive. (2) Their Diligence in that Design, They lay in wait to accomplish it.
(3) The Means they use to compass their End, which are, Slights and cunning
Craftiness, managed sometimes with impetuous Violence, and thence called a Wind
of Doctrine. And, (2) The Means hereof is our Deliverance out of a Child-like
state, accompanied with, (1) Weakness. (2) Instability. And, (3) Wilfulness.
And sad is the condition of those Churches which either have such Ministers as
will themselves toss them up and down by false and pernicious Doctrines, or are
not able by sound Instructions to deliver them from such a condition of
Weakness and Instabi'ity, as wherein they are not able to preserve themselves
from being in these things imposed on by the cunning Slights of Men that lie in
wait to deceive. And as this Ministry is always to continue in the Church, ver.
13. so it is the great means of Influencing the whole Body, and every Member of
it into a due Discharge of their Duty, unto their Edification in Love, ver. 15,
16.

( 15.) DESIGNING to treat of the Spiritual Gifts bestowed on the Ministry of
the Church, I have thus far diverted into the Consideration of the Ministry it
self, as it is a Gift of Christ, and shall shut it up with a few Corollaries.
As, (1) Where there is any Office erected in the Church, that is not in
particular of the Gift and Institution of Christ, there is a Nullity in the
whole Office, and in all Administrations by virtue of it. (2) Where the Office
is appointed, but Gifts are not communicated unto the Person called unto it,
there is a Nullity as to his Person, and a Disorder in the Church. (3) It is
the Duty of the Church to look on the Ministry as an eminent Grant of Christ,
with Valuation, Thankfulness and Improvement. (4) Those who are called unto
this Office in due Order, labor to approve themselves as a Gift of Christ;
which it is a shameless Impudence for some to own who go under that Name. (5)
This they may do in laboring to be furnished, (1) With gracious
Qualifications. (2) Useful Endowments. (3) Diligence and laborious Travail in
this Work. (4) By an exemplary Conversation; in, 1. Love. 2. Meekness. 3.
Self-denial. 4. Readiness for the Cross, etc.

CHAP. VII. Of Spiritual Gifts enabling the Ministry to the Exercise and
Discharge of their Trust and Office.
( 1.) UNTO the Ministry so given unto the Church, as has been declared, the
Holy Ghost gives Spiritual Gifts enabling them unto the Exercise and Discharge
of the Power, Trust and Office committed unto them. Now although I am not
thoroughly satisfied what Men will grant or allow in these Days, such uncouth
and bold Principles are continually advanced among us, yet I suppose it will
not, in Words at least, be denied by many, but that Ministers have, or ought to
have, Gifts for the due Discharge of their Office. To some indeed the very Name
and Word is a Derision, because it is a Name and Notion peculiar to the
Scripture. Nothing is more contemptible unto them than the very mention of the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost; at present I deal not with such directly, though what
we shall prove will be sufficient for their Rebuke, though not for their
Conviction. Wherefore our Enquiry is, Whether the Spirit of God does
effectually collate on the Ministers of the Gospel, Spiritual Gifts, enabling
them to perform and effect Evangelical Administrations, according to the Power
committed unto them, and duly required of them, unto the Glory of Christ and
Edification of the Church. It is moreover enquired whether the Endowmen of Men
with these Spiritual Gifts in a Degree and Measure suited unto public
Edification, be not that which does materially constitute them Ministers of the
Gospel, as being Antecedently necessary unto their Call unto their Office.
These things I say are to be Enquired into, because in opposition unto the
first it is affirmed, that these supposed Gifts are nothing but mere Natural
Abilities attained by Diligence, and improved by Exercise, without any especial
respect unto the working of the Holy Ghost, at least otherwise than what is
necessary unto the attaining of Skill and Ability in any Humane Art or Science,
which is the ordinary Blessing of God on Man's Honest Endeavors. And to the
other it is opposed, that a Lawful ordinary outward Call is sufficient to
constitute any Man a Lawful Minister, whether he have received any such Gifts
as those enquired after or no. Wherefore, the substance of what we have to
declare and confirm is, that there is an especial Dispensation and Work of the
Holy Ghost in providing able Ministers of the New Testament for the Edification
of the Church, wherein the Continuance of the Ministry, and Being of the
Church, as to its outward Order, does depend; and that herein he does exert his
Power, and exercise his Authority in the Communication of Spiritual Gifts unto
Men, without a participation whereof no Man has de jure, any Lot or Portion in
this Ministration. Herein consists no small part of that Work of the Spirit
which belongs unto his promised Dispensation in all Ages, which to deny is to
renounce all Faith in the Promise of Christ, all regard unto his continued Love
and Care toward the Church in the World, or at least the principal pleadable
Testimony given thereunto, and under pretense of exalting and preserving the
Church, totally to overthrow it. Now the Evidence which we shall give unto this
Truth, is contained in the ensuing Assertions with their Confirmation.

2. THE Lord Jesus Christ has faithfully promised to be present with his
Church unto the end of the World. It is his Temple and his Tabernacle, wherein
he will dwell and walk continually. And this presence of Christ is that which
makes the Church to be what it is, a Congregation Essentially distinct from all
other Societies and Assemblies of Men. Let Men be formed into what Order you
please, according unto any outward Rules and Measures that are either given in
the Scripture, or found out by themselves, let them derive Power and Authority
by what Claim soever they shall think fit, yet if Christ be not present with
them, they are no Church, nor can all the Powers under Heaven make them so to
be. And where any Church loses the especial presence of Christ, it cease so
to be. It is, I suppose, confessed with and among whom Christ is thus present,
or it may be easily proved. See his Promises to this purpose, Mat. 18. 20.
Revel. 21. 3. And those Churches do exceedingly mistake their Interest who are
sollicitous about other things, but make little Enquiry after the Evidences of
the presence of Christ among them. Some walk as if they supposed they had him
sure enough, as it were immured in their Walls, whilst they keep up the Name of
a Church, and an outward Order that pleases and advantageth themselves. But
outward Order be it what it will, is so far from being the only Evidence of the
presence of Christ in a Church, that where it is alone, or when it is
principally required, it is none at all. And therefore whereas Preaching of the
Word, and the right Administration of the Sacraments are assigned as the Notes
of a true Church, if the outward Acts and Order of them only be regarded, there
is nothing of Evidence unto this purpose in them.

( 3.) 2dly, THIS promised presence of Christ is by his Spirit. This I have
safficiently proved formerly, so that here I shall be brief in its rehearsal,
though it be the next Foundation of what we have farther to offer in this Case.
We speak not of the Essential presence of Christ with respect unto the
Immensity of his Divine Nature, whereby he is equally present in, or equally
indistant from all places, manifesting his Glory when, where and how he
pleases. Nor does it respect his Humane Nature; for when he promised this his
presence, he told his Disciples that therein he must leave and depart from
them, John 16. 5 6, 7, 8. whereon they were filled with Sorrow and (...) until
they knew how he would make good the Promise of his Presence with them; and who
or that it was that should unto their Advantage supply his Bodily Absence. And
this he did in his vi^^^^ Ascension, when he was taken up, and a Cloud (...)
Him out of their sight, Acts 1. 9. when also (...) given in charge unto them
not to expect His return until his coming unto Judgment, ver. 11. And
accordingly Peter tells us, That the Heavens (...) receive him unto the time of
the Restitution of all (...), Acts 3. 21. when he will appear again in the
Glory of his Father, Mat. 16. 27. even (...) Glory which the Father gave him
upon his (...), 2 Pet. 1. 17. joined unto that Glory which he had with him
before the World was, John 17. 5. In and upon this his Departure from them he
taught his Disciples how they should understand his Promise of being present,
and abiding with them unto the End of the World. And this was by sending of his
Holy Spirit in his Name, Place and Stead; to do all to them, and for them,
which he had yet to do with them and for them. See John 14. 16, 17, 18, 26, 27,
28. Chap. 15. 26. Chap. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And other Vicar in the
Church Christ has none, nor does stand in need of any; nor can any Mortal Man
supply that Charge and Office. Nor was any such ever thought of in the World,
until Men grew weary of the Conduct and Rule of the Holy Spirit, by various
ways taking his Work out of his Hand, leaving him nothing to do in that which
they called the Church. But I suppose I need not handle this Principle as a
thing in Dispute or Controversy. If I greatly mistake not, this presence of
Christ in his Church by his Spirit, is an Article of Faith unto the Catholic
Church, and such a Fundamental Truth as whoever denies it, overthrows the whole
Gospel. And I have so confirmed it in our former Discourses concerning the
Dispensation and Operations of the Holy Ghost, as that I fear not, nor expect
any direct opposition thereunto. But yet I acknowledge that some begin to talk
as if they owned no other presence of Christ but by the Word and Sacraments.
Whatever else remains to be done lies wholly in our selves. It is acknowledged
that the Lord Christ is present in and by his Word and Ordinances; but if he be
no otherwise present, or be present only by their External Administration,
there will no more Church State among Men ensue thereon, than there is among
the Jews, who enjoy the Letter of the Old Testament and the Institutions of
Moses. But when Men rise up in express contradiction unto the Promises of
Christ, and the Faith of the Catholic Church in all Ages, we shall not contend
with them. But

( 4.) 3dly, THIS presence of the Spirit is secured unto the Church by an
Everlasting unchangeable Covenant, Isa. 59. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant
with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon them, and my Words which I
have put in thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth
of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever. This is God's Covenant with the Gospel Church, to be
erected then when the Redeemer should come out of Zion, and unto them that turn
from Transgression in Jacob, ver. 20. This is a part of the Covenant that God
has made in Christ the Redeemer. And as the continuance of the Word unto the
Church in all Ages is by this Promise secured, without which it would cease and
come to nothing, seeing it is Built on the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2. 20. so is the presence of the Spirit in like manner secured
unto it, and that on the same Terms with the Word, so as that if he be not
present with it, all Covenant Relation between God and it does cease; where
this promise does not take place, there is no Church, no Ordinance, no
acceptable Worship, because no Covenant Relation. In brief then, where there is
no participation of the Promise of Christ to send the Spirit to abide with us
always, no Interest in that Covenant, wherein God ingageth that his Spirit
shall not depart from us for ever; and so no presence of Christ to make the
Word and Ordinances of Worship living, useful, effectual in their
Administration unto their proper Ends, there is no Church State, whatever
outward Order there may be.

( 5.) AND hereon (4thly,) is the Gospel called the Ministration of the Spirit,
and the Ministers of it the Ministers of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Who has also
made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter but of the
Spirit; not the Ministration of Death, but that of the Spirit, which is
Glorious, ver. 7, 8. There never was, nor ever shall be any, but these two
Ministrations in the Church; that of the Letter and of Death; and that of the
Spirit and of Life. If there be a Ministration in any Church, it must belong to
one of these, and all Ministers must be so, either of the Letter or of the
Spirit. If there be a Ministry pretended unto, that is neither of the Letter
nor of the Spirit, it is Antichristian. The Ministry which was Carnal, of the
Letter and Death, was a true Ministry, and in its place Glorious, because it
was appointed of God, and was efficacious as unto its proper end. That of the
Gospel is of the Spirit, and much more Glorious. But if there be a Ministration
that has the outward form of either, but indeed is neither of them, it is no
Ministration at all. And where it is so, there is really no Ministration but
that of the Bible; that is, God by his Providence continuing the Bible among
them, makes use of i^ ^s he sees good for the Conviction and Conversion of
Sinners, wherein there is a secret (...) of the Spirit also. We may there^^^^
^^quire in what sense the Ministration of the (...) called the Ministry of the
Spirit. Now this cannot be, because the Laws, Institutions and Ordinances of
its Worship were revealed by the Spirit, for so were all the Ordinances and
Institutions of the Old Testament, as has been proved before, and yet the
Ministration of them was the Ministration of the Letter and of Death, in a
worldly Sanctuary by Carnal Ordinances. Wherefore it must be so called in one
of these Respects. Either, (1) Because it is the peculiar Aid and Assistance of
the Spirit whereby any are enabled to administer the Gospel, and its
Institutions of Worship according to the Mind of God, unto the Edification of
the Church. In this sense Men are said to be made able Ministers of the New
Testament, that is, Ministers able to Administer the Gospel in due order. Thus
in that Expression Ministers of the Spirit, the Spirit denotes the Efficient
Cause of the Ministry, and he that quickens it, ver. 6, 7. Or (2) It may be
said to be the Ministration of the Spirit, because in and by the Ministry of
the Gospel, the Spirit is in all Ages Administered and Communicated unto the
Disciples of Christ, unto all the ends for which he is promised. So Gal. 3. 2.
the Spirit is received by the Preaching of Faith. Take it either way, and the
whole of what we plead for is confirmed. That he alone enableth Men unto the
Discharge of the Work of the Ministry, by the Spiritual Gifts which he
communicates unto them, is the first sense, and expressly that which we contend
for; and if in and by the Ministration of the Gospel in all Ages, the Spirit is
Communicated and Administered unto Men, then does he abide with the Church for
ever; and for what Ends we must further enquire.

( 6.) 5thly, THE great End for which the Spirit is thus promised, administered
and communicated under the Gospel, is, the continuance and preservation of the
Church in the World. God has promised unto the Lord Christ that his Kingdom in
this World should endure unto all Generations with the course of the Sun and
Moon, Psalm. 72. 5. and that of the Increase of his Government there should be
no End, Isa. 9. 7. And the Lord Christ himself has declared his preservation
of his Church, so as that the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it, Mat.
16. It may therefore be enquired whereon the Infallible Accomplishment of these
Promises, and others innumerable unto the same End, does depend; or what is
that means whereby they shall be certainly Executed. Now this must be either
some work of God or Man. If it be of Men, and it consist of their Wills and
Obedience, then that which is said amounts hereunto; namely, that where men
have once received the Gospel, and professed subjection thereunto, they will
infallibly abide therein in a Succession from one Generation unto another. But
besides, that it must be granted that what so depends on the Wills of Men, can
have no more certainty than the undetermined Wills of Men can give security of,
which indeed is none at all; so there are confessed instances without number,
of such Persons and Places, as have lost the Gospel and the Profession thereof.
And what has fallen out in one place may do so in another, and consequently in
all places where the Reasons and Causes of things are the same. On this
supposition therefore there is no security that the Promises mentioned shall be
infallibly accomplished. Wherefore the Event must depend on some Work of God
and Christ. Now this is no other but the Dispensation and Communication of the
Spirit. Hereon alone does the continuance of the Church and of the Kingdom of
Christ in the World depend. And whereas the Church falls under a double
consideration, namely, of its internal and external Form, of its internal
Spiritual Union with Christ, and its outward Profession of Obedience unto him;
the Calling, Gathering, Preservation and Edification of it in both respects
belong unto the Holy Spirit. The first he does, as has been proved at large,
by his Communicating Effectual Saving Grace unto the Elect; the latter by the
Communication of Gifts unto the Guides, Rulers, Officers and Ministers of it,
with all its Members according unto its Place and Capacity. Suppose then his
Communication of Internal Saving Grace to cease, and the Church must absolutely
cease as to its Internal Form. For we are united unto the Lord Christ as our
Mystical Head by the Spirit, the one and self-same Spirit dwelling in Him and
them that do believe. Union unto Christ without Saving Grace, or Saving Grace
without the Holy Spirit, are Strangers unto the Gospel and Christian Religion.
So is it to have a Church that is Holy and Catholic, which is not united unto
Christ as a Mystical Head. Wherefore the very Being of the Church, as unto its
Internal Form, depends on the Spirit in his Dispensation of Grace, which if you
suppose an Intercision of the Church, must cease. It has the same dependence
on him as to its outward Form and Profession upon his Communication of Gifts.
For no Man can call Jesus Lord, or profess Subjection and Obedience unto him in
a due manner, but by the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. Suppose this Work of his to
cease, and there can be no Professing Church. Let Men mould and cast themselves
into what Order and Form they please, and let them pretend that their Right and
Title unto their Church Power and Station is derived unto them from their
Progenitors or Predecessors, if they are not furnished with the Gifts of the
Spirit to enable their Guides unto Gospel Administrations, they are no orderly
Gospel Church. Wherefore,

( 7.) 6thly, THE Communication of such Gifts unto the ordinary Ministry of the
Church in all Ages, is plainly asserted in sundry places of the Scripture; some
whereof may be briefly considered. The whole Nature of this Work is declared in
the Parable of the Talents, Matthew. 25. from ver. 13. to 31. The state of the
Church from the Ascension of Christ unto his coming again unto Judgment, that
is, in its whole course on the Earth, is represented in this Parable. In this
season he has Servants whom he intrusteth in the Affairs of his Kingdom, in
the care of his Church, and the propagation of the Gospel. That they may in
their several Generations, Places and Circumstances be enabled hereunto, he
giving them in various Distributions Talents to Trade withal, the least
whereof was sufficient to encourage them who received them unto their Use and
Exercise. The Trade they had to drive, was that of the Administration of the
Gospel, its Doctrine, Worship and Ordinances to others. Talents are Abilities
to Trade, which may also comprize Opportunities and other Advantages; but
Abilities are chiefly intended. These were the Gifts where of we speak. Nor did
it ever enter into the Minds of any to apprehend otherwise of them. And they
are Abilities which Christ as the King and Head of his Church, gives unto Men
in an especial manner, as they are employed under him in the service of his
House and Work of the Gospel. The Servants mentioned are such as are called,
appointed and employed in the service of the House of Christ, that is, all
Ministers of the Gospel from first to last. And their Talents are the Gifts
which he endows them withal by his own immediate Power and Authority for their
Work. And hence these three things follow, (1) That wherever there is a
Ministry that the Lord Christ sets up, appoints or owneth, he furnishes
all those whom he employs therein with Gifts and Abilities suitable to their
Work, which he does by the Holy Spirit. He will never fail to own his
Institutions with gracious supplies to render them Effectual. (2) That where
any have not received Talents to Trade withal, it is the highest presumption
in them, and casts the greatest Dishonor on the Lord Christ, as though he
requires Work where he gave no Strength, or Trade where he gave no Stock, for
any one to undertake the Work of the Ministry. Where the Lord Christ gives no
Gifts, he has no Work to do. He will require of none any especial Duty where
he does not give an especial Ability. And for any to think themselves meet for
this Work and Service, in the strength of their own Natural Parts and
Endowments, however acquired, is to despise both his Authority and his Work.
(3) For those who have received of these Talents, either not to Trade at all,
or to pretend the managing of their Trade on another Stock, that is, either not
sedulously and duly to Exercise their Ministerial Gifts, or to discharge their
Ministry by other helps and means, is to set up their own Wisdom in opposition
unto his and his Authority. In brief, that which the whole Parable teaches,
is, that wherever there is a Ministry in the Church that Christ owneth or
regards as used and employed by him, there Persons are furnished with
Spiritual Gifts from Christ by the Spirit, enabling them unto the discharge of
that Ministry: and where there are no such Spiritual Gifts dispensed by him,
there is no Ministry that he either accepts or approves.

( 8.) ROMANS 12. 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. As we have many Members in one Body, and all
Members have not the same Office; so we being many are one Body in Christ, and
every one Members one of another. Having therefore Gifts differing according to
the Grace that is given unto us, whether Prophecy, etc. It is indifferent as
to our present purpose, whether the Apostle treat here of Offices or of Duties
only. The things ensuing which are plain and obvious in the Text, are
sufficient unto the confirmation of what we plead for. (1) It is the ordinary
state of the Church, its Continuance being planted, its Preservation and
Edification that the Apostle discourses about; wherefore what he speaks, is
necessary unto the Church in all Ages and Conditions. To suppose a Church
devoid of the Gifts here mentioned, is to overthrow the whole Nature and End of
a Gospel Church. (2) That the Principle of all Administrations in the
Church State described, is Gifts received from Jesus Christ by his Spirit. For
declaring the way whereby the Church may be Edified, he laveth the Foundation
of it in this, that to every one of us is Grace given according to the measure
of the Gift of Christ. For the Apostle exhorts those unto whom he speaks, to
attend unto those Duties whereby the Church may be Edified, and that by virtue
of the Gifts which they had received. All the whole Duty of any one in the
Church lies in this, that he act according to the (...) that he is made
partaker of. And what these (...) are, as also by whom they are bestowed, has
been already fully declared. (3.) That these Gifts give not only Ability for
Duty, but Rule and Measure unto all Works of Service that are to be performed
in the Church. Every one is to act therein according to his Gift, and no
otherwise. To say that this state of the Church is now ceased, and that another
state is introduced, wherein all Gospel Administrations may be managed without
Spiritual Gifts, or not by virtue of them, is to say that which de facto is
true in most places; but whether the true Nature of the Church is not
overthrown thereby, is left unto consideration. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. is a parallel
Testimony hereunto, and many others to the same purpose might be pleaded,
together with that which is the Foundation of this whole Discourse, Ephesians. 4.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. Only let it be remembered, that in this whole
Discourse by Gifts I do understand those (...), those Spiritual Largesses which
are neither absolutely Natural Endowments, nor attainable by our own Industry
and Diligence.

( 9.) 7thly, THESE Gifts, as they are bestowed unto that End, so they are
indispensibly necessary unto Gospel Administrations. For as we have proved,
they are Spiritual, and not Legal or Carnal; and Spiritual Administrations
cannot be exercised in a due manner without Spiritual Gifts: Yea, one Reason
why they are Spiritual, and so called, is because they cannot be performed
without the Aid and Assistance of the Holy Spirit in and by these Gifts of his.
Had the Lord Christ appointed Administrations of another Nature, such as were
every way suited unto the Reason of Men, and to be exercised by the Powers
thereof, there had been no need of these Spiritual Gifts. For the Spirit of a
Man knows the things of a Man, and will both guide and act him therein. And
whereas these Admistrations are in their Nature, Use, Signification and
Efficacy Spiritual, it is by Spiritual Gifts alone that they may be managed.
Hence these things do live and die together. Where the one is not, there
neither will the other be. Thus when many, perhaps the most who were outwardly
called unto Office in the Church, began to be Carnal in their Hearts and Lives,
and to neglect the use of these Gifts, neither applying themselves unto the
attaining of them, nor endeavoring to excite or increase what they had
received, by Diligence or constant Exercise, refusing to Trade with the Talent
committed unto them, they quickly began to wax weary of Spiritual
Administrations also. Hereon in compliance with many corrupt. Affections, they
betook themselves unto an outward, Carnal, Ceremonious Worship and
Administration of Ordinances, which they might discharge and perform without
the least Aid or Assistance of the Holy Ghost, or Supply of Spiritual Gifts. So
in the neglect of these Gifts, and the loss of them which ensued thereon, lay
the beginning of the Apostasy of the Christian Church as to its outward
Profession, which was quickly completed by the neglect of the Grace of the
Spirit, whereby it lost both Truth and Holiness. Nor could it be otherwise. For
as we have proved, the outward Form and Being of the Church as to its visible
Profession, depends on the receipt and use of them: On their decay therefore
the Church must decay as to its Profession, and in their loss is its Ruin. And
we have an instance in the Church of Rome, what Various, Extravagant and
Endless Inventions the Minds of Men will put them upon to keep up a show of
Worship, when by the loss of Spiritual Gifts Spiritual Administrations are lost
also. This is that which their innumerable Forms, Modes, sets of Rites and
Ceremonies, seasons of Worship are invented to supply, but to no purpose at
all; but only the aggravation of their Sin and Folly.

( 10.) IN the last place we plead the Event even in the days wherein we live.
For the Holy Ghost does continue to dispense Spiritual Gifts for Gospel
Administrations in great variety, unto those Ministers of the Gospel who are
called unto their Office according unto his Mind and Will. The opposition that
is made hereunto by Profane Scoffers, is not to be valued. The Experience of
those who are Humble and Wise, who fearing God do enquire into those things, is
appealed unto. Have they not an Experiment of this Administration? Do they not
find the presence of the Spirit himself by his various Gifts in them by whom
Spiritual things are Administered unto them? Have they not a proof of Christ
speaking in them by the Assistance of his Spirit, making the Word mighty unto
all its proper Ends? And as the thing it self, so variety of his Dispensations
manifest themselves also unto the Experience of Believers. Who see not how
different are the Gifts of Men, the Holy Ghost dividing unto every one as he
will? And the Experience which they have themselves who have received these
Gifts, of the especial Assistance which they receive in the Exercise of them,
may also be pleaded. Indeed the Profaneness of a contrary apprehension, is
intolerable among such as profess themselves to be Christians. For any to boast
themselves, they are sufficient of themselves for the Stewardly Dispensation of
the Mysteries of the Gospel, by their own Endowments Natural or Acquired, and
the Exercise of them, without a participation of any peculiar Spiritual Gift
from the Holy Ghost, is a presumption which contains in it a Renunciation of
all or any Interest in the Promises of Christ made unto the Church, or the
continuance of his presence therein. Let Men be never so well persuaded of
their own Abilities, let them Pride themselves in their Performances, in
Reflection of Applauses from Persons unacquainted with the Mystery of these
things; let them frame to themselves such a Work of the Ministry as whose
Discharge stands in little or no need of these Gifts, yet it will at length
appear, that where the Gifts of the Holy Ghost are excluded from their
Administration, the Lord Christ is so, and the Spirit himself is so, and all
true Edification of the Church is so, and so are all the real Concerns of the
Gospel: And so have we, as I hope, confirmed the second part of the Work of the
Holy Ghost with respect unto Spiritual Gifts; namely his continuance to
distribute and communicate unto the Church to the End of the World, according
unto the Powers and Duties which he has erected in it, or required of it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Gifts of the Spirit, with respect unto Doctrine, Rule, and
Worship; how attained, and improved.
( 1.) THERE remain yet two things to be spoken unto with respect unto the
Gifts which the Holy Ghost bestows on the Ministers of the Gospel, to qualify
them unto their Office, and to enable them unto their Work. And these are, (1)
What they are. (2.) How they are to be attained and improved. In our Enquiry
after the first; or what are the Gifts whereby Men are fitted and enabled for
the Ministry, we wholly set aside the consideration of all those gracious
qualifications of Faith, Love, Zeal, Compassion, Careful tender Watchfulness,
and the like, whereon the Holy Use of their Ministry does depend. For our
Enquiry is only after those Gifts whereon depends the very Being of the
Ministry. There may be a true Ministry in some cases where there is no
sanctifying Grace; but where there are no Spiritual Gifts, there is no Ministry
at all. They are in General Abilities for the due management of the Spiritual
Administrations of the Gospel in its Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, unto the
Edification of the Church. It is not easy, nay, it they be unto us, it is not
possible to enumerate in particular all the various Gifts which the Holy Ghost
endows the Ministers of the Gospel withal. ^^ereas all the Concerns of the
Church may be referred unto these three Heads, of Doctrine, Worship and Rule,
we may enquire what are the principal Spiritual Gifts of the Holy Ghost with
respect unto them distinctly.

( 2.) THE first great Duty of the Ministry with reference unto the Church, is,
the Dispensation of the Doctrine of the Gospel unto it, for its Edification. As
this is the Duty of the Church continually to attend unto, Acts 2. 42. so it is
the principal Work of the Ministry, the Foundation of all other Duties, which
the Apostles themselves gave themselves unto in an especial manner, Acts 6. 4.
Hence is it given in charge unto all Ministers of the Gospel, Acts 20. 28. 1
Pet. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 1. 3. chap. 5. 17. chap. 4. 13, 14, 16. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3.
For this is the principal means appointed by Christ for the Edification of his
Church; that whereby Spiritual Life is begotten and preserved. Where this Work
is neglected or carelessly attended unto, there the whole Work of the Ministry
is despised. And with respect unto this Ministerial Duty there are three
Spiritual Gifts that the Holy Ghost endoweth Men withal, which must be
considered.

( 3.) THE first is Wisdom or Knowledge, or Understanding in the Mysteries of
the Gospel, the Revelation of the Mystery of God in Christ, with his Mind and
Will toward us therein. These things may be distinguished, and they seem to be
so in the Scripture sometimes. I put them together, as all of them denote that
Acquaintance with, and Comprehension of the Doctrine of the Gospel which is
indispensibly necessary unto them who are called to Preach it unto the Church.
This some imagine an easy matter to be attained; at least that there is no
more, nor the use of any other means required thereunto, than what is necessary
to the Acquisition of Skill in any other Art or Science. And it were well if
some, otherwise concerned in Point of Duty would but lay out so much of their
Strength and Time in the obtaining of this Knowledge, as they do about other
things which will not turn much unto their account. But the Cursory Perusal of
a few Books is thought sufficient to make any Man wise enough to be a Minister.
And not a few undertake ordinarily to be Teachers of others, who would scarcely
be admitted as tolerable Disciples in a well ordered Church. But there
belongs more unto this Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding, than most Men are
aware of. Were the Nature of it duly considered, and withal the Necessity of
it unto the Ministry of the Gospel, probably some would not so rush on that
Work as they do, which they have no provision of Ability for the performance
of. It is in brief such a comprehension of the Scope and End of the Scripture,
of the Revelation of God therein, such an Acquaintance with the Systeme of
particular Doctrinal Truths, in their Rise, Tendency and Use, such an Habit of
Mind in judging of Spiritual Things, and comparing them one with another, such
a distinct insight into the Springs and Course of the Mystery of the Love,
Grace and Will of God in Christ, as enables them, in whom it is to declare the
Counsel of God, to make known the Way of Life, of Faith and Obedience unto
others, and to instruct them in their whole Duty to God and Man thereon. This
the Apostle calls his Knowledge in the Mystery of Christ which he manifested in
his Writings, Ephesians. 3. 4. For as the Gospel, the Dispensation and Declaration
whereof is committed unto the Ministers of the Church, is the Wisdom of God in
a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7. so their Principal Duty is to become so wise and
understanding in that Mystery, as that they may be able to declare it unto
others, without which they have no Ministry committed unto them by Jesus
Christ. See Ephesians. 1. 9. Chap. 3. 3, 6, 19. Col. 4. 3. The sole Enquiry is,
Whence we may have this Wisdom, seeing it is abundantly evident that we have it
not of our selves? That in general it is from God, that it is to be asked of
him, the Scripture every where declares. See Col. 1. 9. Chap. 2. 2. 2 Timothy 2.
7. Jam. 1. 5. 1 John 5. 20. And in particular it is plainly affirmed to be the
especial Gift of the Holy Ghost. He gives the Word of Wisdom, 1 Cor. 12. 8.
which place has been opened before. And it is the first Ministerial Gift that
he bestows on any. Where this is not in some measure, to look for a Ministry is
to look for the Living among the Dead. And they will deceive their own Souls in
the End, as they do those of others in the mean time, who on any other grounds
do undertake to be Preachers of the Gospel. But I shall not here divert unto
the full description of this Spiritual Gift, because I have discoursed
concerning it elsewhere.

( 4) WITH respect unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, there is required unto the
Ministry of the Church, skill to divide the word aright, which is (...) a
peculiar Gift of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy (...) study to approve thy self unto
God, a (...) that needs not to be ashamed, rightly (...) Word of Truth. Both
the former Clauses depend on the latter. If a Minister (...) be accepted with
God in his Work, if he would (...) found at the last day a Workman that needs
(...) to be ashamed, that is, such a Builder of the House of God, as whose Work
is meet, proper and useful, he must take care to divide the word of Truth,
which is committed unto his Dispensation, aright, or in a due manner. Ministers
are Stewards in the House of God, and Dispensers of the Ministeries thereof.
And therefore it is required of them that they give unto all the Servants that
are in the House, or do belong unto it, a meet Portion according unto their
Wants, Occasions and Services suitable unto the Will and Wisdom of their Lord
and Master, Luke 12. 42, 43. Who is that faithful and wise Steward, whom his
Master shall make Ruler over his Household, to give them their Portion of Meat
in due Season. For this giving of Provision, and a Portion of Meat unto the
Household of Christ, consists principally in the Right dividing and distribution
of the Word of Truth. It is the taking out from those great stores of it in the
Scripture, and as it were cutting off a Portion suitable unto the various
Conditions of those in the Family. Herein consists the principal Skill of a
Scribe furnished for the Kingdom of Heaven, with the Wisdom before described.
And without this, a ^^^mon course of Dispensing or Preaching the (...) without
differencing of Persons and (...) ever it may be Gilded over with a (...)
Words and Oratory, is shameful (...) House of God. Now unto this skill, (...)
are required. (1) A sound Judgment in (...) ^^ncerning the state and condition
of th^se (...) any one is so dispensing the Word (...) of a Shepherd to know
the state of his Flock; and unless he do so, he will never feed them
profitably. He must know whether they are Babes, or Young Men, or Old; whether
they need Milk or strong Meat; whether they are skilful or unskilful in the
Word of Righteousness; whether they have their Senses exercised to discern
Good and Evil, or not; or whether their Hearers are mixed with all these sorts.
Whether in the Judgment of Charity they are Converted unto God, or are yet in
an unregenerate Condition. What probably are their principal Temptations,
their Hindrances and Furtherances; what is their growth or decay in Religion?
He that is not able to make a competent Judgment concerning these things, and
the other Circumstances of the Flock, so as to be steered thereby in his Work,
will never Evidence himself to be a Workman that needs not to be ashamed.
(2) An Acquaintance with the VVays and Methods of the Work of God's Grace on
the Minds and Hearts of Men, that he may pursue and comply with its design in
the Ministry of the Word. Nothing is by many more despised, than an
understanding hereof; yet is nothing more necessary to the Work of the
Ministry. The Word of the Gospel as Preached is Vehiculum Gratiae, and ought
to be ordered so as it may comply with its design in its whole Work on the
Souls of Men. He therefore who is unacquainted with the ordinary Methods of the
Operation of Grace, sights uncertainly in his Preaching of the Word like a Man
beating of the Air. It is true, God can, and often does direct a Word of Truth
spoken as it were at Random unto a proper effect of Grace on some or other, as
it was when the Man drew a Bow at a venture, and smote the King of Israel
between the Joints of the Harness. But ordinarily a Man is not like to hit a
Joint, who knows not how to take his aim. (3) An Acquaintonce with the Nature
of Temptation, with the especial Hindrances of Faith and Obedience, which may
befall those unto whom the Word is dispensed, is in like manner required
hereunto. Many things might be added on this Head, seeing a principal part of
Ministerial Skill does consist herein. (4) A right understanding of the Nature
of Spiritual Diseases, Distempers and Sicknesses, with their proper Cures and
Remedies, belongs hereunto. For the want hereof the Hearts of the wicked are
oftentimes made glad in the Preaching of the Word, and those of the Righteous
filled with sorrow; the Hands of Sinners are strengthened, and those who are
looking toward God are discouraged or turned out of the way. And where Men
either know not these things, or do not, or cannot apply themselves skilfully
to distribute the Word according to this variety of occasion, they cannot give
the Household its portion of Meat in Season. And he that wants this Spiritual
Gift, will never divide the Word aright unto its proper Ends, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
And it is lamentable to consider what shameful Work is made for want hereof in
the Preaching of some Men: Yea how the whole Gift is lost, as to its Power, Use
and Benefit.

( 5.) THIRDLY, The Gift of Utterance also belongs unto this part of the
Ministerial Duty in the Dispensation of the Doctrine of the Gospel. This is
particularly reckoned by the Apostle among the Gifts of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 1.
5. 2 Cor. 8. 5. And he desires the Prayers of the Church that the Gift may
abide with himself, and abound in him, Ephesians. 6. 19. And he there declares that
the Nature of it consists in the opening of the Mouth boldly to make known the
Mysteries of the Gospel: As also Col. 4. 3. Now this Utterance does not consist
in a Natural Volubility of Speech, which taken alone by it self, is so far from
being a Gift of the Spirit, or a thing to be so earnestly prayed for, as that
it is usually a Snare to them that have it, and a trouble to them that hear
them. Nor does it consist in a Rhetorical Ability to set off Discourses with a
flourish of Words, be they never so plausible or enticing; much less in a bold
corrupting of the Ordinance of Preaching by a Foolish Affectation of words in
supposed Elegancies of Speech, Quaint Expressions, and the like Effects of Wit,
that is Fancy and Vanity. But four things do concur hereunto. (1) (...), or
dicendi libertas. The word we Translate Utterance is (...), that is Speech. But
that not Speech in general, but a certain kind of Speech is intended, is
evident from the places mentioned, and the Application of them. And it is such
a Speech as is elsewhere called (...), that is, a freedom and liberty in the
declaration of the Truth conceived. This a Man has when he is not from any
Internal Defect, or from any outward Consideration streightened in the
Declaration of those things which he ought to speak. This Frame and Ability the
Apostle expresses in Himself, 2 Cor. 6. 11. O ye Corinthians, our Mouth is
open unto you, our Heart is enlarged. A free enlarged Spirit, attended with an
Ability of Speech suited unto the matter in Hand, with its occasions, belong to
this Gift. (2) So also does Boldness and Holy Confidence. So we often render
(...), wherein this utterance does much consist. When the Spirit of God in the
midst of Difficulties, Oppositions and Discouragements strengthens the Minds
of Ministers, so as that they are not terrified with any Amazement, but
discharge their Work freely, as considering whose Word and Message it is that
they do deliver, belongs to this Gift of Utterance. (3) So also does Gravity in
Expression, becoming the Sacred Majesty of Chriist and his Truths in the
Delivery of them. He that speaks, is to speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.
11. That is, not only as to Truth, preaching the Word of God and nothing else,
but doing it with that Gravity and Soundness of Speech, which becomes them who
speak the Oracles of God. For as we are to deliver Sound Doctrine and nothing
else, Tit. 1. 9. so we are to use sound Speech that cannot be condemned, Tit.
2. 7, 8. (4) Hereunto also belongs that Authority which accompanies the
Delivery of the Word when preached in Demonstration of these Spiritual
Abilities. For all these things are necessary, that the Hearers may receive the
Word, not as the Word of Man, but as it is indeed the Word of God.

( 6.) THESE are the principal Spiritual Gifts wherewith the Holy Ghost endows
the Ministers of the Church, with respect unto the effectual Dispensation of
the Word or the Doctrine of the Gospel which is committed unto them. And where
they are communicated in any such degree as is necessary unto the due Discharge
of that Office, they will evidence themselves to the Consciences of them that
do believe. The Dispensation of the Word by virtue of them, though under great
Variety from the various Degrees wherein they are communicated, and the
different natural Abilities of them that do receive them, will be sufficiently
distinguished and remote from that empty, wordy, sapless way of discoursing
Spiritual things, which is the mere effect of the Wit, Fancy, Invention and
Projection of Men destitute of the Saving Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Mysteries of the Gospel.

( 7.) THE second Head of Duties belonging unto the Ministerial Office,
respects the Worship of God. By the Worship of God here I understand only that
especial part thereof, whereof himself is the immediate Object. For absolutely
the preaching and hearing of the Word is a part of Sacred Worship, as that
wherein we act the Obedience of Faith unto the Commands of God, and submit our
selves unto his Institution. And indeed as unto those that hear, it is God
declaring himself by his Word that is the immediate Object of their Worship.
But the Dispensation of the Word which we have considered is the acting of Men
upon the Authority and Command of God toward others. But as was said by that
part we enquire into, I intend that alone whereof God himself was the immediate
object. Such are all the remaining Offices and Duties of the Church, those only
excepted which belong to it is Rule. And this Worship has various Acts
according to the variety of Christ's Institutions and the Churches occasions.
Yet as to the manner of it is Performance, it is comprised in Prayer. For by
Prayer we understand all Confessions, Supplications, Thanksgivings and Praises
that are made unto God in the Church, whether absolutely, or in the
Administration of other Ordinances, as the Sacraments. Wherefore in this Duty,
as comprehensive of all the Sacred Offices of public Worship, as the Glory of
God is greatly concerned, so it is the principal Act of Obedience in the
Church. This then as to the performance of it, depends either on the natural
Abilities of Men, or on the Aids and Operation of the Holy Ghost. By the
natural Abilities of Men, I understand not only what they are able of
themselves in every Instance to perform; but also whatever Assistance they may
make use of, either of their own finding out, or of others. And by the Aids of
the Holy Ghost I intend and especial Spiritual Gift bestowed on Men to this
purpose. Now to suppose that the whole Duty of the Church herein should consist
in the Actings of Men in their own Strength and Power, without any especial
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, is to exclude the consideration of him from
those things, with respect whereunto he is principally promised by our Lord
Jesus Christ. But what concerns this Gift of the Holy Ghost has been at
large handled by it self already, and must not here be again insisted on:
Taking for granted what is therein sufficiently confirmed, I shall only add,
that those who have not received this Gift are utterly unfit to undertake the
Office of the Ministry, wherein it is their Duty to go before the Churrh in the
Administration of all Ordinances by virtue of these Abilities. In things Civil
or Secular, it would be esteemed an intolerable Solecism to call and choose a
Man to the Discharge of an Office or Duty, whose Execntion depended solely on
sach a peculiar Faculty or Skill, as he who is so called has no interest in,
or acquaintance with: And it will one day appear to be so also in things Sacred
and Religious, yea, much more.

( 8.) THIRDLY, The Rule of the Church belongs unto the Ministers of it. God
has established Rule in the Church, Romans 12. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Heb. 13. 17. I dispute not now of what sort this Ministry is, nor
whether the Rule belong unto one sort alone. It is enough unto my present
Design that it is committed by Christ unto the Ministers of the Church, which
are it is Guides, Rulers and Overseers. Nor shall I at present enquire into the
particular Powers, Acts and Duties of this Rule. I have done it elsewhere. I am
only now to consider it so far as it is Exercise requires an especial
Ministerial Gift to be communicated by the Holy Ghost. And in order thereunto
the things ensuing must be premised. (1) That this Rule is Spiritual, and has
nothing in common with the Administration of the Powers of the World. It has,
I say, no Agreement with Secular Power and it is Exercise, unless it be in some
natural Circumstances that inseparably attend Rulers and Ruled in any kind. It
belongs unto the Kingdom of Christ, and the Administration of it, which are not
of this World. And as this is well pleaded by some against those who would
erect a Kingdom for him in the World, and, as far as I can understand, of this
World, framed in their own Imaginations unto a fancied Interest of their own;
so it is as pleadable against them who pretend to exercise the Rule and Power
of his present Kingdom after the manner of the Potestative Administrations of
the World. When our Savior forbad all Rule unto his Disciples after the manner
of the Gentiles, who then possessed all Sovereign Power in the World, and told
them, that it should not be so with them, that some should be great and
exercise Dominion over others, but that they should serve one another in Love,
the greatest Condescension unto Service being required of them who are
otherwise most eminent; he did not intend to take from them, or divest them of
that Spiritual Power and Authority in the Government of the Church which he
intended to commit unto them. His Design therefore was to declare, what that
Authority was not, and how it should not be exercised. A Lordly or Despotical
Power it was not to be, nor was it to be exercised by Penal Laws, Courts and
Coercive Jurisdiction, which was the way of the Administration of all Power
among the Gentiles. And if that kind of Power and Rule in the Church, which is
for the most part exercised in the World, be not forbidden by our Savior, no
Man living can tell what is so. For as to Meekness, Moderation, Patience,
Equity, Righteousness, they were more easy to be found in the Legal
Administrations of Power among the Gentiles, than in these used in many
Churches. But such a Rule is signified unto them, the Authority whereof from
whence it proceeds was Spiritual, its Object the Minds and Souls of Men only,
and the way of whose Administration was to consist in an humble, holy,
Spiritual Application of the Word of God, or Rules of the Gospel unto them. (2)
The End of this Rule is merely and solely the Edification of the Church. All
the Power that the Apostles themselves had either in or over the Church, was
but unto their Edification, 2 Cor. 10. 8. And the Edification of the Church
consists in the Increase of Faith and Obedience in all the Members thereof, in
the subduing and mortifying of Sin, in Fruitfulness in good Works, in the
Confirmation and Consolation of them that stand, in the raising up them that
are fallen, and the recovery of them that wander, in the Growth and Flourishing
of mutual Love and Peace; and whatever Rule is exercised in the Church unto any
other end, is Foreign to the Gospel, and tends only to the Destruction of the
Church it self. (3) In the way and manner of the Administration of this Rule
and Government, two things may be considered. (1) What is internal in the
Qualifications of the Minds of them by whom it is to be exercised. Such are
Wisdom, Diligence, Love, Meekness, Patience, and the like Evangelical
Endowments. (2) What is external, or what is the outward Rule of it, and this
is the Word and Law of Christ alone, as we have elsewhere declared.

( 9.) FROM these things it may appear what is the Nature in general of that
Skill in the Rule of the Church, which we assert to be a peculiar Gift of the
Holy Ghost. If it were only an Ability or Skill in the Canon or Civil Law, or
Rules of Men; if only an Acquaintance with the Nature and Course of some Courts
proceeding litigiously by Citations, Processes, Legal Pleadings, issuing in
Pecuniary Mulcts, outward Coercions or Imprisonments, I should willingly
acknowledge that there is no peculiar Gift of the Spirit of God required
thereunto. But the Nature of it being as we have declared, it is impossible it
should be exercised aright without the especial Assistance of the Holy Ghost.
Is any Man of himself sufficient for these things? Will any Man undertake of
himself to know the mind of Christ in all the occasions of the Church, and to
adminster the Power of Christ in them and about them? Wherefore the Apostle in
many places teaches that Wisdom, Skill and Understanding to administer the
Authority of Christ in the Church unto its Edification with Faithfulness and
Diligence, are an especial Gift of the Holy Ghost, Romans 12. 6, 8. 1 Cor. 12.
28. It is the Holy Ghost which makes the Elders of the Church it is Bishops or
Overseers, by calling them to their Office, Acts 20. 28. And what he calls any
Man unto, that he furnishes him with Abilities for the Discharge of. And so
have we given a brief Account of these Ordinary Gifts which the Holy Ghost
communicates unto the constant Ministry of the Church, and will do so unto the
Consummation of all things; having moreover in our Passage manifested the
Dependence of the Ministry on this Work of his; so that we need no Addition of
Pains to demonstrate, that where he goes not before in the Communication of
them, no outward Order, Call or Constitution is sufficient to make any one a
Minister of the Gospel.

( 10) THERE are Gifts which respect Duties only. Such are those which the Holy
Ghost continues to communicate unto all the Members of the Church in a great
Variety of Degrees, according to the Places and Conditions which they are in
unto their own and the Churches Edification. There is no need that we should
insist upon them in particular, seeing they are of the same nature with them
which are continued unto the Ministers of the Church, who are required to
excel in them, so as to be able to go before the whole Church in their
Exercise. The Spirit of the Gospel was promised by Christ unto all his
Disciples, unto all Believers, unto the whole Church, and not unto the Guides
of it only. To them he is so in an especial manner, with respect unto their
Office, Power and Duty, but not absolutely or only. As he is the Spirit of
Grace, he quickens, animates and unites the whole Body of the Church, and all
the Members of it, in and unto Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. And as he is
the Administrator of all Supernatural Gifts, he furnishes the whole Body and
all it is Members with Spiritual Abilities unto it is Edification, Ephesians. 4. 15,
16. Col. 2. 19. And without them in some measure or degree ordinarily we are
not able to discharge our Duty unto the Glory of God. For,

( 11.) 1. THESE Gifts are a great means and help to excite and exercise Grace
it self, without which it will be lifeless, and apt to decay. Men grow in Grace
by the due exercise of their own Gifts in Duties. Wherefore every individual
Person on his own account does stand in need of them with respect unto the
exercise and improvement of Grace, Zech. 12. 10. (2) Most Men have, it may be,
such Duties incumbent on them with respect unto others, as they cannot
discharge aright without the especial Aid of the Spirit of God in this kind. So
is it with all them who have Families to take care of and provide for. For
ordinarily they are bound to instruct their Children and Servants in the
Knowledge of the Lord, and to go before them in that Worship which God requires
of them, as Abraham did, the Father of the Faithful. And hereunto some
Spiritual Abilities are requisite: For none can teach others more than they
know themselves, nor perform Spiritual Worship without some Spiritual Gifts,
unless they will betake themselves unto such shifts as we have before on good
Grounds rejected. (3.) Every Member of a Church in Order according to the Mind
of Christ, possesses some Place, Use and Office in the Body, which it cannot
fill up unto the Benefit and Ornament of the whole, without some Spiritual
Gift. These places are various, some of greater use than others, and of more
necessity unto the Edification of the Church, but all are useful in their kind.
This our Apostle disputes at large, 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, etc. All Believers in due order do become one Body by the participation of
the same Spirit, and Union unto the same Head. Those who do not so partake of
the one Spirit, who are not united unto the Head, do not properly belong to the
Body, whatever place they seem to hold therein. Of those that do so, some are
as it were an Eye, some as an Hand, and some as a Foot: All these useful in
their several places, and needful unto one another. None of them is so highly
exalted as to have the least occasion of being lifted up, as though he had no
need of the rest; for the Spirit distributeth unto every one severally as he
will, not all unto any one, save only unto the Head our Lord Jesus, from whom
we all receive Grace according to the measure of his Gift. Nor is any so
depressed or useless as to say, It is not of the Body, nor that the Body has
no need of it. But every one in his Place and Station concurrs to the Unity,
Strength, Beauty and Growth of the Body, which things our Apostle disputes at
large in the place mentioned. (4) Hereby are supplies communicated unto the
whole from the Head, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Col. 2. 19. It is of the Body, that is
of the Church, under the Conduct of its Officers, that the Apostle discourses
in those places. And the Duty of the whole it is to speak the Truth in Love,
every one in his several Place and Station. And herein God has so ordered the
Union of the whole Church in it self, unto and in dependence on its Head, as
that through and by not only the supply of every Joint, which may express
either the Officers, or more Eminent Members of it; but the effectual working
of every part, in the Exercise of the Graces and Gifts of the Spirit, does
impart to the whole, the Body may Edify it self, and be Increased. Wherefore,
(5) The Scripture is express, that the Holy Ghost does communicate of those
Gifts unto private Believers, and directs them in that Duty wherein they are to
be exercised, 1 Pet. 4. 10. Every one, that is, every Believer walking in the
Order and Fellowship of the Gospel, is to attend unto the Discharge of his
Duty, according as he has received Spiritual Ability. So was it in the Church
of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 5, 6, 7. and in that of the Romans, Chap. 15. 14. as they
all of them knew that it was their Duty to covet the best Gifts, which they did
with success, 1 Cor. 12. 31. And hereon depend the Commands for the Exercise of
those Duties, which in the Ability of these Gifts received they were to
perform. So were they all to admonish one another, to exhort one another, to
Build up one another in their most Holy Faith. And it is the loss of those
Spiritual Gifts which has introduced amongst many an utter neglect of these
Duties, so as they are scarce heard of among the generality of them that are
called Christians. But blessed be God we have large and full Experience of the
continuance of this Dispensation of the Spirit in the Eminent Abilities of a
multitude of private Christians, however they may be despised by them who know
them not. By some I confess they have been abused, some have presumed on them
beyond the Line and Measure which they have received; some have been puffed up
with them; some have used them disorderly in Churches, and to their hurt; some
have boasted of what they have not received; all which miscarriages also befell
the Primitive Churches. And I had rather have the Order, Rule, Spirit and
Practice of those Churches that were planted by the Apostles, with all their
Troubles and Disadvantages, than the Carnal Peace of others in their open
Degeneracy from all those things.

( 12.) IT remains only that we enquire how Men may come unto, or attain a
participation of these Gifts, whether Ministerial or more Private. And unto
this End we may observe, (1) That they are not Communicated unto any by a
sudden Afflatus, or extraordinary Infusion, as were the Gifts of Miracles and
Tongues, which were bestowed on the Apostles and many of the first Converts.
That Dispensation of the Spirit is long since ceased, and where it is now
pretended unto by any, it may justly be suspected as an Enthusiastic Delusion.
For as the End of those Gifts which in their own Nature exceed the whole power
of all our Faculties, is ceased, so is their Communication, and the manner of
it also. Yet this I must say, that the Infusion of Spiritual Light into the
Mind, which is the Foundation of all Gifts, as has been proved, being wrought
sometimes suddenly, or in a short season, the Concomitancy of Gifts in some
good measure is oftentimes sudden, with an appearance of something
Extraordinary, as might be manifested in instances of several sorts. (2) These
Gifts are not absolutely attainable by our own Diligence and Endeavors in the
use of means, without respect unto the Sovereign Will and Pleasure of the Holy
Ghost. Suppose there are such means of the Attainment and Improvement of them,
and that several Persons do with the same measures of Natural Abilities and
Diligence use those means for that end, yet it will not follow that all must be
equally Partakers of them. They are not the immediate product of our own
Endeavors, no not as under an ordinary Blessing upon them. For they are (...),
Arbitrary Largesses or Gifts, which the Holy Spirit works in all Persons
severally as he will. Hence we see the different Events that are among them who
are exercised in the same Studies and Endeavors; some are endued with Eminent
Gifts; some scarce attain unto any that are useful, and some despise them, Name
and Thing. There is therefore an immediate Operation of the Spirit of God in
the Collation of these Spiritual Abilities, which is unaccountable by the
measures of Natural Parts and Industry. Yet I say, (4) That ordinarily they are
both attained and increased by the due use of Means suited thereunto, as Grace
is also, which none but Pelagians affirm to be absolutely in the power of our
own Wills. And the naming of these Means, shall put an Issue unto this
Discourse. Among them in the first place is required, a due preparation of Soul
by Humility, Meekness and Teachableness. The Holy Spirit takes no Delight to
impart of his especial Gifts unto Proud, Self-conceited Men, to Men vainly
puffed up in their own Fleshly Minds. The same must be said concerning other
vicious and depraved Habits of Mind, by which moreover they are oft-times
expelled and cast out after they have been in some measure received. And in
this Case I need not mention those by whom all these Gifts are despised: It
would be a wonder indeed if they should be made partakers of them, or at least,
if they should abide with them. (2) Prayer is a principal means for their
Attainment. This the Apostle directs unto, when he enjoins us earnestly to
desire the Best Gifts. For this Desire is to be acted by Prayer, and no
otherwise. (3) Diligence in the things about which these Gifts are conversant.
Study and Meditation on the Word of God, by the due use of means for the
attaining a right understanding of his Mind and Will therein, is that which I
intend. For in this course conscientiously attended unto it is, that for the
most part the Holy Spirit comes in, and joins his Aid and Assistance for
furnishing of the Mind with those Spiritual Endowments. (4) The Growth,
Increase and Improvement of these Gifts depends on their faithful use according
as our Duty does require. It is Trade alone that increases Talents, and
Exercise in a way of Duty that improveth Gifts. Without this, they will first
wither and then perish. And by a neglect hereof are they lost every day, in
some Partially, in some Totally, and in some to a Contempt, Hatred and
Blasphemy of what themselves had received. Lastly, Men's Natural Endowments,
with Elocution, Memory, Judgment, and the like, improved by Reading, Learning,
and diligent Study, do enlarge, set off and adorn these Gifts, where they are
received.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Will. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street.
Books Lately Printed of Dr. Owen 's.
1. THE True Nature of a Gospel Church, and its Government, wherein these
following particulars are distinctly handled: I. The Subject Matter of the
Church. II. Formal Cause of a particular Church. III. Of the Polity, Rule, or
Discipline of the Church in General. IV. The Officers of the Church. V. The
Duty of Pastors of Churches. VI. The Office of Teachers in the Church. VII. Of
the Rule of the Church, or of Ruling Elders. VIII. The Nature of the Polity or
Rule, with the Duty of Elders. IX. Of Deacons. X. Excommunication. XI. Of the
Communion of Churches.
In large Quarto, Price Bound 3 s. 2. A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin and
Grace. Price Bound 1 s. 3. A Brief and Impartial Account of the Nature of the
Protestant Religion, its State and Fate in the World, its Strength and
Weakness; with the Ways and Indications of the Ruin or Continuance of its
Public National Profession. Price 6 d. 4. A Brief Instruction in the Worship
of God, and Discipline of the Churches of the New Testament; by way of
Questions and Answers, with an Explication and Confirmation of those Answers.
Price Bound 1 s. 5. Meditations and Discourses concerning the Glory of Christ;
Applied unto Unconverted Sinners, and Saints under Spiritual Decays, from John
17. 24. Price Bound 1 s. 6. A Guide to Church Fellowship and Order according to
Gospel Institution. Price Bound 6 d. These with the rest of Dr. Owen's Works
that are in Print, are sold by William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street;
where you may be supplied of other Authors Books following. An Exposition of
the whole Book of the Revelation, wherein the Visions and Prophesies of Christ
are Opened and Expounded; by that Late Reverend Divine Hanserd Knollys. Price
Bound 2 s. 6 d. Dr. Crisp's Works in large Quarto, four parts. Bound 7 s. A
Plain and Familiar Conference, concerning. Gospel Churches, and Order; for the
Information and Benefit of those who shall seek the Lord their God, and ask the
way to Sion with their Faces thitherwards. Price Bound 1 s. Ashwood's Heavenly
Trade, or the best Merchandise. Price Bound 2 s. 6 d. Ashwood's best Treasure,
or the unsearchable Riches of Christ. Bound 2 s. 6 d. Mr. Mead's Effigies,
lately Engraven and Printed on large Paper. Price 6 d. Mr. Caryl's Effigies,
large Paper 6 d. Dr. Owen's Effigies in large Paper 6 d. Mr. Bunyan's Effigies,
large Paper 6 d. Dr. Crisp's Effigies in Paper 6 d. There is Newly Printed a
Stitched Book, containing Six Sheets; Entitled, The Sufficiency of the Spirits
Teaching: By Samnel How. Price 6 d. The Labors of John Bunyan, Author of the
Pilgrims Progress, late Minister of the Gospel, and Pastor of the Congregation
at Bedford, Collected, and Printed in Folio, by Procurement of his Church and
Friends, and by his own Approbation before his Death, that these his Christian
Ministerial Labors might be preserved in the World. This Folio contains Ten of
his Excellent Manuscripts, prepared for the Press, before his Death: And Ten of
his Choice Books already Printed, but long ago grown scarce, and not now to be
had. Their Titles are as follows; viz.
MANUSCRIPTS.
1. An Exposition on the Ten first Chapters of Genesis. 2. Justification by
Imputed Righteousness. 3. Paul's Departure and Crown. 4. Israel's Hope
Encouraged. 5. Desires of the Righteous granted. 6. The Saints Privilege and
Profit. 7. Christ a complete Savior. 8. Saints Knowledge of Christ's Love. 9.
The House of the Forest of Lebanon. 10. A Description of Antichrist.
BOOKS formerly Printed.
11. Saved by Grace. 12. Christian Behavior. 13. A Discourse of Prayer. 14.
The Strait Gate. 15. Gospel Truths opened. 16. Light for them in Darkness. 17.
Instructsons for the Ignorant. 18. A Map of Salvation, etc. 19. The New
Jerusalem. 20. The Resurrection. Price Bound 14 s.
THE APPLICATION OF THE Foregoing Discourse.
WITH respect unto the Dispensation of the Spirit toward Believers, and his
Holy Operations in them and upon them, there are sundry particular Duties,
whereof he is the immediate Object, prescribed unto them. And they are those
whereby on our part we comply with him in his Work of Grace, whereby it is
carried on, and rendered useful unto us. Now whereas this Holy Spirit is a
Divine Person, and he acts in all things toward us as a Free Agent according
unto his own Will, the things enjoined us with respect unto him, are those
whereby we may carry our selves aright toward such a one, namely, as he is an
Holy, Divine, Intelligent Person, working freely in and toward us for our
Good. And they are of two sorts; the first whereof are expressed in
Prohibitions of those things which are unsuited unto Him, and his dealings with
us; the latter in Commands for our Attendance unto such Duties as are
peculiarly suited unto a Compliance with Him in his Operations; in both which
our Obedience is to be exercised with a peculiar Regard unto Him. I shall begin
with the first sort, and go over them in the Instances given us in the
Scripture.

I. WE have a negative Precept to this purpose, Ephesians. 4. 30. (...), Grieve not
the Holy Spirit. Consider who he is, what he has done for you, how great your
Concern is in his continuance with you; and withal, that he is a Free,
infinitely Wise and Holy Agent in all that He does, who came freely unto you,
and can withdraw from you, and grieve him not. It is the Person of the Holy
Spirit that is intended in the Words, as appears, (1) From the manner of the
Expression, (...), that Holy Spirit. (2) By the Work assigned unto Him; for by
him we are Sealed unto the Day of Redemption; Him we are not to grieve. The
Expression seems to be borrowed from Isa. 63. 10. where mention is made of the
Sin and Evil here prohibited, (...), But they rebelled, and vexed his Holy
Spirit. (...) is to trouble and to grieve, and it is used when it is done unto
a great Degree. The LXX render it here by (...), which is so to grieve, as also
to irritate and provoke to Anger and Indignation, because it has respect unto
the Rebellions of the People in the Wilderness, which our Apostle expresses by
(...) and (...), Words of the same Signification. To Vex therefore is the
heightning of Grieving by a Provocation unto Anger and Indignation; which Sense
is suited to the place and matter treated of, though the Word signify no more
but to grieve, and so it is rendered by (...), Genesis 45. 5. 1 King. 19. 2.

NOW Grief is here ascribed unto the Holy Spirit as it is elsewhere, unto God
absolutely, Genesis 6. 6. It repented the Lord that he had made Man on the Earth,
and it grieved him at his Heart. Such Affections and Perturbations of Mind are
not ascribed unto God or the Spirit but Metophorically. That intended in such
Ascriptions is to give us an Apprehension of things as we are able to receive
it. And the Measure we take of them is their Nature and Effects in our selves.
What may justly grieve a good Man, and what he will do when he is unjustly or
undeservedly grieved, represent unto us what we are to understand of our own
Condition with respect unto the Holy Ghost when he is said to be grieved by us.
And Grief in the Sense here intended, is a trouble of Mind arising from an
Apprehension of Unkindness not deserved, of Disappointments not expected, on
the Account of a near Concernment in those by whom we are grieved. We may
therefore see hence, what it is we are warned of, when we are enjoined not to
grieve the Holy Spirit. As,

1. THERE must be Unkindness in what we do. Sin has various respects toward
God, of Guilt and Filth, and the like. These several Considerations of it, have
several Effects. But that which is denoted when it is said to grieve him, is
Unkindness, or that Defect of an answerable Love unto the Fruits and
Testimonies of His Love which we have received, that it is accompanied withal.
He is the Spirit of Love, he is Love. All his Actings toward us and in us, are
Fruits of Love, and they all of them leave an Impression of Love upon our
Souls. All the Joys and Consolation we are made Partakers of in this World,
arise from a Sense of the Love of God, communicated in an endearing way of Love
unto our Souls. This requires a return of Love and Delight in all Duties of
Obedience on our part. When instead hereof, by our Negligence and Carelessness,
or otherwise, we fall into those things or ways which he most abhorrs, he
greatly respects the Unkindness and Ingratitude which is therein, and is
therefore said to be grieved by us.

2. DISAPPOINTMENT in Expectation. It is known that no Disappointment properly
can befall the Spirit of God. It is utterly inconsistent with his Prescience
and Omniscience. But we are disappointed, when things fall not out according as
we justly expected they would, in answer unto the means used by us for their
Accomplishment. And when the means that God uses toward us, do not, by reason
of our Sin, produce the Effect they are suited unto, God proposes Himself as
under a Disappointment. So he speaks of his Vineyard, I tooked that it should
bring forth Grapes, and it brought forth wild Grapes, Isa. 5. 2. Now
Disappointment causes Grief. As when a Father has used all means for the
Education of a Child in any honest Way or Course, and expended much of his
Estate therein, if he through Dissoluteness or Idleness fail his Expectation
and Disappoint him, it fills him with Grief. They are great things which are
done for us by the Spirit of God. These all of them have their tendency unto an
Increase in Holiness, Light and Love. Where they are not answered, where there
is not a suitable Effect, there is that Disappointment that causes Grief.
Especially is this so with respect unto some signal Mercies. A Return in Holy
Obedience is justly expected on their Account. And where this is not, is is a
thing causing Grief. This are we here minded of, Grieve not the Spirit whereby
ye are sealed unto the Day of Redemption. So great a Kindness should have
produced other Effects, than those there mentioned by the Apostle.

3. THE Concernment of the Holy Spirit in us, concur to his being said to be
grieved by us. For we are grieved by them in whom we are particularly
concerned. The Miscarriages of others we can pass over without any such
trouble. And there are three things that give us an especial Concernment in
others. (1) Relation, as that of a Father, and Husband, a Brother. This makes
us to be concerned in, and consequently to be grieved for the Miscarriages of
them that are related unto us. So is it with the Holy Spirit: He has
undertaken the Office of a Comforter toward us, and stands in that relation to
us. Hence he is so concerned in us, as that he is said to be grieved with our
Sins, when he is not so at the Sins of them unto whom he stands not in especial
Relation. (2) Love gives Concernment, and makes way for Grief upon occasion of
it. Those whom we love we are grieved for, and by: Others may provoke
Indignation, but they cause not Grief, I mean on their own account; for
otherwise we ought to grieve for the Sins of all. And what is the especial Love
of the Holy Ghost toward us, has been declared.

FROM what has been spoken, it is evident what we are warned of, what is
enjoined unto us, when we are cautioned not to grieve the Holy Spirit, and how
we may do so. For we do it,

(1) WHEN we are not influenced by his Love and Kindness, to answer his Mind
and Will in all Holy Obedience, accompanied with Joy, Love and Delight. This he
deserves at our Hands, this he expects from us; and where it is neglected,
because of his Concernment in us we are said to grieve him. For he looks not
only for our Obedience, but also that it be filled up with Joy, Love and
Delight. When we attend unto Duties with an unwilling willing Mind; when we
apply our selves unto any Acts of Obedience in a Bondage or Servile Frame, we
grieve him, who has deserved other things of us.

(3) WHEN we lose and forget the Sense and Impressions of signal Mercies
received by him. So the Apostle, to give Efficacy unto his Prohibition, adds
the signal Benefit which we receive by him, in that he Seals us to the Day of
Redemption; which, what it is, and wherein it does consist, has been declared.
And hence it is evident, that he speaks of the Holy Spirit as dwelling in
Believers: For as such he seals them. Whereas therefore in and by Sin, we
forget the great Grace, Kindness and Condescension of the Holy Spirit in his
dwelling in us, and by various ways communicating of the Love and Grace of God
unto us; we may be well said to grieve him. And certainly this Consideration,
together with that of the vile Ingratitude and horrible Folly there is in
neglecting and defiling his Dewlling Place, with the Danger of his withdrawing
from us on the continuance of our Provocation, ought to be as effectual a
Motive unto Universal Holiness, and constant watchfulness therein, as any can
be proposed unto us.

(3) SOME Sins there are which in an especial manner above others do grieve the
Holy Spirit. These our Apostle expressly discourses of, 1 Cor. 3. 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20. And by the Connection of the Words in this place, he seems to make
corrupt Communication, which always has a Tendency unto Corruption of
Conversation, to be a Sin of this Nature, ver. 29, 30.

SECONDLY, That which we have rendered to vex him, Isa. 63. 10. is but the
heightning and aggravation of his being grieved by our Continuance, and it may
be Obstinacy in those ways whereby he is grieved. For this is the Progress in
these things. If those whom we are concerned in, as Children, or other
Relations, do fall into Miscarriages and Sins, we are first grieved by it. This
Grief in our selves is attended with Pity and Compassion toward them, with an
earnest Endeavor for their Recovery. But if notwithstanding all our
Endeavors, and the Application of Means for their Reducement, they continue to
go on frowardly in their ways, then are we vexed at them; which includes an
Addition of Anger and Indignation unto our former Sorrow or Grief. Yet in this
posture of things we cease not to attempt their Cure for a Season, which if it
succeed not, but they continue in their Obstinacy, then we resolve to treat
with them no more, but to leave them to themselves. And not only so, but upon
our Satisfaction of their Resolution for a continuance in ways of Sin and
Debauchery, we deal with them as their Enemies, and labor to bring them unto
Punishment. And for our better Understanding of the Nature of our Sin and
Provocation, this whole Scheme of things is ascribed unto the Holy Ghost with
respect unto them. How he is said to be grieved, and on what occasion, has
been declared. Upon a continuance in those ways wherewith he is grieved, he is
said to be vexed; that we may understand there is also Anger and Displeasure
toward us; yet he forsakes us not, yet he takes not from us the Means of Grace
and our Recovery. But if we discover an Obstinacy in our ways, and an
untreatable Perverseness, then he will cast us off, and deal with us no more
for our Recovery: And woe unto us, when he shall depart from us! So when the Old
World would not be brought to Repentance by the Dispensation of the Spirit of
Christ in the Preaching of Noah, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. God said thereon, that his
Spirit should give over, and not always contend with Man, Genesis 6. 3. Now the
Cessation of the Operations of the Spirit toward Men obstinate in ways of Sin,
after he has been long grieved and vexed, comprizeth three things. (1) A
subduction from them of the means of Grace, either totally by the removal of
their Light and Candlestick, all ways of the Revelation of the Mind and Will of
God unto them, Rev. 2. 5. Or as unto the Efficacy of the Word toward them,
where the outward Dispensation of it is continued, so that hearing they shall
hear, but not understand, Isa. 6. 9. John 12. 40. For by the Word it is that he
strives with the Souls and Minds of Men. (2) A forbearance of all Chastisement,
out of a gracious design to heal and recover them, Isa. 1. 6. (3) A giving of
them up unto themselves, or leaving them unto their own ways; which although it
seems only a Consequent of the two former, and to be included in them, yet is
there indeed in it a positive Act of the Anger and Displeasure of God, which
directly influenceth the Event of Things, for they shall be so given up unto
their own Hearts Lusts, as to be bound in them as in Chains of Darkness unto
following vengeance, Romans 1. 26, 28. But this is not all; he becomes at length
a Professed Enemy unto such obstinate Sinners, Isa. 63. 10. They rebelled and
vexed his Holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and he sought
against them. This is the length of his proceeding against obstinate Sinners in
this World. And herein also three things are included. (1) He comes upon them
as an Enemy to spoil them. This is the first thing that an Enemy does, when he
comes to Fight against any; he spoils them of what they have. Have such Persons
had any Light, or Conviction, any Gift, or Spiritual Abilities, the Holy Spirit
being now become their Professed Enemy, he spoils them of it all; From him that
has not shall be taken away, even that which he seems to have. Seeing he
neither had nor used his Gifts or Talent unto any saving End, being now at an
open Enmity with him who leut it him, it shall be taken away. (2) He will come
upon them with Spiritual Judgments, smiting them with Blindness of Mind, and
Obstinacy of Will, filling them with Folly, Giddiness and Madness in their ways
of Sin, which sometimes shall produce most doleful Effects in themselves and
others. (3) He will cast them out of his Territories; if they have been Members
of Churches, he will order that they shall be cut off, and cast out of them.
(4) He frequently gives them in this World a fore-taste of that Everlasting
Vengeance which is prepared for them. Such are those Horrors of Conscience,
and other terrible Effects of an utter Desperation, which he Justly,
Righteously and Holily sends upon the Minds and Souls of some of them. And
these things will he do, as to demonstrate the Greatness and Holiness of his
Nature; so also that all may know what it is to despise his Goodness, Kindness
and Love.

AND the Consideration of these things belongs unto us. It is our Wisdom and
Duty to consider as well the Ways and Degrees of the Spirit's Departure from
provoking Sinners, as those of his approach unto us, with Love and Grace.

THESE latter have been much considered by many as to all his great Works
toward us, and that unto the great Advantage and Edification of those
concerned in them. For thence have they learned both their own State and
Condition, as also what particular Duties they were on all Occasions to apply
themselves unto, as in part we have manifested before, in our Discourses about
Regeneration and Sanctification.

AND it is of no less Concernment unto us to consider aright the Ways and
Degrees of his departure, which are expressed to give us that Godly Fear and
Reverence wherewith we ought to consider and observe Him. David on his Sin
feared nothing more than that God would take his Holy Spirit from him, Psalm.
51. 11. And the fear hereof, should influence us into the utmost Care and
Diligence against Sin. For although he should not utterly forsake us, which as
to those who are true Believers is contrary to the Tenor, Promise and Grace of
the New Covenant, yet he may so withdraw his Presence from us, as that we may
spend the Remainder of our days in Trouble, and our years in Darkness and
Sorrow. Let him therefore that thinks he stands, on this account also take
heed lest he fall. And as for them with whom he is, as it were, but in the
Entrance of his Work producing such Effects in their Minds, as being followed
and attended unto, might have a Saving Event, he may upon their Provocations,
utterly forsake them in the Way and by the Degrees before mentioned. It is
therefore the Duty of all to serve him with Fear and Trembling on this account.
And,

SECONDLY; It is so, to take heed of the very Entrances of the Course
described. Have there been such Evils in any of us, as wherein it is evident
that the Spirit is grieved? as we love our Souls we are to take Care that we do
not vex him by a continuance in them. And if we do not diligently and speedily
recover our selves from the first, the second will ensue. Has he been grieved
by our negligence in, or of Duties, by our Indulgence unto any Lust, by
Compliance with, or Conformity to the World; let not our continuance in so
doing, make it his Vexation. Remember that whilst he is but grieved, he
continues to supply us with all due means for our Healing and Recovery. He will
do so also when he is yet vexed. But he will do it with such a mixture of Anger
and Displeasure, as shall make us know, that what we have done, is an evil
thing and a bitter. But have any proceeded further, and continued long thus to
vex him, and have refused his Instructions, when accompanied it may be with
sore Afflictions, or inward Distresses that have been evident Tokens of his
Displeasure? let men Souls rouse up themselves to lay hold on him, for he is
ready to depart, it may be, for ever. And,

THIRDLY; We may do well to consider much the Miserable Condition of those who
are thus utterly forsaken by him. When we see a Man who has lived in a
plentiful and flourishing Condition, brought to Extreme Penury and Want,
seeking his Bread in Rags from Door to Door, the Spectacle is sad, although we
know, he brought this Misery on himself by Profuseness or Debauchery of Life.
But how sad is it to think of a Man, whom it may be we knew to have had a great
Light and Conviction, to have made an amiable Profession, to have been adorned
with sundry useful Spiritual Gifts, and had in estimation on this account, now
to be despoiled of all his Ornaments, to have lost Light, and Life, and Gifts,
and Profession, and to lie as a poor withered Branch on the Dunghill of the
World! And the sadness hereof will be increased, when we shall consider not
only that the Spirit of God is departed from him, but also is become his Enemy,
and Fights against him, whereby he is devoted unto irrecoverable Ruin.

ERRATA.
Page 101. line ult dele The End of the First Part, in the Titlepage following
blot out Being the Second Part of, in some of the Titles blot out the s at
Works, p. 105. l. 3. blot out Part II.


