MEDITATIONS AND DISCOURSES Concerning the Glory of Christ, APPLIED UNTO
Unconverted SINNERS, AND SAINTS UNDER SPIRITUAL DECAYS: In Two CHAPTERS, FROM
JOHN XVII.XXIV.

By the late Reverend JOHN OWEN, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for William Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street,
1691.

TO THE READER.
THE Design of this Preface is not to commend either the Author or the Matter
contained in this little Book. Let every Reader do as he finds cause. Nor need
any Assurance be given that Doctor Owen was the Author, to any who have
conversed with his Writings, and will be at the Pains to read this over. It is
indeed his Application of the former Discourses upon this Subject, printed in
the Year 1684. But the Reason why it was not then added (the Omission whereof
rendered that Book imperfect to judicious Readers) seems necessary to be given.
Had it pleased God he had lived a little longer, it would have come out as
perfect as his ^ther Works. But there (...) no more transcribed in his
Lifetime than what was then printed, and that published soon after his Death;
These Two Chapters wrote only with his own hand, were found too late to be then
added. They are therefore now printed to complete those Discourses. And it is
presumed, that as no serious Christian who reads this, will be satisfied
without the other also: So all who prize the former, will be glad of the
Opportunity to add this thereunto.

John XVII. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with
me where I am: that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me.
THE High Priest under the Law when he was to enter into the Holy Place on the
Solemn day of Atonement, was to take both his hands full of sweet Incense from
the Golden Table of Incense, to carry along with him in his entrance. He had
also a Censer filled with Fire, that was taken from the Altar of
Burnt-offerings, where Atonement was made for Sin with Blood. Upon his actual
entrance through the vail, he put the Incense on the Fire in the Censer, until
the Cloud of it is smoke covered the Ark, and the Mercy Seat. See Levit. 16. 12,
13. And the end hereof was to present unto God, in the behalf of the People, a
sweet smelling Savor from the Sacrifice of Propitiation. See the Declaration
of these things in our Exposition of Heb. 9th.

IN Answer unto this Mystical Type, the great High Priest of the Church, our
Lord Jesus Christ, being to enter into the Holy Place not made with hands, did
by the glorious Prayer Recorded in this Chapter, influenced from the Blood of
his Sacrifice, fill the Heavens above, the glorious Place of God's Residence,
with a clou^ of Incense, or the sweet perfume of his Blessed Intercession,
typed by the incense offered by the High Priest of old. By the same Eternal
Fi^e wherewith he offered himself a bloody Sacrifice to make Atonement for Sin,
he kindled in his most Holy Soul those desires for the Application of all its
Benefits unto his Church, which are here expressed, and wherein his
Intercession does consist.

IT is only one passage in the Verse above named, that at present I design an
enquiry into. And this is the subject matter of what the Lord Christ here
desires in the behalf of those given him by the Father; namely, That they may
behold his glory.

IT is evident, That in this Prayer the Lord Christ has respect unto his own
Glory, and the manifestation of it, which he had in the entrance asked of the
Father, ver. 4, 5. But in this place he has not so much respect unto it as his
own, as unto the Advantage, Benefit, Satisfaction and Blessedness of his
Disciples, in the beholding of it. For these things were the end of all that
Mediatory Glory which was given unto him. So Joseph charged his Brethren, when
he had revealed himself unto them, that they should tell his Father of all his
Glory in Egypt, Genesis 45. 13. This he did, not for an Ostentation of his own
Glory, but for the Satisfaction which he knew his Father would take in the
Knowledge of it. And such a manifestation of his Glory unto his Disciples does
the Lord Christ here desire, as might fill them with Blessed Satisfaction for
evermore.

THIS alone which is here prayed for, will give them such satisfaction, and
nothing else. The Hearts of Belivers are like the Needle touched by the
Lodestone, which cannot rest until it comes to the Point whereunto by the
secret Virtue of it, it is directed. For being once touched by the Love of
Christ, receiving therein an impression of secret ineffable Virtue, they will
ever be in motion, and restless, until they come unto him, and behold his
Glory. That Soul which can be satisfied without it, that cannot be eternally
satisfied with it, is not partaker of the efficacy of his Intercession.

I shall lay the Foundation of the ensuing Meditations in this one Assertion,
namely, That one of the greatest Privileges and Advancements of Believers,
both in this World, and unto Eternity, consists in their BEHOLDING THE GLORY OF
CHRIST. This therefore he desires for them in this Solemn Intercession, as the
complement of all his other requests in their behalf; That they may behold my
Glory. (...); that they may see, view, behold or contemplate on my Glory. The
Reasons why I assign not this glorious Privilege only unto the Heavenly state,
which is principally respected in this place, but apply it unto the state of
Believers in this World also, with their Duties and Privileges therein, shall
be immediately declared.

ALL Unbelievers do in their Heart call Christ Iohabod; Where is the Glory?
They see neither form nor comeliness in him, that he should be desired. They
look on him as Michael Readiness Daughter did on David dancing before the Ark,
when she despised him in her Heart. They do not indeed (many of them) call
Jesus Anathema, but cry, Hail Master, and then Crucify him.

HENCE have we so many Cursed Opinions advanced in derogation unto his Glory,
some of them really destructive of all that is truly so; yea denying the only
Lord that bought us, and substituting a false Christ in his room. And others
there are who express their slight thoughts of him and his glory, by bold
irreverent enquiries, of what use his person is in our Religion; as though
there were any thing in our Religion, that has either Reality, Substance, or
Truth, but by virtue of its Relation there unto. And by their Answers, they
bring their own (...) yet nearer unto the borders of Blasphemy.

NEVER was there an Age since the name of Christians was known upon the Earth,
wherein there was such a direct Opposition made unto the Person and Glory of
Christ, as there is in that wherein we live. There were indeed in the first
Times of the Church, swarms of proud, doting, brainsick persons, who vented
many foolish imaginations about him, which issued at length in Arianism, in
whose Ruins they were buried. The Gates of Hell in them, prevailed not against
the Rock on which the Church is built. But as it was said of Caesar, Solus
accessie sobrius, ad perdendam Rempublicam; He alone went soberly about the
Destruction of the Commonwealth; So we now have great Numbers who oppose the
Person and Glory of Christ, under a pretense of Sobriety of Reason, as they
vainly plead. Yea, the disbelief of the Mysteries of the Trinity, and the
Incarnation of the Son of God, the sole Foundation of Christian Religion, is so
diffused in the World, as that it has almost devoured the power and vitals of
it. And not a few, who dare not yet express their minds, do give broad
intimations of their intentions and good will toward him, in making them the
Object of their scorn and reproach, who desire to know nothing but him, and him
Crucified.

GOD in his appointed time will effectually Vindicate his Honor and Glory,
from the vain attempts of Men of corrupt minds against them.

IN the mean time, it is the Duty of all those who love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, to give Testimony in a peculiar manner unto this Divine Person and
Glory, according unto their several Capacities, because of the Opposition that
is made against them.

I HAVE thought my self on many accounts obliged to cast my Mite into this
Treasury. And I have chosen so to do, not in a way of controversy (which
formerly I have engaged in) but so* a^ together with the vindica^ion of the
Truth, to promote the strengthening of the Faith of true Believers, their
Edification in the Know^edge of it; and to express the Experience which they
have, or may have of the Power and Reality of th^se things.

THAT which at present I design to Demonstrate is, That the Beholding of the
Glory of Christ, is one of the great^st Privileges and Advancements that
Believers are capable ^f in this World, or that which is to come. It is that
whereby they are first gradually conformed unto it, and then fixed in the
Eternal enjoyment of it. For here in this life, beholding his Glory, they are
changed or transformed into the likeness of it, 2 Cor. 3. 18. and hereafter,
they shall be for ever like unto him, because they shall see him as he is, I
Joh. 3. 1, 2. Hereon do our present Comforts, and future Blessedness depend.
This is the Life and Reward of our Souls. He that has seen him has seen the
Father also; Joh. 14. 9. For we discern the Light of the Knowledge of God, only
in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

THERE are therefore, two ways or degrees of beholding the Glory of Christ,
which are constantly distinguished in the Scripture. The one is by Faith in
this World, which is the Evidence of things not seen. The other is by Sight, or
immediate vision in Eternity, 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by faith and not by sight.
We do so whilst we are in this World, whilst we are present in the Body, and
absent from the Lord, ver. 8. But we shall live and walk by Sight hereafter.
And it is the Lord Christ and his Glory, which are immediate objects both of
this Faith and Sight. For we here behold him darkly in a Glass (that is by
Faith) but we shall see him face to face; (by immediate vision) (...) we know
him in part: but then we shall know him as we are known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. What is
the difference between these two ways of beholding the Glory of Christ; shall
be afterward declared.

IT is the first way, namely by Vision in the Light of Glory, that is
principally included in that prayer of our Blessed Savior, that his Disciples
may be where he is, to behold his Glory. But, I shall not confine my enquiry
thereunto; nor does our Lord Jesus exclude from his desire, that Sight of his
Glory which we have by faith in this World; but prays for the Perfection of it
in Heaven. It is therefore the first way, that in the first place I shall
insist upon, and that for the Reasons ensuing.

1. NO Man shall ever behold the Glory of Christ by Sight hereafter, who does
not in some measure behold it by Faith here in this World. Grace is a necessary
preparation for Glory, and Faith for Sight. Where the Subject, the Soul, is not
previously seasoned with Grace and Faith, it is not capable of Glory, or
Vision. Nay, persons not disposed hereby unto it, cannot desire it, whatever
they pretend; they only deceive their own Souls, in supposing that so they do.
Most Men will say with confidence, living and dying, that they desire to be
with Christ, and to behold his Glory; But they can give no Reason, why they
should desire any such thing; only they think it somewhat that is better than
to be in that evil condition which otherwise they must be cast into for ever,
when they can be here no more. If a Man pretend himself to be enamoured on, or
greatly to desire what he never saw, nor was ever represented unto him, he does
but dote on his own Imaginations. And the pretended desires of many, to behold
the Glory of Christ in Heaven, who have no view of it by Faith whilst they are
here in this World, are nothing but self-deceiving imaginations.

SO do the Papists delude themselves. Their Carnal Affections are excited by
their outward Senses, to delight in Images of Christ, in his Sufferings, his
Resurrection, and Glory above. Hereon they satisfy themselves, that they
behold the Glory of Christ himself, and that with Love and great Delight. But
whereas there is not the least true Representation made of the Lord Christ, or
his Glory, in these things, that being confined absolutely unto the Gospel
alone, and this way of attempting it being laid under a severe interdict, they
do but sport themselves with their own deceivings.

THE Apostle tells us concerning himself, and other Believers, when the Lord
Christ was present, and conversed with them in the Days of his Flesh, that they
saw his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace
and Truth. Joh. 1. 14. And we may enquire, what was this Glory of Christ, which
they so saw, and by what means they obtained a prospect of it? For (1.) It was
not the Glory of his outward condition, as we behold the Glory and Grandeur of
the Kings and Potentates of the Earth; For he made himself of no Reputation,
but being in the Form of a Servant, he walked in the Condition of a Man of low
Degree. The Secular Grandeur of his pretendedVicar, makes no Representation of
that Glory of his, which his Disciples saw. He kept no Court, nor House of
Entertainment, nor (though he made all things) had of his own where to lay his
Head. Nor 2. Was it with respect to the outward Form of the Flesh which he was
made, wherein he took our Nature on him, as we see the Glory of a comely or
beautiful Person; For he had therein neither form nor comelines^, that he
should be desired, his visage was so marred more than any Man, and his form
more than the sons of men, Isa. 52. 14. Chap. 53. 2, 3. All things appeared in
him as became a Man of Sorrows. Nor 3. Was it absolutely the Eternal Essential
Glory of his Divine Nature, that is intended. For this no Man can see in this
World. What we shall attain in a view thereof hereafter, we know not. But 4. It
was his Glory, as he was full of Grace and Truth. They saw the Glory of his
Person and his Office in the Administration of Grace and Truth And how, or by
what means did they see this Glory of Christ? It was by Faith, and no
otherwise. For this Privilege was granted unto them only who received him, and
believed on his name, ver. 12. This was that Glory which the Baptist saw, when
upon his coming unto him he said unto all that were present, Behold the Lamb of
God which takes away the Sin of the World, Joh. 1. 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.

WHEREFORE let no Man deceive himself: He that has no Sight of the Glory of
Christ here, shall never have any of it hereafter unto his Advantage. It is not
therefore unto Edification, to discourse of Beholding the Glory of Christ in
Heaven by vision, until we go through a trial, whether we see any thing of it
in this World by Faith or no.

2ly. THE behol^ing of Christ in Glory, is that which in it self is too High,
Illustrious, and Mavelous for us in our present condition. It has a splendour
and glory too great for our present Spiritual visible faculty; as the direct,
immediate sight of the Sun darkens our sight, and does not relieve or
strengthen it at all. Wherefore we have no way to take into our minds any true
Spiritual Apprehensions of the Nature of Immediate Vision, or what it is to see
the Glory of Christ in Heaven, but by that View which we have by Faith in this
life of the same Glory. Whatever otherwise falls into our Minds, is but
conjecture and imagination; Such as are the Contemplations of most about
Heavenly things.

I have seen and read somewhat of the Writings of of Learned Men, concerning
the state of future glory; some of them are filled with excellent Nations of
Truth, and Elegancy of Speech, whereby they cannot but much affect the minds of
them who duly consider what they say. But I know not well whence it comes to
pass, many complain, that in reading of such discourses they are like a Man who
behold his natural face in a Glass, and immediately forgets what manner of Man
he was; as one of old complained to the same purpose upon his perusal of
Plato's contemplations about the Immortality of the Soul. The things spoken do
not abide, nor Incorporate with our minds. They please and refresh for a little
while, like a shower of Rain in a dry Season, that soaketh not unto the Roots
of things; the power of them does not enter into us. Is it not all from hence,
that their notions of future things are not enduced out of the Experience which
we have of the Beginnings of them in this World; without which, they can make
no permanent abode in our minds, nor continue any Influence upon our
Affections? yea, the Soul is disturbed, not edified, in all Contemplations of
future Glory, when things are proposed unto it, whereof in this life it has
neither foretaste, sense, experience, nor evidence. No man ought to look for
any thing in Heaven, but what one way or other he has some experience of in
this Life. If Men were fully persuaded hereof, they would be, it may be, more
in the exercise of Faith and Love about Heavenly things, than for the most part
they are. At present they know not what they enjoy, and they look for they know
not what.

HENCE is it, that Men utterly strangers unto all Experience of the Beginning
of Glory in themselves as an effect of Faith, have filled their Divine Worship
with Images, Pictures, and Music, to represent unto themselves somewhat of
that Glory which they fancy to be above. For into that which is truly so, they
have no prospect, nor can have; because they have no experience of its power in
themselves; nor do they taste of its Goodness by any of its First Fruits in
their own minds. Wherefore by that view alone, and not otherwise, which we have
of the Glory of Christ by Faith here in this World, we may attain such blessed
conceptions of our beholding his glory above by immediate vision, as shall draw
out our Hearts unto the Admiration of it, and desires of its full enjoyment.

3. HEREIN then our present edification is principally concerned. For in this
present beholding of the Glory of Christ, the Life and Power of Faith are most
eminently acted. And from this Exercise of Faith, does Love unto Christ
principally, if not solely arise and spring. If therefore we desire to have
Faith in its vigor, or Love in its Power, giving Rest, Complacency, and
Satisfaction unto our own Souls, we are to seek for them in the diligent
discharge of this Duty; elsewhere they will not be found. Herein would I live;
Herein would I Dye; Hereon would I dwell in my Thoughts and Affections, to the
withering and consumption of all the painted Beauties of this World, unto the
Crucifying all things here below, until they become unto me a dead and deformed
thing, no way meet for affectionate Embraces.

FOR these, and the like Reasons, I shall first enquire into our Beholding of
the Glory of Christ in this world by Faish; And therein endeavor to lead the
Souls of them that Believe, into the more retired walks of Faith, Love, and
Holy Meditation, whereby the King is held in his Galleries. Caut. 7. 5.

BUT because there is no Benefit in, nor advantage by the Contemplation of this
Sacred Truth, but what consists in an improvement of the practice of the duty
declared in it, namely, the constant beholding of the Glory of Christ by Faith:
I shall for the promotion of it, premise some few Advantages which we may have
thereby.

1. WE shall hereby be made fit and meet for Heaven. Every man is not so, who
desires it, and hopes for it. For some are not only unworthy of it, and
excluded from it by reason of Sin; but they are unmeet for it, and incapable of
any advantage by it. All men indeed think themselves fit enough for Glory (what
should hinder them?) if they could attain it. But it is because they know not
what it is. Men shall not be clothed with Glory, as it were, whether they will
or no^* It is to be received in that Exercise of the Faculties of their Souls,
which such Persons have no Ability for. Music has no Pleasure in it, unto
them that cannot hear; nor the most beautiful Colors unto them that cannot
see. It would be no Benefit unto a Fish to take him from the bottom of the
Ocean, filled with Cold and Darkness, and to place him under the Beams of the
Sun. For he is no way meet to receive any Refreshment thereby. Heaven it self
would not be more advantageous unto Persons not renewed by the Spirit of Grace
in this Life.

HENCE the Apostle gives thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12. Indeed the
Beginning here, and the Fullness of Glory hereafter, are communicated unto
Believers by an Almighty Act of the Will and Grace of God. But yet he has
ordained Ways and Means whereby they may be made meet receptive Subjects of the
Glory so to be communicated unto them. That this Way and Means is by the
beholding of the Glory of Christ by Faith, shall be fully declared in our
Progress. This therefore should excite us unto this Duty; for all our present
Glory consists in our Preparation for future Glory.

2. NO Man can by Faith take a real View of this Glory, but Virtue will proceed
from it in a transforming Power, to change him into the same Image. 2 Cor. 3.
18. How this is done, and how we become like unto Christ, by beholding his
Glory, shall be fully declared in our Progress.

3. THE constant Contemplation of the Glory of Christ, will give Rest,
Satisfaction, and Complacency unto the Souls of them who are exercised therein.
Our Minds are apt to be filled with a Multitude of perplexed Thoughts, Fears,
Cares, Dangers, Distresses, Passions, and Lusts, do make various Impressions on
the Minds of Men, filling them with Disorder, Darkness, and Confusion. But
where the Soul is fixed in its Thoughts and Contemplations on this glorious
Object, it will be brought into, and kept in an Holy, Serene, Spiritual Frame.
For to be Spiritually minded, is Life and Peace. And this it does, by taking
off our Hearts, from all undue Regard unto all things below, in comparison of
the great Worth, Beauty, and Glory of what we are conversant withal. See Phil.
3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. A Defect herein makes many of us Strangers unto an Heavenly
Life; and to live beneath the Spiritual Refreshments and Satisfactions that the
Gospel does tender unto us.

4. THE Sight of the Glory of Christ, is the Spring and Cause of our
Everlasting Blessedness. We shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. Or, be
with Christ, which is best of all. Phil. 1. 23. For there shall we behold his
Glory, Joh. 17. 24. and by seeing him as he is, we shall be made like him, 1 John 3. 2. which is our Everlasting Blessedness.

THE Enjoyment of God by Sight, is commonly called the Beatifical Vision; and
it is the sole Fountain of all the Actings of our Souls in the State of
Blessedness, which the old Philosophers knew nothing of; neither do we know
distinctly what they are, or what is this Sight of God. Howbeit, this we know,
that God in his Immense Essence is invisible unto our Corporeal Eyes, and will
be so to Eternity; as also incomprehensible unto our Minds. For nothing can
perfectly comprehend that which is Infinite, but what is it self Infinite.
Wherefore the Blessed and Blessing Sight which we shall have of God, will be
always in the Face of Jesus Christ. Therein will that Manifestation of the
Glory of God in his Infinite Perfections, and all their blessed Operations, so
shine into our Souls, as shall immediately fill us with Peace, Rest, and Glory.

THESE things we here admire, but cannot comprehend. We know not well what we
say, when we speak of them: yet is there in True Belivers a Foresight, and
Fore-taste of this Glorious Condition. There enters sometimes by the Word and
Spirit into their hearts such a sense of the uncreated Glory of God, shining
forth in Christ, as Affects and Satiates their Souls with ineffable Joy. Hence
arises that Peace of God which is above all understanding, keeping our Hearts
and Minds through Jesus Christ. Phil. 4. 7. Christ in Believers the Hope of
Glory, gives them to taste of the First Fruits of it; yea, sometimes to bath
their Souls in the Fountain of Life, and to drink of the Rivers of Pleasure
that are at his Right hand. Where any are utterly unacquainted with these
things, they are Carnal, yea, Blind, and seeing nothing afar off. These
Enjoyments indeed are rare, and for the most part of short Continuance. Rara
hora, brevis mora. But it is from our own Sloth and Darkness that we do not
enjoy more Visits of this Grace; and that the Dawnings of Glory do not more
shine on our Souls. Such things as these may excite us to Diligence in the Duty
proposed unto us.

AND I shall enquire. 1. What is that Glory of Christ, which we do, or may
behold by Faith? 2. How do we behold it? 3. Wherein our doing so differs from
immediate Vision in Heaven. And in the whole we shall endeavor an Answer unto
the Enquiry made unto the Spouse, by the Daughters of Jerusalem. Cant. 5. 9.
What is thy Beloved more than another Beloved, thou fairest among Women? What
is thy Beloved more than another Beloved, that thou do so charge us?

CHAP. II.
The Glory of the Person of Christ, as the only Representative of God unto the
Church.
THE Glory of Christ, is the Glory of the Person of Christ. So he calls it
(...), Joh. 17. 28. That Glory which is mine, belongs to me, unto my Person.

THE Person of Christ may be considered two ways. 1. Absolutely in it self. 2.
In the Susception and Discharge of his Office, with what ensued thereon. His
Glory on these distinct Accounts, is distinct and different; but all equally
his own. How in both respects we may behold it by Faith, is that which we
enquire into.

THE first thing wherein we may behold the Glory of the Person of Christ, God
and Man, which was given him of his Father, consists in the Representation of
the Nature of God, and of the Divine Person of the Father, unto the Church in
him; For we behold the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Otherwise we know it not, we see it not, we see nothing of it: that is the way
of seeing and knowing God, declared in the Scripture, as our Duty and
Blessedness. The Glory of God comprehends both the Holy Properties of his
Nature, and the Counsels of his Will; and the Light of the Knowledge of these
things, we have only in the Face or Person of Jesus Christ. Whatever obscure
imperfect Notions we may have of them otherways, we cannot have (...) the Light
of the Illuminating, iradiating Knowledge of the Glory of God, which may
enlighten our Minds, and sactifie our Hearts, but only (...) in the Face or
Person of Jesus Christ; for he is the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4. The Brightness
of the Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 2. The Image
of the invisible God, Col. 1. 1^. I do here only mention these things, because
I have handled them at large in my Discourse of the Mystery of (...), or the
Person of Christ; whereunto I refer the Readers for their full Declaration and
Vindication. Herein is he glorious, in that he is the great Representative of
the Nature of God, and his Will unto us, which without him would have been
eternally hid from us, or been invisible unto us; we should never have seen God
at any time, here nor hereafter, Joh. 1. 18.

IN his Divine Person absolutely considered, he is the Essential Image of God,
even the Father: He is in the Father, and the Father in him, in the Unity of
the same Divine Essence, Joh. 14. 10. Now he is with the Father, John 1. 1. In
the Distinction of his Person, so is he his Essential Image, Col. 1. 15. Heb.
1. ^. In his Incarnation he becomes the Representative Image of God unto the
Church, 2 Cor. 4. 6. without whom our Understandings can make no such Approach
unto the Divine Excellencies, but that God continues to be unto us, what he is
in himself, the Invisible God. In the Face of Jesus Christ, we see his Glory.

THIS is the Original Glory of Christ given him by his Father, and which by
Faith we may behold: He, and he alone declares, represents and makes known unto
Angels and Men, the Essential Glory of the Invisible God, his Attributes and
his Will, without which, a perpetual comparative Darkness would have been on
the whole Creation, especially that part of it here below.

THIS is the Foundation of our Religion, the Rock whereon the Church is built,
the Ground of all our Hopes of Salvation, of Life and Immortality: All is
resolved into this; namely, the Representation that is made of the Nature and
Will of God, in the Person and Office of Christ: If this fail us, we are lost
for ever; if this Rock stand firm, the Church is safe here, and shall be
triumphant hereafter.

HEREIN then is the Lord Christ exceedingly glorious. Those who cannot beheld
this Glory. of his by Faith, namely, as he is the great Divine Ordinance to
represent God unto us, they know him not. In their Worship of him, they worship
but an Image of their own devising.

YEA, in the Ignorance and Neglect hereof consists the formal Nature of
Unbelief, even that which is inevitably ruinous unto the Souls of Men. He that
discerns not the Representation of the Glory of God in the Person of Christ
unto the Souls of Men, is an Unbeliever. Such was the State of the unbelieving
Jews and Gentiles of old; They did not, they would not, they could not behold
the Glory of God in him, nor how he did represent him. That this was both the
Cause, and the Formal Nature of their Unbelief, the Apostle declares at large,
1 Cor. 1. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Not to see the Wisdom of God, and the Power of
God, and consequently all the other holy Properties of his Nature in Christ, is
to be an Unbeliever.

THE Essence of Faith consists in a due Ascription of Glory to God, Romans 4. 20.
This we cannot attain unto without the Manifestation of those Divine
Excellencies unto us, wherein he is Glorious. This is done in Christ alone, so
as that we may glorify God in a saving and acceptable Manner. He who discerns
not the Glory of Divine Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Love and Grace, in the Person
and Office of Christ, with the way of the Salvation of Sinners by him, is an
Unbeliever.

HENCE the great Design of the Devil in the beginning of the Preaching of the
Gospel, was to blind the Eyes of Men, and fill their Minds with Prejudices,
that they might not behold this Glory of his; So the Apostle gives an Account
of his Success in this Design, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid
unto them that are lost, in whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds
of them that believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the Image of God, should shine unto them. By various Ways and Methods of
Deceit, to secure the Reputation he had got, of being God of this World, by
Pretenses and Appearances of supernatural Power and Wisdom, he labored to
blind the Eyes of Men with Prejudices against that glorious Light of the
Gospel, which proposed the Lord Christ as the only Image of God. This
Blindness, this Darkness is cured in them that believe, by the mighty Power of
God; For God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has irradiated
our Hearts with the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ,
v. 6. wherein true, saving Faith does consist. Under this Darkness perished the
unbelieving World of Jews and Gentiles; and such is the present Condition of
all by whom the Divine Person of Christ is denied; for no mere Creature can
ever make a perfect Representation of God unto us. But we must a little further
enquire into this Mystery.

SINCE Men fell from God by sin, it is no small part of their Misery and
Punishment, that they are covered with thick Darkness and Ignorance of the
Nature of God. They know him not, they have not seen him at any time: Hence is
that Promise to the Church in Christ, Isa. 60. 1, 2. For behold the Darkness
shall cover the Earth, and gross Darkness the People: but the Lord shall arise
upon thee, and his Glory shall be seen upon thee.

THE Ancient Philosophers made great Enquiries into, and obtained many Notions
of the Divine Being, its Existence and Excellencies. And these Notions they
adorned with great Elegancy of Speech, to allure others unto the Admiration of
them. Hereon they boasted themselves to be the only Wise Men in the World, Romans
1. 22. (...) they boasted that they were the Wise: But we must abide in the
Judgment of the Apostles, concerning them in their Enquiries: He assures us,
that the World in its Wisdom, that is, these wise Men in it by their Wisdom
knew not God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. And he calls the Authors of their best Notions
Atheists, or Men without God in the Word, Ephesians. 2. 12. For,

1. THEY had no certain Guide, Rule, nor Light, which being attended unto,
might lead them infallibly into the Knowledge of the Divine Nature: All they
had of this Kind, was their own (...) their Reasonings or Imaginations, whereby
they commenced (...) the great Disputers of the World; but in them they maxed
vain, and their foolish Heart was darkened, Romans 1. 21. They did at best but
endeavor (...), to feel after God, as Men do in the Dark, after what they
cannot clearly discern, Acts 17. 27. Among others, Cicero's Book De Natura
Deorum, gives us an exact Account of the Intention of the Apostle in that
Expression. And it is at this Day not Want of Wit, but Hatred of the Mysteries
of our Religion, which makes so many prone to forgo all Supernatural
Revelation, and to betake themselves unto a Religion declared, as they suppose,
by Reason, and the Light of Nature; like Bats and Owls, who being not able to
bear the Light of the Sun, betake themselves unto the Twilight, to the
Dawnings of Light and Darkness.

2. WHATEVER they did attain, as unto rational Notions about things invisible
and incomprehensible, yet could they never deliver themselves from such
Principles and Practices in Idolatry and all manner of flagitious Sins, as that
they could be of any Benefit unto them. This is so effectually demonstrated by
the Apostle in the First Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, as that we need
not to insist upon it.

MEN may talk what they please of a Light within them, or of the Power of
Reason, to conduct them unto that Knowledge of God, whereby they may live unto
him: But if they had nothing else, if they did not boast themselves of that
Light, which has its Foundation and Original in Divine Revelation alone, they
would not excel them, who in the best Management of their own Reasonings, knew
not God, but waxed vain in their Imaginations.

WITH respect unto this Universal Darkness, that is, Ignorance of God, with
horrid Confusion accompanying it in the Minds of Men, Christ is called, and is,
the Light of Men, the Light of the World, because in and by him alone this
Darkness is dispelled, as he is the Son of Righteousness.

2. THIS Darkness in the Minds of Men, this Ignorance of God, his Nature and
his Will, was the Original of all Evil unto the World, and yet continues so to
be. For,

1. HEREON did Satan erect his Kingdom and Throne, obtaining in his Design
until he bare himself as the God of this World, and was so esteemed by the
most. He exalted himself by Virtue of this Darkness (as he is the Prince of
Darkness,) into the Place and Room of God, as the Object of the Religious
Worship of Men. For the things which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed
unto Devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Levit. 17. 7. Chap. 32. 17. Psalm.
108. 27. Gal. 3. 8. This is the Territory of Satan; yea, the Power and Scepter
of his Kingdom in the Minds of the Children of Disobedience. Hereby he
maintains his Dominion unto this Day in many and great Nations, and with
individual persons innumerable.

2. THIS is the spring of all wickedness and confusion among men themselves.
Hence arose that flood of Abominations in the Old World, which God took away
with a Flood of Desolation: Hence were the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah, which he
revenged with fire from Heaven. In brief: All the Rage, Blood, Confusion,
Desolations, Cruelties, Oppressions, Villainies, which the World has been, and
is filled withal, whereby the souls of men have been, and are flouded into
eternal destruction, have all arisen from this corrupt Fountain of the
Ignorance of God.

3. OF such as those described, we are the Posterity and Offspring. Our
Forefathers in this Nation, were given up unto as brutish a service of the
Devil, as any Nation under the Sun. It is therefore an effect of infinite
mercy, that the day has dawned on us, poor Gentiles, and that the dayspring
from on high has visited us. See the glory of this Grace expressed, Ephesians. 3.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. God might have left us to perish in the blindness and
ignorance of our Forefathers; but of his own accord, and by his own powerful
Grace alone, he has translated us out of darkness into his mavelous light.
But alas! the horrible ingratitude of men, for the glorious light of the
Gospel* and the abuse of it, will issue in a fore revenge.

GOD was known under the Old Testament, by the Revelation of his Word, and the
Institution of his Worship. This was the glory and privilege of Israel, as the
Psalmist declares, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and his judgments unto Israel; He has not deal^ so with any Nation,
The Church then knew him; yet so as that they had an apprehension that he dwelt
in thick darkness, where they could not have any clear views of him, Exodus 20.
21. Deuteronomy. 5. 22. 1 Kings 8. 12. 2 Chronicles. 6. 1. And the Reason why God so
represented himself in darkness unto them, was to instruct them in their
imperfect state, wherein they could not comprehend that glory which should
afterward be revealed. For as he is now made known in Christ, we see that he
is light, and in him there is no darkness at all.

4. HITHERTO^ darkness in general covered the Earth, and gross darkness the
people, as unto the knowledge of God; only there was a twilight in the Church.
The day did not yet dawn, the shadows did not flee away, nor the day star shine
in the hearts of men. But when the Son of Righteousness did arise in his
strength and beauty, when the Son of God appeared in the flesh, and in the
discharge of his Office; God himself, as unto his Being, and manner of
Existence in three distinct persons, with all the glorious properties of the
Divine Nature, were illustriously manifested unto them that did believe, and
the light of the knowledge of them dispelled all the shadows that were in the
Church, and shone into the darkness which was in the world, so as that none
continued ignorant of God, but those who would not see; See Job 1. 5, 14, 17,
18. 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

HEREIN is the Lord Christ glorious. And this is that which I shall now speak
unto; namely, How we may behold the glory of Christ in the Representation and
Revelation that is made of God and his glory, in his Person and Office, unto
all that do believe. For it is not so much the declaration of the nature of the
things themselves, wherein the glory of Christ does consist, as our way and
duty, in the beholding of them, which at present is designed.

HE calls unto us, saying, Behold me, look unto me, and be saved, Isa. 45. 2.
What is it that we see in Christ? What do we behold in him? He asks that
Question concerning his Church, What will ye see in the Shulamite? Whereto he
answers, as it were the company of two armies, Cant. 6. 13. or the Two Churches
of the Old and New Testament, in order and beauty. We may enquire, What shall
we, what do we see in him? Do we see him as the Image of the invisible God,
representing him, his Nature, Properties, and Will unto us? Do we see him as
the Character, the express Image of the Person of the Father, so as that we
have no need of Philip's Request, Lord, show us the Father, because having seen
him, we have seen the Father also, John 14. 9.

THIS is our first saving view of Christ, the first instance of our beholding
his glory by faith. So to see him, as to see God in him, is to behold his
glory; for herein is he eternally glorious. And this is that Glory whose view
we ought to long for, and labor after. And if we see it not, we are yet in
darkness; yea, though we say we see, we are blind like others. So David longed
and prayed for it, when yet he could behold it only in Types and Shadows, Psalm.
63. 1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee, to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have
seen them in the sanctuary. For there was in the Sancturay an obscure
representation of the Glory of God in Christ. How much more should we prize
that view of it, which we may have with open face, though yet as in a glass? 2
Cor. 3. 18.

MOSES when he had seen the Works of God, which were great and mavelous, yet
found not himself satisfied therewith: Wherefore after all, he prays that God
would show him his Glory, Exodus 33. 18. He knew that the Ultimate Rest,
Blessedness and Satisfaction of the Soul, is not in seeing the works of God,
but the Glory of God himself. Therefore did he desire some immediate dawnings
of it upon him in this World. I beseech thee show me thy Glory. And if we have
right apprehensions of the Future State of Blessedness, we cannot but have the
same desire of seeing more of his Glory in this life. But the Question is, How
me may attain it? If we are left unto our selves in this Enquiry, if we have no
other way for it, but the immediate fixing of our thoughts on the Immensity of
the Divine Nature, we must come every one to the Conclusion that Agur makes on
the like consideration; Surely I am more brutish than any Man, and have not the
Understanding of a Man; I neither learned Wisdom, nor have the Knowledge of the
Holy. Who has ascended up into Heaven, or descended? Who has gathered the
wind in his fist? Who has bound the waters in a garment? Who has established
all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his sons name, if thou
can tell, Prove. 30, 2, 3, 4.

IT is in Christ alone, that we may have a clear distinct view of the Glory of
God and his Excellencies: See Joh. 1. 18. Chap. 14. 7, 8, 9, 10. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Col. 1. 16. Ephesians. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Heb. 1. 2.
For him, and him alone has he appointed the representative of himself unto
us: And we shall take an Account hereof in one or two especial Instances.

1. INFINITE Wisdom is one of the most glorious Properties of the Divine
Nature: It is that which is directive of all the external Works of God, wherein
the Glory of all the other Excellencies of God is manifested; wherefore the
manifestation of the whole Glory of God proceeds originally from Infinite
Wisdom. But as Job speaks, Where shall this Wisdom be found, and what is the
place of understanding? Chap. 28. 12. Can we by searching, find out God? Can we
find out the Almighty to perfection? Chap. 11. 7. As it is in it self an
Essential, Eternal Property of the Divine Nature, we can have no comprehension
of it: We can but adore it in that infinite distance wherein we stand from God;
but in its Operations and Effects it may be discerned; for they are designed of
God for its manifestation. Among these the most excellent is the contrivance of
the great Work of the Salvation of the Church; so it is celebrated by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 9, 10, 11. To make all Men see what is the fellowship of the
mystery, which from the beginning of the World, has been hid in God, who
created all things by Jesus Christ, to the intent, that now unto the
principalities and powers in Heavenly places might be known by the Church, the
manifold Wisdom of God.

If we have any Interest in God, if we have any hopes of Blessedness in
beholding of his Glory unto Eternity, we cannot but desire a view (such as is
attainable) of this Infinite manifold Wisdom of God in this life. But it is in
Christ alone that we can discern any thing of it; for him has the Father
chosen and sealed to represent it unto us. All the Treasures of this Wisdom are
hid, laid up, and laid out in him: Herein lies the essence and form of Faith.
Believers by it do see the Wisdom of God in Christ, in his Person and Office:
Christ the Wisdom of God; Unbelievers see it not, as the Apostle argues, 1 Cor.
1. 22, 23, 24.

IN beholding the Glory of this Infinite Wisdom of God in Christ, we behold his
own Glory also; the Glory given him of his Father; for this is his Glory, that
in and by him, and him alone the Wisdom of God is manifested and represented
unto us. When God appointed him as the great and only means of this end, he
gave him honor and glory above the whole Creation: for it is but little of
Divine Wisdom which the works of it declare, in comparison of what is
manifested in Christ Jesus. We no way deny or extenuate the manifestation that
is made of the Wisdom of God in the works of Creation and Providence. It is
sufficient to detect the folly of Atheism and and Idolatry, and was designed of
God unto that end. But it is comparative insufficiency, with respect unto the
rerepresentation of it in Christ, as unto the ends of knowing God aright, and
living unto him, the Scripture does abundantly attest. And the abuse of it was
Catholic, as the Apostle declares, Romans 1. 20. etc. To see this Wisdom clearly,
is our Wisdom; and a due apprehension of it, fills the Souls of Believers with
joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

2. WE may also instance in the Love of God. The Apostle tells us, that God is
Love, 1 John 4. 8. Divine Love is not to be considered only in its effects, but
in its Nature and Essence; and so it is God himself; For God is Love. And a
blessed Revelation this is of the Divine Nature: It casts out Envy, Hatred,
Malice, Revenge, with all their Fruits, in Rage, Fierceness, Implacability,
Persecution, Murder, into the Territories of Satan. They belong not unto God
in his Nature or Actings; for God is Love. So the same Apostle tells us, that
he who slew his Brother, was of the wicked one, 1 John 3. 12. He was of the
Devil his Father, and his works did he do.

BUT the Enquiry is as before; How shall we have a view of this Love, of God as
Love? By what way or means shall we behold the Glory of it? It is hidden from
all living, in God himself. The Wise Philosophers, who discoursed so much of
the Love of God, knew nothing of this, that God is Love. The Most of the
Natural Notions of men about it are corrupt, and the best of them weak and
imperfect. Generally the Thoughts of men about it, are, that he is of a facile
and easy Nature, one that they may make bold withal in all their occasions, as
the Psalmist declares, Psalm. 50. 21. And whereas it must be learned in its
Effects, Operations and Divine Ways of its manifestation, those who know not
Christ, know nothing of them; and many things in Providence do interpose to
hinder our view of this Love; for although that indeed God is Love, yet his
wrath is revealed from Heaven against the ungodliness of Men: As all things at
this day are filled with Evidences of his anger and displeasure: How then shall
we know, wherein shall we behold the Glory of God in this, that he is Love? The
Apostle declares it in the next words, ver. 9. Herein was manifest the love of
God toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we
might live through him. This is the only Evidence given us that God is Love.
Hereby alone is the Divine Nature as such made known unto us; namely in the
Mission, Person, and Office of the Son of God; Without this all is in Darkness
as unto the true Nature and supreme Operation of this Divine Love.

HEREIN do we behold the Glory of Christ himself, even in this life. This Glory
was given him of the Father: Namely, That he now should declare and evidence
that God is Love; and he did so, that in all things he might have the
Pre-eminence. Herein we may see how Excellent, how Beautiful, how Glorious and
Desirable he is, seeing in him alone we have a due Representation of God as he
is Love, which is the most joyful Sight of God that any Creature can obtain. He
who beholds not the Glory of Christ herein, is utterly ignorant of those
Heavenly Mysteries; he knows neither God nor Christ; he has neither the
Father nor the Son. He knows not God, because he knows not the holy Properties
of his Nature in the Principal way designed by infinite Wisdom for their
Manifestation; he knows not Christ, because he sees not the Glory of God in
him. Wherefore whatever Notions Men may have from the Light of Nature, or from
the Works of Providence, that there is Love in God, however they may adorn them
in elegant affecting Expressions: Yet from them no Man can know that God is
Love, In the Revelation hereof Christ has the Preeminence; nor ca^ any Man
comprehend any thing of it aright but in him. It is that which the whole Light
of the Creation cannot discover; for it is the Spring and Center of the Mystery
of Godliness.

THESE things are of the deep things of God, such as belong unto that Wisdom of
God in a Mystery, which they that are Carnal cannot receive, as the Apostle
testifies, 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the meanest Believer who lives in the Exercise of
Faith, may have an Understanding of them so far as is needful unto his Love and
Obedience. The Sum of the whole is this; if you would behold the Glory of
Christ, as the great Means of your Sanctification and Consolation, as the only
Preparation for the beholding of his Glory in Eternal Blessedness: Consider
what of God is made known and represented unto you in him, wherein God purposed
and designed to glorify himself in him: Now this is all that may be known of
God in a saving manner; especially his Wisdom, his Love, his Goodness, Grace
and Mercy, whereon the Life of our Souls does depend; And the Lord Christ being
appointed the only Way and Means hereof, how exceeding glorious must he be in
the Eyes of them that do believe!

THESE things being promised, I shall close this first Consideration of that
Glory of Christ which we behold by Faith in this World, with some such
Observations, as may excite us unto the Practice of this great Duty, and
Improvement of this great Privilege; the greatest which on this side Heaven we
can be made Partakers of.

THERE are some who regard not these things at all, but rather despise them.
They never entertain any serious thoughts of obtaining a View of the Glory of
God in Christ, which is to be Unbelievers. They look on him as a Teacher that
came forth from God to reveal his Will, and to teach us his Worship: and so
indeed he was. But this they say was the sole use of his Person in Religion,
which is Mahumetism. The Manifestation of all the holy Properties of the Divine
Nature, with the Representation of them unto Angels above, and the Church in
this World* as he is the Image of the incisible God, in the Constitution of his
Person, and the Discharge of his Office, are things they regard not; yea, they
despise and scorn what is professed concerning them; for Pride and Contempt of
others were always the safest Covert of Ignorance; otherwise it would seem
strange, that Men should openly boast of their own Blindness. But these
Conceptions of Men's Minds are influenced by that Unbelief of his Divine Person,
which makes havoc of Christianity at this Day in the World.

I speak of them, whose minds are better disposed toward heavenly things; and
unto them I say, Wherefore do you love Jesus Christ? for so you profess to do.
Wherefore do you trust in him? Wherefore do you honor him? Wherefore do you
desire to be in Heaven with him? Can you give a reason of this hope that is in
you? An account why you do all or any of these things? If you cannot, all that
you pretend toward him, is but fancy and imagination; you fight uncertainly as
men beating the air; or is one of your reasons hereof, That in him you do by
Faith behold that glory of God, with the Holy Properties of his Nature, and
their Principal Operations, in order unto your own Salvation and Blessedness,
which otherwise would have been eternally hid from you? Hereon is he precious
unto them that do believe.

LET us therefore, as many as are spiritual, be thus minded. Let us make use of
this Privilege with rejoicing, and be found in the discharge of this Duty with
diligence: For thus to behold the glory of Christ is both our privilege and
our duty. The duties of the Law were a burden and a yoke; but those of the
Gospel are Privileges and Advantages.

IT is a Promise concerning the days of the New Testament, that our eyes shall
see the King in his beauty, Isa. 33 17. We shall behold the Glory of Christ in
its Luster and Excellency: What is this Beauty of the King of Saints? Is it
not, that God is in him, and he is the great representative of his Glory unto
us? Wherefore in the contemplation of this Glory consists the principal
exercise of Faith: And who can declare the Glory of this Privilege, That we
who are born in Darkness, and deserved to be cast out into utter Darkness,
should be translated into this mavelous Light of the knowledge of the Glory
of God in the Face of Jesus Christ.

WHAT are all the stained Glories, the fading Beauties of this World? Of all
that the Devil showed our Savior from the Mount? What are they in comparison
of one View of the Glory of God represented in Christ, and of the Glory of
Christ as his great Representative?

THE most pernicious effect of Unbelief under the preaching of the Gospel is,
that together with an influence of Power from Satan, it blinds the eyes of men's
minds, that they should not see this Glory of Christ, whereon they perish
eternally, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

BUT the most of those who at this day are called Christians are strangers unto
this duty: Our Lord Jesus Christ told the Pharisees, that notwithstanding all
their boasting of the knowledge of God, they had not heard his voice at any
time, nor seen his shape; that is as Moses did. They had no real acquaintance
with him, they had no spiritual view of his Glory; and so it is amongst our
selves. Notwithstanding the general profession that is of the Knowledge of
Christ, they are but few who thus behold his Glory; and therefore few who are
transformed into his Image and Likeness.

SOME Men speak much of the Imitation of Christ, and following of his Example;
and it were well if we could see more of it really in effect. But no Man shall
ever become like unto him, by bare Imitation of his Actions, without that view
or i^^ition of his Glory which alone is accompanied with a transforming power
to change them into the same image.

THE Truth is, the best of us all are woefully defective in this Duty, and many
are discouraged from it, because a Pretense of it in some has degenerated into
Superstition: But we are loath at any time seriously to engage in it, and come
with an unwilling kind of Willingness, unto the Exercise of our Minds in it.

THOUGHTS of this Glory of Christ are too high for us, or too hard for us, such
as we cannot long delight in; we turn away from them with a kind of Weariness;
yet are they of the same Nature in general with our beholding of the Glory of
Christ in Heaven, wherein there shall be no weariness or Satiety unto Eternity.
Is not the Cause of it, that we are unspiritual or carnal, having our Thoughts
and Affections wonted to give Entertainment unto other things? For this is the
principal Cause of our Unreadiness and Incapacity to exercise our Minds in and
about the great Mysteries of the Gospel. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3. And it is so with
us moreover, because we do not stir up our selves with Watchfulness and
Diligence in continual Actings of Faith on this Blessed Object. This is that
which keeps many of us at so low an Ebb, as unto the Powers of an Heavenly
Life, and spiritual Joys.

DID we abound in this Duty, in this Exercise of Faith, our Life in walking
before God would be more sweet and pleasant unto us; our spiritual Light and
St^^ngth would have a daily Increase; we should more represent the Glory of
Christ in our Ways and Walking, than usually we do; and Death it self would be
most welcome unto us.

THE Angels themselves desire to look into the things of the Glory of Christ, 1
Pet. 1. 10, 12. There is in them Matter of Enquiry and Instruction for the most
high and holy Spirits in Heaven. The manifold Wisdom of God in them is made
known unto Principalities and Powers in heavenly Places by the Church, Ephesians.
3. 10. And shall we neglect that which is the Object of Angelical Diligence to
enquire into; especially considering that we are more than they concerned in it?

IS Christ then thus glorious in our Eyes? Do we see the Father in him, or by
seeing of him? Do we sedulously, daily contemplate on the Wisdom, Love, Grace,
Goodness, Holiness, and Righteousness of God, as revealing and manifesting
themselves in him? Do we sufficiently consider, that the immediate Vision of
this Glory in Heaven will be our everlasting Blessedness? Does the imperfect
View which we have of it here, increase our Desires after the perfect Soght of
it above? With respect unto these Enquiries, I shall briefly speak unto sundry
sorts of Men.

SOME will say they understand not these things, nor any Concernment of their
own in them. If they are true, yet are they Notions which they may safely be
without the Knowledge of; for so far as they can discern, they have no
Influence on Christian Practice, or Duties of Morality. And the preaching of
them does but take off the Minds of Men from more necessary Duties. But if the
Gospel be hid it is hid unto them that perish. And unto the Objection I say:

1. NOTHING is more fully and clearly revealed in the Gospel, than that unto us
Jesus Christ is the Image of the invisible God that he is the Character of the
Person of the Father, so as that in seeing him, we see the Father also; that we
have the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in his Face alone, as has
been proved. This is the Principal Fundamental Mystery and Truth of the Gospel;
and which if it be not received, believed, owned, all other Truths are useless
unto our Souls. To refer all the Testimonies that are given hereunto, to the
Doctrine which he taught, in Contradistinction unto his Person, as acting in
the Discharge of his Office, is Antievangilical, Antichristian, turning the
whole Gospel into a Fable.

2. IT is so, that the Light of Faith is given unto us principally to enable us
to behold the Glory of God in Christ; to contemplate on it, as unto all the
Ends of its Manifestation. So is it expressly affirmed, 2 Cor. 4. 6. If we have
not this Light, as it is communicated by the Power of God unto them that do
believe, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18, 19. we must be Strangers unto the whole Mystery of
the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

3. THAT in the beholding of the Glory of God in Christ, we behold his Glory
also. For herein is he infinitely glorious above the whole Creation, in that in
and by him alone the Glory of the Invisible God is represented unto us. Herein
do our Souls live. This is that whereby the Image of God is renewed in us, and
we are made like unto the First born.

4. THIS is so far from being unnecessary unto Christian Practice, and the
sanctified Duties of Morality, that he knows not Christ, he knows not the
Gospel, he knows not the Faith of the Catholic Church, who imagins that they
can be performed acceptably without it. Yea, this is the Root whence all other
Christian Duties do spring, and whereon they grow, whereby they are
distinguished from the Works of Heathens. He is no Christian who believes not
that Faith in the Person of Christ is the Spring of all Evangelical Obedience;
or who knows not that this Faith respects the Revelation of the Glory of God in
him.

IF these things are so, as they are the most important Truths of the Gospel,
and whose Denial overthrows the Foundation of Faith, and is ruinous to
Christian Religion: Certainly it is our Duty to live in the constant Exercise
of Faith with respect unto this Glory of Christ. And we have sufficient
Experience of what kind of Morality the Ignorance of it has produced.

OTHERS there are who may be some way Strangers, but are no way Enemies unto
this Mystery, and to the practical Exercise of Faith therein: Unto such I shall
tender the ensuing Directions.

1. RECKON in your Minds, that this beholding of the Glory of Christ by
beholding the Glory of God, and all his Holy Properties in him, is the greatest
Privilege whereof in this Life we can be made Partakers. The Dawning of Heaven
is in it, and the First Fruits of Glory; for this is Life Eternal to know the
Father, and whom he has sent Christ Jesus, John 17. 3. Unless you value it,
unless you esteem it as such a Privilege, you will not enjoy it; and that
which is not valued according unto its Worth, is despised. It is not enough to
think it a Privilege, an Advantage; but it is to be valued above other things
according unto its Greatness and Excellency. Destruction and Death say we have
heard the Fame of it with our Ears. Job 28. 22. And if we do no more, we shall
die Strangers unto it: We are to cry after this Knowledge, and lift up our
Voice for this Understanding, if we design to attain it.

2. AS it is a great Privilege which requires a due Valuation; so it is a
great Mystery which requires much Spiritual Wisdom to the right understanding
of it, and to direct in its Practice, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. Flesh and Blood will not
reveal it unto us, but we must be taught of God, to apprehend it, John 1. 12,
13. Mat. 16. 16, 17. Mere unsanctified Reason will never enable us unto, nor
guide us in the Discovery of this Duty. Men are not so vain as to hope for
Skill and Understanding in the Mystery of a secular Art or Trade, without the
diligent Use of those Means whereby it may be attained; and shall we suppose
that we may be furnished with spiritual Skill and Wisdom in this sacred
Mystery, without Diligence in the Use of the Means appointed of God for the
attaining of it? The Principal of them is Fervent Prayer. Pray then with Moses,
that God would s^ew you this his Glory; pray with the Apostle, that the Eyes of
your Understandings may be enlightened to behold it; Pray that the God of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation in the Knowledge of him. Fill your Minds with spiritual Thoughts
and Contrivances about them. Slothful and lazy Souls never obtain one View of
this Glory; the Lion in the way deters them from attempting it. Being carnal,
they abhor all Diligence in the Use of spiritual Means, such as Prayer and
Meditation on things unto them uneasy, unpleasing and difficult. Unto others
the Way partakes of the Nature of the End; the Means of obtaining a View of the
Glory of Christ are of the same Kind, of the same Pleasantness, with that View
it self in their Proportion.

3. LEARN the Use hereof from the Actings of contrary vicious Habits. When the
Minds of Men are vehemently fixed on the pursuit of their Lusts, they will be
continually ruminating on the Objects of them, and have a thousand Contrivances
about them, until their Eyes become full of an Adulteress and they cannot cease
from sinning, as the Apostle speaks. The Objects of their Lusts have framed and
raised an Image of themselves in their Minds, and transformed them into their
own Likeness, is this the way of them who go down to the Chambers of Death? Do
they thus frame their Souls, and make them meet for Destruction, until their
Words, Gestures, Actions, proclaim the Frame of their Minds unto all that look
upon them? And shall we be slothful and negligent in the Contemplation of that
Glory which transforms our Minds into its own Likeness, so as that the Eyes of
our Understandings shall be continually filled with it, until we see him and
behold him continually, so as never to cease from the ho^y Acts of Delight in
him, and Love unto him?

4. WOULD we then behold the Glory of God, as he manifests it in and by the
holy Properties of his Nature, with their blessed Operations and Effects,
without which we have nothing of the Power of Religion in us, whatever we
pretend; this alone is the Way of it. Go to the whole Creation, and all things
contained in it; they can say no more, but we have heard the Fam^ and Report of
these things, and what we have heard we declare; but it is but a little Portion
of them that we are acquainted withal. The Heavens indeed declare the Glory of
God, and the Firmament shows his handy Work. The invisible things of God are
understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead. But
comparatively, it is but little that we can hence learn of these things, as
unto what we may behold of them in Christ Jesus. How blind herein was the best
Philosopher in comparison of the meanest of the Apostles, yea, of him who is
least in the Kingdom of Heaven?

BUT herein it is required, that we rest not in the Notion of this Truth, and a
bare Assent unto the Doctrine of it. The affecting Power of it upon our Hearts,
is that which we should aim at. Wherein does the Blessedness of the Saints
above consist? Is it not herein, that they behold and see the Glory of God in
Christ? And what is the Effect of it upon those blessed Souls? Does it not
change them into the same Image, or make them like unto Christ? Does it not
fill and satiate them with Joy, Rest Delight, Complacency and ineffable
Satisfaction? Do we expect, do we desire the same State of Blessedness? It is
our present View of the Glory of Christ which is our Initiation thereinto, if
we are exercised in it, until we have an Experience of its Transforming Power
in our Souls.

THESE things are, it may be, of little use unto some. Such as are Babes in
spiritual Knowledge and Understanding, either because they are Carnal, 1 Cor.
3. 1, 2. or slothful in hearing, Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14. are not capable of these
Divine Mysteries. And therefore the Apostle did in an especial manner declare
this Wisdom of God in a Mystery unto them that were perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7.
That is, who were more grown in spiritual Knowledge, and had their Senses
exercised to discern Good and Evil. It is unto them who are exercised in the
Contemplation of invisible things, who delight to walk in the more retired
Paths of Faith and Love, to whom they are precious.

SOME few Inferences from the Whole of what has been declared, shall put a
Close to this part of our Discourse.

1. THE Holy Properties of the Divine Nature are not only represented unto our
Faith in Christ as unto their own essential Glory, but as they are in the
Exercise of their Powers for the Salvation of the Church. In him do we behold
the Wisdom, Goodness, Love, Grace, Mercy and Power of God acting themselves in
the Contrivance, Constitution, and efficacious Accomplishment of the great Work
of our Redemption and Salvation. This gives, as unto us, an unutterable Luster
unto the Native Amiableness of the Divine Excellencies. The Wisdom and Love of
God are in themselves infinitely Glorious, infinitely Amiable; nothing can be
added unto them, there can be no increase of their essential Glory. Howbeit as
they are eternally resident in the Divine Nature, and absolutely the same with
it, we cannot so comprehend them, as to have an endearing satiating View of
their Glory: But as they are exerted in the Work of the Redemption and
Salvation of the Church, as they are expressed, communicating their blessed
Effects unto the Souls of them that do believe, which is done only in Christ;
so the Beams of their Glory shine unto us with unspeakable Refreshment and Joy,
2 Cor. 4. 6. Hence the Apostle on the Consideration of the Actings of the Holy
Properties of God in this blessed Work, falls into that Contemplation: O the
Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! For who has not known the
Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor, or who has first given unto
him, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? For of him, and through him,
and to him are all things; to whom be Glory for ever, Amen, Rom: 11. 33, 34,
35, 36.

2. IN and through Christ we do believe in God, 1 Pet. 1. 24. This is the Life
of our Souls. God himself in the infinite Perfections of his Divine Nature, is
the ultimate Object of our Faith, but he is not here the immediate Object of
it, but the Divine Way and Means of the Manifestation of himself and them unto
us, are so. Through Christ we believe in God. By our Belief in him, we come to
place our Faith ultimately in God himself; and this we can no otherwise do, but
by beholding the Glory of God in him, as has been declared.

3. THIS is the only way whereby we may attain the saving, sanctifying
Knowledge of God; Without this, every Beam of Divine Light that shines on us,
or gleans from without (as the Light shines into Darkness when the Darkness
comprehends it not, Joh. 1. 5.) Every Spark that arises from the Remainders
of the Light of Nature within, do rather amaze the Minds of Men, than lead them
into the saving Knowledge of God. So a Glance of Light in a dark Night giving a
transient View of various Objects, and passing away, does rather amaze, than
direct a Traveller, and leave him more exposed unto wandering than before. Such
were all those Notions of the Divine Being and its Excellencies, which those
who boasted themselves to be wise among the Heathen embraced and improved. They
did but fluctuate in their Minds, they did not transform them into the Image
and Likeness of God, as the saving Knowledge of him does, Col. 3. 10.

SO the Apostle expresses this Truth; Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe?
Where is the Disputer of this World? Has not God made foolish the Wisdom of
this World? For after that in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not
God, it pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe.
For the Jews require a sign, and the Gentiles seek after Wisdom; but we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a Stumbling Block, and unto the Greeks
Foolishness; but unto them that are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the
Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor, 1. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

AFTER it was evident unto all, that the World, the Wise, the Studious, the
Contemplative Part of it, in the Wisdom of God, disposing them into that
Condition, wherein they were left unto themselves, in their own Wisdom, their
Natural Light and Reason did not, could not come to the saving Knowledge of
God, but were pus^ed up into a Contempt of the only way of the Revelation of
himself, as Weakness and Folly; it pleased God then to manifest all their
Wisdom to be Folly; and to establish the only Means of the Knowledge of himself
in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. III.
The Glory of Christ in the Mysterious Constitution of his Person.
THE Second Thing wherein we may behold the Glory of Christ given him of his
Father, is in the Mysterious Constitution of his Person, as he is God and Man
in one and the same Person. There are in him, in his one single, individual
Person, two distinct Natures; The one Eternal, Infinite, Immense, Almighty, the
Form and Essence of God; The other having a beginning in Time, Finite, Limited,
Confined unto a certain Place, which is our Nature, which he took on him when
he was made Flesh, and dwelt among us. The Declaration of the Nature of this
Glory, is a Part of my Discourse of the Person of Christ, whereunto I refer the
Reader: My present Design is of another Nature.

THIS is that Glory whose Beams are so illustrious, as that the blind World
cannot bear the Light and Beauty of them. Multitudes begin openly to deny this
Incarnation of the Son of God, this Personal Union of God and Man in their
distinct Natures. They deny that there is either Glory or Truth in it; and it
will ere long appear, it begins already to evidence it self what greater
Multitudes there are, who yet do not, who yet dare not openly reject the
Doctrine of it, who in Truth believe it not, nor see any Glory in it. Howbeit
this Glory, is the Glory of our Religion, the Glory of the Church, the sole
Rock whereon it is built, the only Spring of present Grace, and future Glory.

THIS is that Glory which the Angels themselves desire to behold, the Mystery
whereof they bow down to look into, 1 Pet. 1. 12. So was their Desire
represented by the Cherubims in the most holy Place of the Tabernacle; for they
were a Shadow of the Ministry of Angels in the Church. The Ark and Mercy Seat
were a Type of Christ in the Discharge of his Office; and these Cherubims were
made standing over them, as being in Heaven above; but earnestly looking down
upon them in a Posture of Reverence and Adoration. So they did of Old, and in
their present Contemplation of it consists no small part of their Eternal
Blessedness.

HEREON depends the Ruin of Satan and his Kingdom. His Sin, so far as we can
conceive, consisted of two Parts (1.) His Pride against the Person of the Son
of God, by whom he was created. For by him were all things created that are (or
were when first created) in Heaven, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers, Col. 1. 16. Against him he lifted up himself, which
was the Beginning of his Transgression. (2.) Envy against Mankind made in the
Image of God, of the Son of God the Firstborn. This completed his Sin;
nothing was now left whereon to act his Pride and Malice. Unto his Eternal
Confusion and Ruin God in infinite Wisdom unites both the Natures he had
sinned against, in the one Person of the Son, who was the first Object of his
Pride and Malice. Hereby his Destruction is attended with Ever^^sting Shame in
the Discovery of his Folly, wherein he would have contended with infinite
Wisdom, as well as Misery, by the Powers of the two Natures united in one
Person.

HERE lies the Foundation of the Church. The Foundation of the whole Old
Creation was laid in an Act of absolute Sovereign Power. Hereby God hanged the
Earth upon nothing. But the Foundation of the Church is on this Mysterious
immovable Rock; Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God; on the most
intimate Conjunction of the two Natures, the Divine and Humane, in themselves
infinitely distant, in the same Person.

WE may name one place wherein it is gloriously represented unto us, Isa. 9. 6.
For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall
be on his Shoulders; and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Here must the whole
Church fall down and worship the Author of this wonderful Contrivance, and
captivating their Understandings unto the Obedience of Faith, humbly adore what
they cannot comprehend.

THIS was obscurly represented unto the Church of old, Exo. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a Flame of Fire out of the midst
of a Bush, and he looked, and behold the Bush burned with Fire, and the Bush
was not consumed. And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great
Sight, why the Bush is not burnt. And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to
see, God called unto him out of the midst of the Bush, and said, Moses, Moses;
and he said, here am I. And he said, draw not nigh hither, ^ut of thy Shoes
from off thy Feet, for the Place whereon thou stand is holy Ground. Moreover
he said, I am the God of ^hy Fathers, the God of Abraham, etc.

THIS Fire was a Type or Declaration of the Presence of God in the Person of
the Son. For with respect unto the Father he is called an Angel, the Angel of
the Covenant; but absolutely in himself, he was Jehovah, the God of Abraham,
etc. And of his Presence the Fire was a proper Representation. For in his
Nature, he is as a Consuming Fire; and his present Work was the Delivery of ^he
Church out of a Fiery Trial. This F^^e placed it self in a Bush, where it
burned, but the Bush was not consumed: And although the Continuance of the Fire
in the Bush, was but for a short season, a present Appearance; yet thence was
God said to dwell in the Bush; The good will of him that dwelt in the Bush;
Deuteronomy. 33. 16. And this is so spoken, because the being of the Fire in the Bush
for a season, was a Type of him in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt
bodily, and that for ever, Col. 2. 9. Of him who was made flesh and dwelt among
us, Joh. 1. 14. The Eternal Fire of the Divine Nature dwells in the Bush of our
frail Nature, yet is not consumed thereby. God thus dwells in this Bush, with
all his Good will toward Sinners.

MOSES looked on this sight as a mavelous and wondrous thing. And if it were
so in the Type, what is it in the Truth, Substance and Reality of it?

AND by Direction given unto him, to put off his shoes, we are taught to cast
away all fleshly Imaginations and carnal Affections, that by pure Acts of
Faith, we may behold this Glory, the Glory of the only begotten of the Father.

I DESIGN not here to insist on the Explication, or Confirmation of this
glorious Truth concerning the constitution of the Person of Christ in and by
his Incarnation. What I can comprehend, what I do believe concerning it, I have
fully declared in a large peculiar Treatise. Here I take the Truth it self as
known, or as it may be thence learned. My present Business is only to stir up
the Minds of Believers unto a due Contemplation of the Glory of Christ in the
sacred Mysterious Constitution of his Person, as God and Man in one. So much as
we abide herein, so much do we live by the Faith of the Son of God; and God can
by a Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation open the Eyes of our Understandings, that
we may behold this Glory unto our ineffable Consolation and Joy. And unto the
diligent Discharge of our Duty herein, I shall offer the ensuing Directions.

1. LET us get it fixed on our Souls, and in our Minds, that this Glory of
Christ in the Divine Constitution of his Person, is the best, the most noble,
useful, beneficial Object, that we can be conversant about in our Thoughts, or
or cleave unto in our Affections.

What are all other things in comparison of the Knowledge of Christ? In the
Judgment of the great Apostle, they are but Loss and Dung, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10.
So they were to him, and if they are not so to us, we are carnal.

WHAT is the World, and what are the things thereof which most men spend their
Thoughts about, and fix their Affections on? The Psalmist gives his Judgment
about them, in comparison of a View of this Glory of Christ, Psalm. 4. 6. Many
say, who will show us any good? Who will give and help us to attain so much in
and of this World, as will give Rest and Satisfaction unto our Minds? That is
the good enquired after. But, says he, Lord lift up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us. The Light of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus,
is that satisfactory Good alone, which I desire and seek after.

THE Scripture reproacheth the Vanity and Folly of the Minds of Men, in that
they spend their Money for that which is not Bread, and their Labor for that
which profits not. They engage the Vigor of their Spirits about perishing
things, when they have durable Substance and Riches proposed unto them.

HOW do Men for the most part exercise their Minds? What are they conversant
about in their Thoughts?

SOME by them make provision for the flesh, to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof,
as Romans 13. 14. They search about continually in their Thoughts for Objects
suited unto their Lusts and carnal Affections, coining, framing and stamping of
them in their Imaginations. They fix their Eyes with delight on Toads and
Serpents, with all noisome filthy Objects; refusing in the mean time, to behold
the Beauty and Glory of the Light of the Sun. So is it with all that spend
their Thoughts about the Objects of their sinful Pleasures, refusing to look up
after one view of this Glory of Christ.

SOME keep their Thoughts in continual Exercise about the Things of this World,
as unto the Advantages and Emoluments which they expect from them. Hereby are
they transformed into the Image of the World, becoming earthly, carnal and
vain. Is it because there is no God in Israel that these Applications are made
unto the Idol of Ekron? That there is no Glory, no desirableness in Christ for
Men to enquire after, and fix their Minds upon? Oh the blindness, the darkness,
the folly of poor sinners? Whom do they despise, and for what?

SOME of more refined parts and notional Minds, do arise unto a sedulous
Meditation on the Works of Creation and Providence. Hence many excellent
Discourses on that Subject, adorned with Eloquence, are published among us. And
a Work this is worthy of our Nature, and suited unto our rational Capacities;
yea, the first end of our natural Endowment with them. But in all these things
there is no Glory in comparison of what is proposed unto us in the mysterious
Constitution of the Person of Christ. The Sun has no Glory, the Moon and Stars
no Beauty, the Order and Influence of the Heavenly Bodies, have no Excellency
in comparison of it.

This is that which the Psalmist designs to declare, Psalm. 8. O Lord our Lord,
how excellent is thy Name in all the earth! Who have set thy Glory above the
heavens. When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the
Stars which thou have ordained; what is Man that thou art mindful of him, and
the Son of man that thou visitest him? For thou have made him a little lower
than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor; thou have made him
to have Dominion over the work of thy hands, thou have put all things under his
feet.

HE is engaged in a Contemplation of the Glory of God in his Works; and he
concludes that the Fabric of Heaven, with the Moon and Stars therein (for it
was his Meditation by Night, when he beheld them) was exceeding glorious, and
greatly to be admired. This casts his Thoughts on the poor, weak, infirm Nature
of Man, which seems as nothing in comparison of those Glories above: But
immediately hereon falls into an Admiration of the Wisdom, Goodness, and Love
of God, exalting that Nature incomparably above all the Works of Creation in
the Person of Jesus Christ, as the Apostle expounds this place, Heb. 2, 5, 6.

THIS therefore is the highest, the best, the most useful Object of our
Thoughts and Affections. He who has had a real View of this Glory, though he
know himself to be a poor, sinful, dying Worm of the Earth, yet would he not be
an Angel in Heaven, if thereby he should loose the sight of it; for this is the
Center wherein all the Lines of the Manifestation of the Divine Glory do meet
and rest.

LOOK unto the things of this World, Wives, Children, Possessions, Estates,
Power, Friends, and Honor; how amiable are they! How desirable unto the
Thoughts of the most of Men! But he who has obtained a View of the Glory of
Christ, will in the midst of them all say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
There is none on Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73. 25. For who in the
Heavens can be compared unto the Lord? Who among the Sons of the mighty, can be
compared unto the Lord? Psalm. 89. 6.

HE himself out of his infinite Love and ineffable Condescension, upon the
Sight and View of his Church, and his own Graces in her, wherewith she is
adorned, does say; Thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have
ravished my Heart with one of thine Eyes, with one Chain of thy Neck, Cant. 4.
8. How much more ought a believing Soul, upon a View of the Glory of Christ, in
whom it pleased the Father, that all Fullness should dwell, to say, Thou have
ravished my Heart, taken it away from me, O thou whom my Soul loves; One
Glance of thy glorious Beauty upon me, has quite overcome me, has left no
heart in me, unto things here below? If it be not thus with us frequently, if
we value not this Object of our Minds and Affections, if we are not diligent in
looking up unto him, to behold his Glory, it is because we are carnal, and not
in any good measure partakers of the promise, that our Eyes shall see the King
in his Beauty.

2. OUR second Direction unto the same End is; That we diligently study the
Scripture, and the Revelations that are made of this Glory of Christ therein.
To behold it, is not a Work of Fancy or Imagination. It is not conversing with
an Image framed by the Art of Men without, or that of our own Fancy within; but
of Faith exercised on Divine Revelations. This Direction he gives us himself.
Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for they are they that testify of me. The
way whereby this is done, is fully set before us in the Example of the holy
Prophets under the old Testament, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12, 13.

THIS Principle is always to be retained in our Minds in reading of the
Scripture, namely, that the Revelation and Doctrine of the Person of Christ and
his Office, is the Foundation whereon all other Instructions of the Prophets
and Apostles for the edification of the Church are built, and wherein to they
are resolved, as is declared, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. So our Lord Jesus Christ
himself at large makes it manifest, Luke 24. 26, 27, 45, 46. Lay aside the
Consideration hereof, and the Scriptures are no such thing as they pretend
unto; namely, a Revelation of the Glory of God in the Salvation of the Church;
nor are those of the Old Testament so at this Day unto the Jews, who own not
this Principle, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16. There are therefore such Revelations
of the Person and Glory of Christ treasured up in the Scripture, from the
beginning unto the end of it, as may exercise the Faith and Contemplation of
Believers in this World; and shall never, during this Life, be fully discovered
or understood; and in Divine Meditations of these Revelations, does much of the
Life of Faith consist.

THERE are three ways whereby the Glory of Christ is represented unto us in the
Scripture. First, by direct Descriptions of his glorious Person and
Incarnation. See among other places, Genesis 3. 15. Psalm. 2. 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 45. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. Psalm. 68. 17, 18. Psalm. 110. Isa. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 9. 6. Zech.
2. 8. Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3. Chap. 2. 14, 15, 16.
Rev. 1. 17, 18. Secondly, by Prophecies, Promises and express Instructions
concerning him, all leading unto the Contemplation of his Glory, which are
innumerable. Thirdly, By the sacred Institutions of Divine Worship under the
Old Testament: For the end of them all was to represent unto the Church the
Glory of Christ in the Discharge of his Office, as we shall see afterward.

WE may take notice of an Instance in one kind under the Old Testament, and of
one and another under the New.

HIS Personal Appearances under the Old Testament, carried in them a
Demonstration of his Glory: Such was that in the Vision which Isaiah had, when
he saw his Glory, and spoke of him, Chap. 6. 1, 2. I saw the Lord sitting upon
a Throne, high and lifted up, and his Train filled the Temple. About it stood
the Seraphims, etc. It was a Representation of the Glory of the Divine Presence
of Christ filling his Humane Nature, the Temple of his Body, with a Train of
all glorious Graces. And if this Typical Representation of it was so glorious,
as that the Seraphims were not able steadfastly to behold it, but covered their
Faces upon its Appearance, v. 2. how exceeding glorious is it in it self, as it
is openly revealed in the Gospel!

OF the same Nature are the immediate Testimonies given unto him from Heaven in
the New Testament: So the Apostle tells us, he received from God the Father,
honor, and glory, when there came such a Voice unto him from the excellent
Glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, 2 Pet. 1. 17. The
Apostle intends the Time of his Transfiguration in the Mount, for so he adds,
Ver. 18. And this Voice which came from Heaven, we heard who were with him in
the holy Mount. Howbeit, at sundry other times he had the same Testimony, or to
the same purpose, from God, even the Father in Heaven. Herein God gave him
Honor and Glory, which all those that believe in him should behold and admire;
not only those who heard this Testimony with their bodily Ears, but all unto
whom it is testified in the Scripture, are obliged to look after, and
contemplate on the Glory of Christ, as thus revealed and proposed. From the
Throne of his Excellency by audible Voices, by visible Signs, by the opening of
the Heavens above, by the descent of the holy Spirit upon him, God testified
unto him as his eternal Son, and gave him therein Honor and Glory. The Thoughts
of this Divine Testimony, and the Glory of Christ therein, has often filled
the Hearts of some with Joy and Delight.

THIS therefore in reading and studying the holy Scripture, we ought with all
diligence to search and attend unto, as did the Prophets of old, 1 Pet. 11. 12.
if we intend by them to be made wise unto Salvation.

WE should herein be as the Merchant man that seeks for Pearls; he seeks for
all sorts of them, but when he has found one of Great Price, he parts with all
to make it his own, Mat. 13. 45, 46. The Scripture is the Field, the Place, the
Mine where we search and dig for Pearls; see Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Every
sacred Truth that is made effectual unto the good of our Souls, is a Pearl
whereby we are enriched; but when we meet with, when we fall upon this Pearl of
price, the Glory of Christ; this is that which the Soul of a Believer cleaves
unto with joy.

THEN do we find Food for our Souls in the Word of Truth, then do we taste how
gracious the Lord is therein, then is the Scripture full of Refreshment unto
us, as a Spring of Living Water, when we are taken into blessed Views of the
Glory of Christ therein. And we are in the best Frame of Duty, when the
principal Motive in our Minds to contend earnestly for retaining the possession
of the Scripture, against all that would deprive us of it, or discourage us
from a daily diligent search into it, is this, that they would take from us the
only Glass wherein we may behold the Glory of Christ. This is the Glory of the
Scripture, that it is the great, yea, the only outward Means of representing
unto us the Glory of Christ; and he is the Sun in the Firmament of it, which
only has Light in it self, and communicates it unto all other things besides.

3. ANOTHER Direction unto this same End, is, That having attained the Light of
the Knowledge of the Glory of Christ from the Scripture, or by the Dispensation
of the Truth in the preaching of the Gospel, we would esteem it our Duty
frequently to meditate thereon.

WANT hereof is that fundamental Mistake which keeps many among us so low in
their Grace, so regardless of their Privileges. They hear of these things,
they assent unto their Truth, at least they do not gain say them: but they
never solemnly meditate upon them. This they esteem a Work that is above them,
or are ignorant totally of it, or esteem themselves not much concerned in it,
or dislike it as Fanatacism. For it is that which no Considerations can engage
a carnal Mind to delight in. The Mind must be spiritual and holy, freed from
earthly Affections and Encumbrances, raised above things here below, that can
in a due manner meditate on the Glory of Christ. Therefore are the most
Strangers unto this Duty, because they will not be at the Trouble and Charge of
that Mortification of earthly Affections, that Extirpation of sensual
Inclinations, that Retirement from the Occasions of Life, which are required
there unto. See the Treatise of Spiritual-mindedness.

IT is to be feared that there are some who profess Religion with an Appearance
of Strictness, who never separate themselves from all other Occasions to
meditate on Christ and his Glory. And yet with a strange Inconsistency of
Apprehensions, they will profess that they desire nothing more, than to behold
his Glory in Heaven for ever. But it is evident even in the Light of Reason,
that these things are irreconcilable. It is impossible that he who never
meditates with delight on the Glory of Christ here in this World, who labors
not to behold it by Faith as it is revealed in the Scripture, should ever have
any real gracious Desire to behold it in Heaven. They may love and desire the
Fruition of their own Imaginations, they cannot do so of the Glory of Christ
whereof they are ignorant, and wherewith they are unacquainted. It is therefore
to be lamented that Men can find time for, and have inclinations to think and
meditate on other things, it may be earthly and vain; but have neither Heart
nor Inclinations, nor Leisure to meditate on this glorious Object. What is the
Faith and Love which such Men profess? how will they find themselves deceived
in the Issue?

4. LET your occasional Thoughts of Christ be many, and multiplied every Day,
he is not far from us; we may make a speedy Address unto him at any time: so
the Apostle informs us, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. Say not in thine heart who shall
ascend into Heaven (that is to bring Christ down from above) or who shall
descend into the deep; that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead; for the
word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart. The things that Christ
did, were done at a Distance from us, and they are long since past. But says
the Apostle, the Word of the Gospel wherein these things are revealed, and
whereby an Application is made of them unto our Souls, i^ nigh unto us, even in
our hearts; that is, if we are true Believers, and have mixed the Word with
Faith: and so it exhibiteth Christ and all the Benefits of his Mediation unto
us. If therefore this Word is in our Hearts, Christ is nigh unto us. If we turn
at any time into our selves to converse with the Word that abides in us, there
we shall find him ready to receive us into Communion with himself, that is, in
the Light of the Knowledge of Christ which we have by the Word, we may have
sudden occasional Thoughts of him continually; and where our Minds and
Affections are so filled with other things, that we are not ready for converse
with him who is thus nigh unto us by the Word, we are spiritually indisposed.

SO to manifest how nigh he is unto us, it is said that he stands at the door
and knocks, Rev. 3. 20. in the continual tender that he makes of himself and
his Grace unto our Souls. For he is always accompanied with the glorious Train
of his Graces, and if they are not received, he himself is not so. It is to no
purpose to boast of Christ, if we have not an Evidence of his Graces in our
Hearts and Lives. But unto whom he is the Hope of Future Glory, unto them he is
the Life of present grace.

SOMETIMES it may be, that he is withdrawn from us, so as that we cannot hear
his Voice, nor behold his Countenance, nor obtain any sense of his Love, though
we seek him with diligence. In this state all our thoughts and Meditations
concerning him will be barren and fruitless, bringing in no spiritual
Refreshment into our Souls. And if we learn to be content with such lifeless,
in affecting thoughts of him, as bring in no experience of his Love, nor give
us a real View of the Glory of his Person, we shall wither away as unto all the
power of Religion.

WHAT is our Duty in this Case, is so fully expressed by the Spouse in the
Canticles, as represents it plainly unto the Minds of Believers, who have any
Experience of these things, Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. By night on my Bed I sought
him whom my Soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not. I will rise now,
and go about the City in the Streets, and in the broad ways, I will seek him
whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not. The Watchmen that go
about the City found me, to whom I said, saw ye him whom my soul loves? It was
but a little I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loves: I held
him, and would not let him go. The like account she gives of her self, and of
her Behavior on the like Occasion, Chap. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

THIS is the substance of what by this Example we are instructed unto. The Lord
Christ is pleased sometimes to withdraw himself from the spiritual Experience
of Believers; as unto any refreshing sense of his Love, or the fresh
communications of consolatory Graces. Those who never had Experience of any
such thing, who never had any refreshing communion with him, cannot be sensible
of his Absence, they never were so of his Presence. But those whom he has
visited, to whom he has given of his Loves, with whom he has made his Abode,
whom he has refreshed, relieved and comforted, in whom he has lived in the
Power of his Grace, they know what it is to be forsaken by him, though but for
a moment. And their Trouble is increased, when they seek him with diligence in
the wonted ways of obtaining his presence, and cannot find him. Our Duty in
this case is, to presevere in our Enquiries after him in Prayer, Meditation,
Mourning, Reading, and Hearing of the Word, in all Ordinances of Divine
Worship, private and public, in diligent Obedience, until we find him, or he
return unto us, as in former Days.

IT were well if all Churches and Possessors now would manifest the same
Diligence herein, as did the Church of old in this Example. Many of them, if
they are not hardened by the Deceitfulness of Sin, cannot but be sensible that
the Lord Christ is variously withdrawn from them, if ever they had experience
of the Power of his Presence: Yet are the generality of them far from the frame
of heart here described in the Spouse; for they are slothful, careless,
negligent, and stir not up themselves to enquire after him, or his return unto
their Souls. So was it with Laodicea of old, so was it with Sardis, and so it
is to be feared that it is with many at present. But to return.

GENERALLY Christ is nigh unto Believers, and of a ready Access; and the
principal Actings of the Life of Faith, consists in the frequency of our
Thoughts concerning him; for hereby Christ lives in us, as he is said to do,
Gal. 2. 20. This we cannot do, unless we have frequent thoughts of him, and
converse with him. It is often said among Men, that one lives in another; this
cannot be but where the Affections of one are so engaged unto another, that
night and day he thinks of him, and is thereby as it were present with him. So
ought it to be between Christ and Believers. He dwells in them by Faith; but
the Actings of this Life in them (as wherever Life is, it will be in act and
exercise) are proportionable unto their Thoughts of him, and Delight in him.

IF therefore we would behold the Glory of Christ, the present direction is,
That on all occasions, and frequently when there are no occasions for it by the
performance of other Duties, we would abound in thoughts of Him and his Glory.
I intend not at present fixed and stated Meditations, which were spoken unto
before; but such Thoughts as are more transient, according as our opportunities
are. And a great Rebuke it ought to be unto us, when Christ has at any time in
a day been long out of our Minds. The Spouse affirms, That ere she was aware,
her soul made her as the Chariots of Amminadab, Cant. 7. 12. It so fell out,
that when she had no thoughts, no design or purpose for attendance or communion
with Christ, that she was surprised into a readiness and willingness unto it.
So will it be with them that love him in sincerity. Their own Souls, without
previous designs or outward occasions, will frequently engage them in holy
thoughts of him, which is the most eminent character of a truly spiritual
Christian.

4. THE next Direction is, That all our Thoughts concerning Christ and his
Glory, should be accompanied with Admiration, Adoration, and Thanksgiving. For
this is such an Object of our Thoughts and Affections, as in this Life we can
never fully comprehend; an Ocean whose Depths we cannot look into. If we are
spiritually renewed, all the Faculties of our Souls are enabled by Grace to
exert their respective powers toward this glorious Object. This must be done
in various Duties, by the Exercise of various Graces, as they are to be acted
by the distinct powers of the Faculties of our Minds. This is that which is
intended, where we are commanded to love the Lord with all our souls, with all
our minds, with all our strength. All the distinct powers of our Souls, are to
be acted by distinct Graces and Duties, in cleaving unto God by Love. In
Heaven, when we are come to our Center, that State of Rest and Blessedness
which our Nature is ultimately capable of, nothing but one infinite invariable
Object of our Minds and Affections received by Vision, can render that State
uninterrupted and unchangeable. But whilst we are here, we know, or see but in
part, and we must also act our Faith and Love, on parts of that Glory, which is
not at once entirely proposed unto us, and which as yet we cannot comprehend.
Wherefore we must act various Graces in great Variety about it; some at one
time, some at another, according unto the powers of all our renewed Faculties.
Of this fort are those mentioned of Adoration, Admiration, and Thanksgiving;
which are those Acts of our Minds wherein all others do issue, when the Object
is incomprehensible. For unto them we are enabled by Grace.

ONE end of his illustrious coming unto the Judgment of the last Day is, that
he may be admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1. 11. Even Believers
themselves shall be filled with an overwhelming Admiration upon his glorious
Appearance. Or if the meaning be, not that he shall be admired by them, but
admired in them, because of the mighty Works of his Grace and Power in their
Redemption, Sanctification, Resurrection, and Glory, it is to the same purpose,
he comes to be admired. And according to the prospect which we have of that
Glory, ought our Admiration to be.

AND this Admiration will issue in Adoration and Thanksgiving; whereof we have
an eminent Instance and Example in the whole Church of the Redeemed, Rev. 5. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14. They sang a new Song, saying, Worthy art thou to receive
the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and have bought
us unto God by thy Blood, out of every Tribe, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation, and have made us Kings and Priests unto God, and we shall reign upon
the Earth. And I saw and heard the Voice of many Angels round about the Throne,
and of the living Creatures, and of the Elders, and the Number of them was ten
thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, saying with a loud
Voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and
Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing; and every Creature
that is in Heaven, and in the Earth, and under the Earth, and that are in the
Sea, and all things in them heard I saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Power,
and Glory, be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever.

THE Design of this Discourse is no more, but that when by Faith we have
attained a View of the Glory of Christ, in our Contemplations on his Person, we
should not pass it over as a Notion of Truth which we assent unto, namely, that
he is thus glorious in himself; but endeavor to affect our Hearts with it, as
that wherein our own principal Interest does lie; wherein it will be effectual
unto the Transformation of our Souls into his Image.

BUT some it may be will say, at least I fear some may truly say, That these
things do not belong unto them, they do not find that ever they had any Benefit
by them: They hope to be saved as well as others by the Mediation of Christ;
but as unto this beholding of his Glory by constant Meditation and Actings of
Faith therein, they know nothing of it, nor are concerned in it. The Doctrine
which they are taught out of the Scripture concerning the Person of Christ,
they give their Assent unto; but his Glory they hope they shall see in another
World, here they never yet enquired after it.

SO it will be. It is well if these things be not only neglected, because the
Minds of Men are carnal, and cannot discern spiritual things; but also
despised, because they have an Enmity unto them. It is not for all to walk in
these retired Paths. Not for them who are negligent and slothful, whose Minds
are earthly and carnal. Nor can they herein sit at the Feet of Christ with
Mary, when she chose the better part, who like Martha, are cumbred about many
things here in this World. Those whose principal Design is to add unto their
present Enjoyments (in the midst of the prosecution whereof, they are commonly
taken from them, so as that their Thoughts do perish, because not accomplished)
will never understand these things. Much less will they do so, whose Work it is
to make provision for the Flesh to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof.

THEY must make it their Design to be heavenly minded, who will find a Relish
in these things. Those who are Strangers unto holy Meditation in general, will
be Strangers unto this Mystery in a peculiar manner.

SOME Men can think of the World, of their Relations, and the manifold
Occasions of Life; but as unto the things that are above and within the Vail,
they are not concerned in them.

WITH some it is otherwise. They profess their Desire to behold the Glory of
Christ by Faith; but they find it, as they complain, too high and difficult for
them. They are at a Loss in their Minds, and even overwhelmed, when they begin
to view his Glory. They are like the Disciples, who saw him in his
Transfiguration; they were filled with Amazement, and knew not what to say, or
said they knew not what. And I do acknowledge, that the Weakness of our Minds
in the comprehension of this Eternal Glory of Christ, and their Instability in
Meditations thereon, whence we cannot steadfastly look on it, or behold it,
gives us an afflicting abasing Consideration of our present State and
Condition. And I shall say no more unto this Case but this alone: When Faith
can no longer hold open the Eyes of our Understandings unto the beholding of
the Son of Righteousness shining in his Beauty, nor exercise orderly Thoughts
about this incomprehensible Object, it will betake it self unto that holy
Admiration which we have spoken unto; and therein it will put it self forth in
pure Acts of Love and Complacency.

CHAP. IV.
The Glory of Christ in his Susception of the Office of a Mediator.
First in his Condescension.
THE Things whereof we have thus far discoursed, relating immediately unto the
Person of Christ in it self, may seem to have somewhat of Difficulty in them,
unto such whose Mind are not duly exercised in the Contemplation of Heavenly
Things. Unto others they are evident in their own Experience, and instructive
unto them that are willing to learn. That which remains will be yet more plain
unto the Understanding and Capacity of the meanest Believer. And this is the
Glory of Christ in his Office of Mediator, and the Discharge thereof.

IN our beholding of the Glory of Christ herein, does the Exercise of Faith in
this Life principally consist; so the Apostle declares it, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. Yea doubtless, and I count all things loss for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. -- To know him, and the Power of his
Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, and to be made conformable
unto his Death. This therefore we must treat of somewhat more at large.

THERE is one God, says the Apostle, and one Mediator between God and Man, the
Man Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy 2. 5. In that great difference between God and Man
occasioned by our Sin and Apostasy from him, which of it self could issue in
nothing but the utter Ruin of the whole Race of Mankind, there was none in
Heaven or Earth in their Original Nature and Operations, who was meet or able
to make up a Righteous Peace between them. Yet must this be done by a Mediator,
or cease for ever.

THIS Mediator could not be God himself absolutely considered; for a Mediator
is not of one, but God is one; Gal. 3. 20. Whatever God might do herein in a
way of Sovereign Grace, yet he could not do it in the way of Mediation, which
yet was necessary unto his own Glory, as we have at large discoursed elsewhere.

AND as for Creatures, there was none in Heaven or Earth that was meet to
undertake this Office. For if one Man sin against another, the Judge shall
judge herein; but if a Man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. There is not any days-man betwixt us to lay his hand upon us both,
Job 9. 33.

IN this State of Things the Lord Christ as the Son of God said, Lo I come to
do thy Will, O God; sacrifice and burnt offerings thou would not, but a body
have thou prepared me, and Lo I come to do thy Will, Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. By
the Assumption of our Nature into Union with himself, in his one Divine Person
he became every way meet for the Discharge of this Office, and undertakes it
accordingly.

THAT which we enquire after at present, is the Glory of Christ herein, and how
we may behold that Glory. And there are three things wherein we may take a
prospect of it.

1. IN his Susception of this Office.

2. In his Discharge of it.

3. In the Event and Consequence thereof or what ensued thereon.

IN the Susception of this Office we may behold the Glory of Christ. (1.) In
his Condescension. (2.) In his Love.

1. WE may behold his Glory in his Infinite Condescension to take this Office
on him, and our Nature to be his own unto that end. It did not befall him by
Lot or Chance; it was not imposed on him against his Will; it belonged not unto
him by any Necessity of Nature or Condition, he stood not in need of it; it was
no addition unto him; but of his own Mind and Accord he graciously condescended
unto the Susception and Discharge of it.

So the Apostle expresses it, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. Let this mind be in you
which was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took on
himself the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men; and being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient (...) death,
even the death of the Cross.

IT was the Mind that was in Jesus Christ, which is proposed unto our
Consideration and Imitation. What he was inclined and disposed unto from
himself and his own mind alor^. And that in general which is ascribed unto him
is (...) (...) or Self emptiness; he emptied himself. This the Ancient Church
called his (...), as we do his Condescension, an Act of which (...) God is
called (...) humbling of himself, Psalm. 113. 6.

WHEREFORE the Susception of our Nature for the Discharge of the Office of
Mediation therein, was an Infinite Condescension in the Son of God, wherein he
is exceedingly Glorious in the Eyes of Believers.

AND I shall do these three Things. (1.) Show in general the Greatness of this
Condescension. (2.) Declare the Especial Nature of it. And (3.) Take what view
we are able of the Glory of Christ therein,

1. SUCH is the transcendent Excellency of the Divine Nature, that it is said
of God, that he dwells on high, and humbles himself to behold the things
that are in Heaven, and in the Earth, Psalm. 113. 5, 6. He condescends from the
Prerogative of his Excellency, to behold, to look upon, to take notice of the
most glorious Things in Heaven above, and the greatest Things in the Earth
below. All his Respect unto the Creatures, the most glorious of them, is an Act
of Infinite Condescension. And it is so on Two Accounts.

1. BECAUSE of the Infinite Distance that is between his Essence, Nature, or
Being, and that of the Creatures. Hence all Nations before him, are as the Drop
of a Bucket, and are counted as the small Dust of the Balance; yea, that they
are as nothing, that they are accounted unto him less than nothing, and vanity.
All Being is essentially in him, and in comparison thereunto, all other things
are as nothing. And there are no Measures, there is no Proportion between
infinite being and nothing; Nothing that should induce a Regard from the one
unto the other. Wherefore the Infinite, Essential Greatness of the Nature of
God, with its Infinite Distance, from the Nature of all Creatures thereby,
causes all his Dealings with them to be in the way of Condescension or
humbling himself. So it is expressed, Isa. 57. 15. Thus says the high and
lofty one who inhabiteth Eternity, I dwell in the high and holy Place, with him
also who is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. He is so the high and
losty one, and so inhabiteth Eternity, or existeth in his own Eternal Being,
that it is an Act of mere Grace in him, to take notice of things below; and
therefore he does it in an especial manner of those whom the World does most
despise.

2. IT arises from his Infinite Self-Sufficiency unto all the Acts and Ends of
his own Eternal Blessedness. What we have a Regard unto, what we respect and
desire, it is that it may add unto our Satisfaction. So it is, so it must be
with every Creature; no Creature is self-ufficient unto its own Blessedness.
The humane Nature of Christ himself in Heaven is not so; it lives in God, and
God in it, in a full dependence on God, and in receiving blessed and glorious
Communications from him. No rational Creature, Angel or Man, can do, think, act
any thing, but it is all to add to their Perfection and Satisfaction, they are
not Self-ufficient. God alone wants nothing, stands in need of nothing, nothing
can be added unto him, seeing he gives unto all Life and Breath, and all
things, Act. 17. 25. The whole Creation in all its Excellency cannot contribute
one Mite unto the Satisfaction or Blessedness of God. He has it all in
Infinite Perfection from himself and his own Nature; our Goodness extends not
unto him; A Man cannot profit God, as he may profit his Neighbor. If thou
sinnest, what do thou against him? and if thy Transgressions are multiplied,
what do thou unto him? (God loses nothing of his own Self-^ufficiency and
Blessedness therein, by all this) and if thou be righteous, what give thou
unto him, or what receives he at thy hand? Job 35. 6, 7, 8. And from hence
also it follows that all Gods concernment in the Creation, is by an Act of
Condescension.

HOW glorious then is the Condescension of the Son of God in his Susception of
the Office of Mediation? For if such be the Perfection of the Divine Nature,
and its distance so absolutely Infinite from the whole Creation, and if such be
his Self sufficiency unto his own Eternal Blessedness, as that nothing can be
taken from him, nothing added unto him, so that every Regard in him unto any of
the Creatures, is an Act of Self-umiliation and Condescension from the
Prerogative of his Being and State; what Heart can conceive, what Tongue can
express the Glory of that Condescension in the Son of God, whereby he took our
Nature upon him, took it to be his own, in order unto a discharge of the Office
of Mediation on our Behalf?

BUT that we may the better behold the Glory of Christ herein, we may briefly
consider the Especial Nature of this Condescension, and wherein it does consist.

BUT whereas not only the Denial, but Misapprehensions hereof have pestered the
Church of God in all Ages, we must in the first place reject them, and then
declare the Truth.

1. THIS Condescension of the Son of God did not consist in a laying aside, or
parting with, or separation from the Divine Nature, so as that he should cease
to be God, by being Man. The Foundation of it lay in this, that he was in the
form of God, and counted it not robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. v. 6.
That is, being really and essentially God in his Divine Nature, he professed
himself therein to be equal with God or the Person of the Father. He was in the
Form of God, that is, he was God, participant of the Divine Nature, for God
has no Form but that of his Essence and Being; and hence he was equal with
God, in Authority, Dignity and Power. Because he was in the Form of God, he
must be equal with God, for there is Order in the Divine Persons, but no
Inequality in the Divine Being. So the Jews understood him, that when he said,
God was his Father, he made himself equal with God. For in his so saying, he
ascribed unto himself equal Power with the Father, as unto all Divine
Operations, My Father, says he, works hitherto, and I work, Joh. 5. 17, 18.
And they by whom his Divine Nature is denied, do cast this Condescension of
Christ quite out of our Religion, as that which has no Reality or Substance in
it. But we shall speak of them afterward.

BEING in this state, it is said that he took on him the form of a servant, and
was found in fashion as a Man, ver. 7. This is his Condescension. It is not
said, that he ceased to be in the Form of God; but continuing so to be, he took
on him the form of a Servant in our Nature: He became what he was not, but he
ceased not to be what he was: so he testifies of himself, Joh. 3. 13. No man
has ascended up into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man
which is in heaven. Although he was then on Earth as the Son of Man; yet he
ceased not to be God thereby; in his Divine Nature he was then also in Heaven.

HE who is God, can no more be not God, than he who is not God can be God: And
our difference with the Socinians herein is, we believe that Christ being God,
was made Man for our Sakes; they say, that being only a Man, he was made a God
for his own sake.

THIS then is the foundation of the Glory of Christ in this Condescension, the
Life and Soul of all heavenly Truth and Mysteries; namely, that the Son of God
becoming in time to be what he was not, the Son of Man; ceased not thereby to
be what he was, even the Eternal Son of God. Wherefore,

2. MUCH less did this Condescension consist in the Conversion of the Divine
Natura into the Humane, which was the Imagination of some of the Arians of old,
and we have yet (to my own knowledge) some that follow them in the same Dotage.
They say that the Word which was in the Beginning, by which all things were
made, being in it self an Effect of the Divine Will and Power, was in the
fullness of time turned into Flesh; that is, the Substance of it was so, as the
Water in the Miracle wrought by our Savior, was turned into Wine; for by an
Act of the Divine Power of Christ it ceased to be Water substantially, and was
Wine only; not Water mixed with Wine: So these Men suppose a Substantial Change
of the one Nature into the other, of the divine Nature into the humane; like
what the Papists imagine in their Trasubstantiation: So they say God was made
Man, his Effence being turned into that of a Man.

BUT this no way belongs unto the Condescension of Christ. We may call it
Ichabod, it has no Glory in it. It destroys both his Natures, and leaves him a
Person in whom we are not concerned. For according unto this Imagination, that
Divine Nature wherein he was in the Form of God, did in its own Form cease to
be, yea, was utterly destroyed, as being substantially changed into the Nature
of Man; as the Water did cease to be, when it was turned into Wine; and that
humane Nature which was made thereof, has no Alliance or Kindred unto us, or
our Nature, seeing it was not made of a Woman, but of the Substance of the Word.

3. THERE was not in this Condescension, the least Change or Alteration in the
Divine Nature. Eutiches and those that followed him of old, conceived that the
two Natures of Christ, the Divine and Humane were mixed and compounded as it
were into one: And this could not be without an Alteration in the divine
Nature, for it would be made to be essentially what it was not; for one Nature
has but one and the same Essence.

BUT as we said before; although the Lord Christ himself in his Person was made to
be what he was not before, in that our Nature hereby was made to be his, yet
his Divine Nature was not so: There is in it neither variableness nor shadow of
turning. It abode the same in him in all its Essential Properties, Actings and
Blessedness, as it was from Eternity. It neither did, acted, nor suffered any
thing, but what is proper unto the Divine Being: The Lord Christ did and
suffered many things in Life and Death, in his own Person, by his Human Nature,
wherein the Divine neither did, nor suffered any thing at all; although in the
doing of them, his Person be denominated from the Nature; so God purchased his
Church with his own Blood, Act. 20. 28.

4. IT may then be said, what did the Lord Christ in this Condescension, with
respect unto his Divine Nature? The Apostle tells us, that he humbled himself,
and made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2. 7, 8. He veiled the Glory of his
Divine Nature in ours, and what he did therein, so as that there was no outward
Appearance or Manifestation of it. The World hereon was so far from looking on
him as the true God, that it believed him not to be a good Man. Hence they
could never bear the least intimation of his Divine Nature, supposing
themselves secured from any such thing, because they looked on him with their
Eyes to be a Man, as he was indeed, no less truly and really than any one of
themselves. Wherefore on that Testimony given of himself, Before Abraham was, I
am, which asserts a Pre-existence from Eternity in another Nature than what
they saw, they were filled with Rage, and took up stones to cast at him, John
8. 58. And they give a Reason of their Madness, Joh. 10. 33. Namely, that he
being a Man, should make himself to be God. This was such a thing, they
thought, as could never enter into the Heart of a wise and sober Man, namely,
that being so, owning himself to be such, he should yet say of himself, that he
was God: This is that which no Reason can comprehend, which nothing in Nature
can parallel or illustrate, that one and the same Person should be both God and
Man: and this is the Principal Plea of the Socinians at this Day, who through
the Mahumetans succeed unto the Jews in an Opposition unto the Divine Nature of
Christ.

BUT all this difficulty is solved by the Glory of Christ in this
Condescension; for although in himself, or his own Divine Person, he was over
all God blessed for over, yet he humbled himself for the Salvation of the
Church unto the Eternal Glory of God, to take our Nature upon him, and to be
made Man: and those who cannot see a Divine Glory in his so doing, do neither
know him, nor love him, nor believe in him, nor do any way belong unto him.

SO is it with the Men of these Abominations. Because they cannot behold the
Glory hereof, they deny the Foundation of our Religion, namely, the Divine
Person of Christ. Seeing he would be made Man, he shall be esteemed by them no
more than a Man. So do they reject that Glory of God, his Infinite Wisdom,
Goodness and Grace, wherein he is more concerned than in the whole Creation.
And they dig up the Root of all Evangelical Truths, which are nothing but
Branches from it.

IT is true, and must be confessed, that herein it is that our Lord Jesus
Christ is a stumbing Stone, and a Rock of Offense unto the World. It we should
confess him only as a Prophet, a Man sent by God, there would not be much
Contest about him, nor Opposition unto him. The Mahumetans do all acknowledge
it, and the Jews would not long deny it; for their Hatred against him was, and
is solely because he professed himself to be God, and as such was believed o^
in the World. And at this day partly through the Insinuation of the Socinians,
and partly from the Efficacy of their own Blindness and Unbelief, Multitudes
are willing to grant him to be a Prophet sent of God, who do not, who will not,
who cannot believe the Mystery of this Condescension in the Susception of our
Nature, nor see the Glory of it. But take this away, and all our Religion is
taken away with it. Farewell Christianity as unto the Mystery, the Glory, the
Truth, the Efficacy of it; let a refined Heathenism be established in its Room.
But this is the Rock on which the Church is built, against which the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail.

4. THIS Condescension of Christ was not by a Phantasm or an Appearance only.
One of the first Heresies that pestered the Church immediately after the Days
of the Apostles, was this, that all that was done or suffered by Christ as a
Man, were not the Acts, Doings or Sufferings of one that was truly and really a
Man, but an outward Representation of things, like the Appearance of Angels in
the Shape of Men, eating and drinking under the Old Testament; and suitably
hereunto some in our Days have spoken; namely, that there was only an
Appearance of Christ in the Man Jesus at Jerusalem, in whom he suffered no more
than in other Believers. But the ancient Christians told those Men the Truth;
namely, that as they had feigned unto themselves an imaginary Christ, so they
should have an imaginary Salvation only.

BUT the true Nature of this Divine Condescension does consist in these three
Things.

1. THAT the Eternal Person of the Son of God, or the Divine Nature in the
Person of the Son of God, did by an ineffable Act of his Divine Power and Love,
assume our Nature into an individual Subsistence, in or with himself; that is,
to be his own, even as the Divine Nature is his. This is the infallible
Foundation of Faith even to them who can comprehend very little of these Divine
Mysteries. They can and do believe that the Son of God did take our Nature to
be his own, so as that whatever was done therein, was done by him, as it is
with every other Man. Every Man has human Nature appropriated unto himself by
an Individual Subsistence; whereby he becomes to be that man which he is, and
not another; or that Nature which is common unto all, becomes in him to be
peculiarly his own, as if there were none Partaker of it but himself. Adam in
his first Creation, when all human Nature was in him alone, was no more that
individual Man which he was, than every Man is now the Man that he is, by his
Individual Subsistence. So the Lord Christ taking that Nature which is common
unto all, into a peculiar Subsistence in his own Person, it becomes his, and
He the man Christ Jesus. This was the Mind that was in him.

2. BY reason of this Assumption of our Nature, with his doing and suffering
therein, whereby he was found in fashion as a Man, the Glory of his Divine
Person was veiled, and he made himself of no reputation. This also belongs unto
his Condescension, as the first general Effect and Fruit of it. But we have
spoken of it before.

3. IT is also to be observed, That in the Assumption of our Nature to be his
own, He did not change it into a thing Divine and Spiritual; but preserved it
entire in all its Essential Properties and Actings. Hence it really did and
suffered, was tried, tempted and forsaken as the same Nature in any other Man
might do and be. That Nature as it was peculiarly his, and therefore he or his
Person therein, was exposed unto all the temporary Evils which the same Nature
is subject unto in any other Person.

THIS is a short general View of this incomprehensible Condescension of the Son
of God, as it is described by the Apostle, Pil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. And this is that
wherein in an especial manner we are to behold the Glory of Christ by Faith
whilst we are in this World.

BUT had we the Tongue of Men and Angles, we were not able in just measure to
express the Glory of this Condescension. For it is the most ineffable Effect of
the Divine Wisdom of the Father and of the Love of the Son, the highest
Evidence of the Care of God toward Mankind. What can be equal unto it? What
can be like it? It is the Glory of Christian Religion, and the animating Soul
of all Evangelical Truth. This carries the Mystery of the Wisdom of God, above
the Reason or Understanding of Men and Angels to be the Object of Faith and
Admiration only. A Mystery it is that becomes the Greatness of God with his
Infinite Distance form the whole Creation; which renders it unbecoming him that
all his Ways and Works should be comprehensible by any of his Creatures, Job
11. 4, 5, 9. Romans 11. 34, 35, 36.

HE who was eternally in the Form of God, that is, was essentially so, God by
Nature, equally participant of the same Divine Nature with God the Father: God
over all blessed for ever; who humbles himself to behold the things that are
in Heaven and Earth: he takes on him the Nature of Man, takes it to be his own;
whereby he was no less truly a Man in time, than he was truly God from
Eternity: And to increase the Wonder of this Mystery, because it was necessary
unto the end the designed, he so humbled himself in this Assumption of our
Nature, as to make himself of no Reputation in this World; yea, unto that
Degree, that he said of himself, that he was a Worm and no Man, in comparison
of them who were of any Esteem.

WE speak of these things in a poor, low, broken manner. We teach them as they
are revealed in the Scripture. We labor by Faith to adhere unto them as
revealed. But when we come into a steady, direct View and Consideration of the
thing it self, our Minds fail, our Hearts tremble, and we can find no rest, but
in an Holy Admiration of what we cannot comprehend. Here we are at a loss, and
know that we shall be so whilst we are in this World: But all the ineffable
Fruits and Benefits of this Truth are communicated unto them that do believe.

IT is with reference hereunto, that that great Promise concerning him is given
unto the Church, Isa. 8. 14. He shall be for a Sanctuary (namely, unto all that
believe, as it is expounded, 1 Pet. 2. 8.) but for a stone of stumbling, and a
rock of offense, even to them that stumble at the Word, being disobedient,
whereunto also they were appointed.

HE is herein a Sanctuary, an assured Refuge unto all that betake themselves
unto him. What is it that any Man in distress, who flies thereunto may look for
in a Sanctuary? A Supply of all his Wants, a Deliverance from all his Fears, a
Defense against all his Dangers, is proposed unto him therein. Such is the Lord
Christ herein unto sin-distressed Souls; he is a Refuge unto us in all
spiritual Distresses and Disconsolations, Heb. 6. 18. See the Exposition of the
Place. Are we or any of us burdened with a Sense of Sin? Are we perplexed with
Temptations? Are we bowed down under the Oppression of any Spiritual Adversary?
Do we on any of these accounts walk in Darkness and have no Light? One View of
the Glory of Christ herein is able to support us and relieve us.

UNTO whom we betake our selves for Relief in any case, we have regard to
nothing but their Will and their Power. If they have both, we are sure of
Relief. And what shall we fear in the Will of Christ as unto this end? What
will he not do for us? He who thus emptied and humbled himself, who so
infinitely condescended from the Prerogative of his Glory in his Being and
Self-sufficiency, in the Susception of our Nature for the Discharge of the
Office of a Mediator on our Behalf; will he not relieve us in all our
Distresses? Will he not do all for us we stand in need of, that we may be
eternally saved? Will he not be a Sanctuary unto us?

NOR have we hereon any Ground to fear his Power: For by this infinite
Condescension to be a suffering Man, he lost nothing of his Power as God
Omnipotent; nothing of his Infinite Wisdom or glorious Grace. He could still
do, all that he could do as God from Eternity. If there be any thing therefore
in a Coalescency of Infinite Power, with Infinite Condescension, to constitute
a Sanctuary for distressed Sinners, it is all in Christ Jesus. And if we see
him not glorious herein, it is because there is no Light of Faith in us.

THIS then is the Rest wherewith we may cause the weary to rest, and this is
the Refreshment. Herein is he an hiding place from the Wind, and a Covert from
the Tempest, as Rivers of Water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great
Rock in a weary Land. Hereon he says, I have satiated the weary soul, and have
refreshed every sorrowful soul. Under this Consideration it is, that in all
Evangelical Promises and Invitations for coming to him, he is proposed unto
distressed Sinners as their only Sanctuary.

HEREIN he is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense unto the unbelieving
and disobedient, who stumble at the Word. They cannot, they will not see the
Glory of this Condescension, they neither desire nor labor so to do; yea, they
hate it and despise it. Christ in it is a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offense unto them. Wherefore they choose rather utterly to deny his Divine
Person, than allow that he did thus abase himself for our Sakes. Rather than
they will own this Glory, they will allow him no Glory. A Man they say he was,
and no more, and this was his Glory. This is that Principle of Darkness and
Unbelief, which works effectually at this day in the Minds of many. They think
it an absurd thing, as the Jews did of old, that he being a man should be God
also; or on the other hand that the Son of God should thus condescend to take
our Nature on him. This they can see no Glory in, no Relief, no Refuge, no
Refreshment unto their souls in any of their Distresses: Therefore do they deny
his Divine Person: Here Faith triumphs against them, it ^inds that to be a
Glorious Sanctuary, which they cannot at all discern.

BUT it is not so much the Declaration or Vindication of this Glory of Christ
which I am at present engaged in as an Exhortation unto the practical
Contemplation of it in a way of believing. And I know that among many this is
too much neglected; yea, of all the evils which I have seen in the Days of my
Pilgrimage now drawing to their close, there is none so grievous as the Public
contempt of the Principal Mysteries of the Gospel among them that are called
Christians. Religion in the Profession of some Men is withered in its vital
Principles, weakened in its Nerves and Sinews, but thought to be put off with
outward Gaiety and Bravery.

BUT my Exhortation is unto diligence in the Contemplation of this Glory of
Christ, and the exercise of our Thoughts about it. Unless we are diligent
herein it is impossible we should be steady in the principal Acts of Faith, or
ready unto the principal duties of Obedience. The Principal Act of Faith
respects the Divine Person of Christ, as all Christians must acknowledge. This
we can never secure (as has been declared) if we see not his Glory in this
Condescension: And whoever reduces his Notions unto experience, will find that
herein his Faith stands or falls. And the Principal Duty of our Obedience, is
self-denial, with readiness for the Cross. Hereunto the Consideration of this
Condescension of Christ is the Principal Evangelical Motive, and that wherein
to our Obedience in it is to be resolved, as the Apostle declares, Phil. 2. 5,
6, 7. And no Man does deny himself in a due manner, who does it not on the
Consideration of the self-denial of the Son of God. But a prevalent Motive this
is thereunto. For what are the things wherein we are to deny our selves, or
forgo what we pretend to have a Right unto? It is in our Goods, our Liberties,
our Relations, our Lives. And what are they, any, or all of them, in
themselves, or unto us, considering our Condition, and the end for which we
were made? Perishing things, which whether we will or no, within a few days
death will give us an everlasting separation from. Things under the Power of a
Fever or an Asthma, etc. As unto our Interest in them. But how incomparable
with respect hereunto is that Condescension of Christ, whereof we have given an
Account? If therefore we find an unwillingness in us, a Tergiversation in our
minds about these things when called unto them in a way of Duty, one view by
Faith of the Glory of Christ in this Condescension, and what he parted from
therein, when he made himself of no Reputation, will be an Effectual cure of
that sinful Distemper.

HEREIN then, I say, we may by Faith behold the Glory of Christ, as we shall do
it by Sight hereafter. If we see no Glory in it, if we discern not that which
is matter of Eternal Admiration, we walk in darkness. It is the most ineffable
Effect of Divine Wisdom and Grace. Where are our Hearts and Minds, if we can
see no Glory in it? I know in the Contemplation of it, it will quickly
overwhelm our Reason, and bring our Understanding into a loss: But unto this
loss do I desire to be brought every day: For when Faith can no more act it
self in Comprehension, when it finds the Object it is fixed on, too great and
glorious to be brought into our Minds and Capacities, it will issue (as we said
before) in holy Admiration, humble Adoration, and joyful Thanksgiving. In and
by its actings in them, does it fill the soul with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory.

CHAP. V.
The Glory of Christ in his Love.
IN the Susception and Discharge of the Mediatory Office by the Son of God, the
Scripture does most eminently represent his Love, as the sole impelling and
leading cause thereof, Gal. 2. 20. 1 John 3. 16. Rev. 1. 5.

HEREIN is he glorious, in a way and manner incomprehensible: For in the Glory
of Divine Love, the chief Brightness of Glory does consist. There is nothing of
Dread or Terror accompanying it, nothing but what is amiable and infinitely
refreshing. Now that we may take a view of the Glory of Christ herein by Faith,
the Nature of it must be enquired into.

1. THE Eternal Disposing Cause of the whole work wherein the Lord Christ was
engaged by the Susception of this Office, for the Redemption and Salvation of
the Church, is the Love of the Father. Hereunto it is constantly ascribed in
the Scripture. And this Love of the Father acted it self in his Eternal
Decrees, before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4. and afterward in the
sending of his Son to render it effectual, Joh. 3. 16. Originally, it is his
Eternal Election of a Portion of mankind to be brought unto the enjoyment of
himself, through the Mystery of the Blood of Christ, and the Sanctification of
the Spirit, 2 These. 2. 13, 16. 1 Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Pet. 1. 2.

THIS Eternal Act of the Will of God the Father, does not contain in it an
actual approbation of, and complacency in the state and condition of those that
are elected; but only designeth that for them on the Account whereof, they
shall be accepted and approved. And it is called his Love on sundry Accounts.

1. BECAUSE it is an act suited unto that glorious Excellency of his Nature,
wherein he is Love; for God is Love, 1 John 4. 8, 9. And the first Egress of
the Divine Properties must therefore be in an act of communicative Love. And
whereas this Election being an Eternal Act of the Will of God, can have no
moving cause but what is in himself, if we could look into all the Treasures of
the Divine Excellencies, we should find none whereunto it could be so properly
ascribed, as unto Love. Wherefore,

2. IT is styled Love, because it was free and undeserved, as unto any thing on
our part. For whatever good is done unto any altogether undeserved, if it be
with a design of their Profit and Advantage, it is in an Act of Love, and can
have no other cause. So is it with us in respect of Eternal Election. There was
nothing in us, nothing foreseen, as that which from our selves would be in us,
that should any way move the Will of God unto this Election: For whatever is
good in the best of men is an effect of it, Ephesians. 1. 4. Whereas therefore it
tends unto our eternal Good, the spring of it must be Love. And,

3. THE Fruits or Effects of it are inconceivable Acts of Love. It is by
multiplied Acts of Love, that it is made effectual, John 3. 16. Jerem. 31. 5.
Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 John 4. 8, 9, 16.

THIS is the Eternal Spring which is derived unto the Church, through the
Mediation of Christ. Wherefore that which put all the Design of this Eternal
Love of the Father into Execution, and wrought out the Accomplishment of it,
was the Love of the Son, which we enquire after; and Light may be given unto it
in the ensuing Observations.

1. THE whole Number or Society of the Elect, were Creatures made in the Image
of God, and thereby in a State of Love with him. All that they were, had, or
hoped for, were effects of Divine Goodness and Love. And the Life of their
Souls was Love unto God. And a blessed State it was, preparatory for the
Eternal Life of Love in Heaven.

2. FROM this State they fell by sin, into a state of Enmity with God; which is
comprehensive of all Miseries, Temporal and Eternal.

3. NOTWITHSTANDING this woeful Catastrophe of our first state, yet our Nature
on many Accounts was recoverable unto the Enjoyment of God, as I have at large
elsewhere declared.

4. IN this Condition, the first Act of Love in Christ toward us, was in Pity
and Compassion. A Creature made in the Image of God, and fallen into Misery,
yet capable of Recovery, is the proper Object of Divine Compassion. That which
is so celebrated in the Scripture, as the Bowels, the Pity, the Compassion of
God, is the acting of Divine Love toward us, on the consideration of our
Distress and Misery. But all Compassion cease toward them whose condition is
irrecoverable. Wherefore the Lord Christ pitied not the Angels that fell,
because their Nature was not to be relieved. Of this Compassion in Christ, see
Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16. Isa. 63. 9.

5. AS then we lay under the Eye of Christ in our Misery, we were the Objects
of his Pity and Compassion: But as he looks on us as recoverahle out of that
state, his Love works in and by Delight. It was an inconceivable Delight unto
him to take a prospect of the deliverance of mankind unto the Glory of God,
which is also an act of Love, see this divinely expressed, Prove. 8. 30, 31; as
that place has been elsewhere explained.

6. IF it be enquired, whence this compassion and delight in him should arise,
what should be the cause of them; that he who was eternally blessed in his own
self-sufficiency should so deeply concern himself in our lost forlorn
Condition? I say it did so, merely from the Infinite Love and Goodness of his
own Nature, without the least procuring inducement from us, or any thing in us,
1 Pet. 3. 16.

7. IN this his Readiness, Willingness and Delight, springing from Love and
Compassion, the council of God concerning the way of our Recovery, is, as it
were proposed unto him. Now this was a way of great difficulties and
perplexities unto himself; that is, unto his Person as it was to be
constituted. Unto the Divine Nature nothing is grievous, nothing is difficult:
But he was to have another Nature, wherein he was to undergo the difficulties
of this way and work. It was required of him, that he should pity us until he
had none left to pity himself when he stood in need of it; that he should
pursue his delight to save us, until his own soul was heavy and sorrowful unto
death; that he should relieve us in our sufferings by suffering the same things
that we should have done. But he was not in the least hereby deterred from
undertaking this work of Love and Mercy for us: Yea his love rose on this
Proposal, like the Waters of a mighty Stream against opposition. For hereon he
says, Lo, I come to ^o thy will, O God, it is my delight to do it, Heb. 10. 5,
6, 7. Isa. 50. 4, 5, 6, 7.

8. BEING thus inclined, disposed, and ready in the Eternal Love of his Divine
Person, to undertake the Office of Mediation, and the work of our Redemption; A
body was prepared for him. In this Body or Human Nature made his own, he was to
make this Love effectual in all its Inclinations and Actings. It was provided
for him unto this end, and filled with all Grace in a way unmeasurable,
especially with Fervent Love unto Mankind. And hereby it became a meet
Instrument to actuate his Eternal Love in all the fruits of it.

9. IT is hence evident, that this Glorious Love of Christ, does not consist
alone in the Eternal Actings of his divine Person, or the Divine Nature in his
Person, such indeed is the Love of the Father namely, his Eternal Purpose for
the communication of Grace and Glory, with his Acquiescency therein; but there
is more in the Love of Christ. For when he exercised this Love, he was man
also, and not God only. And in none of those Eternal Acts of Love could the
Human Nature of Christ have any interest or concern; yet is the Love of the Man
Christ Jesus, celebrated in the Scripture.

10. WHEREFORE this Love of Christ which we enquire after, is the Love of his
Person; that is, which he in his own Person acts in and by his Distinct Natures
according unto their Distinct Essential Properties. And the acts of love in
these distinct Natures, are infinitely distinct and different; yet are they all
acts of one and the same Person. So then, whether that Act of Love in Christ
which we would at any time consider, be an Eternal Act of the Divine Nature in
the Person of the Son of God; or whether it be an act of the Human performed in
time by the Gracious Faculties and Powers of that Nature, it is still the Love
of one and the self same Person, Christ Jesus.

It was an Act of inexpressible Love in him that he assumed our Nature, Heb. 2.
14, 17. But it was an act in and of his Divine Nature only: For it was
antecedent unto the existence of his Human Nature, which could not therefore
concur therein. His laying down his life for us, was an act of inconceivable
Love, 1 John 8. 16. Yet was it only an act of the Human Nature wherein he
offered himself and died. But both the one and the other were Acts of his
Divine Person; whence it is said that God laid down his life for us, and
purchased the Church with his own Blood.

THIS is that Love of Christ wherein he is glorious, and wherein we are by
Faith to behold his Glory. A great part of the Blessedness of the Saints in
Heaven, and their Triumph therein, consists in their beholding of this Glory of
Christ, in their thankful contemplation of the Fruits of it, see Rev. 5. 9, 10.
etc.

THE illustrious Brightness wherewith this Glory shines in Heaven, the All
satisfying Sweetness which the view of it gives unto the Souls of the Saints
there Possessed of Glory, are not by us conceivable nor to be expressed. Here
this love passes knowledge, there we shall comprehend the Dimensions of it.
Yet even here, if we are not slothful and carnal, we may have a refreshing
prospect of it; and where Comprehension fail^, let Admiration take place.

MY present Business is to exhort others unto the Contemplation of it, though
it be but a little, a very little, a small portion of it, that I can conceive;
and less than that very little, that I can express. Yet may it be my duty to
excite not only my self, but others also unto due Enquiries after it, unto
which End I offer the things ensuing.

1. LABOUR that your minds may continually be fitted and prepared for such
Heavenly Contemplations. If they are carnal and sensual, or filled with earthly
things, a due sense of this Love of Christ and its Glory, will not abide in
them. Virtue and Vice in their highest Degrees are not more diametrically
opposite and inconsistent in the same mind, than are an habitual Course of
sensual worldly Thoughts, and a due Contemplation of the Glory of the Love of
Christ: Yea, an earnestness of Spirit, pregnant with a multitude of Thoughts
about the lawful Occasions of Life, is obstructive of all due Communion with
the Lord Jesus Christ herein.

FEW there are whose Minds are prepared in a due Manner for this Duty. The
Actions and Communications of the most, evidence what is the inward Frame of
their Souls. They rove up and down in their Thoughts, which are continually
lead by their Affections into the Corners of the Earth. It is in vain to call
such Persons unto Contemplations of the Glory of Christ in his Love. An holy
Composure of Mind by virtue of spiritual principles, an Inclination to seek
after Refreshment in Heavenly Things, and to bath the Soul in the Fountain of
them, with constant Apprehensions of the Excellency of this Divine Glory, are
required hereunto.

2. BE not satisfied with General Notions concerning the Love of Christ, which
represent no Glory unto the Mind, wherewith many deceive themselves. All who
believe his divine Person, profess a Valuation of his Love, and think them not
Christians who are otherwise minded: But they have only General Notions, and
not any distinct Conceptions of it, and really know not what it is. To deliver
us from this Snare, peculiar Meditations on its principal Concerns, are
required of us. As,

1. WHOSE Love it is; namely, of the divine Person of the Son of God. He is
expressly called God, with respect unto the Exercise of this Love; that we may
always consider whose it is, 1 John 3. 16. Hereby we perceive the Love of God,
because he laid down his Life for us.

2. BY what Ways and Means this wonderful Love of the Son of God, does act it
self; namely, in the divine Nature, by Eternal Acts of Wisdom, Goodness and
Grace proper thereunto; and in the humane by Temporary Acts of Pity or
Compassion, with all the Fruits of them in doing and suffering for us, see
Ephesians. 3. 19. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Rev. 1. 5.

3. WHAT is the Freedom of it as unto any desert on our Part, 1 John 4. 10. It
was Hatred not Love that we in our selves deserved, which is a Consideration
suited to fill the Soul with self-abasement, the best of Frames in the
contemplation of the Glory of Christ.

4. WHAT is the Efficacy of it in its Fruits and Effects, with sundry other
Considerations of the like Nature. By a distinct Prospect and Admiration of
these Things, the Soul may walk in this Paradise of God, and gather here and
there an Heavenly Flower, conveying unto it a sweet Savor of this Love of
Christ. See Cant. 11. 2, 3, 4.

MOREOVER, Be not contented to have right Notions of the Love of Christ in your
Minds, unless you can attain a gracious Taste of it in your Hearts; no more
than you would be to see a Feast or Banquet richly prepared, and partake of
nothing of it unto your Refreshment. It is of that Nature that we may have a
spiritual Censation of it in our Minds; whence it is compared by the Spouse to
Apples and Flagons of Wine. We may taste that the Lord is gracious. And if we
find not a Relish of it in our Hearts, we shall not long retain the Notion of
it in our Minds. Christ is the Meat, the Bread, the Food of our Souls. Nothing
is in him of an higher spiritual Nourishment than his Love, which we should
always desire.

IN this Love is he Glorious; for it is such as no Creatures, Angels, or Men
could have the least Conceptions of, before its Manifestation by its Effects:
And after its Manifestation, it is in this World absolutely incomprehensible.

CHAP. VI.
The Glory of Christ in the Discharge of his Mediatory Office.
AS the Lord Christ was Glorious in the Susception of his Office: So was he
also in its Discharge. An unseen Glory accompanied him in all that he did, in
all that he suffered. Unseen it was unto the Eyes of the World, but not in his
who alone can judge of it. Had Men seen it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of Glory. Yet to some of them it was made manifest. Hence they testified
that in the Discharge of his Office, they beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, Joh. 1. 14. And that when others could see neither
Form nor Comeliness in him that he should be desired, Psalm. 53. 2. and so it is
at this day. I shall only make some few Observations; first, on what he did in
a way of Obedience, and then on what he suffered in the Discharge of his Office
so undertaken by him.

1. WHAT he did, what Obedience he yielded unto the Law of God, in the
Discharge of his Office (with respect whereunto he said, Lo, I come to do thy
Will, O God, ^ea, thy Law is in my Heart) it was all on his own free choice or
Election, and was resolved thereinto alone. It is our Duty to endeavor after
Freedom, Willingness, and Cheerfulness in all our Obedience. Obedience has its
formal Nature from our Wills. So much as there is of our Wills, in what we do
toward God, so much there is of Obedience, and no more. Howbeit, we are
antecedently unto all Acts of our own Wills obliged unto all that is called
Obedience. From the very Constitution of our Natures, we are necessarily
subject unto the Law of God. All that is left unto us, is a voluntary
Compliance with unavoidable Commands; with him it was not so. An Act of his own
Will and Choice preceded all Obligation as unto Obedience. He obeyed because he
would, before because he ought. He said, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God,
before he was obliged to do that Will. By his own Choice, and that in an Act of
Infinite Condescension and Love, as we have showed, he was made of a woman, and
thereby made under the Law. In his Divine Person he was Lord of the Law, above
it, no more obnoxious unto its Commands, than its Curse. Neither was he
afterward in himself on his own Account unobnoxious unto its Curse, merely
because he was Innocent, but also because he was every way above the Law it
self, and all its force.

This was the Original Glory of his Obedience. The Wisdom, the Grace, the Love,
the Condescension that was in this Choice, animated every Act, every Duty of
his Obedience rendering it amiable in the sight of God, and useful unto us. So
when he went unto John to be baptized, he who knew he had no need of it on his
own Account, would have declined the Duty of administering that Ordinance unto
him; but he replied, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill
all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. This I have undertaken willingly of my own
accord without any need of it for my self, and therefore will discharge it. For
him who was Lord of all universally, thus to submit himself to Universal
Obedience, carries along with it an Evidence of Glorious Grace.

2. THIS Obedience as unto the use and end of it, was not for himself, but for
us. We were obliged unto it, and could not perform it; he was not obliged unto
it any otherwise but by a free Act of his own Will, and did perform it. God
gave him this Honor, that he should obey for the whole Church, that by his
obedience we should be made righteous, Romans 5. 19. Herein I say did God give
him Honor and Glory, that his Obedience should stand in the stead of the
perfect Obedience of the Church as unto Justification.

3. HIS Obedience being absolutely universal, and absolutely perfect, was the
great Representative of the Holiness of God in the Law. It was repre^^nted
glorious when the Ten Words were written by the Finger of God in Tables of
Stone: It appears yet more eminently in the Spiritual Transcription of it in
the Hearts of Believers: But absolutely and perfectly it is exemplified only in
the Holiness and Obedience of Christ, which answered it unto the utmost. And
this is no small Part of his Glory in Obedience, that the Holiness of God in
the Law was therein, and therein alone in that one Instance, as unto human
Nature, fully represented.

4. HE wrought out this Obedience against all Difficulties and Oppressions. For
although he was absolutely free from that Disorder which in us has invaded our
whole Natures, which internally renders all Obedience difficult unto us, and
perfect Obedience impossible; yet as unto Opposition from without in
Temptations, Sufferings, Reproaches, Contradictions, he met with more than we
all. Hence is that glorious Word, Although he were a Son, yet he learned
Obedience by the things which be suffered, Heb. 5. 8. See our Exposition of
that place. But,

5. THE Glory of this Obedience arises principally from the Consideration of
the Person, who thus yielded it unto God. This was no other but the Son of God
made Man; God and Man in one Person. He who was in Heaven, above all, Lord of
all, at the same time lived in the World in a Condition of no Reputation, and a
Course of the strictest Obedience unto the whole Law of God. He unto whom
Prayer was made, prayed himself Night and Day. He whom all the Angels of
Heaven, and all Creatures worshipped, was continually conversant in all the
Duties of the Worship of God. He who was over the House, diligently observed
the meanest Office of the House. He that made all Men, in whose Hand they are
all as Clay in the Hand of the Potter, observed amongst them the strictest
Rules of Justice, in giving unto every one his Due, and of Charity, in giving
good things that were not so due. This is that which renders the Obedience of
Christ in the Discharge of his Office, both mysterious and glorious.

2. AGAIN, The Glory of Christ is proposed unto us in what he suffered in the
Discharg of the Office which he had undertaken. There belonged indeed unto his
Office, Victory, Success, and Triumph with great Glory, Isa. 63. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
but there were Sufferings also required of him antecedently thereunto. Ought
not Christ to suffer, and to enter into his Glory?

BUT such were these Sufferings of Christ, as that in our Thoughts about them,
our Minds quickly recoil in a Sense of their Insufficiency to conceive a Right
of them: Never any one launched into this Ocean with his Meditations, but he
quickly found himself unable to fathom the Depths of it: Nor shall I here
undertake an Enquiry into them. I shall only point at this Spring of Glory, and
leave it under a Vail.

WE might here look on him as under the Weight of the Wrath of God, and the
Curse of the Law; taking on himself, and on his whole Soul, the utmost of Evil
that God had ever threatened to Sin or Sinners; we might look on him in his
Agony and bloody Sweat, in his strong Cries and Supplications, when he was
sorrowful unto the Death, and began to be amazed, in apprehensions of the
things that were coming on him; of that dreadful Trial which he was entering
into: we might look upon him, conflicting with all the Powers of Darkness, the
Rage and Madness of Men; suffering in his Soul, his Body, his Name, his
Reputation, his Goods, his Life; some of these Sufferings being immediate from
God above, others from Devils and wicked Men, acting according to the
Determinate Counsel of God: we might look on him praying, weeping, crying out,
bleeding, dying, in all things making his Soul an Offering for sin: So was he
taken from Prison, and Judgment, and who shall declare his Generation? for he
was cut off from the Land of the Living, For the Transgression (says God) of
my People was he smitten, Isa. 53. 8. But these things I shall not insist on in
particular, but leave them under such a Vail as may give us a Prospect into
them, so far as to fill our Souls with holy Admiration.

LORD! What is Man that thou art thus mindful of him, and the Son of Man that
thou visitest him? Who has known thy Mind, or who has been thy Councellor? O
the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out? What shall we
say unto these things? that God spared not his only Son, but gave him up unto
Death, and all the Evils included therein, for such poor lost Sinners as we
were; that for our Sakes the Eternal Son of God should submit himself unto all
the Evils that our Natures are obnoxious unto, and that our Sins had deserved,
that we might be delivered!

HOW Glorious is the Lord Christ on this Account in the Eyes of Believers! When
Adam had sinned, and thereby eternally, according unto the Sanction of the Law,
ruined himself and all his Posterity, he stood ashamed, afraid, trembling, as
one ready to perish for ever under the Displeasure of God. Death was that which
he had deserved, and immediate Death was that which he looked for. In this
State the Lord Christ in the Promise comes unto him, and says, Poor Creature!
How woeful is thy Condition! How deformed is thy Appearance! What is become of
the Beauty, of the Glory of that Image of God wherein thou wast created? How
have thou taken on thee the monstrous Shape and Image of Satan! And yet thy
present Misery, thy Entrance into Dust and Darkness, is no way to be compared
with what is to ensue. Eternal Distress lies at the Door. But yet look up once
more, and behold me, that thou may have some Glymps of what is in the
Designs of Infinite Wisdom, Love and Grace. Come forth from thy vain Shelter,
thy hiding Place: I will put my self into thy Condition. I will undergo and
bear that Burden of Guilt and Punishment, which would sink thee eternally into
the bottom of Hell. I will pay that which I never took; and be made temporally
a Curse for thee, that thou may attain unto Eternal Blessedness. To the same
purpose he speaks unto convinced Sinners in the Invitation he gives them to
come unto him.

THUS is the Lord Christ set forth in the Gospel evidently crucified before our
Eyes, Gal. 3. 1. Namely, in the Representation that is made of his Glory, in
the Suffering he underwent for the Discharge of the Office he had undertaken.
Let us then behold him as poor, despised, persecuted, reproached, reviled,
hanged on a Tree; in all laboring under a Sense of the Wrath of God due unto
our Sins. Unto this End are they recorded in the Gospel, read, preached, and
represented unto us. But what can we see herein? What Glory is in these things?
Are not these the things which all the World of Jews and Gentiles stumbled and
took Offense at? Those wherein he was appointed to be a Stone of stumbling, and
a Rock of offense? Was it not esteemed a foolish thing to look for Help and
Deliverance by the Miseries of another? To look for Life by his Death? The
Apostle declares at large that such it was esteemed, 1 Cor. 1. So was it in the
Wisdom of the World. But even on the Account of these things is he Honorable,
Glorious and Precious in the sight of them that do believe, 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7. For
even herein he was the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. And
the Apostle declares at large the Grounds and Reasons of the different Thoughts
and Apprehensions of Men concerning the Cross and Sufferings of Christ, 2 Cor.
4. 3, 4, 5, 6.

CHAP. VII.
The Glory of Christ in his Exaltation, after the Accomplishment of the Work of
Mediation in this World.
WE may in the next Place behold the Glory of Christ with respect unto his
Office in the Actings of God toward him, which ensued on his Discharge of it
in this World, in his own Exaltation.

THESE are the two Heads, whereunto all the Prophesies and Predictions
concerning Jesus Christ under the Old Testament are referred, namely, his
Sufferings, and the Glory that ensued thereon, 1 Pet. 1. 11. All the Prophets
testified beforehand of the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should
follow. So when he himself opened the Scriptures unto his Disciples, he gave
them this as the Sum of the Doctrine contained in them; Ought not Christ to
have suffered these things, and to enter unto his Glory, Luke 24. 26. The same
is frequently expressed elsewhere, Romans 14. 9. Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8.

SO much as we know of Christ, his Sufferings and his Glory; so much do we
understand of the Scripture, and no more.

THESE are the Two Heads of the Mediation of Christ and his Kingdom; and this
is their Order which they communicate unto the Church; first Sufferings, and
then Glory: If we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. They do
but deceive themselves, who design any other Method* of these things. Some
would reign here in this World; and we may say with the Apostle, would you did
reign, that we might reign with you. But the Members of the mystical Body must
be conformed unto the Head. In him, Sufferings went before Glory; and so they
must in them. The Order in the Kingdom of Satan and the Word, is contrary
hereunto. First, the Good Things of this Life, and then Eternal Misery, is the
Method of that Kingdom, Luke 16. 25.

THESE are the two Springs of the Salvation of the Church; the two anointed
ones that stand before the Lord of the whole Earth; from which all the golden
Oil whereby the Church is dedicated unto God and sanctified does flow. This
Glory of Christ in his Exaltation which followed on his Sufferings, is that
which we now enquire into. And we shall state our Apprehensions of it in the
ensuing Observations.

1. THIS is peculiarly that Glory which the Lord Christ prays that his
Disciples may be where he is, to behold it. It is not solely so, as it is
considered absolutely: but it is that, wherein all the other Parts of his Glory
are made manifest. It is the Evidence, the Pledge, the Means of the
Manifestation of them all. As unto all the Instances of his Glory before
insisted on, there was a Vail drawn over them whilst he was in this World.
Hence the most saw nothing of it, and the best saw it but obscurely. But in
this Glory that Vail is taken off, whereby the whole Glory of his Person in it
self, and in the Work of Mediation is most illustriously manifested. When we
shall immediately behold this Glory, we shall see him as he is. This is that
Glory whereof the Father made grant unto him before the Foundation of the
World, and wherewith he was actually invested upon his Ascension.

2. BY this Glory of Christ, I do not understand the Essential Glory of his
Divine Nature; or his being absolutely in his own Person over all God blessed
for ever: But the manifestation of this Glory in particular, after it had been
veiled in this World under the Form of a Servant, belongs hereunto. The Divine
Glory of Christ in his Person belongs not unto his Exaltation; but the
Manifestation of it does so. It was not given him by free Donation; but the
Declaration of it unto the Church of Angels and Men after his Humiliation was
so. He left it not whilst he was in this World; but the direct Evidence and
Declaration of it he laid aside, until he was declared to be the Son of God
with Power, by the Resurrection from the Dead.

WHEN the Sun is under a total Eclipse, he loses nothing of his Native,
Beauty, Light, and Glory. He is still the same that he was from the beginning;
a great Light to rule the Day. To us he appears as a dark useless Meteor: but
when he comes by his course to free himself from the Lunar Interposition unto
his proper Aspect toward us, he manifests again his Native Light and Glory. So
was it with the Divine Nature of Christ as we have before declared. He veiled
the Glory of it by the Interposition of the Flesh, or the Assumption of our
Nature to be his own, with this Addition, that therein he took on him the Form
of a Servant, of a Person of mean and low Degree. But this temporary Eclipse
being past and over, it now shines forth in its Infinite Luster and Beauty,
which belongs unto the present Exaltation of his Person. And when those who
behel^ him here as a poor, sorrowful, persecuted Man, dying on the Cross* come
to (...) in all the infinite increated Glories of the Divine Nature,
manifesting themselves in his Person, it could not but fill their Souls with
Transcendent Joy and Admiration. And this is one reason of his Prayer for them
whilst he was on the Earth, that they might be where he is to behold his Glory.
For he knew what ineffable Satisfaction it would be unto them for evermore.

3. I do not understand absolutely the Glorification of the Human Nature of
Christ; That very Soul and Body wherein he lived and died, suffered and rose
again, tho that also be included herein. This also were a Subject meet for our
Contemplation, especially as it is the Exemplar of that Glory which he will
bring all those unto, who believe in him. But because at present we look
somewhat further, I shall observe only one or two things concerning it.

1. THAT very Nature it self which he took on him in this World, is exalted
into Glory. Some under a Pretense of great Subtilty and Acuracy do deny that he
has either Flesh or Blood in Heaven, that is, as to the Substance of them;
however you may suppose that they are changed, purified, glorified. The great
Foundation of the Church, and all Gospel Faith is, that he was made Flesh, that
he did partake of Flesh and Blood, even as did the Children. That he has
forsaken that Flesh and Blood which he was made in the Womb of the Blessed
Virgin; wherein he lived and died, which he offered unto God in Sacrifice, and
wherein he rose from the Dead, is a Socinian Fiction. What is the true Nature
of the Glorification of the Humanity of Christ, neither those who thus surmise,
nor we can perfectly comprehend. It does not yet appear what we our selves
shall be, much less is it evident unto us what he is, whom we shall be like.
But that he is still in the same Human Nature, wherein he was on the earth,
that he has the same rational Soul, and the same Body, is a fundamental
Article of the Christian Faith.

2. THIS Nature of the Man Christ Jesus, is filled with all the Divine Graces
and Perfections whereof a limited created Nature is capable. It is not Deified,
it is not made a God; it does not in Heaven coalesce into one Nature with the
Divine by a Composition of them; It has not any Essential Property of the
Deity communicated unto it, so as subjectively to reside in it; It is not made
Omniscient, Omnipresent, Omnipotent: But it is exalted in a Fullness of all
Divine Perfection ineffably above the Glory of Angels and Men. It is
incomprehensibly nearer God than they all; has Communications from God, in
glorious Light, Love, and Power, ineffably above them all. But it is still a
Creature.

FOR the Substance of this Glory of the Human Nature of Christ, Believers shall
be made Partakers of it; for when we see him as he is, we shall be like him:
but as unto the Degrees and Measures of it, his Glory is above all that we can
be made Partakers of: There is one Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon and
Stars, and one Star differs from another in Glory, As the Apostle speaks, 1
Cor. 15. 45. And if there be a difference in Glory among the Stars themselves
as to some degrees of the same Glory: How much more is there between the Glory
of the Sun, and that of any Star whatever? Such is the difference that is and
will be unto Eternity between the Human Nature of Christ, and what glorified
Believers do attain unto. But yet this is not that properly wherein the Glory
of Christ in his Exaltation after his humiliation and Death, does consist. The
Things that belong unto it may be reduced unto the ensuing Heads.

1. IT consists in the Exaltation of the Human Nature, as subsisting in the
Divine Person above the whole Creation of God in Power, Dignity, Authority and
Rule, with all things that the Wisdom of God has appointed to render the Glory
of it illustrious. I have so largely insisted on the Explication and
Confirmation of this Part of the present Glory of Christ, in the Exposition of
Heb. 1. ver. 2, 3. that I have nothing more to add thereunto.

2. IT does so in the Evidence given of the Infinite Love of God the Father
unto him, and his delight in him, with the Eternal Approbation of his Discharge
of the Office committed unto him. Hence he is said to sit at the right hand of
God, or at the right hand of the Majesty on high. That the Glory and Dignity of
Christ in his Exaltation is singular, the highest that can be given to a
Creature incomprehensible; that he is with respect unto the Discharge of his
Office, under the eternal Approbation of God; that as so gloriously exalted, he
is proclaimed unto the whole Creation, are all contained in this Expression.

3. HEREUNTO is added the full Manifestation of his own Divine Wisdom, Love and
Grace in the Work of Mediation and Redemption of the Church. This Glory is
absolutely singular and peculiar unto him. Neither Angels or Men have the least
Interest in it. Here we see it darkly as in a Glass; above, it shines forth in
its brightness to the eternal Joy of them who behold him.

THIS is that Glory which our Lord Jesus Christ in an especial manner prayed
that his Disciples might behold. This is that whereof we ought to endeavor a
Prospect by Faith. By Faith, I say, and not by Imagination. Vain and foolish
Men having general Notions of this Glory of Christ, knowing nothing of the real
Nature of it, have endeavored to represent it in Pictures and Images with all
that Luster and Beauty with the Art of Painting, with the Ornaments of Gold and
Jewels, can give them. This is that Representation of the present Glory of
Christ, which being made and proposed unto the Imagination and carnal
Affections of superstitious Persons carries such a show of Devotion and
Veneration in the Papal Church. But they err not knowing the Scripture, nor the
eternal Glory of the Son of God.

THIS is the sole Foundation of all our Meditations herein. The Glory that the
Lord Jesus Christ is in the real actual Possession of in Heaven, can be no
otherwise seen or apprehended in this World, but in the Light of Faith, fixing
it self on Divine Revelation. To behold this Glory of Christ is not an Act of
Fancy or Imagination. It does not consist in framing unto our selves the Shape
of a glorious Person in Heaven. But the steady Exercise of Faith on the
Revelation and Description made of his Glory of Christ in the Scripture, is the
Ground, Rule and Measure* of all Divine Meditations thereon.

HEREON our Duty it is, to call our selves to an Account, as unto our Endeavor
after a gracious View of this Glory of Christ: When did we steadfastly behold
it? When had we such a View of it as wherein our Souls have been satisfied and
refreshed? It is declared and represented unto us as one of the chief Props of
our Faith, as an Help of our Joy, as an Object of our Hope, as a Ground of our
Consolation, as our greatest Encouragement unto Obedience and Suffering. Are
our Minds every day conversant with Thoughts hereof? Or do we think our selves
not much concerned herein? Do we look upon it, as that which is without us and
above us, as that which we shall have time enough to consider when we come to
Heaven? So is it with many. They care neither where Christ is, nor what he is,
so that one way or other they may be saved by him. They hope, as they pretend,
that they shall see him and his Glory in Heaven, and that they suppose to be
time enough: But in vain do they pretend a Desire thereof; in vain are their
Expectations of any such thing. They who endeavor not to behold the Glory of
Christ in this World, as has been often said, shall never behold him in glory
hereafter unto their Satisfaction; nor do they desire so to do. Only they
suppose it a part of that Relief which they would have when they are gone out
of this World. For what should beget such a Desire in them? Nothing can do it,
but some View of it here by Faith, which they despise, or totally neglect.
Every Pretense of a Desire of Heaven, and of the Presence of Christ therein,
that does not arise from, that is not resolved into that Prospect which we have
of the Glory of Christ in this World by Faith, is mere Fancy and Imagination.

OUR constant Exercise in Meditation on this Glory of Christ will fill us with
Joy on his Account, which is an effectual Motive unto the Duty it self. We are
for the most part Selfish, and look no farther than our own Concernments. So we
may be pardoned and saved by him, we care not much how it is with himself, but
only presume it is well enough. We find not any Concernment of our own therein.
But this Frame is directly opposite unto the Genius of Divine Faith and Love.
For their principal Actings consist in preferring Christ above our selves; and
our Concerns in him, above all our own. Let this then stir us up unto the
Contemplation of this Glory. Who is it that is thus exalted over all? Who is
thus encompassed with Glory, Majesty, and Power? Who is it that sits down at
the Right Hand of the Majesty on high, all his Enemies being made his
Footstool? Is it not he, who in this World was poor, despised, persecuted and
slain, all for our Sakes? Is it not the same Jesus who loved us, and gave
himself for us, and washed us in his own Blood? So the Apostle told the Jews,
that the same Jesus whom they slew and hanged on a Tree, God had exalted with
his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance unto Israel, and
the forgiveness of sins, Act. 5. 30, 31. If we have any valuation of his Love,
if we have any concernment in what he has done and suffered for the Church, we
cannot but rejoice in his present State and Glory.

LET the World rage whilst it pleases; let it set it self with all its Power
and Craft against every thing of Christ that is in it; which whatever is by
some otherwise pretended, proceeds from an hatred unto his Person: Let Men make
themselves drunk with the blood of his Saints, we have this to oppose unto all
their attempts, unto our supportment, Namely, what he says of himself; Fear
not, I am the first and the last, he that lives and was dead, and behold I am
alive for evermore, and have the Keys of Hell and Death, Rev. 1. 16, 18.

BLESSED Jesus! We can add nothing to thee nothing to thy Glory; but it is a
Joy of heart unto us that thou art what thou art; that thou art so gloriously
exalted at the right hand of God; and do long more fully and clearly to behold
that Glory according to thy Prayer and Promise.

CHAP. VIII.
Representations of the Glory of the Christ under the Old Testament.
IT is s^id of our Lord Jesus Christ, that beginning at Moses and all the
Prophets, he declared unto his Disciples in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself, Luke 24. 27. It is therefore manifest that Moses and the
Prophets and all the Scriptures, do give Testimony unto him, and his Glory.
This is the line of Life and Light, which runs through the whole Old Testament;
without the conduct whereof we can understand nothing aright* therein: And the
neglect hereof, is that which makes many as blind in reading the Books of it,
as are the Jews, the same vail being upon their minds. It is Faith alone,
discovering the Glory of Christ, that can remove that vail of darkness which
covers the minds of men in reading the Old Testament, as the Apostle declares,
2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16. I shall therefore consider briefly some of those ways and
means whereby the glory of Christ was represented unto Believers under the Old
Testament.

1. IT was so in the Institution of the Beautiful Worship of the Law, with all
the means of it. Herein have they the Advantage above all the splendid
Ceremonies that men can invent, in the outward worship of God; they were
designed and framed in Divine Wisdom to represent the Glory of Christ in his
Person and his Office. This nothing of Human Invention can do, or once pretend
unto. Men cannot create Mysteries, nor give unto any thing natural in it self,
a Mystical signification. But so it was in the Old Divine Institutions. What
were the Tabernacle and Temple? What was the Holy Place with the Utensils of
it? What was the Oracle, the Ark, the Cherubims, the Mercy-Seat placed therein?
What was the High Priest in all his Vestments and Administrations? What were
the Sacrifices, and annual sprinkling of Blood in the most Holy Place? What was
the most whole Systeme of their Religious Worship? Were there any thing but
Representations of Christ in the Glory of his Person and his Office? They were
a Shadow, and the Body represented by that shadow, was Christ. If any would see
how the Lord Christ was in particular foresignified and represented in them, he
may peruse our Exposition on the ninth Chapter of the Epistle unto the Hebrews,
where it is handled so at large as that I shall not here again insist upon it.
The Sum is, Moses was faithful in all the House of God, for a Testimony of
those things which mere to be spoken afterward, Heb. 3. 5. All that Moses did
in the erection of the Tabernacle, and the institution of all its services, was
but to give an antecedent Testimony by way of Representation, unto the Things
of Christ that were aftewards to be revealed. And that also was the substance
of the Ministry of the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. The dark apprehensions of
the Glory of Christ which by these means they obtained, were the life of the
Church of Old.

2. IT was represented in the Mystical Account which is given us of his
Communion with his Church in Love and Grace. As this is intimated in many
places of Scripture; so there is one entire Book designed unto its Declaration.
This is the Divine Song of Solomon who was a Type of Christ, and a Penman of
the Holy Ghost therein. A Gracious Record it is of the Divine Communications of
Christ in Love and Grace unto his Church, with their returns of love unto him,
and delight in him. And then may a man judge himself to have somewhat profited
in the experience of the Mystery of a blessed intercourse and communion with
Christ, when the expressions of them in that holy Dialogue, do give Light and
Life unto his mind, and efficaciously communicate unto him an experience of
their power. But because these things are little understood by many, the book
it self is much neglected if not despised. Yea to such impudence have some
arrived, in foaming out their own shame, as that they have ridiculed the
expressions of it; but we are foretold of such mockers in the last days, that
should walk after their own ungodly lusts; they are not of our present
consideration.

THE former Instance of the Representations of the Glory of Christ in their
Institutions of outward Worship with this Record of the inward communion they
had with Christ in Grace, Faith, and Love, gives us the Substance of that view
which they had of his Glory. What holy strains of Delight and Admiration, what
Raptures of Joy, what solemn and divine Complacency, what ardency of Affection,
and Diligence in Attendance unto the means of enjoying communion with him, this
discovery of the Glory of Christ wrought in the souls of them that did believe,
is Emphatically expressed in that discourse. A few days, a few hours spent in
the frame characterised in it, is a Blessedness excelling all the treasures of
the Earth; and if we, whose Revelations of the same Glory do far exceed theirs,
should be found to come short of them in Ardency of Affection unto Christ, and
continual holy Admiration of his excellencies, we shall one day be judged
unworthy to have received them.

3. IT was so represented and made known under the Old Testament in his
personal Appearances on various occacasions unto several Eminent Persons,
Leaders of the Church in their Generations. This he did as a Praeludium to his
Incarnation. He was as yet God only; but appeared in the assumed shape of a
man, to signify what he would be. He did not create an Human Nature, and unite
it unto himself for such a Season; only by his Divine Power he acted the Shape
of a Man composed of what Aetherial Substance he pleased, immediately to be
dissolved. So he appeared to Abraham, to Jacob, to Moses, to Joshua, and
others, as I have at large elsewhere proved and confirmed. And hereon also,
because he was the Divine Person who dwelt in, and dealt with the Church, under
the Old Testament from first to last, in so doing he constantly assumes unto
himself Human Affections, to intimate that a season would come when he would
immediately act in that Nature. And indeed after the fall there is nothing
spoken of God in the Old Testament, nothing of his Institutions, nothing of the
way and manner of dealing with the Church, but what has respect unto the
future Incarnation of Christ. And it had been absurd to bring in God under
perpetual Anthropopathis, as grieving, repenting, being angry, well-pleased,
and the like, were it not but that the Divine Person intended, was to take on
him the Nature wherein such Affections do dwell.

4. IT was represented in Prophetical Visions. So the Apostle affirms that the
Vision which Isaiah had of him, was when he saw his Glory, John, 12. 41. And it
was a blessed Representation thereof. For his Divine Person being exalted on a
Throne of Glory, his Train filled the Temple. The whole Train of his Glorious
Grace filled the Temple of his body. This is the true Tabernacle which God
pitched, and not man. The Temple which was destroyed and which he raised again
in three days, wherein dwelt the fullness of the Godhead. Col. 1. 9. This Glory
was now presented unto the view of Isaiah, Chap. 6. 1, 2, 3. which filled him
with Dread and Astonishment. But from thence he was relieved, by an act of the
Ministry of that Glorious one, taking away his Iniquity by a coal from the
Altar, which typified the purifying efficacy of his Sacrifice. This was food
for the Souls of Believers, in these and on the like occasions, did the whole
Church lift up their voice in that Holy Cry, Make have our Beloved, and be thou
like to a Roe, or to a young Heart on the Mountain of Spices.

OF the same Nature was his Glorious Appearance on Mount Sinai at the giving of
the Law, Exodus 19. For the description thereof by the Psalmist, Psalm. 68. 17,
18. is applied by the Apostle unto the Ascension of Christ after his
Resurrection, Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. Only as it was then full of outward
Terror, because of the giving of the fiery Law, it was referred unto by the
Psalmist, as full of Mercy, with respect unto his Accomplishment of the same
Law. His giving of it was as Death unto them concerned, because of its
Holiness, and the severity of the the Curse wherewith it was attended; his
fulfilling of it was Life, by the Pardon and Righteousness which issued from
thence.

5. THE Doctrine of his Incarnation whereby he became the Subject of all that
Glory which we enquire after, was revealed, although not so clearly as by the
Gospel, after the actual accomplishment of the thing it self. In how many
places this is done in the Old Testament, I have elsewhere declared; at least I
have explained and vindicated many of them (for no man can presume to know them
all) Vindic. Evangel. One instance therefore shall here suffice, and this is
that of the same Prophet Isaiah chap. 9. v. 6, 7. Unto us a child is born, unto
us a Son is given, and the government shall be on his shoulder, and his name
shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father,
the Prince of Peace, of the increase of his government and peace there shall be
no end, upon the Throne of David and upon his Kingdom to order it and establish
it with judgment and Justice from henceforth and for ever, the zeal of the Lord
of Hosts will perform this. This one Testimony is sufficient to confound all
Jews, Socinians, and other Enemies of the Glory of Christ. I do acknowledge,
that notnotwithstanding this Declaration of the Glory of Christ in his future
Incarnation and Rule there remained much darkness in the minds of them unto
whom it was then made. For although they might and did acquiesce in the truth
of the Revelation, yet they could frame to themselves no notions of the way or
manner of its accomplishment. But now when every word of it is explained,
declared, and its Mystical Sense visibly laid open unto us in the Gospel, and
by the accomplishment exactly answering every expression in it, it is Judicial
Blindness not to receive it. Nothing but the Satanical Pride of the hearts of
men which will admit of no effects of Infinite Wisdom, but what they suppose
they can comprehend, can shut their eyes against the Light of this Truth.

6. PROMISES, Prophesies, Praedictions, concerning his Person, his coming, his
Office, his Kingdom and his Glory in them all, with the Wisdom, Grace and Love
of God to the Church in him, are the Line of Life, as was said, which runs
through all the Writings of the Old Testament, and take up a great portion of
them. Those were the things which he expounded unto his Disciples out of Moses
and all the Prophets. Concerning these things he appealed to the Scriptures
against all his adversaries; Search the Scriptures, for they are they that
testify of me. And if we find them not, if we discern them not therein, it is
because a vail of Blindness is over our minds. Nor can we read, study, or
meditate on the Writings of the Old Testament unto any Advantage, unless we
design to find out and behold the Glory of Christ declared and represented in
them. For want hereof they are a sealed book to many unto this day.

7. IT is usual in the Old Testament to set out the Glory of Christ under
Metaphorical Expressions; yea it abounds therein. For such Allusions are
exceedingly suited to let in a sense into our minds of those things which we
cannot distinctly comprehend. And there is an Infinite Condescension of Divine
Wisdom in their way of Instruction, Representing unto us the Power of Things
Spiritual, in what we naturally discern. Instances of this kind in calling the
Lord Christ by the Names of those Creatures which unto our senses represent
that Excellency which is spiritually in him, are innumerable. So he is called
the Rose for the sweet savor of his Love, Grace and Obedience; the Lilly for
his gracious Beauty and Amiableness; the Pearl of Price for his worth, for to
them that believe he is precious; the Vine for his fruitfulness; the Lion for
his Power, The Lamb for his Meekness and Fitness for Sacrifice, with other
things of the like kind almost innumerable.

THESE Things have I mentioned, not with any design to search into the depth of
this Treasury of those Divine Truths concerning the Glory of Christ; but only
to give a little Light unto the words of the Evangelist, that he opened unto
his disciples out of Moses and all the Prophets the things which concerned
himself; and to stir up our own souls unto a contemplation of them as contained
therein.

CHAP. IX.
The Glory of Christ in his intimate Conjunction with the Church.
WHAT concerns the Glory of Christ in the Mission of the Holy Ghost unto the
Church, with all the Divine truths that are branched from it, I have at large
declared in my Discourse concerning the whole dispensation of the Holy Spirit.
Here therefore it must have no place amongst those many other things which
offer themselves unto our contemplation, as part of this Glory, or intimately
belonging thereunto. I shall insist briefly on Three only, which cannot be
reduced directly unto the former heads.

AND the first of these is, That intimate Conjunction that is between Christ
and the Church; whence it is just and equal in the sight of God, according unto
the Rules of his Eternal Righteousness, that what he did and suffered in the
Discharge of his Office, should be esteemed, reckoned, and imputed unto us, as
unto all the fruits and benefits of it, as if we had done and suffered the same
things our selves. For this conjunction of his with us, was an act of his own
Mind and Will, wherein he is ineffably glorious.

THE Enemies of the glory of Christ and of his Cross, do take this for granted,
That there ought to be such a conjunction between the guilty person and him
that suffers for him, as that in him the guilty person may be said in some
sense to undergo the punishment himself. But then they affirm on the other
hand, That there was no such conjunction between Christ and sinners, none at
all; but that he was a man, as they were men; and otherwise, that he was at the
greatest distance from them all, as it is possible for one man to be from
another, Socin. de Servat. lib. 3. cap. 3. The falseness of this latter
Assertion, and the gross ignorance of the Scripture under a pretense of
subtilty, in them that make it, will evidently appear in our ensuing Discourse.

THE Apostle tells us 1 Pet. 2. 24. That in his own self he bare our sins in
his own body on the tree; and chap. 3. 18. That he suffered for sin, the just
for the unjust, that he might bring us unto God. But this seems somewhat
strange unto Reason; where is the Justice, where is the Equity, that the just
should suffer for the unjust? Where is Divine Righteousness herein? For it was
an act of God, The Lord has laid on him the iniquites of us all, Isa. 53. 6.
The Equity hereof, with the grounds of it, must be here a little enquired into.

FIRST of all, it is certain that all the Elect, the whole Church of God, fell
in Adam, under the curse due to the transgression of the Law. It is so also,
that in this curse, Death both Temporal and Eternal was contained. This curse
none could undergo and be saved. Nor was it consistent with the Righteousness,
or Holiness, or Truth of God, that sin should go unpunished. Wherefore there
was a necessity upon a supposition of Gods Decree to save his Church, of a
Translation of punishment; namely, from them who had deserved it, and could not
bear it, unto one who had not deserved it, but could bear it.

A SUPPOSITION of this Translation of punishment by Divine dispensation, is the
foundation of Christian Religion, yea of all supernatural Revelation contained
in the Scripture. This was first intimated in the first promise; and afterward
explained and confirmed in all the institutions of the Old Testament. For
although in the Sacrifices of the Law there was a revival of the greatest and
most fundamental principal of the Law of Nature, namely, That God is to be
worshipped with our best; yet the principal end and use of them, was to
represent this translation of punishment from the offender unto another, who
was to be a Sacrifice in his stead.

THE reasons of the equity hereof, and the unspeakable glory of Christ herein,
is what we now enquire into. And I shall reduce what ought to be spoken
hereunto, to the ensuing Heads.

1. IT is not contrary unto the nature of Divine Justice; it does not interfere
with the principles of natural light in man, that in sundry cases some persons
should suffer punishment for the fine and offenses of others.

I SHALL at present give this Assertion no other confirmation, but only that
God has often done so, who will, who can do no iniquity.

SO he affirms that he will do, Exodus 20. 5. Visiting the sins of the fathers
upon the children under the third and fourth generation. It is no exception of
weight, that they also are sinners, continuing in their Fathers sins: for the
worst of sinners must not be dealt unjustly withal; but they must be so if they
are punished for their fathers sins, and it be absolutely unlawful that any one
should be punished for the sin of another.

SO the Church affirms; Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have born
their iniquities, Lam. 5. 11. And so it was: For in the Babylonish captivity
God punished the sins of their forefathers, especially those committed in the
days of Manasses, 2 King. 23. 26, 27. As afterward in the final destruction of
that Church and Nation, God punished in them the guilt of all bloody
persecutions from the beginning of the world, Luke 11. 50, 51.

SO Canaan was cursed for the sin of his Father, Genesis 9. 25. Readiness seven Sons
were put to death for their Fathers bloody Cruelty, 2 Samuel 21. 8. 14. For the
Sin of David, seventy thousand of the People were destroyed by an Angel,
concerning whom he said, It is I that have sinned and done evil, these sheep
what have they done? 2 Samuel 24. 15, 17. See also 1 King. 21. 29. So was it with
all the Children or Infants that perished in the Flood, or in the Conflagration
of Sodom and Gomorrah. And other instances of the like nature may be assigned.

IT is therefore evident, That there is no inconsistency with the nature of
Divine Justice, nor the Rules of Reason among Men, that in sundry Cases the
Sins of some may be punished on others.

2. IT is to be observed that this Administration of Justice is not
promiscuous, that any whatever, may be punished for the sins of any others.
There is always a special Cause and Reason of it; and this is a peculiar
conjunction between them who sin, and those who are punished for their sins.
And two Things belong unto this Conjunction. (1.) Especial Relation. (2.)
Especial mutual Interest.

1. THERE is an especial Relation required unto this Translation of Punishment.
Such as that between Parents and Children, as in most of the Instances before
given; or between a King and Subjects, as in the Case of David. Hereby the
Persons sinning, and those suffering, are constituted one Body, wherein if one
Member offend, anonother may justly suffer: The back may answer for what the
hands takes away.

2. IT consists in mutual Interest. Those whose sins are punished in others,
have such an Interest in them, as that their being so, is a punishment unto
themselves. Therefore are such sinners threatened with the punishment and evils
that shall befall their Posterity or Children for their sakes which is highly
poepal unto themselves, Numb. 14. 33. Your Children shall wander in the
wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms. The Punishment due to their
sins is in part transferred unto their Children, and therein did the sting of
their own Punishment also consist.

3. THERE is a greater, a more Intimate Conjunction, a nearer Relation, an
higher mutual Interest between Christ and the Church, than ever was or can be
between any other Persons or Relations in the world, whereon it became just and
equal in the sight of God, that he should suffer for us, and that what he did
and suffered should be imputed unto us, which is farther to be cleared.

THERE neither is nor can be any more than a Threefold Conjunction between
diverse, distinct Persons. The first is Natural, the second is Moral, whereunto
I refer that which is Spiritual or Mystical; and the Third Foederal, by virtue
of mutual compact. In all these ways is Christ in Conjunction with his Church,
and in every in one of them, in a way Singular and Peculiar.

1. THE first Conjunction of distinct Persons is Natural. God has made all
Mankind of one blood, Act. 17. 26. Whereby there is a Cognation and Alliance
between them all. Hence every Man, is every Man's Brother or Neighbor, unto
whom loving kindness is to be showed, Luke 10. 36. And this Conjunction was
between Christ and the Church; as the Apostle declares, Heb. 2. 14. Forasmuch
as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is the Devil, and deliver them who through fear of death were all
their life time subject to bondage. Hence both he that sanctifies, and they
who are sanctified are all of one, v. 11. His Infinite Condescension in coming
into this Communion and Conjunction of Nature with us, was before declared: But
it is not common like that between all other Men partakers of the same Nature.
There are Two Things wherein it was peculiar and eminent.

1. THIS Conjunction between him and the Church, did not arise from a necessity
of Nature, but from a voluntary act of his Will. The Conjunction that is
between all others is necessary. Every Man is every Man's Brother whether he
will or no, by being a Man. Natural Generation communicating to every one his
subsistence in the same Nature, prevents all acts of their own Will and Choice.
With the Lord Christ it was otherwise as the Text affirms: For such Reasons as
are there expressed, he did by an act of his own Will partake of Flesh and
Blood, or came into this Conjunction with us. He did it of his own choice,
because the Children did partake of the same. He would be what the Children
where. Wherefore the Conjunction of Christ in humane Nature with the Church, is
ineffably distinct from that common Conjunction which is amongst all others in
the same Nature. And therefore although it should not be meet amongst mere Men,
that one should act and suffer in the stead of others, because they are all
thus related to one another as it were whether they will or no; yet this could
not reach the Lord Christ, who in a strange and wonderful manner came into this
Conjunction by a mere act of his own.

2. HE came into it on this design, and for this only end, n^mely, that in our
Nature taken to be his own, he might do and suffer what was to be done and
suffered for the Church: So it is added in the Text; That by death he might
destroy him who had the power of death; and deliver them who for fear of death
were subject to Bondage. This was the only end of his Conjunction in Nature
with the Church: And this puts the case between him and it, at a vast distance
from what is or may be between other Men.

IT is a foolish thing to argue, that because a mere participation of the same
Nature among Men, is not sufficient to warrant the Righteousness of punishing
one for another; that therefore the conjunction in the same Nature betwixt
Christ and the Church, is not a sufficient and just foundation of his suffering
for us, and in our Stead! For by an act of his own will and choice, he did
partake of of our Nature, and that for this very end, that therein he might
suffer for us, as the Holy Ghost expressly declares. Amongst others there
neither is nor can be any thing of this Nature, and so no objection from what
is equal or inequal amongst them, can arise against what is equal between
Christ and the Church. And herein is he glorious and precious unto them that
believe, as we shall see immediately.

2. THERE is a Mystical Conjunction between Christ and the Church, which
answers all the most strict real or moral Unions (...) Conjunctions between
other persons or things. Such is the Conjunction between the head of a body and
its members, or the tree of the vine and its branches which are real; or
between an Husband and Wife, which is moral and real also. That there is such a
Conjunction between Christ and his Church, the Scripture plentifully declares,
as also that it is the Foundation of the Equity of his suffering in its stead.
So speaks the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Husbands love
your Wives, even as Christ also loved the Church (that is his Wife, the Bride
the Lambs Wife) and gave himself for it. etc. Being the Head and Husband of the
Church, which was to be sanctified and saved, and could be so no otherwise but
by his Blood and Sufferings, he was both meet so to suffer, and it was
righteous also that what he did and suffered should be imputed unto them for
whom he both did it, and suffered. Let the adversaries of the Glory of Christ
assign any one Instance of such a Conjunction, Union and Relation between any
amongst mankind, as is between Christ and the Church, and they may give some
countenance unto their Cavils against his Obedience and Sufferings in our
stead, with the imputation of what he did and suffered unto us. But the Glory
of Christ is singular herein, and as such it appears unto them by whom the
Mystery of it is in any measure spiritually apprehended.

BUT yet it will be said, that this Mystical Conjunction of Christ with his
Church is consequential unto what he did and suffered for it: for it ensues on
the conversion of Men unto him. For it is by Faith that we are implanted into
him. Until that be actually wrought in us, we have no Mystical Conjunction with
him. He is not an Head, or an Huusband unto unregenerate, unsanctified
unbelievers whilst they continue so to be: And such was the state of the whole
Church when Christ suffered for us, Romans 5. 8. Ephesians. 2. 5. There was therefore
no such Mystical Conjunction between him and the Church, as to render it meet
and equal that he should suffer in its stead. Wherefore the Church is the
Effect of the Work of the Redemption, that which rose out of it, which was made
and constituted by it; and cannot be so the Object of it, as that which was to
be redeemed by virtue of an antecedent Conjunction with it. I answer,

1. ALTHOUGH this Mystical Conjunction is not actually consummate without an
actual Participation of the Spirit of Christ, yet the Church of the Elect was
designed antecedently unto all his sufferings, to be his Spouse and Wife, so as
that he might love her and suffer for her; so it is said, Hos. 12. 13. Israel
served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep. Howbeit, she was not his
married wife, until after he had served for her, and thereby purchased her to
be his Wife; yet as he served for her, she is called his Wife, because of his
Love unto her, and because the was so designed to be upon his Service. So was
the Church designed to be the Spouse of Christ in the Counsel of God, whereon
he loved her, and gave himself for her.

HENCE in the work of Redemption the Church was the Object of it as designed to
be the Spouse of Christ, and the Effect of it, inasmuch as that thereby it was
made meet for the full consummation of that Alliance; as the Apostle expressly
declares, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.

2. ANTECEDENTLY unto all that the Lord Christ did and suffered for the Church,
there was a supreme act of the Will of God the Father, giving all the Elect
unto him, entrusting them with him, to be redeemed, sanctified and saved; as
himself declares, Joh. 17. 6, 9. Chap. 10. 14, 15, 16. And on these Grounds
this Mystical Conjunction between Christ and the Church has its virtue and
efficacy before it be actually consummate.

3. THERE is a foederal Conjunction between distinct Persons: And as this is
various according unto the variety of the Interests and Ends of them that enter
into it; so that is most eminent, where one by the common consent of all that
are concerned, undertakes to be a Sponsor or Surety for others, to do and
answer what on their part is required of them for attaining the ends of the
Covenant. So did the Lord Christ undertake to be Surety of the new Covenant in
behalf of the Church, Heb. 7. 22. and thereon tendered himself unto God to do
and suffer for them, in their stead, and on their behalf, whatever was
required, that they might be sanctified and saved. These things I have treated
of at large elsewhere, as containing a great part of the Mystery of the Wisdom
of God in the Salvation of the Church. Here therefore I do only observe that
this is that whereby the Mystical Conjunction that was between Christ and the
Church, whereon it was meet just and equal in the sight of God, that what he
did and suffered should be imputed unto us, is completed.

THESE are some of the Foundations of that Mystery of transmitting the sins of
the Church as unto the guilt and punishment of them from the sinners themselves
unto another every way innocent pure and righteous in himself, which is the
Life, Soul and Center of all Scripture Revelations. And herein is he
exceedingly Glorious, and precious unto them that believe. No heart can
conceive, no Tongue can express the Glory of Christ herein. Now because his
Infinite Condescension and Love herein have been spoken to before* I shall here
only instance its Greatness in some of its Effects.

1. IT shines forth in the Exaltation of the Righteousness of God in the
forgiveness of sins. There is no more adequate conception of the Divine Nature,
than that of Justice in Rule and Government. Hereunto it belongs to punish sin
according unto its desert: And herein consisted the first actings of God as the
Governor of the Rational Creation; They did so in the Eternal punishment of
the Angels that sinned, and the casting of Adam. out of Paradise, an Emblem
also of everlasting Ruin. Now all the Church, all the Elect of God are sinners:
They were so in Adam; they have been and are so in themselves. What does become
the Justice of God to do thereon? Shall it dismiss them all unpunished? Where
then is that Justice which spared not the Angels who sinned nor Adam at the
first? Would this procedure have any consonancy thereunto, be reconcilable unto
it? Wherefore the Establishment of the Righteousness of God on the one hand,
and the forgiveness of sin on the other, seem so contradictory, as that many
stumble and fall at it eternally, see Ram. 10. 3, 4.

BUT in this interposition of Christ, in this Translation of punishment from
the Church unto him, by virtue of his Conjunction therewith, there is a blessed
harmony between the Righteousness of the God, and the forgiveness of sins; the
exemplification whereof, is his Eternal Glory. O Blessed Change! O Sweet
permutation; as Justine Martyr speaks.

BY Virtue of his Union with the Church, which of his own accord he entered
into, and his undertaking therein to answer for it in the sight of God, it was
a righteous thing with God, to lay the punishment of all our sins upon him, so
as that he might freely and graciously pardon them all, to the Honor and
Exaltation of his Justice, as well as of his Grace and Mercy, Romans 3. 24, 25,
26.

HEREIN is he Glorious in the sight of God, Angels and Men. In him there is at
the same time, in the same Divine Actings, a Glorious Resplendency of Justice
and Mercy; of the one in punishing; of the other in pardoning. The appearing
inconsistency between the Righteousness of God and the Salvation of sinners,
wherewith the Consciences of convinced Persons are exercised and terrified, and
which is the Rock at which most of them split themselves into Eternal Ruin, is
herein removed and taken away. In his Cross were Divine Holiness and Vindictive
Justice exercised and manifested; and through his Triumph Grace and Mercy are
exerted to the utmost. This is that Glory which ravisheth the Hearts, and
satiates the Souls of them that believe. For what can they desire more, what is
farther needful unto the Rest and Composure of their Souls, than at one view to
behold God eternally well pleased in the declaration of his Righteousness, and
the exercise of his Mercy, in order unto their Salvation? In due apprehensions
hereof, let my Soul live; in the faith hereof let me dye, and let present
Admiration of this Glory make way for the eternal enjoyment of it in its beauty
and fullness.

HE is Glorious in that the Law of God in its Preceptive part, or as unto the
Obedience which it required, was perfectly fulfilled and accomplished. That it
should be so, was absolutely necessary from the Wisdom, Holiness and
Righteousness of him, by whom it was given: For what could be more remote from
those Divine Perfections, than to give a Law, which never was to be fulfilled
in them unto whom it was given, and who were to have the advantages of it? This
could not be done by us; But through the Obedience of Christ by virtue of this
his Mystical Conjunction with the Church, the Law was so fulfilled in us by
being fulfilled for us, as that the Glory of God in the giving of it, and
annexing eternal Rewards unto it, is exceedingly exalted, see Romans 8. 3, 4.

THIS is that Glory of Christ whereof one view by faith, will scatter all the
fears, answer all the objections, and give relief against all the Despondencies
of poor tempted, doubting souls; and an Anchor it will be unto all believers,
which they may cast within the Vail, to hold them firm and steadfast in all
Trials, Storms and Temptations in Life and Death.

CHAP. X.
The Glory of Christ in the Communication of himself unto Believers.
ANOTHER instance of the Glory of Christ which we are to behold here by Faith,
and hope that we shall do so by sight hereafter, consists in the Mysterious
Communication of himself and all the Benefits of his Mediation, unto the souls
of them that do believe, to their present happiness and future eternal
Blessedness.

HEREBY he becomes theirs as they are his; which is the Life, the Glory and
Consolation of the Church, Cant. 6. 3. Chap. 2. 16. Chap. 3. 10. He and all
that he is being appropriated unto them by virtue of their Mystical Union;
There is, there must be some Ground, formal Reason and Cause of this Relation
between Christ and the Church, whereby he is theirs, and they are his; he is in
them, and they in him; so as it is not between him and other Men in the World.

THE Apostle speaking of this Communication of Christ unto the Church, and the
Union between them, which does ensue thereon, affirms that is a Great Mystery;
for I speak, says he, concerning Christ and the Church, Ephesians. 5. 32.

I SHALL very briefly enquire into the Causes, Ways and Means of this
Mysterious Communication whereby he is made to be ours, to be in us, to dwell
with us, and all the benefits of his Mediation to belong unto us: For, as was
said, it is evident that he does not thus communicate himself unto all by a
natural Necessity, as the Sun gives light equally unto the whole World; nor is
he present withal by an Vbiquity of his humane Nature; nor as some dream, by a
Diffusion of his rational Soul into all; nor does he become ours by a carnal
eating of him in the Sacrament; but this Mystery proceeds from, and depends on
other Reasons and Causes, as we shall briefly declare.

BUT yet before I proceed to declare the way and manner whereby Christ
communicates himself unto the Church, I must premise something of Divine
Communications in General, and their Glory. And I shall do this by touching a
little on the harmony and Correspondency that is between the Old Creation and
the New.

1. ALL Being, Power, Goodness, and Wisdom were originally, essentially,
infinitely in God: And in them with the other Perfections of his Nature,
consisted his Essential Glory.

2. THE Old Creation was a Communication of Being and Goodness by Almighty
Power, directed by Infinite Wisdom, unto all things that were created for the
manifestation of that Glory. This was the first Communication of God unto any
thing without himself, and it was exceeding glorious, see Psalm. 19. 1. Romans 1.
21. And it was a curious Machine, framed in the subordination and dependency of
one thing on another, without which they could not subsist, nor have a
continuance of their Beings. All Creatures below live on the Earth, and the
products of it; the Earth for its whole production depends on the Sun and other
Heavenly Bodies, as God declares, Hos. 2. 21, 22. I will hear, says the Lord,
I will hear the Heavens and they shall hear the Earth, and the Earth shall hear
the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall bear Jezreel. God has
given a subordination of things in a Concatenation of Causes whereon their
Subsistence does depend. Yet,

4. IN this mutual Dependency on, and Supplies unto one another, they all
depend on, and are influenced from God himself, the Eternal Fountain of Being,
Power, and Goodness. He hears the Heavens; and in the Continuation of this
Order by constant Divine Communication of Being, Goodness and Power, unto all
Things, God is no less glorified than in the first Creation of them, Act. 14.
15, 16, 17. Chap. 17. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

5. THIS Glory of God is visible in the Matter of it, and is obvious unto the
Reason of Mankind; for from his Works of Creation and Providence they may learn
his Eternal Power and Godhead, wherein he is essentially glorious.

6. BUT by this divine Communication God did not intend only to glorify
himself in the essential Properties of his Nature, but his Existence also in
Three Persons, of Father, Son and Spirit. For although the whole Creation in
its first framing, and in its Perfection, was and is by an Emanation of Power
and Goodness from the Divine Nature in the Person of the Father, as he is the
Fountain of the Trinity, whence he is said peculiarly to be the Creator of all
things; yet the immediate Operation in the Creation was from the Son, the Power
and Wisdom of the Father, Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3. Col. 1. 16. Heb. 1. 3. And as upon
the first Production of the Mass of the Creation, it was under the especial
care of the Spirit of God to preserve and cherish it, unto the production of
all distinct sorts of Creatures, Genesis 1. 2. So in the Continuance of the whole
there is an especial Operation of the same Spirit in all things. Nothing can
subsist one Moment by virtue of the Dependence which all things have on one
another, without a continual Emanation of Power from him, see Psalm. 104. 29, 30.

BY these divine Communications in the production and preservation of the
Creature, does God manifest his Glory, and by them alone in the way of Nature
he does so; and without them, although he would have been for ever essentially
glorious, yet was it impossible that his Glory should be known unto any but
himself. Wherefore on these divine Communications does depend the whole
Maninifestation of the Glory of God. But this is far more eminent, though not
in the outward Effects of it so visible in the new Creation, as we shall see.

1. ALL Goodness, Grace, Life, Light, Mercy and Power, which are the Springs
and Causes of the New Creation, are all originally in God, in the divine
Nature, and that infinitely and essentially. In them is God eternally or
essentially glorious, and the whole Design of the New Creation was to manifest
his Glory in them by external Communications of them and from them.

2. THE first Communication of, and from these things, is made unto Christ as
the Head of the Church. For in the first place, it pleased God that in him
should all the fullness of these things dwell, so as that the whole New Creation
might consist in him, Col. 1. 17, 18, 19. And this was the first Egress of
divine Wisdom for the Manifestation of the Glory of God in these holy
Properties of his Nature. For,

3. THIS Communication was made unto him as a Repository and Treasury of all
that Goodness, Grace, Life, Light, Power and Mercy which were necessary for the
Constitution and Preservation of the New Creation. They were to be laid up in
him, to be hid in him, to dwell in him; and from him to be communicated unto
the whole Mystical Body designed unto him, that is the Church. And this is the
first Emanation of divine Power and Wisdom for the Manifestation of his Glory
in the New Creation. This Constitution of Christ as the Head of it, and the
Treasuring up in him, all that was necessary for its Production and
Preservation, wherein the Church is chosen and preordained in him unto Grace
and Glory, is the Spring and Fountain of divine Glory in the Communications
that ensue thereon.

4. THIS Communication unto Christ is (1.) Unto his Person; and then (2.) With
respect unto this Office. It is in the Person of Christ that all Fullness does
originally dwell. On the Assumption of human Nature into personal Union with
the Son of God, all Fullness dwells in him bodily, Col. 2. 9. And thereon
receiving the Spirit in all Fullness, and not by Measure, all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge were hid in him, Col. 2. 3. and he was filled with the
unsearchable Riches of Divine Grace, Ephesians. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. And the Office of
Christ is nothing but the way appointed in the Wisdom of God, for the
Communication of the Treasures of Greece, which were communicated unto his
Person. This is the end of the whole Office of Christ in all the parts of it,
as he is a Priest, a Prophet and a King. They are, I say, nothing but the Ways
appointed by infinite Wisdom for the Communication of the Grace laid up in his
Person unto the Church. The transcendent Glory hereof, we have in some weak
measure enquired into.

5. THE Decree of Election prepared, if I may so say, the Mass of the New
Creation. In the old^ Creation, God first prepared and created the Mass or
Matter of the whole, which afterward by the Power of the holy Spirit, was
formed into all the distinct Beings whereof the whole Creation was to consist;
and animated according to their distinct Kinds.

AND in order unto the Production and Perfecting of the Work of the new
Creation, God did from Eternity in the holy purpose of his Will prepare, and in
design set apart unto himself, that Portion of Mankind whereof it was to
consist. Hereby they were only the peculiar Matter that was to be wrought upon
by the Holy Ghost, and the glorious Fabric of the Church erected out of it.
What was said, it may be, of the Natural Body, by the Psalmist, is true of the
Mystical Body of Christ, which is principally intended, Psalm. 139. 15, 16. My
substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth: Thine eyes did see my substance yet
being imperfect, and in thy Book all my members were written which in
continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. The substance
of the Church whereof it was to be formed, was under the Eye of God, as
proposed in the Decree of Election; yet was it as such imperfect. It was not
formed or shaped into Members of the Mystical Body. But they were all written
in the Book of Life. And in pursuance of the Purpose of God, there they are by
the holy Spirit in the whole course and continuance of time in their several
Generations fashioned into the Shape designed for them.

6. THIS therefore is herein, the glorious Order of divine Communications. From
the infinite eternal Spring of Widsom, Grace, Goodness, and Love in the Father,
all the Effects whereof unto his end were treasured up in the Person and
Mediation of the Son; the holy Spirit unto whom the actual Application of them
is committed, communicates Life, Light, Power, Grace and Mercy unto all that
are designed parts of the New Creation. Hereon does God glorify both the
essential Properties of his Nature, his infinite Wisdom, Power, Goodness and
Grace, as the only eternal Spring of all these things; and also his ineffable
glorious Existence in three Persons, by the Order of the Communication of these
things unto the Church, which are originally from his Nature. And herein is the
glorious Truth of the Blessed Trinity, which by some is opposed, by some
neglected, by most looked on as that which is so much above them, as that it
does not belong unto them, made precious unto them that believe, and becomes
the Foundation of their Faith and Hope. In a View of the glorious Order of
those divine Communications, we are in a steady Contemplation of the ineffable
Glory of the Existence of the Nature of God in the Three distinct Persons of
Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

7. ACCORDING unto this Divine Order the Elect in all Ages are by the holy
Spirit moving and acting on that Mass of the New Creation, formed and animated
with spiritual Life, Light, Grace and Power unto the Glory of God. They are not
called accidentally according unto the external Occasions and Causes of their
Conversion unto God; but in every Age, at his own Time and Season, the holy
Spirit communicates these things unto them, in the Order declared unto the
Glory of God.

8. AND in the same manner is the whole New Creation preserved every Day: every
moment there is vital Power and Strength, Mercy and Grace communicated in this
Divine Order to all Believers in the World. There is a continual Influence from
the Fountain, from the Head, into all the Members, whereby they all consist in
him, are acted by him, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure: and the Apostle declares that the whole Constitution of Church Order
is suited as an external Instrument to promote these Divine Communications,
unto all the Members of the Church, it self Ephesians. 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.

THIS in general is the Order of Divine Communications, which is for the
Substance of it continued in Heaven, and shall be so unto Eternity; For God is,
and ever will be all and in all. But at present, it is invisible unto Eyes of
Flesh, yea, the Reason of Men. Hence it is by the most despised, they see no
Glory in it: But let us consider the Prayer of the Apostle, that it may be
otherwise with us, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. For the Revelation
made of the Glory of God in the old Creation, is exceeding inferior to that
which he makes of himself in the New.

HAVING premised these things in general concerning the Glory of Divine
Communications, I shall proceed to declare in particular, the Grounds and Way
whereby the Lord Christ communicates himself, and therewithal all the Benefits
of his Mediation, unto them that do believe, as it was before proposed.

WE on our part are said herein to receive him, and that by Faith, John 1. 11,
12. Now where he is received by us, he must be tendered, given, granted, or
communicated unto us. And this he is by some divine Acts of the Father, and
some of his own.

THE Foundation of the whole is laid in a Sovereign Act of the Will, the
Pleasure, the Grace of the Father. And this is the Order and Method of all
divine Operations in the Way and Work of Grace. They originally proceed all
from him; and having effected their Ends, do return, rest, and center in him
again, see Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. Wherefore that Christ is made ours, that he is
communicated unto us, is originally from the free Act, Grant and Donation of
the Father, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Romans 5. 15, 16, 17. And hereunto sundry things do
concur. As (1.) His Eternal Purpose which he purposed in himself to glorify
his Grace in all his Elect, by this Communication of Christ, and the Benefits
of his Mediation unto them, which the Apostle declares at large, Ephesians. 1. (2.)
His granting all the Elect unto Christ to be his own: so to do and suffer for
them what was antecedaneously necessary unto the actual Communication of
himself unto them. Thine they were, and thou gave them to me, Joh. 17. (3.)
The giving of the Promise, or the Constitution of the Rule and Law of the
Gospel, whereby a participation of Christ, an Interest in him and all that he
is, is made over and assured unto Believers, Joh. 1. 12. 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
(4.) An Act of Almighty Power, working and creating Faith in the Souls of the
Elect, enabling them to receive Christ so exhibited and communicated unto them
by the Gospel, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. Chap. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8.

THESE things which I have but named, have an Influence into the Glory of
Christ herein: For this Communication of him unto the Church, is an effect of
the eternal Counsel, Wisdom, Grace and Power of the Father.

BUT they are the Acts of Christ himself herein, which principally we enquire
into, as those which manifest the Glory of his Wisdom, Love and Condescension.

AND 1. He gives and communicates unto them his holy Spirit; the holy Spirit as
peculiarly his, as granted unto him of the Father, as inhabiting in him in all
fullness. This Spirit abiding originally as to his Person, and immeasurably as
unto his Effects and Operations in himself, he gives unto all Believers to
inhabit and abide in them also, Joh. 14. 14. 20. 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17. Romans 8. 8.
Hence follows an ineffable Union between him and them. For as in his
Incarnation he took our Nature into personal Union with his own; so herein he
takes our Persons into a Mystical Union with himself. Hereby he becomes ours,
and we are his.

AND herein is he unspeakably glorious: For this Mystery of the Inhabitation of
the same Spirit in him as the Head, and the Church as his Body, animating the
whole, is a transcendent Effect of Divine Wisdom. There is nothing of this
Nature in the whole Creation besides; no such Union, no such mutual
Communication. The strictest Unions and Relations in Nature are but Shadows of
it. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Herein also is the Lord Christ
precious unto them that do believe, but a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of
offense unto the Disobedient. This glorious ineffable Effect of his Wisdom and
Grace, this rare, peculiar, singular Way of the Communication of himself unto
the Church, is by many despised. They know, it may be, some of them, what it is
to be joined unto an Harlot so as to become one Flesh, but what it is to be
joined unto the Lord so as to become one Spirit, they know not. But this
Principle and Spring of the spiritual Life of the Church, and of all vital
spiritual Motions toward God, and Things heavenly, wherein, and whereby our
Life is hid with Christ in God, is the Glory, the Exaltation, the Honor, the
Security of the Church unto the Praise of the Grace of God. The Understanding
of it in its Causes, Effects, Operations and Privileges wherewith it is
accompanied, is to be preferred above all the Wisdom in, and of the World.

2. HE thus communicates himself unto us, by the Formation of a new Nature, his
own Nature in us; so as that the very same spiritual Nature is in him, and in
the Church. Only it is so with this difference, that in him it is in the
absolute perfection of all those glorious Graces wherein it does consist; in
the Church it is in various Measures and Degrees, according as he is pleased to
communicate it. But the same Divine Nature it is, that is in him and us; for
through the precious Promises of the Gospel, we are made Partakers of his
Divine Nature. It is not enough for us, that he has taken our Nature to be
his, unless he gives us also his Nature to be ours; that is implants in our
Souls all those gracious Qualifications, as unto the Essence and Substance of
them, wherewith he himself in his human Nature is endued. This is that new Man,
that new Creature, that Divine Nature, that Spirit which is born of the Spirit,
that Transformation into the Image of Christ, that putting of him on, that
Workmanship of God, whereunto in him we are created, that the Scripture so
fully testifies unto, Joh. 3. 6. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 3. 18. Chap.
5. 17. Ephesians. 4. 20. 24. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

AND that new Heavenly Nature which is thus formed in Believers, as the first
vital Act of that Union which is between Christ and them by the Inhabitation of
the same Spirit, is peculiarly his Nature. For both is it so as it is in him
the Idaea and the Exemplar of it in us, inasmuch as we are predestined to be
conformed unto his Image; and as it is wrought or produced in our Souls by an
Emanation of Power, Virtue, and Efficiency from him.

THIS is a most heavenly Way of the Communication of himself unto us, wherein
of God he is made unto us Wisdom and Sanctification. Hereon he says of his
Church, This now is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh; I see my self, my
own Nature in them, whence they are comely and desirable. Hereby he makes way
to present it to himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any
such thing, but holy and without Blemish. On this Communication of Christ unto
us by the forming of his own Nature in us, depends all the Purity, the Beauty,
the Holiness, the inward Clory of the Church. Hereby is it really,
substantially internally separated from the World, and distinguished from all
others, who in the outward forms of things, in the Profession and Duties of
Religion seem to be the same with them. Hereby it becomes the First Fruits of
the Creation unto God, bearing forth the Renovation of his Image in the World:
Herein the Lord Christ is, and will be glorious unto all Eternity. I only
mention these things, which deserve to be far more largely insisted on.

3. HE does the same by that actual Insitition or Implantation into himself,
which he gives us by Faith; which is of his own Operation. For hereon two
Things do ensue; one by the Grace or Power, the other by the Law or
Constitution of the Gospel, which have a great Influence into this Mystical
Communication of Christ unto the Church.

AND the first of these is, that thereby there is communicated unto us, and we
do derive Supplies of spiritual Life, Sustentation, Motion, Strength in Grace,
and Perseverance from him continually. This is that which himself so divinely
teaches in the Parable of the Vine and its Branches, Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Hereby is there a continual Communication from his All fullness of Grace Unto
the whole Church, and all the Members of it, unto all the Ends and Duties of
spiritual Life. They live, nevertheless not they, but Christ lives in them;
and the Life which they lead in the Flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God.
And the other, by virtue of the Law and Constitution of the Gospel, is, that
hereon his Righteousness, and all the Fruits of his Mediation, are imputed unto
us; the Glory of which Mystery the Apostle unfolds, Romans 3. 4, 5.

I MIGHT add hereunto the mutual Inbeing that is between him and Believers by
Love; for the way of the Communication of his Love unto them, being by the
shedding of it abroad in their Hearts by the Holy Ghost, and their returns of
Love unto them being wrought in them by an Almighty Efficiency of the same
Spirit, there is that which is deeply mysterious and glorious in it. I might
mention also the Continuation of his Discharge of all his Offices toward us,
whereon all our Receptions from him, or all the Benefits of his Mediation,
whereof we are made Partakers, do depend. But the few Instances that have been
given of the Glory of Christ in this Mysterious Communication of himself unto
his Church, may suffice to give us such a View of it, as to fill our Hearts
with holy Admiration and Thanksgiving.

CHAP. XI.
The Glory of Christ in the Recapitulation of all things in him.
IN the last Place the Lord Christ is peculiarly and eminently glorious in the
Re-capitulation of all things in him, after they had been scattered and
disordered by sin. This the Apostle proposes as the most signal Effect of
Divine Wisdom, and the sovereign Pleasure of God.

HE has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence; having made known unto
us the Mystery of his Will according unto his good Pleasure, which he has
purposed in himself. That in the Dispensation of the fullness of time, he might
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in the Heavens, and
which are on Earth, even in him, Ephesians. 1. 8, 9, 10.

FOR the Discovery of the Mind of the Holy Ghost in these Words, so far as I am
at present concerned, namely, as unto the Representation of the Glory* of
Christ in them, sundry brief Observations must be premised; and in them it will
be necessary that we briefly declare the Original of all these things in Heaven
and Earth, their Primitive Order, the Confusion that ensued thereon, with their
Restitution in Christ, and his Glory thereby.

GOD alone has all being in him. Hence he gives himself that Name, I AM, Exodus
3. 14. He was eternally All; when all things else that ever were, or now are,
or shall be, were nothing. And when they are, they are no otherwise, but as
they are of him, and from him, and to him, Romans 11. 36. Moreover his Being and
Goodness are the same. The Goodness of Good is the Meetness of the Divine Being
to be communicative of it self in its Effects. Hence this is the first Notion
of the Divine Nature, Infinite Being and Goodness in a Nature intelligent and
self-subsistent. So the Apostle declares it, He that comes unto God must
believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder, Heb. 11. 6.

2. IN this State of Infinite, Eternal Being and Goodness antecedent unto any
Act of Wisdom or Power without himself, to give Existence unto other Things,
God was, and is eternally in himself all that he will be, all that he can be,
unto Eternity. For where there is Infinite Being and Infinite Goodness, there
is Infinite Blessedness and Happiness, whereunto nothing can be added. God is
always the same. That is his Name (...) Psalm. 102. 27. Thou art he, always the
same. All things that are, make no addition unto God, no change in his State.
His Blessedness, Happiness, Self-satisfaction, as well as all other his
Infinite Perfections, were absolutely the same before the Creation of any
thing, whilst there was nothing but himself, as they are since he has made all
things: For the Blessedness of God consists in the ineffable mutual Inbeing of
the Three holy Persons in the same Nature, with the immanent reciprocal Actings
of the Father and the Son in the eternal Love and Complacency of the Spirit.
Hereunto nothing can be added, herein no Change can be made by any external
Work or Effect of Power. Herein does God act in the perfect Knowledge, and
perfect Love of his own Perfections unto an infinite Acquiescency therein,
which is the Divine Blessedness. This gives us the true Notion of the Divine
Nature antecedent unto the Manifestation of it made by any outward Effects.
Infinite Being and Goodness eternally blessed in the Knowledge and Enjoyment of
it self by inconceivable, ineffable, internal Actings answering the manner of
its Subsistence, which is in three distinct Persons.

3. THIS Being and Goodness of God by his own Will and Pleasure, acting
themselves in Infinite Wisdom and Power, produced the Creation of all things.
Herein he communicated a finite, limited, dependent Being and Goodness unto
other things without himself. For all Being and Goodness being, as was said, in
him alone, it was necessary that the first outward Work and Effect of the
Divine Nature must be the Communication of Being and Goodness into other
things. Wherefore as when he had given unto every thing its Being out of
nothing by the Word of his Power, saying, Let them be, and they were; so it is
said, that he looked on all that he had made, and behold, they were exceeding
good, Genesis 1. last. Being and Goodness must be the first outward Effects of the
Divine Nature, which being wrought by Infinite Power and Wisdom, do represent
unto us the Glory of God in the Creation of all things. Infinite Being in
Self-subsistence, which is necessary in the first Cause and Spring of all
things; Infinite Goodness to communicate the Effect of this Being unto that
which was not, and Infinite Wisdom and Power in that Communication, are
gloriously manifested therein.

4. IN this State, all things that were made, depended immediately on God
himself, without the Interposition of any other Head of Influence or Rule. They
had the Continuance of their Being and its Preservation, from the immediate
Actings of these Properties of the Divine Nature whereby they were made; and
their Dependence on God was by Virtue of that Law, which was implanted on the
Principles and Powers of their several Natures by God himself.

5. THUS in the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth. He provided
himself of two distinct Rational Families, that should depend on him according
to a Law of Moral Obedience, and thereby give Glory to him; with two distinct
Habitations for them cognate unto their Nature and Use; Heaven above, and the
Earth beneath. The Earth he appointed for the Habitation of Man, which was
every way suited unto the Constitution of his Nature, the Preservation of his
Being, and the End of his Creation in giving Glory to God. Heaven he prepared
for the Habitation of the Angels, which was suited unto the Constitution of
their Nature, the Preservation of their Being, and the End of their Creation in
giving Glory to God. Wherefore as Man had Power and Dominion over all things
here below, and was to use them all unto the Glory of God, by which means God
received Glory from them also, though in themselves bruit and inanimate; so the
Angels had the like Dominion over the Celestial and Aetherial Bodies,
wherewith God had fitted the Place of their Habitation, that through the
Contemplation and Use of them, God might have a Revenue of Glory and Praise
from them also. To suppose any other Race of Intellectual Creatures, besides
Angels in Heaven, and Men on Earth, is not only without all Countenance from
any Divine Testimony, but it disturbs and disorders the whole Representation of
the Glory of God made unto us in the Scripture, and the whole Design of his
Wisdom and Grace as declared therein. Intellectual Creatures not comprehended
in that Government of God, and Mystery of his Wisdom in Christ, which the
Scripture Reveals, are a Chimera framed in the Imaginations of some Men, scarce
duly sensible of what it is to be wise unto Sobriety.

6. THIS Order of things was beautiful and comely. Hence were they all said to
be exceeding good. For each of these Families had their own immediate, distinct
Dependence on God. He was the immediate Head of them. There was no other common
Head interposed between God and them. They were not an Head unto one another.
There were no Communications unto them, but what were immediate from God
himself. And their Union among themselves was in this alone, that all their
Obedience did meet and center in God. So God made the Heavens and the Earth,
and two distinct Families in them for himself.

7. THIS beautiful Order in it self, this Union between the two Families of
God, was disturbed, broken, dissolved by the Entrance of Sin: For hereby part
of the Family above, and the whole Family below, fell off from their Dependence
on God, and ceasing to center in him as their Head, they fell into Variance and
Enmity among themselves. For the Center of this Union and Order being removed
and lost, nothing but Enmity and Confusion remained among them. Hereon to show
that its Goodness was lost, God cursed the Earth and all that was in it; for it
was put in Subjection unto Man, who was now fallen from him: Howbeit he cursed
not the Heavens which were in Subjection unto the Angels, because some of them
only left their Habitation; and the Habitation of the Residue was not to be
cursed for their Sakes. But Mankind was wholly gone off from God.

8. THE Angels that sinned, God utterly rejected for ever as an Example of his
Severity; the whole Race of Mankind he would not utterly cast off, but
determined to recover and save a Remnant according to the Election of Grace;
which how he did it in a way of Condecency unto all his Divine Perfections, I
have elsewhere declared.

9. HOWBEIT he would not restore them into their former State, so as to have
again two distinct Families, each in an immediate Dependence on himself, though
he left them in different and distinct Habitations, Ephesians. 3. 15. But he would
gather them both into one, and that under a new Head, in whom the one Part
should be preserved from sinning, and the other delivered from sin committed.

10. THIS then is that which the Apostle declares in these Words, To gather
together in one all things which are in Heaven, and which are in Earth; even in
him. And so he again expresses it, Col. 1. 20. To reconcile all things unto
himself in him, whether they are things in Heaven, or things in Earth, all
things were fallen into disorder and confusion by sin; they were fallen off
from God into variance among themselves. God would not restore them into their
first Order in an immediate Dependence on his Divine Perfections. He would no
longer keep them in two distinct Families; but he would in his infinite Wisdom
and Goodness gather them up into one common Head, on whom they should have
their immediate Dependence, and be reconciled again among themselves.

11. THIS New Head, wherein God has gathered up all things in Heaven and Earth
into one; one Body, one Family, on whom is all their dependence, in whom they
all now consist, is Jesus Christ the Son of God incarnate, see 1 Cor. 11. 3.
Ephesians. 1. 21, 22, 23. This Glory was reserved for him; none other could be meet
for it, or worthy of it, see Col. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20

12. TO answer all the Ends of this New Head of Gods recollected Family, all
Power in Heaven and Earth, all Fullness of Grace and Glory, is committed unto
him. There is no Communication from God, no Act of Rule toward this Family, no
Supply of Virtue, Power, Grace or Goodness unto Angels or Men, but what is
immediately from this New Head, whereinto they are gathered. In him they all
consist, on him do they depend, unto him are they subject; in their Relation
unto him does their Peace, Union and Agreement among themselves consist. This
is the Recapitulation of all things intended by the Apostle.

13. IT is true, that he acts distinctly and variously toward the two parts of
the Recollected Family of Angels and Men, according as their different States
and Conditions do require. For (1.) We had need of a Reparation by Redemption
and Grace, which the Angels had not. (2.) Angels were capable of immediate
Confirmation in Glory, which we are not, until we come to Heaven. Therefore
(1.) He assumed our Nature that it might be repaired; which he did not the
Nature of the Angels. (2.) He gives us Union unto himself, by his Spirit, which
exalts us into a Dignity and Honor, meet for Fellowship with them in the same
Family.

THIS is a brief Account of the mysterious Work of Divine Wisdom in the
Recapitulation of all things in Jesus Christ; and herein is he transcendently
glorious; or his Glory herein is far above our Comprehension: Yet some few
things may be observed to direct us in the View and Contemplation of it. As,

1. HE alone was a meet and capable Subject of it. He only could bear the
weight of this Glory. No meet Creature in Heaven or Earth was meet to be thus
made the Head of the whole new Creation of God. In none of them could all
things consist. None of them was meet to be thus in the Place of God, to have
all things depend upon him, and be put in subjection unto him, so as that there
should be no Communication between God and the Creation, but by and through him
alone. Wherefore when the holy Ghost assigns this Glory unto him, he so
describes him, as that we may discern his singular meetness for it; as that he
is the Brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person,
upholding all things by the Word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. That he is the Image
of the invisible God, the first born of every Creature, by whom all things were
created, that are in Heaven, and that are in the Earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things
were created by him, and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all
things consist, Col. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Such an one alone and no other was
meet to bear and uphold this Glory, And the Glory of his Person is such as that
it is the Blessedness of all Creatures to center in this Glory of his Office.

2. THIS is that Glory which God designed unto his only Son incarnate; and it
gives us a little View into the Glory of that Mystery, the wonderful eternal
Design of God to glorify himself in the Incarnation of Christ. God would have
his eternal, his only begotten Son to be incarnate, to take our Nature on him,
to be made Man. What is his Design in this incomprehensible Work of his Wisdom,
Love and Power? Indeed in the first place, it was for the Redemption of the
Church, by the Sacrifice of himself and other Acts of his Mediation. But there
is that which is more general and comprehensive, and wherein all the concerns
of the Glory of God do center. And this was that he might gather all things
into one in him, that the whole Creation, especially that which was to be
eternally blessed, should have a new Head given unto it for its Sustentation,
Preservation, Order, Honor and Safety. All Springs are in him, and all Streams
are unto him, and in and by him unto God. Who can express the Divine Beauty,
Order and Harmony of all things that are in this their Recapitulation in
Christ? The Union and Communion between Angels and Men, the Order of the whole
Family in Heaven and Earth, the Communication of Life, Grace, Power, Mercy and
Consolation to the Church, the Rule and Disposal of all things unto the Glory
of God, do all depend hereon. This Glory God designed unto his Son incarnate,
and it was the greatest, the highest that could be communicated unto him. For
as the Apostle observes, All things are put in subjection unto him, he only
excepted who does ^o make them subject, that is God the Father, 1 Cor. 15.

THERE is no Contemplation of the Glory of Christ that ought more to affect the
Hearts of them that do believe, with Delight and Joy, than this of the
Recapitulation of all things in him. One View by Faith of him in the place of
God as the supreme Head of the whole Creation, moving, acting, guiding and
disposing of it, will bring in spiritual Refreshment unto a believing Soul.

AND it will do so the more, in that it gives a glorious Representation of his
Divine Nature also. For that any mere Creature should thus be an Head of Life,
Motion and Power, as also of sovereign Rule, and disposal of the wh^le new
Creation, with all things reduced into order thereby, is not only an impious,
but a foolish Imagination.

DID we live more in the Contemplation of this Glory of Christ, and of the
Wisdom of God in this Recapitulation of all things in him, there is not any
thing of our Duty which it would not mind us of, nor any thing of Privilege
which it would not give us a Sense of, as might easily be demonstrated.

3. IN particular, the Lord Christ is glorious herein, in that the whole Breach
made on the Glory of God in the Creation by the Entrance of Sin, is hereby
repaired and made up. The Beauty and Order of the whole Creation consisted in
i^s dependence on God by the Obedience of the rational Part of it, Angels and
Men. Thereby were the being, the goodness, the wisdom and power of God made
manifest. But the Beauty of this Order was defaced, and the Manifestation of
the Divine Perfections unto the glory of God eclipsed by the Entrance of Sin.
But all is restored, repaired and made up in this Recapitulation of all things
in one new Head Christ Jesus; yea, the whole curious Frame of the Divine
Creation is rendered more beautiful than it was before. Hence the whole of it
groaneth for the Interest of each Part in this Restoration of all things.
Whatever there is of Order, of Beauty, of Glory in Heaven above, or in Earth
beneath, it all arises from this new Relation of the Creation unto the Son of
God. Whatever is not gathered into one, even in him, in its place and according
to its measure, is under Darkness, Disorder and the Curse. Hence the Jews have
a saying, that in the days of the Messiah all things shall be healed but the
Serpent, that is the Devil, and wicked Men which are as his Seed.

4. HE is glorious herein, in that he is appointed as the only means of
exerting, and expressing all the Treasures of the Infinite Wisdom of God
toward his Creatures. The Wisdom of God is absolutely, always and in all
things Infinite. God does not, God cannot act with more Wisdom in one thing
than in another; as in the Creation of man than in that of any inanimate
Creatures. In the first Creation Infinite Wisdom was the inseparable companion
of Infinite Power. How mavelous are thy works, O Lord! in Wisdom have thou
made them all. But when the effects of this Divine Wisdom in their principal
beauty and glory were defaced, greater Treasures of Wisdom were required unto
their Reparation. And in this Recollection of all things in Christ did God lay
them forth unto the utmost of whatever he will do in dealing with his
Creatures; so the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 3. 10. To the intent that now
unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the
Church the manifold wisdom of God. By the Recapitulation of all things into
this one head, the manifold various unsearchable Wisdom of God was made known
unto the Angels themselves. They knew not before of the Design and Work of God
after the Entrance of Sin. These could not comprehend the Wisdom that might
repair that Loss. They knew not that Divine Wisdom had another way to take
herein, at least they knew not what way that should be. But hereby the manifold
Wisdom of God, his infinite Wisdom in the Treasures of it, able by various ways
to attain the ends of his Glory, was made known unto them. Herein, namely, in
the Recollection of all things in Christ, Divine Wisdom has made known and
represented it self in all its Stores and Treasures unto Angels and Men. In him
are hid, and by him are displayed, all the treasures of Wisdom, Col. 2. 3.
Herein is he glorious, and will be so to Eternity.

5. He is glorious herein, in that hereby firmness and security is communicated
unto the whole new Creation. The first Creation in its Order was a curious and
glorious Fabric. But every thing depending immediately on God by virtue of the
Principles of its own Nature, and the Law of its Obedience, all was brought
unto a Loss by the sin of Angels and Men. But now every thing that belongs unto
this new Creation, even every Believer in the World as well as the Angels in
Heaven being gathered together in this one Head, the whole and all, and every
part and member of it, even every particular Believer are secured from Ruin,
such as befell all things before. In this New Head they have an indissoluble
Consistency.

BUT manum de Tabula. I shall insist on no more Instances of this Nature which
plentifully offer themselves in the Scripture unto us. For who can declare this
glory of Christ? Who can speak of these things as he ought? I am so far from
designing to set forth the whole of it, that I am deeply sensible how little a
Portion I can comprehend of the least part of it. Nor can I attain unto any
Satisfaction in these Meditations, but what Issue in an humble Admiration.

CHAP. XII.
Differences between our beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in this World,
and by sight in Heaven. The first of them explained.
WE walk here by faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. That is, in the Life of
God, in our walking before him, in the whole of our Obedience therein, we are
under the Conduct and Influence of Faith and not of Sight. Those are the two
spiritual Powers of our Souls; by the one whereof, we are made Partakers of
Grace, Holiness and Obedience in this Life; and by the other of eternal
Blessedness and Glory.

BOTH these, namely, Faith and Sight, the one in this Life, the other in that
which is to come, have the same immediate Object. For they are the Abilities of
the Soul to go forth unto, and to embrace their Object. Now this Object of them
both, is the Glory of Christ, as has been declared, as also what that glory
is, and wherein it does consist; wherefore my present Design is to enquire into
the difference that is between our beholding of the Glory of Christ in this
World by Faith, and the Vision which we shall have of the same Glory hereafter.

THE latter of these is peculiarly intended in that Prayer of our Lord Jesus
Christ for his Disciples, Joh. 17. 24. Father I will that they also whom thou
have given me, may be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory which
thou have given me. But I shall not distinctly insist upon it, my design being
another way, respecting principally the Work of God in this Life, and the
Privileges which we enjoy thereby: Yet I shall now take a short Prospect of
that also; not absolutely, but in the Differences that are between Faith and
Sight, or the View which we have of the glory of Christ in this World by Faith,
and that which they enjoy by Vision who are above; the Object of them both
being adequately the same.

BUT herein also, I shall have respect only unto some of those things which
concern our Practice, or the present immediate Exercise of Faith. For I have
elsewhere handled at large the State of the Church above, or that of present
glory; giving an account of the Administration of the Office of Christ in
Heaven, his Presence among the glorified Souls, and the Adoration of God under
his Conduct: I have also declared the Advantage which they have by being with
him, and the Prospect they have of his glory. Therefore these things must here
be only touched on:

THESE Differences may be referred unto two heads. (1.) Those which arise from
the different Natures and Actings of those Means and Instruments whereby we
apprehend this glory of Christ, namely, Faith and Vision. And (2.) Those that
arise from the different Effects produced by them. Instances in each kind shall
be given.

1. THE View which we have of the glory of Christ by Faith in this World, is
obscure, dark, inevident, reflexive. So the Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Now we see through a Glass darkly (...). Through or by a Glass in a Riddle, a
Parable, a dark Saying. There is a double figurative Limitation put upon our
View of the glory of Christ, taken from the two ways of our Perception of what
we apprehend, namely, the Sight of things, and the hearing of Words.

THE first is, that we have this View not directly, but reflexively, and by way
of a Representation, as in a Glass. For I take the Glass here, not to be
Optical, or a Prospective which helps the Sight, but a Speculum, or a Glass
which reflects an Image of what we do behold. It is a Sight like that which we
have of a Man in a Glass, when we see not his Person or Substance, but an Image
or Representation of them only, which is imperfect.

The Shadow or Image of this glory of Christ is drawn in the Gospel, and
therein we behold it as the Likeness of a Man represented unto us in a Glass;
and although it be obscure and imperfect in comparison of his own real,
substantial glory, which is the Object of Vision in Heaven; yet is it the only
Image and Representation of himself, which he has left, and given unto us in
this World. That woeful cursed Invention of framing Images of him out of Stocks
and Stones however adorned, or Representations of him by the Art of painting,
are so far from presenting unto the Minds of Men any thing of his real glory,
that nothing can be more effectual to divert their Thoughts and Apprehensions
from it. But by this figurative Expression of seeing in a Glass, the Apostle
declares the comparative Imperfection of our present View of the glory of
Christ.

BUT the Allusion may be taken from an Optic Glass or Tube also, whereby the
sight of the Eye is helped in beholding things at a great distance. By the aid
of such Glasses Men will discover Stars or heavenly Lights, which by reason of
their distance from us, the Eye of it self is no way able to discern. And those
which we do fee, are more fully represented, though remote enough from being
so, perfectly. Such a Glass is the Gospel, without which we can make no
discovery of Christ at all, but in the use of it, we are far enough from
beholding him in the just dimensions of his glory.

AND he adds another intimation of this Imperfection, in an Allusion unto the
way whereby things are proposed and conveyed unto the Minds and Apprehensions
of Men: Now this is by Words. And these are either plain, proper and direct, or
dark, figurative and parabolical: And this latter way makes the Conception of
things to be difficult and imperfect; and by reason of the imperfection of our
View of the glory of Christ by Faith in this World, the Apostle says, it is in
(...) in a Riddle. These (...) the Psalmist calls (...) darksaying, Psalm. 78. 2.

BUT here it must be observed, that the description and Representation of the
Lord Christ and his glory in the Gospel, is not absolutely, or in it self
either dark or obscure. Yea, it is perspicuous, plain and direct. Christ is
therein evidently set forth crucified, exalted, glorified. But the Apostle does
not here discourse concerning the Way or Means of the Revelation of it unto us,
but of the Means or Instrument whereby we comprehend that Revelation. This is
our Faith, which as it is in us, being weak and imperfect, we comprehend the
Representation that is made unto us of the Glory of Christ, as Men do the sense
of a dark Saying, a Riddle, a Parable, that is, imperfectly, and with
difficulty.

ON the account hereof we may say at present, How little a portion is it that
we know of him? as Job speaks of God, Chap. 26. 14. How imperfect are our
Conceptions of him? How weak are our Minds in their Management? There is no
part of his glory that we can fully comprehend. And what we do comprehend (as
there is a Comprehension in Faith, Ephesians. 3. 18.) we cannot abide in the steady
contemplation of. For ever blessed be that Sovereign Grace, whence it is that
he who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our
hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of his own Glory in the face of
Jesus Christ, and therein of the glory of Christ himself; that he has so
revealed him unto us, as that we may love him, admire him and obey him; but
constantly, steadily, and clearly to behold his glory in this life we are not
able, for we walk by Faith and not by Sight.

HENCE our sight of him here, is as it were by Glances liable to be clouded by
many interpositions. Behold he stands behind the wall, he looks forth at
the windows, showing ((...) flourishing) himself at the lattess, Cant. 2. 9.
Th^re is a great Interposition between him and us, as a Wall; and the means of
the discovery of himself unto us, as through a Window and Lattess, include a
great instability and imperfection in our view and Apprehension of him. There
is a Wall between him and us, which yet he stands behind. Our present mortal
state is this Wall, which must be demolished before we can see him as he is. In
the mean time he looks through the Windows of the ordinances of the Gospel.
He gives us sometimes, when he is pleased to stand in those Windows, a view of
himself; but it is imperfect, as is our sight of a man through a Window. The
appearances of him at these Windows are full of refreshment unto the souls of
them that do believe. But our view of them is imperfect, transient, and does
not abide: We are for the most part quickly left to bemoan what we have lost.
And then our best is but to cry; As the heart pants after the water-brook, so
pants my soul after thee, O God; my soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before thee? When will thou again give me to
see thee, tho but as through the Windows? Alas what distress do we oftentimes
sit down in, after these views of Christ and his Glory! But he proceeds further
yet; and flourishes himself through the lattesses. This displaying of the glory
of Christ called the flourishing (...) himself, is by the promises of the
Gospel as they are explained in the ministry of the word. In them are
represented unto us the desirable beauties and glories of Christ; how precious,
how amiable is he as represented in them? How are the Souls of Believers
ravished with the views of them? Yet is this discovery of him also but as
through a Lattess. We see him but by parts, unsteadily and unevenly.

SUCH I say is the sight of the glory of Christ which we have in this world by
Faith. It is dark, it is but in part. It is but weak, transient, imperfect,
partial. It is but little that we can at any time discover of it; it is but a
little while, that we can abide in the contemplation of that we do discover,
rara hora, brevis mora. Sometimes it is unto us as the Sun when it is under a
Cloud, we cannot perceive it. When he hides his face, who then can behold him?
As Job speaks, so may we, Behold I go forward, but he is not there: and
backward, but I cannon perceive him; on the left hand, where he does work, but
I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see
him, chap. 23 8, 9. Which way soever we turn our selves, and what duties soever
we apply our selves unto, we can obtain no distinct view of his glory. Yet on
the other hand, it is sometimes as the Sun when it shines in its brightness,
and we cannot bear the rays of it. In infinite condescension he says unto his
Church, Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me, Cant. 6. 5. As
if he could not bear that overcoming affectionate love, which looks through the
eyes of the Church in its acting of Faith on him. Ah! How much more do we find
our souls overcome with his love, when at any he is pleased to make any clear
discoveries of his glory unto us!

LET us now on the other hand, take a little Consideration of that Vision*
which we shall have of the same Glory in Heaven, that we may compare them
together.

VISION or the sight which we shall have of the glory of Christ in Heaven, is
immediate, direct, intuitive, and therefore steady, even and constant: And it
is so on a double Account. (1.) Of the Object which shall be proposed unto us.
(2.) Of the Visive Power or faculty wherewith we shall be endued; from the
imperfection of both which in this World, arises the imperfection of our view
of the glory of Christ by faith, as has been declared.

1. THE Object of it will be real and substantial. Christ himself in his own
person with all his glory, shall be continually with us, before us, proposed
unto us. We shall no longer have an Image, a Representation of him, such as is
the delineation of his Glory in the Gospel. We shall see him, says the
Apostle, face to face; 1 Cor. 13. 12. which he opposes unto our seeing him
darkly as in a glass, which is the utmost that faith can attain to. We shall
see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2, not as now in an imperfect description of him.
As a man sees his neighbor when they stand and converse together face to face;
So shall we see the Lord Christ in his glory, and not as Moses who had only a
transient sight of some parts of the Glory of God, when he caused it to pass by
him.

THERE will be use herein, of our bodily eyes, as shall be declared. For as Job
says, in our Flesh shall we see our Redeemer, and our eyes shall behold him,
Chap. 19. 25, 26, 27. That corporeal sense shall not be restored unto us, and
that glorified above what we can conceive, but for this great use of the
eternal beholding of Christ and his Glory. Unto whom it is not a matter of
rejoicing, that with the same eyes wherewith they see the tokens and signs of
him in the Sacrament of the Supper, they shall behold himself immediately, in
his own person. But principally, as we shall see immediately, this vision is
intellectual. It is not therefore the mere Human Nature of Christ, that is the
object of it, but his Divine Person as that nature subsisteth therein. What is
that perfection which we shall have (for that which is perfect must come and do
away that which is in part) in the comprehension of the hypostatical Union, I
understand not; but this I know, that in the immediate beholding of the Person
of Christ, we shall see a glory in it a thousand times above what here we can
conceive. The excellencies of Infinite Wisdom, Love and Power therein, will be
continually before us. And all the glories of the Person of Christ, which we
have before weakly and faintly enquired into, will be in our sight for evermore.

HENCE the ground and cause of our Blessedness is, that we shall be ever with
the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. As himself prays, that we may be with him where he is,
to behold his glory: Here we have some dark views of it, we cannot perfectly
behold it, until we are with him where he is. Thereon our sight of him will be
direct, intuitive, and constant.

THERE is a glory, there will be so subjectively in us in the beholding of this
glory of Christ, which is at present incomprehensible. For it does not yet
appear what we our selves shall be, 1 John, 3. 2. Who can declare what a glory
it will be in us to behold this Glory of Christ? And how excellent then is that
glory of Christ it self?

THIS immediate sight of Christ, is that which all the Saints of God in this
life do breath and pant after. Hence are they willing to be dissolved, or
desire to depart, that they may be with Christ, which is best for them, Phil.
1. 23. They choose to be absent from the body and present with the Lord, 2 Cor.
5. 8. Or that they may enjoy the inexpressibly longed for sight of Christ in
his glory. Those who do not so long for it, whose souls and minds are not
frequently visited with earnest desires after it, unto whom the thoughts of it
are not their relief in Trouble, and their chiefest Joy, are carnal, blind, and
cannot see afar off. He that is truly spiritual, entertains and refreshes
himself with thoughts hereof continually.

2. IT will be so from that Visive Power or faculty of beholding the Glory of
Christ, which we shall then receive. Without this we cannot see him as he is.
When he was transfigured in the Mount, and had on his Human Nature some
reflections of his Divine Glory, his Disciples that were with him, were rather
amazed, than refreshed by it. Mat. 17. 4. They saw his glory, but spoke thereon
they knew not what, Luke 9. 30, 33. And the reason hereof was because no man in
this life can have a Visive Power, either spiritual, or corporeal, directly and
immediately to behold the real Glory of Christ.

SHOULD the Lord Jesus appear now to any of us in his Majesty and Glory, it
would not be unto our edification nor consolation. For we are not meet nor
able, by the Power of any Light or Grace that we have received, or can receive,
to bear the immediate appearance and representation of them. His beloved
Apostle John had leaned on his bosom probably many a time in this life, in the
intimate familiarities of love: But when he afterward appeared unto him in his
Glory, he fell at his feet as dead, Rev. 1. 17. And when he appeared unto Paul,
all the account he could give thereof, was, that he saw a light from Heaven
above the brightness of the Sun, whereon he and all that were with him, fell to
the ground, Act. 26. 13, 14.

AND this was one Reason why in the days of his Ministry here on earth, his
Glory was veiled with the infirmities of the flesh, and all sorts of
sufferings, as we have before related. The Church in this life is no way meet,
by the Grace which it can be made partaker of, to converse with him in the
immediate manifestations of his Glory.

AND therefore those who dream of his Personal Reign on the earth before the
day of Judgment, unless they suppose that all the Saints shall be perfectly
glorified also (which is only to bring down Heaven to the Earth for a while, to
no purpose) provide not at all for the edification or consolation of the
Church. For no present grace advanced unto the highest degree whereof in this
World it is capable, can make us meet for an immediate converse with Christ in
his unvailed Glory.

How much more abominable is the folly of men, who would represent the Lord
Christ in his present Glory by Pictures and Images of him? When they have done
their utmost with their burnished Glass and Guildings, an eye of flesh cannot
only behold it, but if it be guided by reason, see it contemptible and foolish.
But the true Glory of Christ neither inward nor outward sight can bear the rays
of in this life.

THE dispensation which we are meet for is only that of his presence with us by
his Spirit. We know him now no more after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16. We are
advanced above that way and means of the knowledge of him by the fleshly carnal
Ordinances of the Old Testament. And we know him not according unto that bodily
presence of his, which his Disciples enjoyed in the days of his flesh. We have
attained somewhat above that also. For such was the nature of his Ministry here
on earth, that there could not be the promised dispensation of the spirit until
that was finished. Therefore he tells his Disciples that it was expedient for
them that he should go away and send the spirit to them, John. 16. 7. Hereon
they had a clearer view of the Glory of Christ, than they could have by
beholding him in the flesh. This is our spiritual posture and condition. We are
past the knowledge of him according to the flesh; we cannot attain nor receive
the sight of him in Glory; but the life which we now lead, is by the Faith of
the Son of God.

I SHALL not here enquire into the nature of this vision, or the power and
ability which we shall have in Heaven to behold the Glory of Christ. Some few
things may be mentioned, as it relates unto our Minds and our Bodies also after
the Resurrection.

1. FOR the Mind, it shall be perfectly freed from all that Darkness,
Unsteadiness, and other Incapacities, which here it is accompanied with; and
whereby it is weakened, hindered and obstructed in the Exercise of Faith. And
they are of two sorts. First, such as are the remainders of that depravation of
our Natures, which came upon us by sin. Hereby our Minds became wholly vain,
dark, and corrupt, as the Scripture testifies, utterly unable to discern
spiritual things in a due manner. This is so far cured and removed in this Life
by Grace, as that those who were darkness, do become light in the Lord, or are
enabled to live unto God under the Conduct of a new spiritual Light
communicated unto them. But it is so cured and removed in part only, it is not
perfectly abolished. Hence are all our remaining Weaknesses and Incapacities in
discerning things spiritual and eternal, which we yet groan under, and long for
deliverance from. No Footsteps, no Scars or Marks that ever it had place in our
Minds shall abide in glory, Ephesians. 5. 27. Nothing shall weaken, disturb, or
incapacitate our Souls, in acting all their Powers unimpeded by Vanity,
Diversions, Weakness, Inability, upon their proper Objects. The Excellency
hereof in universal Liberty and Power, we cannot here comprehend: Nor can we
yet conceive the Glory and Beauty of those immixed spiritual actings of our
Minds, which shall have no Clog upon them, no Encumbrance in them, no Alloy of
Dross accompanying of them. One pure Act of spiritual Sight in discerning the
Glory of Christ, one pure Act of Love in cleaving unto God, will bring in more
Blessedness and Satisfaction into our Minds, than in this World we are capable
of.

2. THERE is an Incapacity in our Minds, as unto their Actings on things
spiritual and eternal, that is merely natural from the Posture wherein they
are, and the Figure which they are to make in this Life. For they are here
clothed with Flesh, and that debased and corrupted. Now in this State, though
the Mind act its Conceptions by the Body as its Organ and Instrument: Yet is it
variously straightened, encumbred and impeded in the exercise of its native
Powers, especially toward things heavenly, by this Prison of the Flesh,
wherein it is immured. There is an Angelical Excellency in the pure Actings of
the Soul, when delivered from all material Instruments of them; or when they
are all glorified and made suitable helps in its utmost spiritual Activity. How
and by what degrees our Minds shall be freed from these Obstructions in their
beholding the glory of Christ, shall be afterward declared.

2. AGAIN, a new light, the light of Glory shall be implanted in them. There is
a Light in Nature, which is the Power of a Man to discern the things of Man. An
Ability to know, perceive and judge of things natural. It is that Spirit of a
Man which is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the
belly, Prove. 20. 27.

BUT by the light hereof no man can discern spiritual things in a due manner,
as the Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Wherefore God gives a
superior, a supernatural Light, the Light of Faith and Grace, unto them whom he
effectually calls unto the knowledge of himself by Jesus Christ. He shines into
their hearts to give them the knowledge of his Glory in the face of his dear
Son. Howbeit this new Light does not abolish, blot out, or render useless the
other Light of Nature, as the Sun when it rises extinguisheth the Light of the
Stars: But it directs it, and rectifies it, as unto its principle, object and
end. Yet is it in its self, a Light quite of another Nature. But he who has
only the former Light, can understand nothing of it, because he has no Taste
or Experience of its Power and Operations. He may talk of it, and make
Enquiries about it, but he knows it not.

NOW we have received this Light of Faith and Grace, whereby we discern
spiritual things, and behold the glory of Christ in the Imperfect manner before
described. But in Heaven there shall be a superadded light of Glory, which
shall make the Mind it self shine as the Firmament, Dan. 12. 3. I shall only
say three things of it. (1.) That as the Light of Grace does not destroy or
abolish the Light of Nature, but rectify and improve it; so the Light of Glory
shall not abolish or destroy the Light of Faith and Grace, but by incorporating
with it, render it absolutely perfect. (2.) That as by the Light of Nature, we
cannot clearly comprehend the true Nature and Efficacy of the Light of Grace,
because it is of another Kind, and is seen only in its own Light; so by the
Light of Grace we cannot absolutely comprehend this Light of Glory, being of a
peculiar Kind and Nature, seen perfectly only by its own Light. It does not
appear what we shall be. (3.) That this is the best Notion we can have of this
Light of Glory, that in the first Instance of its Operation, it perfectly
transforms the Soul into the Image and Likeness of Christ.

THIS is the progress of our nature unto its Rest and Blessedness. The
principles remaining in it concerning Good and Evil, with its practical
convictions, are not destroyed, but improved by grace; as its blindness,
darkness and enmity to God, are in part taken away. Being renewed by Grace,
what it receives here of spiritual Life and Light, shall never be destroyed but
be perfected in Glory. Grace renews Nature; Glory perfects Grace; and so the
whole Soul is brought unto its rest in God. We have an Image of it in the blind
Man whom our Savior cured, Mark 8. 22, 23, 24. He was absolutely blind, born
so, no doubt. Upon the first touch his Eyes were opened, and he saw but very
obscurely; he saw men walking like Trees. But on the second he saw all things
clearly. Our minds in themselves are absolutely blind. The first visitation of
them by Grace, gives them a sight of things spiritual, heavenly and eternal,
but it is obscure and unsteady. The sight of Glory makes all things clear and
evident.

2ly; THE body as glorified, with its senses, shall have its use and place
herein. After we are clothed again with our flesh, we shall see our Redeemer
with our Eyes.

We know not here what power and spirituality there will be in the acts of our
glorified Bodies. Such they will be, as shall bear a part in eternal
Blessedness. Holy Stephen, the first Martyr, took up somewhat of Glory by
Anticipation before he died. For when he was brought to his Trial before the
Council, all that sat therein looking steadfastly on him, saw his face as the
face of an Angel, Act. 6. 15. He had his Transfiguration, according unto his
measure, answerable unto that of our Blessed Savior in the Mount. And by this
initial Beam of Glory, he received such a piercing vivacity and edge on his
bodily eyes, that through all those inconceivable distances between the earth
and the residence of the Blessed, he looked steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, Act. 7. 55, 56. Who
then can declare what will be the power and acting of this sense of sight when
perfectly glorified; or what sweetness and refreshment may be admitted into our
Souls thereby?

IT was a privilege (who would not have longed to partake of it?) to have seen
him with our bodily eyes in the days of his flesh, as did the Apostles and
other his Disciples. Howbeit he was not then glorified himself in the
manifestation of his Glory; nor they who saw him, in the change or
transformation of their nature. How great this privilenge was, himself declares
unto those that so saw him, Mat. 13. 17. Verily I say unto you, that many
Prophets and righteous Men have desired to see those things which ye see;
whereunto we shall speak immediately. And if this were so excellent a
privilege, as that we cannot but congratulate them by whom it was enjoyed, how
excellent, how glorious will it be, when with these eyes of ours, gloriously
purified and strengthened beyond those of Stephen, we shall behold Christ
himself immediately in the fullness of his Glory! He alone perfectly understands
the greatness and excellency hereof, who prayed his Father that those who
believe in him, may be where he is, so to behold his Glory.

THESE are some of the grounds of this first difference between our beholding
the Glory of Christ by Faith here, and by immediate Vision hereafter. Hence the
one is weak, imperfect, obscure, reflexive; the other direct, immediate, eaven
and constant; and we may stay a little in the contemplation of these things.

THIS view of the Glory of Christ which we have now spoken unto, is that which
we are breathing and panting after; that which the Lord Christ prays that we
may arrive unto; that which the Apostle testifies to be our best; the best
thing, or state, which our nature is capable of, that which brings eternal rest
and satisfaction unto our Souls.

HERE our Souls are burdened with innumerable Infirmities, and our Faith is
clogged in its Operations by Ignorance and Darkness. This makes our best estate
and highest seize to be accompanied with groans for deliverance. We which
have received the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves groan withing
our selves, waiting for the Adoption, even the redemption of the body, Romans 8.
23. Yea, whilst we are in this Tabernacle, we groan earnestly as being
burdened, because we are not absent from the body, and present with the Lord,
2 Cor. 5. 2, 4, 8. The more we grow in Faith, and Spiritual Light, the more
sensible are we of our present burdens, and the more vehemently do we groan
for deliverance into the perfect liberty of the Sons of God. This is the
posture of their minds who have received the first fruits of the Spirit, in the
most eminent degree. The nearer any one is to Heaven, the more earnestly he
desires to be there, because Christ is there. For the more frequent and steady
are our views of him by faith, the more do we long and groan for the removal of
all obstructions and interpositions in our so doing. Now groaning is a vehement
desire mixed with sorrow, for the present want of what is desired. The desire
has sorrow, and that sorrow has joy and refreshment in it; like a shower that
falls on a Man in a Garden in the Spring; it wets him, but withal refreshes
him with the Savor it causes in the Flowers and Herbs of the Garden, where he
is. And this groaning, which when it is constant and habitual, is one of the
choicest effects of Faith in this life, respects what we would be delivered
from, and what we would attain unto. The first is expressed, Romans 7. 24. The
other in the places now mentioned. And this frame with an intermixture of some
sighs from weariness by the troubles, sorrows, pains, sicknesses of this life,
is the best we can here attain unto.

ALAS! we cannot here think of Christ, but we are quickly ashamed of, and
troubled at our own thoughts: So confused are they, so unsteady, so imperfect.
Commonly they issue in a groan or a sigh; Oh when shall we come unto him? when
shall we be ever with him? when shall we see him as he is? And if at any time
he begins to give more than ordinary evidences and intimations of his Glory and
Love unto our Souls, we are not able to bear them, so as to give them any
abiding residence in our Minds. But ordinarily, this trouble and groaning is
amongst our best seize in this World, a trouble which, I pray God, I may
never be delivered from, until deliverance do come at once from this state of
mortality. Yea the good Lord increase this trouble more and more in all that
believe.

THE heart of a believer affected with the Glory of Christ, is like the Needle
touched with the Loadstone. It can no longer be quiet, no longer be satisfied
in a distance from him. It is put into a continual motion toward him. The
motion indeed is weak and tremulous. Pantings, breathings, sighings, groanings,
in prayer, in meditations, in the secret recesses of our Minds, are the life of
it. However it is continually pressing toward him. But it obtains not its
point, it comes not to its center and rest in this World.

BUT now above, all things are clear and serene; all plain and evident in our
beholding the Glory of Christ; we shall be ever with him, and see him as he is.
This is Heaven, this is Blessedness, this is Eternal Rest.

THE Person of Christ in all his Glory shall be continually before us; and the
eyes of our understandings shall be so gloriously illuminated, as that we shall
be able steadily to behold and comprehend that Glory.

BUT alas! here at present our Minds recoil, our Meditations fail, our Hearts
are overcome, our Thoughts confused, and our Eyes turn aside from the Luster of
this Glory; nor can we abide in the Contemplation of it. But there, an
immediate, constant view of it, will bring in everlasting refreshment and joy
unto our whole Souls.

THIS beholding of the Glory of Christ given him by his Father, is indeed
subordinate unto the ultimate vision of the essence of God. What that is we
cannot well conceive; only we know that the pure in heart shall see God. But it
has such an immediate connection with it, and subordination unto it, as that
without it we can never behold the face of God, as the objective blessedness of
our Souls. For he is and shall be to eternity, the only means of Communication
between God and the Church.

AND we may take some Direction in our looking into and longing after this
perfect view of the Glory of Christ, from the example of the Saints under the
Old Testament. The sight which they had of the Glory of Christ, for they also
saw his Glory through the obscurity of its Revelation, and its being veiled
with types and shadows, was weak and imperfect in the most illuminated
believers, much inferior unto what we now have by faith, through the Gospel.
Yet such it was, as encouraged them to enquire and search diligently into what
was revealed, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Howbeit their discoveries were but dark and
confused, such as Men have of things at a great distance, or in a Land that is
very far off, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 33. 16. And the continuance of this
Vail on the Revelation of the Glory of Christ, whilst a Vail of Ignorance and
Blindness was upon their Hearts and Minds, proved the ruin of that Church in
its Apostasy, as the Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 13, 14. This double vail
(the covering covered, the vail veiled) God promised to take away, Isa. 25. 7.
And then shall they turn to the Lord, when they shall be able clearly to behold
the Glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 16.

BUT this caused them who were real Believers among them, to desire, long, and
pray for the removal of these Vails, the Departure of those shadows, which made
it as Night unto them in comparison of what they knew would appear, when the
Sun of Righteousness should arise with healing in his Wings. They thought it
long ere the day did break, and the shadows flee away, Cant. 2. 17. Chap. 4. 6.
There was an (...) as the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 19. A thrusting forth of the
head with desire and expectation of the exhibition of the Son of God in the
flesh, and the accomplishment of all divine promises therein. Hence he was
called the Lord whom they sought and delighted in, Mal. 3. 1.

AND great was the spiritual Wisdom of believers in those days. They rejoiced
and gloried in the Ordinances of Divine Worship which they did enjoy. They
looked on them as their chiefest privilege, and attended unto them with
diligence, as an effect of Divine Wisdom and Love, as also because they had a
shadow of good things to come. But yet at the same time they longed and desired
that the time of Reformation were come, wherein they should all be removed;
that so they might behold and enjoy the good things signified by them. And
those who did not so, but rested in, and trusted unto their present
Institutions, were not accepted with God. Those who were really illuminated did
not so, but lived in constant desires after the revelation of the whole Mystery
of the Wisdom of God in Christ, as did the Angels themselves, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Ephesians. 3. 9, 10.

IN this frame of heart and suitable actings of their Souls, there was more of
the power of true faith and love than is found among the most at this day. They
saw the promises afar o^^, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, Heb.
11. 13. They reached out the arms of their most intent Affections, to embrace
the Things that were promised. We have an instance of this frame in Old Simeon,
who so soon as he had taken the Child Jesus in his Arms, cried out, Now Lord,
let me depart, now let me dye, this is that which my Soul has longed for, Luke
2. 28, 29.

OUR present darkness and weakness in beholding the Glory of Christ, is not
like theirs. It is not occasioned by a vail of Types and Shadows cast on it by
the Represen^ative Institutions of it; It does not arise from the want of a
clear Doctrinal Revelation of the Person and Office of Christ; But as was
before declared, it proceeds from two other Causes. First from the nature of
Faith it self in comparison of Vision. It is not able to look directly into
this excellent Glory, nor fully to comprehend it. Secondly, from the way of its
proposal, which is not substanti^^ of the thing it self, but only of an Image
of it, as in a Glass. But the light, the view of the Glory of Christ, which we
shall have in Heaven, is much more above that which we now enjoy by the Gospel,
than what we do, or may so enjoy, is above what they have attained under their
Types and Shadows. There is a far greater distance between the Vision of
Heaven, and the sight which we have now by faith, than is between the sight
which we now have, and what they had under the Old Testament. Heaven does more
excel the Gospel-State, than that State does the Law. Wherefore, if they did
so pray, so long for, so desire the removal of their Shadows and Vails, that
they might see what we now see, that they might so behold the Glory of Christ,
as we may behold it in the Light of the Gospel; how much more should we, if we
have the same Faith with them, the same Love (which neither will nor can be
satisfied without perfect fruition) long and pray for the removal of all
Weakness, of all Darkness and In^erposition, that we may come unto that
immediate beholding of his Glory, which he so earnestly prayed, that we might
be brought unto.

To sum up briefly what has been spoken. There are three things to be
considered concerning the Glory of Christ, three degrees in its manifestation;
The Shadow, the perfect Image, and the Substance it self. Those under the Law
had only the shadow of it, and of the things that belong unto it, they had not
the perfect Image of them, Heb. 10. 1. Under the Gospel we have the perfect
Image, which they had not; or a clear complete revelation and declaration of it
presenting it unto us as in a glass: But the enjoyment of these things in their
Substance is referred for Heaven; we must be where he is, that we may behold
his Glory. Now there is a greater difference and distance between the real
substance of any thing, and the most perfect image of it, than there is between
the most perfect image, and the lowest shadow of the same thing. If then they
longed to be freed from their state of Types and Shadows, to enjoy the
Representation of the Glory of Christ in that Image of it, which is given us in
the Gospel; much more ought we to breath and pant after our deliverance from
beholding it in the Image of it, that we may enjoy the Substance it self. For
whatever can be manifest of Christ on this side Heaven, it is granted unto us
for this end, that we may the more fervently desire to be present with him.

AND as it was their Wisdom and their Grace to rejoice in the Light they had,
and in those typical Administrations of Divine Worship which shadowed out the
Glory of Christ unto them, yet did always pant after that more excellent Light
and full Discovery of it, which was to be made by the Gospel; So it will be
ours also, thankfully to use and improve the Revelations which we enjoy of it,
and those Institutions of Worship, wherein our Faith is assisted in the view
thereof; yet so as continually to breath after that perfect, that glorifying
sight of it, which is reserved for Heaven above.

AND may we not a little examine our selves by these things? Do we esteem this
pressing toward the perfect view of the Glory of Christ to be our Duty, and do
we abide in the performance of it? If it be otherwise with any of us, it is a
signal evidence that our Profession is Hypocritical. If Christ be in us, he is
the hope of Glory in us; and where that hope is, it will be active in desires
of the things hoped for. Many love the World to well, and have their minds too
much filled with the things of it, to entertain desires of speeding through it
unto a state wherein they may behold the Glory of Christ. They are at home, and
are unwilling to be absent from the body, tho to be present with the Lord. They
hope it may be that such a season will come at one time or another, and then it
will be the best they can look for when they can be here no more. But they have
but a little sight of the Glory of Christ in this World by Faith, if any at
all, who so little, so faintly desire to have the immediate sight of it above.
I cannot understand how any Man can walk with God as he ought, or has that
Love for Jesus Christ which true Faith will produce, or does place his
Refreshments and Joy in spiritual things, in things above, that does not on all
just occasions, so meditate on the Glory of Christ in Heaven as to long for an
admittance into the immediate sight of it.

OUR Lord Jesus Christ alone perfectly understood wherein the Eternal
Blessedness of them that believe in him, does consist. And this is the sum of
what he prays for with respect unto that end; namely, that we may be where he
is to behold his Glory. And is it not our Duty to live in a continual desire of
that which he prayed so earnestly that we might attain? If in our selves, we as
yet apprehend but little of the Glory, the Excellency, the Blessedness of it,
yet ought we to repose that confidence in the Wisdom and Love of Christ, that
it is our best, infinitely better than any thing we can enjoy here below.

UNTO those who are inured unto those Contemplations, they are the salt of
their Lives, whereby every thing is condited and made savory unto them, as we
shall show afterward. And the want of spiritual diligence herein, is that
which has brought forth a negligent, careless, wordy profession of Religion,
which countenancing it self with some outward Duties, has lost out of it, the
power of Faith and Love in their principal Operations. Hereby many deceive
their own Souls, Goods, Lands, Possessions, Relations, Trades, with secular
Interests in them, are the things whose Image is drawn on their Minds, and
whose Characters are written on their Foreheads, as the Titles whereby they may
be known. As believers beholding the Glory of Christ in the blessed Glass of
the Gospel, are changed into the same Image and Likeness by the Spirit of the
Lord; so these Persons beholding the Beauty of the World, and the Things that
are in it, in the cursed Glass of Self-love, they are in their minds changed
into the same Image. Hence perplexing Fears, vain Hopes, empty Embraces of
perishing things, fruitless desires, earthly, carnal designs, cursed,
self-pleasing Imaginations, feeding on and being fed by the Love of the World
and self, do abide and prevail in them. But we have not so learned Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XIII.
The second Difference between our beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in
this World, and by Sight in Heaven.
FAITH is the Light wherein we behold the Glory of Christ in this World. And
this in its own Nature, as unto this great End, is weak and imperfect, like
weak Eyes, that cannot behold the Sun in its Beauty. Hence our sight of it
differs greatly from what we shall enjoy in Glory, as has been declared. But
this is not all; it is frequently hindered and interrupted in its Operations, or
it loses the view of its object by one means or other. As he who sees any
thing at a great distance, sees it imperfectly; and the least interposition or
motion takes it quite out of his sight. So is it with our Faith in this matter;
whence sometimes we can have little, sometimes no sight at all of the Glory of
Christ by it. And this gives us, as we shall see, another Difference between
Faith and Sight.

NOW although the consideration hereof may seem a kind of Diversion from our
present Argument, yet I choose to insist upon it, that I may evidence the
Reasons whence it is that many have so little experience of the things whereof
we have treated, that they find so little of Reallity or Power in the exercise
of this Grace, or the performance of this Duty. For it will appear in the
issue, that the whole defect is in themselves; the truth it self insisted on,
is great and efficacious.

1. WHILST we are in this life, the Lord Christ is pleased in his Sovereign
Wisdom sometimes to withdraw, and as it were, to hide himself from us. Then do
our Minds fall into Clouds and Darkness; Faith is at a loss, we cannot behold
his Glory; yea, we may seek him, but cannot find him. So Job complains as we
observed before. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I
cannot perceive him: on the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold
him: he hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him. Chap. 23. 8,
9. Which way soever I turn my self, whatever are my endeavors, in what way or
work of his own, I seek him, I cannot find him, I cannot see him, I cannot
behold his Glory. So the Church also complains; Verily thou art a God that
hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Savior, Isa. 45. 15. And the Psalmist,
How long Lord will thou hide thy self for ever? Psalm. 89. 46. This hiding of
the face of God, is the hiding of the shining of his Glory in the face of
Christ Jesus, and therefore of the Glory of Christ himself, for it is the Glory
of Christ to be the Representative of the Glory of God. The Spouse in the
Canticles is often at a loss and herein, bemoans her self that her Beloved was
withdrawn, that she could neither find him, nor see him, Chap. 3. 1, 2. Chap.
5. 6.

MEN may retain their Notions concerning Christ, his Person, and his Glory.
These cannot be blotted out of their Minds, but by Heresy or obdurate
Stupidity. They may have the same Doctrinal Knowledge of him with others; but
the sight of his Glory does not consist therein; They may abide in the outward
performance of Duties toward him, as formerly; but yet all this while as unto
the especial gracious Communications of himself unto their Souls, and as unto a
cheerful refreshing view of his Glory, He may withdraw and hide himself from
them.

AS under the same outward dispensations of the word, he does manifest himself
unto some, and not unto others; ( How is it that thou will manifest thy self
unto us, and not unto the world? Joh. 14. 22.) Whereon they to whom he does so
mani^est himself, do see him to be beautiful, glorious, and lovely (for unto
them that believe, he is precious) whilst the others see nothing hereof, but
wonder at them, by whom he is admired, Cant. 5. 9. So in the same dispensation
of the word, he sometimes hides his face, turns away the Light of his
countenance, clouds the beams of his Glory unto some, whilst others are
cherished and warmed with them.

TWO Things we must here speak unto.

1. WHY does the Lord Christ at any time thus hide himself in his Glory from
the Faith of Believers that they cannot behold him.

2. HOW we may perceive and know that he does so withdraw himself from us, so
that however we may please our selves, we do not indeed behold his Glory.

AS unto the first of these, tho what he does is supposed an act of Sovereign
unaccountable Wisdom, yet there are many holy ends of it, and consequently
reasons for it. I shall mention one only. He does it to stir us up in an
eminent manner unto a diligent search and enquiry after him. Woeful sloth and
negligence are apt to prevail in us, in our Meditations on heavenly things. Tho
our hearts wake (as the Spouse speaks, Cant. 5. 2.) in a valuation of Christ,
his Love, and his Grace, yet we sleep, as unto the due exercise of Faith and
Love toward him. Who is it that can justify himself herein? That can say, My
heart is pure, I am clean from this sin? Yea it is so far otherwise with many
of us, that he is for ever to be admired in his patience, that on the account
of our unkindness and woeful negligence herein, he has not only withdrawn
himself at seasons, but that he has not utterly departed from us. Now he knows
that those with whom he has been graciously present, who have had views of his
Glory, although they have not valued the mercy and privilege of it, as they
ought, yet can they not bear a sense of his absence, and his hiding himself
from them. By this therefore will he awake them unto a diligent enquiry after
him. Upon the discovery of his absence and such a distance of his Glory from
them as their Faith cannot reach unto it, they become like the Doves of the
Valleys all of them mourning every one for his iniquity, and do stir up
themselves to seek him early and with diligence, see Hos. 5. 5. So wherever the
Spouse intimates this withdrawing of Christ from her, she immediately gives an
account of her restless diligence and endeavors in her enquiries after him,
until she have found him, Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Chap. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
And in these enquiries there is such an exercise of Faith and Love, tho it may
be acting themselves mostly in sighs and groans, as is acceptable and well
pleasing to him.

WE are like him in the Parable of the Prophet that spoke unto Ahab, who having
one committed unto him to keep, affirms that whilst he was busy here and
there, he was gone. Christ commits himself unto us, and we ought carefully to
keep his presence; I held him, says the Church, and would not let him go,
Cant. 3. 4. But whilst we are busy here and there, while our Minds are over
filled with other things, he withdraws himself, we cannot find him. But even
this rebuke is a sanctified ordinance for our recovery, and his Return unto us.

2. Our second enquiry is, How we may know when Christ does so withdraw himself
from us, that we do not, that we cannot behold his Glory.

I SPEAK herein unto them alone who make the observation of the lively actings
of Faith and Love in and toward Jesus Christ their chiefest concern in all
their Retirements, yea in their whole walk before God, Concerning these, our
enquiry is, how they may know when Christ does in any degree or measure
withdraw from them so as that they cannot in a due manner behold his Glory?

AND the first discovery hereof is by the consequents of such withdrawings. And
what are the consequents of it, we can know no otherwise but by the effects of
his presence with us, and the manifestation of himself unto us, which as unto
some degrees must necessarily cease thereon.

NOW the first of these is the Life, Vigor and effectual Acting of all Grace in
us. This is an inseparable consequent and effect of a view of his Glory. Whilst
we enjoy it, we live; nevertheless not we, but Christ lives in us, exciting
and acting all his Graces in us.

THIS is that which the Apostle instructs us in: while we behold his Glory,
as in a Glass, we are transformed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, 2
Cor. 3. 18. That is, whilst by faith we contemplate on the Glory of Christ as
revealed in the Gospel, all Grace will thrive and flourish in us toward a
perfect Conformity unto him. For whilst we abide in this View and
Contemplation, our Souls will be preserved in holy Frames, and in a continual
exercise of Love and Delight, with all other spiritual Affections toward him.
It is impossible whilst Christ is in the eye of our Faith as proposed in the
Gospel, but that we shall labor to be like him and greatly love him. Neither
is there any way for us to attain unto either of these which are the great
concernments of our Souls, namely to be like unto Christ and to love him, but
by a constant view of him and his Glory by faith which powerfully and
effectually works them in us. All the Doctrinal Knowledge which we have of him
is useless; all the view we have of his Glory is but Fancy, Imagination or
Superstition, which are not accompanied with this transforming Power. And that
which is wrought by it, is the increase and vigor of all Grace; for therein
alone our Conformity unto him does consist. Growth in Grace, Holiness and
Obedience, is a growing like unto Christ, and nothing else is so.

I cannot refrain here from a necessary short Digression. This transforming
efficacy from a spiritual View of Christ as proposed in the Gospel, being lost
as unto an expeperience of it in the Minds of Men carnal and ignorant of the
mystery of believing (as it is at present by many derided, tho it be the life
of Religion) Fancy and Superstition provided various supplies in the room of
it. For they found out Crucifixes and Images with Faintings to represent him in
his Sufferings and Glory. By these things, their carnal Affections being
excited by their outward Senses, they suppose themselves to be affected with
him, and to be like unto him. Yea, some have proceeded so far, as either by
Arts Diabolical, or by other means, to make an appearance of wounds on their
hands, and feet, and sides, therein pretending to be like him; yea, to be
wholly transformed into his Image. But that which is produced by an Image, is
but an Image, an imaginary Christ will effect nothing in the Minds of Men, but
imaginary Grace.

THUS Religion was lost and died. When Men could not obtain any experience in
their Minds of the spiritual Mysteries of the Gospel, nor be sensible of any
spiritual Change or Advantage by them, they substituted some outward Duties and
Observances in their stead; as I shall show (God willing) elsewhere more at
large. These produced some kind of effects on their Minds and Affections, but
quite of another nature than those which are the real effects of true
Evangelical Grace. This is openly evident in this substitution of Images
instead of the representation of Christ and his Glory made in the Gospel.

HOWEVER there is a general Supposition granted on all hands; namely, that
there must be a View of Christ, and his Glory, to cause us to love him, and
thereby to make us conformable or like unto him. But here lies the difference;
those of the Church of Rome say that this must be done by the beholding of
Crucifixes with other Images and Pictures of him; and that with our bodily
eyes: We say it is, by our beholding his Glory by Faith, as revealed in the
Gospel, and no otherwise. And to confess the Truth, we have some, who as they
reject the use of Images, so they despise that spiritual View of the Glory of
Christ which we enquire after. Such Persons on the first occasion will fall on
the other side; For any thing is better than nothing.

BUT as we have a sure word of Prophecy to secure us from these abominations
by an express prohibition of such Images unto all ends whatever; so unto our
stability in the profession of the Truth, and experience of the efficacy of
this Spiritual View of Christ transforming our Souls into his own likeness, is
absolutely necessary. For if an Idolater should plead, as they do all, that in
the beholding of the Image of Christ, or of a Crucifix, especially if they are
sedulous and constant therein, they find their Affections unto him greatly
excited, increased, and inflamed (as they will be, Isa. 57. 5.) and that hereon
he endeavors to be like unto him, what shall we have to oppose thereunto? For
it is certain that such Images are apt to make impressions on the Minds of Men;
partly from the readiness of the senses and imagination to give them admittance
into their thoughts; and partly from their natural inclinations unto
superstition, their aversation from things spiritual and invisible, with an
inclination unto things present and visible. Hence among them who are satisfied
that they ought not to be adored with any Religious Veneration, yet some are
apt upon the sight of them to entertain a thoughtful Reverence, as they would
do if they were to enter into a Pagan Temple full of Idols; and others are
continually making approaches toward their use and veneration in Paintings and
Altars and such outward postures of Worship as are used in the Religious
Service of them. But that they do sensibly affect the Minds of Men carnal and
superstitious, cannot be denied, and as they suppose, it is a love unto Christ
himself. However, certain it is in general, and confessed on all hands, that
the beholding of Christ is the most blessed means of exciting all our Graces,
spiritualizing all our Affections, and transforming our Minds into his
likeness. And if we have not another, and that a more excellent way of
beholding him, than they have who behold him, as they suppose, in Images and
Crucifixes, they would seem to have the advantage of us. For their Minds will
really be affected with somewhat, ours with nothing at all. And by the pretense
thereof, they inveagle the carnal affections of Men ignorant of the Power of
the Gospel, to become their Proselytes. For having lived, it may be, a long
time without any the least experience of a sensible impression on their Minds,
or a transforming power from the Representation of Christ in the Gospel, upon
their very first Religious, Devout, Application unto these Images, they find
their Thoughts exercised, their Minds affected, and some present change made
upon them.

BUT there was a difference between the Person of David, and an Image with a
bolster of Goats Hair, though the one were laid in the room and place of the
other. And there is so between Christ and an Image, though the one be put into
the place of the other. Neither do these things serve unto any other end, but
to divert the Minds of Men from Faith and Love to Christ; giving them some such
satisfactions in the room of them, as that their carnal Affections do cleave
unto their Idols. And indeed it does belong unto the Wisdom of Faith, or we
stand in need of spiritual Light, to discern and judge between the working of
natural Affections toward spiritual Objects, on undue motives, by undue means,
with indirect ends, wherein all Papal Devotion consists, and the spiritual
Exercise of Grace in those Affections duly fixed on spiritual Objects.

BUT as was said, it is a real experience of the Efficacy, that there is in the
spiritual beholding of the Glory of Christ by Faith as proposed in the Gospel,
to strengthen, increase and excite all Grace unto its proper exercise, so
changing and transforming the Soul gradually into his likeness, which must
secure us against all those Pretenses; and so I return from this Digression.

HEREBY we may understand whether the Lord Christ does so withdraw himself, as
that we do not, as that we cannot behold his glory by Faith in a due manner,
which is the thing enquired after. For if we grow weak in our Graces,
unspiritual in our Frames, cold in our Affections, or negligent in the exercise
of them by holy Meditation, it is evident that he is at a great distance from
us, so as that we do not behold his Glory as we ought. If the weather grow
cold, Herbs and Plants do whither, and the Frost begins to bind up the earth,
all men grant that the Sim is withdrawn, and makes not its wonted approach unto
us. And if it be so with our Hearts, that they grow cold, frozen, withering,
lifeless in and unto spiritual Duties, it is certain that the Lord Christ is in
some sense withdrawn, and that we do not behold his Glory. We retain Notions of
Truth concerning his Person, Office and Grace; but faith is not in constant
exercise, as to real views of him and his Glory. For there is nothing more
certain in Christian Experience than this is, that while we do really by Faith
behold the Glory of Christ, as proposed in the Gospel, the Glory of his Person
and Office as before described, and so abide in Holy Thoughts and Meditations
thereof, especially in our private Duties and Retirements, all Grace will live
and thrive in us in some measure, especially love unto his Person, and therein
unto all that belongs unto him. Let us but put it to the trial, and we shall
infallibly find the promised event.

DO any of us find decays in Grace prevailing in us; deadness, coldness,
lukewarmness, a kind of Spiritual Stupidity and senseless coming upon us? Do we
find an unreadiness unto the exercise of Grace in its proper season, and the
vigorous actings of it in Duties of Communion with God? And would we have our
souls recovered from these dangerous diseases? Let us assure our selves there
is no better way for our healing and deliverance, yea no other way but this
alone, namely the obtaining a fresh view of the Glory of Christ by faith, and a
steady abiding therein. Constant contemplation of Christ and his Glory putting
forth its transforming power unto the revival of all Grace, is the only relief
in this case, as shall further be showed afterward.

SOME will say, that this must be effected by fresh supplies and renewed
communications of the Holy Spirit. Unless he fall as dew and showers on our dry
and barren hearts, unless he causes our Graces to spring, thrive and bring
forth fruit, unless he revive and increase faith, love and holiness in our
souls, our backs^idings will not be healed, nor our spiritual state be
recovered. Unto this end is he prayed for, and promised in the Scripture, see
Cant 4. 1. 6. Isa. 44. 3, 4. Ezekiel. 11. 19. chap. 36. 26. Hos. 14. 5, 6. And so
it is. The immediate efficiency of the revival of our souls, is from and by the
Holy Spirit. But the enquiry is, in what way, or by what means, we may obtain
the supplies and communications of him unto this end? This the Apostle declares
in the place insisted on; We beholding the Glory of Christ in a Glass, are
changed into the same image from glory to glory, even by the spirit of the
Lord. It is in the exercise of Faith on Christ in the way before described,
that the Holy Spirit puts forth his renewing, transforming Power in and upon
our souls. This therefore is that alone which will retrive Christians from
their present decays and deadness.

SOME complain greatly of their State and Condition; none so dead, so dull and
stupid as they. They know not whether they have any spark of heavenly life left
in them; some make weak and faint endeavors for a recovery, which are like the
attempts of a man in a dream wherein he seems to use great endeavors without
any success. Some put themselves unto multiplied duties. Howbeit the
Generallity of Prifessors seem to be in a pining thriftless condition. And the
reason of it is, because they will not sincerely and constantly make use of the
only remedy and relief; like a man that will rather choose to pine away in his
sickness, with some useless, transient refreshments, than apply himself unto a
known and approved remedy, because it may be the use of it is unsuited unto
some of his present occasions. Now this is to live in the exercise of Faith in
Christ Jesus: This himself assures us of, Joh. 15. 4, 5. Abide in me, and I in
you; As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide in the vine, no
more can ye except you abide in me, I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me
ye can do nothing.

THERE is a twofold coming unto Christ by believing. The first is that we may
have life; that is, a spring and principle of spiritual life communicated unto
us from him, for he is our life, Col. 3. 3. and because he lives, we live
also, Joh. 14. 19. Yea, it is not so much we that live, as he lives in us,
Gal. 2. 19, 20. And unbelief is a not coming unto him, that we may have life,
Joh. 5. 40. But secondly, there is also a coming unto him by believers in the
actual exercise of Faith, that they may have this life more abundantly, Joh.
10. 10. That is, such supplies of Grace as may keep their souls in a healthy,
vigorous acting of all the powers of spiritual life. And as he reproacheth some
that they would not come unto him that they might have life, so he may justly
reprove us all, that we do not so come unto him in the actual exercise of Faith
as that we might have this life more abundantly.

SECONDLY; When the Lord Christ is near us, and we do behold his Glory, he will
frequently communica^e spiritual refreshment in peace, consolation, and joy
unto our souls. We shall not only hereby have our graces excited with respect
unto him as their object, but be made sensible of his actings toward us in the
communications of himself and his love unto us. When the Sun of Righteousness
arises on any soul, or makes any near approach thereunto, it shall find
healing under his Wings; his beams of Grace shall convey by his spirit, holy
spiritual refreshment thereunto. For he is present with us by his spirit, and
these are his fruits and effects as he is the Comforter, suited unto his Office
as he is promised unto us.

MANY love to walk in a very careless unwise profession. So long as they can
hold out in the performance of outward duties, they are very regardless of the
greatest Evangelical Privileges; of those things which are the marrow of
divine Promises, all real endeavors of a vital communion with Christ. Such are
spiritual peace, refreshing consolations, ineffable joys, and the blessed
composure of assurance. Without some taste and experience of these things,
profession is heartless, lifeless, useless; and Religion it self a dead carcass
without an animating soul. The peace which some enjoy, is a mere stupidity.
They judge not these things to be real, which are the substance of Christ's
present reward; and a renunciation whereof would deprive the Church of its
principal supportments and encouragements in all its sufferings. It is a great
evidence of the power of unbelief, when we can satisfy our selves without an
experience in our own hearts of the great things in this kind of Joy, Peace,
Consolation, Assurance, that are promised in the Gospel. For how can it be
supposed that we do indeed believe the promises of things future, namely, of
Heaven, Immortality and Glory, the faith whereof is the foundation of all
Religion, when we do not believe the promises of the present reward, in these
spiritual Privileges, And how shall we be thought to believe them, when we do
not endeavor after an experience of the things themselves in our own souls,
but are even contented without them? But herein men deceive themselves. They
would very desirously have evangelical Joy, Peace and Assurance to countenance
them in their evil frames, and careless walking. And some have attempted to
reconcile these things unto the ruin of their souls, But it will not be.
Without the diligent exercise of the Grace of Obedience, we shall never enjoy
the Grace of Consolation. But we must speak somewhat of these things afterward.

IT is peculiarly, in the view of the Glory of Christ, in in his approaches
unto us, and abiding with us, that we are made Partakers of Evangelical Peace,
Consolation, Joy and Assurance. These are a part of the Royal Train of his
Graces, of the Reward wherewith he is accompanied; His reward is with him.
Wherever he is graciously present with any, these things are never wanting in a
due measure and degree, unless it be by their own fault, or for their trial. In
these things does he give the Church of his loves, Cant. 7. 12. For if any man
(says he) loves me, I will love him, and manifest my self unto him, Joh, 14.
21. Yea, I and the Father will come unto him and make our abode with him, v.
23. and that so as to sup with him, Rev. 3. 20. which on his part, can be only
by the Communication of those spiritual refreshments. The only enquiry is by
what way and means we do receive them? Now I say this is in and by our
beholding of the Glory of Christ by Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9, 10. Let that Glory be
rightly stated as before laid down; the Glory of his Person, his Office, his
Condescension, Exaltation, Love and Grace; let Faith be fixed in a view and
contemplation of it, mix it self with it as represented in the Glass of the
Gospel, meditate upon it, embrace it, and virtue will proceed from Christ,
communicating spiritual, supernatural refreshment and joy unto our souls. Yea,
in ordinary cases it is impossible that believers should have a real prospect
of this Glory at any time, but that it will in some measure affect their hearts
with a sense of his love, which is the spring of all consolation in them. In
the exercise of Faith on the discoveries of the Glory of Christ made unto us in
the Gospel, no man shall ever totally want such intimations of his Love, yea,
such effusions of it in his heart, as shall be a living spring of those
spiritual refreshments, Joh. 4. 14. Romans 5. 5. When therefore we lose these
things as unto a sense of them in our souls, it is evident that the Lord Christ
is withdrawn, and that we do not behold his Glory.

BUT I cannot here avoid another short digression. There are those by whom all
these things are derided as distempered fancies and imaginations. Yea, such
things have been spoken and written of them, as contain a virtual renunciation
of the Gospel, the powers of the World to come and the whole work of the Holy
Ghost as the comforter of the Church. And hereby all real intercourse between
the Person of Christ, and the souls of them that do believe, is utterly
overthrown; reducing all Religion to an outward show and a pageantry, ^itter
for a stage, than that Temple of God which is in the minds of men. According
unto the sentiments of these profane scoffers, there is no such thing as the
shedding abroad of the love of God in our hearts by the Holy Ghost; nor as the
witnessing of the spirit of God with our spirits, that we are the Children of
God; from which these spiritual joys and refreshments are inseparable, as their
necessary effects. No such thing, as the lifting up of the Light of Gods
countenance upon us, which will put gladness into our hearts; that gladness
which comprizeth all the things mentioned; No such thing as rejoicing upon
Believing with joy unspeakable and full of Glory; no such thing as Christ's
showing and manifesting himself unto us, supping with us, and giving us of his
loves; that the divine promises of a f^ast of fat things, and Wine well refined
in Gospel-Mercies, are empty and insignificant words; that all those ravishing
joys and exultations of spirit that multitudes of faithful Martyrs of old, and
in later ages have enjoyed by a view of the Glory of God in Christ and a sense
of his love, whereunto they gave testimony unto their last moments in the midst
of their torments, were but fancies and Imaginations. But it is the height of
impudence in these profane scoffers, that they proclaim their own Ignorance of
those things which are the real powers of our Religion.

OTHERS there are, who will not deny the truth of these things. They dare not
rise up in contradiction unto those express Testimonies of the Scripture,
wherewith they are confirmed. And they do suppose that some are partakers of
them, at least they were so formerly; but as for their parts, they have no
experience of them, nor do judge it their duty to endeavor after it. They can
make a shift to live on hopes of Heaven and future Glory: As unto what is
present they desire no more, but to be found in the performance of some duties
in answer unto their convictions, which gives them that sorry peace which they
do enjoy. So do many countenance themselves in their spiritual sloth and
unbelief, keeping themselves at liberty to seek for refreshment and
satisfaction in other things, whilst those of the Gospel are despised. And
these things are inconsistent. While men look for their chief refreshment and
satisfaction in temporal things, it is impossible they should seek after those
that are spiritual in a due manner. And it must be confessed, that when we have
a due regard unto spiritual, evangelical Consolations and Joys, it will abate
and take off our affections unto, and satisfaction in present enjoyments, Phil.
3 8, 9.

BUT there is no more sacred truth than this; That where Christ is present with
Believers, where he is not withdrawn for a season from them, where they live in
the view of his Glory by faith as it is proposed unto them in the Gospel, he
will give unto them at his own seasons such intimations of his love, such
supplies of his spirit, such holy joys and rejoycings, such repose of soul in
assurance, as shall refresh their souls, fill them with joy, satisfy them with
spiritual delight, and quicken them unto all acts of holy Communion with
himself.

LET no such dishonor be reflected on the Gospel, that whereas the faith of
it, and obedience unto it, are usually accompanied with outward Troubles,
Afflictions, Persecution and Reproaches, as we are foretold they should be;
that it does not by its inward consolations and divine refreshments,
outballance all those evils which we may undergo upon the account of it. So to
suppose, is expressly contrary to the promise of Christ himself who has assured
that even (...) even now in this life, in this world, distinct from eternal
life; in the world to come, we shall receive an hundredfold recompense for all
that, we can lose or suf^er for his his sake, Mat. 10. 30. as also unto the
experience of them who in all ages have taken joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, as knowing in themselves (by the experience which they have of its first
fruits) that they have in heaven a better and more abiding substance, Heb. 10.
29, 30. If we come short in a participation of these things, if we are
strangers unto them, the blame is to be laid on our selves alone, as it shall
be immediately declared.

NOW the design of the Lord Christ in thus withdrawing himself from us, and
hiding his glory from our view, being the exercise of our Graces, and to stir
us up unto diligence in our enquiries after him, here lies our guidance and
direction in this case. Do we find our selves lifeless in the spiritual duties
of Religion? Are we strangers unto the heavenly visits of consolation and joys,
those visitations of God whereby he preserves our souls? Do we seldom enjoy a
sense of the shedding abroad of his love in our hearts by the holy Ghost? We
have no way of Recovery but this alone. To this strong Tower must we turn our
selves as Prisoners of hope; unto Christ must we look that we may be saved. It
is a steady view or contemplation of his Glory by faith alone, that will bring
in all these things in a lively experience in our hearts and souls.

AGAIN; In the second place, it is from our selves principally, if we lose the
views of the Glory of Christ, and the exercise of faith be obstructed therein.
All our spiritual disadvantages do arise from our selves. It is the remainder
of lusts and corruptions in us, either indulged by sloth and negligence, or
excited and inflamed by Satan's Temptations, that do obstruct us in this duty.
Whilst they are in any disorder or disturbance, it is in vain for us to expect
any clear view of this Glory.

THAT view of the Glory of Christ, whereof we treat, consists in two things;
namely, its especial Nature, and its necessary Adjunct or effect. The first is,
a spiritual perception or understanding of it as revealed in the Scriptures.
For the revelation of the Glory of his Person, Office and Grace, is the
Principal Subject of them, and the principal Object of our Faith. And the other
consists in multiplied thoughts about him, with actings of Faith in Love,
Trust, Delight, and longing after the the full enjoyment of him, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
If we satisfy our selves in mere notions and speculations about the Glory of
Christ as doctrinally revealed unto us, we shall find no transforming power or
efficacy communicated unto us thereby. But when under the conduct of that
spiritual Light our affections do cleave unto him with full purpose of heart,
our minds are filled with thoughts of him, and delight in him, and faith is
kept up unto its constant exercise in Trust and Affiance on him, virtue will
proceed from him to purify our hearts, increase our holiness, strengthen our
Graces, and to fill us sometimes with joy unspeakable and full of Glory. This
is the just temperature of a state of spiritual health; namely, when our Light
of the knowledge of the Glory of God in Christ, does answer the means of it
which we enjoy; and when our Affections unto Christ do hold proportion unto
that light; and this according unto the various degrees of it; for some have
more, and some have less. Where Light leaves the Affections behind, it ends in
Formality or Atheism: And where Affections outrun Light they sink in the Bog of
Superstition, doting on Images and Pictures or the (...). But where things go
not into these excesses, it is better that our affections exceed our light on
the defect of our understandings, than that our light exceed our affections
from the corruption of our wills. In both these is the exercise of faith
frequently interrupted and obstructed by the remainder of corruption in us,
especially if not kept constantly under the discipline of Mortification, but
some way indulged unto. For,

1. THE steam of their disorder will cloud and darken the understanding, that
it shall not be able clearly to discern any spiritual object, least of all the
greatest of them. There is nothing more acknowledged even in things natural and
moral than that the disorder of the passions and affections will blind, darken,
and deceive the mind in its Operations. And it is much more so in things
spiritual, wherein that Disorder is an immediate Rebellion against its proper
conducting Light; that is, against the Light and Rule of Grace.

THERE are three sorts of them unto whom the Gospel is preached, in whom there
are various Obstructions of this view.

1. THERE is in obstinate unbelievers a darkness that is an effect of the power
of Satan on their minds, in blinding of them, which makes it impossible for
them to behold any thing of the Glory of Christ. So the Apostle declares it, If
our Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that are lost, in whom the God of this
World has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2
Cor. 4. 3, 4. Of these we do not speak.

2. THERE is in all men, a corrupt, natural darkness; or such a depravation of
their minds by nature, as that they cannot discern this Glory of Christ in a
due manner. Hence the Light shines in darkness and the darkness comprehends
it not, John. 1. 5. For the natural man receives not the things of the spirit
of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Hence it is that although Christ
be preached among us continually, yet there are very few who discern any Glory
or Beauty in him, for which he should be desired, as the Prophet complains,
Isa. 53. 1, 2. But I speak not of this natural darkness in general. But even
these persons have their minds filled with prejudices against the Gospel and
darkened as unto the Glory of Christ according as corrupt lusts and affections
are prevalent in them, see Joh. 1. 44. chap. 12. 43. Hence is the difference
that is among the common hearers of the word. For although no man can do any
thing of himself for the receiving of Christ, and the beholding of his Glory,
without the especial aid of the Grace of God, Mat. 11. 24. John. 6. 44, 45; Yet
some may make more opposition unto believing, and lay more hindrances in their
own way, than others; which is done by their lusts and (...).

3. THERE are those in whom both these evils are cured by faith, wherein the
eyes of our understandings are enlightened to perceive and discern spiritual
things, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18. But this cure is wrought in this life but in
part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. And in this cure by a supply of a principle of saving
light unto our minds, there are many degrees. For some have a clearer light
than others, and thereby a more clear discerning of the Mystery of the Wisdom
of God, and of the Glory of Christ therein. But whatever be our seize
herein, that which obstructs this light, that hinders it from shining in a due
manner, that obstructs and hinders faith in its view of the Glory of Christ.
And this is done by the remainders of corrupted nature in us, when they act in
any prevalent degree. For they darken the mind and weaken it in its spiritual
Operations. That is, where any corrupt and inordinate affections, as love of
the world, cares about it, inclinations unto sensuality, or the like spiritual
disorders do prevail, faith is weakened in its spiritual acts, especially in
discerning and beholding the Glory of Christ. For the mind is rendered unsteady
in its enquiries after it, being continually distracted and diverted with vain
thoughts and Imaginations.

PERSONS under the Power of such Distempers may have the same doctrinal
knowledge of the Person of Christ his Office and his grace with other men, and
the same evidence of its Truth fixed on their minds; but when they endeavor a
real intuition into the things themselves, all things are dark and confused
unto them from the uncertainty and instability of their own minds.

THIS is the sum of what I do design. We have by Faith a View of the Glory of
Christ. This View is weak and unsteady from the Nature of Faith it self, and
the way of its proposal unto us as in a Glass, in comparison of what by Sight
we shall attain unto. But moreover, where corrupt Lusts or inordinate
Affections are indulged unto, where they are not continually mortified, where
any one sin has a perplexing prevalency in the Mind, Faith will be so far
weakened thereby, as that it can neither see nor meditate upon this Glory of
Christ in a due manner. This is the Reason why the most are so weak and
unstable in the performance of this Duty, yea are almost utterly unacquainted
with it. The Light of Faith in the Minds of Men being impaired, clouded,
darkened by the prevalency of unmortified Lusts; it cannot make such discoveries
of this Glory, as otherwise it would do. And this makes the preaching of Christ
unto many so unprofitable as it is.

SECONDLY; In the View of the Glory of Christ which we have by Faith, it will
fill the Mind with Thoughts and Meditations about him, whereon the affections
will cleave unto him with delight. This, as was said, is inseparable from a
spiritual View of his Glory in its due exercise. Every one that has it, must
and will have many Thoughts, concerning, and great affections to him. See the
description of these things, Phil. 3. 8, 10. It is not possible, I say, that we
should behold the Glory of his Person, Office and Grace, with a due conviction
of our concernment and interest therein, but that our Minds will be greatly
affected with it, and be filled with contemplations about it. Where it is not
so with any, it is to be feared that they have not heard his voice at any time,
nor seen his shape, whatever they profess. A spiritual sight of Christ will
assuredly produce love unto him, and if any Man love him not, he never saw him,
he knows him not at all. And that is no love, which does not beget in us many
thoughts of the object beloved. He therefore who is partaker of this Grace,
will think much of what Christ is in himself, of what he has done for us, of
his love and condescension, of the manifestation of all the glorious
excellencies of the Divine Nature in him, exerted in a way of infinite Wisdom
and Goodness for the Salvation of the Church. Thoughts and Meditations of these
things will abound in us, if we are not wanting unto the due exercise of Faith:
and intense inflamed Affections unto him, will ensue thereon, at least they
will be active unto our own refreshing experience. And where these things are
not in reality (though in some they may be only in a mean and low degree) Men
do but deceive their own Souls in hopes of any benefit by Christ or the Gospel.

THIS therefore is the present case. Where there are prevailing sinful
Distempers or inordinate Affections in the Mind, such as those before
mentioned, as Self love, love of the World, cares and fears about it, with an
excessive valuation of relations and enjoyments; they will so far cumber and
perplex it with a multitude of thoughts about their own Objects, as shall leave
no place for sedate Meditations on Christ and his Glory. And where the thoughts
are engaged, the Affections which partly excite them, and partly are led by
them, will be fixed also, Col. 3. 1, 2.

THIS is that which in the most, greatly promoteth that imperfection, which is
in our View of the Glory of Christ, by Faith in this Life. According to the
proportion and degree of the prevalency of Affections, corrupt, earthly,
selfish or sensual, filling the Heads and Hearts of Men with a multitude of
thoughts about what they are fixed on, or inclined unto; so is Faith obstructed
and weakened in this Work and Duty.

WHEREFORE, whereas there is a remainder of these Lusts, as to the Seeds of
them in us all, tho more mortified in some than in others; yet having the same
effects in the minds of all, according to the Degree of their remainder; thence
it is as from an Efficacious cause of it, that our View of the Glory of Christ
by Faith, is in many so weak, imperfect and unsteady.

THIRDLY, We have interruption given unto the work of Faith herein, by the
Temptations of Satan. His original great design, wherever the Gospel is
preached, is to blind the Eyes of Men, that the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the Image of God, should not shine into them, or irradiate their
Minds, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And herein he prevails unto astonishment. Let the Light of
the Gospel in the preaching of the Word be never so glorious; yet by various
means and artifices, he blinds the Minds of the most, that they shall not
behold any thing of the Glory of Christ therein. By this means he continues his
rule in the Children of Disobedience. With respect unto the Elect, God
overpowers him herein. He shines into their Hearts to give them the Knowledge
of his Glory in the face of Christ Jesus, verse. 6. Yet will not Satan so give
over. He will endeavor by all ways and means to trouble, discompose, and
darken the mind even of them that believe, so as that they shall not be able to
retain clear and distinct Views of this Glory. And this he does two ways.

1. WITH some he imploys all his Engines, uses all his Methods of Serpentine
Subtilty, and casts in his fiery Darts, so to d^squiet, discompose and deject
them, as that they can retain no comfortable Views of Christ or his Glory.
Hence arise fears, doubts, disputes, uncertainties, with various
Disconsolations. Hereon they cannot apprehend the Love of Christ, nor be
sensible of any Interest they have therein, or any refreshing persuasions that
they are accepted with him. If such things sometimes shine and beam into their
Minds, yet they quickly vanish and disappear. Fears that they are rejected and
cast off by him, that he will not receive them here nor hereafter, do come in
their place; hence are they filled with Anxieties and Despondencies, under
which it is impossible they should have any clear View of his Glory.

I KNOW that Ignorance, Atheism and Obstinate Security in sensual Sins, do
combine to despise all these things. But it is no new thing in the World, that
Men outwardly professing Christian Religion, when they find gain in that
God^iness, should speak evil of the things which they know not, and corrupt
themselves in what they know naturally, as bruit Beasts.

2. WITH others he deals after another manner. By various means he seduceth
them into a careless Security wherein they promise Peace unto themselves
without any diligent search into these things. Hereon they live in a general
presumption that they shall be saved by Christ, although they know not how.
This makes the Apostle so earnest in pressing the Dury of self-examination on
all Christians, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith:
Prove your own selves: know you not your own selves that Christ is in you,
except you be reprobates? The Rule of Self-judging prescribed by him, is
whether Christ be in us or no; and in us he cannot be, unless he be received by
that Faith wherewith we behold his Glory. For by Faith we receive him, and by
Faith he dwells in our hearts. Joh. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 17.

THIS is the principal way of his prevailing in the World. Multitudes by his
Seduction live in great security under the utmost neglect of these things.
Security is granted to be an Evil destructive of the Souls of Men; but then it
is supposed to consist only in Impenitency for great and open Sins; but to be
neglective of endeavoring an experience of the Power and Grace of the Gospel
in our own Souls, under a Profession of Religion, is no less destructive and
pernicious, than impeni^ency in any course of sin.

THESE and the like Obstructions unto Faith in its Operations being added unto
its own imperfections, are another cause whence our View of the Glory of Christ
in this World is weak and unsteady; so that for the most part it does but
transiently affect our Minds, and not so fully transform them into his
likeness, as otherwise it would.

IT is now time to consider, that sight which we shall have of the Glory of
Christ in Heaven, in comparison of that which we have herebelow. Now this is
equal, stable, always the same without interruption or diversion. And this is
evident, both in the causes or means of it, as also in our perfect Deliverance
from every thing that might be an hindrance in it, or an obstrunction unto it.

1. WE may consider the state of our minds in Glory. The faculties of our Souls
shall then be made perfect, Heb. 12. The Spirits of just Men made perfect. (1.)
Freed from all the clogs of the flesh, and all its influence upon them, and
restraint of their Powers in their Operations. (2.) Perfectly purified from all
Principles of instability and variety; of all Inclinations unto things Sensual
and Carnal, and all Contrivances of Self-preservation or Advancement, being
wholly transformed into the Image of God, in spirituality and holiness. And to
take in the state of our Bodies after the Resurrection; even they also in all
their Powers and Senses, shall be made entirely subservient unto the most
spiritual actings of our Minds in their highest Elevation by the Light of
Glory. Hereby shall we be enabled and sitted eternally to abide in the
Contemplation of the Glory of Christ, with joy and satisfaction. The
understanding shall be always perfected with the Vision of God, and the
Affections cleave infeparably to him; which is Blessedness.

THE very essential faculties of our Souls in that way and manner of working,
which by their Union with our Bodies they are confined unto, are not able to
comprehend and abide constantly in the Contemplation of this Glory. So that,
though our sight of it here be dim and imperfect, and the proposal of it
obscure; yet from the weakness of our minds, we are forced sometimes to turn
aside from what we do discern, as we do our bodily eyes from the beams of the
Sun, when it shines in its brightness. But in this perfect State they are able
to behold and delight in this Glory constantly, with eternal satisfaction.

BUT as for me (says David) I will behold thy face in Righteousness; I shall
be satisfied when I awake, with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. 15. It is Christ alone,
who is the Likeness and Image of God. When we awake in the other World, with
our Minds purified and rectified, the beholding of him shall be always
satisfying unto us. There will be the^ no Satiety, no Weariness, no
Indispositions; but the Mind being made perfect in all its faculties, powers
and operations, with respect unto its utmost end, which is the enjoyment of
God, is satisfied in the beholding of him for evermore. And where there is
perfect satisfaction without Satiety, there is blessedness for ever. So the
Holy Spirit affirms of the four living Creatures in the Revelation; They rest
not day nor night, saying, holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, Chap. 4. 8. They
are continually exercised in the Admiration and Praises of God in Christ,
without weariness or interruption. Herein shall we be made like unto Angels.

2. AS our Minds in their essential powers and Faculties shall be enabled to
comprehend and acquiesce in this Glory of Christ, so the means or instrument of
the beholding of it, is much more excellent than Faith, and in its kind
absolutely perfect, as has in part been before declared. This is vision or
sight. Here we walk by Faith, there by Sight. And this Sight is not an external
aid, like a Glass helping the weakness of the visive faculty to see things afar
off; but it is an internal power, or an act of the internal power of our Minds,
wherewith they are endowed in a glorified state. Hereby we shall be able to see
him face to face, to see him as he is, in a direct comprehension of his Glory;
for this sight or visive power shall be given us for this (...) do. Hereunto
the whole Glory of Christ is clear, perspicuous and evident, which will give us
eternal Acquiescency therein. Hence shall our sight of the Glory of Christ be
invariable, and always the same.

2. THE Lord Christ will never in any one instance, on any occasion, so much as
one moment withdraw himself from us, or Eclipse the proposal and manifestation
of himself unto our sight. This he does sometimes in this life, and it is
needful for us that so he should do. We shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.
17. without end, without interruption. This is the Center of good and evil, as
to the future different states of Men. They shall be for ^ver. Eternity makes
them absolutely good on the one hand, and absolutely evil on the other. To be
in Hell under the wrath of God, is in it self the greatest penal Evil: But to
be there for ever, without the Intermission of Misery, or Determination of
Time, is that which renders it the greatest evil unto them who shall be in that
condition. So is Eternity the Life of future Blessedness. We shall be ever with
the Lord, without Limitation of Time, without Interruption of Enjoyment.

THERE are no vicissitudes in the heavenly state, The New Jerusalem has no
Temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple thereof,
Revel. 21. 24. There is no need of instituted means of Worship, nor of
Ordinances of Divine Service. For we shall need neither increase of Grace, nor
Excitations unto its exercise. The constant, immediate, uninterrupted enjoyment
of God and the Lamb, supplieth all. And it has no need of the Sun, nor of the
Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God does enlighten it, and the Lamb is
the Light thereof. The Light of the Sun is excellent; howbeit, it has its
Seasons, after it has shone in its brightest Luster, it gives place to the
night and darkness. So is the Light of the Moon of great use in the Night; but
it has its Seasons also. Such is the Light we have of the Glory of God and the
Lamb in this World. Sometimes it is as the Light of the Sun, which under the
Gospel is seven fold, as the Light of Seven Days in one, in comparison of the
Law, Isa. 30. 26. Sometimes as the Light of the Moon, which gives relief in
the Night of Temptations and Trials. But it is not constant; we are under a
vicissitude of Light and Darkness, Views of Christ, and a loss of him. But in
Heaven the perpetual presence of Christ with his Saints, makes it always one
Noon of Light and Glory.

3. THIS Vision is not in the least liable unto any weaknings from internal
defects, nor any assaults from Temptations, as is the sight of Faith in this
Life. No Doubts or Fears, no disturbing Darts or Injections shall there have
any place. There shall no Habit, no Quality, no Inclination or Disposition
remain in our Souls, but what shall eternally lead us unto the Contemplation of
the Glory of Christ, with delight and complacencey. Nor will there be any
defect in the gracious Powers of our Souls, as unto a perpetual exercise of
them; and as unto all other opposing Enemies, we shall be in a perpetual
triumph over them, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. The mouth of iniquity shall be
stopped for ever, and the voice of the self avenger shall be heard no more.

WHEREFORE the Vision which we shall have in Heaven of the Glory of Christ, is
Serene; always the same, always new and indeficient, wherein nothing can
disturb the Mind in the most perfect Operations of a blessed Life. And when all
the faculties of the Soul can without any internal weakness or external
hindrances exercise their most perfect operations on the most perfect Object;
therein lies all the blessedness which our nature is capable of.

WHEREFORE, whenever in this life we attain any comfortable refreshing View of
the Glory of Christ, by the exercise of Faith on the Revelation of it, with a
sense of our interest therein, we cannot but long after, and desire to come
unto this more perfect abiding, invariable Aspect of it.

CHAP. XIV.
Other Differences between our Beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in this
World, and by Sight in Heaven.
AMONG the many other Differences which might be insisted on (although the
greatest of them are unto us at present absolutely incomprehensible, and so not
to be enquired into) I shall name two only, and so put a close to this
Discourse.

1. IN the View which we have here of the Glory of Christ by Faith, we gather
things as it were one by one, in several parts and parcels out of the
Scripture, and comparing them together in our Minds, they become the Object of
our present Sight, which is our spiritual comprehension of the things
themselves. We have no proposal of the Glory of Christ unto us by Vision or
illustrious appearance of his Person, as Isaiah had of old, Chap. 6. 1, 2, 3,
4. or as John had in the Revelation, Chap. 1. verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. We need it
not, it would be of no advantage unto us. For as unto the assurance of our
Faith, we have a word of prophecy more useful unto us, than a Voice from
Heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19. And of those who received such Visions, tho of
eminent use unto the Church; yet as unto themselves, one of them cried out, Woe
is me, I am undone; and the other fell as dead at his feet. We are not able in
this life to bear such glorious Representations of him, unto our Edification.

AND as we have no such external proposals of his Glory unto us in Visions, so
neither have we any New Revelations of him, by immediate inspiration. We can
see nothing of it, know nothing of it, but what is proposed unto us in the
Scripture, and that as it is proposed. Nor does the Scripture it self in any
one place, make an entire proposal of the Glory of Christ, with all that
belongs unto it; nor is it capable of so doing; nor can there be any such
Representation of it, unto our capacity on this side Heaven. If all the Light
of the Heavenly Luminaries had been contracted into one, it would have been
destructive, not useful to our sight; But being by Divine Wisdom distributed
into Sun, Moon and Stars, each giving out his own Proportion, it is suited to
declare the Glory of God, and to enlighten the World: So if the whole
Revelation of the Glory of Christ, and all that belongs unto it, had been
committed into one series and contexture of Words, it would have overwhelmed
our Minds, rather than enlightened us. Wherefore God has distributed the Light
of it through the whole Firmament of the Books of the Old and New Testament,
whence it communicates it self, by various parts and degrees unto the proper
use of the Church. In one place we have a description of his Person, and the
Glory of it; sometimes in words plain and proper, and sometimes in great
variety of Allegories, conveying an heavenly Sense of things unto the Minds of
them that do believe; In others of his Love and Condescension in his Office,
and his Glory therein. His Humiliation, Exaltation and Power, are in like
manner in sundry places represented unto us. And as one Star differs from
another in Glory; so it was one way, whereby God represented the Glory of
Christ, in Types and Shadows under the Old Testament, and another wherein it is
declared in the New. Illustrious Testimonies upon all these things are planted
up and down in the Scripture, which we may collect as choice flowers in the
Paradise of God, for the

SO the Spouse in the Canticles considered every part of the Person and Grace
of Christ distinctly by it self, and from them all, concludes that he is
altogether lovely, Chap. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. So ought we to do in
our study of the Scripture, to find out the Revelation of the Glory of Christ,
which is made therein, as did the Prophets of old, as unto what they themselves
received by immediate Inspiration. They searched diligently what the spirit of
Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified before hand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory which should ensue, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. But
this seeing of Christ by parts in the Revelation of him, is one cause why we
see him here but in part.

SOME suppose that by Chopping and Painting, and Gilding, they can make an
Image of Christ that shall perfectly represent him to their Senses and carnal
Affections from head to foot, But they feed on ashes, and have a lie in their
right hand, Jesus Christ is evidently crucified before our eyes in the
Scripture, Gal. 3. 1. So also is he evidently exalted, and glorified therein.
And it is the Wisdom of Faith to gather into one, these parcelled Descriptions
that are given of him, that they may be the Object of its View and
Contemplation.

IN the Vision which we shall have above, the whole Glory of Christ will be at
once and always represented unto us; and we shall be enabled in one act of the
Light of Glory to comprehend it. Here indeed we are at a loss; our minds and
understandings fail us in their Contemplations. It will not yet enter into our
hearts to conceive what is the beauty, what is the Glory of this complete
Representation of Christ unto us. To have at once all the Glory of what he is,
what he was in his outward State and Condition, what he did and suffered, what
he is Exalted unto, his Love and Condescension, his Mystical Union with the
Church, and the Communication of himself unto it, with the Recapitulation of
all things in Him and the Glory of God, even the Father, in his Wisdom,
Righteousness, Grace, Love, Goodness, Power, Shining forth eternally in him, in
what he is, has done, and does, all presented unto us in one view, all
comprehended by us at once, is that which at present we cannot conceive. We can
long for it, pant after it, and have some foretasts of it; namely of that State
and Season, wherein our whole Souls in all their powers and faculties, shall
constantly, inseparably, eternally cleave by Love unto whole Christ in the
fight of the Glory of his Person and Grace, until they are watered, dissolved
and inebriated in the Waters of Life, and the Rivers of Pleasure that are above
for evermore. So must we speak of the things which we admire, which we adore,
which we love, which we long for, which we have some foretasts of in sweetness
inessable, which yet we cannot comprehend.

THESE are some few of those things whence arises the difference between that
view which we have here of the Glory of Christ, and that which is reserved for
Heaven; namely, such as are taken from the difference between the means or
instruments of the one and the other, Faith and Sight.

IN the last place, the great difference between them, consists in, and is
manifested by their effects. Hereof I shall give some few instances, and close
this discourse.

1. THE Vision which we shall have of the Glory of Christ in Heaven, and of the
Glory of the immense God in him, is perfectly and absolutely transforming. It
does change us wholly into the Image of Christ. When we shall see him, we shall
be as he is, we shall be like him, because we shall see him, 1 John 3. 2. But
although the closing, perfecting act of this Transformation be an act of sight,
or the sight of Glory; yet there are many things toward it, or degrees in it,
which we may here take notice of in our way.

1. THE Soul upon its Departure from the Body, is immediately freed from all
the Weakness, Disability, Darkness, Uncertainties and Fears, which were
impressed on it from the Flesh; wherewith it was in the strictest Union. The
Image of the first Adam as fallen, is then abolished. Yea, it is not only freed
from all irregular sinful Distempers cleaving to our Nature as corrupted, but
from all those sinless Grievances and Infirmities which belong unto the
Original Constitution of it. This necessarily ensues on the Dissolution of the
Person in order unto a blessed State. The first entrance by Mortality into
Immortallity, is a step toward Glory. The ease which a blessed Soul finds in a
deliverance from this Encumbrance, is a Door of entrance into eternal Rest.
Such a change is made in that, which in it self is the Center of all Evil,
namely Death, that it is made a means of freeing us from all the Remainders of
what is evil.

FOR this does not follow absolutely on the Nature of the thing it self. A mere
Dissolution of our Natures can bring no Advantage with it, especially as it is
a part of the Curse. But it is from the Sanctification of it by the Death of
Christ. Hereby that which was Gods Ordinance for the Infliction of Judgment,
becomes an effectual Means for the Communication of Mercy, 1 Cor. 5. 22. Chap.
15. 54. It is by virtue of the Death of Christ alone, that the Souls of
Believers are freed by Death from all impressions of Sin, Infirmity and Evils,
which they have had from the Flesh, which were their Burden, under which they
groaned all their Days. No Man knows in any measure the Excellency of this
Privilege, and the Dawnings of Glory which are in it, who has not been
wearied, and even worn out, through long conflicting with the Body of Death.
The Soul hereon being freed from all Annoyances, all Impressions from the
Flesh, is expedite and enlarged unto the Exercise of all its gracious
Faculties, as we shall see immediately.

WITH wicked Men it is not so. Death unto them is a Curse; and the Curse is the
Means of the Conveyance of all Evil, and not Deliverance from any. Wherein they
have been warmed and refreshed by the Influences or the Flesh, they shall be
deprived of it. But their Souls in their separate State, are perpetually
harrased with the disquieting Passions which have been impressed on their Minds
by their corrupt fleshly Lusts. In vain do such Persons look for Relief by
Death. If there be any thing remaining of present good and usefulness to them,
they shall be deprived of it. And their Freedom for a Season from bodily pains,
will no way lie in the Balance against that Confluence of Evils which Death
will let in upon them.

2. THE Spirits of just Men being freed by Death from the Clog of the Flesh,
not yet refined; all the Faculties of their Souls, and all the Graces in them,
as Faith, Love and Delight, are immediately set at Liberty, enabled constantly
to exercise themselves on God in Christ. The end for which they were created,
for which our Nature was endowed with them, was, that we might adhere unto God
by them, and come unto the Enjoyment of him. Being now freed wholly from all
that Impotency, perverseness, and Disability unto this End, with all the Effects
of them, which came upon them by the Fall; they are carried with a full Stream
toward God, cleaving unto him with the most intense Embraces. And all their
Actings toward God, shall be natural, with Facility, Joy, Delight and
Complacency. We know not yet the Excellency of the Operations of our Souls in
divine things, when disburdened of their present Weight of their Flesh. And
this is a second step toward the Consummation of Glory. For,

IN the Resurrection of the Body, upon its full Redemption, it shall be so
purified, sanctified, glorified, as to give no Obstrnction unto the Soul in its
Operations, but be a blessed Organ for its highest and most spiritual Actings.
The Body shall never more be a Trouble, a Burden unto the Soul, but an
Assistant in its Operations, and participant of its Blessedness. Our Eyes were
made to see our Redeemer, and our other Senses to receive impressions from him,
according unto their Capacity. As the Bodies of wicked Men shall be restored
unto them to increase and complete their Misery in their Sufferings; so shall
the Bodies of the Just be restored unto them, to heighten and consummate their
Blessedness.

3. THESE things are preparatory unto Glory. The complete Communication of it,
is by the Infusion of a new heavenly Light into the Mind, enabling us to see
the Lord Christ as he is. The Soul shall not be brought into the immediate
Presence of Christ without a new Power to behold him, and the immediate
Representation of his Glory. Faith now does cease as unto the manner of its
Operation in this Life, whilst we are absent from Christ. This Light of Glory
succeeds into its Room, fitted for that State and all the ends of it, as Faith
is for that which is present. And,

4. IN the first Operation of this Light of Glory, Believers shall so behold
the glory of Christ, and the glory of God in him, as that therewith, and
thereby they shall be immediately and universally changed into his Likeness.
They shall be as he is, when they shall see him as he is. There is no growth in
glory, as unto Parts, there may be as unto Degrees. Additions may be outwardly
made unto what is at first received, as by the Resurrection of the Body; but
the internal Light of Glory, and its transforming Efficacy is capable of no
degrees, though new Revelations may be made unto it, unto Eternity. For the
infinite Fountain of Life, and Light, and Goodness, can never be fathomed, much
less exhausted. And what God spoke on the Entrance of sin, by the way of
contempt and aproach. Behold the Man is become like one of us, upbraiding him
with what he had foolishly designed; on the Accomplishment of the Work of his
Gace, he says in Love and infinite Goodness, Man is become like one of us, in
the perfect Restoration of our Image in him. This is the first Effect of the
Light of Glory.

FAITH also in beholding the glory of Christ in this Life, is accompanied with
a transforming Efficacy, as the Apostle expressly declares, 2 Cor. 3. 18. It is
the Principle from whence, and the Instrumental Cause whereby all spiritual
change is wrought in us in this Life; but the Work of it is imperfect; first
because it is gradual, and then because it is partial.

1. AS unto the manner of its Operation, it is gradual, and does not at once
transform us into the Image of Christ. Yea, the degrees of its Progress
therein, are unto us for the most part imperceptible. It requires much
spiritual Wisdom and Observation to obtain an Experience of them in our own
Souls. The inward man is renewed day by day, whilst we behold these invisible
things, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. but how? even as the outward Man decays by Age,
which is by insensible Degrees and Alterations. Such is the Transformation
which we have by Faith in its present View of the glory of Christ. And
according to our Experience of its Efficacy herein, is our Evidence of its
Truth and Realty in the beholding of him. No Man can have the least ground of
assurance that he has seen Christ and his glory by Faith, without some Effects
of it in changing him into his Likeness. For as on the Touch of his Garment by
the Woman in the Gospel, Virtue went out from him to heal her Infirmity: So
upon this View of Faith, an influence of transforming Power will proceed from
Christ unto the Soul.

2. AS unto the Event it is but partial. It does not bring this Work unto
perfection. The change wrought by it, is indeed great and glorious; or as the
Apostle speaks, it is from Glory to Glory, in a Progress of glorious Grace: But
absolute perfection is reserved for Vision. As unto Divine Worship, Perfection
was not by the Law. It did many things preparatory unto the Revelation of the
Will of God concerning it; but it made nothing perfect: So absolute Perfection
in Holiness, and the Restoration of the Image of God, is not by the Gospel, is
not by Faith; however it gives us many preparatory degrees unto it, as the
Apostle fully declares, Phil. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

SECONDLY, Vision is Beatifical, as it is commonly called, and that not amiss.
It gives perfect Rest and Blessedness unto them in whom it is. This may be a
little opened in the ensuing Observations.

1. THERE are continual Operations of God in Christ, in the Souls of them that
are glorified, and Communications from him unto them. For all Creatures must
eternally live even in Heaven, in dependence on him who is the eternal Fountain
of Being, Life, Goodness and Blessedness unto all. As we cannot subsist one
moment in our Beings, Lives, Souls, Bodies, the inward or outward Man, without
the continual Actings of divine Power in us, and toward us; so in the
glorified State our All shall depend eternally on Divine Power and Goodness,
communicating themselves unto us, for all the ends of our blessed Subsistence
in Heaven.

2. WHAT is the way and manner of these Communications, we cannot comprehend.
We cannot indeed fully understand the Nature and way of his Spiritual
Communications unto us in this Life. We know these things by their Signs, their
outward Means, and principally by the Effects they produce in the real change
of our Natures. But in themselves we see but little of them. The wind blows
where it lists, and we hear the Sound thereof, but we know not whence it
comes, and whither it goes; so is every one that is born of the Spirit. Joh.
3. 8. All Gods real Operations in Heaven and Earth are incomprehensible, as
being Acts of infinite Power and we cannot search (...)

3. ALL Communications from the Divine Being and infinite Fullness in Heaven
unto glorified Saints, are in, and through Christ Jesus, who shall for ever be
the Medium of Communication between God and the Church, even in glory. All
things being gathered into one head in him, even things in Heaven, and things
in Earth; that Head being in immediate dependence on God, this Order shall
never be dissolved, Ephesians. 1. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 3. 23. And on these Communications
from God through Christ depends entirely our Continuance in a State of
Blessedness and Glory. We shall no more be self-subsistent in glory, than we
are in Nature or Grace.

4. THE way on our part whereby we shall receive these Communications from God
by Christ, which are the eternal Springs of Life, Peace, Joy and Blessedness,
is this Vision, the Sight whereof we speak. For as it is expressly assigned
thereunto in the Scripture; so whereas it contains the perfect Operation of our
Minds and Souls in a perfect State, on the most perfect Object, it is the only
means of our Blessedness. And this is the true Cause whence there neither is,
nor can be any Satiety or weariness in Heaven, in the eternal Contemplation of
the same glory. For not only the Object of our sight is absolutely infinite,
which can never be searched into the bottom; yea, is perpetually new unto a
finite understanding; so our subjective Blessedness consisting in continual
fresh Communications from the infinite Fullness of the Divine Nature, derived
unto us through Vision, is always new, and always will be so to Eternity.
Herein shall all the Saints of God drink of the Rivers of Pleasure that are at
his Right Hand, be satisfied with his Likeness, and refresh themselves in the
eternal Springs of Life, Light and Joy for evermore.

THIS effect that View which we have by Faith of the glory of Christ in this
World, does not produce. It is Sanctifying, not Glorifying. The best of Saints
are far from a perfect or glorified State in this Life. And that not only on
the account of the outward Evils, which in their Persons they are exposed unto;
but also of the Weakness and Imperfection of their inward State in Grace. Yet
we may observe some things unto the Honor of Faith in them who have received
it. As,

1. IN its due Exercise on Christ, it will give unto the Souls of Believers
some previous Participation of future glory, working in them Dispositions unto,
and Preparation for the Enjoyment of it.

2. THERE is no Glory, no Peace, no Joy, no Satisfaction in this World to be
compared with what we receive by that weak and imperfect View which we have of
the Glory of Christ by Faith. Yea, all the Joys of the World are a thing of
naught in Comparison of what we so receive.

3. IT is sufficient to give us such a Perception, such a Foretaste of future
Blessedness in the Enjoyment of Christ, as may continually stir us up to breath
and pant after it. But it is not Beatifical.

OTHER Differences of an alike Nature between our Beholding of the Glory of
Christ in this Life by Faith, and that Vision of it, which is reserved for
Heaven, might be insisted on; but I shall proceed no further. There is nothing
farther for us to do herein but that now and always we shut up all our
Meditations concerning it, with the deepest Self-abasement out of a Sense of
our Unworthiness and Insufficiency to comprehend those things, Admiration of
that excellent Glory which we cannot comprehend, and vehement Longings for that
Season when he shall see him as he is, be ever with him, and know him, even as
we are known.

FINIS.
CHAP. I.
Application of the foregoing Meditations concerning the Glory of Christ. First
in an Exhortation unto such as are not yet Partakers of Him.
THAT which remains, is to make some Application of the Glorious Truth insisted
on unto the Souls of them that are concerned: And what I have to offer unto
that end, I shall distribute under two Heads. The First shall be with respect
unto them who are yet Strangers from this Holy and Glorious One, who are not
yet made partakers of him, nor have any especial Interest in him. And the
Second shall be directed unto Believers, as a Guide and Assistance unto their
Recovery from Spiritual Decays, and the Revival of a Spring of vigorous Grace,
Holiness and Obedience in them.

FOR the first of these, although it seems not directly to lie in our way, yet
is it suited unto the method of the Gospel, that wherever there is a
Declaration of the Excellencies of Christ, in his Person, Grace or Office, it
should be accompanied with an Invitation and Exhortation unto Sinners to come
unto him. This method he himself first made use of, Mat. 11. 27, 28, 29, 30.
Joh. 7* 37, 38. and consecrated it unto our use also. Besides, it is necessary
from the nature of the things themselves, for who can dwell on the
consideration of the Glory of Christ, being called therewith to the Declaration
of it, but his own mind will engage him to invite lost Sinners unto a
participation of him. But I shall at present proceed no further in this
Exhortation, but only unto the Proposal of some of those Considerations which
may prepare, incline, and dispose their Minds unto a closure with him as he is
tendered in the Gospel. As,

1. LET them consider well what is their present State with respect unto God
and Eternity. This Moses wishes for the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that they
were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter
end: It is the greatest Folly in the World to leave the Issues of these things
unto an uncertain hazard: And that Man who cannot prevail with himself
strictly to examine what is his State and Condition with respect unto Eternity,
does never do any good, nor abstain from any evil in a due manner; remember
therefore, that many are called, but few are chosen. To be called, is to enjoy
all the outward Privileges of the Gospel, which is all you unto whom I speak
can pretend unto, yet this you may do and not be chosen: Even among those unto
whom the Word is preached, they are but few that shall be saved. In the
Distribution made by our Lord Jesus Christ of the Hearers of the Word into four
sorts of ground, it was but one of them that received real Benefit thereby; and
if our Congregations are no better than were his Hearers, there is not above a
fourth part of them that will be saved, it may be a far less number: And is it
not strange that every one of them is not jealous over himself and his own
Condition? Many herein deceive themselves, until they fall under woeful
surprizals. And this is represented in the Account of the final Judgment; for
the generality of those who have professed the Gospel are introduced as
complaining of their Disappointments, Mat. 25. 41, 42, 43. For what is there
spoken, is only a Declaration of what befell them here in the close of their
Lives, and their Personal Judgment thereon.

2. TAKE heed of being deluded by common Presumptions. Most men have some
thoughts in general about what their State is, and what it will be in the
issue: But they make no diligent search into this matter, because a number of
common presumptions do immediately insinuate themselves into their minds for
their relief, and they are such, as all whose force and efficacy unto this end
lies in this, that they differ from others, and are better than they; as that
they are Christians, that they are in the right way of Religion, that they are
partakers of the outward privileges of the Gospel, hearing the Word, and
participation of the Sacraments; that they have light and convictions, so as
that they abstain from Sin, and perform Duties so as others do not, and the
like. All those with whom it is not so, who are behind them in these things,
they judge to be in an ill State and Condition, whence they entertain good
hopes concerning themselves: and this is all that most trust unto. It is not my
present business to discourse the vanity of Presumptions, it has been done by
many; I give only this warning in general unto those who have the least design
or purpose to come to Christ, and to be made partakers of him, that they put no
trust in them, that they rely not on them; for if they do so, they will
eternally deceive their Souls. This was a great part of the preparatory
Ministry of John the Baptist, Mat. 3. 9. Think not to say within your selves,
we have Abraham to our Father. This was their great comprehensive privilege,
containing all the outward Church and Covenant Advantages. These they rested
in, and trusted to unto their Ruin: Herein he designed to undeceive them.

3. CONSIDER aright what it is to live and die without an Interest in Christ,
without a participation of him. Where this is not stated in the mind, where
thoughts of it are not continually prevalent, there can be no one step taken in
the way toward him. Unless we are thoroughly convinced that without him we are
in a state of Apostasy from God, under the Curse, obnoxious unto Eternal Wrath,
as some of the worst of God's Enemies, we shall never flee unto him for Refuge
in a due manner: The whole have no need of a Physician, but the sick; Christ
came not to call the Rightous, but Sinners to Repentance: And the Conviction
intended, is the principal end of the Ministry of the Law. The Miseries of this
State have been the subject of innumerable Sermons and Discourses; but there is
a general misery in the whole, that few take themselves to be concerned
therein, or apply these things unto themselves. Let us tell men of it a
thousand times, yet they either take no notice of it, or believe it not, nor
look on it as that which belongs unto the way and course of preaching, wherein
they are not concerned. These things it seems Preachers must say, and they may
believe them who have a mind thereunto. It is a rare thing that any one shall
as much as say unto himself, Is it so with me? And if we now, together with
this Caution, tell the same Men again, that whilst they are uninterested in
Christ, not ingrafted into him by Faith, that they run in vain, that all their
labor in Religion is lost, that their Duties are all rejected, that they are
under the Displeasure and Curse of God, that their End is eternal Destruction,
which are all unquestionably certain, yet will they let all these things pass
by without any further consideration.

BUT here I must fix with them unto whom I speak at present, unless there be a
full Conviction in them of the woeful deplorable condition of every Soul of
whatever Quality, Profession, Religion, outward State it be, who is not yet
made partaker of Christ, all that I have further to add will be of no
signification. Remember then that the due consideration hereof is unto you in
your State, your chiefest concernment in this World: and be not afraid to take
in a full and deep sense of it, for if you are really delivered from it, and
have good Evidence thereof, it is nothing unto you but matter of eternal Praise
and Thanksgiving. And if you are not so, it is highly necessary that your Minds
should be possessed with due Apprehension of it. The work of this Conviction is
the first effect of true Religion, and the great Abuse of Religion in the World
is, that a pretense of it deludes the Minds of men to apprehend that it is not
necessary; for to be of this or that Religion, of this or that way in Religion,
is supposed sufficient to secure the Eternal State of men, though they are
never convinced of their lost estate by Nature.

4. HEREON consider the Infinite Condescension and Love of Christ, in his
Invitations and Calls of you to come unto him for Life, Deliverance, Mercy,
Grace, Peace, and Eternal Salvation. Multitudes of these Invitations and Calls
are recorded in the Scripture, and they are all of them filled up with those
blessed Encouragements, which Divine wisdom knows to be suited unto lost
convinced Sinners in their present state and condition. It were a blessed
Contemplation to dwell on the Consideration of the Infinite Condescension,
Grace and Love of Christ, in his Invitations of Sinners to come unto him, that
they may be saved; of that mixture of Wisdom and persuasive Grace that is in
them; of the force and efficacy of the pleading and Argument that they are
accompanied withal, as they are recorded in the Scripture; but that belongs not
to my present Design: This I shall only say, that in the Declaration and
Preaching of them, Jesus Christ yet stands before Sinners, calling, inviting,
encouraging of them to come unto him.

THIS is somewhat of the Word which he now speaks unto you. Why will ye dye?
why will ye perish? why will you not have compassion on your own Souls? Can
your Hearts endure, or can your hands be strong in the day of Wrath that is
approaching? It is but a little while before all your Hopes, your Reliefs and
Presumptions will forsake you, and leave you eternally miserable: Look unto me,
and be saved; come unto me, and I will ease you of all Sins, Sorrows, Fears,
Burdens, and give rest unto your Souls. Come I entreat you, lay aside all
Procrastinations, all delays, put me off no more, Eternity lies at the door;
cast out all cursed self-deceiving Reserves, do not so hate me, as that you
will rather perish than accept of Deliverance by me.

THESE and the like things does the Lord Christ continually declare, proclaim,
plead and urge on the Souls of Sinners; as it is fully declaclared, Prove. 1.
ver. 20. to the 34. He does it in the preaching of the word, as if he were
present with you, stood amongst you, and spoke personally to every one of you:
And because this would not suit his present state of Glory, he has appointed
the Ministers of the Gospel to appear before you, and to deal with you in his
stead, avowing, as his own, the Invitations that are given you in his Name, 2
Cor. 5. 19, 20.

CONSIDER therefore his Infinite Condescension, Grace, and Love herein: Why all
this toward you? does he stand in need of you? Have you deserved it at his
hands? Did you love him first? Cannot he be happy and blessed without you? Has
he any Design upon you, that he is so earnest in calling you unto him? Alas, it
is nothing but the overflowing of Mercy, Compassion, and Grace that moves and
acts him herein. Here lies the entrance of innumerable Souls into a Death and
Condemnation far more severe than those contained in the Curse of the Law, 2
Cor. 2. 15, 16. In the contempt of this Infinite Condescension of Christ, in
his Holy Invitation of Sinners to himself, lies the sting and poison of
Unbelief, which unavoidably gives over the Souls of Men unto Eternal Ruin: And
who shall once pity them to Eternity who are guilty of it? Yea but,

5. PERHAPS if you should on his Invitation begin to look to him, and resolve
to come to him, you are greatly afraid that when it comes to the Trial he will
not receive you; for no Heart can conceive, no Tongue can express what
wretched, vile, and provoking Sinners you have been. That the Lord Christ will
receive unto him such as we are, we have no hopes, or that ever we shall find
Acceptance with him: I say, it is not amiss when Persons come so far, as to be
sensible of what Discouragements they have to conflict withal, what
difficulties lie in their way, and what objections do arise against them, for
the most do perish in a senceless stupidity; they will not consider how it is
with them, what is required of them, nor how it will be in the latter end; they
doubt not but that either they do believe already, or can do so when they
please; but when any come so far as to charge the failure of their Acceptance
with Christ on their own unworthiness, and so are discouraged from coming unto
him, there are Arguments for their Conviction and Persuasion, which nothing but
the Devil and Unbelief can defeat: Wherefore, that which is now proposed unto
consideration in answer hereunto, is the Readiness of Christ to receive every
Sinner, be he who or what he will, that shall come unto him: And hereof we have
the highest Evidences that Divine Wisdom and Grace can give unto us. This is
the Language of the Gospel, of all that the Lord Christ did or suffered, which
is recorded therein. This is the Divine Testimony of the Three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and of the Three that bear
witness in Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, all give their joint
Testimony, that the Lord Christ is ready to receive all Sinners that come to
him; they who receive not this Testimony, make God a Liar, both Father, Son,
and Spirit. Whatever the Lord Christ is in the Constitution of his Person, in
the Representation of the Father, in his Office, in what he did on the Earth,
in what he does in Heaven, proclaims the same Truth. Nothing but cursed
Obstinacy in Sin and Unbelief can suggest a thought unto our minds, that he is
not willing to receive us when we come unto him. Herein we are to bear
Testimony against the Unbelief of all unto whom the Gospel is preached, that
come not unto him. Unbelief acting it self herein, includes a contempt of the
Wisdom of God, a Denial of his Truth or Faithfulness, an Impeachment of the
sincerity of Christ in his Invitations, making him a Deceiver, and will issue
in an express hatred of his Person and Office, and of the Wisdom of God in him.
Here then you are shut up, you cannot from hence take any Countenance unto your
Unbelief.

6. CONSIDER that he is as able to Save us, as he is ready and willing to
Receive us. The Testimonies which he has given us unto his Goodness and Love
are uncontrollable, and none dare directly to call in Question, or deny his
Power. Generally this is taken for granted by all, that Christ is able to save
us if he will; yea, who shall question his Ability to save us, though we live
in Sin and Unbelief, and many expect that he will do so, because they believe
he can if he will: But indeed Christ has no such Power, no such Ability; he
cannot save unbelieving impenitent Sinners, for this cannot be done without
denying himself, acting contrary to his Word, and destroying his own Glory. Let
none please themselves with such vain Imaginations, Christ is able to save all
them, and only them who come to God by him. Whilst you live in Sin and Unbelief
Christ himself cannot save you; but when it comes to the Trial in particular,
some are apt to think, that although they will not conclude that Christ cannot
save them, yet they do on various accounts, that they cannot be saved by him.
This therefore we also give Testimony unto, in our Exhortation to come unto
him; namely, that his power to save those that shall comply with his Call is
Sovereign, Incontrollable, Almighty, that nothing can stand in the way of. All
things in Heaven and Earth are committed unto him, all power is his, and he
will use it unto this end, namely, the assured Salvation of all that come unto
him.

7. CONSIDER greatly what has been spoken of the Representation of God, and
all the Holy Properties of his Nature in Him. Nothing can possibly give us more
encouragement to come unto him; for we have manifested, that God who is
infinitely Wise and Glorious, has designed to exert all the Holy Properties of
his Nature, his Mercy, Love, Grace Goodness, Righteousness, Wisdom and Power in
him, in and unto the Salvation of them that do believe. Whoever therefore comes
unto Christ by Faith on this Representation of the Glory of God in him, he
ascribes and gives unto God all that Glory and Honor which he aims at from
his Creatures, and we can do nothing wherewith he is pleased equal unto it.
Every poor Soul that comes by Faith unto Christ, gives unto God all that Glory
which it is his Design to manifest and be exalted in and what can we do more?
There is more Glory given unto God by coming unto Christ in believing, than in
keeping the whole Law, inasmuch as he has more eminently manifested the holy
Properties of his Nature in the way of Salvation by Christ, than in giving of
the Law: There is therefore no Man who under Gospel Invitations refuses to
come unto, and close with Christ by believing, but (...), through the Power of
Darkness, Blindness, and Unbelief, he hates God, dislikes all his ways, would
not have his Glory exalted, nor manifested, choosing rather to dye in Enmity
against him, than to give Glory to him. Do not deceive your selves, it is not
an indifferent thing, whether you will come in unto Christ upon his Invitations
or no; a thing that you may put off from one season unto another: Your present
Refusal of it is as high an Act of Enmity against God, as your Nature is
capable of.

8. CONSIDER that by coming unto Christ, you shall have an interest in all that
Glory which we have proposed unto you: for Christ will become yours more
intimately than your Wives and Children are yours, and so all his Glory is
yours also. All are apt to be affected with the good things of their Relation,
their Grace, their Riches, their Beauty, their Power; for they judge themselves
to have an Interest in them, by reason of their Relation unto them. Christ is
nearer to Believers than any Natural Relations are to us whatever; they have
therefore an Interest in all his Glory. And is this a small thing in your Eyes,
that Christ shall be yours, and all his Glory shall be yours, and you shall
have the advantage of it unto your Eternal Blessedness? Is it nothing unto you
to continue Strangers from and uninterested in all this Glory? To be left to
take your portion in this World in Lusts and Sins, and Pleasures, and a few
perishing Trifles with Eternal Ruin in the close, whilst such durable
Substance, such Riches of Glory are tendered unto you?

LASTLY, Consider the horrible ingratitude there is in a neglect or refusal to
come in to Christ upon his Invitation, with the doleful Eternal Ruin that will
ensue thereon: How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? Impenitent
Unbelievers under the preaching of the Gospel, are the vilest and most
ungrateful of all Gods Creation. The Devils themselves, as wicked as they are,
are not guilty of this Sin, for Christ is never tendered unto them, they never
had an offer of Salvation on Faith and Repentance; this is their peculiar Sin,
and will be the peculiar Aggravation of their misery unto Eternity. Hear ye
Despisers, wonder and perish. The sin of the Devil is in malice and opposition
unto knowledge, above what the Nature of Man is capable of in this World. Men
therefore must sin in some instance above the Devil, or God would not give them
their Eternal Portion with the Devil and his Angels: this is Unbelief.

SOME it may be will say, What then shall we do? What shall we apply our selves
unto? What is it that is required of us?

1. TAKE the Advice of the Apostle, Heb. 3. 7, 8, 13. -- To day if you will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation in the day of
Temptation in the Wilderness: But exhort one another daily, while it is called
to day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. This day,
even this is unto you in the tender of Grace the acceptable time, this is the
day of Salvation. Others have had this day as well as you, and have missed
their Opportunity; take heed lest it should be so with you also. How if any one
should write it down, or peculiarly commit it to remembrance, this day there
was a tender of Christ and Salvation in him made unto my Soul; from this time I
will resolve to give up my self unto him. And if you find your Resolutions,
charge your Consciences with what you have engaged, and make your selves to
know, that if you go back from it, it is a token that you are going to Ruin.

2. CONSIDER that it is high time for you to make somewhat of Religion. Do not
hang always in suspense; let it not be a question with your selves, whether you
have a mind to be saved or no. This is as good a time and season for a
Resolution as ever you are like to have whilst in this World. Some things, nay,
many things may fall in between this and the next opportunity, that shall put
you backward, and make your entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven far more
difficult than ever it was; and the living in that uncertainty at best, which
you do, of what will become of you unto Eternity, is the most miserable kind of
Life in the World. Those who put far from them the evil day, and live in the
pursuit of lusts and pleasures, have somewhat that gives them present
satisfaction, and they say not, There is no hope, because they find the Life of
the hand: But you have nothing that gives you any prevalent Refreshment,
neither will your latter end be better than theirs, if you dye without an
Interest in Christ Jesus. Come therefore at length unto a determinate
Resolution what you will do in this matter. Christ has waited long for you,
and who knows how soon he may withdraw, never to look after you any more.

UPON occasion of the preceding Discourse concerning the Glory of Christ, I
thought it necessary to add unto it this brief Exhortation unto Faith in him,
aiming to suit it unto the Capacity of the meanest Sinner that is capable of
any self-consideration as unto his Eternal Welfare. But yet a little further,
to give efficacy unto this Exhortation, it will be necessary to remove some of
those common and obvious Tergiversations that convinced Sinners do usually
betake themselves unto, to put off a present compliance with the calls of
Christ to come unto him; for although it is Unbelief alone acting in the
darkness of men's minds and the obstinacy of their Wills, that effectually keeps
off Sinners from coming unto Christ upon his Call, yet it shrouds it self under
various pretenses, that it may not appear in it is own ugly Form; for no Sin,
whereof Men can be guilty of in this World, is of so horrible a Nature, and so
dreadful an Aspect as is this Unbelief, where a clear view of it is obtained in
Evangelical Light: wherefore by the aid of Satan, it suggests other pleas and
pretenses unto the Minds of Sinners, under which they may countenance
themselves in a Refusal to come to Christ; see 2 Cor. 4. 4. Any thing else it
shall be, but not Unbelief, that they all disavow. I shall therefore speak unto
a few of those Tergiversations in this case which are obvious, and which are
exemplified in the Gospel it self.

I. SOME do say on such Exhortations: What is it that you would have us to do?
We hear the Word preached, we believe it as well as we can, we do many things
willingly, and abstain from many evils diligently, what is more required of us?
This is the Language of the Hearts of the most with whom in this Case we have
to do: And I say,

1. IT is usual with them who do something in the ways of God, but not all they
should, and so nothing in a due manner, to expostulate about requiring of them
more than they do. So the People dispute with God himself, Mal. 1. 6. Chap. 3.
8, 13. So they in the Gospel who esteemed themselves to have done their Duty,
being pressed unto Faith by Christ Jesus, ask him with some Indignation, What
shall we do, that we might work the work of God? John 6. 28. If what we do be
not enough, what is it that you require more of us? So was it with the Young
Man, Mat. 19. 20. What do I lack yet? Be advised therefore not to be too
confident of your State, left you should yet lack that one thing, the want
whereof might prove your Eternal Ruin.

2. THE things mentioned, with all of the like nature, which may be multiplied,
may be where there is no one spark of saving Faith. Simon Magus heard the Word,
and believed as well as he could; Herod heard it, and did many things gladly;
and all sorts of Hypocrites do upon their Convictions perform many duties, and
abstain from many sins, so as that notwithstanding this plea you may perish for
ever.

3. WHERE these things are sincere, they belong unto the exercise of Faith;
they may be after a sort without Faith, but Faith cannot be without them: But
there is a fundamental Act of Faith, whereby we close with Christ, whereby we
receive him; that is, in order of Nature, antecedent unto it is actings in all
other Duties and Occasions; it is laying the foundation, other things belong to
the building. This is that you are called on to secure, and you may know it by
these two Properties:

1. It is Singular: So our Savior tells the Jews, Joh. 6. 29. This is the work
of God, that you believe on him whom he has sent. The Act, Work or Duty of
Faith in the receiving of Christ, is a peculiar singular Work, wherein the Soul
yields especial obedience unto God: It is not to be reckoned unto such common
Duties as those mentioned, but the Soul must find out wherein it has in a
singular manner closed with Christ upon the Command of God.

2. IT is accompanied with an universal Spiritual Change in the whole Soul, 2
Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are
passed away, behold all things are become new: Wherefore if you would not choose
rather to deceive and ruin your own Souls, come to the trial whether indeed
you have received Christ in such a singular transforming act of Faith, do not
on such pretenses want a compliance with the word of Exhortation proposed unto
you. But

II. SOME will say, they know not how to proceed in this Work. They can make
nothing of it; they have tried to come to this believing, but do still fail in
what they design; they go on and off, but can make no progress, can come to no
satisfaction; therefore they think it best to let things go in general as they
are, without putting themselves to farther trouble as unto any especial Act of
Faith in the receiving of Christ. This is the language of Men's Hearts, though
not of their mouths, another shelter of Unbelief, and they act accordingly;
they have a secret Despondency, which keeps them safe from attempting a real
closure with Christ on the tender of the Gospel: Something may be offered unto
this distempered frame of Mind.

1. REMEMBER the Disciples that were fishing, and had toiled all night, but
caught nothing, Luke 5. 3, 4; upon the coming of Christ unto them, he requires
that they should cast out their Nets once more; Peter makes some excuse from
the labor which they had taken in vain all Night; however he would venture
once more on the Command of Christ, and had an astonishing draught of Fishes,
ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Have you bin wearied with disappointments in your attempts
and Resolutions, yet cast in your Net this once more upon the Command of
Christ, venture this once more to come unto him on his Call and Invitation, you
know not what success he may give unto you.

2. CONSIDER that it is not failing in this or that Attempt of coming to
Christ, but a giving over your Endeavors that will be your Ruin. The Woman of
Canaan in her great outcry to Christ for Mercy, Mat. 15. 22. had many a
Repulse: First it is said, he answered her not a word, then his Disciples
desired that he would send her away, that she might not trouble him any more;
whereon he gives a Reason why he would not regard her, or why he could justly
pass her by; she was not an Israelitess, unto whom he was sent, yet she gives
not over, but pressing into his presence, cries out for Mercy, ver. 25. being
come to that issue, to try and draw out her Faith to the utmost, which was his
design from the beginning, he reckons her among Dogs, that were not to have
Childrens bread given unto them. Had she now at last given over upon this
severe Rebuke, she had never obtained Mercy; but persisting in her Request she
at last prevailed, ver. 27. 28. It may be you have prayed, and cried, and
resolved, and vowed, but all without success as you suppose, Sin has broken
thorough all: however, if you give not over, you shall prevail at last; you
know not at what time God will come in with his Grace, and Christ will manifest
his love unto you as unto the poor Woman, after many a rebuke. It may be after
all he will do it this day, and if not, he may do it another, do not despond.
Take that word of Christ himself for your Encouragement, Prove. 8. 34. Blessed
is the man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the posts of
my doors. If you hear him, and wait, though you have not yet admission, but are
kept at the gates and posts of the doors, yet in the issue you shall be blessed.

3. THE Rule in this case is, Hos. 6 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know. Are you in the way of knowing Christ in the use of Means, hearing the
Word, and sincere Endeavors in holy Duties; though you cannot yet attain unto
any Evidence that you have received him, have closed with him, nothing can
ruin you but giving over the way wherein you are; for then shall you know, if
you follow on to know the Lord. Many can give you their Experiences, that if
they had been discouraged by present overwhelming Difficulties, arising from
their Disappointments, breaking of Vows, relapses into Folly, they had been
utterly ruined, whereas now they are at rest and peace in the Bosom of Christ.
On a great surprizal Christ lost at once many Disciples, and they lost their
Souls, John 6. 66. They went back, and walked no more with him; take heed of
the like Discouragements.

III. SOME may say, yea, practically they do say, That these things indeed are
necessary; they must come to Christ by believing, or they are undone, but this
is not the season of it, there will be time enough to apply themselves unto it
when other occasions are past. At present they have not leisure to enter upon,
and go through with this Duty: wherefore they will abide in their present State
for a while, hearing and doing many things, and when time serves, will apply
themselves unto this Duty also.

1. THIS is an uncontrollable evidence of that Sottishness and Folly which is
come upon our Nature by Sin. A Depravation that the Apostle places in the head
of the Evils of corrupted Nature, Tu. 3. 3. Can any thing be more foolish,
sottish and stupid, than for men to put off the consideration of the Eternal
Concernment of their Souls for one hour, being altogether uncertain whether
they shall live another or no? to prefer present Trifles before the
Blessedness or Misery of an Immortal State? For those who never heard of these
things, who never had any Conviction of Sin and Judgment, to put the evil day
far from them, is not much to be admired: But for you who have Christ preached
unto you, who own a necessity of coming unto him, to put it off from day to day
upon such slight pretenses, it is an astonishable Folly. May you not be spoken
unto in the language of the Wisdom of God, Prove. 6. 9, 10, 11. You come to hear
the Word, and when you go away, the language of your Hearts is; Yet a little
sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep: We will abide
a little while in our present State, and afterward we will rouse up our
selves. Under this Deceit do multitudes perish every day. This is a dark Shade,
wherein cursed Unbelief lies hid.

2. CONSIDER that this is the greatest Engine that Satan makes use of in the
World among them that hear the Word preached unto them, for the ruin of their
Souls. He has other Arts and Ways, and Methods of dealing with other Men, as
by sensual and worldly Lusts: But as unto them who through their Convictions do
attend unto the preaching of the Word, this is his great and almost only Engine
for their Ruin. There needs no haste in this matter, another time will be more
seasonable, you may be sure not to fail of it before you dye: However, this
present day and time is most unfit for it, you have other things to do, you
cannot part with your present frame, you may come again to hear the Word the
next opportunity. Know assuredly, if your Minds are influenced unto delays of
coming to Christ by such insinuations, you are under the Power of Satan, and he
is like enough to hold you fast unto Destruction.

3. THIS is as evil and dangerous a Posture, or frame of Mind, as you can well
fall under. If you have learned to put off God, and Christ, and the Word for
the present Season, and yet relieve your selves in this, that you do not intend
like others always to reject them, but will have a time to hearken to their
calls; you are secured and fortified against all Convictions and Persuasions,
all fears; one answer will serve for all, within a little while you will do all
that can be required of you. This is that which ruins the Souls of multitudes
every day. It is better dealing with Men openly profligate, than with such a
trifling promiser. See Isa. 5. 7, 10.

4. REMEMBER that the Scripture confines you unto the present day, without the
least intimation that you shall have either another day, or another tender of
Grace and Mercy in any day, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Heb. 3. 7. 13. Chap. 12. 15. Take care
lest you come short of the Grace of God, miss of it by missing your
opportunity. Redeem the time, or you are lost for ever.

5. AS unto the pretense of your Occasions and Business, there is a ready way
to disappoint the craft of Satan in that pretense, namely, to mix Thoughts of
Christ, and the Renovation of your Resolutions, either to come or to cleave
unto him with all your Occasions. Let nothing put it utterly out of your minds;
make it familiar unto you, and you will beat Satan out of that strong hold,
Prove. 7. 4. However, shake your selves out of this dust, or destruction lies at
the door.

IV. IT is the Language of the Hearts of some, that if they give up themselves
unto a compliance with this Exhortation, and go seriously about this Duty, they
must relinquish and renounce all their Lusts and pleasures, yea much of their
Converse and Society, wherein they find so much present satisfaction, as that
they know not how to part with them. If they might retain their old ways, at
least some of them, it were another matter, but this total Relinquishment of
all is very severe.

Answ. I. THE Jesuits preaching and painting of Christ among some of the
Indians, concealed from them his Cross and Sufferings, telling them only of his
present Glory and Power; so as they pretended to win them over to Faith in him,
hiding from them that whereby they might be discouraged; and so preached a
false Christ unto them, one of their own framing. We dare do no such thing for
all the World; we can here use no condescension, no compliance, no composition
with respect unto any Sin or Lust, we have no Commission to grant that request
of Lot, Is it not a little one? let it be spared; nor to come to Naamans terms,
God be merciful to me in this thing, in all others I will be obedient.
Wherefore,

2. WE must here be peremptory with you, whatever be the event, if you are
discouraged by it, we cannot help it; Cursed be the Man that shall encourage
you to come to Christ, with hopes of Indulgence unto any one Sin whatever. I
speak not this, as though you could at once absolutely and perfectly leave all
Sin in the root and branches of it; but only you are to do it in Heart and
Resolution, engaging into an Universal Mortification of all Sin, as by Grace
from above you shall be enabled: But your Choice must be absolute, without
Reserves, as to Love, Interest and Design; God or the World, Christ or Belial,
Holiness or Sin, there is no Medium, no terms of composition, 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16,
17, 18.

3. AS unto what you pretend of your Pleasures, the Truth is, you never yet had
any real Pleasure, nor do know what it is: How easy were it to declare the
folly, vanity, bitterness, poison of those things which you have esteemed your
pleasures. Here alone, namely, in Christ, and a participation of him, are true
Pleasures, and durable Riches to be obtained; Pleasure of the same Nature with,
and such as like pleasant Streams flow down into the Ocean of Eternal Pleasures
above. A few moments in these Joys are to be preferred above the longest
continuance in the cursed pleasures of this World. See Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18.

V. IT will be said by some, that they do not see those who profess themselves
to be Believers, to be so much better than they are, as that you need to press
us so earnestly to so great a change; we know not why we should not be
accounted Believers already as well as they. I shall in a few words, as well as
I am able, lay this stumbling block out of the way, though I confess at this
day it is weighty and cumbersome. And I say.

1. AMONG them that profess themselves to be Believers, there are many false,
corrupt Hypocrites; and it is no wonder that on various occasions they lay the
stumbling block of their Iniquities before the faces of others: But they shall
bear their own burden and Judgment.

2. IT is acknowledged, it must be bewailed, that some whom we have reason to
judge to be true Believers, yet through their unmortified Pride, or
Covetousness, or Carelessness in their Conversation, or vain Attire, and
conformity to the World, or Frowardness, do give just occasion of offense. We
confess that God is displeased herewith, Christ and the Gospel dishonored, and
many that are weak are wounded, and others discouraged. But as for you, this is
not your Rule; this is not proposed unto you, but that Word only is so that
will never fail you.

3. THE World does not know, nor is able to make a right Judgment of Believers;
nor do you so, for it is the Spiritual Man alone that discerns the things of
God. Their Infirmities are visible to all, their Graces invisible; the King's
Daughter is glorious within. And when you are able to make a right Judgment of
them, you will desire no greater Advancement than to be of their Society, Psalm.
16. 3.

THESE few Instances of the pretenses wherewith Unbelief covers it is Deformity,
and hides that destruction wherewith it is accompanied, may suffice unto our
present purpose; they are multiplied in the minds of Men, impregnated by the
suggestions of Satan on their Darkness and Folly. A little Spiritual Wisdom
will rend the vail of them all, and expose Unbelief acting in Enmity against
Christ under them. But what has been spoken may suffice to answer the
necessity of the preceding Exhortaion on this Occasion.

CHAP. II.
The Way and Means of the Recovery of Spiritual Decays, and of obtaining fresh
Springs of Grace.
THE Application of the same Truth in the Second place belongs unto Believers,
especially such as have made any long profession of walking in the ways of God
and the Gospel. And that which I design herein, is to manifest, That a steady
Spiritual view of the Glory of Christ by Faith, will give them a gracious
Revival from inward Decays, and fresh Springs of Grace, even in their latter
days. A Truth this is, as we shall see confirmed by Scripture, with the joyful
Experience of multitudes of Believers, and is of great importance unto all that
are so.

THERE are two things, which those who after a long profession of the Gospel
are entering into the Confines of Eternity, do long for and desire. The one is,
that all their Breaches may be repaired, their Decays recovered, their
Backslidings healed: For unto these things they have been less or more
obnoxious in the course of their walking before God. The other is, that they
may have fresh Springs of Spiritual Life, and vigorous actings of all Divine
Graces, in Spiritual Mindedness, Holiness, and Fruitfulness, unto the praise of
God, the honor of the Gospel, and the increase of their own Peace and Joy.
These things they value more than all the World, and all that is in it; about
these things are their Thoughts and Contrivances exercised night and day. Those
with whom it is otherwise, whatever they pretend, are in the dark unto
themselves, and their own Condition: For it is in the Nature of this Grace to
grow and increase unto the end. As Rivers, the nearer they come unto the Ocean
whither they tend, the more they increase their waters, and speed their
streams: So will Grace flow more freely and fully in it is near approaches to
the Ocean of Glory. That is not saving which does not so.

AN experience hereof, I mean of the thriving of Grace toward the end of our
Course, is that alone which can support us under the Troubles and Temptations
of Life, which we have to conflict withal. So the Apostle tells us, that this
is our great Relief in all our Distresses and Afflictions, whereon me faint
not, that as our outer man does perish, so the inner man is renewed day by day,
2 Cor. 4. 16. If it be so, that in the daily Decays of the outward man, in all
the Approaches of it is Dissolution, we have inward Spiritual Revivals and
Renovation, we shall not faint in what we undergo. And without such continual
Renovations, we shall faint in our Distresses, whatever other things we may
have, or whatever we pretend unto the contrary.

AND ordinarily it is so in the Holy, Wise Providence of God, that Afflictions
and Troubles increase with Age. It is so in an especial manner with Ministers
of the Gospel; they have many of them a share in the lot of Peter, which our
Lord Jesus Christ declared unto him, John 21. 18. When thou wast young, thou
girdedst thy self, and walkedst whither thou would; but when thou shall be
old, thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry
thee whither thou would not. Besides those natural Distempers and Infirmities
which accompany the decays of Life, Troubles of Life, and in their Affairs do
usually grow upon them, when they look for nothing less, but were ready to say
with Job, We shall dye in our nest, Job 29. 18. So was it with Jacob, after all
his hard Labor and Travel to provide for his Family, such things fell out in
it in his Old Age, as had almost broken his Heart: And often times both
Persecutions and Public Dangers do befall them at the same season. Whilst the
outward man is thus perishing, we need great supportment that we faint not. And
this is only to be had in an Experience of daily Spiritual Renovations in the
inner man.

THE Excellency of this Mercy the Psalmist expresses in an Heavenly manner,
Psalm. 92. 12, 13, 14, 15. The Righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree, be
shall grow like the Cedar in Lebanon: Those that be planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God; they shall bring forth fruit in
old Age, they shall be fat and flourishing. To shem that the Lord is upright;
be is my Rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

THE Promise in the 12th. verse, respects the times of the Messiah, or of the
New Testament, for so it is prophesied of him; In his days the Righteous shall
flourish, Psalm. 72. 7. namely, through the abundance of Grace that should be
administered from his fullness, as Joh. 1. 16. Col. 1. 19. And herein consists
the Glory of the Gospel, and not in outward Prosperity, or External Ornaments
of Divine Worship. The flourishing of the Righteous, I say, in Grace and
Holiness, is the Glory of the Office of Christ, and of the Gospel. Where this
is not, there is no Glory in the profession of our Religion. The Glory of Kings
is in the Wealth and Peace of their Subjects; and the Glory of Christ is in the
Grace and Holiness of his Subjects.

THIS flourishing is compared to the Palm Tree, and the Growth of the Cedar.
The Palm Tree is of the greatest Verdure, Beauty, and Fruitfulness, and the
Cedar of the greatest and longest growth of any Trees. So are the Righteous
compared to the Palm Tree, for the Beauty of Profession, and Fruitfulness in
Obedience; and unto the Cedar for a continual constant growth and increase in
Grace. Thus it is with all that are righteous, unless it be from their own
sinful neglect, as it is with many in this day. They are hereon rather like the
Shrubs and Heaths in the Wilderness, which see not when Good comes, than like
the Palm Tree, or the Cedars of Lebanon. And hereby do Men what lies in them,
obscure the Glory of Christ and his Kingdom, as well as disquiet their own
Souls.

THE words that follow, ver. 13. They that be planted in the house of the Lord,
shall flourish in the Courts of our God, are not distinctive of some from
other, as though some only of the flourishing Righteous were so planted; but
they are descriptive of them all, with an addition of the way and means whereby
they are caused so to grow and flourish. And this is their Implantation in the
House of the Lord; that is, in the Church, which is the seat of all the means
of Spiritual Life, both as unto growth and flourishing, which God is pleased to
grant unto Believers. To be planted in the House of the Lord, is to be fixed
and rooted in the Grace communicated by the Ordinances of Divine Worship.
Unless we are planted in the house of the Lord, we cannot flourish in his
Courts: see Psalm. 1. 3. Unless we are partakers of the Grace administered in the
Ordinances, we cannot flourish in a fruitful Profession. The outward
participation of them is common unto Hypocrites, that bear some leaves, but
neither grow like the Cedar, nor bear fruit like the Palm Tree. So the Apostle
prays for Believers, that Christ may dwell in their Hearts by Faith, that they
may be rooted and grounded in love, Ephesians. 3. 17. Rooted, built up, and
established, Col. 2. 7. The want hereof is the cause that we have so many
fruitless Professors; they have entered the Courts of God by Profession, but
were never planted in his House by Faith and Love. Let us not deceive our
selves herein; we may be entered into the Church, and made partakers of the
outward Privileges of it, and not be so planted in it as to flourish in Grace
and Fruitfulness.

THAT which on this Occasion I principally intend, is the Grace and Privilege
expressed ver. 14th. They shall still bring forth fruit in old Age, they shall
be fat and flourishing. There be three things which constitute a Spiritual
State, or belong to the Life of God. (1.) That Believers be fat, that is, by
the Heavenly Juice, Sap, or Fatness of the true Olive, of Christ himself; as
Romans 11. 17. This is the principle of Spiritual Life and Grace derived from
him. When this abounds in them so as to give them strength and vigor in the
Exercise of Grace, to keep them from decays and withering, they are said to be
fat, which in the Scripture Phrase is strong and healthy. (2.) That they
flourish in the Greenness (as the word is) and Verdure of Profession; for
vigorous Grace will produce a flourishing Profession. (3.) That they still
bring forth Fruit in all Duties of Holy Obedience: All these are promised unto
them even in Old Age.

EVEN Trees when they grow old (the Palm and the Cedar) are apt to lose of
their Juice and Verdure: and men in Old Age are subject unto all sorts of
Decays both outward and inward. It is a rare thing to see a Man in Old Age
naturally vigorous, healthy and strong; and would it were not more rare to see
any Spiritually so at the same Season: But this is here promised unto Believers
as an especial Grace and Privilege, beyond what can be represented in the
growth or fruit-bearing of Plants and Trees.

THE Grace intended, is, That when Believers are under all sorts of bodily and
Natural Decays, and it may be have been overtaken with Spiritual Decays also,
there is provision made in the Covenant, to render them fat, flourishing and
fruitful, vigorous in the power of Internal Grace, and flourishing in the
expression of it in all Duties of Obedience, which is that which we now enquire
after.

BLESSED be God for this good Word of his Grace, that he has given us such
encouragement against all the Decays and Temptations of Old Age which we have
to conflict withal.

AND the Psalmist in the next words declares the greatness of this Privilege:
To shem that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, there is no unrighteousness in
him. Consider the oppositions that lie against the flourishing of Believers in
Old Age, the Difficulties of it, the Temptations that must be conquered, the
Actings of the Mind above it is natural Abilities which are decayed, the
weariness that is apt to befall us in a long Spiritual conflict, the cries of
the Flesh to be spared, and we shall see it to be an Evidence of the
Faithfulness, Power and Righteousness of God in Covenant; nothing else could
produce this mighty effect. So the Prophet treating of the same Promise, Hos.
14. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. closes his Discourse with that blessed Remark, Ver. 9. Who
is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know them?
for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them. Spiritual
Wisdom will make us to see that the Faithfulness and Power of God are exerted
in this work of preserving Believers flourishing and fruitful unto the End.

HAVING laid the Foundation of this illustrious Testimony, I shall farther
declare and confirm my Intention, so to make way for the Application of the
Truth under Consideration unto this Case, manifesting, that the way whereby we
may be made partakers of this Grace, is by a steady view of the Glory of
Christ, as proposed unto us in the Gospel.

TRERE is a latter Spring in the Year, a Spring in Autumn: it is indeed for the
most part but faint and weak, yet is it such as the Husbandman cannot spare.
And it is an evident sign of Barren ground, when it does not put forth afresh
toward the end of the Year. God the good Husbandman looks for the same from
us, especially if we had a Summers drought in Spiritual Decays; as the Psalmist
complains, Psalm. 32. 4. Had we not had a latter Spring the last Year, the Land
had greatly suffered under the drought of the Summer. And if we have had such a
drought in the Course of our Profession by Spiritual Decays, as God the good
Husbandman looks for a latter Spring in us, even in old Age, in the vigorous
acting of Grace and fruitful Obedience: So without it we can neither have Peace
nor Joy in our own Souls. If a Man therefore has made a great Appearance of
Religion in his former or younger days, and when he is growing into Age becomes
dead, cold, worldly, selfish; if he have no fresh Springs of Spiritual Life in
him, it is an Evidence that he has a barren Heart, that was never really
fruitful to God. I know that many stand in need of being excited by such
warning, unto a diligent consideration of their State and Condition.

IT is true, that the latter Spring does not bring forth the same Fruit with
the former. There is no more required in it, but that the Ground evidence it
self to be in good heart, and to put forth that which is proper unto the
Season. It may be such Graces as were active and vigorous in Men at their first
Conversion unto God, as were carried in a stream of warm natural Affections,
may not so eminently abound in the latter Spring of old Age: But those which
are proper for the Season, as namely, Spirituality, Heavenly Mindedness,
weanedness from the World, readiness for the Cross, and Death, are necessary,
even in old Age, to evidence that we have a living Principle of Grace, and to
show thereby that God is upright, he is our Rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.

WHAT is further to be insisted on, shall be reduced unto these four Heads.

1. THAT the constitution of Spiritual Life, is such as is meet to thrive, grow
and increase unto the end, and will do so, unless it be from the default of
them in whom it is.

2. THAT notwithstanding this Nature and Constitution of Spiritual Life, yet
Believers are subject unto many Decays, partly gradual, and partly by
Surprizals in Temptation, whereby the growth of it is obstructed unto the
dishonor of the Gospel, and the loss of their own Peace with Joy.

3. I shall show that such at present is the condition of many Professors,
namely, that they are visibly fallen under Spiritual Decays, and do not
evidence any Interest in the blessed Promise insisted on.

4. ON the Confirmation of these things, our Enquiry will be, how such Persons
may be delivered from such Decays, and by what means they may obtain the Grace
here promised, of Spiritual flourishing in old Age, both in the strengthening of
the inward Principle of Life, and abounding in Fruits of Obedience, which are
to the praise of God by Jesus Christ: And then we shall make Application unto
this case, of that Truth which is the Subject of the preceding Discourse.

1. THE Constitution of Spiritual Life is such, as is meet to grow and increase
unto the end. Hereby it does distinguish it self from that Faith which is
Temporary; for there is a Temporary Faith which will both flourish for a
Season, and bring forth some Fruit, but it is not in its Nature and
Constitution to abide, to grow and increase, but rather to decay and wither. It
is described by our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 13. 20, 21. either some great
Temptation extinguisueth it, or it decays insensibly, until the mind wherein it
was do manifest it self to be utterly barren. And therefore whoever is sensible
of any Spiritual Decays, he is called unto a sevcre Trial and Examination of
himself, as unto the Nature of the Principle of his Profession and Obedience;
for such Decays do rather argue a principle of Temporary Faith only, unto which
they are proper and natural, than that whose Nature it is to thrive and grow to
the end, whereon those that have it, shall as it is in the Promise, still bring
forth fruit, and without their own great Guilt be always freed from such Decays.

THAT this Spiritual Life is in it is Nature and Constitution such as will
abide, thrive and grow to the end, is three ways testified unto in the
Scripture.

1. IN that it is compared unto things of the most infallible increase and
Progress: For besides that, it is growth is frequently likened unto that of
Plants and Trees well watered, and in a fruitful Soil, which fail not to
spring, unless it be from some external violence; it is likewise compared unto
such things as whose progress is absolutely infallible, Prove. 4. 18. The path
of the just is as the shining light, that shines more and more to the perfect
day. The path of the Just is his Covenant-walk before God, as it is frequently
called in the Scripture, Psalm. 119. 35. 105. Isa. 26. 7. Psalm. 23. 3. Mat. 3.
3. Heb. 12. 13. and it comprizeth the Principle, Profession, and Fruits of it.
This, faith the Wise Man, is as the shining Light; that is, the Morning Light:
And wherein is it so? Why, as that goes on by Degrees, and shines more and
more unto the high Noon; (though it may be interrupted sometimes by Clouds and
Storms:) So is this Path of the Just, it goes on and increases unto the high
Noon, the perfect Day of Glory. It is in it is Nature so to do, though it may
sometimes meet with obstructions, as we shall see afterward; and so does the
Morning light also.

THERE is no visible difference as unto Light, between the Light of the
Morning, and the Light of the Evening; yea, this latter sometimes from gleams
of the Setting Sun, seems to be more Glorious than the other. But herein they
differ; the first goes on gradually unto more Light, until it comes to
perfection; the other gradually gives place unto Darkness, until it comes to be
Midnight. So is it as unto the Light of the Just and of the Hypocrite, and so
is it as unto their Paths. At first setting out they may seem alike and equal;
yea, Convictions and Spiritual Gifts acted with corrupt ends in some
Hypocrites, may for a time give a greater luster of Profession than the Grace
of others sincerely Converted unto God may attain unto. But herein they
discover their different Natures; the one increases and goes on constantly,
though it may be sometimes but faintly; the other decays, grows dim, gives
place to darkness and crooked walking.

THIS then is the Nature of the path of the Just: And where it is otherwise
with us in our Walk before God, we can have no Evidence that we are in that
Path, or that we have a living, growing Principle of Spiritual Life in us. And
it is fit that Professors of all sorts should be minded of these things; for we
may see not a few of them under visible Decays, without any sincere endeavors
after a Recovery, who yet please themselves that the root of the matter is in
them. It is so, if Love of the World, Conformity unto it, negligence in Holy
Duties, and coldness in Spiritual Love be an Evidence of such Decays. But let
none deceive their own Souls, wherever there is a saving Principle of Grace, it
will be thriving and growing unto the end. And if it fall under Obstructions,
and thereby into Decays for a Season, it will give no rest or quietness unto
the Soul wherein it is, but will labor continually for a Recovery. Peace in a
Spiritually decaying condition, is a Soul-ruining Security; better be under
terror on the account of surprizal into some Sin, than be in peace under
evident Decays of Spiritual Life.

AND by the way, this comparing of the Path of the Just unto the Morning Light,
minds me of what I have seen more than once. That Light has sometimes
cheerfully appeared unto the World, when after a little season by reason of
Clouds, Tempests and Storms; it has given place again to Darkness, like that
of the Night; but it has not so been lost and buried like the Evening Light;
after a while it has recovered it self unto a greater luster than before,
manifesting that it increased in it self whilst it was eclipsed as to us. So
has it been with not a few at their first Conversion unto God, great Darkness
and Trouble have by the Efficacy of Temptation, and Injections of Satan
possessed their minds: But the Grace which they have received being as the
Morning Light, has after a while disentangled it self, and given Evidence,
that it was so far from being extinguished, as that it grew and thrived under
all those Clouds and Darkness; For the Light of the Just does in the issue
always increase by Temptations, as that of the Hypocrite is constantly impaired
by them.

AGAIN, As it is as the Morning Light, than which nothing has a more assured
Progress; so it is called by our Savior Living water, Joh. 4. 10. yea, a Well
of water, springing up unto Everlasting Life, ver. 14. It is an indeficient
Spring, not a Pool or Pond, though never so large, which may be dried up. Many
such Pools of Light, Gifts, and Profession, have we seen utterly dried up, when
they have come into Age, or been ensnared by the Temptations of the World. And
we may see others every day under dangerous decays; their Countenances are
changed, and they have lost that Oil which makes the face of a Believer to
shine, namely, the Oil of Love, Meekness, Self-denial, and Spirituality of
Converse; and instead thereof there is spread upon them the falsome Ointment of
Pride, Self-love, Earthly-mindedness, which increases on them more and more.
But where this Principle of Spiritual Life is, it is as the Morning Light, as
an indeficient Spring that never fails, nor can do so, until it issue in
Eternal Life: and sundry other ways there are whereby the same Truth is
asserted in the Scripture.

2. THERE are sundry Divine Promises given unto Believers, that so it shall be,
or to secure them of such supplies of Grace as shall cause their Spiritual Life
to grow, increase, and flourish unto the end, such as that in the Psalm which
we have considered: For these Promises are the Means whereby this Spiritual
Life is originally communicated unto us, and whereby it is preserved in us; by
them are we made partakers of this Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and through them
is it continued in us. Now Promises of this Nature, namely, that by the
Dispensation of the Spirit of Christ, and supplies of his Grace, our Spiritual
Life shall flourish, and be made fruitful to the end, I shall briefly call over
one of them only at present, which is recorded Isa. 44. 3, 4. I will pour water
on him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine Offspring; and they shall spring up
as among the Grass, as willows by the water courses.

ALTHOUGH this Promise may have respect unto the Gracious dealing of God with
the People of the Jews after their Return from the Captivity, yet has it so
only as it was Typical of the Redemption of the Church by Jesus Christ: But it
belongs properly to the Times of the Gospel, when the Righteous were to
flourish, and it is a Promise of the New Covenant, as is manifest, in that it
is not only given unto Believers, but is also extended unto their Seed and
Offspring, which is an assured Signature of New Covenant Promises. And here
is, (1.) A supposition of what we are in our selves, both before and after our
Conversion unto God, namely, as thirsty, dry, and barren Ground. We have
nothing in our selves, no radical moisture to make us flourishing and fruitful.
And as it is before, so it is after Conversion; We are not sufficient of our
selves, our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Being left to our selves, we
should utterly wither and perish. But, (2.) Here is the blessed Relief which
God in this Case has provided; he will pour the sanctifying Water of his
Spirit, and the Blessing of his Grace upon us. And this he will so do, as to
cause us to spring up as among the Grass, as Willows by the water courses.
There is nothing of a more eminent and almost visible growth, than Willows by
the water courses. Such shall be the Spiritual growth of Believers under the
Influences of these Promises; that is, they shall be fat and flourishing, and
still bring forth fruit. And other Promises of the same Nature there are many;
but we must observe two things concerning them, that we may be satisfied in
their Accomplishment. As,

1. THE Promises of the New Covenant, as unto the first Communication of Grace
unto the Elect, are absolute and inconditional; they are the executive
conveyances of Gods immutable Purposes and Decrees: And what should be the
condition of the Communication of the first Grace unto us? Nothing that is not
Grace can be so. If it be said, that this also is of God in us, which is the
Condition of the Communication of the first Saving Grace unto us, then I would
know whether that be bestowed on us without any Condition; if it be, then that
is the first Grace, as being absolutely free; if it be not, then what is the
Condition whereon it is bestowed, concerning which the same Enquiry must be
made, and so for ever? But this is the Glory of Convenant Promises, that as
unto the Communication of the Grace of Conversion and Sanctification unto the
Elect, they are absolutely free and inconditionnate: But,

2. THE Promises which respect the Growth, Degrees and Measures of this Grace
in Believers are not so. There are many Duties required of us, that these
Promises may be accomplished toward us, and in us; yea, watchful Diligence in
Universal Gospel Obedience is expected from us unto this end: See 2 Pet. 1. 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. This is the ordinary Method of the Communication of all
supplies of Grace to make us spiritually flourish, and be fruitful, namely,
that we be found in the diligent exercise of what we have received. God does
sometimes deal otherwise in a way of Sovereignty, and surprizeth men with
healing Grace in the midst of their Decays and Backslidings, as Isaiah 57. 17,
18. So has many a poor Soul been delivered from going down into the Pit. The
good Shepherd will go out of his way to save a wandering sheep; but this is the
ordinary method.

3. NOTWITHSTANDING these blessed Promises of Growth, Flourishing, and
Fruitfulness, if we are negligent in the due Improvement of the Grace which we
have received, and the discharge of the Duties required of us, we may fall into
Decays, and be kept in a low, unthrifty state all our days. And this is the
principal ground of the Discrepancy between the Glory and Beauty of the Church,
as represented in the Promises of the Gospel, and as exemplified in the Lives
and walking of Professors, they do not live up unto the Condition of their
accomplishment in them; howbeit, in Gods way and time they shall be all
fulfilled. We have therefore innumerable blessed Promises concerning the
thriving, growing, and flourishing of the Principle of Spiritual Life in us
even in old Age, and until Death: But the Grace promised unto this end, will
not befall us whilst we are asleep in Spiritual Sloth and Security. Fervent
Prayer, the exercise of all Grace received, with Watchfulness unto all holy
Duties, are required hereunto.

3. GOD has secured the Growth of this Spiritual Life, by the provision of
Food for it, whereby it may be strengthened and increased, for Life must be
preserved by Food. And this in our Case is the Word of God, with all other
Ordinances of Divine Worship which depend thereon, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. Whatever the
state of this Life be, whether in it is Beginning, it is Progress, its Decays,
there is suitable nourishment provided for it in the good Word of Gods Grace.
If Men will neglect their daily Food that is provided for them, it is no wonder
if they be weak and thriftless. And if Believers are not earnest in their
desires after this Food, if they are not diligent in providing of it, attending
unto it, much more if through Corruptions and Temptations they count it in the
preaching of it light and common Food, which they do not value, it is no wonder
if they fall into Spiritual Decays; but God has herein provided for our growth
even unto old Age.

AND this is the first thing which was proposed unto Confirmation, namely, that
the Constitution and Nature of Spiritual Life is such, as to be indeficient, so
as to thrive and grow even in old Age, and unto the end.

THE Second thing proposed, is, That notwithall this provision for the Growth
of Spiritual Life in us, Believers especially, in a long course of Profession
are subject to Decays, such as may cast them into great Perplexities, and
endanger their Eternal Ruin.

AND these Spiritual Decays are of two sorts: (1.) Such as are gradual and
universal, in the loss of the vigor and Life of Grace, both in it is Principle,
and in it is Exercise. (2.) Such as are occasioned by Surprizal into Sin through
the Power of Temptation; I mean, such Sins as do waste the Spiritual Powers of
the Soul, and deprive it of all solid peace.

AS for Temporary Believers, give them but time enough in this World,
especially if it be accompanied with outward Prosperity, or Persecution; and
for the most part their Decays of one sort or another will make a discovery of
their Hypocrisy. Though they retain a Form of Godliness, they deny the Power
of it, Prove. 1. 31. And if they do not openly relinquish all Duties of
Religion, yet they will grow so Lifeless and favourless in them, as shall
evidence their Condition; for so it is with them who are lukewarm, who are
neither hot nor cold, who have a Name to live, but are dead.

AND herein lies a signal difference in this matter, between sincere
Believers, and those who believe only for a time; for those of the latter sort
do either not perceive their Sickness and Decays, their Minds being taken up
and possessed with other things; or if they do find that it is not with them as
it has been formerly, they are not much concerned, and on any occasional new
Conviction they cry, Yet a little more slumber, a little more sleep, a little
more folding of the hands to sleep: But when the other do find any thing of
this Nature, it makes them restless for a Recovery. And although through the
many Snares, Temptations, and Deceits of Sin, or through their Ignorance of the
right way for their Healing, they do not many of them obtain a speedy Recovery,
yet none of them do approve themselves in such a Condition, or turn unto any
undue Reliefs.

NOW that Believers are subject to Decays in both the ways mentioned, we have
full Testimony in Scripture: For as unto that general gradual Decay in the loss
of our first Faith, Love, and Works, in the weakening of the internal Principle
of Spiritual Life, with the loss thereon of Delight, Joy and Consolation, and
the Abatement of the Fruits of Obedience, our Lord Jesus Christ does expressly
charge it on five of the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2d. 3d. And in some of
them, as Sardis and Laodicea, those Decays had proceeded unto such a degree, as
that they were in danger of utter Rejection: And hereunto answers the
experience of all Churches, and all Believers in the World. Those who are
otherwise minded, are dead in Sin, and have got pretenses to countenance
themselves in their miserable Condition. So is it with the Church of Rome; and
I wish others did not in some measure follow them therein.

AND as unto those of the Second sort, whereinto Men are cast by Surprizals and
Temptations, producing great Spiritual Distress and Anguish of Soul, under a
sense of God's displeasure, we have an instance in David, as he gives us an
account of himself, Psalm. 38. verse 2. to the 10th. O Lord, thine Arrows stick
fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. There is no soundness in my Flesh,
because of thine Anger; neither is there any rest in my Bones, because of my
Sin: For mine Iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden, they are
too heavy for me. My Wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness,
etc.

IT is certain, that here is a description of a very woeful State and Condition:
And the Psalmist knowing that he was called of God to be a Teacher and
Instructor of the Church in all Ages, records his own Experience unto that end.
Hence the Title of it is, A Psalm to bring to Remembrance: Some judge that
David had respect unto some great and sore Disease that he was then visited
withal. But if it were so, it was only an occasion of his Complaint; the cause
of it was Sin alone. And four things he does represent: (1.) That he had
departed from God, and fallen into provoking Sins, which had produced great
Distresses in his mind, verse 3, 4. (2.) That he had foolishly continued in
that State, not making timely Application to Grace and Mercy for healing,
whereby it was grown deplorable, ver. 5. And this Folly is that alone which
makes such a Condition dangerous; namely, when Men on their Surprizals in Sin,
do not speedily apply themselves unto healing Remedies. (3.) That he had herein
a continual sense of the Displeasure of God by reason of Sin, verse. 2. 3, 4.
(4.) That he was altogether restless in this State, mourning, groaning,
laboring continually for Deliverance.

THIS is a clearer Delineation of the Condition of Believers, when either by
the greatness of any Sin, or by a long continuance in an evil and a careless
frame, they are cast under a sense of Divine displeasure. This opens their
Minds and their Hearts, declaring how all things are within, which they cannot
deny. It is not so with many in the same Measures and Degrees as it was with
David, whose falls were very great, but the substance of it is found in them
all. And herein the Heart knows it is own Bitterness; a Stranger intermedleth
not with it: None knows the groaning and laboring of a Soul convinced of such
Spiritual Decays, but he alone in whom they are. Hereon is it cast down to the
Earth, going mourning all the day long, though others know nothing of it is
Sorrows: But it is of a far more sad Consideration, to see men manifesting
their inward Decays by their outward Fruits, and yet are little or not at all
concerned therein. The former are in ways of Recovery, these in the Paths that
go down to the Chambers of Death.

I suppose, therefore, I may take it for granted, that there are few Professors
of Religion, who have had any long continuance in the ways of it, having withal
been exposed unto the temptations of Life, and much exercised with the
occasions of it; but that they have been asleep in their days, as the Spouse
complains of her self, Cant. 5. 2. that is, they have been overtaken with
decays of one sort or another, either with respect unto Spiritual or Moral
Duties, in their Relation unto Churches or Families; in their Judgments, or
their Affections; in their inward Frames or outward Actions, they have been
overtaken with the effects of Sloth, Negligence, or the want of a continual
Watch in the Life of Faith: I with it were otherwise.

I principally herein intend those gradual Declensions in the Life and Power of
Grace, which Men in a long course of Profession are subject unto. And these for
the most part proceed from Formality in Holy Duties, under the constant outward
performance of them; vehement Engagements in the Affairs of Life, an
overvaluation of sinful Enjoyments, growth in Carnal Wisdom, neglect of daily
Mortification of such Sins as Men are naturally disposed unto, with a secret
influence from the prevalent Temptation of the days wherein we live, which
things are not now to be spoken unto.

3. BUT I come to that which was proposed in the Third Place, namely, To show
that this at present is the State of many Professors of Religion, that they are
fallen under those Spiritual Decays, and do not enjoy the effects of the
Promises concerning Flourishing and Fruitfulness, which we have insisted on. To
fasten a Conviction on them, or some of them at least, that it is indeed so
with them, is my present Design: and this ought to be done with some diligence.
The Glory of Christ, the Honor of the Gospel, and the danger of the Souls of
Men do call for it. This is the secret root of all our Evil, which will not be
removed unless it be dug up; who sees not, who complains not of the loss of,
or Decays in the Power of Religion, in the days wherein we live? But few there
are, who either know or apply themselves, or direct others unto the proper
Remedy of this Evil. Besides, it is almost as difficult to convince Men of
their Spiritual Decays, as it is to recover them from them; but without this,
healing is impossible. If Men know not their Sickness, they will not seek for a
Cure. Some when they see their Sickness, and their Wound, will apply themselves
unto wrong useless Remedies, like them in the Prophet Hosea 5. 13. But none
will make use of any Cure who see no Disease at all. Wherefore, to fasten a
Conviction hereof on the Minds of some, we may make use of the ensuing
Enquiries and Observations.

1. HAVE you in the way of your Profession had any Experience of these
Spiritual Decays? I doubt not but that there are some who have been preserved
green and flourishing, from their first Conversion unto God, who never fell
under the power of Sloth, Neglect, or Temptation, at least not for any
remarkable Season; but they are but few. It was not so scarce with any of those
Believers under the Old Testament, whose Lives and Walkings are recorded for
our Instruction; and they must be such as lived in an exact and diligent course
of Mortification. And some there are who have obtained Relief and Deliverance
from under their Decays, whose Backslidings have been healed, and their
Diseases cured. So it was with David, as he Divinely expresses it, Psalm. 103.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his
Holy Name: Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities, and herewith all thy Discases:
Who redeemeth thy Life from Destruction, and crowns thee with Loving
kindness, and tender Mercy: Who satisfies thy mouth with good things, so that
thy Youth is renewed like the Eagles. So does he celebrate his Deliverance from
that State, whereof he complains, Psalm 38. which we mentioned before. And
there is no Grace or Mercy that does more affect the Hearts of Believers, that
gives them a greater Transport of Joy and Thankfulness, than this of
Deliverance from Backslidings. It is a bringing of the Soul out of Prison,
which enlarges it unto Praise, Psalm. 142. 7. Of this sort I doubt not but that
there are many; for God has given great warnings of the danger of a
Spiritually decaying State; and he has made great Promises of Recovery from
it, and multitudes in the Church are daily exercised herein: but I speak in
general unto all. Have you any Experience of such Spiritual Decays, either in
the frame of your Spirits, or in the manner of your walking before God, or at
least that you are prone unto them, if not mightily preserved by the Power of
Grace in your own utmost Diligence? If you have not so, then I fear it is from
one of these two Causes.

1. THAT indeed you have never had any flourishing Spiritual State in your
Souls. He that has been always weak and sickly, does not know what it is to
want a state of Health and Strength, because he never had experience of it;
much less does he that is dead, know what it is to want Life. But he that from
an exquisite Temper of Health, falls into languishing Distempers, knows
distinctly, both how it was, and how it is with him. And the frame of the Minds
of many Professors of Religion, with the manner of their walking, is such, as
that if they are not sensible of Spiritual Decays, it is evident that they
never had any good Spiritual Health; and it is to no purpose to treat with such
Persons about a Recovery. There are amongst those who make an outward
Profession of true Religion, many that live in all sorts of Sins. If you should
deal with them about Backslidings, Decays, and a Recovery, you will seem unto
them as Lot did to his Sons-in-law, when he told them of the Destruction of
Sodom, as one that mocked, or made sport with them, Genesis 19. 14. or you will be
mocked by them for your pains; they have been always such as they are, it was
never otherwise with them, and it is a ridiculous thing to speak to them of a
Recovery. We must be able in this case to say to Men, Remember whence you are
fallen, and repent, and do your first works, Revel. 2. 5. They must have had an
experience of a better State, or they will not endeavor a Recovery from that
wherein they are. Such therefore as see neither Evil nor Danger in their
present Condition, but suppose all is well enough with them, because it is as
good as ever it was, will not easily be brought under this Conviction; but they
have that which is of no less importance for them to enquire into, namely,
whether they have had any thing of the Truth of Grace or no. Or,

2. IF you have not this Experience, it is to be feared that you are asleep in
Security, which is hardly distinguishable from Death in Sin. The Church of
Laodicea was sensibly decayed, and gone off from it is Primitive Faith and
Obedience, yet she was so secure in her Condition, knew so little of it, that
she judged her self on the contrary to be in a thriving flourishing State. She
thought her self increased in all Church Riches and Goods, that is, Gifts and
Grace, while she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked,
Revel. 3. 17. in such a State as wherein it is questionable, whether she had
any thing of the Life and Power of Grace to be found in her or no. And so is it
with many Churches at this day, especially that which boasts it self to be
without Error, or Blame: And it is strange that a Church should suppose that it
flourishes in Grace and Gifts, when it has nothing but a noise of words in
their stead.

SO God testified concerning Ephraim, that gray hairs were sprinkled on him,
yet he knew it not, Hos. 7. 9. He was in a declining, dying condition, but did
not understand it. Hence it is added, They do not return to the Lord their God,
nor seck him for all this, ver. 10. If Men will not learn, and own their
Spiritual Decays, there is no hopes of prevailing with them to return unto the
Lord; the whole have no need of a Physician, but the sick; Christ came not to
call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance: such Persons are under the Power
of a stupid Security, from whence it will be very hard to rouse them up. Hence
it is that we have so little success for the most part, in calling Persons to
look after a Revival and Recovery of their Decays; they acknowledge no such
thing in themselves, such Calls may belong unto others; yea, if nay word seem
to come near them unto their Disquietment, they are apt to think it was spoken
out of spite and ill will toward them; they approve of themselves in their
present Condition. Hence is the Complaint of Christ in the Ministry of the
Word: I have called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no
Man regarded. We have set at naught all my Counsel, and you would none of my
Reproof, Prove. 1. 24, 25. Hence let this Truth be pressed a thousand times, it
is not one of a thousand who will think himself so concerned, as to apply
himself unto a Relief. A Spirit of slumber seems to be poured on many.

2. TO improve this Conviction, I would ask of some, whether they have been
able to maintain Spiritual Peace and Joy in their Souls. I take it for granted,
that ordinarily they are inseparable Adjuncts of the Life of Faith, in an
humble fruitful Walk before God. The Scripture testifies that they are so, and
no Experience lies against it in ordinary Cases. And I suppose that those unto
whom I speak, do in some measure know what they are, and do not delude
themselves with Fancies and Imaginations; they have substance in them however
by some derided, and to some unknown. Have this Peace and Joy been maintained
and born sway in your Minds? Have they under all Trials and Surprizals been
quickly composed by them? Or are you not rather on all Occasions uneasy and
perplexed? This is certain, that a decaying Spiritual State, and solid
Spiritual Peace, are inconsistent: And if ever you had such Peace, you may by
the loss of it, know into what state you are come.

3. NOT to enquire further into things internal and hidden, wherein Men may
justify themselves if they please, there are too many open visible Evidences
of these Decays among Professors of Religion; they have not kept them from he
Eyes of the Church, nor yet from the World. Do not Pride, Selfishness,
Worldliness, Levity of Attire, and Vanity of Life, with corrupt unsavory
Communication, abound among many? The World was never in a worse posture for
Conformity, than it is at this day, wherein all Flesh has corrupted it is ways;
and yet as unto things of outward appearance, how little dinstinction is left
between it, and those who would be steemed more strict Professors of Religion!
was this the way and manner of the Saints of old, of those that went before us
in the same Profession? Was it so with our selves in the time of our first
Espousals, when we went after God in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not
sown; as Jerem. 2. 2? Some understand what I say: If we have not some of us had
better days, we never had good days in our Lives; if we have had them, why do
we not stir up our selves to look after a Recovery?

4. MAY not God say of many of us, what he said of his People of old; Thou have
been weary of me, O Israel? Isa. 43. 22. Have we not been weary of God, until
we have abundant cause to be weary of our selves? The most, I presume will be
ready with them in Malachi, to say, How, or wherein have we been weary of God?
Do we not abide, yea, abound in the Duties of his Service? What can be more
required of us? wherein are we to blame? This were something indeed, but that
it is often so, that Men are weary of Cod, when they even weary God with their
Duties and Services, Isa. 1. 13, 14. God says in his Word, He is weary, They
say in their Hearts they are weary, Mal. 1. 13. But I answer,

MANY cannot with any modesty make use of this pretense. Their Sloth,
Indifferency, and Negligence in the Observance of the Duties of Divine Worship,
both in private and public, is notorious. In particular, is not the Duty of
Family Prayer neglected by many, at least as to it is constancy and fervency?
And although it be grounded in the Light of Nature, confirmed by the general
Rules of the Scripture, requisite unto the Dedication of a Family unto God,
strengthened by the constant Example of all the Saints of old, and necessary in
the Experience of all that walk with God; yet do not many begin to seek out
pleas and arguings to justify their Omission hereof? Are not all things filled
with the fruits of the negligence of such Professors in the Instruction of
their Children and Servants? And has not God given severe Rebukes unto many of
us in their fearful miscarriages? And as unto the public Worship of God, I
wish that Sloth and Indifferency did not appear upon too many, under various
pretenses. But,

2. THIS is not that which I do intend. Men may be weary of God, whilst they
abide in the observance of a multitude of outward Duties.

1. THEY may be so, with respect unto that Spirituality and Intention of mind
unto the Exercise of all Grace, which are required unto such Duties. These are
the Life, the Soul, the animating Principle of them, without which their
outward performance is but a dead Carcass. Men may draw nigh to God with their
Lips, when their Hearts are far from him. This is that which becomes God in his
Worship, and is useful to our own Souls; for God is a Spirit, and he will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; which he is not, but in the Exercise of the
Graces of his Spirit in the Worshippers; For bodily exercise profits little,
but Godliness is profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

TO keep up the Mind unto this frame, to stir up all Grace unto a constant
vigorous Exercise in all Holy Duties, is a matter whereunto great Spiritual
Diligence and Watchfulness is required: Watch unto Prayer. A thousand pretenses
rise against it; all the Arts of Sloth, Formality, weariness of the Flesh, and
the business of Life, do contend to frustrate the design of it. And the
suitableness of resting in the work done unto the Principles of a Natural
Conscience, gives efficacy to them all: And when Men come to satisfy
themselves herein, it may be it were better that for a time such Duties were
wholly omitted; for in that case Conscience it self will urgently call on Men
not hardened in Sin, to a consideration of their Condition: wherefore much
Spiritual Labor and Diligence is required in this matter. The outward
performance of Religious Duties, be they never so many, or however strictly
enjoined, as the daily and nightly Canonical hours amongst the Popish
Devotionists, is an easy task, much inferior unto the constant labor which
some Men use in their Trades and Callings. And in them, in the performance of
them either public, or in their Families, men may be weary of God: And
according as they are remiss in the constant keeping up of Spirituality, and
the Exercise of Grace in sacred Duties, so is the Degree of their Weariness.
And there is almost nothing whereby Men may take a safer Measure of their
Decays, or Growth, than by the usual frame of their Minds in these Duties. If
they do constantly in them stir up themselves to take hold of God, as Isa. 64.
7. it is an evidence of a good Temper of Spiritual Health in the Soul. But this
will not be done without the utmost Watchfulness and Care against Impressions
from the Flesh and other Temptations. But Sloth and Formality, herein, is a
sign of a thriftless State in the inner man: And all Inventions of such
Formality are disserviceable unto the Interest Grace.

2. SO is it with them also who attending unto the outward Duties of Religion,
do yet indulge themselves in any known Sin; for there is nothing of God in
those Duties, which tend not unto the mortification of all Sin: and Men may
keep up a Form of Godliness, to countenance themselves in the neglect of it is
Power. And in particular, where any known Sin is indulged unto, where the
mortification of it is not duly endeavored, where our Religious Duties are not
used, applied and directed unto that end, there is a weariness of whatever is
of God in them, nor has the Soul any real intercourse or Communion with God by
them.

5. IF we should make a particular Enquiry into the State of our Souls, with
respect unto those Graces which are most useful, and tend most to the Glory of
God, it is to be feared, that the Decays of many would be made very evident;
such are Zeal, Humility, Contriteness of Heart, Spiritual mindedness, vigor of
Soul, and Delight in the ways of God, Love, Charity, Self-denial, and like. Are
we fat and flourishing in these things even in old Age? Are they in us, and do
abound, as the Apostle speaks? 2 Pet. 1. 8. Do we bring forth the fruit of them
so as to show the Faithfulness of God in his supply of Grace? I shall not make
a particular Enquiry into them, but only give two General Rules whereby we may
try our selves with respect unto them all.

1. THE loss of a Spiritual Appetite unto the Food of our Souls, is an Evidence
of a Decay in all these Graces. Spiritual Appetite consists in Earnest Desires,
and a Savoury Relish: So it is described by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. As
newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby; if
so be you have tasted that the Lord is gracious. There is required unto this
Spiritual Appetite an earnest desire of the Word, grounded on an Experience of
the Grace of God in it unto this end, that we may grow and thrive Spiritually
thereby. And this Appetite will give us as just a measure of the State of Grace
in us, as a Natural Appetite unto wholesome Food, with due digestion thereon,
does give of a good state of Health in the Body.

THIS therefore we are to enquire into: Does it abide in us as formerly? We
hear the Word preached as much as ever; but do we do it with the same desire
and Spiritual Relish as before? Some hear to satisfy their Convictions, some
to please their Fancies, and some to judge of the Persons by whom it is
dispensed. It is but in few that the necessary preparation for the due
receiving of it are found.

WHEN Men grow in Age, they lose much of their Natural Appetite unto Food; they
must eat still for the maintenance of Life, but they do it not with that desire
after it, and that gust in it as in the days of Youth and Health. Hence they
are apt to think, that the meat which they had formerly was more savoury than
what is now provided for them; though what they now enjoy is much to be
preferred before what they then had: the change is in themselves. So we may
find not a few Professors, who are ready to think and say, that the preaching
which they had in former days, and the Religious Exercises which they were
engaged in, were far to be preferred above what they now enjoy. But the Change
is in themselves, they have lost their Spiritual Appetite, or their hunger and
thirst after the Food of their Souls.

THE full Soul loatheth the Honeycomb; but to the hungry Soul every bitter
thing is sweet, Prove. 27. 7. Men being grown full of themselves, and of a good
conceit of their own Abilities, have lost their Spiritual Appetite unto the
Word of God; and this makes the Word lose it is Power and Efficacy toward them.
That Word which the Psalmist says is sweeter than the honey, or honeycomb,
Psalm. 19. 10. has little or no taste or relish in it unto them. If they were
hungry, they would find a sweetness in the bitterest of it is Reproofs, beyond
what they can now find in the sweetest of it is Promises. They come to hear the
Word with sick Desires, and low Expectations, as if they were invited to eat
after a Feast, being self-full before. But this loss of a Spiritual Appetite,
is an Evidence of the Decay of all other Graces whatever.

2. A neglect of making Religion our Principal business, is another Evidence of
the Decay of all sorts of Grace in us: For where Grace is in it is proper
Exercise, it will subordinate all things unto Religion, and the Ends of it, as
David twenty times declares in the 119th. Psalm. All things, all Occasions of
Life shall be postponed thereunto: The Love and valuation of it will bear sway
in our Minds, our Thoughts and Affections, and the practice of it shall give
Rule unto all other Concernments: But is it so with many amongst us? It is well
if Religion be one thing, it is far enough from being the One thing; every
other thing is preferred before it, and it can hardly crowd in to possess any
place in their Minds. To see Men continually plodding in the Affairs of the
World, regulating all their actings by their concernment in them, diverting
only at some seasons, as it were out of their way unto Duties of Religion, it
is vain to say, that they make Religion their Business: But there is scarce a
more certain Evidence of a frame of Mind spiritually Decaying in all sorts of
Graces, if ever any of them were in it in Sincerity and Power, than this one,
that Men do not make Religion their chiefest Business: And a little
Self-Examination will help Men to judge what it is that they make so to be.

LASTLY, I might also instance in the uselesness of Men in their Profession; in
want of Love unto all Saints, Barrenness in Good Works, unreadiness and
unwillingness to comply in any extraordinary manner with the Calls of God unto
Repentance and Reformation; in Love of the World, and Pride of Life, with
Passions suited unto such Principles, predominant in them; for they are all
undeniable Evidences, that those with whom they are found, had never any true
Grace at all, or that they are fallen under woeful Decays. But what has been
spoken may be sufficient unto our present purpose.

THIS is the third thing that was proposed, namely, an endeavor to leave
Convictions on the Minds of some concerning their Spiritual Decays, and the
necessity of seeking after a Revival by the Means that shall be insisted on.
And I intend it principally for those of us who under a long Profession, are
now come unto Age, and shall not have much time for Duty continued unto us. And
the Truth is, I meet with none, who are Christians of any considerable
Experience, and are Spiritually minded, but they are sensible of the Danger of
such Decays in this hour of Temptation, and how difficult it is in the use of
all means to keep up a vigorous active frame of Mind in Faith, Love, Holiness
and Fruitfulness. And for those who are not concerned herein, I confess I know
not what to make of them, or their Religion.

4. I proceed unto that which was proposed in the fourth, or last place;
namely, the Way and Means whereby Believers may be delivered from these Decays,
and come to thrive and flourish in the inward Principle, and outward Fruits of
Spiritual Life, which will bring us back unto the Consideration of that Truth
which we may seem to have diverted from. And to this end, the things ensuing
are proposed unto Consideration.

1. THE State of Spiritual Decays is recoverable. No Man that is fallen under
it has any Reason to say There is no hope, provided he take the right way for
his Recovery. If every step that is lost in the way to Heaven should be
irrecoverable, Woe would be unto us; we should all assuredly perish. If there
were no Reparation of our Breaches, no healing of our Decays, no Salvation but
for them who are always progressive in Grace; if God should mark all that is
done amiss, as the Psalmist speaks, O Lord, who should stand? Nay, if we had
not Recoveries every day, we should go off with a perpetual Backsliding. But
then, as was said, it it required that the right means of^ it be used, and not
that which is destructive of what is designed, whereof I shall give an
Instance. When Trees grow old, or are decaying, it is useful to dig about them,
and manure them, which may cause them to flourish again, and abound in Fruit:
But instead hereof, if you remove them out of their Soil, to plant them in
another, which may promise much advantage, they will assuredly wither and dye.
So it is with Professors, and has been with many; finding themselves under
manifold Decays, and little or nothing of the Life and Power of Religion left
in them, they have grown weary of their Station, and have changed their Soil,
or turning from one way in Religion unto another, as some have turned Papists,
some Quakers, and the like, apprehending that fault to be in the Religion which
they professed, which was indeed only in themselves. You cannot give an
instance of any one who did not visibly wither and dye therein; but had they
used the proper means for their Healing and Recovery, they might have lived and
brought forth Fruit.

2. A strict Attendance unto the Severities of Mortification, with all the
Duties that lead thereunto, is required unto this end: So also is the utmost
Diligence in all Duties of Obedience. These things naturally offer themselves,
as the first Relief in this case, and they ought not to be omitted. But if I
should insist upon them, they would branch themselves into such a multitude of
particular Directions, as it is inconsistent with my Design here to handle.
Besides, the way which I intend to propose is of another Nature, though
consistent with all the Duties included in this Proposal; yea, such as without
which not one of them can be performed in a due manner. Wherefore, as unto
these things, I shall only assert their Necessity, with a double Limitation.

1. THAT no Duties of Mortification be prescribed unto this end, as a Means of
Recovery from Spiritual Decays, but what for Matter and Manner are of Divine
Institution and Command. All others are laid under a severe Interdict, under
what pretense soever they may be used, Who has required these things at your
hands? Want hereof, is that whereby a pretended Design to advance Religion in
the Papacy, has ruined it. They have under the name and pretense of the means
of Mortification, or the Duties of it, invented and enjoined, like the
Pharisees, a number of Works, Ways, Duties, so called, which God never
appointed, nor approved, nor will accept, nor shall they ever do good unto the
Souls of Men. Such are their Confessions, Disciplines, Pilgrimages, Fastings,
Abstinence, framed Prayers to be repeated in stated Canonical hours, in such a
length and number. In the bodily Labor of these things, they exercise
themselves to no Spiritual Advantage.

BUT it is Natural to all Men to divert to such Reliefs in this case. Those who
are thoroughly convinced of Spiritual Decays, are therewithal pressed with a
sense of the Guilt of Sin; for it is Sin which has brought them into that
Condition. Hereon in the first place they set their Contrivance at work, how
they may atone Divine Displeasure, and obtain Acceptance with God: And if they
are not under the actual Conduct of Evangelical Light, two things immediately
offer themselves unto them. First, Some extraordinary course in Duties, which
God has not commanded. This is the way which they betake themselves unto in
the Papacy, and which Guilt in the Darkness of corrupted Nature vehemently
calls for. Secondly, An extraordinary multiplication of such Duties, as for the
substance of them are required of us. An instance in both kinds we have Micah
6. 6, 7. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the
high God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with Calves of a year
old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgressions, the Fruit of
my Body for the Sin of my Soul? And by this means they hope for a Restitution
into their former Condition. And whereas Spiritual Decays are of two sorts:
First, from the Power and Effect of Convictions only, which are multiplied
among Temporary Believers: And Secondly, from Degrees in the Power and Effects
of Saving Grace. Those whose Decays are of the first sort, are never to be
diverted from, attempting their Relief by such means: And when they find them
fail, for the most part they cease contending, and abandon themselves to the
power of their Lusts; for they have no Evangelical Light to guide them in
another course.

UNTO them who are of the second Sort, is this Direction given, in an endeavor
for a Recovery from Backsliding, and thriving in Grace, by a redoubled
Attendance unto the Duties of Mortification, and New Obedience. Let care be
taken, that as unto the matter of them they be of Divine Appointment, and as to
the manner of their performance, that it be regulated by the Rules of the
Scripture. Such are constant Reading and Hearing of the Word, Prayer with
fervency therein, a diligent watch against all Temptations and occasions of
Sin; especially an Endeavor by an Holy Earnestness, and vehement Rebukes, of
the entrance of any other Frame, to keep the Mind Spiritual and Heavenly in
it is Thoughts and Affections.

2. LET them take heed, that they attempt not these things in their own
strength. When Men have strong Convictions, that such and such things are their
own Duty, they are apt to act as if they were to be done in their own strength.
They must do them, they will do them, that is as unto the outward work, and
therefore they think they can do them, that is in a due manner. The Holy Ghost
has for ever rejected this confidence, none shall prosper in it, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
Chap. 9. 8. But hereby many deceive themselves, laboring in the Fire, while
all they do does immediately perish; they have been negligent and careless,
whereby things are come to an ill posture with them, and that peace which they
had is impaired: But now they will pray, and read, and fast, and be liberal to
the poor, and now an Abstinence from Sin. All these things they suppose they
can do of themselves, because they can and ought to perform the outward works,
wherein the Duties intended do consist. Hereby Christ is left out of the whole
Design, who when all is done, is the Lord that heals us, Exodus 1 5. 26. And
there is another evil herein; for whatever Men do in their own Natural
Abilities, there is a secret Reserve of some kind of Merit in it. Those who
plead for these things, do averr there can be no merit in any thing, but what
proceeds from our own Free Will; and what is so done, has some kind of merit
inseparably accompanying of it; And this is enough to render all Endeavors of
this kind not only useles and fruitless, but utterly rejected. Faith (...) the
Assistance of Christ and his in and unto these Duties; or however they may be
multiplied, they will not he effectual unto our Healing and Recovery. These
things are to be used, according as we receive supplies of Grace from above, in
Subordination unto that Work of Faith that shall be declared. Wherefore,

3. THE Work of recovering Backsliders or Believers from under their Spiritual
Decays, is an Act of Sovereign Grace, wrought in us by virtue of Divine
Promises; out of this Eater comes meat. Because Belivers are liable to such
Declensions, Backslidings, and Decays, God has provided and given unto us
great and precions Promises of a Recovery, if we duly apply our selves unto the
Means of it. One of the places only wherein they are recorded, I shall here
call over, and explain, Hosea 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. O Israel, return unto
the Lord they God, for thou have fallen by thine Iniquit^: Take with you words,
and turn with the Lord, say unto him, Take away all Iniquity, and receive (...)
graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips, etc. I will heal their
Backslidings, I will love them freely, for mine Anger is turned away from him:
I will be as the dew unto Israel; be shall grow as the Lilly, and cast out his
Roots as Lebanon. His Branches shall spread, and his Beauty shall be as the
Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow shall
return, they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the scent thereof
shall be as the Wine of Lebanon: (...). Wall say, What have I to do any more
with Idols? I have heard him, and observed him, I am like a green Fir Tree;
from me is thy fruit found.

THE whole matter treated of in general, both as unto the Disease and Remedy,
is fully stated in this passage of Scripture; and that in the Experience of the
Church, and God's dealing with them: we may therefore receive many plain
Directions from it, and a safe Guidance in our Progress, which we shall
endeavor to take in the ensuing Observations.

1. THIS Application of God unto Israel, (O Israel return,) was made when the
generality of the People were wicked and devoted unto utter Destruction. So it
is declared in the last words of the foregoing Chapter, and their Desolation
fell out not long after accordingly. Wherefore, no Season nor Circumstances of
things shall obstruct Sovereign Grace, when God will exercise it toward his
Church: It shall work in the midst of desolating Judgments.

2. IN such a time the true Israel of God, the Elect themselves, are apt to be
overtaken with the Sins of the whole, and so to Backslide from God, and so to
fall into Spiritual Decays. So Israel had now done, though she had not
absolutely broken Covenant with God; He was yet unto her The Lord thy God, yet
she had fallen by her Iniquity. Times of public Apostasy are often accompanied
with partial defects in the best; Because Iniquity abounds, the love of many
shall wax cold, Mat. 24. 12.

3. WHEN God designs to heal the Backsliding of his People by Sovereign Grace,
he gives them effectual Calls unto Repentance, and the use of means for their
Healing: So he does here by his Prophet, O Israel return, take with you words.
And if I could see that God did stir up his Faithful Ministers to apply
themselves in a peculiar manner, unto this Work of pressing vehemently all
their Congregations with their Duty herein; and let them know, that there is no
other way to prevent their Ruin, but by returning unto the Lord, according to
the ways of it here prescribed; I should not doubt but that the time of Healing
were at hand.

4. THE means prescribed unto this end, that our Backslidings may be healed, in
a way suited unto the Glory of God, is renewed Repentance: And this acts it
self,

1. IN servent Prayer; Take with you words, and say. Consider the Greatness and
Importance of the Work before you, and weigh well what you do in your dealing
with God. The matter of this Prayer is twofold: (1.) The pardon of all
Iniquity; that is, the taking of it away: And no Sin is omitted, all being now
become equally burdensome; take away all Iniquity. When the Souls of Sinners
are in good earnest in their Return unto God, they will leave out the
Consideration of no one Sin whatever. Nor are we meet for Healing, nor shall we
apply our selves unto it in a due manner, without some previous sense of the
Love of God in the pardon of our Sin. (2.) Gracious Acceptance, Receive us
graciously. The words in the Original are only, (...), and receive good: but
both the words being used variously, the Sense eminently included in them, is
well expressed by receive us graciously. After we have cast our selves under
tokens of thy Displeasure, now let us know that we are freely accepted with
thee. And this also lies in the Desires of them who design to obtain an Healing
of their Backslidings; for under them they are sensible that they are obnoxious
unto Gods Displeasure.

2. AFFECTIONATE Confessions of the Sin, wherein their Beckslidings did
consist, or which were the Occasions of them. Ashur shall not save us, etc. we
will say no more to the work of our hands, Ye are our Gods. Fleshly Confidence,
and False Worship, were the two great Sins that had now ruined the Body of the
People: These Believers themselves had an Accession unto them more or less, as
now they have unto the prevailing Sins of the Days wherein we live, by
Conformity unto the World. Of these Sins God expects a full and free
Confession in order unto our Healing.

3. A renewed Covenant Engagement to renounce all other Hopes and Expectation,
and to betake themselves with their whole Trust and Confidence unto him;
whereof they express, First, The Cause, which was his mere Grace and Mercy: For
in thee the Fatherless finds Mercy; And Secondly, The Effect of it, which is
Praise and Thanksgiving: So will we render the Calves of our Lips. And some
things we may hence farther observe as unto the Case under Consideration. As,

1. ALTHOUGH God will repair our Spiritual Decays, and heal our Backslidings
freely, yet he will do it so, or in such a way, as wherein he may communicate
Grace unto us, to the praise of his own Glory. Therefore are these Duties
prescribed unto us in order thereunto; for although they are not the procuring
Cause of the Love and Grace from whence alone we are healed, yet are they
required in the method of the Dispensation of Grace, to precede the Effect of
them. Nor have we any where a more illustrious Instance and Testimony of the
Consistency and Harmony which is between Sovereign Grace, and the diligent
discharge of our Duty, than we have in this place: For as God promises, that
he would heal their Backslidings out of his free Love, verse 4. and would do it
by the Communication of Effectual Grace; ver. 5. so he injoyns them all these
Duties in order thereunto.

2. THAT Tunless we find these things wrought in us in a way of preparation,
for the receiving of the Mercy desired, we have no firm ground of Expectation,
that we shall be made partakers of it: For this is the method of Gods dealing
with the Church. Then, and then only we may expect a gracious Reviving from all
our Decays, when serious Repentance working in the ways declared, is found in
us. This Grace will not surprise us in our Sloth, Negligence, and Security, but
will make way for it self, by stirring us up unto sincere endeavors after it,
in the perseverance of these Duties. And until we see better Evidences of this
Repentance among us, than as yet appears, we can have but small Hopes of a
general Recovery from our present Decays.

5. THE Work it self is declared, (1.) By it is Nature. (2.) In it is Causes.
(3.) From it is Effects.

1. IN the Nature of it, it is the healing of Backslidings; I will heal their
Backslidings; the Sin whereby they are fallen off from God, unto whom they are
now exhorted to Return. These bring the Souls of Men into a diseased Estate,
and danger of Death: The Cure hereof, is the Work of God alone. Hence he gives
himself that Title, I am the Lord that heals thee, Exodus 15. 26. And because
of the poisonous Nature of Sin, and the danger it brings of Eternal Death unto
the Souls of Men, the Removal of it, or a Recovery from it, is often called by
the name of Healing, Psalm. 6. 2. Isai. 57. 18, 19. Hos. 6. 1. Here it includes
two things; First, the pardon of Sin past, and then a supply of Grace to make
us fruitful in Obedience. I will be as the Dew to Israel, as we shall see. This
is God's Healing of Backslidings.

2. IN the Causes of it, which are, (1.) The Principal moving Cause, and that
is free undeserved Love; I will love them freely. From hence alone is our
Recovery to be expected. (2.) The Efficient Cause, which as unto Sins past is
pardoning Mercy; Mins Anger is turned away from him: And as unto renewed
Obedience, in which two our Recovery consists, it is in a plentiful Supply of
Effectual Grace; I will be as the Dew unto Israel. Fresh supplies of the Spirit
of Grace from above are so expressed: This is necessary unto our Healing and
Recovery.

3. IT is described by it is Effect, which is a much more abundant Fruitfulness
in Holiness and Obedience, in Peace and Love, than ever they had before
attained. This the Prophet sets out in multiplied Similitudes and Metaphors, to
denote the Greatness and Efficacy of the Grace so communicated.

I have a little insisted on the opening of this Context, for sundry Reasons.

1. THE Case which I would consider, is in all the parts of it stated
distinctly, and represented clearly unto us. There is nothing remains, but only
the especial Way, whereby in the Exercise of Faith this Grace may be obtained,
which is that which I shall speak unto in the last place, as that which is
principally intended in this Discourse.

2. THAT I might show how great a thing it is to have our Spiritual Decays made
up, our Backslidings healed, and so to attain the vigorous acting of Grace and
Spiritual Life, with a flourishing Profession, and fruitful Obedience in Old
Age: It is so set forth here by the Holy Ghost, as that every one must needs
have a sense of the Beauty and Glory of the Work: It is that which Divine Love,
Mercy and Grace are eminently effectual in unto the Glory of God, that which so
many Duties are required to prepare us for. Let no Man think that it is a light
or common work, every thing in it is peculiar: It is unto them who are made
partakers of it, a Life from the Dead.

3. THAT none may utterly despond under their Decays. When Persons are awakened
by new Convictions, and begin to feel the weight of them, and how (...) they
are entangled with them, they (...) ready to faint, and even to despair of
Deliverance. But we see that here is a Promise of Deliverance from them by
pardoning Mercy, and also of such fresh Springs of Grace as shall cause us to
abound in Holiness and Fruitfulness. Who is it that is entangled with
Corruptions and Temptations, that groans under a sense of a cold lifeless
barren frame of Heart? he may take in Spiritual Refreshment, if by Faith he can
make Application of this Promise unto himself.

4. THAT which remains, is to declare the particular Way whereby in the
Exercise of Faith, we may obtain the Fruit of this and all other Promises of
the like Nature, unto the End so often proposed; namely, of being flourishing
and fruitful even in Old Age. Now supposing a due Attendance unto the Duties
mentioned, I shall give some Directions, with respect unto that which gives
Life, Power and Efficacy unto them all, and which will infallibly bring us unto
the full Enjoyment of this Signal Mercy: And they are these that ^ollow.

1. ALL our Supplies of Grace are from Jesus Christ. Grace is declared in the
Promises of the Old Testament, but the way of it is Communication, and our
receiving of it, is revealed unto us in the New. This belongs to the Mystery of
it, that all Grace is from Christ, and shall be in vain expected any other way.
He has assured us, that without him we can do nothing; we can no more bring
forth Fruit, than a Branch can that is separated from the Vine, John 15. 3, 4,
5. He is our Head, and all our Spiritual Influences, that is, Divine
Communication of Grace; are from him alone. He is our Life efficiently, and
lives in us effectively, so as that our Ability for vital Acts is from him,
Gal. 2. 20. Col. 3. 1, 2. Are we then any of us under Convictions of Spiritual
Decays? or do we long for such Renovations of Spiriritual strength, as may make
us flourish in Faith, Love and Holiness, we must know assuredly, that nothing
of all this can be attained, but it must come from Jesus Christ alone. We see
what Promises are made, what Duties are prescribed unto us; but however, we
should endeavor to apply our selves unto the one on the other, they would
yield us no Relief, unless we know how to receive it from Christ himself.

2. THE only way of receiving Supplies of Spiritual Strength and Grace, from
Jesus Christ, on our part, is by Faith. Hereby we come unto him, are implanted
in him, abide with him, so as to bring forth Fruit. He dwells in our Hearts by
Faith, and he acts in us by Faith, and we live by Faith in or on the Son of
God. This I suppose will be granted, that if we receive any thing from Christ,
it must be by Faith, it must be in the Exercise of it, or in a way of
Believing; nor is there any one word in the Scripture that gives the least
Encouragement to expect either Grace or Mercy from him in any other way, or by
any other means.

3. THIS Faith respects the Person of Christ, his Grace, his whole Mediation,
with all the Effects of it, and his Glory in them all. This is that which has
been so much insisted on in the foregoing Discourses, as that it ought not to
be again insisted on: This therefore is the issue of the whole. A steady view
of the Glory of Christ, in his Person, Grace, and Office, through Faith, or a
constant lively Exercise of Faith on him, according as he is revealed unto us
in the Scripture, is the only effectual way to obtain a Revival from under our
Spiritual Decays, and such Supplies of Grace as shall make us Flourishing and
Fruitful even in Old Age. He that thus lives by Faith in him, shall by his
Spiritual thriving and growth, show, That the Lord is upright, that he is our
Rock, and that there is no unrighteousness in him.

WE may consider briefly: First, How this is is testified unto in the
Scripture, and then what are the ways whereby this Grace, or Duty will produce
this effect, and so put a close unto this part of the Application of the Sacred
Truth before declared.

1. THIS Direction is given us, Psalm. 34. 5. They looked unto him and were
lightened, and their Faces were not ashamed. That it is Christ, or the Glory of
God in him, that is thus looked unto, I need not prove, it will not be denied.
And it is their Faith which is expressed by their looking unto him; which is
nothing but that beholding of his Glory which we have described: For it is an
Act of Trust arising from an Apprehension of who and what he is. The issue or
effect hereof is, that they were lightened; that is, received fresh
Communication of Spiritual, Saving, Refreshing Light from him, and consequently
of all other Graces, whence their Faces were not ashamed; nor shall we fail in
our Expectation of new Spiritual Communication in the Exercise of the same
Faith.

THIS is that which we are called unto, Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be
saved, all ye ends of the Earth. On this look to Christ, on this view of his
Glory depends our whole Salvation; and therefore all things that are needful
thereunto, do so also: This is the way whereby we receive Grace and Glory. This
is the Direction given us by the Holy Ghost for the attaining of them.

SO is the same Duty described, Micah 7. 7. Therefore I will look unto the
Lord, I will wait for the God of my Salvation; my God will hear me. The Church
knew not any other way of Relief, whatever her Distresses were.

A Look unto Christ as Crucified, (and how Glorious he was therein, has been
declared,) is made the Cause and Fountain of that Godly Sorrow, which is a
Spring unto all other Graces, especially in those who have fallen under Decays;
Zech. 12. 10. and it is so also of desiring strength from him, to enable us to
endure all our Trials, Troubles and Afflictions, with patience unto the end,
Heb. 12. 2.

THE only Enquiry remaining, is, How a constant view of the Glory of Christ,
will produce this Blessed Effect in us: And it will do so several ways.

1. IT will be effected by that transforming Power and Efficacy, which this
Exercise of Faith is always accompanied withal. This is that which changes us
every day more and more into the likeness of Christ, as has been at large
before declared. Herein all Revivals and all Flourishings are contained. To
have a good measure of Conformity unto Christ, is all whereof in this Life we
are capable: The perfection of it is Eternal Blessedness. According as are our
Seize therein, so is the thriving and flourishing of the Life of Grace in
us, which is that which is aimed at; other ways and means it may be have failed
us, let us put this to the Trial. Let us live in the constant Contemplation of
the Glory of Christ, and virtue will proceed from him to repair all our Decays,
to renew a right. Spirit within us, and to cause us to abound in all Duties of
Obedience. This way of producing these effects, Flesh and Blood will not
reveal; it looks like washing in Jordan to cure a Leprosy: But the Life of
Faith is a Mystery known only unto them in whom it is.

2. IT will fix the Soul unto that Object which is suited to give it Delight,
Complacency, and Satisfaction. This in perfection is Blessedness, for it is
caused by the Eternal Vision of the Glory of God in Christ: And the nearer
Approaches we make unto this State, the better, the more Spiritual, the more
Heavenly is the State of our Souls. And this is to be obtained only by a
constant Contemplation of the Glory of Christ, as has been declared. And it is
several ways effectual unto the end now proposed. For,

1. THE most of our Spiritual Decays and Barrenness arise from an inordinate
admission of other things into our Minds; for these are they that weaken Grace
in all it is Operations. But when the Mind is filled with thoughts of Christ and
his Glory, when the Soul thereon cleaves unto him with intense Affections, they
will cast out, or not give admittance unto those causes of Spiritual Weakness
and Indisposition: See Col. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ephesians. 5. 8.

2. WHERE we are engaged in this Duty, it will stir up every Grace unto it is
due Exercise, which is that wherein the Spiritual Revival enquired after, does
consist. This is all we desire, all we long for, this will make us fat and
flourishing, namely, that every Grace of the Spirit have it is due Exercise in
us. See Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. Whereas therefore, Christ
himself is the first proper adequate Object of all Grace, and all it is
Exercise, (for it first respects him, and then other things for him) when the
Mind is fixed on him, and his Glory, every Grace will be in a Readiness for
it is due Exercise. And without this we shall never attain it by any Resolutions
or Endeavors of our own, let us make the Trial when we please.

3. THIS will assuredly put us on a vigilant watch, and constant conflict
against all the deceitful workings of Sin, against all the Entrances of
Temptation, against all the ways and means of Surprizals into foolish frames,
by vain Imaginations, which are the causes of our Decays. Our Recovery or
Revival will not be effected, nor a fresh Spring of Grace be obtained, in a
careless, slothful Course of Profession. Constant watching, fighting,
contending against Sin, with our utmost endeavor for an absolute Conquest over
it, are required hereunto. And nothing will so much excite and encourage our
Souls hereunto, as a constant view of Christ and his Glory; every thing in him
has a constraining Power hereunto, as is known to all who have any
Acquaintance with these things.

FINIS.
Books Sold by William Marshall, at the Bible in Newgate-street.
Books written by the late Dr. John Owen. In Folio.
1. His Exposition on the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, with Exercitations
concerning the Messiah: Wherein the Promises concerning him to be a Spiritual
Redeemer of Mankind, are explained and vindicated. His Coming, and
Accomplishment of his Work according to the Promises, is proved and Confirmed.
The Person, or who he is, declared. The whole Economy of the Mosaical Law,
Rites, Worship, and Sacrifices, is explained. And in all, the Doctrine of the
Person, Office and Work of the Messiah, is opened: The Nature and demerit of
the first Sin is unfolded: The Opinions and Traditions of the Ancient and
Modern Jews are examined: Their Objectious against the Lord Christ and the
Gospel are Answered: The time of the Coming of the Messiah is stated: And the
great fundamental Truths of the Gospel vindicated. In four Volumes, Folio.

2. A Discourse concerning the Holy Spirit: Wherein an Account is given of his
Name, Nature, Personality, Dispensation, Operations, and Effects. His whole
Work in the Old and New Creation is Explained: The Doctrine concerning it
vindicated from Oppositions and Reproaches. The Nature also and Necessity of
Gospel Holiness; the Difference between Grace and Morality, or a Spiritual Life
unto God in Evangelical Obedience, and a Course of Moral Virtues, are stated
and declared. Fol.

3. The Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, explained and confirmed. Or, the
certain Permanency of their (1.) Acceptance with God, and (2.) Sanctification
from God; manifested and proved: from, 1. The Eternal Principles, 2. The
Effectual Causes: And, 3. The External Means thereof, etc. Fol.

Books in Quarto, written by the same Author.
1. THe True Nature of a Gospel Church and its Government: Wherein these
following particulars are distinctly handled. I. The Subject Matter of the
Church. II. The formal Cause of a particular Church. III. Of the Polity, Rule
or Discipline of the Church in general. IV. The Officers of the Church. V. The
Duty of Pastors of Churches. VI. The Office of Teachers in the Church. VII. Of
the Rule of the Church, or of Ruling Elders. VIII. The nature of Church Polity
or Rule, with the Duty of Elders. IX. Of Deacons. X. Of Excommucation. XI. Of
the Communion of Churches. Price Bound 3. s.

2. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, through the Imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ, explained, confirmed and vindicated.

3. An Enquiry into the Original, Nature, Institution, Power, Order, and
Communion of Evangelical Churches. With an Answer to the Dscourse of the
Unreasonableness of Separation, written by Dr. Edward Stillingfleet; And in the
Defense of the Vindication of Nonconformists from the Guilt of Schism.

4. The Grace and Duty of being Spiritually Minded, declared and practically
Improved.

5. A Discourse of Communion with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, each
Person distinctly: In Love, Grace and Consolation: Or the Saints fellowship
with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, unfolded.

6. Vindiciae Evangelicae: Or, The Mystery of the Gospel vindicated, and
Socinianism examined, in the Consideration, and Confutation of a Catechism,
called, A Scripture Catechism, written by J. Biddle, M. A. And the Catechism of
Valentinus Smalcius, commonly called the Racovian Catechism.

7. A Display of Arminianism: Being a Discovery of the Old Pelagian Idol
Free Will, with the New Goddess Contingency, advancing themselves into the
Throne of the God of Heaven, to the prejudice of his Grace, Providence, and
Supreme Dominion over the Children of Men. Wherein the main Errors of the
Arminians are laid open, by which they are fallen off from the received
Doctrine of all the Reformed Churches, with their Opposition in diverse
particulars to the Doctrine established in the Church of England. Discovered
out of their own Writings and Confessions, and confuted by the Word of God.

8. The Death of Death in the Death of of Christ. A Treatise of the Redemption
and Reconciliation that is in the Blood of Christ, with the Merit thereof, and
the Satisfaction wrought thereby. Wherein the proper End of the Death of Christ
is asserted; the immediate Effects and Fruits thereof assigned, with their
Extent in respect of it is Object; and the whole Controversy about Universal
Redemption fully discussed. In four Parts.

9. A Declaration of the Glorious Mystery of the Person of Christ, God and Man.
With the Infinite Wisdom, Love and Power of God in the Contrivance and
Constitution thereof. As also the Grounds and Reasons of his Incarnation, the
Nature of his Ministry in Heaven, the Present State of the Church above
thereon, and the Use of his Person in Religion. With an Account and Vindication
of the Honor, Worship, Faith, Love and Obedience due unto him, in and from the
Church.

Books in Octavo, written by the same Author.
1. THe Nature of Apostasy from the Profession of the Gospel, and the
Punishment of Apostates declared, in an Exposition of Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. With an
Enquiry into the Causes and Reasons of the Decay of the Power of Religion in
the World; or the present general Defection, from the Truth, Holiness and
Worship of the Gospel. Also, of the Proneness of Churches and Persons of all
sorts unto Apostasy. With Remedies and Means of Prevention.

2. Exercitations concerning the Name, Original, Nature, Use and Continuance of
a Day of Sacred Rest. Wherein the Original of the Sabbath, from the Foundation
of the World, the Morality of the Fourth Commandment, with the Change of the
Seventh Day, are enquired into. Together with an Assertion of the Divine
Institution of the Lord's Day, and Practical Directions for it is due
Observation.

3. The Nature, Power, Deceit, and Prevalency of the remainders of
Indwelling-Sin in Believers. Together with the ways of it is working, and Means
of Prevention. Opened, evinced and applied, with a Resolution of sundry Cases
of Conscience thereunto appertaining.

4. An Answer to a Book, entitled, Fiat Lux.

5. A Vindication of the Animadversions on Fiat Lux. Wherein the Principles of
the Roman Church, as to Moderation, Unity and Truth are examined: And sundry
Important Controversies concerning the Rule of Faith, Papal Supremacy, the
Mass, Images, etc. discussed.

6. A Vindication of some Passages in a Discourse concerning Communion with
God, from the Exceptions of William Sherlock, Rector of St. George Botolph-lane.

7. A Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church-Peace and Unity. With the
Occasions and Reasons of present Differences and Divisions about things Sacred
and Religious. Written in the Vindication of the Principles and Practice of
some Ministers and others.

8. A brief Declaration and Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity: As also
of the Person and Satisfaction of Christ. Accommodated to the Capacity and Use
of such as may be in danger to be seduced: and the establishment of the Truth.

9. A Discourse of the Mortification of Sin in Believers: 1. The Necessity, 2.
The Nature, and 3. The Means of it. With a Resolution of sundry Cases of
Conscience, thereunto belonging.

10. A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin and Grace; wherein Sins Reign is
discovered, in whom it is, and in whom it is not: How the Law supports it; how
Grace delivers from it by sealing up it is Dominion in the Heart: From Romans 6.
14. Bound 1 s.

11. A brief and Impartial Account of the Nature of the Protestant Religion,
it is State and Fate in the World, it is strength and weakness, with the Ways and
Indications of the Ruin or Continuance of it is public National Profession.
Price stitched 6 d.

12. A brief Instruction in the Worship of GOD, and Discipline of the Churches
of the New Testament: By way of Question and Answer: With an Explication and
Confirmation of those Answers. Price bound 1 s.

13. A Discourse of the Work of the Spir^ in Prayer, with a brief Inquiry into
the Nature and Use of Mental Prayer and Forms.

14. The Causes, ways and means of Understanding the Mind of God in the
Scripture.

15. An Answer to Doctor Parker.

16. An humble Testimony unto the Goodness and Severity of God, in his dealing
with sinful Churches and Nations: Or, the only way to deliver a sinful Nation
from utter Ruin by Impendent Judgments. Price bound 1 s.

17. A Discourse of Temptation, the Nature and Power of it; the Danger of
entering into it, and the Means of Preventing that Danger: With a Resolution of
sundry Cases there to belonging. Price bound 1 s.

18. The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ unfolded: Wherein those
Principles of Religion are explained, the Knowledge whereof is required before
any Person be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: For the use of
Christian Congregations. Price bound 6 d.

19. The Original of the Scriptures.

20. Diatriba de Justitia Divina.

21. The Defense of Mr. Cotton against Mr. Cawdrey.

22. Eshcol, or Rules for those in Church Fellowship.

23. Meditations and Discourses on the Glory of Christ, in his Person, Office
and Grace; with the difference between Faith and Sight: Applied unto the use of
them that Believe. It was formerly Printed, and is now Reprinted, and may be
bound up with the Second Part, being the Application both to Unconverted
Sinners, and Saints under Spiritual Decays. Both bound together 2 s. 6 d.

All these by the late Reverend Dr. John Owen.

Books written by other Authors.
CAryl's Exposition on the Book of Job. Two Volumes.

Pool's Synopsis in Latin. Five Volumes. With the Index's.

Pool's Synopsis on the New Testament. In Two Volumes, in Latin, with the
Index, is sold very Cheap, for 20. s. in Quires, and 30 s. Bound.

Index's on the Old and New Testament, to be sold alone. Price 5. s.

Clarks Martyrology.

Christ alone Exalted: Being the complete Works of Tobias Crisp, D. D.
containing XLII. Sermons on several Select Texts of Scriptures: Which were
formerly Printed in three small Volumes, by that late Eminent and Faithful
Dispenser of Gods Word: Who was sometime Minister at Brinkworth in Wiltshire;
and afterward many of the Sermons were preached in and about London. To which
is now added, ten Sermons, whereof eight were never before Printed, Faithfully
transcribed from his own Notes: Which is all that ever will be Printed of the
said Dr's.

An Exposition of the whole Book of the Revelation. Wherein the Visions and
Prophecies of Christ are opened and expounded: Showing the great Conquests of
our Lord Jesus Christ for his Church over all his and her Adversaries, Pagan,
Arian, and Papal; and the glorious State of the Church of God in the New
Heavens and New Earth, in these latter days. By Hanserd Knowles, Preacher of
the Morning Lecture at Pinners-Hall.

The Character of a Good Commander, together with a short Commendation of the
famous Artillery (more properly Military) Company of London; also a brief
Encomium on the Great Duke, and worthy Prince, Elector of Brandenburg. Lastly,
Plain Dealing with Treacherous Dealing. Whereunto is annexed the general
Exercise of the Prince of Oranges Army: By Captain Tho. Plunket.

The General Exercise ordered by his then Highness the Prince of Orange, to be
punctually observed of all the Infantry in service of the States General of the
United Provinces. Containing the General Exercise of Pike and Musket; with
their Facings, Doublings and ^heelings of a Battalion; ordered by his present
(...), to be observed of all the Infantry in his service, being short, easy
and graceful. The Second Edition, corrected.

The Heavenly Trade, or the best Merch^ndizing: The only way to live well in
impove^shing Times. A Discourse occasioned from the decay of Earthly Trades,
and visible wastes of Practical Piety in the day we live in, offering Arguments
and Counsels to all, toward a speedy revival of dying Godliness, and timely
prevention of the dangerous Issues thereof impending on us. Necessary for all
Families. The second Edition corrected. By Bartholomew Ashwood, Minister of the
Gospel, Author of the Best Treasure.

Christ a Christians Life: Or a Practical Discourse of a Believers Life,
derived from Christ, and Resolved into Christ. Being the substance of several
Sermons Preached by the Author upon his Recovery from a Fit of Sickness, and
now extorted from him by the Importunity of Friends. By John Gammon, Minister
of the Gospel, and Pastor of ^ Congregation in White-Chappel.

Cook's Mellifigium Chirurgia, or the Marrow of Chir^rgery, with Anatomy. The
Fourth Edition enlarge^, with many Additions.

Cha^eton 's Anatomy Lectures.

FINIS.

