THE CASE OF THE PERSECUTED and OPPRESSED PROTESTANTS In some Parts of Germany
and Hungary: Laid open in a MEMORIAL, Which was lately presented at VIENNA TO
HIS Imperial Majesty, By His Majesty the King of SWEDEN'S Ambassador
Extraordinary, the Count of Oxenstierna.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1674/5:

May it please Your Sacred Imperial and Royal Majesty;
WHereas His Sacred Royal Majesty, my most gracious Lord and Master, does
cherish a good and due opinion of Your Sacred Imperial Majesty's Equity and
Indulgence upon all occasions; so does He, with the greatest confidence, rely
on, and most earnestly request the same, as to the straits and necessities of
the most afflicted Protestants, living within your Kingdoms and Provinces: For
Honor, Conscience, and not only Christianity, but even Humanity it self urge
it. His Royal Majesty had indeed much rather have spared the mention of a thing
so often repeated, nor would he have stirred any more in this business, had the
Promises so often made formerly, and now lately renewed by the Count of
Sternbergh, That those of the Auspurge Confession should be so treated, that
neither they, nor any other Protestants in their name, should have any occasion
of complaint, obtained hitherto the due and hoped effect; and if nothing had
been done against them, contrary to the Grace and Indulgence so certainly
promised them by Your Imperial Majesty: But how far otherwise it fares with
them hitherto, and how notoriously miserable their condition, although it may
perhaps be concealed by the cunning of some Zelotes, who intercept the Groans
of the oppressed Protestants from coming to the most benign Ear of Your Sacred
imperial Majesty; yet His Sacred Royal Majesty has, to His no small grief,
understood, by no less sad then certain relations. And he hopes, that Your
Imperial Majesty will not think strange, if he cannot behold, without regret,
and without interposing in their behalf, that His own Religion should, in those
of the same Profession, suffer so dismal a Persecution; and under this color,
that so many, not only innocent, but well-deserving persons, ruined in all
their Fortunes, should be exposed to the most exquisite Contumelies and
mockeries; and that the Protestant Ministers, especially in the Cities of
Hungary, Leopoldople, Capuarina, Camara, and others, being most violently
seized on, should be pillaged, and insolently abused, and, stead with stripes,
starved with hunger and nakedness, be thrust down into most loathsome and
horrible Prisons, among Snakes and Toades; and moreover so bound and manacled,
that they want all desence to help themselves against the Venomous Creatures;
and that even where they are most favorably dealt with, and suffered to live
above ground, that there being compelled to Employments, not so laborious, but
the most filthy and noisome that can be invented, loaded perpetually with Chains
more cruelly, than those that are guilty of the most heinous Parricides or
Treasons, without all commiseration, without any satiety in mocking abusing
them, they should lead a life, than which, Hell it self may seem more
tolerable. To this may be added, that to deprive their Souls and Consciences of
all Means of Instruction, all Schools and Helps of good Education and Piety, by
which their Youth ought in their tender age to be bought up, and formed for use
and serviceableness, and to a faithful subjection toward Your Imperial
Majesty, are, without any regard to the maintenance of Public Faith,
absolutely refused them. That I may not pass by, how even they are not allowed
Baptism by the Hands of Protestant Ministers; that the us^ o^ their Churches,
either by their own Blood gained from the Turk, or at the Protestants own
Charges built by the Imperial Consent and Permission, is refused them. It is in
earnest very sad* that the things of this World should so far be preferred
before those of Heaven: that, while Players and Mountebanks have Places
assigned, nay, and Privileges granted them, and so much tenderness is used to
that sort of People, which never is without nuisance and inconvenience to
others; those that have embraced Christ, and are neither troublesome, nor
incommodious to the Public, but do seriously pray for the health and safety of
Your Imperial Majesty, are in the mean time debarred to join in Prayer, under a
mean ^hed, where it rains through; nay, under the open Sky, or in the privacy
of their own Houses, and that under pain of the most intolerable punishments.
It is far from His Sacred Royal Majesty, hereby to impute any fault to your
Imperial Majesty, a Prince so renowned for Clemency, Equity, and Honor;
especially when He calls to memory, how great Evidences You have given of a
Mind, deservedly abhorring and condemning this manner of proceeding, so
barbarous, so contrary to the gentle Rule of Christ, and the Apostolic Example
of Charity, no^ only by Your benign Answers and Promises declared to His
Sacred Royal Majesty, by His Ministers, but also by Your Praiseworthy Edicts,
published in favor of the Protestants, after the Example of Your Predecessors
of most Glorious Memory, who disdained not to own the Protestants among their
faithful Subjects, and to interpose their Authority for securing them. But
while those miserable Persons confide in those Records, and Your Imperial
Majesty emulates the Renown of Your Ancestors, with a worthy tenderness toward
them, and all others; it so happens, that the Fruit of so great a Virtue, and
of so great a Benefit, is blasted, both as to Your Imperial Majesty, and those
for whom it was designed; and that Your Inviolable Imperial Word is eluded and
infringed, by I know not what tricks and pretenses; the miserable Protestants
never lived in less security, then after the obtaining the Imperial
Declarations and Laws for their security, as if they were made only for a
time, not so much for the safeguard of the Afflicted, as for a show of
Clemency, but not to avail against the Cruelty of Persecution. The Authors of
this Calamity might have discharged their Duty much better, would they have
endeavored to maintain Your Imperial Honor and Dignity, by an Execution
conformable to Your so Benign Imperial Intention, rather than to undermine and
overthrow it for Profane, far from Pious purposes. By which it comes to that
pass at last, that it is not lawful for Men to be Godly, Honest, and Loyal, and
so many Christian and most Sincere Souls being driven out of the Dominion of
Your Imperial Majesty, are, which is a thing most miserable, bound under the
yoke of the Turkish Slavery.

His Royal Majesty would not deprecate the utmost severity against the
Protestant Subjects of Your Imperial Majesty, if their dissenting not from the
Foundation of Christian Salvation, but from some Additions to the Apostolical
Doctrines, did involve them in any Crimes or Wickedness; if this their
Nonconformity in Religion did corrupt their Loyalty, or the Civil Happiness; if
the Protestants did by Seditious Counsels rise up against Your Imperial
Majesty; if by Riots or Irregular Tumults they attempted upon Your Supreme
Authority; if they avoided any Duty of most Loyal Subjects; or if they obeyed
Your Commands with less readiness than the Papists: But seeing the contrary is
manifest to all men, notwithstanding the false Gloss of Conspiracy, or being
Accomplices therein, wherewith their Persecutions are for the most part colored;
whereas the Protestants live quietly and peaceably, and approve themselves, as
becomes them, toward their Prince, and do so much abhor the Crime of Treason
or Disloyalty; that there is nothing which they do more earnestly deprecate,
than the necessity of parting with their Allegiance; nor any are more ready,
than they, to sacrifice their Estates, their Bodies, and their Lives, for Your
Imperial Majesty, against the Infidels; only desiring to keep their Souls
untainted. Let those, who are the Authors of these severe Counsels against
them, consider well, what account they can make to His Imperial Majesty, if
those fatal Accidents, which may ensue hereupon, but, which God forbid, should
at some time or other, turn your severity upon themselves.

His Sacred Royal Majesty has in the mean time commanded me, to represent to
Your Imperial Majesty, how clear and remarkable the words are of the Instrument
of Peace, in favor of the Protestants inhabiting the Kingdoms and Provinces of
Your Imperial Majesty, and of the most Serene House of Austria, whereby the
free Exercise of Religion is inviolably, explicitly, and by name granted to
some of them, and particularly to those of Silesia: The condition of others in
this matter is respited to another time, to be dispatched by the Amicable
interposition of His Royal Majesty, and the humble Intercession (which has,
notwithstanding, hitherto been so vainly attempted) of the States of the
Auspurge Confession. Verily it can scarce be believed, without injuring those,
who labored in that so pious and sincere Agreement, that they did add this
Clause in vain, (though such it has hitherto proved) or that they intended to
delude these miserable Persons with deceitful hopes: Forasmuch therefore, as no
less in respect to the Public Honor and Dignity, than to the Nature of all
Agreements, the Words of that Clause ought to operate something; the least that
they can operate must be, that the Protestants may be left however in the same
state that they were, when the Peace was concluded. And His Royal Majesty
hopes, that Your Imperial Majesty will no more insist upon the Distinction used
by the Count of Sternberg in Sweden, between the Dutchies of Silesia, belonging
to Your Royal Chamber and Table, and others, and upon the excluding of Hungary
from these Kingdoms of Your Imperial Majesty, which are comprehended in the
Sense of the Pacification: Seeing neither that Distinction, nor this Exclusion,
has any foundation at all in the Instrument of Peace, but does rather directly
oppose it. Which things being so, His Royal Majesty does, with all the power
that He properly has of entreating and prevailing with Your Imperial Majesty,
for those oppressed Protestants, groaning under so great rigor and cruelty of
Inquisitions, beseech and conjure Your Imperial Majesty, by the Rights of the
Friendship, and sincere Correspondence perpetually to be observed with Your
Imperial Majesty, by the Public Tranquillity, by Your own Clemency, by Your
Honor, and even by Your Self, that in conformity to the Privileges granted by
your most August Ancestors, and by Your Self to the Protestants, and to the
Public Laws and Agreements, You would command, that they may have liberty of
Conscience; and that restoring in Your Kingdoms and Hereditary Provinces the
Exercise of their Religion, together with their Churches, Seminaries and
Schools, which heretofore belonged to them, You would deign once for all, to
revive the Spirits of the Protestants, drooping under the want of their Divine
Worship, from that desperate life, in which at present they languish; and that
You will think fit to retain them as Yours, who are Yours, both by their Birth,
and by the Duty of their inviolated Loyalty. And hereby it will come to pass,
that henceforward Your Imperial Majesty will be free from all further
interruptions, of those, who interceed for them, and that as many miserable
Persons, as do now with sighs and groans lament unto God their sad condition;
so many hereafter shall with Praises Celebrate the Goodness and Equity of their
most Indulgent Lord and Emperor, and with most ardent Prayers recommend to
Heaven Your Health, Life, and Prosperity.

But in particular, forasmuch as several undoubted Rights and Privileges,
which belong by the Instrument of Peace, to the Protestants of the Order of
Knights, and their Subjects, in the Dutchies of Silesia, Tropaw, and
Jegerndorffe, have been diverse ways infringed, and, as far as possible, utterly
torn in pieces, partly by New Articles added two or three years ago to the
Provincial Ordinance of Tropaw, and partly by sundry bold Attempts of the
Missionaries of the Bishop of Olmutz; His Sacred Royal Majesty does
exceedingly, and most instantly urge Your Sacred Imperial Majesty, that you
would deign to leave inviolate, and maintain not only the aforesaid Orders of
Knights, and their Subjects, in the said Places, but also whatsoever other
Protestants, living within the other Dutchies of Silesia, in full and quiet
Liberty of Conscience, and Education, (as does most rightly belong by the
Public Agreement) and in the Right appertaining to them hitherto, as well of
serving in the Public Dignities and Offices of the Province, as of purchasing
and possessing immovable Goods or Lands therein. And to that purpose, that You
would not only hasten to Cancel the Articles of the said Ordinance, by which
this is forbidden; but also either to remove and recall the said Missionaries,
or so to bridle their rigid and licentious proceedings, that they may for the
future desist from the most unjust violence, they have hitherto exercised, in
Reforming Religion in the Cities of Leobschutz, Teschin, and other Territories
adjoining, (against which, the three years Intercession and Solicitation of
His Royal Majesty has produced no other effect, than that above four hundred
Inhabitants of Leobschutz are forced to wander, begging through the
Neighboring Countries) and that You would cause them to restore to the
foresaid Order of Knights, without any impediment, the Feudatary Lands hitherto
usurped from them: Whereby this also will of consequence follow, by the
Clemency and Equity of Your Sacred Imperial Majesty, that those Missionaries
shall no longer have power, under pretense of I know not what Contingences of
the Stole, and such like; to despoil the wretched Protestants of their Estates;
especially seeing by this way of proceeding, they do nothing but make in the
Dominions of Your Imperial Majesty, a sad solitude for want of good Subjects;
they chase away the Inhabitants from their Cities, the Husbandmen from the
Land, and compel the otherwise most honest and most Loyal Subjects of Your
Imperial Majesty, either to be ill ones, or to have no being.

In the same manner, about the beginning of this Year, at the instances of His
Sacred Royal Majesty, and previous to a perpetual Sanction, it was established
by Your Sacred Imperial Word, and by Public Records, that the Protestants
living in Hungary, and particularly the Citizens of Edenburg, who are, if any,
signal and devoted in their subjection to Your Imperial Majesty, should have
free Exercise of their Religion; yet afterward it happened, that their meeting
for Divine Worship was removed from Edenburg to Eysenstadt, whether there is no
going safely, or without most grievous inconvenience, by reason of the distance
of the Places, and the Passage infested by the Enemy, although there was no
probable reason for it, and why the Public Faith should be in this degree
interrupted; unless perhaps, that the Liberty and Rights of the Protestants
being loosened and weakened by the dangers and troubles of that change, might,
in conclusion, be utterly overthrown with the greater facility. His Sacred
Royal Majesty therefore, as judging, that nothing does more belong to Him, and
nothing ought to be prosecuted by Him, with more earnest affection, than the
safety of those, whom the Communion of the same Religion endeareth to Him, does
Amicably, Brotherly, and most Vehemently request of Your Sacred Imperial
Majesty, that You would at length so far consider His so often repeated
Interposition, nay, Your own Honor, that the Liberties so graciously confirmed
by Your Self to those of Edenburg, may have the convenient and desired Effect,
and that the Exercise of their Religion, which, contrary to the Tenor of Your
Grant, has been cast out, or (as it has pleased the Secretary's Office in
Hungary to express it) banished into a place, so improper, together with the
Churches, that have been taken away; and the Schools and Colleges, which are
so exceeding necessary, may be restored both to their City, and to the other
Cities and Towns, and that they may enjoy them for the future freely, and
undisturbed, without any hinderance or violence. His Royal Majesty desires Your
Imperial Majesty to be fully persuaded, that You cannot give Him a more
evident* or more acceptable Pledge of Your Benign, Friendly, and Brotherly
Mind, than by suffering Your Self to be prevailed with in this Matter, by being
pleased, to second His most earnest Zeal and Charity toward His afflicted
Companions in Religion, and by giving present ease to their calamitous
Condition.

These things will extremely increase the Fame of Your Imperial Majesty's
Clemency, and will not only put a most strict Obligation upon His Royal
Majesty, but moreover upon so many Electors, Princes, and States of the Sacred
Roman Empire, who will reckon themselves to be cherished in the Persons of the
Protestants, and will apply their favorable usage unto themselves; and will be
so much the more ready, upon that account, to join their Arms, as often as it
shall be needful, with those of Your Imperial Majesty, against the Common
Enemy, as His Royal Majesty offers Himself most addicted, by all Endeavors and
Offices, to Your Imperial Majesty.

And so promising my self an Equitable, Benign, and Speedy Declaration,
concerning those things, from Your Imperial Majesty, I recommend my self most
submissively to Your accustomed Grace and Favor.

FINIS.

