Englands Warning, By Late Frowning PROVIDENCE: ESPECIALLY THE Immediate Hand
of GOD UPON THE STRAITS-FLEET. Improved in a SERMON, Preached April 1st. 1694.

Wherein is plainly showed the Causes and Tokens of Gods present Controversy
with us, especially for our Non-improvement of National Deliverances to an
Obliged Reformation.

From EZEKIEL V. viii. Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold, I, even I am
against thee, and will execute Judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of
the Nations.

Luke 13.3. (...).

Micah 6.9. The Lords Voice cries unto the City, and the Man of Wisdom shall
see thy Name; hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it.

Ezekiel 13.13. Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will even rent it with a
stormy Wind in my Fury; nnd there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger,
and great Hailstones in my Fury to consume it.

By Jonathan Owen Pastor of a Congregation in Southwark.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by John Harris at the
Harrow in the Poultrey, 1694.

TO Capt. Anthony Clifford, At Peckham near London.
SIR,
THe Subject I write upon I must confess looks with a dismal Aspect upon this
sinful Nation; and were not I well assured of your full Satisfaction in, and
your Zealous Affection to the present mercifully Established Government, (even
to the hazarding of your Person as formerly, if not superannuated) I should not
venture to shelter this poor Essay for the Public Welfare under the Patronage
of your Noble Name. Nor do I doubt but you lodge the like Charitable Thoughts
in your Breast concerning your unworthy Relate, who in Compliance with the
Auditors of this plain Sermon, is at last prevailed with to expose this his
mean Endeavor to Public View and Censure, as being constrained thereunto by
them that judge better of it than my self, and to whom as I now stand related I
can deny no reasonable Request for the Publick's and their good: Therefore I
hope, Sir, you will put an amicable construction upon the whole, and condescend
to admit this Attempt into your favorable acceptance, and also follow it with
your fervent Prayers; that the End propounded, viz. The Convincing and
Awakening this sinful secure Nation, that because the Sins specified therein
abound in the midst of us, and our late National Deliverances have not been
improved to a general Reformation, therefore God by his* Judgments, especially
his immediate Hand upon the Straits-Floet, does evidently declare he has a
Controversy with us. That this Necessary End might through influencing Grace
be obtained, is and shall be in conjunction with yours, the hearty Prayers of

Your Unworthy Nephew, Jonathan Owen.

TO THE READER.
Candid Reader,
THou have now in thy Hands a plain Discourse, not Polisht with that Art and
Eloquence which many are studious of, but with an earnest desire to promote the
Happiness of this sinful threatened Nation, which the immediate Hand of God upon
the Straits-Fleet gave birth unto. I did once little think and in part
determine with my self, never to expose my weak Endeavors to Public View and
Censure; but since by a more than ordinary Hand of Divine Providence, attended
with common difficulties from the unstable, I am (with the Favor of the
present Government) fixed in a Pastoral Relation, over a Church of Christ,
whose Souls to my utmost I would gladly serve, and for Christ and their sakes,
spend and be spent, and in the prosecution of this high and noble End; I would
prudently take hold of every opportunity, whether smiling or frowning, which
presents it self; and because some that sat under my Ministry are engaged in
this unhappy Fleet, both in a Military and Civil respect, and amongst the great
number of precious Souls, that with the greatest horror, and most amazing
outcry shot the Gulf of Eternity, there is but one as we yet hear lost and
that not confirmd; the General concern of the Nation, with, this no small
Mercy, made such an impression upon me, as to put by my intended Subject, and
determined me upon this awful one, Ezekiel. 5.8. as that which I judged to be the
loud Voice of Providence to us; concluding from hence that doubtless, God has
a controversy with us; but not because of the Happy Revolution of Public
Affairs, as unthinking Dreamers do falsely imagine, but because our unspeakable
Mercy, in our late Deliverance, is not improved to an obliged Reformation; for
it may too truly be said of us, as Psalm. 106.7. We remembered not the Multitude
of his Mercies, but provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red Sea; as for those
(to speak mildly) if not Sons of Belial without yoke, yet Persons of low
designs, if any, for Gods Glory, and the Public Interest, that are longing to
go back into Egypt, that evidently make their own Interest not the Publicks,
the Idol of their Care and Endeavors; as for these I hope every Prudent Man
will take heed and beware of them, (as Vipers in their Native Land) and in
Praying for them, leave them to the Justice of the Nation; in the mean time let
us improve our present Mercies, and bless God for what we enjoy of Peace and
Liberty at home, and cheerfully contribute to this necessary defensive War
abroad, since our Deliverer himself is exposed to the greatest Dangers, (whom
God Preserve and Prosper.) Reader, if with the present Hand of God stretched out
against us, this Sermon might obtain its desegned and desired end, then may we
be a happy People, and I shall greatly rejoice, who in compliance with some of
them that affectionately heard it, for Substance as Memory serves, have thrown
in my small Mite, for the general good of my Native Country, and shall follow
it with my Prayers, who am thine in the bonds of the Gospel,

Jonathan Owen.

EZEKIEL V. viii. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I, even I am
against thee, and will execute Judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of
the Nations.


THE Spirit of God sets forth the Duty of Gospel Ministers, by the Name of
Watchmen, Ezekiel. 3.17. Son of Man, I have made thee a Watchman unto the House of
Israel; therefore hear the Word at my Mouth, and give them warning from me: Who
in faithfulness to whom they relate, must give seasonable warning of all
approaching Calamities and Dangers, that so there may be either a happy
Prevention, or a becoming Submission to what is otherwise inevitably befalling
them. Now that I might approve my self to Christ, my Country, and those I Watch
over in the Lord, I shall endeavor to assist you in making a right Improvement
of the late awakening Dispensations of God to us in these Kingdoms; especially
the immediate Hand of God upon the Straits-Fleet: In Order to do this, I have
exercised my Thoughts upon this awful Subject: Thus says the Lord God, I even
I am against thee, and will execute Judgments in the midst of thee, in the
sight of the Nations.

In this and the foregoing Verse, the Prophet does discharge the Duty of a
faithful Watchman; and not fearing to give them Disturbance in their sleepy
secure State, he lets them understand what eminent Dangers their great
Abominations had brought them into, for as much as now God did manifestly
declare himself to be against them. In the preceding Verse, I find the Prophet
in the Name of God, charges them with their Wickedness thus, because ye
multiplied more than the Nations that are round about you; some by this
understand the (...) manifold Blessings and signal Favors which God gave them,
and should have been improved to thankfulness and Obedience to God; but were
not: but I humbly conceive it rather relates to their Sins; because ye
multiplied more than the Nations that are round about you in Sin; thy
Transgressions have been more and of a deeper Dye than theirs, thou have more
grievously offended than the very Heathens that know not God; and the following
Words explain it: And have not walked in my Statutes, neither have kept my
Judgments, neither have done according to the Judgments of the Nations that are
round about you: i. e. The Heathens have been more saithful to their false
Gods, than you have been to Me the only True God; they have by the Light of
Nature been more steadfast to their cruel Injunctions, than you have been to my
Holy and Divine Institutions; they have been steadfast to their Gods; but you
have been given to change; and not only to comply with them, but you have
exceeded them in Sin and Guilt: Therefore thus says the Lord God, I, even I,
etc.

In the Words you have these things considerable:

1. An Argumentative, awful Preface, Therefore thus says the Lord God;
Wherefore? Because ye multipti'd more than the Nations that are round about
you: You excelled them in Sin and Wickedness.

2. You have a necessary Duty called for and required from them; Behold, the
Word imports the Clearness, Certainty and Awfulness of the things he is about
to Denounce and Declare, as being somewhat extraordinary, which duly weighed
by them, might make their Ears Tingle to hear it, and cause their Hearts to
tremble to Meditate upon it; for it is the worst and severest of Judgments,
Thus says the Lord God, I, even I, am against thee, etc.

3. You have the Subject matter it self, which I can scarce without Horror and
Trepidation mention: I, even, I am against thee; mark the Congemmination, I,
even I, not once I, but twice I; even I, that it might make the greater
Impression upon them. I that formerly set my Heart upon you, am now weaned from
you; I that chose you before other Nations, not because you were more than
others, but only because I had a Favor for you: I even I, that took you into
special Covenant with my self, do now declare against you; I that have
Graciously superintended you, do now take my Heart off from you; I that have
wrought wonders for you in the sight of the Nations, I that have preserved you
alive in Famine, I that delivered you out of the Hands of the Cruel Tyrant
Pharaoh, I that divided the Red Sea, that fed you in the Wilderness, I that
have carried you as upon Eagles Wings all your days, I that have been a Father
and a Friend to you, I, even I am against you, my Heart cannot be toward you,
nor can I bear with you any longer.

4. You have the plain Evidence and full Confirmation of this his being turned
to be their Enemy, And will execute Judgments in the midst of thee: I will not
only shake the Rod over you, but I will lay it heavy upon you; and you shall
smart and groan under it sensibly. What I will do in my fury, shall not be done
in a Corner, or upon a part of you, but in the midst of you: I will strike at
the very Heart, you shall feel it; for I will execute Judgments one upon
another in the midst of you; you shall be sick of my Smiting, and groan under
my heavy Judgments in the midst of you; my Heart shall not Pity, my Hand shall
not help you; but I will with my immediate Hand afflict you with Judgments one
on the Neck of another in the midst of you.

5. You have the fore Aggravation of it, and that in the sight of the Nations
round about; as your Sins have been, so shall your Sufferings be; you
dishonored me with your Abominations before the Heathens, and I will execute
my Judgments before the Nations: You have not ceased to profane my Name before
them, and in their sight will I vindicate my great Name; and show that I am of
Purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; they that beheld your Sins, shall be
Spectators of my Judgments in the midst of you; Therefore thus, etc.

From the Words, I shall Collect and Depose several Doctrines, but shall speak
more fully to the last of them.

Doct. 1. That Ministers of the Gospel, like faithful Watchmen, must give their
People warning of apprehended, present and approaching Judgments: So did the
Prophet, and so must all others, if they will be faithful to Christ, and the
precious Souls they are to watch over: We must declare, what of the Night, and
like Paul, keep back nothing, that we might have their Record, that we are
clear from the Blood of all men, Acts 20.27. Isa. 58.1. There faith God to the
Prophet, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my
People their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins.

Doct. 2. That whatsoever Personal, Family or National Judgments befall a
People, it is certain that Sin is the meritorious procuring cause of them: It Is
Sin that is the Teeming Mother of all Mischief, the procuring cause of all
Calamities whatsoever: Its that which lets in all Misery, and causes
Destruction to come in upon a People like an armed Man, or an overflowing
Flood; Therefore thus says the Lord God, etc because ye multiplied more than,
etc. It was Jerusalems Abominations, which inevitably brought their
Desolations; and it is Englands Sins that cause God to execute Judgments in the
midst of us at this day: If Sin abounds without control, Judgments will
follow, Ezekiel. 14.23. for he does nothing without a cause; and it is not
difficult to relate what is the Cause of great Anger being gone out from the
Lord against this Land; not the late Deliverance which God graciously wrought
for us, as some little better than Papists dream, but our not improving so
unspeakable a Mercy to an obliged Reformation.

Doct. 3. In all the Judgments, which are executed upon a People, God himself
has a Hand in it; and sometimes more visibly than at other times, Amos 3.6.
Isai. ^2.24, 25. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers; did not
the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? For they would not walk in his ways,
neither were they obedient unto his Law. Therefore he has poured upon him the
Fury of his Anger, and the strength of Battle, and it has set him en fire
round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to Heart.
No Afflictions or Judgments arise out of the Dust; it is an Expression more fit
for an Atheist than Christians, to attribute Afflictions and Judgments to
Chance and Fortune: J will execute Judgment in the midst of thee, in the sigbt
of the Nations.

Doct. 4. When God for the Sins of a Nation does execute Judgments, as he
reasonably expects, so they seriously should take due notice of it: Therefore
thus says the Lord, behold, etc. it is no small Aggravation of our Guilt and
Misery, for Persons lightly to pass over the evident tokens of Gods
displeasure: This is but to entangle our selves so much the more, and to make
our bands of Sorrow with the Judgments of God so much the stronger and heavier,
Isai. 26.11. When thy Hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see
and be ashamed at it.

Doct. 5. Of all Judgments, for the great God to manifest or declare himself to
be against a People or a Nation, is the worst and sorest. As David said of
Goliah's Sword, 1 Samuel 21.9. There is none like that; so of all that can befall
a People, there is none like this Judgment, for God to be against them, that
have set themselves against him: I, even I, am against thee, and will execute
Judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the Nations.

In the Prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to keep to this Method.

I. I shall lay down some Propositions to explicate this Doctrine, and to
preserve good thoughts of God, though in a way of Judgment with a sinful People
and Nation. II. I shall make some inquiry, What are those Sins that have, and
it is to be feared now do, provoke God to proceed in a way of Judgment against
a People or a Nation. III. I shall demonstrate, what are the dismal Signs and
sad Tokens of Gods being against a People or a Nation. IV. I shall evince, that
of all Judgments which may befall a People or a Nation, there is none
comparable to, or greater than Gods manifest declaring himself to be against a
People or Nation. V. I shall Improve the whole with some Practical
Applications.
(1.) The Propositions needful to explicate the Doctrine, they are these
following.

1. Prop. The Great, Sovereign and Alwise God, does not absolutely delight in
setting himself against a People, or in manifesting himself to be against a
Nation in a way of Judgment: God forbid that any should have such hard thoughts
of a good and a gracious God, as to imagine that he takes delight in wasting
and destroying his Creatures! he has fully declared himself to the contrary in
his Word, which we have the highest Reason to believe: For he is Truth, and
cannot deny himself: Therefore the Church kept up believing good thoughts of God
under the hottest Furnace of Affliction: Lam. 3.32, 33. Tho he cause grief, yet
will he have Compassion, according to the Multitude of his Mercies; for he does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children in of Men: i. e, He does not
afflict from his Heart, but like a tender Loving Father, who will not spare to
correct his Child as the Fault requires, but yet not without natural Reluctance
and Bowels: Thence it is, that Judgment, though it be his Work, yet it is called
his strange Act, Isa. 28.21. Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in me, i. e. against my
People. Well, let it remembered, that God does not absolutely delight to be
executing his Judgments in the midst of a People, or a Nation.

2. Prop. As God does not delight to execute his Judgments in the midst of a
People, so upon honorable Terms to him, and easy and profitable to us, he is
willing to let fall his quarrel, and withold his Judgments from us: See those
Places, and consider them, Jerem. 3.12, 13. Go and proclaim these Words toward
the North, and say, Return thou back sliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will
not cause mine anger to fall upon yon: For I am Merciful says the Lord, and I
will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God, and have scattered thy ways to the
strangers under every green Tree, and ye have not obeyed my Voice, says the
Lord. And Joel 2.13. Micah 7.18, 19. Beloved, it is from hence abundantly
manifest, that God is willing to be pacified when his Wrath is stirred up
against a People or a Nation, if we repent and reform.

3. Prop. When God manifests himself against a People or a Nation, if ever
Judgments felt be removed, and feared be prevented, he must be complied with in
his just demands from us: If the Fire of Gods Wrath be extinguished against a
Nation, the fuel that feeds it must be pulled away: and so long as the
distemper Reigns, proper Physic must be applied, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12, 13. when
Manasseh humbled himself after he was taken, the Lord by entreaty was found of
him, to deliver him; and when Nineveh fasted and humbled themselves, the Lord
repented him of his anger, and brought not the Destruction threatened upon them;
so if ever the Lord be entreated for England, we must be a Reformed People, and
turn to the Lord, from whom we have woefully revolted: if ever God hear Prayer,
Pardon our National Sins, and heal our wounded and bleeding Kingdom, we must
sincerely humble our selves, earnestly pray and unfeignedly turn from the evil
of our ways: 2 Chorn. 7.14, 15. As all sorts of Persons have a Hand in Englands
threatened Danger, so all should endeavor to prevent it by personal, speedy
Repentance, and thorough Reformation; for is it not the loud Voice of
Providence at this day, Luke 13.3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish? So much for the Propositions.

(2.) General, is to enquire, what are those Abominations which have, and now
do provoke the Lord, by his late Dispensations, to declare, as in the Text, I,
even I, am against thee, and will execute Judgments in the midst of thee? I
might answer, As all Sin whatsoever is an offense to the Divine Majesty, so
like Fuel it adds to the Fire, and helps forwards our now threatened Misery; but
more particularly, these following, wherever they are found, pull down Wrath
and Judgments upon a People or a Nation.

1. It is corrupting the true Worship of God, and defiling the pure
Institutions of Christ with the Inventions of Men; when those things are made
necessary, which never came into the Heart of God to ordain, and those things
he has by his Word injoined, are slighted and disregarded: The Disorder among
the Corinthians provoked God to visit them with sore Trial* Afflictions and
Judgments; and the neglect of Gods Order works all things out of order, where
it is practiced and allowed: If Nadab and Abihu will offer strange Fire, God
will declare their Sin, and set up a Monument of his Wrath by the Judgment of
strange Fire from Heaven to destroy them. Lev. 10.1, 2. Did not Vzza dig his
own Grave by going contrary to the command, though out of a good In^^^tion^ when
he put forth his Hand to support the trembling Ark? (...) 13.10. Beloved,
wherefore did God so much let himself (...) Israel, was it not for their
spiritual Whoredoms and Idol^^^^^^ See Deuteronomy. 6.14, 15. Jer. 1.16. I will utter
my Judgments against them, touching all their Wickedness, who have forsaken me,
and have burnt incense unto other gods, and worshipped the Works of their own
Hands: This way of affronting Gods Authority, always meets with some evident
remarks of Gods displeasure: His Heart could not be toward Israel for it, and
had not Moses his chosen stood in the gap, he had cut them off in his Wrath.
And beloved, if this Sin be found with us, you may know whence Destruction
comes; nor can we expect it will fare otherwise, so long as Persons stand more
upon Bowing the Head, and bending the Knee at the Name of Jesus, and at the
same time have no regard to be Subject to him in their Hearts and Lives:
Corrupting Gods true worship provokes Him to declare by his Judgments, I, even
I am against you, and will execute Judgment in the midst of you in the sight of
the Nations.

2. It Is Apostasy, backsliding and departing from God, this also, sets God
against a People or a Nation: When the Inhabitants of a Nation, (as the
Psalmist speaks of the proudly wicked, Psalm. 36.3, 4.) He has left off to be
wise, and do good, and he sets himself in a way that is not good: When
Persons by fearful backsliding from God and his ways, which they formerly made
Profession of; when the Power of unbelief Reigns to such a Degree, that Persons
generally depart from God, and the true Doctrine of the Gospel. And Beloved is
not this Achan in our Camp? and this Jonah in our Ship? yea sure. Ah! how many
are there in England, that have forsaken God in their Judgments, by their
imbibing Errors for Truth; in their Affections, by losing their first Love; and
in their Conversation, by neglecting practical Godliness in their Families and
Civil Employments? Ah, alas! how many are there that were taller, like Saul, by
the Head and Shoulders in the House of God, now have bid adieu, and never come
there? how many that were zealous for Gods Worship, Public and Private, now
have left off to Hear, to Pray, and instruct their Families, Children and
Servants? for this wrath is gone out from the Lord; and by his Judgments he
seems to declare, I, even I, am against thee, etc. O that these Scriptures may
be considered by those whose Consciences tell them, as Nathan did David, Thou
art the Man, Isa. 1.28, 31. They that forsake the Lord shall be confounded. 31.
And the strong shall be as Tow, and the maker of it as a spark; and they shall
both burn together, and none shall quench them. Ezra 8.11. The hand of the Lord
is for good upon all those that fear him, but his Power and his Wrath is
against all those that forsake him. Well, you see that it is our departing from
God, that makes him depart from us; 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while
ye be with him, and if ye seek him he will be found of you; but if ye forsake
him, he will forsake you. O England! have not thou forsaken thy God? Therefore
by his Judgments he now says, I, even I, am against thee, etc.

3. Another Sin which provokes God by his Judgments to declare himself against
a People or a Nation, is Pride; pride, as some think, was the Sin that turned
the Apostate Angels out of Heaven, and has shut them up in Hells Misery; and
it is this Diabolical reigning common Sin of Pride, that has justly incensed
the anger of the Lord against this Nation. I grant, that the root of Pride is
in the Heart, but the Index of it is in the Carriage and Habit of Persons: And
ah, alas! did this Heaven-daring and Nation-destroying Sin ever more abound in
England than now, among all Ranks and Degrees of Persons? Is it not become a
common thing, for Persons, yea Professors, in effect to quarrel with Gods
handiwork, and by their Patching and Painting declare their dislike of
themselves, because God has not made them in the Fashion, though such Attires
are more to be lamented in Bedlam, than permitted in Christian Assemblies:
Beloved, the high God and proud Persons, bid defiance one to another. And so
long as Pride reigns in the Heart, there can be no Peace from God to such a
Soul. I grant, Persons might be distinguished one from another by their Habits;
but its unmeet that any, especially Professors, should exceed the approved
bounds of Modesty; much more that indecent Practice, when the Maid with her
Broom is hardly by Habit distinguishable from Persons of Honor, and Quality;
this ought not to be so; and because of this Iniquity, abounding Pride, the
Land mourns, and God has a controversy with us, as is manifest by his
executing Judgments in the midst of us. See these Scriptures, Psalm. 138.6.
Prove. 16.5. Jer. 50.31, 32. Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, says
the Lord God of Hosts: For the day is come, and the time that I will visit
thee. And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up:
and I will kindle a Fire in his Cities, and it shall devour all round about him.

4. The shameful Profanation of Gods Holy Sabbath, is another Sin, which
provokes God by his Judgments to declare himself against a People or Nation.
Beloved, the great God has consulted his own Honor, and our good and
advantage, and therefore when he might justly have required six days out of
seven to himself, he has allowed us six for our common Callings, and taken to
himself but one to be wholly spent (excepting Works of Mercy and Necessity) in
his Public and Private Worship: Butah! how many now plead for a sinful
licentiousness in this day! and make it a light matter to Rob God of his
Honor, by spending this Holy Day in the service of the Devil, and their own
Hearts Lusts: Ah Sirs! is not the Lords day converted into the Devils Drudgery?
and do not many amongst us Trade more for Hell than Heaven in it? if we
consider how much of this precious Time is spent in Alehouses and Taverns, in
idle Walks, sinful Chats, and unnecessary Visits; we must conclude for this
also the Land Mourns, and Judgments are executed in the midst of us, in the
sight of the Nations. See Neb. 13.15, 18. O that such a Spirit from the Lord
might excite our present Magistrates; for verily God is contending for our
breach of Sabbaths; and by his late Dispensations loudly cries in our Ears, as
in Jer. 17.27. If you will not hearken unto me, to hallow the Sabbath Day, and
not to bear a burden, even entering in at the Gates of Jerusalem on the
Sabbath Day: Then will I kindle a Fire in the Gates thereof, and it shall
devour the Palaces of Jerusalem; and it shall not be quenched. Hear O England!
if you will not hallow my Sabbaths, says the Lord, then I, even I, am against
thee, and will execute Judgments in the midst of thee; as I have done upon my
own Day, by Fire and Water, to show my Controversy with you is very great, and
I am against you.

5. Another Sin, which sets God against a People or a Nation, is Stupidity and
incorrigibleness, under present Mercies and Judgments: Beloved, what Nation
under the Copes of Heaven, have enjoyed greater Mercies than we have formerly
and of late, by a merciful Deliverance from Tyranny and Popery? it was but the
other day, when we were laying our Hands upon our Loins, and our Faces gathered
paleness, and we perceived all that is valueable to us upon the Block, and the
hands lifted up to give the fatal blow to all, and yet then did their bloody
Inventions meet with a happy Prevention, through Gods raising up for us a
Deliverer; but ah! how have we forget our Vows, and the generality live as though
they were delivered to commit greater Abominations than before: And because
Mercies have not melted us to Repentance; therefore Judgments follow one upon
the Neck of another, and Gods immediate hand is obviously stretched out against
us. Consider what God said of old to Israel, and is it not his Voice to us now?
Ezekiel 20. 7, 8. Then said I unto them, Cast ye away every man the
Abominations of his Eyes, and defile not your selves with the Idols of Egypt: I
am the Lord your God. But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto
me: they did not every Man cast away the Abominations of their Eyes, neither
did they forsake the Idols of Egypt: then I said, I will pour out my fury upon
them, to accomplish mine anger against them in the midst of the Land of Egypt.
I think that is applicable to us also, Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your
Children, they will receive no Correction.

6. The manifest grieving of Gods Holy Spirit, is another great Abomination
which provokes God to declare, I, even I, am against thee. The Holy Spirit of
God is grieved many ways; when the loud Voice of Providence are not regarded,
when Ministers that speak to you with Bowels, in his Name, are slighted, and
their Message not received; when the Spirit comes with Light, and you shut your
Eyes and will not see; when he comes with powerful Convictions, and you stifle
them; when you are called to believe and repent without delay, you will rather
hearken to the Devils Verb mane, delay, than Gods Adverb mane, early, or comply
with speed; when Gods Comminations on the one hand, and his woes on the other,
as by the Prophet, have not their due effect upon us, Jer. 13. last, Woe unto
thee, O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? (or
after, when yet) as tho God had said, I have staid long, and sent time after
time, waiting and wooing, I am now as it Were tired out, if you will comply,
well, if not, I must, tho with reluctance, fall on; but O When once shall it
be! But as it was with them, so is it not with us now, Isa. 63.9, 10. In all
their Affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in
his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them
all the days of old. But they rebelled, and vexed his Holy Spirit: therefore he
was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them: Beloved, if we in
this Nation go on thus to rebel against Gods Holy Spirit; if we fight against
him, and he against us; it is no hard matter to tell who will have the worst;
for if he fights, we must needs fall; Who has hardened himself against him and
prosper'd? Job 9.4. Thus Beloved, I have shown what are some of those crying
Sins that provoke God against a People or a Nation. I might add many more, as
Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness, Oppression, Violence, Ingratitude for National
Mercies, non-improvement of signal Deliverances from Tyranny and Popery to a
thorough Reformation, which God expected, as we in Adversity promised the Lord;
these and the like Abominations have stirred up his Wrath against us, who
says, as in Hosea 5.15. I will go, and return to my place, till they
acknowledge their offense, and seek my Face: in their Affliction they will seek
me early. But I shall not enlarge.

(3.) General, What are the black Tokens, and evident Signs of Gods being
against a People or a Nation? I, even I, am against thee, and will execute
Judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the Nations.

(1.) When Men of Piety, Prudence, and Conduct, are dispirited in the midst of
us, and have not that regular zeal for God, Godliness, and the Public
Interest, as formerly: it was a sad Omen to the Egyptians, of what God was
about to do with them, when he took off their Chariot-Wheels, that they drove
them heavily, Exodus 14.24, 25. Men of Piety, Prudence, and Conduct, are as the
Chariot-Wheels of the Nation; and if these abate their Spirit and Zeal for
Godliness and the Public good, our Wheels are off, and we are like to be
over-flowed with destructive Judgments. I remember what God complains of
Ephraim, Hosea 7.11. That he was as a silly Dove without a Heart; and is it not
applicable to us? What is become of our late Zeal for Godliness, amongst Men of
Piety, Prudence, and Conduct, when Popery was coming in by Policy, and Power?
some had a Heart to venture for the public good in the Face of threatening
Dangers; but now when God threatens for want of Reformation, we are sitting
still, and grudge at the necessary Charges of defensive War, and are ready to
impute our present Misery to our invaluable Mercy, and suffer our cruel Vipers
unnaturally to eat out our own Bowels before our Faces: well, its an Argument
of Gods being against a People, when such Men have lost their Heart, Spirit and
Zeal for Religion, the Public Good and Safety: This speaks to us, I, even I,
am against you, etc.

(2.) Another Sign of Gods being against a People or a Nation, is his
permitting Men to be exalted to places of Dignity and Trust, who are not
rightly principl'd for Gods Glory, and the publick's Interest: Beloved, I bless
God day and night heartily, for the signal favor showed to these Kingdoms, in
the happy Accession of the present King and Queen to the Throne; (what! two
Protestants at once!) such a Mercy as has not been granted to England for many
Years past; and not only so, but I bless God Publicly and Privately, that by
their Royal Proclamations, they have signified their Pleasure to have
Profaneness and Debauchery discouraged and trampled under foot; but yet, where
the governing Wheels move regularly, if others subordinate be defective, the
desirable end will not be obtained; if some call for and endeavor after a
Reformation with hopeful Success, yet if others will affront Heaven, and
despise Government, by not executing wholesome Laws; what will become of that
People where it is so? it is no less than Irrational to conclude, where the
Leaders of the People be Examples of Profaneness and Debauchery, that there
can be any hopeful Reformation. It was a doleful time, Isa. 9.13. When the
People turned not to him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of
Hosts. But the Leaders of the People caused them to err, and they that are load
of them are destroyed. When the Case of a Land is thus, it might be rightly
inferred, as the Lord God faith by the Prophet, I, even I, am against thee, etc.

(3.) Another Symptom of Gods being against a People or a Nation, is, when
neither Mercies nor Judgments are rightly improved: Beloved, it is the hearty
desire and endeavor of all whose Hearts are right with God, to have all things
sanctified to them, and improved by them to Gods Glory and their good; they
full well know, that Mercies not fanctified are real Judgments, and Judgments
sanctified to a right improvement are eventually Mercies; but when neither have
their proper end upon a People, it plainly indicates Gods displeasure, and
loudly speaks that He, even He is against them: And now let me tell you,
Beloved, we in England have had as signal Mercies as any Nation under the
Heavens; Liberty, Peace, Plenty, and what appertains to this Life and
Godliness; with a wonderful and never to be forgotten Deliverance from apparent
eminent dangers; but ah! how evilly have we requited the Lord, and by our
obstinacy and continuance in impenitency and disobedience, we have caused him
to turn his Hand against us: it was but the other day, and God by his own
outstretched Arm wrought Salvation for us, when we were expecting the black
Cloud of Tyranny and, Popery to empty it self in showers of Protestant Blood,
then did the Lord send us a Savior, and we are escaped out of the hands of
them whose avowed Principle it is to murder whom they cannot prevail upon to
imbibe their damnable Doctrines. And yet so amazingly raging is the Frenzy of
some amongst us, that we are longing for the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, and
in a mad fit coveting our former Bondage and Slavery: but we hope, as the Blind
lead the Blind, so both shall fall into the Ditch ere it be long: but as we
have had signal Mercies, so we have no less remarkable Indications of Gods fore
Displeasure; have not Gods four sore Judgments been amongst us, ( Ezekiel. 14.21.)
and do not many now unreasonably complain of a long and chargeable, though just,
necessary and defensive War? does not God himself by his immediate Hand upon
the Fleet fight against us, for Non-Reformation and Ingratitude? yet who
considers this, or lays it to Heart, or takes right measures to have these
awful Indications of Gods displeasure sanctified to us, or be improved by us?
there is little hope of the Patients health, when no Physic has it is proper
end, or kindly operates; so it is a sad Symptom, that the great God is against a
People, when neither Mercies draw, nor Judgments drive to Repentance and
Reformation; when it may be truly said of them, as in Jer. 2.30. In vain have I
smitten your Children, they receive no Correction; or as the Prophet complains,
Isa. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they shall
see, and be ashamed. What can we expect, but that he should still punish us
seven times more, until we do see and reform whatsoever is amiss, under such
public Mercies and National Judgments?

(4.) Another black Token of Gods being against a People or a Nation, is
Discord, and Variance, concerning those things that make for the common good
and public Interest: Beloved, Unity and Concord are, under God, the Walls of
our Defense; Discord and Variance makes us weak, and like a great breach in a
close besieged Castle, lays us open to the Rage and Fury of the Enemy: and how
sad is it with that People, where proper Medicines to heal the bleeding wounds
of a languishing Kingdom, are not applied? and how much more sad, when
experienced ones are not made use of, where Religion, not Interest, would
oblige to the greatest Peril? and how lamentable is it also, when the Godly,
who are the Props and Pillars of the Kingdom, are divided amongst themselves;
and some stand upon Tithing Mint, Annis and Cummin, and neglect the weightier
matters of the Law? It was an old stratagem of some, and proves often true,
(First divide, and then Tyrannize, and do your Pleasure:) I pray God we in
England may take heed, this seems to be the design at this day; and nothing
does more effectually ferve the Papists Interest, and disserve ours, than this:
Divisions like the Trojan Horse, will let in Ruin insensibly upon us: When God
would destroy Jerusalem, they made way for it by their Intestine Quarrels; and
of old, For the Divisions of Reuben, there were great Thoughts of Heart, Judge.
5.15. so I wish that now for ours also, there were great (searching of Hearts,
and Prudent endeavors to heal and compose them made use of: for Dogs to tear
and devour one another, is natural, but for Sheep to do so is strange and
unusual. I remember a Story in Esop to this purpose: an aged Father upon a Sick
bed, called his Sons together, and commanded them to bring him a bundle of
Twigs, he injoins them to endeavor by pulling to break them, but they could
not, then to try again one by one, and they did break them: if we unite, we are
like to stand; but if we divide, we make our selves a prey. O how Happy yet
might these Kingdoms be, if that once were fulfilled upon us, Isa. 11.13.
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim. I wish heartily,
that all who profess themselves to be Christ's sincere followers, would Regard
and Practice his dying, and New command, to Love one another, John 13.34. So
called, that it might be always minded, and never forgot to be obeyed by us;
but if after all that God has wrought for us, we will obstinately persist in
so great Folly, what can we expect but Ruin? as the Apostle hints, Gal. 5.15.
For if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of
another. For by his Judgments, for this, as well as other Sins, he declares, I,
even I am against thee.

(5.) Another sad Symptom of the great Gods being against a People or a Nation,
is Frustration or Disappointment in common, proper, and ordinary endeavors for
the Honor, Safety, and Wealth of a Nation: Beloved, the great God Rules and
upholds both Kingdoms and Commonwealths by second Causes and subordinate
Means, such as Merchandising abroad, Trading at home; and sometimes by just,
necessary and defensive Wars with other Nations; but now, when an incensed God,
by his overruling Providence frowns upon any, or all of these, as of late, it
surely indicates he has a controversy with us: was it not the accursed thing
in the Camp, that occasioned that sad disappointment to Israel before Ai? as
Joshua 7.1, 4. And were they not compelled to reform, according to Gods
command, before they could prosper against their Enemies? and was it not the
disobedience of Jonah to Gods Precepts, that caused a Storm to arise that
impeded their Passage, until he was thrown overboard? And what may we imagine
has been the occasion of our late Disappointments by Sea and Land, but our
great Provocations here and there? For can a Bulrush grow without Mire, as in
Job 8.11? or will a Lion roar in the Forest, when he has no Prey, as in Amos
3.4? Neither would God thus blast ordinary endeavors, for our Honor, Safety
and Wealth, if we had not by our Sins set him against us: I must confess, though
we have looked for much, and it is come to little; yea, though our Trading is Dead
in the midst of us, though our Merchants wax Poor, and much of their Wealth is
swallowed up in the merciless Waves, though we have many Widows, Fatherless and
Orphans, by the late desolating blow from Gods immediate Hand upon the Fleet;
yet he that has done all this, might justly have swallowed up all, and have
spared none to inform us of so great a Judgment, commixt with tender, and
sparing Mercy to others, by this repeated Judgment, the incensed God has
evidently fulfilled that Commination upon us, Ezekiel. 13.13. Therefore thus says
the Lord God, I will even Rent it with a stormy Wind in my Fury; and there
shall be an overflowing shower in my anger; and great Hailstones in my Fury,
to consume it. Thus I have given you the Signs of a Black day, wherein it may
be said, as in the Text, I, even I am against thee, etc.

(3.) General, Is to Evince and Demonstrate, that of all Judgments, for the
great God manifestly to declare himself against a People or a Nation, is the
worst and sorest; and the Reasons are these following.

1. Reason: It Is so, because if God be against a People or a Nation, then all
he is, in himself is against that People; as when a Sinner is brought in to
Covenant with God, then all in God is his, and for his good, even every
Attribute of God, his Wisdom, Mercy, Goodness, Faithfulness, and the like; so
when God sets himself against a People or a Nation, then every Attribute of God
is set against that People and Nation. And therefore it must necessarily be the
greatest and worst of Judgments, for God to declare Himself against a People or
a Nation: Beloved, there is infinitely more in the One great God's manifesting
Himself against us, than if all the World besides him should do it; sad was the
Case of Israel, when God pronounced by the Prophet, Jer. 18.11. Behold I frame
evil against you, and devise a device against you. etc. When the great Jehovah
sets his Wisdom on Work to frame Evil, and devise Judgments, it must needs be
sad; for not only one, but all the Attributes of God are against that People.

2. Reason: Of all Judgments, for the great God to manifest and declare himself
against a People or a Nation, is the worst; because then all the Creatures of
God are against that People: the Lord of Heaven and Earth has all his
Creatures at his beck and command; they do and must fulfill whatsoever his
Pleasure is; as a great General once said, If he did but nod with his Head, or
stamp with his Foot, he could make his Soldiers encounter the greatest
difficulties; so if the Lord of Heaven and Earth does but look out of Heaven,
and say as Jehu did, to them with proud painted Jezebel, 2 Kings 9.32. Who it
on my side, who? Then all the Creatures in Heaven and upon Earth, in the Sea
also, and Winds, shall be ready to look out and obey his Commands, and fulfill
his Will, Psalm. 148.8. Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, Stormy Wind, fulfilling
his Word. Did not he cause the Stars to fight against Sisera? Judge. 5.20. and
did not he send an Angel to discomfit the Camp of the Assyrians, who blasphemed
against the Lord? and many more such Instances we have, wherein the great God,
as well as of late upon the Straits Fleet, has showed, that it is the worst of
Judgments for God to declare himself to be against a People, because if he be
against them, all his Creatures shall be against them also.

3. It is so, because if God be against a People or a Nation, his Opposition
renders all other Means ineffectual for our Preservation, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 127.1, 2. Except the Lord build the House, they labor in vain
that build it; except the Lord keep the City, the Watchmen watch in vain. 2.
It Is in vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of
Sorrows. So if the Lord does not bless our Merchandising, our Trade and
Callings, our Forces by Sea and Land, all our Care and Cost will be in vain. It
was a dismal time with Saul, when he cried out to him the Witch raised, 1 Samuel
28.15. I am sore distressed and the Philistines make War against me, and the
Lord God has departed from me. So if God forsake us in this time of War, sore
Distress must necessarily follow: I pray God deliver us from that woeful
Commination mentioned by the Prophet against Egypt, Isa. 19.3. I will destroy
the Council of Egypt. Isa. 7.7. Thus says the Lord God it shall not stand,
neither shall it come to pass. As with good Advice War is to be made, and in
multitude of Counsel is Safety, under God; so for God to set himself against a
People, is the worst and forest of Judgments, because his Opposition renders
all means for our welfare ineffectual.

4. It Is the worst of Judgments, for God to set himself against a People or a
Nation, because then there is no Safety, but the greatest Peril; as it is
written concerning the Children of the Wicked, Job 5.4. They are far from
Safety. So it may truly be said of that People whom God is against, They are
far from Safety; that is, they are in eminent danger, encompassed with hazards
on every side, as helpless as a naked man is against an incensed Army, that
resolves to put all to the Sword and spare none; when God by Judgments declares
as in the Text, I, even I am against thee, it may truly be said to such, as
Psalm. 142.4. Refuge fails, and which way soever we betake our selves, there
will be no Exemption from the Judgments of an incensed God. I remember what the
King said to the Woman in the Famine of Samaria, to this effect, 2 Kings 6.27.
When she cried out, Help, O King help! if the Lord do not help thee, whence
shall I help thee? intimating, that it was out of his Power, and God only could
supply her: so when the great God declares by his Judgments, I, even I am
against thee, then it is the Language of all created Beings, If God do not
help, we cannot; it is natural and common for Persons in extreme danger to seek
out for help some way or other, but when God sets himself against a People,
their Fingers are rapt off from Creatural helps: see what God speaks by the
Prophet, Zeph. 1.17, 18. I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk,
like Blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, and their Blood
shall, be poured out as Dust, and their Flesh as Dung. V. 18. Neither their
Silver, nor their Gold, shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords
wrath, etc. You see hence, that vain is the help of any Creature, when God is
against a People; Power, Policy, Wealth, will avail nothing for Safety, when
God declares by his Judgment, I, even I am against thee: Therefore it is the
worst of Judgments.

Thus you have the Reasons, which evince the Truth of this awful Doctrine. I
now come to make some brief Application of the whole.

The Application of the Doctrine is this.

If this be so, as you hear it is, Of all Judgments, for the great God to
manifest or declare himself against a People, or a Nation, is the worst and
forest; then,

1. From hence, we may plainly see the evil and Mischievous Nature and
Consequence of Sin, wheresoever and by whomsoever it is committed, and
continued in without Repentance, and Reformation; it sets the great God and his
Creatures at variance one with another: Therefore, says the Lord God, I, even
I am against thee; as in the Text: And wherefore? Because ye have multiplied
more than the Nations that are round about you; and ye have committed greater
Abominations in my sight, than the very Heathens; you have been in your Morals
more defective than they, neither have done according to the Judgments of the
Nations that are round about you. You have been more false to Me the true God,
than they have been to their false gods; you have excelled them, in Wickedness;
Therefore, behold, I, even I am against you, etc. So as you may plainly see,
what was the cause of the great Controversy God had with them, even their
great Abominations; and so if we ask, Wherefore is Wrath gone out from the Lord
against these Kingdoms? why does the Lord contend with us, by the wasting
Sword, and impoverishing Judgments? it is because of the Iniquities that are in
our Skirts; as Isreal's ways and doings procured to them destroying Judgments,
so have ours in England pulled down desolating Calamities upon us: may it not
too truly be said of us in England, as the Prophet speaks in Jerusalems
Caralogue of Sins, Ezekiel. 22.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. In thee have they set light by
Father and Mother, in the midst of thee have they dealt by Oppression with the
Stranger, in thee have they vexed the Fatherless and the Widow, thou have
despised mine holy things, and have profaned my Sabbaths. And scarce one
mentioned, but the like horrid Abominations are to be found in the midst of us;
and when the Lord did for these things manifest himself against them, yet that
which was worst of all, is this, Ver. 30. I sought for a Man among them, that
should make up the Hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the Land, that I
should not destroy it; but I found none. How? was not Jeremiah with them, and
Ezekiel it is concluded was in Babylon, and Jeremiah they would not hearken
unto: (but it was among them that the Lord looked for one to stand up and
reform, and amongst them there was none;) therefore was Indignation poured out
upon them: would to God this were not too much our present Case! Well, if of
all Judgments, for the great God to manifest himself against a People or a
Nation, be the worst and forest; then see what our Sins have done now in the
midst of us, the Lord help us to confider before it be too late.

2. If this be so, then we have, just Cause to condole the general Supineness,
Stupidity and Carelessness, that Reigns amongst all forts at this day; although
it is most evident that God has a controversy with us, Ah, alas! where is the
Person who has a becoming Sense of the Judgments of God in the midst of us?
how few, now God is gone from the Cherub to the Threshold, do sigh, and cry,
for all the Abominations done in the midst of us? Ezekiel. 9.4. There Is little
hope of the Patients recovery, when he is insensible of his Disease and Danger;
so there is little hope of better times, while there is such a general Lethargy
has seized the Spirits of most in this Land: That Is our present Case, which
the Prophet complains of, Isa. 26.11. Lord, when thy hand is listed up, they
will not see; but they shall see and be ashamed, etc. Well, if it be as you
hear, we have great Reason to lament the general Stupidity that abounds in the
midst of us at this day, when God is executing his Judgments in the midst of us.

3. If it be so, that of all Judgments this is the forest, for God to declare
himself against a People or a Nation, then what cause have we to stand and
admire, yea and adore the Infinite Patience of God toward us! That
notwithstanding he is executing Judgments in the midst of us; yet he has not
made a full End of us, nor overthrown us quite for our Abominations, as he did
Sodom and Gomorrah: At this day is fulfilled, and made good that Word by the
Prophet, Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, says the Lord. When Advantage is given, we are for taking it one of
another; this is the way of Men too often one with another, but God does not
deal thus with us, after the manner of Men; for in the midst of Judgments he
remembers Mercy: Although God by terrible things in Righteousness answers us,
yet, we must own here is great Mercy commixt with Judgment; for he that has
with his immediate hand upon the Fleet swept away so many precious Souls, and
overturnd so much of our Wealth, might with the same stroke have spared none to
give us a report of what God has done against us in the sight of the Nations:
Well, as it is less than deserved, so it is enough to make us fear and tremble
before Him; and since he has manifestly a controversy with us, we should
admire Divine Goodness in giving warning, and adore Infinite Patience, that all
was not consumed in Wrath, and that we are yet a People, and not destroyed. I
come to a Word of Exhortation, for I shall hasten to conclude, not delighting
to insist upon such Tragical Subjects; but the hand of God has engaged me in
it, beyond my Intention a few days past: Therefore,

By way of Exhortation:

Is this so, that of all Judgments, for the great God to declare himself
against a People or a Nation, is the worst and forest that can befall us, then,
what shall I press upon you? sure I need not exhort you to Credit the Truth of
this: It will be easily granted, by all that have their Senses exercised to
discern Divine Truth, therefore I address my self to exhort you to these
following things.

1. Place: Be persuaded and conclude, that the great God has a Controversy
with these sinful Kingdoms: it is not hard to prove it, God does by his Frowning
Dispensations evidently declare it, by what he has formerly and of late done
in the midst of us, he now as in the Text loudly cries in our Ears: I, even I
am against thee. Beloved, so long as we Fancy it is otherwise, we shall not set
our selves in, good earnest to the Work, of Reformation, which we are obliged
unto, and God calls for by his Judgments, and says, to us, as by the Prophet,
Jer. 13. last, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, when will thou be made clean? when shall
it once be? When, when after all that I have done in the midst of you?

2. Be exhorted to Fear and Tremble before this great God, who now by his
frowning Providence, declares, he has a controversy with us: O that all the
Inhabitants of these Nations would stand in awe of him, who has made himself
known to be a Just and Holy God, by his Judgments executed upon us! We may
evidently see that our Abominations have provoked him to Wrath, and if we will
not after all this be prevailed upon to make him our dread, what can we expect
but that he should proceed to visit us with greater Calamities than have yet
befallen us?

3. Be exhorted to Reform what in you lies, and lament before the Lord what you
cannot obtain from others. I earnestly entreat every Soul of you, in the Name of
the Lord, to begin with his own Heart and House; and cast away, the detestable
things, which God pleads against us for; as good House-wises are most at home,
minding their own concerns; so the best and most upright-hearted Christians are
most Conversant with their own Hearts, and more concerned to east the beam out
of their own Eyes, than to complain of the Mote in another; therefore set to
the Work of Reformation thy self, and when you have stoned the Achan in your
own Camp, expect to prosper, and not before; and then lay before the Lord the
neglect of Reformation by others, go to the Throne of Grace, and weep over
those Sins which are abounding in the midst of us; and that there is so little
done to reform, under so great Obligations to it, by what National Mercies we
yet enjoy upon Trial.

4. Be exhorted to secure your Interest in Christ, the anointed of God to save
lost Sinners; above all things look to this; in times of Distress wise men
endeavor to secure their best things, their Jewels, Gold, etc. Beloved in this
dark and calamitous day, now God is contending by his Judgments, look to your
Souls; above all things, every one get Arkt in Christ; for as every Soul out of
the Ark perished in the Deluge, so every Soul that dies out of Christ must
perish Eternally, as Romans 8.1. There is no Condemnation, to them that be in
Christ Jesus; so there is nothing but Condemnation to them that dye out of him;
if the avenger of Blood under the Law laid hold of the Manslayer before he got
into the City of Resuge, there is no relief for him; so if you dye out of
Christ, you cannot escape the Wrath of God: O then flee to Christ, cast Anchor
within the Vail upon him, in this stormy Season! that if you are not deliverd
from Temporal Calamities, you may be freed Him Eternal: study Christ, his Name,
Nature and Fullness; even that too much eclipsed Name of his, Jer. 23.6. Toe
Lord our Righteousness, and submit to it, that thou be not found naked of that
which only can skreen the Wrath of God off you, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy
Name, will put their trust in thee. O that the Tokens of Gods Wrath might in
this day move all to prepare an Ark for the saving their Souls, I mean to
secure their Interest in Christ: 1 Cor. 1.30. Who of God is made to us, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. In him there is enough for your
supply, Sinners, therefore hasten by Faith, grapple upon him, who rejects none
that come to him, Joh. 6.37. therefore take him at his Word, he is faithful and
cannot deny himself.

5. Lift up a Cry, and pour out your Souls to God in Prayer for these sinful
and threatened Kingdoms; although Wrath is gone out from the Lord, who knows but
he will yet be entreated for us, yea if we hear the Rod, and him that has
appointed it; he will remember his former Loving Kindnesses, for he delights
not in the Destruction of his Creatures, but upon honorable terms to him, and
easy to us if complied with, he will show Mercy; therefore set your selves to
seek the Lord, it may be he has not said, though Noah, Daniel, and Job pray, he
will not be entreated for us; he formerly has showed himself slow to anger, of
great kindness and tender Mercy; therefore go home and plead with him, that
felt Judgments may be sanctified, and removed and feared Judgments may be
prevented, and it may be God will yet dwell in our Land. Thus I have given you
my short Meditations upon what the Lord has done upon our Fleet, by his
immediate hand, apparently to all. I pray God, we may see, hear, learn, and do
no more so wickedly, lest worse befall us from the Lord than yet has happened.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THe Reader is desired to amend the Errata's that have escaped the Press.


